SEVERAL SPEECHES Delivered At a Conference concerning the Power of
Parliament, to proceed against their KING for MISGOVERNMENT.

In which is Stated:

I. That Government by blood is not by Law of Nature, or Divine, but only by
humane and positive Laws of every particular Commonwealth, and may upon just
causes be altered. II. The particular form of Monarchies and Kingdoms, and
the different Laws whereby they are to be obtained, holden, and governed in
diverse Countries, according as each Commonwealth has chosen and established.
III. The great reverence and respect due to Kings, and yet how diverse of them,
have been lawfully chastised by their Parliaments and Commonwealths for their
misgovernment, and of the good and prosperous success that God commonly has
given to the same. IV. The lawfulness of proceeding against Princes: what
interest Princes have in their Subjects goods or lives: how Oaths do bind, or
may be broken by Subjects toward their Princes: and finally the difference
between a good King and a Tyrant. V. The Coronation of Princes, and manner of
their admitting to their authority, and the Other which they do make in the
same, unto the Commonwealth for their good Government. VI. What is due to
only Succession by birth, and what interest or right an Heir apparent has to
the Crown, before he is Crowned or admitted by the Commonwealth, and how
justly he may be put back, if he have not the parts requisite. VII. How the
next in succession by propinquity of blood, have often times been put back by
the Commonwealth, and others further off admitted in their places, even in
those Kingdoms where succession prevails, with many examples of the Kingdoms
of Israel, and Spain. VIII. Diverse other examples out of the States of France
and England, for proof that the next in blood are sometimes put back from
succession, and how God has approved the same with good success. IX. What are
the principal points which a Commonwealth ought to respect in admitting or
excluding their King, wherein is handled largely also of the diversity of
Religions, and other such causes.
LONDON, Printed by Robert Ibbitson, dwelling in Smith field near the
Queens-head-Tavern. MDCXLVIII.

The first Speech.
THe Examples of a mad or furious Heir apparent, or of one that were by
Education a Turk or Moor in Religion, or by Nature deprived of his Wit or
Senses, do plainly prove that propinquity of Birth or Blood alone, without
other circumstances, is not sufficient to be preferred to a Crown; for that no
Reason or Law, Religion or Wisdom in the World, can admit such Persons to the
Government of the Commonwealth by whom no good, but destruction may be
expected to the same, seeing that Government was ordained for the benefit of
the Weal-publique, and not otherwise.

And though some in these our Days have affirmed the contrary, and published
the same in writing for the defense, flattery, or advancement of the Prince
they favor, affirming that even a fool, mad or furious man, or otherwise so
wicked as he would endeavor to destroy the Commonwealth, were to be admitted
to the Seat Royal, without further consideration, if he be next in Blood; yet
this is manifestly against all reason and conscience, and against the very first
end and purpose of institution of Commonwealths, and Magistrates.

Hereof it does ensue, that some other Conditions also must needs be requisite,
for coming to Government by Succession, besides the only propinquity or
priority in Blood, and that the Conditions must be assigned and limited out by
some higher Authority than is that of the Prince himself, who is bound and
limited thereby, and yet it seems evident they are not prescribed by any Law
of Nature or Divine, for that then they should be both immutable and the
selfsame in all Countries, (as God and Nature are one, and the same to all,
without change) where notwithstanding we see, that these Conditions and
Circumstances of succeeding by Birth, are diverse or different in different
Countries, as also they are subject to changes according to the diversity of
Kingdoms, Realms, and People, whereby we are forced to conclude that every
particular Country and Commonwealth has prescribed these Conditions to it
self, and has Authority to do the same.

For better proof whereof, it is first of all, to be supposed, that albeit
sociability or inclination to live together in company, Man with Man, (whereof
ensues both City and Commonwealth, as Aristotle gathers in his first Book
of Politiques) be of Nature, and consequently also of God, that is Author of
Nature: though Government in like manner and jurisdiction of Magistrates which
do follow necessarily upon this living together, in company; be also of Nature,
yet the particular Form or manner of this or that Government, in this or that
Fashion, as to have many Governors, few, or one, and those either Kings,
Dukes, Earls, or the like: or that they should have this or that Authority
more or less, for longer or shorter time, or be taken by Succession or
Election, themselves and their Children, or next in Blood: all these things (I
say) are not by Law either Natural or Divine, (for then as has been said, they
should be all one in all Countries and Nations, seeing God and Nature is one to
all) but they are ordained by particular positive Laws of every Country.

But now that sociability in Mankind, or inclination to live in company; is by
Nature, and consequently ordained by God, for the common benefit of all, is an
easy thing to prove: seeing that all ground of Realms and Commonwealths
depends of this point, as of their first Principle, for that a Commonwealth
is nothing else but the good Government, of a Multitude gathered together, to
live in one, and therefore all old Philosophers, Lawmakers, and Wise men, that
have treated of Government or Commonwealths, as Plat^ in his ten most
excellent Books, which he wrote of this matter intituling them of the
Commonwealth, Plato de repub. Cicero de repub. Arist. Polit. And Marcus Cicero
that famous Counselor in other six Books that he writ of the same matter,
under the same Title. And Aristotle that perhaps excels them both, in eight
Books which is called his Politiques, All these (I say) do make their entrance
to treat of their Commonwealth affairs, from this first Principle, to wit,
That man by Nature is sociable, and inclined to live in company: whereof do
proceed first, all private Houses, then Villages, then Towns, then Cities,
then Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

This ground and Principle then do they prove by diverse evident reasons, as
first, for that in all Nations, never so wild and barbarous, we see by
experience that by one way or other, they endeavor to live together, either in
Cities, Towns, Villages, Caves, Woods, Tents, or other like manner, according
to the Custom of each country, Pompon, Mela. lib. 3. cap. 3, 4. Tacit. lib.
8. which universal instinct could never be in all, but by impression of Nature
it self.

Secondly, they prove the same, by that the use of speech is given to Man for
this end and purpose; for that little available were this privilege of
speaking, if Men should live alone, and converse with none, Arist. l. 1. pol.
c. 1, 2, 3, 4.

Thirdly, not only Aristotle but Theophrastus, also Plutarch, and others do
confirm the same, Theoph. lib. de Plaut. Plutarch. Com. de fortuna, and lib.
de pietatem in parent. by the poor estate and condition, wherein Man is borne,
more infirm than any other creature, though by creation he be Lord and
Governor of all the rest; for whereas each other creature is borne in a
certain sort armed and defended in it self, as the Bull with his horns, the
Boar with his tuske, the Bear and Wolf, with their teeth, the Bird with her
feathers against cold, and with her wings to fly away, the Heart and Hare with
their swiftness, and the like, only Man is borne feeble and naked, not able
to provide or defend himself in many years, but only by the help of others,
which is a token that he is borne to live in company, and to he helped by
others, and this not only for his necessity and help at his beginning whiles
he is in this imbecility, but also for his more comodious living in the rest of
his days afterward, seeing no Man of himself is sufficient for himself, and
he that lives alone can have no benefit of others, or do any to others;
wherefore wittily said Aristotle in the second chapter of his first Book of
Politiques, That he which flies to live in society is Deus aut Bellua, a God
or a beast: for that either he does it because he has no need of any, which is
proper to God, or else for that he will do good to none, and feels not that
natural instinct, which Man has to live in conversation, which is a sign
rather of a Beast than of a Man.

Cicero does add another reason for this purpose, to wit, the use of certain
principal virtues given unto Man, but principally justice and friendship, which
should be utterly in vain, and to no utility, if Man should not live in company
of others, for seeing the office of justice is to distribute to every one his
own: where no number is, there no distribution can be used, as also neither any
act of friendship, which yet in the society of Man is so necessary and usual,
says this excellent Man, Vt nec aqua, nec igne, nic ipso sole pluribus in
locis utamur, quam amicitia, Cicero lib. de amicitia. That we use neither water
nor fire nor the Sun it self in more places or occasions than friendship.

And to this effect, of using friendship, love and charity the one toward the
other, do Christian Doctors also, and especially Augustine in his Book of
friendship, reduce the institution of this natural instinct of living in
company: Aug. lib. de amicitia. Which seems also to be confirmed by God
himself in those words of Genesis, Dixit quoque Dominus Deus; non est bonum
hominem esse solum, faciamus ei adjutorium, simile sibi, Genesis 2. 18. God said,
It is not good that Man should be alone, let us make unto him an help or
assistant like unto himself, of which words is deduced, that as this first
society of our first Parents, was of God, and for so great purpose as here is
set down, the one to be helped by the other; so all other societies in like
manner which grow of this first, stand upon the same ground of God's Ordination
for the self same end of Man's utility.

And I have been the longer in speaking of this natural instinct to society,
for that it is the first fountain of all the rest, that ensues in a
commonwealth: for of this come, families, villages, towns, castles, cities
and commonwealths, all which Aristotle, does prove to be of nature, for that
this first inclination to live to gether (whereof all those other things do
spring) is of nature.

Out of this, is the second point before mentioned deduced, to wit, that
government also, superiority, and jurisdiction of magistrates, is likewise of
nature, for that it follows of the former, and seeing that it is impossible
for men to live together with help and commodity of the one, to the other,
except there be some Magistrate or other to keep order among them, without
which order there is nothing else to be hoped for as Job says, but horror and
confusion, Job. 10. v. 12. as for example, wheresoever a multitude is gathered
tegether, if there be not some to repress the insolent, to assist the
impotent, reward the vertnous, chasten the outrageous and minister some kind of
justice and equality unto the inhabitants: their living together would be far
more hurtful, then their living asunder, for that one would consume and devour
the other, and so we see, that upon living together follows of necessity some
kind of jurisdiction in Magistrates, and for that the former is of nature, the
other also is of nature.

All which is confirmed also by the consent and use of all nations throughout
the world, which general consent, Cicero calls, ipsius vocem naturae the
voice of nature herself: Cicero li. 1. de natura Deorum, for there were never
yet nation found either of ancient time or now in our days, by the discovery
of the Indies, or else where, among whom men living together, had not some kind
of Magistrate or superior, to govern them, which evidently declares that
this point of Magistrates is also of nature, and from God that created nature,
which point our civil law does prove in like manner in the very beginning of
our digests, where the second title of the first book is, de origin juris
civilis and omnium magistratuum, Lib. 1. digest, tit. 2. of the beginning of
the civil law and of all magistrates which beginning is referred to this first
principle, of natural instinct and Gods institution: And last of all, that God
did concur also expressly with this instinct of nature, our Divines do prove
by clear testimony of holy scripture, as when God says to Solomon, by me
Kings do reign, Prove. 8. and Paul to the Romans avoucheth, that authority is
not but of God, and therefore he which resists authority resists God, Romans
13. Which is to be understood of authority, power or jurisdiction in it self,
according to the first institution, as also when it is lawfully laid upon any
person, for otherwise when it is either wrongfully taken or unjustly used, it
may be resisted in diverse cases, for then it is not lawful Authority.

These two points then are of Nature, to wit, the Commonwealth, and Government
of the same by Magistrates, but what kind of Government each Commonwealth
will have, whether Democratia, which is popular Government by the People it
self, as Athens, Thebes, and many other Cities of Greece had in old time, and
as the Cantons of Switzers at this day have: or else Aristocratia, which is the
government of some certain chosen number of the best, as the Romans many years
were governed by Consuls and Senators, and at this day the States of this
country of Holland do imitate the same: or else Monarchia, which is the
Regiment of one; and this again either of an Emperor, King, Duke, Earl, or
the like: these particular Forms of Government (I say) are not determined by
God or Nature, as the other two points before, (for then they should be all one
in all Nations, as the other are, seeing God and Nature are one to all) but
these particular Forms are left unto every Nation and country to choose that
Form of Government, which they shall like best, and think most fit for the
Natures and conditions of their People, which Aristotle proves throughout all
the second and fourth Books of his Politiques very largely laying down diverse
kinds of Governments in his days, as namely in Greece that of the Milesians,
Lacedaemonians, Candians, and others, and showing the causes of their
differences, which he attributes to the diversity of Men's Natures, customs,
educations and other such causes that made them make choice of such or such
Form of Government.

And this might be proved also by infinite other Examples both of times past
and present, and in all Nations and countries both Christian and otherwise,
which have not had only different fashions of Governments the one from the
other, but even among themselves at one time, one Form of Government, And
another at other times; for the Romans first had Kings, and after rejecting
them for their evil Government, they chose Consuls, which were two Governors
for every Year, whose Authority yet they limited by a multitude of senators,
which were of their counsel, and these Men's power was restrained also by adding
Tribunes of the People, and sometimes Dictatours, and finally they came to be
governed last of all by Emperors.

The like might be said of Carthage in Africa, and many Cities and
Commonwealths of Greece, which in diverse seasons, and upon diverse causes have
taken different Forms of Government to themselves.

The like we see in Europe at this day, for in only Italy, what different
Forms of Government have you? Naples has a King for their Sovereign, Roma
the Pope, and under him one Senator in place of so many as were wont to be in
that Commonwealth. Venice and Genua have Senators and Dukes, but little
Authority have their Dukes. Florence, Farara, Mantua, Parma, Vrbin, and Savoy,
have their Dukes only without Senators, and their power is absolute. Milan
was once a Kingdom but now a Dukedom, the like is of Burgundy, Lorain, Bavire,
Gasconie, and Britain the lesser, all which once had their distinct Kings, and
now have Dukes for their supreme Governors. The like may be said of all
Germany, that many Years together had one King over all, which now is divided
into so many Duke ^omes, Earldomes, and other like Titles of Supreme Princes.

But the contrary is of Castile, Aragon, Portugal, Barcelona, and other
Kingdoms this day in Spain, which were first Earldomes only, and after
Dukedomes, and then Kingdoms, and now again are all under one Monarchy. The
like is of Bohemie and Polonia, which were but Dukedomes in old time, and now
are Kingdoms. The like may be said of France also after the expulsion of the
Romans, which was first a Monarchy under Pharamond their first King, and so
continued for many Years under Clodion, Meronys, Childrik, and Clodovaus,
their first christened Kings, but after they divided it into four Kingdoms, to
wit, one of Paris, another of Suessons, the third of Orleans, and the fourth of
Metts, and so it continued for diverse years, but yet afterward they made it
one Monarchy again.

England also was first a Monarchy under the Britains, and then a Province
under the Romans, and after that divided into seven Kingdoms at once under the
Saxons, and now a Monarchy again under the English, and all this by Gods
permission and approbation, who in token thereof, suffered his own peculiar
People also of Israel to be under diverse manners of Governments in diverse
times, as first under Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; then under
Captains, as Moses, Joshua, and the like; then under Judges, as Othoniel,
Aiod, and Gideon; then under high Priests, as Heli and Samuel; then under
Kings, as Saul, David, and the rest; and then under Captains and high Priests
again, as Zorobabel, Judas, Machabeus, and his Brethren, until the Government
was lastly taken from them, and they brought under the power of the Romans, and
foreign Kings appointed by them.

So as of all this, there can be no doubt, but that the Commonwealth has
power to choose their own fashion of Government, as also to change the same upon
reasonable causes, as we see in all times and Countries, and God no doubt
approves what the Realm determines in this point, for otherwise nothing
could be certain, for that of these changes does depend all that has succeeded.

In like manner, is it evident, that as the Commonwealth has this Authority
to choose and change her Government, so has she also to limit the same with
what Laws and conditions she pleases, whereof ensues the great diversity of
Authority and power which each one of the former Governments has, as for
example, the Consuls of Rome were but for one year, other Officers and
Magistrates were for more or less time, as their Commonwealth did a lot them.
The Dukes of Venice at this day are for their lives (except in certain cases
wherein they may be deposed) and those of Genua only for two years, and their
power is very small and much limited, and their Heirs have no claim or
pretense at all after them to that Dignity, as the children and next of kin of
other Dukes of Italy have, though in different sort also, for that the
Dukedomes of Ferara, Vrbin, and Parma, are limited only to Heirs male, and
for defect thereof to return to the Pope or Sea of Rome: Florence, and Mantua,
for like defects are to return to the Empire, and do not pass to the Heirs
female, or to the next of kin, as Savoy and some others do.

And now if we respect God and Nature, as well might all these Governments
follow one Law, as so different, for that neither God nor Nature prescribes
any of these particular Forms, but concurreth with any that the Commonwealth
it self appoints, and so it is to be believed, that God and Nature concurred
as well with Italy when it had but one Prince, as now when it has so many; and
the like with Germany, and also with Swizerland, which once was one
Commonwealth only under the Dukes and Marquesses of Austria, and now are
divided into thirteen Cantons or Commonwealths under popular Magistrates of
their own, as has been said; so as when Men talk of a natural Prince or
natural Successor (as many times I have heard the word used) if it be
understood of one that is borne in the same Realm or Country, and so of our
own natural Blood, it has some sense, though he may be both good or bad, (and
none has been worse or more cruel many times than home-borne Princes:) but if
it be meant as though any Prince had his particular Government or interest to
succeed by institution of Nattre, it is ridiculous, for that Nature gives it
not as has been declared, but the particular constitution of every
Commonwealth within it self.

The second Speech.
FIrst of all is to be considered, that of all other Forms of Government the
Monarchy of King in it self, appears to be the most excellent and perfect,
and so do hold not only Aristotle in his forenamed Books of Politiques, and
namely in his third (with this only condition that he govern by Laws) but
Seneca also and Plutarch in his Morals, and namely in that special Treatise
wherein he discusseth, An sens sit Respub, tracta^^da, whether an old man ought
to take upon him the Government of a Commonwealth or no; where he says that,
Reg^um inter omnes respub. consummatissima and prima est, a Kingdom is the most
perfect Commonwealth among all other, and the very first, that is to say, the
most perfect, for that it has most commodities and least inconveniences in it
self of any other Government, and it is the first of all other; for that all
People commonly made their choice at the beginning of this kind of Government,
so as of all other it is most ancient; for so we read that among the Syrians,
Medes, and Persians; their first Governors were Kings; and when the children
of Israel did ask a King at the hands of Samuel, 1 Reg. 8. which was a
thousand years before the coming of Christ, they alleged for one reason, that
all Nations round about them had Kings for their Governors, and at the very
same time, the chiefest Cities and Common wealths of Greece, as the
Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Corinthians, and others, whereof diverse afterward
took other Governments unto themselves, for the abuses in kingly Government
committed, at that time were governed by Kings, as at large proves Dyanisius
Halicarnasseus, Coruelius Tacitus, Cicero, and others. Dyonis. Hal. l. 5.
Cornel. Tac. l. 3. Cic. l. 1. Offic.

The Romans also began with Kings, as before I have noted, and the reason of
this is, for that as our Christian Doctors do gather, (especially Hierome and
Chrysostom, Hierom. l. 2. Epist. 12. Chrisost. hom. 23.) this kind of
Government resembles most of all the Government of God, that is but one: it
represents the excellency of one sun that lightneth all the Planets, of one
soul in the body that governs all the powers and members thereof, and finally
they show it also to be most conform unto Nature, by example of the Bees which
do choose unto themselves a King, and do live under a Monarchy, as the most
excellentest of all other Governments, to which purpose also I have heard
alleged sometimes by diverse those words of Peter, Subjecti estote omni
humanae creaturae propter Deum, sint Regi quasi precellenti, sive ducibus ab co
missis, etc. 1 Pet. 2. Be you subject to every humane creature for God's cause,
whether it be to a King, as the most excellent, or to Dukes sent by God for the
punishment of evil men and praise of the good: cut of which words some do note
two points, first, that as on the one side the Apostle does plainly teach, that
the Magistrates Authority is from God by his first institution, in that he
says, We must be subject to them for God's cause; so on the other side, he
calls it a humane creature, or a thing created by man, for that by man's free
choice this particular Form of Government (as al other also) is appointed in
every Commonwealth, and that by man's election and consent, the same is laid
upon some particular man or woman, according to the Laws of every Country,
all which makes it rightly to be called both a humane creature, and from God.

The second point which diverse do note out of these words, is, that Peter
calls a King most excellent, which though it may be understood in respect of
the Dukes Authority, whereof immediately there follows mention; yet may it
seem also to be taken and verified of kingly Authority in respect of all other
Governments, seeing that at this time when the Apostle wrote this Epistle, the
chief Governor of the world was not called King but Emperor, and therefore
seeing in such a time Peter affirms the state of kingly Government to be most
excellent, it may seem he meant it absolutely, signifying thereby that this is
the best kind of Government among all others, though to confess the truth
between the Title of King and Emperor there is little or no difference in
substance, but only in name, for that the Authority is equal, every King is an
Emperor in his own Kingdom.

And finally the excellency of this Government above all other, is not only
proved by the perfection thereof in it self, as for that it is most ancient,
simple, and conform unto Nature, and most resembling the Government of God
himself, as has been said, but by the effects also and utility that it
brings unto the Subjects, with far less inconveniences than any other
Form of Government whatsoever if we compare them together; for in the Monarchy
of one King, there is more unity, agreement and conformity, and thereby also
celerity commonly in dispatching of businesses, and in defending the
Commonwealth, than where many Heads be; less passions also, in one man than
in many; as for example, in Demecratia, where the common people do bear the
chief sway, which is Bellua multorum capitum, as Cicero wisely said, that is, a
Beast of many heads. Cicero l. 1. Offic. Democratis. There is nothing but
sedition, trouble, tumults, outrages, and injustices committed upon every
little occasion, especially where crafty and cunning men may be admitted to
incense or assuage them with sugared words, such as were the Orators in Athens,
and other Cities of Greece, that had this Government, and the Tribunes of the
People of Rome, and other such popular and plausible men, who could move the
waves, raise up the winds, and inkindle the fire of the vulgar Peoples
affections, passions or furies at their pleasure, by which we see that of all
other Common wealths, these of popular Government, have soonest come to rain,
which might be showed not only by old examples of Greece, Asia, and Africa,
but also of many Cities of Italy, as Florence, Bolonia, Siena, Pisa, Arezzo,
Spoleto, Perugio, Padua, and others, which upon the fall or diminution of the
Roman Empire (under which they were before) took unto themselves popular
Governments, wherein they were so tossed with continual sedition, mutinies, and
banding of Factions, as they could never have end thereof, until after infinite
murders, massacres, and inundation of blood, they came in the end to be under
the Monarchy of some one Prince or other, as at this day they remain: so that
of all other Governments this is the worst.

The second Form, which is called Oligarchia or Aristocratia (for that a few
and those presumed to be the best, are joined together in Authority) as it does
participate something of both the other Governments, to wit, of Monarchia and
Democratia, or rather tempereth them both: so has it both good and evil in it,
but yet inclines more to the evil, for the disunion that commonly by man's
infirmity and malice is among those Heads, for which cause the States before
named of Venice and Genua, which were wont to have simply this Government of
Aristocratia, in that their Regiment was by certain chose Senators, were
enforced in the end to choose Dukes also, as Heads of their Senates, for
avoiding of dissension, and so they have at this day, though their Authority be
but small, as has been said.

We see also by the examples of Carthage and Rome, where Government of
Aristocratia took place, that the division and factions among the Senators of
Carthage, was the cause why aid and succor was not sent to Hannibal their
Captain in Italy after his so great and important victory at Cannas, which was
the very cause of the saving of the Roman Empire, and the loss of their own:
and also afterward the emulations, discord, and dis union of the Roman
Senators among themselves in the affairs and contentions of Marius and Sylla,
and of Pompry and Caesar, was the occasion of all their destruction, and of
their Commonwealth with them. Tit. Live. l. 30. Entrop l. 3. Oros. l. 5. and 6.

Evident then it is, that of all other Governments the Monarchy is the best,
and least subject to the inconveniences that other Governments have, and if the
Prince that governs alone, and has supreme authority to himself, as he
resembles God in this point of sole Government, so could he resemble him also,
in wise, discreet, and just Government, and in ruling without passion; no
doubt, but that nothing more excellent in the World could be desired for the
perfect felicity of his Subjects: but for that a King or Prince is a man as
others be, and thereby not only subject to errors in judgment, but also to
passionate affections in his will: for this cause, it was necessary that the
Commonwealth, as it gave him this great power over them, so it should assign
him also the best helps that might be, for directing and rectifying both his
will and judgment, and make him therein as like in Government to God, whom he
represents, as man's frailty can reach unto.

For this consideration they assigned to him first of all the assistance and
direction of Law, whereby to govern, which Law Aristotle says, Est meus
quaelam nulle perturbata affectu, Arist. l. 3. Pol. c. ult. It is a certain
mind disquieted with no disordinate affection, as men's minds commonly be, for
that when a Law is made, for the most part, it is made upon due considlration
and deliberation, and without perturbation of evil affections, as anger, envy,
hatred, rashness, or the like passions, and it is referred to some good end
and commodity of the Commonwealth, which Law being once made, remains so
still without alteration or partial affection, being indifferent to all, and
partial to none, but tells one tale to every man; and in this it resembles
the perfection as it were of God himself, for the which cause the said
Philosopher in the same place adds a notable wise saying, to wit, That he
which joyneth a Law to govern with the Prince, joyneth God to the Prince, but
be that joyneth to the Prince his affection to govern, joyneth a beast. Ar. l.
3. Pol. c. 12. For that men's affections and concupiscences are common also to
Beasts: so that a Prince ruling by Law is more than a man, or a man deified,
and a Prince ruling by affections, is less than a man, or a man brutified. In
another place also the same Philosopher says, that a Prince that leaves Law
and rules himself and others by his own appetite and affections, Of all
creatures is the worst, and of all beasts is the most furious and dangerous.
Arist. l. 1. Pol. c. 2. For that nothing is so outrageous, as injustice armed,
and no armor is so strong, as wit and authority. whereof the first he has in
that he is a man, and the other in that he is a Prince.

For this cause then all Commonwealths have prescribed Laws unto their
Princes, to govern thereby, as by a most excellent, certain and immutable rule;
to which sense Cicero said, Leges sunt inventae ut omnibus semper una and eadem
voce loquerentur; Laws were invented to the end they should speak in one and
the self same sense to all men Cic. l. 2. Offic. For which very reason in like
manner these Laws have been called by Philosophers a rule or square,
inflexible, and by Aristotle in particular, a mind without passion, as has
been said, but the Prophet David who was also a Prince and King, seems to
call it by the name of Discipline, for that as Discipline does keep all the
parts of a man or of a particular house in order, so Law well ministered keeps
all the parts of a Commonwealth in good order, and to show how securely God
exacteth this at all Princes hands, he says these words, And now learn ye
Kings and be instructed, ye that judge the World, serve God in fear, and
rejoice in him with trembling, embrace ye discipline, least he enter into
wrath, and so ye perish from the way of righteousness. Psalm. 2. Which words
being uttered by a Prophet and King do contain diverse points of much
consideration for this purpose; as first, that Kings and Princes are bound to
learn Law and Discipline: and secondly, to observe the same with great
humility and fear of Gods wrath: and thirdly, that if they do not, they shall
perish from the way of righteousness, as though the greatest plague of all to
a Prince were to lose the way of righteousness, law and reason in his
Government, and to give himself over to passion, and his own will, whereby
they are sure to come to shipwreck: and thus much of the first help.

The second help that Commonwealths have given to their Kings and Princes,
especially in later Ages, has been certain Councels and Councelours with whom
to consult in matters of most importance, as we see the Parliaments in England
and France, the Courts in Spain, and Diets in Germany, without which no matter
of great moment can be concluded; and besides this, commonly every King has
his Privy Council, whom he is bound to hear, and this was done to temper
somewhat the absolute form of a Monarchy, whose danger is by reason of his
sole Authority to fall into tyranny, as Aristotle wisely notes in his fourth
Book of Politiques, showing the inconvenience or dangers of this Government;
which is the cause that we have few or no simple Monarchies now in the World,
especially among Christians, but all are mixed lightly with diverse points of the
other two forms of Government also; and namely in England all three do enter
more or less; for in that there is one King or Queen, it is a Monarchy; in
that it has certain Councels which must be heard: it participateth of
Aristocratia, and in that the Commonalty have their voices and Burgesses in
Parliament, it takes part also of Democratia, or popular Government, All which
linitations of the Princes absolute Authority, as you see, do come from the
Commonwealth, as having authority above their Princes for their restraint to
the good of the Realm.

From like Authority, and for like considerations have come the limitations of
other Kings and kingly power in all times and Countries, from the beginning,
both touching themselves and their posterity and successors, as briefly in
this place I shall declare.

And first of all, if we will consider the two most renowned and allowed States
of all the World, I mean of the Romans and Grecians, we shall find that both
of them began with Kings, but yet with far different Laws and restraints
about their Authorities; for in Rome the Kings that succeeded Romulus their
first Founder, had as great and absolute Authority as ours have now a days,
but yet their children or next in blood succeeded them not of necessity, but
new Kings were chosen partly by the Senate, and partly by the people, as Titus
Livius testifies, Livil. 1 dec. 1. So as of three most excellent Kings that
ensued immediately after Romulus, to wit, Numa Pompilius, Tullius Hostilius, and
Tarquinius Priscus, none of them were of the Blood Royal, nor of kin the one to
the other, no nor yet Romans borne, but chosen rather from among strangers, for
their virtue and valor, and that by election of the Senate and consent of the
People.

In Grecce, and namely among the Lacedaemonians, which was the most eminent
Kingdom among others at that time, the succession of children after their
fathers was more certain, but yet Aristotle notes, Arist. l. 2. c. 8. Pol.
Plutarch. in Lycurg. Their authority and power was so restrained by certain
Officers of the people named Ephori (which commonly were five in number) as
they were not only checked and chastened by them, if occasion served, but also
deprived and sometimes put to death; for which cause the said Philosopher did
justly mislike this eminent jurisdiction of the Ephori over their Kings: but
yet hereby we see what authority the Commonwealth had in this case, and what
their meaning was in making Laws, and restraining their Kings power, to wit,
thereby the more to bind them to do justice, which Cicero in his Offices
utters in these words, Justitiae fruendae causa apud majores nostros and in
Asia, and in Europa been morati Reges olim sunt constiti, etc. at cum jus
aquabile ab (...) viro homines non consequerentur, inventae sunt leges. Cic. l.
2. Offic. Good Kings were appointed in old time among our Ancestors in Asia
and Europe, to the end thereby to obtain justice, but when men could not obtain
equal justice at one man's hands, they invented Laws.

The same reason yeildeth the same Philosopher in another place, not only of
the first institution of Kingdoms, but also of the change thereof again into
other Government, when these were abused. Omnes antiquae gentes regibus quondam
paruerunt, etc. Cic. l. 3. de legibus. That is, All old Nations did live under
Kingdoms at the beginning, which kind of Government first they gave unto the
most just, and wisest men which they could find, and also after for love of
them, they gave the same to their posterity or next in kin, as now also it
remains where kingly Government is in use: but other Countries which liked
not that form of Government, and have shaken it off, have done it not that
they will not be under any, but for that they will not be ever under one only.

Thus far Cicero, and speaks this principally in defense of his own
Commonwealth I mean the Roman: which had cast off that kind of Government, as
before has been said, for the offense they had taken against certain Kings of
theirs, and first of all, against Romulus himself their first Founder, for
reigning at his pleasure without law, as Titus Livius testifies, for which
cause the Senators at length slew him, and cut him in small pieces. And
afterward they were greatly grieved at the entering of Scrvius Tullius their
sixth King, for that he gat the Crown by fraud and not by Election of the
Senate, and special approbation of the people, as he should have done: but most
of all they were exasperated by the proceeding of their seventh King named
Lucius Tarquinius, surnamed the proud, who for that he neglected the Laws of
Government prescribed to him by the Commonwealth, as namely in that he
consulted not with the Senate in matters of great importance, and for that he
made War and Peace of his own head, and for for that he appointed to himself a
Guard, as though he had mistrusted the People, and for that he did use
injustice to diverse particular men, and suffered his children to be insolent,
he was expelled with all his posterity, and the Government of Rome changed from
a Kingdom unto the Regiment of Consuls, after two hundred years that the other
had endured.

And thus much of those Kingdoms of Italy and Greece: and if likewise we will
look upon other Kingdoms of Europe, we shall see the very same, to wit, that
every Kingdom and Country has his particular Laws prescribed to their Kings
by the Common wealth, both for their Government, Authority, and Succession in
the same: for if we behold the Roman Empire it self, as it is at this day
annexed to the German Electours, though it be first in Dignity among Christian
Princes, yet shall we see it so restrained by particular Laws, as the Emperor
can do much less in his State than other Kings in theirs, for he can neither
make War, nor exact any contribution of men, or money, thereunto, but by the
free leave and consent of all the States of the German Die^ or Parliament, and
for his children or next in kin, they have no action, interest, or pretense at
all to succeed in their Fathers Dignity, but only by free Election, if they
shall be thought worthy nay, one of the chiefest points that the Emperor must
swear at his entrance, as Sleydan writes, Sleydan l. 8. Anno 1532. is this,
That he shall never go about to make the Dignity of the Emperor peculiar or
bereditary to his Family, but leave it unto the seven Electours free in their
power, to choose his Successor, according to the Law made by the Pope ^regory
the fifth, and the Emperor Charles the fourth in this behalf. Blond. Dicad.
2. l. 3. Crant. l. c. 25.

The Kingdoms of Poloma and Bohemia do go much after the same fashion, both
for their restrant of power, and succession to their Kings. For first touching
their Authority, they have great limitation, neither can they do any thing of
great moment, without the consent of certain principal men called Palatines or
Castellians, neither may their children or next of Blood succeed except they be
chosen, as in the Empire. Herbert. l. 9. Hist. Pol. Cromerus l. 3. Hist. Polon.

In Spain, France, and England, the privileges of Kings are far more eminent
in both these points, for that both their Authority is much more absolute, and
their next in Blood do ordinarily succeed, but yet in different manner; for as
touching authority, it seems that the Kings of Spain and France, have greater
than the King of England, for that every ordination of these two Kings is Law
in it self, without further approbation of the Commonwealth, which holds
not in England, where no general Law can be made without consent of Parliament;
but in the other point of Succession, it appears that the restraint is far
greater in those other two Countries than in England, for that in Spain the
next in Blood cannot succeed be he never so lawfully descended, but by a new
approbation of the Nobility, and States of the Realm, as it is expressly set
down in the two ancient Councels of Tolledo the fourth and fifth, Council. blet.
4. c. 74. and coneil. s. c. 3. In confirmation whereof we see at this day, that
the King of Spain's own son, cannot succeed nor be called Prince, except he be
first sworn by the said Nobility and States in token of their new consent; and
so we have seen it practiced in our days toward three or four of king Philips
children, which have succeeded the one after the other in the Title of Princes
of Spain, and at every change a new Oath required at the Subjects hands, for
their admission to the said Dignity, which is not used in the Kings children of
France or England.

In France the World knows, how Women are not admitted to succeed in the
Crown be they never so near in Blood, neither any of their Issue, though it be
Male; for which cause I doubt not but you remember how King Edward the third of
England, though he were son and heir unto a daughter of France, whose three
brethren were kings, and left her sole heir to her father king Philip the
fourth surnamed the Fair, yet was he put by the Crown, Anne 1340. Anil. hist.
Franc. l. 2. Gerard. du Haylan. l. 14. hist. Franc. as also was the king of
Navar at the same time, who was son and heir unto this woman's eldest brothers
daughter, named Lewis Huttin king of France, (which king of Nav^r thereby
seemed also to be before king Edward of England) but yet were they both put by
it, and Philip de Vallois, a brothers son of Philip the fair, was preferred to
it, by general decree of the States of France, and by verdict of the whole
Parliament of Paris, gathered about the same affairs. Franc. Belfor. l. 5. c.
1. Anno 1327.

Neither did it avail, that the two kings aforesaid alleged, that it was
against reason and conscience, and custom of all Nations, to exclude women,
from the Succession of the Crown which appertained unto them by propinquity of
Blood, seeing both Nature and God has made them capable of such Succession
every where, as it appears by example of all other Nations, and in the old
Testament among the people of God it self, where we see Women have been
admitted, unto kingdoms by succession, but all this (I say) prevailed not,
with the French as it did not also since for the admission of Dona Isabella
Eugenia Clara, Infanta of Spain, unto the said Crown of France, though by
dissent of Blood there be no question of her next propinquity, for that she was
the eldest child of the king's eldest sister.

The like exclusion was then made against the prince of Lorain, though he was a
man and nephew to the king, for that his Title was by a Woman, to wit, his
mother, that was younger sister unto king Henry of France.

And albeit the Law called Salica by the Frenchmen, by virtue whereof they
pretend to exclude the Succession of Women, be no very ancient Law, as the
French themselves do confess, and much less made by Pharamond their first
king, or in those ancient times as others without ground do affirm. Gerard. du
Hail. l. 13. hist. Fra^c. and Anno 1317. and l. 14. Anno 1328 and l. 3. de
l'Estat defrunce. Yet do we see that it is sufficient, to bind all Princes and
Subjects of that Realm, to observe the same, and to alter the course of
natural Descent, and nearness of Blood, as we have seen, and that the king of
Navar and some others of his race by virtue of this only Law did pretend to be
next in Succession to this goodly Crown, though in nearness of Blood they were
farther off, by many degrees from king Henry the third, than either the
foresaid Infanta of Spain, or the prince of Lorain, who were children of his
own sisters, which point yet in England were great disorder, and would not be
suffered, for that our Laws are otherwise, and who made these Laws, but the
Commonwealth it self.

By all which we see that diverse Kingdoms, have diverse laws and customs in
the matter of succession, and that it is not enough for a man to allege bare
propinquity of blood, thereby to prevail, for that he may be excluded or put
back by diverse other circumstances, for sundry other reasons which afterward we
shall discuss.

Yea, not only in this point has the commonwealth authority to put back the
next inheritors upon lawful considerations, but also to dispossess them that
have bin lawfully put in possession, if they fulfill not the laws and
conditions, by which and for which, their dignity was given them. Which point
as it cannot serve for wicked men to be troublesome unto their Governors, for
their own interests or appetites, so yet when it is done upon just and urgent
causes and by public authority of the whole body the justice thereof is
plain, not only by the grounds and reasons before alleged, but also by those
examples of the Romans and Grecians already mentioned, who lawfully deposed
their Kings upon just considerations, and changed also their Monarchy and
Kingly Government, into other form of regiment, And it might be proved also,
by examples of all other nations, and this perhaps with a circumstance which
every man considers not, to wit, That God has wonderfully concurred (for the
most part.) with such juditiall acts of the Commonwealth against their evil
Princes, not only in prospering the same, but by giving them also commonly
some notable successor in place of the deposed, thereby has to justify the
fact, and to remedy the fault of him that went before.

I am far from the opinion of those people of our days, or of old, who make so
little account of their duty toward Princes, as be their title what it will,
yet for every mislike of their own they are ready to band against them
wheresoever they think they may make their party good, inventing a thousand
calumniations for their discredit without conscience or reason, whom in deed I
do think to have little conscience or none at all but rather to be those whom
the Apostles Peter and Jude did speak of when they said. Novit Dominus iuiquos
in diem judicii reservare, cruciandos, magis autem eos qui dominitionem
contemnunt, audaces, sbi placentes, etc. 2 Pet 2 10. J^de 8. God knows how to
reserve the wicked unto the day of judgment, there to be tormented, but much
more those which do contemn domination or government, and are bold and liking
of themselves.

Nay further, I am of opinion, that whatsoever a Princes Title be, if once he
be settled in the Crown, and admitted by the Commonwealth (for of all other
holds I esteem the tenure of a Crown) if so it may be termed (the most
irregular and exraordinary) every man is bound to settle his conscience to obey
the same, In all that lawfully he may command, and this without examination of
his Title or Interest, for that God disposes of kingdoms, and works his
will in princes affairs, as he pleases, and this by extraordinary means
oftentimes, so that if we should examine the Titles at this day of all the
princes in Christendom by the ordinary rule of private men's rights,
successions, or tenures, should find so many knots and difficulties, as it
were hard for any to make the same plain, but only the supreme Law of God's
disposition, which can dispense in what he lists.

This is my opinion in this behalf for true and quiet obedience, and yet on
the other side, as far off am I from the abject and wicked flattery of such
as affirm princes to be subject to no Law or limitation at all, either in
authority, government, life, or succession, but as though by Nature they had
been created kings from the beginning of the World, or as though the
Commonwealth had been made for them, and not they for the Commonwealth, or as
though they had begotten or purchased, or given life to the Weal-publique, and
not that the Weal-publique had exalted them, or given them their authority,
honor, and dignity; so these flatterers do free them for all obligation, duty,
reverence, or respect unto the whole Body, where of they are the Heads; nay,
expressly they say and affirm, that All men's goods, bodies, and lives, are the
Princes at their pleasures to dispose of; that they are under no Law or
account-giving whatsoever, that they succeed by Nature and generation only,
and not by any authority, admission, or approbation of the Commonwealth, and
that consequently no merit or demerit of their person is to be respected, nor
any consideration of their Na^ures or qualities, to wit, of capacity,
disposition, or other personal circumstances, is to be had or admitted, and do
they what they list, no authority is there under God to cha^ten them.

All these absurd paradoxes have some men of our days uttered in flattery of
princes, to defend a kings Title with assertions and propositions, do destroy
all Law of reason, conscience, and Commonwealth, and do bring all to such
absolute tyranny as no Realm ever did or could suffer among civil people, no
not under the dominion of the Turk himself at this day, where yet some
proportion of equity is held between the prince and the people, both in
Government and Succession, though nothing so much as in Christian Nations.

To avoid these two extremes, as all the duty, reverence, love, and obedience
before name^, is to be yielded unto every Prince which the commonwealth has
once established: so yet retains still the commonwealth her authority, not
only to restrain the same Prince, if he be exor^itant, but also to chasten and
remove him, upon due and weighty considerations, and that the same has bin
done and practiced at many times in most Nations, both Christian and otherwise
with right good success, to the weal public.

The Third Speech.
TWo points are now to be proved, First, that Commonwealths have chastised
sometimes lawfully their lawful Princes, though never so lawfully they were
descended, or otherwise lawfully put in possession of their Crown; and
secondly, that this has fallen out ever, or for the mo^^ part, commodious to the
weal public, and that it may seem that God approved and prospered the same,
by the good success and successors that insued thereof. Yet with this
protestation, that nothing be taken out of my speech, against the sacred
authority and due respect and obedience, that all men owe unto Princes, both by
Gods Law and Nature, but only this shall serve to show that as nothing under
God is more honorable, amiable, profitable, or Sovereign, than a good Prince:
so nothing is more pestilent, or brings so general destruction and
desolation as an evil Prince. And therefore as the whole body is of more
authority th^n the only head, and may cure the head if it be out of tune, so
may the weal-publique cure or purge their heads, if they infect the rest,
seeing that a body Civil may have diverse heads, by succession, and is not
bound ever to one, as a body natural is, which body natural, if it had the
same ability that when it had an aching or sickly head, it could cut it off and
take another, I doubt not, but it would so do, and that all men would confess
that it had authority sufficient and reason to do, the same rather then all
the other parts should perish or live in pain and continual torment: but yet
much more clear is the matter that we have in hand for disburdening our selves
of wicked Princes, as now I shall begin to prove unto you.

And for proof of both the points jointly, I might begin perhaps with some
examples out of the Scripture it self, but some man may chance to say, that
these things recounted there of the Jews, were not so much to be reputed for
acts of the Commonwealth, as for particular ordinations of God himself, which
yet is not any thing against me, but rather makes much for our purpose. For
that the matter is more authorized hereby, seeing that whatsoever God did
ordain or put in ^re in his Common Wealth, that may also be practiced by other
Commonwealths, now having his authority and approbation for the same.
Wherefore (said he) though I do hasten to examples that are more nearer home,
and more proper to the particular purpose whereof we treat, yet can I not omit
to note some two or three out of the Bible, that do appertain to this purpose
also, and these are the deprivation and putting to death of two wicked Kings of
Judah, named Saul and Amon, 1 Kin. 31. 4. King. 22. 44. (though both of them
were lawfully placed in that dignity) and the bringing in of David and Josia in
their rooms, who were the two most excellent princes that ever that Nation or
any other (I think) have had to govern them.

And first king Saul though he were elected by God to that royal Thron, yet was
he slain by the Philistims, by God's order as it was foretold him for his
disobedience, and not fulfilling the law and limits prescribed unto him. Amon
was lawful King also, and that by natural descent and succession, for he was
son and heir to king Manasses whom he succeeded, and yet was he slain by his
own people, Quia non ambulavit in via Domini, for that he walked not in the way
prescribed unto him by God: and unto these two kings so deprived God gave two
Successors, as I have named, the like whereof are not to be found in the whole
rank of kings for a thousand years together; for of Josias it is written,
Fecit quod crat rectum in conspectu Domini, and non declinavit neque ad dextram
neque ad sinistram. 2. Paralip. 34. 5. He did that which was right in the sight
of God, neither did he decline unto the right hand nor the left; he reigned 31
years, 2. Paralip. 35. And Jeremias the prophet that lived in his time loved
so extremely this good king, as he never ceased afterward to lament his death,
as the Scripture says, 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35. Chapters

As for king David, it shall not be needful to say any thing, how excellent a
king he was, for as many learned men do note, he was a most perfect pattern for all kings that should follow in the World, not as king Cyrus whom Xenophon did
paint out more according to his own imagination of a perfect king, that he
wished, then to the truth of the story, but rather as one that passed far in
acts that which is written of him, and this not only in matters of religion,
piety, and devotion, but also of chivalry, valor, wisdom and policy; neither
is it true which Nicholas Maehiavel the Florentine, N. Match. l. 2. c. 2. in
Tit. Live. And some others of his new unchristian school do affirm, for
defacing of Christian virtue, That religion and piety are lets oftentimes to
politic and wise Government, and do break or weaken the high spirits of
magnanimous men, to take in hand great enterprises for the Commonwealth. Aug.
l^de Gran. This (I say) is extreme false, for that as Divines are wont to say
(and it is most true) Grace does not destroy or corrupt, but perfect Nature; so
so as he which by Nature is valiant, wise, liberal, or politic, shall be the
more, if also he be pious and religious: which we see evidently in king David,
who notwithstanding all his piety, yet omitted he nothing appertaining to the
state and government of a noble, wise, and politic Prince: for first of al,
he began with reformation of his own Court and Realm in matter of good lif and
service of God, wherein he used the counsel and direction of God and of Nathan
the Prophet, as also of Abiathar and Hiram the chief Priests and of Heman his
wise Counselor 1. Par. 15. He reduced the whole Clergy into 24. degrees,
appointing 4000. Singers with diverse sorts of musical instruments, under Asaph,
Heman, and other principal men that should be Heads of the Quire. psalm. 22. and
25. He appointed all Officers needful both for his Court, and also the
Commonwealth, with the Arms of the Crown, which was a Lion, in remembrance of
the Lion which he had slain with his own hands, when he was a child; he
ordained a mynt with a peculiar form of money to be stamped: took order for
distributing relief unto the poor, and other like acts of a prudent and pious
Prince.

After all this he turned himself to his old exercise of Wars, to which he
was given from his child hood, being wonderful valiant of his own person, as
appears by the Lion and Bear that he slew with his own hands, and the courage
wherewith he took upon him the combat with Goliath; and as he had showed
himself a great Warrior and renowned Captain many years in the service of
Saul against the Philistims, and had gained many noble victories: so much more
did he after he was king himself, for that he conquered not only the
philistims, but also the Amorites, Idumeans, Moabites, with the kings and
people of Damasco and all Syria, even unto the River Euphates, and left all
these Countries peaceable to his Successor, 2 Reg. 8. and in three or four
Battles wherein David himself was present, within the space of two or three
years, almost a hundred thousand Horse and Foot slain by him, 8. paral. 18.
and that himself flew in his days eight hundred with his own hands, 2 reg.
13. Joseph. l. 7. antiqu. c. 10. and that he made by his example thirty and
seven such Captains as each one of them was able to lead and govern a whole
Army, and yet among all these expenses of Wars had he care to lay up so much
money and treasure as was sufficient for the building of that huge and
wonderful Temple after him, which he recommended to his son Solomon, and
amidst all this valor and courage of so warlike a King and Captain, had he so
much humility as to humble himself to Nathan the Prophet when he came to
rebuke him for his fault, and so much patience and charity as to pardon Semci
that reviled him, and threw stones at him in the high way as he went, and among
so many and continual businesses, both Martial and Civil, and great affairs
of the Commonwealth, he had time to write so many Psalms as we see, and to
sing praises seven times a day to Almighty God, and to feel that devotion at
his death which we read of, and finally he so lived and so dyed, as never
Prince (I think) before him, nor perhaps after him, so joined together both
valor and virtue, courage and humility, wisdom and piety, government and
devotion, nobility and religion. Wherefore though I have been somewhat longer
then I would in this example, yet has it not been from the purpose to note
somewhat in particular what two worthy Kings were put up by God in place of two
other by him deprived and deposed.

And now, if we will leave the Hebrews and return to the (...) of whom we
spoke before, we shall find diverse things notable in that state also, to the
purpose we have in hand. For before Romulus their first King having by little
and little declined into tyranny, (...) thine and cut in pieces by the Senate.
(...) 1. (which at that time contained an hundred in number) and in his place
was chosen Numa Pompilius the notablest King that ever they had, wh^ prescribed
all their order of Religion and manner of sacrifices, imitating therein and in
diverse other points, the rites and ceremonies of the Jews, as Ter^ul^ and
other Fathers does note, (...) contrahaeres, Justin. Martyr apolog. He began
also the building of their Capitol, added the two months of January and
February to the year, and did other such notable things for that Commonwealth.

Again, when Tarqui^ius the proud, their seventh and last King, was expelled
by the Senate, for his cruel government, and the whole manner of Government
changed, Tit. live. li. 1. doc. 1. Eutrop, l. 1. We see the success was
prosperous, so that not only no hurt came thereby to the Commonwealth, but
exceeding much good, their government and increase of Empire was prosperous
under their Consulls for many years in such sort, that whereas at the end of
their Kings government, they had but fifteen miles territory without their
City, it is known, that when their Consulls government ended, and was changed
by Julius Caesar, their territory reached more then fifteen thousand miles in
compass, for that they had not only all Europe under their dominion, but the
principal parts also of Asia and Africa, so as this chastisement so justly
laid upon their Kings was profitable and beneficial to their Commonwealth.

When Julius Caesar upon particular ambition had broken all Law both humane and
divine, and taken all government into his own hands alone, he was in revenge
hereof, slain by Senators in the Senate House: and Octavianus Augustus
preferred in his room, who proved afterward the most famous Emperor that ever
was.

I might note here also how Nero sixth Emperor of Rome which succeeded
lawfully his Uncle Claudius in the Empire, and being afterward deposed
sentenced to death by the Senate for his wicked government (which was the first
judicial sentence that ever the Senate gave against Emperors) albeit peace
ensued not presently, but that Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, three great
Captains of the Empire, made some little enterludes of tragical killing of
one the other, Cornel, Ta^it. lib. 20 and 21. Egesp l. 5. yet within few months
the whole Empire by that means fell upon Vespasian and his son Titus, two of
the best governors that those times ever saw.

The like might be noted of the noble rank of five excellent good Emperors, to
wit, (...), Traian Adrian, Antonius Pius, and Marcus Aurelius, that ensued in
the Empire by the just death of cruel Domitian, Europ. in viti Caesa. which
execution the Senate is thought in secret to have procured, (being not able to
perform it openly by Justice) which was seen by that, that when the act was
done, the Senate did presently by public decree allow of the some, and
d^sanulled all his barbarous acts for his exceeding cruelty, and commanded his
arms and memories to be p^lled down every where, and chose for his
successor, one Cocc^nis Norva, an italian, a man of excellent virtue, by whom
they enjoyed not only the most prosperous time of his government, but of all
those other four before named that ensued him no less worthy then himself.

Not long after, the succession of these excellent good Emperors that came to
the Crown by lawful descent of blood, a youth named Anto^inus Heliogtholus son
of the Emperor Antoninus Caracalla, and nephew to the most famous and noble
Emperor Septimius Serverus that dyed in England. Which youth as he was greatly
loved and honored a great while for so worthy a grandfather: so afterward for
his own most beastly life and foul actions, An. Dom. 124. he was deprived and
put to death by the Soldiers of Rome, at the request and common desire both of
the people and Senate, when he had reigned six years, and yet was but twenty
years of age, when he was put down, Alius lap in vita Heliog. and his death
and deprivation was approved by public act of the Senate, who ordained also
in his detestation, that never Emperor after him should be called more
Antoninus, and so it was observed, though no other name had ever been more
grateful before, to the world for the remembrance of the good Emperors that
had been so called.

This man being chastized as is said, there was preferred to the Empire in his
room a goodly young man, of his next kindred, named Alexander Severus, son to
Mamonea which was sister to Holiogabolus his mother, and being admitted by
common consent, both of the Senate, People, and Army, Herod. in vit. Seven. he
proved one of the most rarest Princes for his valor and virtue, that ever the
Roman Empire has had, so as the worthiness of Severus seemed to recompense
fully the wickedness of Heliogabolus.

I might name diverse other such examples, and among the rest that of Maxentius,
who being lawfully possessd of the Empire in Rome, as it seemed (for that he
was son to Max^minianus the Emperor that reigned with Dioclesian) yet for his
tyrannous Government, that was intolerable, it is supposed that the Senate (not
being able to match him in open strength) sent privily into England and France,
to invite Constantine to come, and do justice upon him, and so he did, and he
being drowned in the river of Tyber, Constantine surnamed afterward the Great
succeeded in the Empire, and was the man that all men know, and the first
Emperor that publicly professed himself a Christian, and planted cur faith
over all the World, and this of the Roman Empire.

And if we will come lower down, and nearer home, we have yet another example,
more remarkable perhaps than all the rest, which was the change of the Empire
from the East to the West, for the evil Government of Constantine the sixth,
who was deposed first, and his eyes put out by his own mother Irene, and the
Empire usurped by her, but being not able to rule it in such order as was
needful, for so great a Monarchy (though otherwise she were one of the rarest
women for valor and wisdom that ever the world had) she was deprived thereof
by the sentence of Leo the third, Pope of Rome, and by consent of all the
people and Senate of that City, and Charles King of France and of Germany
(surnamed afterward the great) was crowned Emperor of the West, An. 100. and so
has that succession remained unto this day, and many worthy men have succeeded
therein, and infinite acts of jurisdiction have been exercised by this
authority which were all unjust and tyrannical, if this change of the Empire,
and deposition of Irene and her son for their evil government had not been
lawful.

It were to long to run over all other Kingdoms, yet some I shall touch in
such points as are most notorious.

The two famous changes that have been made of the royal line in France, the
first from the race of Pharamond and Clodoveus to the line of Pepin, and the
second from the race of Pepin again to the line of Hugo Capetus, that endures
unto this day, Belfor l. 1. Girard. l. 3. Aemil. l. Clem. Baudi^^en la
chronique des ros de France* whereon are they founded, but upon the judicial
chastisement and deposition of two cruel Princes, the first of Childerie, the
third lawful King of France, who after ten years that he had reigned was
deposed, by Zachary the Pope at the request of the whole Nobility and Clergy of
France, or rather his deprivation was by them, and confirmed by the Pope, to
whom they alleged this reason for their doing in that behalf, as Girard
puts it down in both his French Chronicles, I mean the large and the
abbreviation, to wit, that their oath to Childerie was to honor, serve, and
obey, maintain, and defend him against all men, as long as he was just,
religious, valiant, clement, and would resist the enemies of the Crown, punish
the wicked and conserve the good, and defend the Christian faith. And for as
much as these promises (said they) were conditional, they ought not to hold or
bind longer, then that they were reciprocally observed on both parts, which
seeing they were not on the part of Childerie, they would not be any longer his
subject, and so desired Zacharias to absolve them from their oaths, which he
did, and by this means Childerie was deposed and (...) into a Monastery, where
he dyed, and in his place Pepin was chosen and crowned King, whose posterity
reigned for many years after him, and were such noble Kings as all the world
can testify.

And so continued the race of Pepin in the royal throne for almost two hundred
years together until Hugo Capetus, Hug. Cap. per an. 988. who was put into the
same throne by the same authority of the Commonwealth, and Charles of Loraine
last, of the race of Pepin, for the evil satisfaction which the French Nation
had of him was put by it, and kept prisoner during his life in the Castle of
Orleance. And thus much do affirm all the French Histories; and do attribute
to these changes, the prosperity and greatness of their present Kingdom and
Monarchy; and thus much for France, where many other examples might be
alleged, as of King Lewis the third, surnamed Faineant. For that he was
unprofitable, and of Charles surnamed Legros, that succeeded him both of them
deposed by the States of France, and other the like, of whom I shall have
occasion to speak afterward to another purpose.

But now if you please, let us step over the Pireny mountains, and look into
Spain, where there will not fail us, also diverse examples both before the
oppression of that Realm by the Moors, as also after, Council. Tolet. 4. cap.
4. Ambros. morac. l. 11. cap. 17. For that before, to wit, about the year of
Christ 630. we read of a lawful King named Flaveo Suintila put down and
deprived, both he and his posterity in the fourth Council National of Toledo,
and one Sissinando confirmed in his place, notwithstanding that Suintila were
at the beginning of his reign a very good King, and much commended by Isidorus
Archbishop of Sivill, Isidor, in Hist. hispan, who yet in the said Council was
the first man that subscribed to his deprivation.

After the entrance of the Moors also, when Spain was reduced again to the
order and government of Spanish Kings, we read Estevan de Garibay l. 13. de la
hist. de Espa. c. 15. that about the year of Christ 1282. one Don Alonso, the
eleventh of that name, King of Castile and Leon, succeeded his father Fernando
surnamed the Saint, and himself obtained the surname of Sabio and Astrologo,
that is to say, of wise and of an Astrologer, for his excellent learning and
peculiar skill in that Art, as may well appear by the Astronomy tables that at
this day go under his name, which are the most perfect, and exact that ever
were set forth, by judgment of the learned.

This man, for his evil government and especially for tyranny used toward two
nephews of his, as the Spanish Chronicler Garavay writes, was deposed of his
Kingdom by a public act of Parliament in the Town of Valiodolid, after he
had reigned 30. years, and his own son Don Sancho the fourth, was crowned
in his place, who for his valiant acts, was surnamed ^l bravo, and it turned to
great commodity of the Commonwealth.

The same Commonwealth of Spain some years after, to wit, about the year of
Christ, 1368. having to their King one Don Pedro, surnamed the cruel, for his
injurious proceeding with his Subjects, though otherwise he were lawfully
seized also of the Crown, as son and heir to King Don Alonso the twelfth, and
had reigned among them 18. years, yet for his evil government they resolved
to depose him, and so sent for a bastard brother of his, named Henry that lived
in France requesting him that he would come with some Frenchmen to assist them
in that act, and take the Crown upon himself, Garibay l. 14. c. 40. 41 which
he did, and by the help of the Spaniards and French Soldiers, he drove the
said Peter out of Spain, and himself was crowned. And albeit Edward surnamed
the black Prince of England, by order of his father King Edward the third,
restored once again the said Peter, yet was it not durable, for that Henry
having the favor of the Spaniards returned again, and deprived Peter the
second time, and slew him in fight hand to hand, which made show of more
particular favor of God in this behalf to Henry, and so he remained King of
Spain as does also his pr^geny enjoy the same unto this day, though by nature
he was a bastard, that King Peter left two daughters which were led away into
England, and there married to great Princes.

And this King Henry so put up in his place was called King Henry the second of
this name, and proved a most excellent King, and for his great nobility in
conversation, and prowess in Chivalry, was called by Excellency, El cavallero
the Kingly King, and for his exceeding benignity and liberality, was surnamed
also, El del merceedes, which is to say, the King that gave many gifts, or the
liberal franck and bountiful King, which was a great change from the other
surnamed cruel, that King Peter had before; and so you see that always I give
you a good King in place of the bad deposed.

In Portugal also before I go out of Spain, I will allege you one example
more, which is of Don Sancho the second, surnamed Capelo, fourth King of
Portugal, lawful son and heir unto Don Alanso surnamed el Gardo, who was
third King of Portugal. This Don Sancho, after he had reigned 34. years was
deprived for his defects in government by the universal consent of all
Portugal. Garibay, lib. 4. de hist. Portug. c. 19. and this his first
deprivation from all kingly rule and authority (leaving him only the bare name
of King) was approved by a general Council in Lions, Pope ^nnocentius the
fourth being there present, who at the Petition and instance of the whole
Realm of Portugal by their Ambassadors the Archbishop of Braga, Bishop of
Camibra, and diverse of the Nobility sent to Lions for that purpose, did
authorize the said State of Portugal to put in supreme government, one Don
Alonso brother to the said King Don Sarcho, who was at that time, Earl of
Bullen in Picardy, by right of his wife, and so the Portugales did, and further
also a little after they deprived their said King, and did drive him out of his
Realm into Castilla, where he lived all the rest of his life in banishment,
and dyed in Toledo without ever returning, and this Decree of the Council and
Pope at Lions, for authorizing of this fact, is yet extant in our Common Law,
in the sixth Book of Decretal^ now in print* Lib. 6. de cret. tit. 6. de
supplenda. cap. Grand. 1. And this King Don Alonso, the third which in this
sort was put up against his brother was peaceably and prosperously King of
Portugal, all the days of his life, Garibay in hist de Portug. lib. 34. cap.
20. and 21. and he was a notable King, and among other great exployts, he was
the first that set Portugal free from all subjection dependence and homage to
the Kingdom of Castile, which unto his time ^t ha^ acknowledged, and he left
for his successor his so^^, and heir, Don Dionysi^el Fabricador, to wit, the
great builder, for that he builded and founded above forty and four great
towns in Portugal, and was a most rare Prince, and his offspring rules in
Portugal unto this day.

Infinite other examples could I allege if I would examine the lives and
discents of these and other Kingdoms with their Princes, and namely, if I would
speak of the Greek Emperors, deprived for their evil government, not so much
by popular mutiny (which often happened among them) as by consent and grave
deli^e^ation of the whole State and Weal-publick, Glicas in Annal. part. 4.
Zon. Annal. co. 3. in vita Michael Calapha, as Michael Calaphates, for that he
had trodden the Cross of Christ under his feet, and was otherwise also a wicked
man, as also the Emperor Nicephorus Botoniates, for his dissolute life, and
preferring wicked men to authority, and the like, whereof I might name many,
but it would be too long.

What should I name here, the deposition made of Princes, in our days, by
other Commonwealths, as in Polonia, of Henry the third that was King of
France* and before that had been sworn King of Polonia, of which Crown of
Polonia, he was deprived by public act of Parliament, for his departing thence
without license, and not returning at his day by the said State appointed and
denounced by public Letters of peremptory commandment, which are yet extant,
In literis reip. Polon. ad Henr. Valesium page 182. 184. Vide Gagneum part. 1.
de rebus Polon. In Suetia.

What should I name the deprivations of Henry King of Suetia, who being lawful
successor and lawfully in possession after his Father, Gustavus was yet put
down by that Commonwealth and deprived, and his brother made King in his
place who was in England, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, whose
son reigned King of Polonia, Polin. 1. 32. Histor. de Franc. An. 1568. and
this fact was not only allowed of at home by all the States of that country,
but also abroad, as namely of Maximilian the Emperor, and appointed also by the
King of Denmark, and by all the Princes of Germany near about that Realm, who
saw the reasonable causes which that Commonwealth had to proceed as it did.

And a little before that, the like was practiced also in Denmark against
Cisternus their lawful King if we respect his descent in blood, for he was
son to King John that reigned before him, and crowned in his fathers life, but
yet afterward for his intolerable cruelty, he was deprived and driven into
banishment, together with his wife and three children, all which were
disinherited, and his Uncle Frederick Prince of Holsatia, was chosen King,
who^e Progeny yet remains in the Crown, and the other, though he were
married to the sister of Charles the fifth last Emperor of that name, and were
of kin also to King Henry the eight in England, yet could he never get to be
restored, ^^^pessed his time miserably, partly in banishment, and partly in
prison until he died. Sleydon. l. 4. hist. An. 1532. Mu^st. lib. 3. Cosmogra.
in d^script. D^^i'e Paulus Iovius in viris illust.

But it shall be best perhaps to end this narration with example out of England
it self, for that no where (...) have I read more markeable accidets, touching
this point, then in England, and for brevity sake I shall touch only a few
since the Conquest, for that I will go no higher though I might, as appears
by the example of King Ed^in and others, neither will I begin to stand much
upon the example of King John, though well also I might, so that by his cruel
government he made himself both odious at home and contempt^ble abroad.

After him King Henry the third was admitted, and he proved a very worthy King
after so cruel a one as had gone before him, and had been deposed (which is a
circumstance that you must always note in this narration) and he reigned more
years then ever King in England did before or after him, for he reigned full
53 years, and left his son and heir Edward the first, not inferior to
himself in manhood and virtue, who reigned 34. years and left a son named
Edward the second, who falling into the same defects of government or worse,
then King John his great Grandfather had done, was after 1. years reign
deposed also by act of Parliament holden at London the year 1326. Polyd. l.
18. hist. Anglicanae Anno 1326. and his body adjudged to perpetual prison, in
which he was at that present in the Castle of Wallingford, whither diverse both
Lords and Knights of the Parliament were sent unto him to denounce the sentence
of the Realm against him* to wit, how they had deprived him, and chosen Edward
his son in his place, Stow in the life of King Edward the 2. for which act of
choosing his son, he thanked them heartily and with many tears, acknowledged
his own unworthiness, whereupon he was degraded, his name of King first
taken from him, and he appointed to be called Edward of Carnarvan from that
hour forward. And then his Crown and ring were taken away, and the Steward of
his house brake the staff of his office in his presence, and discharged his
servants of their service, and all other people of their obedience or
allegiance toward him: and toward his maintenance he had only a 100 marks a
year allowed for his expenses, and then was he delivered also into the hands
of certain particular keepers, who led him prisoner from thence by diverse other
places using him with extreme indignity in the way, until at last they took
his life from him in the Castle of Barkley, and his son Edward the third
reigned in his place, who if we respect either valor, prowess, length of
reign, acts of chevalry, or the multitude of famous Princes, his children left
behind him, was one of the noblest Kings that ever England had, chosen in the
place of a very evil one.

But what shall we say? Is this worthiness which God gives commonly to the
successors at these changes, perpetual or certain by descent? no truly; nor
the example of one Princes punishment makes another to beware, for the next
successor after this noble Edward which was King Richard the second, though he
were not his son, but his sons son, to wit, son and heir to the excellent and
renowned black Prince of Wales, this Richard (I say) forgetting the miserable
end of his great Grandfather for evil government, as also the felicity, and
virtue of his Father and Grandfather for the contrary, suffered himself to be
abused and misled by evil councillors, to the great hurt and disquietnesse of
the Realm. For which cause after he had reigned 22. years, he was deposed by
act of Parliament holden in London, the year of our Lord 1399. and condemned
to perpetual prison in the Castle of Pomfret, Polyd. l. 20. hist. Aug. 1399.
where he was soon after put to death also, and used as the other before had
been, and in this man's place by free election was chosen for King the noble
Knight Henry Duke of Lancaster, who proved afterward a notable King, and was
father to King Henry the fifth, surnamed commonly the Alexander of England, for
that as Alexander the great conquered the most part of Asia in the space of 9.
or 10. years, so did this Henry conquer France in less then the like time.

I might reckon also this number of Princes deposed for defect in government
(though otherwise he were no evil man in life) this King Henry the fourths
nephew, I mean King Henry the sixth, who after almost forty years reign was
deposed, imprisoned, and put to death, Polyd. l. 23. ^istor. Anglie. together
with his son the Prince of Wales, by Edward the fourth of the house of York,
and the same was confirmed by the Commons, and especially by the people (...)
London, and afterward also by public Act of Parliament, in respect not only
of the title which King Edward pretended, but also and especially for that King
Henry did suffer himself to be overruled by the Queen his wife, and had broke
the articles of agreement made by the Parliament, between him and the Duke of
York, and solemnly sworn on both sides, the 8. of October. in the year 1459.
In punishment whereof and of his other negligent and evil government, (though
for his own particular life he was a good man) sentence was given against him,
partly by force and partly by law, and King Edward the fourth was put in his
place, who was no evil King and all English men well know, but one of the
renownedst for martial acts and justice that has worn the English Crown.

But after this man again, there fell another accident much more notorious,
which was that Richard Duke of Gloucester, this King Edwards younger brother, did
put to death his two nephews, this man's children, to wit, King Edward the fifth
and his little brother, and made himself King, and albeit he sinned grievously
by taking upon him the. Crown in this wicked manner yet when his nephews were
once dead, he might in reason seem to be lawful King, both in respect that he
was the next male in blood after his said brother, as also for that by diverse
acts of Parliament, both before and after the death of those infants, his title
was authorized and made good, and yet no man will say (I think) but that he was
lawfully also deposed again afterward by the Commonwealth, An. 1487. which
called out of France, Henry Earl of Richmond to chastise him, and to put him
down, and so he did, and took from him both life and Kingdom in the field,
and was King himself after him by the name of King Henry the seventh, and no
man I suppose, will say but that he was lawfully King also, which yet cannot
be, except the other might lawfully be deposed; I would have you consider in
all these mutations, what men commonly have succeeded in the places of such as
have been deposed, as namely in England, in the place of those five Kings
before named, that were deprived, to wit, John, Edward the second, Richard the
second, Henry the sixth, and Richard the third, there have succeeded the three
Henry's, to wit, the third, fourth, and seventh, and two Edwards, the third and
fourth, all most rare and valiant Princes, who have done infinite important acts
in their Commonwealths, and among other, have raised many houses to Nobility,
put down others, changed states both abroad and at home, distributed
Ecclesiastical dignities altered the course of descent in the blood Royal,
and the like, all which was unjust, and is void at this day if the changes and
deprivations of the former Princes could not be made, and consequently none of
these that do pretend the Crown of England, at this day, can have any title
at all, for that from those men they descend who were put up in place of the
deprived.

And this may be sufficient for proof of these two principal points, that
lawful Princes have oftentimes by their Commonwealths been lawfully deposed,
for misgovernment, and that God has allowed and assisted the same, with good
success unto the Weal-publique, and if this be so, or might be so, in Kings
lawfully set in possession, then much more has the said Commonwealth power and
authority to alter the succession of such as do but yet pretend to that
dignity, if there be due reason and causes for the same.

The fourth Speech.
TRuly Sir I cannot deny, but the examples are many that this Gentleman has
alleged, and they seem to prove sufficiently that which you affirmed, at the
beginning, to wit, that the Princes by you named were deprived, and put down
by their Commonwealths for their evil government. And good successors
commonly raised up in their places, and that the Commonwealth had authority
also to do it I do not greatly doubt, at leastwise, they did it, de facto,
and now to call these facts in question, were to embroyle and turn
up-side-down all the States of Christendom, as you have well signified, but
yet for that you have added this word lawfully so many times, in the course of
your narration, I would you took the pains to tell us also, by what Law, they
did the same, seeing that Belloy whom you have named before, and some other of
his opinion do affirm, Belloy apolog. catholic. part. 2. paragraf. 9. and
apol. pro rege. cap. 9. That albeit by nature the Commonwealth have authority
over the Prince, to choose and appoint him, at the beginning, as you have well
proved out of Aristotle and other ways; yet having once made him, and given up
all their authority unto him, he is now no more subject to their correction, or
restraint, but remains absolute of himself without respect to any, but only
to God alone, which they prove by the example of every particular man, that
has authority to make his Master or Prince, of his inferior; but not
afterward to put him down again, or to deprive him of the authority which he
gave him, though he should not bear himself well and gratefully, but
discourteous rather, and injuriously toward him that gave him first this
authority.

To which also they do allege the speech of the Prophet Samuel, in the first
Book of the Kings, where the people of Israel demanded to have a King to
govern over them, as other nations round about them had, and to leave the the
government of thhe high Priest under whom at that day they were. At which
demand* both God himself and Samuel were grievously offended, and Samuel by
Gods express order, protested unto them in this manner, 1. Reg. 8. Well (quoth
he) you will have a King, hearken then to this that I will say, Hoc erit ius
regis, qui imperaturus est vobis, this shall be the right and power of the King
that shall rule over you, to wit, he shall take from you your children both
Sons and Daugh^ers, your Fields and Vinyards, your Harvest also and Ren^s, your
Servants, Handmaids, and Herds of Cattie, and shall give them to his Servants*
and you shall cry unto God in that day from the face of this your King, whom
you have chosen, and God shall not hear you, for that you have demanded a King
to govern you.

Out of all which discour^e and speech of the Prophet, these men do gather,
that a King is nothing so restrained in his power, or limited to law, as you
have affirmed* but rather that his law is his own will, as by these words of
the Prophet may appear and much less may the Commonwealth chastise or deprive
him for exceeding the limits of law, or doing his will, seeing that here in
this place God does foretell, that Princes oftentimes shall commit excesses
and injuries; and yet does he not therefore will them to chasten or depose them
for the same, but rather insinuate^h, that they must take it patitiently for
their sins, and cry to God for remedy, and persevere therein, though he do
not at the first hearken to them, or grant their redress.

The fifth Speech.
I Confess, that Flatterers of Princes in these our days, have not only
affirmed, that Princes were lawless, and subject to no account, reason, or
correction whatsoever they did, but also (which is yet more absurd and
pernicious to all Commonwealths) Belloy apolog. part 2. p. 7. and apol pro
Rege c. 6. and 24. and 26. That all goods, chattels possessions, and whatsoever
else commodities temporal of the Commonwealth, are properly the Kings, and
that their subjests have only the use thereof, without any propriety at all,
so as when the King will, he may take it from them by right, without injustice
or injury, which assertions do overthrow wholly the very nature and substance
of a Common* wealth it self.

For first, to say that a King is subject to no law or limitation at all, but
may do what he will is against all that I have alleged before of the very
institution of a Commonwealth, which was to live together in justice and
order, and as I showed out of Cicero, speaking of the first Kings, Iustitiae
fruendae causa been morati Reges olim sunt constituti. For enjoying of iustic^
were Kings appointed in old time that were of good life; but if they be bound
to no justice at all, but must be born and obeyed, be they never sowicked, then
is this end and butt of the common wealth, and of all Royal authority, utterly
frustrate: then may we set up public Murderers, Ravishers, Thieves, and
Spoylers, to devour us, in stead of Kings and Governors to defend us; for such
indeed are Kings that follow no law, but passion and sensuality and do commit
injustice by their public authority; and then finally were all those Kings
beforementioned, both of the Jews, Gentiles, and Christians unlawfully
deprived, and their Successors unlawfully put up in their places, and
consequently all Princes living in Christianity at this day, who are deseended
of them, are intruders, and no lawful Princes. By the second saying also, that
all temporallties are properly the Princes, and that Subjects have only the use
thereof, without any interest of their own, no less absurdities do follow, then
of the former assertion: Institut. imp. l 2. Tit. 1.
for that first* it is against the very principle and foundation of our civil
law, which at the first entrance, and beginning, makes this division of goods,
That some are common by nature to all men, as the Air, the Sea, and the like;
other are public to all of one City or Country, but yet not common to all
ingenerall, as Rivers, Ports, and other such: some are of the community of a
City or Commonwealth, but yet not common to every particular person of that
City, as common Rents, Theators, the public house, etc some are of none, nor
properly of any man's goods, as Churches and sacred things, and some are proper
to particular men, as those which every man possesses of his own, which
divi^^on of Iustiman the Emperor, and his most learned Lawyers is not good, if
the Prince be Lord proprietary of all: nay he that made this division, being
Emperor, did great injury also to himself, ^n assigning that to others, which
by the opinion of Belloy and his fellows, was properly and truly his own, in
that he was Emperor and Lord of the world. Besides all this, so absurd a
saying is this, as it over^hroweth the whole nature of a Common* wealt^ it self
and waketh all subjects to be but very slaves. For that slaves and bondmen, as
Aristotle says, in this do diffe^ from Freemen, that slaves have only the use
of things without property or interest and cannot acquire or get to themselves
any dominion or true right in any thing for that whatsoever they do get, it
accreweth to their Master and not to themselves, and for that the condition of
an Ox or an Ass is the very same in respect of a poor man that has no slave:
for that the Ox or Ass g^t^eth nothing to himself, but only to his Master,
and can be Lord of nothing of that for which he labors: for this cause,
wittily also said Arist^tle, that bos aut asinus pauperi agricolae proservo
est, An Ox or an Ass is to a poor husbandman in stead of a boudman, and so
seeing that Malignants will needs have the state and condition of all Subjects
to be like unto this, in respect of their Prince, and that they have nothing in
propriety, but only the use and that all dominion is properly the Princes: what
does the other then make all Subjects not only slaves, but also Oxen and Asses,
and pecora campi. Last of all, for I will not overload you with reasons in a
matter so evident, if all Subjects goods be properly the Kings, why then was
Achab and Iezabell King and Queen of Israel so repre^ended by Elias, and so
punished by God, for taking away Nabothes Vinyard? seeing they took but that
which was their own. Nay, why wa^ not Naboth accused of iniquity, rebellion and
treason, for that he did hot yield up pre^ently his Vinyard, when his Princes
demanded the same, seeing it was not his, but theirs? Why do the Kings of
England France and Spain ask money of their Subjects in Parliaments, if they
might take it as their own? Why are those contributions ^ermed ^y the name of
Subsidies, helps, benevolences, lones, etc. if all be due, and not voluntary of
the Subjects part? How have Parliaments oftentimes denied to their Princes such
helps of money as they demanded? Why are their Judges appointed to determine
matter of Suits and Pleas between the Prince and his Subjects, if all be his,
and the Subject have nothing of his own? And last of all, why does the Canon
Law so straightly inhibit all Princes, upon pain of excommunication, to impose
new impositions and taxes upon their people, without great consideration and
necessity, and free consent of the givers, if all be the Princes, and nothing
of the Subject? Nay, why be all Princes generally at this day prohibited to
alienate any thing of their own Crown, without consent of their people, if they
only be Lords of all, and the People have interest in nothing.

And hereby also we may gather what the Prophet Samuel meant, when he thretned
the Jews with the disorders of Kings that should reign over them; not that
these disorders were lawful or appertained to a righteous King, but that
seeing they refused, ^o be under the moderate government of their high Priests,
and other Governors which God had given them hitherto, and required to be ruled
by Kings, as other Heathen Nations of Egypt, Babylon, Syria, and Persia were,
whose manner of Government not only Historiogr^phers, but Philosophers also,
and Aristotle among the rest does note to have been very tyrannical, Arist. l.
5. pol. c. 11. Joseph. l. 6. ant. c. 4. yet for that the Jews would needs have
that government, as a matter of more pomp and glory, then that which hitherto
they had had, Samuel did first iusinuate to them, what extortion and
wickedness those Heathen Kings did use commonly over their people, in taking
their children, servants wives, goods, and the like from them, and that many
Kings of Israel should do the like, and take it for their right and
Sovereignty, and should oppose and tyranize over them, and enforce them to cry
out to God for help, and they should not find remedy, for that so heddily they
had demanded this change of Government, which highly displeased Almighty God.

And this is the true meaning of that place, if it be well considered, and not
to authorize hereby injustice or wickedness in any King seeing the principal
point^ recorded to all Princes, and Kings through all course of Scripture, are
diligere inducrum and justitiam, apprebendere disciplinam, and ^facere
veritatem, that is to say to love judgment, and justice to admit discipline
and to execu^e truth, and this is the instruction that God gave to the Jews in
Deutronomy Deuteronomy. 17. 3. Reg. 2. and 10 for their Kings when they should have
them, which God foretold many years before they had any, and this is the
admonition that King David left unto, Psalm. the 2. his Son and successor
Solomon, at his death, and by him to all other Kiogs and Princes, and for want
of observing their points of judgment justice discipline, and truth, we see
not only Achab, and Iezabel before mentioned grievously punished but many other
Kings also by God himself, as Achaz Manasses Ioachim, and the like which had
not been justice on Gods part so to punish them if it had been lawful for them
to use that manner of proceeding toward their people, as these good
instructors of Princes in out days most fondly, and wickedly do affirm, and
thus much for that place.

But to the point by what Law the Commonwealths, did punish their evil
Princes it is by all law divine and human* divine for that God dath approve
that form of government which every commonwealth does choose unto it self, as
also the conditions, statutes und limitations which it self shall appoint unto
her Princes as largely before has been declared. And by all human law also;
for that all law both natural, national, and positive, does teach us, that
Princes are subject to law and order, and that the commonwealth which gave
them their authority for the commmon good of all may, also restrain or take
the same way again, if they abuse it to the common evil.

And whereas these men say, that like as if a private man should make his
inferior or equal to be his prince, he could not after restrain the same
again, and so neither the common wealth having once delivered away her
authority: I answer first that the comparison is not altogether like, for that
a private man though he give his voice to make a Pr^nce, yet he being but one
makes not the Prince wholly as the Common wealth does, and therefore no
marvel though it lie not in a particular man's hand to unmake him again,
besides this, a private man having given his voice to make his Prince remains
subject and inferior to the same, but the whole body though it be governed by
the Prince as by the head, yet is it not inferior but superior to the Prince;
neither so gives the common wealth her authority and power up to any Prince,
that she depriveth her self utterly of the same, when need shall require to use
it for her defense for which she gave it. And finally which is the chiefest
reason of all, and the very ground and foundation indeed of all Kings authority
among christians the power and authority which the Prince has from the common
wealth is in very truth not absolute, but potestas vicaria or deligata, that is
to say a power deligate, or power by commission from the common wealth, which
is given with such restrictions cautels, and conditions yea, wi^h such plain
exceptions, promises and oaths of both parties, (I mean between the King and
common wealth at the day of his admission or coronation) as if the same be not
kept, but wilfully broken, on either part, then is the other not bound to
observe his promise neither, though never so solemnly made or sworn for that in
all bargains, agreements and con^racts, where on part is bound mutually and
reciprocally to the other, by oath, vow, or condition, there, if one side go
from his promise, the other stands not obliged to perform his: and this is
so notorious by all law, both of nature and nations, and so conform to all
reason and equity, that it is put among the very rules of both the civil and
cannon law where it is said, frustra a fidem sibi quis postulat servari ab eo,
cui sidem a se prestitam servare recusat. He does in vain require promise to
be kept unto him at an other man's hands to whom he refuses to perform that
which himself promised and again. Non abstringitur quis ^uramento ad
implendam quod juravit, si ab alia part non impletur, cujus respectu praebuit
juramentum. A man is not bound to perform that which by oath he pr^mised, if
on the other part, that be not performed in respect whereof this oath was made:
as for example, if two should swear the one to assist the other upon the way
in all respect^, and after falling upon enemies that were either kin or friends
to the one of them, and he should take their part against his fellow; clear it
is, that the other were not bound to keep his oath toward that Party that has
so wickedly broken it unto him. Nay, not only in this case, that is so evident
and palpable by nature it self, but in many other also, it is both lawful,
honest, and convenient, to leave sometimes the performance of our oath; as
namely, when the fulfilling thereof should contain any notable hurt or
inconvenience against Religion, Piety, justice, honesty, or the weal public,
or against the party himself to whom it was made, as if a man had sworn to
restore a sword to a mad or furious man, wherewith it were likely he would
destroy himself and others, and other like cases, which Cicero puts down in
his first book of offices, and deduceth them from the very ground of nature and
reason it self, and says that it were contrary to the duty of a good or honest
man, in such cases to perform his promise. Our Divines do also allege the
example of Herod, that had sworn to the daughter of Herod as to give her what
she demanded, who demanding the head of St. John Baptist, Mat. 24 though Herod
were sorry for the same; yet says the text, that for his oaths sake he
commanded it to be performed, which yet no man will deny, but that it had been
far better left unperformed and the oath better broken then fulfilled,
according to another rule of the law, which says, in malis promissis fidem non
expedit observari, Regul. 68. in fine 6. Decret. it is not expedient to keep
our promise in things evil promised. And finally to this purpose, to wit, to
determine how many ways an oath may be lawfully broken or not kept, there is a
whole title in the Canon law, containing 36 chapters, wherein are set down many
and diverse most excellent and evident cases about the same, determined by
Gregory the 1. and other ancient Popes and Doctors; and in the second part of
the Decret. there is alleged this sentence out of Isidorus, and established
for law, in malis promissis rescinde fidem, in turpi voto muta decretum, impia
enim promisso quae scelere impletur, that is, in evil promises perform not
your word, in an unlawful vow or oath change your determination, for it is an
impious promise which cannot be fulfilled but with wickedness, and the very
same matter is handled in the question following, which is the fist, throughout
23 whole chapters together. So as nothing is more largly handled in our law,
both Civil and Canon, then this matter of promises and oaths how and when and
why, and in what cases they hold or bind* and when no^. All which, to apply it
now unto our matter of Kings, that we have in hand, we are to understand that
two evident cases are touched here, as you see, when a Subjects oath or promise
of obedience may be left unperformed toward his Prince: the first when the
Prince observes not at all his promise and oath made to the Commonwealth, at
his admission or coronation, and the other when it should turn to the notable
damage of the weal public (for whose only good the Princes office was
ordained and proved* if the Subject should keep and perform his oath and
promise made unto his Prince. And both these cases are touched in the
deprivation of Childerike the last K of France, of the first line of Pharamond,
for that as Paulus, Em^lus, Belforest, G^rard, and other French stories do
testify, Em^l. l. 2. Hist Fran Belfor^n vita childe^ Girard lib 3. the Bishop
of Wirtsburg, that in the name of all the Nobility and Commonwealth of France,
made his Speech to Zachary the Pope for his deposition, and for the election of
Pepin in his place, alleged these reasons, saying.

Truth it is, that the French have sworn fidelity unto Ch^ldericke, as to their
true and natural King but yet with condition, that he on his part should also
perform the points that are incident to his office, which are

To defend the Commonwealth, protect the Church of Christ resist the wicked
advance the good and the like; and it he do this then the F^ench are ready to
continue their obedience and allegiance unto him: but if he be apt for none of
these things, neither fit, either for a Captain in War, or for a Head in Peace;
and if nothing else may be expected while he is King, but detriment to the
State, ignominy to the Nation, danger to Christ and Religion, and destruction
to the Weal Public, then it is lawful for you no doubt, most holy Father, to
deliver the French from this band of their oath, and to testify that no
promise can bind this Nation in particular, to that which may be hurtful to
all Christendom ingenerall. Thus far that Bishop and his speech was allowed,
and Chelderick deposed, and Pepin made King in his place.

By this then you see the ground whereon depends the righteous and lawful
deposition and chastisement of wicked Princes, viz. their failing in their oath
and promises, which they made at their first en^rance, that they would rule and
govern justly, according to law, conscience, equity, and religion, wherein when
they fail, or wilfully decline, casting behind them all respect of obligation
and duty, to the end for which they were made Princes, and advanced in dignity
above the rest; then is the Common wealth not only free from all Oaths made of
obedience or allegiance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover for
saving the whole body, to resist, chasten, and remove such evil heads if she
be able, for otherwise all would come to destruction, ruin, and public
desolation.

And here now comes in all those considerations which old Philosophers,
Lawmakers, and such others as have treated of Commonwealths, are wont to lay
down, of the difference and contrariety between a King and a Tyrant, Plat.
dial. 1 de repub. Arist. l. 2. pol. c. 5. for that a King (as both Plato and
Aristotle does declare) when once he declineth from his duty becomes a
Tyrant, that is to say, of the best and most Sovereign thing upon earth, the
worst and most hurtful creature under Heaven; for that as the end and office of
a King is to make happy his Commonwealth, so the butt of a Tyrant is to
destroy the same. And finally the whole difference is reduced to the principal
head that before I have mentioned, to wit, That a King rules according to
equity, oath, conscience, justice, and law prescribed unto him; and the other
is enemy to all these conditions, There is a special book set forth of this
matter, by one Bartolus, Father of Civil Law, where the matter is handled
largly, as also how lawful and commendable it is to resist any Tyrant. He
concludes with Cicero in his books de legibus, where he says, ut populo
Magistratus ita Magistratut presunt leges, Cicero l. 3. dt legibus. A good
Prince or Magistrate make^h his account, that as he is over the People, so Laws
are over him, and a Tyrant the contrary. And greatly is commended the saying of
Theodosius and Valentiman, two worthy Emperors, recorded in our civil Law, who
said, Digna vox est Majestate regnantis, legibus se allegatum fateri. It is a
speech worthy the Majesty of him that reigns, to confess that he is bound unto
the Laws, and the contrary, saying of the Tyrant Cajus Caligna, is justly
detested by all Writers, who said unto one, as Suetonus reports, Memento mihi
omnia and in omnes licere, remember that all things are lawful unto me and
against all men without exception. The saying also of the famous Emperor Trajan
deserves immortal memory and commendation who when he delivered the Sword to a
Praetor or Governor of Rome to do justice he added these words, Take this Sword,
and if I do reign justly, use it for me, and if not, then use it against me,
which in effect and substance, are the very same words, which our Christian
Princes at this day do use at their entrance and coronations, when they promise
and swear to rule justly; and according to the laws, Statutes, and Ordinances
of their country, and upon that condition do take the oaths of their subjects
obedience, protesting there withal^, that if they perform not this, that then
their subjects are free as before from all alegeance and then may the common
wealth as also the very officers themselves of such a Kiug use their sword
against him, who gave it to them, for the public good if need so ^equire, as
Trajan commanded.

Concerning oaths and promises made by Princes at their first admission to
government, for as much as not nature, but the election and consent of the
people, had made their first Princes from the beginniug of the world most
certain it appeared, and conform to all reason that they were not preferred
to this eminent power and dignity over others, without some condi^ions and
promises made also on their parts, for using well t^is supreme authority given
unto them: seeing it is not likely that any people would ever yeetd to put
their lives, goods and liberties in the hands of an other, without some
promise and assurance of justice and equity to be us^d toward them, and hereof
came to pass, that both the Romans and Grecians to their ancient Kings
prescribed laws and limits.

And in every common wealth the more orderly the Prince comes to his crown,
and dignity, the more express and certain have been ever these conditions and
agreements between him and the p^^ple, as one the other side the more violeutly
the Prince gets his authority or by tyranny and disorder, as those ancient
and first Tyrants of Assiria to wit Nem^ed Belus and the like* that by mere
force and guile got rule over others, and the old King of Egypt, and Babylon,
and those of the Roman Emperors that by violence of Soldiers only got unto
the Royal seat, and all such as at this day do get by force to rain among to^
the Tur^es, among these (I say) it is no marvel, though few conditions of
just dealing may be expected, though I doubt not but get to their followers and
advancers, these men also do ma^e large promises of good government, as the
beginoing as all ambitions men are wont to do, though with little intention of
performance.

But in all good and well ordered common wealths where matters pass by reason,
conscience wisdom and consultation, and especially since christian religion
has prevailed, and given perfection to that natural light which morrall good
men had before in matters of government^ since that time I say this ^oint of
mutual and reciprocal oaths between Princes and subjects at the day of their
coronation or admission (for all are not crowned) bave been much more
est^blished, made clear and put in ure. And this form of agreement and
convention, between the commou wealth and their chtistian head or King, has
been reduced to a most sacred and religious kind of union and concord then
before for that the whole action has b^eu^don by Bishops and ecclesiastical
Prelates, and the astipulation and promises made on both sides, have passed and
been given received and regestred with great reverence in sacred places, and
with great solemnity of religious ceremonies, which before were not so much
used, though all ways there were some. And therefore our examples at this time
shall be only of Christian common wealths, for that they are more peculiarly to
our purpose.

Fir^^ then to begin with the East or Greek Emperors of Constantinople as the
most ancient among other, for that after the Empire once translated from Room
to Constantinople, by our Constontine the great and the first Christian
Emperor that ever did publicly show himself for such, these Greek
emperors were the most eminent Princes of all christianity among whom I do
find that albeit their there coming to the Crown were nothing so orderly for
them pu^ as at this day it is used, but many times the means thereof were
turbulent and sedi^ious, yet find I (as I say) that above a thousand years
one, they were wont to have anoth exacted at their hand, by rh^^ pa^riark of
Constantinople, who was the chief Prelate, for thus writes Zon^ras of the
c^ronation of A^asta^ius the first, that succeeded Zeno, obout the veare of
(...) 5 4 Amequam coronaretur, fidei confessionam script^m, quae ollic c^retur,
se in dogmatibus Ecclesiastic (...) esse novatu u^^, ab eo exegi^ patrlar^
(...) vir sanctus and orthodoxus he (...) being a help and catholic mae^
^equired of Anast^tius ^l^cted Emperor, before he was crowned a cou^^sion
(...) should pro^ise to change or innovate nothing in matt^rs perteining t^ the
doctrine of the (...) and the same have Nicepb^^ (...) and ot^ers.

And not only this but diverse other conditions also does the same author
insinuate that this Anaas^tius promised at his coronat on before he could be
crowned, as among other things, the taking away of certain tributes and
impositions, the giving of Offices without money and other like points,
apperteining to reformation and good government. which he performed for a ti^e
in the beginning of his government, but after fel^ into the heresies of the
Eutichians, and banished this same good Patriarch Euphemius, that had crowned
him, and he thrived thereafter for that he was slain by a thunder bot^ from
^eaven, after he had reigned 27. years, and was accounted for a very wicked
man, by all writers, for that he had broken (as they said) the conditions quas
gravi juramento scriptis ^elato confirmasset. That is to say the conditions
which he had avowed and confirmed with a grave oath.

^he like I read about 300. years after, recorded by the same author of the
Emperor Michaell the first in these words. The Grecian Emperors oath,
Michaell ubi dilaxit magnam ecclesiam ingressus, a Patriarcha Nicephoro
imperatorio diademate est ornatus post silato scripto, quo promilleret, se
nulla eccleisa instituta violatu^um neque christianorum sanguine manus
contaminaturum. Zon. To^ 3. in vita Mich. An. 820. which is Michell new chosen
Emperor, came early in ^he morning into the great Church of Constantinople,
and was crowned there with the Emperial crown by the hands of Nicephorus the
Patriarch, but yet so, as he was first required to swear and promise by
writing, that he would never violate the ordinances of the Church* nor
contaminat is hands with christian blood, which in effect, is as much to say*
as that he should reign godly and justly and many other such examples might be
alleged, but by this it is easy to see, what was the fashion of admitting and
crowning those Grecian Emperors by their Patriarks, in the name of all the
Commonwealth, which Common-wel^h was not satisfied with an oath, except also
it were set down in writi^g* And if we pass to the Latin and West Empire
which about this very time was restored by Zachary the Pope, and by the whole
Common-welth of Rome and was given to Cha^les the great and his Posterity, we
shall find that this point is more settled and more inviolably kept vet in this
Empire then in the other, for albeit, that this Empire (...) West went by
succession for the most part at the beginning, until afterward it was
appointed by Pope Gregory the 5. to pass by the election of certain Princes
in Germany, that now enjoy that privilege to be Electors, yet shall we see
always, that they even before this constitution, when this dignity went by
succession, were never admi^ted to the same, without this circumstance of
swearing to conditions of righteous government: the form and manner o which
admission, for that I find it set down more perfectly, and perticulerly in the
coronation of O^ho the I, then of any other Emperor, and that by many Authors,
and that this Otho was son and heyr unto the famous Emperor of Hen. 1. of that
name, Duke of Saxony, surnamed the Faulkner for the great delight ^e had in the
flight of Faulcons, Saxo Gram. l. 10. Cranzio l. 3. metro c 12. for these
causes I mean to begin with the coronation of this man before any other This
otho then son to H. ^: though being his heir, and so named by H. himself to the
inheritance of the said r^^wn of Germany: yet was he not admitted thereunto
until he had made his oath and received his new approbation by the people, for
so the story says, that the Archbishop of Moguntia (the chief Prunate of all
Germany bringing him to the Alter where he must swear, said these words unto
the people: Behold I bring you here Otho, chosen by God, and appointed ou^ by
his Father Henry our Lord, and now made King by all the Princes of this Empire,
if this election please you, do you signify the same by ho^^din^ up your hands
to Heaven, Whitich ndus gest. Saxon lib. 1. And the^ upon the said Archbishop
turned about to the Alter, where lay all the ornaments and ensigns of the
Empire, as the sword with the girdle, the cloak with the bracelets, the staf
with the scepter, and diadem, every one whereo^ the Archbishop out up ^n the
Emperor, telling him the signification of every thing, what it did bind him
un^o: as for example when he put the sword about him he said, accipe hunc
gladium quo ejicias omnes Christi adversari^s and ma^os christianos,
authoritate divino per Episcopos tibi tradita, w^t^chin. l. 2, which is, take
unto thee this sword wh^reby thou may cast out and drive away all the enemies
of Christ, whether they be barbarous infidels, or evil christians, and this by
the authority of God delivered unto thee by us,

And thus he ^id with all other ornaments and ensigns, telling the
signification and obligation of every one, and taking the Emperors promise to
perform all.

And after al, Rex persusus olco sancto, co^onatur diademate aureo, ab
Episcopis, and ab eisdem ad soticitur and in eo colocatur. The King being
anointed with holy oil was crowned by the Bishops, and by the same was
brought to the royal seat and therein placed. This happened about the year of
Christ 940. and the ceremony is recounted in ore amply in this man's coronation,
then in any other, both for that he was a very noble prince, and the very first
of the Germain nation, that was lawfully, and orderly preferred to the
imperial feat, after that it passed from the children of Charles the great,
and there be diverse points worthy the noting in this example, and among other
that albeit he were lawful King and Emperor by succession, as also by
appointment of his Father: yet was he chosen and admitted again by the Princes
and people, and that he swore to fulfill all those points and conditions, which
the signification of the Emperial ornaments did bind him unto. After this,
about 60 Years or more, Pope Gregory the 5. in a synod holden in Rome, did by
the consent of Otho the 3. Emp^ror and Nephew unto this other Oth^, appoint a
certain form of Election for the time to come of the German Emperor that he
should be chosen by six Princes of Germany, three eclesiasticall which are the
Archbishops of Moguntia, Colen, and Trevires, and three temporal Lords.
Blend. decad. 2 li. 3 Crant. l. 4. cap. 25. Duke of Saxony, the County Palatine
of Rhene, and the Marquis of Brandeburg and when these 6 voices should happen
to be equally divided, then that the Duke of Bohemia (for then it was no
Kingdom) should have place also to determine the election. All which was
determined in the Y^are of Christ 996. in Rome, and approved afterward by all
the Princes of Germany, and allowed by all other Christian Princes, and states
of the world, and so endures unto this day. And among all other points, of
this his Coronation and his Oath to be taken for his well government, was and
is most exactly set down, and recorded by many historiographers of that time,
and since: But I shall allege them only out of John Sleydan, as the most
convenient Author for this our time and purpose. Sleyd. l. 1. Histor. An. 1519.

First of all, after any man is chosen Emperor, he is to be called only Caesar
and the King of the Romans, and not Emperor, until he be Crowned, and the
conditions which he swears unto presently after his election, Are to defend
the Christian and Catholic Religion, to defend the Pope and Church of Rome,
whose advocate he is, to minister justice equally to all, to follow p^ace, to
keep and observe all Laws Rights and Privileges of the Empy^e, not to
alienat or engage the possessions of the Empire, to condemn no man without
hearing his cause, but to suffer the course of law to have his place, in all
and whatsoever he shall do otherwise, that it be void and of no Validity at
all.

Unto all these Articles, he swears first by his Legates, and then he gives
a copy of his Oath in writing to every one of the six Electors, and after this
he goes to the City of Aquis-gran to be crowned in the great Church, where
about the middle of the Mass, the Arch Bishop of Colen goes unto him in the
presence of all the people, and asks, whether he be ready to swear and
promise to observe the Catholic Religion, defend the Church, Minister,
Justice, protect the Widows and Fatherless, and yeald dutiful honor and
obedience to the Pope of Rome, whereunto he answering that he is ready to do
all this, the Archbishop leads him to the high Alter where he swears in
express words, all these Articles, which being done, the said Archbishop
turning himself to the Princes of the Empire, and people there present, does
ask them, whether they be content to swear obedience and fealty unto him, who
answering yea, he is anointed by the said Archbishop before the Alter, and
then do come the other two Archbishops of Moguntia and Treveris, and do lead
him into the Vestery, where certain Deacons are ready to apparel him in his
robes, and do set him in a Chair, upon whom the Archbishop of Colen says
certain prayers, and then delivers him a Sword drawn, and puts a Ring upon
his Finger, and gives him a Scepter in his hand, and then all the three
Archbishops together, do put on the Crown upon his head, and leading him so
crowned and appareled unto the high Alter again; he swears the second time,
that he will do the part of a good Christian and Catholic Emperor. Which being
ended, he is brought back and placed in the Imperial Seat and Throne, where
all the Princes of the Empire do swear obedience and faith unto him, beginning
with the three Archbishops, and continuing on with the three other Electors,
and so all the rest in order which is a notable and magesticall manner of
admitting and authorizing of a Prince as you see, and it is to be marked among
other things, that the Emperor swears three times, once by his depu^ies, and
twice by himself, before his Subjects swear once unto him. And yet will
Malignants needs have subjects only bound to their Princes, and the Prince
nothing at all bound to them again.

In Polonia, which being first a Dukedom was made a Kingdom, about the same
time that this form of electing of the German Emperor was prescribed; the
manner of Coronation of their Kings, is in substance the very same, that we
have declared to be of the Emperor. For first of all, the Archbishop of
Gnesua metropolitan of all Polonia, comes to the King standing before the high
Alter and says unto him these words. Whereas you are right noble Prince to
receive at our hands this day who are (though unworthily) in place of Christ
for execution of this function, the sacred anointing nnd other Ceremonies,
Ensigns, and Ornaments appertaining to the Kings of this Land; it shall be
well that we admonish you in a few words, what the charge imports which you
are to take upon you, etc. Alex Gua guinterum Polon. Tom. 1. and Oricho in
Chimer. fol. 9. and 106.

Thus he begineth* and after this, he declares unto him for what end he is
made King, what the obligation of that place and dignity binds him unto, and
unto what points he must swear, what do signify the Sword, the Ring, the
Sceptor, and the Crown that he is to receive, and at the delivery of each of
these things he makes both a short exhortation unto him, and prayer unto God
for him. And the Kings Oath in these words. Promi^o coram Deo and angelis ejus,
I do promise and swea^e before God and his An^els, that I will do Law and
Justice to all, and keep the peace of Christ his Church, and the union of his
catholic Faith, and will do and cause to be done, du^ and canonic^ll honor
unto the Bishops of ^his Land, and to the rest of the Clergy, and if (which God
forbid) I should break my Oath, I am content that the Inhabitants of this
Kingdom, shall owe no duty or obedience unto me as God shall help me and Gods
holy Gospels. Bodin derep. l. 2. c. 9.

After this Oath made by the King, and received by the subjects, the Lord
Martial General of the whole Kingdom, does ask with a loud voice of all the
Counselors, Nobility, and people there present, whether they be content to
submit themselves unto this King, or no, who answering yea: the arch Bishop
does end the residue of the ceremonies, and does place him in the royal Throne,
where all his Subjects do homage unto him, and this for Polonia.

In Spain I do find, that the manner of admitting their Kings was different,
and not the same before and after the destruction thereof by the Moors; bu^
yet that in both times their Kings did swear in effect the self-same points
which before have been mentioned in other Kingdoms. For first, before the
entering of the Moors when Spain remained yet one general Monarchy, under
the Goths, it is recorded in the four^h national Council of Toled^, which was
holden the year of our Lord, 633. according to Ambrosio Morales, the most
learned and diligent historiographer of Spain. Amb. Morales li. 11. c. 17.
hist. Hisp. praefat, ejusdem concilij. (though others do appoint it some few
years after) in this Council (I say) it is said, that their new King
S^ssinandus (who had expelled Suintila their former King for his evil
Government.) This King Sissinandus, I say coming into the said Council in the
third year of his reign ac^ompanied with a most magnificient number of
Nobles, that waited on him, did fall down prostrate upon the ground, before the
Archbishops, and Bishops there gathered together, which were 70. in number,
and desired them with tears to pray for him, and to determine in that Council,
that which should be needful and most convenient both for maintaining of Gods
Religion, and also for upholding and prospering the whole Commonwealth:
whereupon those Fathers after matters of Religion and reformation of manners,
which they handled in 73. Chapters. In the end and last Chapter, they come to
handle matters of Estate also. Council. Tol. 4. c. 74. And first of all they do
confirm the deposition of King Suintila together with his Wife, Brother, and
Children, and all for his great wickedness, which in the Council is recounted,
and they do deprive them not only of a little to the Crown; but also of all
other goods, and possessions, movables and immoveables, saving only that which
the new Kings mercy should bestow upon them, and in this Council was present
and subscribed first of all others, ^sidorus Archbishop of Siuil, who writing
his History of Spain dedicated the same unto this King Sissinandus, Ambros.
Maral. l. 11. cap. 17. and speaks infinite good in the same, of the virtues
of King Suintila, that was now deposed and condemned in this said Council;
whereby it is to be presumed, that he had changed much his life afterward, and
became so wicked a man, as here is reported.

After this, the Council confirms the Title of Sissinandus, and makes
decrees for the defense thereof; but yet insinuates what points he was bound
unto, and whereunto he had sworn when they said unto him, To quoque p^^aesentem
(...) Ac juturos aelatum sequentium principes, etc. We do require you, that are
our present King, and all other our Princes that shall follow hereafter with
the humility which is convenient, that you be meek and moderate toward your
Subjects, and that you govern your people in justice and piety, and that none
of you do give sentence alone against any man in cause of life and death; but
with the consent of your public Council, and with those that be Governors in
matters of judgment. And against all Kings that are to come, we do promulgate
this sentence, that if any of them shall against the rever^nce of our Laws,
exercise cruel authority with proud domination, and Kingly Pomp, only
following their own concupiscence in wickedness, that they are condemned by
Christ with the sentence of excommunication, and have their separation both
from him and us to everlasting judgment.

But in the next two years after the end of this Council, King Sissinandus
being now dead and one Chintilla made King in his place, there were other two
Councels gathered in Toled^, the first whereof was but Provincial, and the
second National, and they are named by the names of the fifth and sixth
Councels of Toledo. Ambros. Moral. l. 11. cap. 23. and 24. In the which
Counsels, according to the manner of the Goths (who being once converted,
from the Arrian haere^ie, were very catholic and devout ever after, and
governed themselves most, by their Clergy) and not only matters of Religion
were handled; but also of State and of the Common Wealth, Council. 5. cap. 2, 3,
4. 5. and conc. 6. cap. 16. 17, 18. especially about the succession to the
Crown, safety of the Prince, provision for his Children, friends, Officers, and
favorites after his death, and against such as without election or approbation
of the Commonwealth, did aspire to the same, all these points I say were
determined in these Councels and among other points a very s^vere decre^ was
made in the sixth Council, conc^rning the Kings Oath at his admission in these
words. Consonan une cord and ore promulgamus Deo placituram sententiam.
Coucil. Td. 6. c. 3. We do promulgate with one heart and mouth this sentence
agreeable and pleasing unto God, and do decree the same with the consent and
deliberation of the Nobles and Peers of this Realm, that whosoever in time to
come shall be advanced to the honor and preferment of this Kingdom, he shall
not be placed in the Royal Seat, until among other conditions he has
promised by the Sacrament of an Oath, that he will suffer no man to break the
Catholic Faith, etc. By which words especially (among other conditions) is
made evident, that those Princes swear not only to keep the Faith; but also
such other conditions of good Government as were touched before in the fourth
Council, and these things were determined while their King Chintill^ was
present in Tolledo, as Ambrosio Morales ^oteth. Ambros. Moral. lib. 1. cap. 23.
The destruction of Spain. Before the entrance of the Moors, and before the
dividing thereof into many Kingdoms, which happened about ^ hundredth years
after this, to wit in the year of our Savior 713. and 714.

But after the Moors had gained all Spain, and divided it between them, into
diverse Kingdoms. Ambros. Moral. li. 13. c. 1. and 2 de la Chron. de Esp^ yet
God provided that within four or five years the Christians that were left and
fled to the Mountains of Asturias and Biscay* found a certain young Prince
named Don Pelayo of the ancient blood of the Gotish Kings, who was also fled
thither, and miraculously saved from the enemies, whom they chose straight
ways to be their King, and he began presently the recovery of Spain, and was
called first King of Asturias, and afterward of Leon, and after his successors
got to be Kings also of Castilia, and then of Toledo and then of Aragon,
Barcelona, Valentia, Murcia, Cartagena, (...), Cortuba, Granado, Siuil,
Portugal, and Nauarra, all which were different Kingdoms at that time, so made
by the Moors. And all these Kingdoms were gained again, by little and little,
in more then 700. years space, which were lost in less then two years, and
they never came again indeed into one Monarchy, as they were under Don Rod^igo
their last King that lost the whole, until the year of our Lord 158^. when
Don Philippe King of Spain reunited again unto that Crown, the Kingdom of
Portugal which was the last piece, that remained separated, and this was
almost 900. years after Spain was first lost.

But now to our purpose, the Chronicler of Spain, named Ambrosio Morales does
record in his Chronicle a certain Law, written in the Gotish-tongue, and left
since the time of this Don Pelay^ the first King, after the universal
destruction of Spain, and the title of the Law is this Como se an delevantar
Reyen Espua, y como el ha de lurar los fueros, Ambros. Moral. l. 13. c. 2. that
is to say, how men must make their King in Spain, and now he must swear to the
privileges and liberties of that Nation: and then he puts the Articles of
the Law, whereof the first says thus. before all things it is establish^d for
a law, liberty, and privilege of Spain, that the King is to be placed by
voices and consent perpetually, and this to the intent that no evil King may
enter without consent of the people seeing they are to give to him, that which
with their blood and labors they have gained of the Moors Lucas Episcop.
Tuyens. in histor. Hispan, Loudou, de molin. lib. de hered. Thus far goes this
first article, which is the more to be marked, for that diverse and those most
ancient Spanish Authors do say, that from this Don Pelayo, the succession of
Kings descended ever by propinquity of blood, and yet we see that election was
joined there withal in express terms.

The second part of the law contains the manner of ceremonies used in those
old days at the admission of their Kings, which is expressed in these words,
let the King be chosen and admitted in the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom,
or at least wise in some Cathedral Church, and the night before he is exalted,
let him watch all night in the Church, and the next day let him here mass, and
let him offer at Mass a piece of Scarlet, and some of his own money, and after
let him communicate, and when they come to lift him up let him step upon a
buckler or target and let the chief and principal men there present hold the
Target, and so lifting him up let them and the people cry three times, as hard
as they can, Real, Real, Real. Then let the King command some of his own money,
to be cast among the people, to the quantity of the hundr^d shillings, and to
the end be may give all men to understand, that no man now is above him, let
himself tie on his own Sword in the form of a cross, and let no Knight or
other man, bear a Sword that day, but only the King.

This was the old fashion of making Kings in Spain, which in effect and
substance remains still, though the manner thereof be somewhat altered, for
that the Spanish Kings be not Crowned, but have an other ceremony for their
admission equal to coronation, which is performed by the Archbishop of Toled
primat of all Spain, as the other Coronations before mentioned are by the
Archbishop of Moguntia to the Emperor, and by the Archbishop of Guesna to
the King of Polonia, and by the Archbishop Praga to the King of Bohemia, and
by the Archbishop of Praga to the King of Portuga as was by the Archbishop of
Canterbury to the King of England, and by the Archbishop Rhemes to the King of
France, of which Realm of France we may not omit to say somewhat in
particular, seeing it is so goodly a Kingdom, and so near to England, not
only in Cituation, but also in Laws manners and customs, and as the race of
English Kings have come from them in diverse manners, since the conquest, so
may it be also supposed that the principal ceremonies and circumstances of
this action of Coronation, has been received in like manner from them.

First then touching the act of Cornation, and admission of the King of France,
even as before I have said of Spain, so also in this Kingdom do I find two
manners of that action, the one more ancient which the French do say has
endured in substance from their first Christian King named Clodoueus, unto this
day, which is nigh Twelve hundred years, for that Clodouius was Christened the
year of our Lord, 490. in the City of Rhems by Remigius, Bishop of that City,
and anointed also, and Crowned King by the same Bishop, which manner and order
of anointing, and Coronation endured after for about six, hundred years, unto
the time of Henry the first, and King Phillip the first his son, both Kings
of France. At what time (which is about 500. years a gone) both the
Chroniclers, and Cosmographers of France do testify, that there was a peculier
book in the library of the Church of Beuais, containing the particular order
of this action Belfor. l. 3. c. 20. Thevet. cosmograph. univers. l. 15. c. 2.
Papir. masson. annal. l 3. page 2. 15. which had endured from Clodo^eus unto
that time. Which order, for so much as touches the solemnite of officers in
the Coronation and other like circumstances, was far different at that time,
from that which is now, for that in those days there were no Peers of France,
appointed to assist the same Coronation, which now are the chief, and the
greatest part of that Solemnity. Yea Girard du Hailan Secretary of France in
his third book of the affairs, and state of that Kingdom says, that the
ceremonies of Crowning their old Kings were much after the fashon which I
noted a little before, out of the law of Dan Pelay^ first King of Spain, after
the Moors, for that they were lifted up and carried about upon a Target by the
chief subjects there present as the Spaniards were.

But as touching the principal point of that action which is the substance of
admitting the King unto his Royal authority, and oath by him made o^ Governing
well and justly, and of the reciprocal oath of obedience made to him again by
his subjects, it was not much different from that which now is, as shall
appear by the Coronation of the foresaid Phillip the first, who was crowned in
the life and presence of his Father, King Henry, after the fashion then used in
the year of Christ, 1059. and it was in manner following as Nangis, and
Tillet, both authors of great authority among the French, do recount it, and
Francies Belforest, out of them both repeateth the same at large, in these
words following. Francis Belfor. hist. Fran. lib. 3. c, 20. in vita Philip 1.

King Henry the first of this name, seeing himself very old and feeble, made
an Assembly of all the states of France in the City of Paris, in the year of
Christ 1059. where bringing in his young son, and heir Phil^p that was but
9. years of age, before them all, he said as follows. The speech of the
Father.

Hitherto my dear friends, and subjects, I have bin the head of your Nobility
and men at arms, but now by mine age and disposition of body, I do
well-perceive, that ere it be long I must be separated from you^ and therefore
I desire you that if ever you have loved me, you show it now in giving your
consent and approbation that this my son may be admitted for your King, and
apparaled with the Royal ornaments of this Crown of France and that you will
swear fealty unto him, and do him homage.

Thus said the King, and then having asked every one of the assistance in
particular for his consent apart and afterward the whole assembly ingenerall,
whether they would swear obedience to him or no, and finding all to promise
with a good will he passed over the feast of the assention with great joy in
Paris, and after went to Rhemes with all the Court and Tryan, to celebrate the
Coronation upon the feast of Whitsunday.

Thus far are the words of William de Nangis alleged in the story of France
by Balforest, and it is to be noted first how the King did r^quest the nobility
and people to admit his son, and secondly how ^e did ask there consents, a
part, for that these two points do evedently confirm that* which I said at the
beginning, that only succession is not sufficient, but that Coronation ever
requires a new consent, which also includes a certain election or new
approbation of the Subjects.

This is proved also most manifestly by the very order of Coronation which
ensues in Belforest, taken word for word out of Tillet, in his Treatise of
Records, in the Chapter of ^nnointing the Kings of France in these words.

In the year of grace 1059. and 32. of the Reign of King Henry the first of
this name of France, and in the 4^ year of the seat and Bishopric of Geruays,
Archbishop of Rhemes, and in the 23 day of May being Whitsunday, King Philip
the first was anointed by the said Archbishop Geruays in the great Church of
Rhemes, before the Alter of our Lady, with the order and ceremony that ensues.

The Mass being b^gun, when it came to the reading of the Epistle, the said
Lord Arch Bishop turning about to Philip the Prince, that was there present,
declared unto him what was the Catholic Faith, and asked him whether he did
believe it, and whether he would defend it against all persons whatsoever, who
affirming that he would, his Oath was brought unto him; whereunto he must
swear, which he took and read with a loud voice, and signed it with his own
hand, and the words of the Oath were these.

I^ Phillippe parle grace de Lieu prochain d^estre ordoune Roy de France,
promets au jour de mon sacre devant Dieu and ses sanctes, etc. That is in
English, (for I will not repeat all the Oath in French, seeing it is somewhat
long) The Oath of the King of France. I Philip by the grace of God, near to be
ordained King of France, do promise in this day of my anointing, before
Almighty God, and all his Saints, that I will conserve unto you that are
Ecclesiastical Prelates, all canonical privileges, and all Law and Justice
due unto every one of y^u, and I will defend you by the help of God so much as
shall lie in my power, and as every King ought to do, and as by right and
equity he is bound to defend every Bishop and Church to him committed within
his Realm; and furthermore I shall administer Justice unto all people given me
in charge, and shall preserve unto them the defense of Laws and eqnity
appertaining unto them, so far forth as shall lie in my authority, so God shall
help me and his holy Evangel^sts.

This oath was read by the King, holding his hands between the hands of the
Archbishop of Rhemes, and the Bishop of Syon and Bisanson, legates of the Pope
standing by with a very great number of other Bishops of the realm, and the
said Arc-Bishop taking the Cross of Rimigius in his hands, he showed first
unto all the audience, the anc^ent authority which the Archbishops of Rhems had
even from the time of Remigius that baptized there first Christian King
Clodoveus, to anoint and Crown the Kings of France, which he said was
confirmed unto them by privilege of the Pope Hotmisday that lived in the year
of Christ 516. Belfor. l. 3. cap. 20. and after also by Pope Victor, and this
being done, he then (by license first asked of King Henry the Father there
present) did choose Philip for King. Il esleut le dit Philippe son sils, en, and
pour Roy de France, which is word for word, the Archbishop chose the said
Philip King Henry's Son, in and for King of France; which the legates of the
Pope presently confirmed, and all the Bishops, Abbots, and Clergy, with the
Nobility and people in their order, did the like; crying out three times in
these words. Nous le apprououns, nous le v^ulons, soit fait nostre Roy, that
is, we approve his election, we will have him, let him be made our King, and
presently was song, Te Deum laudamus in the quyar, and the rest of the
Ceremonies of anointing and Coronation were done, according to the ancient
order of this solemnity, used in the time of King Philips predecessors Kings of
France.

Thus far do French stories recount the old and ancient manner of anointing
and Crowning their Kings of France, which had endured as I have said, for
almost 600. years, that is to say, from Clodoueus unto King Philip the first,
who was crowned in France 7. years before our William Conqueror (who also was
present at this Coronation, and had the third place among the temporal Princes
as Duke of Normandy) entered into England; but after this time the manner and
Ceremonies was somewhat altered, and made more majesticall in outward show, and
this especially by King Lewis surnamed the young, Nephew to the foresaid King
Philip, who leaving the Substance of the action as it was before, caused diverse
external additions of honor, and Majesty, to be adjoined thereunto especially
for the Coronation of his son Phillip the second surnamed Augustus, whom he
caused, also to be Crowned in his days, as his Grandfather Phillip had been,
and as himself had been also in his Fathers days.

This man among other Royal Ceremonies ord^ined the offices of the twelve
Peers, of France, 6 Ecclesiastical, and 6. temporal, who are they which ever
since have had the chiefest places and offices in this great action, for that
the foresaid Archbishop of Rhemes entitled also Duke of Rhemes, has the
first and highest place of all others, and (...) King. The Bishop and Duke of
Laon bears the gl^sse of sacred (...) and Duke of Langres the Cross: The
Bishop and Earl of (...), the Bishop and Earl of Noyon the Kings girdle, and
Last of all, the Bisho^ and (...) of Chalons, does carry the ring, and these
are the 6 acclesiasticall Peites of France with their offices in the Coronation.

The temporal Peers are the Duke of Burgundy, Deane of the order, who in this
day of Coronation holds the Crown the Duke of Gasconi^ and Guyene the first
banner quartered, the Duke of Normandy, the Second banner quartered, the Earl
of Tholofa the golden Spurs, the Earl of Champanie, the banner Royal or
standard of War, and the Earl of Flanders the Sword Royal, so as there are 3
Dukes and 3. Earls one of both ranks of Spiritual and temporal Lords, and
as Gidard notes the King is apparraled on this day 3 times, and in 3, several
sorts, the first as a Priest, the second as a King, Warrier, the third as a
Judge, Girard du haillan li. 3. de Pestat. page 240. 242. and 258. and finally
he says, that this solemnity of anointing and Crowning the King of France,
is the most magnificent, gorgious and Majesticall thing that may be seen in the
world, for which he refers us not only to the particular Coronations of
these two ancient King Philips, the first and second, but also to the
Coronation of Henry the Second.

But to say a word or two more of Phillip Augustus before I pass any further
which happened in the year 1179. and in the 25. of the reign of our King Henry
the 2. of England, who as the French stories say was present also at this
Coronation, and had his rank among the Peers as Duke of Normandy, and held
the Kings Crown in his hand, and one of his Sons had his rank also a Duke of
Gasconie, and the form used in this Coronation was the very same which is used
at this day in the admission of the Kings of France, in recounting whereof I
will let pass all the particular Ceremonies which are largely to be read in
Francis Belforest, in the place before mentioned, and I will repair only the
Kings Oath, which the said author recounteth in these words.

The Archbishop of Rhemes being vested in his pontifical attire, and come to
the Alter to begin Mass (where the King also was upon a high seat placed) he
turned to him and said these words in the name of all the Clergy and Churches
of France: Sir, that which we require at your hands this day, is that you
promise unto us that you will keep all canonical privileges law and Justice,
due to be kept and d^fend^d as a good King is bound to do in his Realm, and to
every Bishop and Church to him Committed whereunto the King answered. I do
promise and avow to every one of you and to every Church to you committed, that
I will keep and maintain all canonical privileges law and Justice due to
every man to the uttermost of my power, and by Gods help shall defend you as a
good King is bound to do; in his Realm. This being done the King did swear
and make his Oath, laying his hands upon the Gospel in these words following.
Au^nom de Jesus Christ, ie Jure and promots aw peuple Christi^n a may suject
cos thoses, etc. Which is in English: in the name of Jesus Christ I do swear
and promise to all Christian people subject unto me these poiuts ensuing first
to procure that all my subjects be kept in the union of the Church, and I will
defend them from all excess, rapin extortion, and iniquity, Secondly I will
take order that in all judgments justice shall be kept, with equity and mercy,
to the end that God of his mercy may conserve unto me with my people his holy
grace and mercy. 3. I shall endeavor as much as possibly shall lie in me, to
choose and drive out all my Realm and all my Dominions, all such as the Church
has or shall declare for Heriticks as God shall help me and his holy Gospells.
Thus swears the King, and then kisseth the Gospells, and immediately is sung.
Te Deum laudamus, and after that are said many particular prayers by the
Archbishop, and then is the King vested, and the ring, scepter Crown and other
Kingly Ornaments and Ensigns are brought and put upon him, with Declaration
first what they signify, and then particular prayers are made to God, that
their signification may be by the King fulfilled.

And after all ended the Archbishop with the Bishops do bless him, and say
these words unto him. God which reigns in Heaven, and governs all Kingdoms
bless you, etc. Be you stable and constant, and hold your place and right,
from henceforth which here is committed and laid upon you by the Authority of
Almighty God, and by this present tradition and delivery which we the Bishops
and other Servants of God do make unto you of the same, and remember you in
place convenient, to bear so much more respect and reverence unto the Clergy,
by how much nearer then other men you have seen them to approach to Gods
Alter, to the end that Jesus Christ Mediator of God and man, may confirm and
maintain you by the Clergy and people, in this your Royal Seat and Throne;
who being Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, make you reign with him and his
Father, in the life and glory everlasting.

Thus says the Archbishop unto him, and after this he is led by him and the
other Peers, unto the seat Royal, where the Crown is put upon his head, and
many other large Ceremonies used, which may be read in the Author aforesaid,
and are to long for this place. And yet have I bin the larger in this matter of
France; for that I do not think it to be improbable, which this Author and
others do note, to wit, that most Nations round about have taken their
particular forms of Anointing and Crowning their Kings, from this ancient
Custom of France, though the substance thereof, I mean of their sacring and
Anointing, be deduced from examples of far more antiquity, to wit, from the
very first Kings among the people of Israel. 1. Reg. 10. and 16. 2. Reg. 2.
whom God caused to be anointed by his Priests and Prophets, in token of his
election, and as a singular privilege of honor and pre-eminence unto them
whereof King David made so great account when he said to the Soldier that had
kissed Saul his enemy in the war. 2. Reg. 1. quaere non to ^uisti mittere manum
tuam in Christum Domini, Why did thou not fear to lay thy hands upon the
Anointed of God, and he put him to death for it notwithstanding Saul had been
long before deposed, and rejected by God, and that himself had lawfully borne
Arms against him for many days, so much was that ceremony of Anointing
esteemed in those days and so has it been ever since among Christian people
also, for that Kings hereby are made sacred, and do not only participate with
Priests, but also with Christ himself who has his name of this circumstance
of Anointing as all the world knows.

Probable then I say it is, that albeit the substance of this ceremony of
Anointing King be much elder then the Christian Kingdom of France: yet is this
particular rule and maiesticall manner of doing the same by way of Coronation,
the most ancient in France above all other Kingdoms round about, especially if
it began with their first Christian King Clodovious not full 500. Years after
Christ, as French Authors do hold. At what time also they recount a great
miracle of holy Oil sent from Heaven by an Angel for Anointing Clodou^us,
whereof they say they have still remaining for the Anointing of their Kings at
Rhemes, which point I will not stand to treat or discourse in this place, but
rather will referr my reader to the foresaid Chapter of Francis Belforest
Chronicler of France, Belfo. l. 3. Cap. 17. who alleges diverse writers of
almost 500. year antiquity that write of the same, but howsoever that be, very
propable it seems that all the ceremonies of Coronation in Germany and
Polonia before receited (which had their beginning long after the reign of
Clodoneus) might be taken from thence, and so the affinity and likeness of one
to the other does seem to agree, and Garibay also the Chronicler of Spain,
and Nauarra, in his 22. Book Estevan, Garribay. lib. 22. c. 1. talking of this
custom of anointing and Crowning the Kings of Nauarra, says, that this
excellent custom began there (I mean in Nauara) about 800. years past and
was brought in by certain Earls of Champain of France named Theobaldes who
coming to attain that Crown brought with them that reverent ceremony of
Anointing and Crowning their Kings, according to the use of the French, which
custom endures until this day in that part of Navarra that is, under the
house of Vandome, albeit in the other that is under the Spaniards (which is
firr the greater it was left of in the Year 1513. when Fardinande surnamed the
Cathol que King of Spain entered thereupon, for the Spanish Kings are never
Anointed nor Crowned but otherwise admitted by the Common wealth.

But among all other Kingdoms it seems that England has most particularly
taken this custom, and Ceremony from France, not only for the reason before
alleged that diverse of our English Kings have come out of France, as William
Corquerour borne in Normands, King Steven soune to the Earl of Blois, and
Bolen, a French man, and King Henry the Second born likewise in France, and
son to the Earl of A^iou: but also for that in very deed the thing it self
is all one in both Nations, and albeit I have not seen any particular Book of
this action in England, as in French there is: yet it is easy to gather by
stories What is used in England about this affair.

For first of all, that the Archbishop of Canterbury did ordinarily do this
ceremony in England, as the Archbishop of Rhemes does it in France, there is
no doubt, and with the same solemnity and honor, according to the condition
and state of our Country and Polidor Virgill in his story Polid. ib. 13 Hist
Angile in vita Henrici. notes that Pope Alexander did interdict and suspend
the Archbishop of York with his two assistants the Bishops of London and
Salisbury, for that in the absence of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury,
and without his license, they did Crown King Henry the seconds son, named
also Henry, at his Fathers persuasion, and diverse do attribute the unfortunate
success of the said King Henry the younger that rebelled against his Father,
to this disorderly and violent coronation by his Fathers appointment. Secondly,
that the first thing which the said Archbishop requires at the new Kings
hands at his Coronation, is about religion, Church matters and the Clergy (as
in France we have seen) it appears evedently by these words which the same
Archbishop Thomas (surnamed commonly the martyr) remaining in banishment wrote
to the same King Henry the Second which are these. Memores sitis confessionis
quam fecitis and posuistis super altar apud Westmonasteriam de servanda
Ecclesiae liberiate, quando consecrati fuistis, and uncti in regem a
pradecessore nostro Thebaldo. Invita D. Thom. Cantuar. apud surium in mense
Decembris. Which is, do you call to your remembrance, the confession, which you
made and laid upon the Alter at Westminster, for keeping and defending the
liberty of the Church when you were consecrated and Anointed King by Thebaldus
our predecessor. By which words appears, that as the King of England was
consecrated and anointed in those days by the Archbishop of Canterbury, so
did he swear and give up his Oath also in writing, and for more solemnity and
obligation, laid it down or rather offered it up with his own hands upon the
Alter, so much as was required of him by the said Archbishop and Clergy, for
the special safety of Religion, and these Ecclesiastical liberties, which is
the self same point that we have seen before, as well in the Oath of the
Kings of France, as also of Polonia and Spain, and of the Emperors both
Grecian and German.

The very like admonition in effect I find made by another Thomas Archbishop
of Canterbury, to another King Henry, to wit by Thomas A^undell to King Henry
the fourth, when in a Parliament holden at Coventry, in the Year 1404. the
King was tempted by certain temporal men, to take away the temporalities from
the Clergy, whereunto when the said Archbishop Thomas had answered by diverse
reasons, at last turning to the King ^e besought him [saith Stow in vita
Henrici 4. to remember the Oath which he voluntarily made, that he would honor
and defend the Church and ministers thereof, Whereof (...) desired him to
permit and suffer the Church to enjoy the privileges and (...) of his
prodecessours it did enjoy, and to fear that King which reig^eth (...), and by
whom all other Kings do reign, moreover he desired him to consider his promise
also to all the realm, which was that he would preserve unto every man their
wright and title, so far as in him lay. By which speech of the Archbishop the
King was so far moved, as he would hear no more of that bil of the laytie but
said that he would leave the Church in as good estate, or better then he found
it, and so he did, but yet hereby we come to learn, what Oath the Kings of
England do make at their Coronations touching the Church and Clergy.

The other conditions also of good government, are partly touched in the speech
of the Archbishop, Holinosh in his Cro. Page 476. and 1005. and much more
expressly set down in the King of Englands Oath, recorded by ancient writers,
for that he swears as both Holinshead and others do testify, in their
English stories, in these very words, to wit.

That he will during his life, bear reverence and honor unto almighty God,
and to his Ca^holique Church, and unto his Ministers, and that he will
administer law and justice equal to all, and take away all unjust Laws.

Which after he had sworn, laying his hands upon the Gospells: then does the
Archbishop [turning about to the people] declare what the King has promised
and sworn, and by the mouth of a harrald at arms asks their consents,
whether they be content to submit themselves unto this man as unto their King
or no, under the conditions proposed, whereunto when they have yealded
themselves, then begineth the Archbishop to put upon him the regal Ornaments,
as the sword, the ring, the scepter, and Crown, as before in the French
Coronation you have heard, and namely he gives him the Scepter of Edward the
Confessor, and then he adeth also the same words of Commission and exortation
as the other does, to wit, stand and hold thy place and keep thy Oath, and
thereunto adjoyneth a great communication or treat, on the behalf of Almighty
God, if he should take upon him that dignity without firm purpose to observe
the things which this day he has sworn, and this is the sum of the English
Coronation, which you may read also by piece meal in John Stow. Stow in vita
Richardi 2 in fine, (according as other things in that his brief collection are
set down) but especially you shall se it in the admissions as well of the said
King Henry the 4 now last mentioned, as also of K. Edward the fourth, at their
first entrances to the Crown, for in the admission of K. Henry, Stow shows,
how the people were demanded thrice whether they were content to admit him for
their King, and that the Archbishop of Canturbury (who was the same Thomas
Arundell of whom we speak before) did read unto them what this new King was
bound by Oath unto, and then he took the Ring, wherewith he was to wed him to
the Commonwealth (which wedding imports as you know an Oath and mutual
obligation on both sides in every marriage) and the Earl of Northumberland
high Constable of England, for that day, was willing to show the said Ring to
the people, that they might thereby se the band whereby the King was bound unto
them. And then it was put upon his finger, and the King kissed the Constable in
sign of acceptance, fell on his knees also to prayer that he might observe his
promise, and other like Ceremonies, says Stow, were used, and this was done
the 13 of October. 1359. and therefore upon good reason might this same
Archbishop put him afterward in mind of this his Oath as before I have showed
that he did.

At the admission also of King Edward the fourth. 1 the peoples consent was
demanded very solemnly in John's field by London, the 29 of Febr. in the year
1460 notwithstanding that King Edward had proved his Title, by succession
before in the Parliament holden at Westminster. And now this consent of the
people being had, (or he being thus elected at Stowes words are) he went the
next day in procession at Paul's, and offered there, and after Te Deum being
sung, he was with great royalty conveyed to Westminster, and their in the hall
set in the Kings seat, with Edwards scepter in his hand, and then the people
were asked again if they would have him King, and they cried yea, yea.

And if any would take exception against these of King Henry and King Edward
the 4 because they entered and began their Reigns upon the deprivation of other
Kings then living, that are yet many living in England that have seen the
several Coronations of King Edward the 6 Q. Mary, Q Elizabeth, K. James, K.
Charles, and can witness that at all and every of their Coronations, the
consent of the people and their acceptance of those Princes is not only
demanded by the public cry of a Harold at arms, which stands on both the
sides of the high Scaffold, or stage whereon the Prince is Crowned, and the
peoples answer expected, till they cry yea, yea: but also that the said Princes
gave there, their corporal oath upon the Evangelists unto the Bishop that
Crowned them, to uphold and maintain faith aforenamed, with the Liberties and
Privileges of the Church, as also to govern by justice and law as has been
said: which oaths no doubt have been sworn and taken most solemnly by all the
Kings and Queens of England, from the days of King Edward the Confessor at
the least, and ^e that will see more points of these oaths set down in
particular let him read Magna Charta, and he will be satisfied.

By all which, and by infinite more that might be said and alleged in this
matter, and to this purpose, it is most evident, that this agreement, bargain,
and contract between the King and his Commonwealth, at his first admission, is
as certain and firm (notwithstanding any pretense or interest he has or may
have by succession) as any contract or marriage in the world can be, when it is
solemnized by words de praesenti [as our law speaketh] between parties espoused
before by words de futuro, which is an act that expresses this other most
lively, and consequently I must needs affirm it, to be most absurd base and
impious, That only succession of blood, is the thing without further
approbotion, which makes a King, and that the peoples consent to him, that is
next by birth, is nothing at all needful, be he what he will, and that his
admission, inuncti^n, or Coronation is only a matter of external Ceremony,
without any effect at all, for increase or confirmation of his right; these (I
say) are unlearned, fond, and wicked assertions, in flattery of Princes, to the
manifest ruin of Commonwealths and perverting of all Law, order and reason.

The sixth Speech.
COncerning the interest of Princes before their Coronation, most of them have
not failed to find as shamles flatterers, as themselves were either vain or
wicked Princes, and for my part I am of opinion, that the propositions of
Belloy did rather hurt and hinder, then profit the Prince; for whom and in
whose favor he writ them, is the King of Navara, whom hereby be would have
admitted to the Crown of France, without all consent or admission of the
Realm. But I for my part, as I doubt not greatly of his title by propinquity of
blood, according to the law Salique; so on the other side, am I of opinion,
that these propositions of Belloy in his behalf, that he should have entered by
only title of birth, without condition consent or approbation of the Realm, as
also without Oath, Anointing, or Coronation, yea of necessity, without
restraint or obligation to fulfill any law, or to observe any privileges to
Church, Chapel, Clergy, or Nobility, or to be checked by the whole Realm, if
he rule amiss: these things I say, are rather to torify, the people and set
them more against his entrance, then to advance his title; and therefore in my
poor judgment, it was neither wisely written by the one, not politiquely
permitted by the other. And to the end you may se what reason I have to give
this censure, I shall here set down his own propositions, touching this matter
as I find them in his own words. First then he avoucheth, that all families
which enjoy Kingdoms on the world were placed therein by God only, and that he
alone can chang the same, which if he referr unto Gods universal providence,
quae attingit a fine vsquae in finem fortiter, ^s the Scripture says, and
without which a sparrow falls not to the ground, as our Savior testyfieth,
Matt. 6. no man will deny but all is from God either by his Ordinance or
permission; but if we talk (as we do) of the next and immediate causes of an
Empyres, Princes, and of their changes; clear it is, that men also do and may
concur therein, and that God has left them lawful authority so to do, and
to despose thereof, for the public benifit, as largly before has been
declared, and consequently to say that God only does these things, and leaves
nothing to man's judgment therein, is against all reason, use and experience of
the world.

The second proposition of Belloy is, that where such Princes be once placed in
Government, and the Law of succession by birth established; there the Princes
children or next of kin do necessarily succeed, by only birth without any new
choice or approbation of the people, Nobility, or Clergy, or of the whole
Commonwealth together. Apolog. Cathol. part. 1. parag. 7. And to this
assertion he joyneth an other as strange as this, which is, that a King never
dies for that whenever or howsoever he cease by any means to Govern,
then enters the successor, by birth not as heir to the former, but as lawful
governor of the Realm without any admission at all, having his authority only
by the condition of his birth, and not by addoption or choice of any. Apolog.
pro Rege. c. 6. and 34. Which two propositions albeit they have been
sufficiently refuted, by that which has been spoken in the last two chapters
going before, yet shall I now again convince more amply the untruth thereof.

Other two propositions he adds, Apolog. Cathol. part. 2. parag. 7. and pro
Rege c. 9. That a Prince once entered to Government and so placed as has been
said, is under no law or restraint at all of his authority, but that himself
only is the quick and living law, and that no limitation can be given unto him
by any power under heaven except it be by his own will and that no Nation or
Commonwealth can appoint or prescribe how they will obey or how their Prince
shall govern them, but must leave his authority free from all bands of law, and
this either Willingly or by violence, is to be procured. By which words it
seems that he painteth out a perfect pattern of a tyrannical Government,
which how it did further the King of Navar I do not know.

His other proposition is, Apolog. pro Rege Cap. 20. That albeit the heir
apparent which is next by birth to any Crown, should be never so impotent, or
unfit to Govern, as if (for examples sake) he should be deprived of his senses,
mad, furious, lunatique, a fool, or the like, or that he should be known on the
other side to be most malicious, wicked, vicious or abominable, or should
degenerate into a very beast, yea if it were known that he should go about to
destroy the Common Wealth, and drown the ship which he had to guide, yet
(says this man) he must be sacred and holy unto us, and admitted without
contradiction to his inheritance, which God and nature has laid upon him, and
his direction restraint or punishment must only be remited to God alone; for
that no man or Commonwealth, may reform or restrain him. Which I doubt not
will seem unto you rather belly and base doctrine, then to come from the head
of any learned or discreet man, that regards the end why Commonwealths, and
Kingdoms, and all Governments were ordained by God and nature, and not the
flattering or adoring of any one miserable man that shall stand over them to
destroy the whole.

But now to the particular matter that we are to treat, which is, what is to be
attributed to this succession or propinquity of birth alone, I am of opinion,
that albeit their want not reasons on both sides among learned men, what kind
of providing Governors to Commonwealths is best, either by simple and free
election only or by succession of birth: my opinion (I say) is, that succession
is much to be preferred, not for that it wants all difficulties and
inconveniences (which all temporal things upon earth have) but like as before
I have showed of the particular Government of a Monarchy in respect of other
forms of regiment to wit, that is wanted not all, but had fewer inconveniences
then their forms of Regiment have so say I also of this, that albeit some
inconveniences want not in succession yet are they commonly far less and
fewer, then would follow by mere election which are subject to great and
continual dangers of ambition, emulation, division, sedition, and contention,
which do bring with them evident peril of universal destruction and disolation
of the whole body, and this at every change of the prince, which change on the
other side, is much assured by succ^ssion, for that great occasions of strife
and contention are there by cut of.

2. And besides this, the Prince who is in present possession knowing that his
son or next of kin, is to be his heir, has more care to leave the realm in
good order, as we see that the husbandman has to till and manure that ground,
which is his own, and to remain to his posterity.

3. A third commodity also there is, for that less mutations and alterations
are seen in the Commonwealth, where succession prevails, for that the son
following his father, does commonly retain the same friends, counselors,
officers, and servants, which his father had before him: pursues the same
actions and intentions, with the same manner of proceeding for the most part;
whereas he that enters by election, being an aliene to him that went before
him, and never lightly his friend, does change alter and turn upsidowne all
things.

4. Furthermore (which may be also a fourth reason) he that enters by
succession, for that he is either borne a Prince, or has been much respected
still for his title to the Crown, brings with him less passions of hatred,
emulation, anger, envy, or revenge against particular men (for that no man
durst offend him) then does he which enters by only election, for that he
having bin a subject and equal to others before his advancement, and thereby
holding contention with many, espetially at this election, must needs have
matter of quarrel with many, which he will seek easily to revenge when he is
in authority, as one the other side also such as were his equals before will
bear him less respect and more unwillingly be under him, then by birth he had
been there Sovereign.

5. These and diverse other are the commodities of succession, whereunto we may
also add the pre-eminence and priveledge of primogenitura, and auncetrie of
birth so much respected and commended by holy writ, not only in men, but in all
other creatures also, whose first borne were dedicated to God himself, and one
notable example among other occurreth to my mind of the two sons of Isack, of
the which two albeit God has ordained to choose the younger before he was
borne, as S. Paul testifies, and to reject the elder, that is to say, that
Jacob should inherit the benediction and not Esau: Yet would God have his
younger to procure the said privilege of eldership from Esau by diverse means as
first by bargain, and after by guile according to the story we read in Genes.
15 and 49. Deuteronomy. 21. and 15. 2 Paralip. 21 and 3 Exodus 3. and 2. Romans 9. and
13: Genes. 28 and 27. Out of which story two points may be pondered much to our
purpose, first that primogenitura or eldership of birth (as I have said) was
greatly respected by God, and according to that, all the disce^t^ and
successions of Kings were commonly among that people, for that ordinarily the
elder (...) ever succeeded his Father in the Crown of Jury. And the secon^
p^int (...) God would show even in this beginning, that yet this privilege was
not so (...), but that upon just causes it might be broken, as it was by this
his choice of Jacob the younger and rejecting Esau the Elder, and many times
after in matter of government the same was practiced by God himself, as when
Judah the fourth tribe and not Ruben the 1 and Eldest was appointed by God enjoy
the scepter and Crown of the Jews, as also when King David died not in his
first second or third son, but his tenth in order, to wit, Solomon who was
also the fourth that he had by Bersabe, was appointed for his successor, Genes.
29 and, 9. Exodus, 1. 2. Reg. 5. 1. Paral. 3.

So that in very deed we have here both our two cases that were propounded in
the beginning, over ruled and determined by authority and example of holy writ
it self, namely; and 1 of all, that priority and propinquitie of blood in
succession, is greatly to be honored regarded and preferred in all affairs of
digni^ie and principallity, (which is the second point) are we not so absolutely
and peremptorily bound thereunto always, but that upon just and urgent
occasions that Course may be altered and broken.

Which license or liberty is indeed, the only (or at least wise) the most
principal remedy for such inconveniences as before I showed to be far less
and fewer then are wont to follow of bare election alone yet did I confess
also, that some did or might fall out, as namely, that the person who by
sucession of blood is next, may be unable or un^it, or pernicious to govern,
in which cases the remedy is (as before has been declared) hitherto help and
assist him by law directions and wise counsels, if he be capable thereunto or
else to remove him and take in another of the same blood royal (though further
of in degree or propinquity) in his place.

And this is and has been the Custom and practice of all Kingdoms and
Commonwealths from the beginning, since succession has been established among
them, and by this means we come to remedy the difficulties and inconveniences
of both kinds of making our Kings and Princes, which are election, and
succession; for by succession we do remedy the inconveniences and dangers
before mentioned of bare election, to wit, of strife, banding, ambition, and
the like, and by this other mean of adding also election, consent, and
approbation of the Realm to succession; we remedy the inconveniences of bare
succession alone, which inconveniences are principally, that some un^pt
impotent or evil Prince may be offered some times to enter by, periority of
blood; whereof the Realm may deliver it self, by this other means of not
admitting him, so as election by succession, and succession again by election
is salved, and the one made a preservative and treacle to the other, and this
is the wisdom and high policy left by God and nature, to every Commonwealth,
for their own conservation and maintenance, and every man that is of reason and
judgment, and void of passion will not only allow, but also highly commend the
same.

Now then to answer in particular to the two questions. 1 what is to be
attributed to succession alone, and secondly what interest a Prince has
thereby to any Crown, before he be Crowned or admitted by the common wealth.
To the first I say, that to succession alone, or priority of blood only, great
honor* reverence, and ^espect ought to be borne, ^s before has been declared,
for that it is the principal circumstance and condition which leads us to
the next succession of the Crown infalibly, and without a strife: if his
propinquity be clear and evident, and that other nec^ssary circumstances and
conditions do concur also in the same person; which conditions were appointed
and set down at the same time, and by the same authority that this law of
succession was established, for that both the one and the other of these 2.
poin^s, were ordained by the Commonwealth, to wit, that the elder and first in
blood, should succ^ed, and that he should be such a person as can and will
govern to the public weal of al.

To the second question I answer, that an heir apparent to a Crown before his
Cor^nation and admission by the Realm, if he have the conditions before
required, has the same interest to the Kingdom, which the King of Romans, or
Caesar has to the Germain empire after his election and before he be crowned or
to use a more familiar example to Englishmen, as the Mayor of London has to
the majoralty, after he is chosen, and before he be admitted, or have taken his
Oath. For as this man in rigor is not truly Mayor, nor has not his
jurisdiction before his Oath and admission, nor the other is properly Emperor
before he be crowned: so is not an heir apparent, truly King though his
Predecessor be dead, and he next in succession, until he be crowned or
admitted to the Commonwealth.

Another example is there in Marriage also, whereby our matter is made more
plain; for in this contract go both the betrothing and actual joining together
of the parties in wedlock, the first is done by words de futuro, or for the
time to come, and is not properly Marriage, but espousal only, the other is by
words depresenti, that is, by mutual present consent given of both parties, and
this second is only and properly true Marriage, which two points are expressly
represented in the state of an Heir apparent, and of a Crowned King; for that
the Heir apparent by propinquity of blood, is only espoused or be^rothed to
the Commonwealth, for the time to come, and is married afterward by present
mutual consent of both parties, in the contract and knitting up of the matter,
as his Coronation, by the Oaths which either part makes the one to take the
other, and by putting on the ring and other, wedding garments before mentioned
in their Coronations, by all which the heir apparent, (which before was but
espouse) is made now the true King and husband of the Commonwealth, which
before he was not, by only succession; but only a betrothed spouse or designed
King.

Wherefore it follows also, that the Commonwealth owes no allegiance or
subjection unto the heir apparent in rigor of Justice, until he be crowned
or admitted, though his Predecessor be dead, for that in very deed until that
time, he is not their true King and Sovereign, though for better keeping of
order and avoiding of Tumul^^, all Commonwealths lightly that have their
Princes by succession, have ordained in these latter ages, that from the death
of the former Princes, all ma^ters of government shall pass in the name of his
next successor (if his succession be clear) and this (as I say) for avoiding
of garboyles, and under supposall of confirmation and approbation afterward of
the Commonwealth, at his Coronation; for which cause also, and for better
account of years, it was ordained that the beginning of the successors reign,
should be reckoned from the day of the death of his Predecessor, and not from
the day of his Coronation, as otherwise in rigor it ought to be, and as in old
time it was accustomed to be as Girard Secretary and Chronicler of France, does
wisely note, in his third book of the estate and affairs of France, Girard die
Haillan l. 3. del. estate page 241. to wit, that Kings in old time were wont to
account the years of their reigns from the day only of their anointing and
Coronation.

This point also that heirs apparent are not true Kings until their
Coronation: how just soever their title of succession otherwise be, and though
their Predecessors be dead; it might be confirmed by many other Arguments, but
especially and above all others; for that the Realm is asked again three times
at their Coronation, whether they will have such a man to be King, or no, as
before has been showed, which thing were in vain to ask if he were truly King,
as Belloy says, before his Coronation.

Again we see in all the forms and different manners of Coronations, that
after the Prince has sworn diverse times to govern well and justly, then do the
subjects take other Oaths of obedience and allegiance, and not before, which
argues that before they were not bound unto him by allegiance, and as for the
Princes of England, it is expressly noted by English Historiographers in their
Coronations. how that no aliegeance is due unto them before they be Crowned,
and that only it happened to Henry the fifth, among all other Kings, his
Predecessor to have this privilege, and this for his exceeding towardliness,
and for the great affection of the people toward him, that he had homage done
unto him, before his Coronation, and Oath taken. Whereof Polidor writes in
these words: Princeps Heuricus facto patris funere, concilium principum apud
Westomansterium convocandum eurat, in quo dum de rege creando more maiorum
agitabatur, esse tibi, conti^uo ^aliquot Principes ultro in ejus verba mirare
coeperunt, quod benevolentiae officium nulli antea priusquam Rex renunciatus
esset, praestitum constat, adeo Henricus ab ineunte aetate sp^m omnibus optimae
indolis fecit. Polyd^r. virg. lib. 22. histor. Angliae in vita Henrici 5. Which
in English, is this Prince Henry, after he had finished his fathers funerals,
caused a Parliament to be gathered at Westminster, where whilst consultation
was had, according to the ancient custom of England, about creating a new
King; behold certain of the Nobility of their own free wills, began to swear
obedience and loyalty unto him; which demonstration of love and good will, is
well known that it was never showed to any Prince before, until he was declared
King: So great was the hope that men had of the towardlines of this P. Henry,
even from his tender age, and the very same thing expresses John Stow also in
his Chronicle in these words. To this noble Prince by assent of the Parliament,
all the States of the Realm after 3 days, offered to do fealty before he was
Crowned, or had solemnized his Oath well and justly to Govern the
Commonwealth, which offer before was never found to be made to any Prince of
England, Stow in the beginning of the life of K. Henry 5. In whose narration as
also in that of Polidor it may be noted: that K. Henry the 5. was not called
King until after his Coronation, but only Prince, though his father King Henry
the 4. had been dead now almost a month before. And secondly that the
Parliament consulted de Rege creando more majorum (as Polidor his words are)
that is making of a new King according to the ancient custom of their
ancestors, which argues that he was not yet King, though his father were dead,
nor that the manner of our old English ancestors, was to account him so before
his admission.

Thirdly, that this demonstration of good will of the Nobility to acknowledge
him for King before his Coronation, and Oath selemuized well and justly to
Govern the Realm, was very extraordinary and of mere good will. And last of
all, that this was never done to any Prince before K. Henry the 5, all which
points do demonstrate, that it is the Coronation and admission, that makes a
perfect and true King; whatsoever the title by succession be otherwise, And
that except the admission of the Commonwealth be joined to succession, it is
not sufficient to make a lawful King, and of the two, the second is of far
more importance, to wit the consent and admission of the Realm, then nearness
of blood by succession alone.

This I might prove by many exampl^s in England it self, where admission has
prevailed against right of succession, as in Will. Rufus that succeeded the
Conqueror, and in K. Henry the 1. his brother, in K. Stephen, K. John and
others, who by only admission of the Realm were Kings, against the order of
succession, and very specially it may be seen, in the two examples before
mentioned of the admission of the two Kings Henry and Edward, both surnamed the
4. whose entrances to the Crown, if a man do well consider. he shall find that
both of them, founded the best part and most surest of their titles, upon the
election consent, and good will of the people. As in their last words to their
friends in Sr. Tho. Moore and Stow. Yea both of them at their dying days
having some remorse of conscience, (as it seemed) for they had caused so many
men to dye for maintenance of their several Rights and titles, ^ad no better
way to appease their own minds; but by thinking that they were placed in that
room by the voice of the Realm, and consequently might lawfully defend the
same, and punish such as went about to deprive him.

You shall find, if you look into the doings of Princes in all ages, that such
Kings as were most politic, and had any lest doubt or suspicion of troubles
about the title, after their deaths, have caused their sons to be Crowned in
their own days, trusting more to this, then to their title by succession,
thongh they were never so lawfully and lineally descended. And of this I could
alleadg you many examples out of diverse Countries but especially in France,
since the last line of Capetus came unto that Crown; for this did Hugh Capetus
himself procure to be done, to Robert his Eldest son, in his own days, and
the like did King Robert procure for his younger son Henry the 1. as Girard
holds, and excluded his elder only by Crowning Henry in his own days:
Henry also did entreat the States of France, to admit and Crown Philip the 1.
his eldest son, whilst himself reigned, An. 1131. and this man's son Luys Le
Cross, did the same also unto two sons of his: first to Philip, and after his
death to Luys the younger, both which were Crowned in their fathers life time
and this Luys again the younger which is the seventh of that name; for more
assuring of his son named Philip the second entreated the Realm to admit and
Crown him also in his own days, with that great solemnity which in the former
chapter has been declared.

And for this very same cause of security, it is not to be doubted, but that
always the Prince of Spain is sworn and admitted by the Realm^, during his
Fathers reign. The same consideration also moved King David, 2 Reg. 1. to Crown
his son Solomon in his own days. Our King Henry also the 2 of England,
considering the alteration of that the Realm had made in admitting K. Stephen,
Polyd. and Stow. in vita Henrici 11. before him against the order of lineall
succession by propi^quity of blood: and fearing that the like might happen
also, after him, caused his eldest son named, likewise Henry, to be Crowned
in his life time, so as England had two K. Henry's living at one time with
equal authority, and this was done in the 16. year of his Reign, and in the
year of our Lord 1170 but his device had no good success; for that K. Henry
the younger made war soon after upon K. Henry the elder, and had both the
Kings of France and Scotland and many Nobles of England and Normandy, to take
his part; for which cause it is thought that this thing has never been put in
practice again since that time in England, but yet hereby it is evident, what
the opinion of the world was in those days of the force of Coronation, and
admission of the Commonwealth, and how little propinquity of blood prevails
without that.

The Seventh Speech.
I Should begin with the Grecian Kings, it were infinite that might be
alleged, and perhaps some man would say, they were over old, and far fetched
examples, and cannot be presidents to us in these ages, and if I lay before you
the examples of Roman Kings and Emperors put in and out, against the Law aed
Rights of succession; the same men perhaps will answer, that it was by force,
and injury of mutinons soldiers, whereunto that Commonwealth was greatly
subject. And if I should bring forth any presidents and examples of holy
Scripturs, some other might chance to reply, that this was by particular
privilege, wherein God Almighty would deal and dispose of things against the
ordinary course of man's law, as best liked himself, whose will is more then
Law, and whose actions are right it self, for that he is Lord of all, and to
be limited by no rule, or law of man, but yet that this is not properly the
Act of a Common-Welth.

Thus (I say) it may be, that some man would reply, and therefore having store
enough of plain and evident matter, which has no exception; for that it has
happened in settled Commonwealths, and those near home, where the law of
succession is received and established, to wit, in Spain, France, and England,
I shall retire my self to them alone: but yet putting you in mind before I
pass any further, that it is a matter much to be marked how God dealt in this
point with the people of Israel, at the beginning, 1. Reg. 8. after he had
granted to them, that they should have the same government of Kings, that other
Nations round about them had, whose Kings did ordinarily reign by succession,
as ours do at this day, and as all the Kings of the Jews did afterward, and
yet this notwithstanding, God at the beginning, at the very entrance of their
first Kings, would show plainly that this Law of succeeding of the one the
other, by birth and propinquity of blood, though for the most part, it should
prevail) yet that it was not so precisely necessary, but that upon just causes
it might be altered.

For proof whereof, we are to consider, that albeit he made Saul a true and
lawful King over the Jews, and consequent also gave him all Kingly
privileges benefits and prerogatives belonging to that degree and state,
whereof one principal (as you know) is to have his Children succeed after him
in the Crown: yet after his death God suffered not any one of his generation
to succeed him, though he left behind him many Children and among others
Isboseth a Prince of 40. Years of age 2. Reg. 1. and 21. whom Abner the
general captain of that nation, with eleaven tribes followed for a time, as
their lawful Lord and master by succession, until God cheked them for it, and
induced them to reject him though heir apparent by descent, and to cleave to
David newly elected King, who was a stranger by Birth, and no King at all to
the King deceased.

And if you say here that this was for the sin of Saul. whom God had rejected
I do confess it, but yet this is nothing against our purpose, for that we
pretend not that a Prince that is next in blood can justly be put back, except
it be for his own defects, or those of his ancestors. And more over I would
have you consider, that by this it is evident that the fault of the father may
prejudicate the sons right to the Crown, albeit the son has no part in
the fault, as we may see in this example not only of Ishboseth that was
punished and deprived for the offense of Saul his Father (notwithstanding he
had been proclaimed King as has been said) but also of Ionathus Saules other
son, who so good a man, and so much praised in holy Scripture, and yet he
being slain in War, and leaving a son named Mephiboseth he was put back
also, 2. Reg. 5. though by nearenesse of blood he had great interest in the
succession and much before David.

But David being placed in the Crown by election, free consent, and admission
of the people of Israel, as the Scripture plainly testifies (though by motion
and direction of God himself.) we must confess, 2. Reg. 2, and 5. and no man I
think will deny, but that he had given unto him therewith, all Kingly
privileges prehemiences and regali^ies, even in the highest degree, as was
conveniene to such a state, and among other, the Scripture expressly names,
that in particular it was assured him by God, that his seed should reign after
him: yea and that for eve^, Psalm. 131. 2. Paral. 6. but yet we do not find this
to be performed to any of his elder sons as by order of succession it should
seem to appertain) no nor to any of their of spring or discents, but only to
Solomon, which was his younger and tenth son, and the fourth only by Barsabe.

True it is, that the Scripture recounteth how Adonias David's elder son, that
was of rare beauty and a very goodly young Prince, seeing his Father now very
old and impotent, and to lie on his death bed, and himself heir apparent by
antiquity of blood, after the death of Absalon, his elder brother that was
slain before, he had determined to have proclaimed himself heir apparent in
Jerusalem before his Father died, 1. Reg. 1. and for that purpose had ordained
a great assembly and banquet, had called unto it both the high priest Abiather,
and diverse of the Clergy as also the general Captain of all the army of
Israel named Ioah, with other of the Nobillity and with them all the rest of
his brethren, that were sons to King David, saving only Solomon, together
with many other Princes and great men, both spiritual and temporal of that
estate, and had prepared for them a great feast, meaning that very day to
proclaim himself heir apparent to the Crown, and to be Crowned, as indeed
by succession of blood it appertained unto him: and this he attempted so much
the rather, by council of his friends, for that he saw the King his Father
very old and impotent, and ready to die, and had taken no order at all for his
successor, and moreover Adonias had understood, how that Bersabe Solomon's
Mother had some hope to have her son Reign after David, upon a certain
promise that David in his youth had made unto her thereof, as also she had in
the special favor and friendship which Nathan the Prophet, and Sadock the
Priest [who could do much with the old King David] did bear unto her son
Solomon, above all the rest of his Brethren.

Hereupon (I say) these two that is to say, Queen Bersabee, and Nathan the
Prophet, coming together to the old man, as he lay one his bed, and putting
him in mind of his promise, and oath made to Bersabee for the preferment of her
Son, and showing besides how that Adonias without his order and consent, had
gathered an Assembly to make himself King, even that very day (which did put
the old King in very great fear, and anger) and further also telling him
(which pleased him well) quod oculi totius Israel in eum ^espicerent, ut
indicaret eis, quis sederet in solio suo post ipsum: 3. Reg. 1. that is, that
the eyes of all Israel were upon him to see whom he would commend unto them, to
sit in his seat after him, which was as much to say, as that the whole
commonwealth referred it to his choice, which of his Sons should reign
after him.

Upon these reasons and persuasions (I say) the good old King was content that
they should take Solomon out of hand, and put him upon the Kings own mule, and
carry him about the streets of Jerusalem, accompanied with his guard and court,
and crying with sound of Trumpets Vivat Rex Solomon; 3. Reg 1. and that Sadock
the Priest should anoint him, and after that he should be brought back, and
placed in the royal Throne in the palace, and so indeed he was, at what time
King David himself being not able through impotencie, to rise out of his bed,
did him honor and reverence from the place where he lay; for so says the
Scriptures Adoravit Rex in lectulo suo, king David adored his Son Solomon
thus Crowned, even from his bed, all which no doubt though it may seem to have
been wrought by humane means and policy, yet must we confess that it was
principally by the special instinct of God himself, as by the sequel and
succes we see, so that hereby also we are taught, that these and like
determinations of the people Majestrates, and common wealths, about admitting
or refusing of Princes to Reign or not to Reign ever them, when their
designements are to good ands, and for just respects and causes are allowed
also by God, and oftentimes are his own special drifts and dispositions,
though they seem to come from man.

Whereof no one thing can give a more evident proof, then that which ensued
afterward to Prince Roboam, the Lawful Son, and heir of this King Salamon,
who after his Fathers death coming to Sichem where all the People of Israel
were gathered together, for his Coronation, and Admission, according to his
right by succession, 3. Reg. 12. For until that time we see he was not
accounted true King, though his Father was dead, and this is to be noted, the
people began to purpose unto him certain conditions, for taking away of some
hard and heavy impositions, laid upon them by Solomon his Father, (an evident
president of the oath and conditions that Princes do swear unto in these days
at their Coronation) whereunto when Roboam refused to yeald ten Tribes of the
twelve refused to admit him for their King, 3. Reg 11. but chose rather one
Jeroboam Robohams servant, that was a mere stranger and but of poor
parentage, and made him there lawful King and God allowed thereof as the
Scripture in express words does testify: and when Roboam that took himself
to be openly Injured hereby, would by arms have pursued his Title, and had
gathered together an Army of a hundred and foure-score thousand chosen
soldiers (as the scripture says) 5 Rig. 12. and 21. to punish these rebels
as he call them, and to reduce these 10. tribes to their due obedience of
their natural Prince: God appeared unto one Semejah a holy man, and bad him
go to the camp of Roboam, and tell them plainly that he would not have them to
fight against their Brethren. that had chosen another King, but that every man
should go home to his house, and live quietly under the King, which each party
had, and so they did, and this was the end of that tumult which God for the
sins of Solomon had permitted and allowed of. And thus much by the way I
thought good to touch ont of holy Scripture, concerning the Jewish,
Commonwealth, even at the beginning; for that it may give light to all the rest
which after I am to treat of; for if God permitted and allowed this in his own
Common wealth, that was to he the example and pattern of all others, that should
ensue: no doubt but that he approves also the same in other Realms when just
occasions are offered, either for his service, the good of the people and
Realm, or else for punishment of the sins and wickedness of some Princes,
that the ordinary line of succession be altered.

Now then to pass on further, and to begin with the Kingdoms of Spain,
supposing ever this ground of Gods Ordinance, first I say, that Spain has had
3. or 4. races or discents of Kings, as France also and England have had, and
the first race was from the Gothe^, which began their reign in Spain after
the expulsion of the Romans, about the year of Christ 416. Ambros. Moral. lib.
11. c. 12 to whom the Spaniard refers all his old Nobility as the Frenchman
does to the German Franckes, and the English to the Saxons, which entered France
and England in the very same age, that the other did Spain, and the race of
Gothish Kings endured by the space of 300. years, until Spain was lost unto
the Moors.

The second race is from Don Pelayo that was chosen first King of Asturias, and
of the Mountain Country of Spain, after the destruction thereof by the
Moors, about the year of Christ 717. Ambros. Moral. lib. 13. c. 2. which race
continued and increased, and added ^^^gdom unto Kingdom for the space of other
300 years, until the year of Christ 1034. Moral. lib. 13 c. 42, 43, 44. when
Don Sancho Mayor, King of Navarra got unto his power, the Earldom also of
Aragon and Castiliae, and made them Kingdoms, and divided them among his
Children, and to his second son, named Don Fernando, surnamed afterward the
great, he gave not only the said Earldom of Castilia with title of Kingdom, but
by marriage also of the sister of Don Dermudo King of Leon, and Aust^rias, he
joined all those Kingdoms together, that day forward the 3 race of the Kings of
Navair to reign in Castle and so endured for 500 years, until the year of
Christ 1540. when the house of Austira entered to reign there, by marriage of the
daughter and heir Don Ferdinando surnamed the Catholic; and this was the 4
race of Spanish Kings after the Romans, which endures until this day. And
though in all these four race^ and ^anks of Royal discents, diverse examples
might be alleged for manifest proof of my purpose: ye^ will not deal with
their race, for that it is evident by the Council of Tolido, (which were
holden in that very time) that in those days express election, was joined
with succession as by the deposition of K. Suintila, and putting back of all
his children: as also by the election and approbation of K. Sifinando that was
further of by succession, has been insinuated before, and in the 5 Council of
that age of Toledo, it is decreed expressly in these words, Si quis talia
meditatus fuorit (talking of pretending to be King, quem nec electio omnium
perficet, nec Gothicae gentis nobilitas ad hunc honoris apicom trahit, si
consortio Catholicorum privatus, and divino anathemat condemuatus. Council. Tol.
5. c. 3. If any man shall imagine (said these Fathers (or go about to aspire to
the Kingdom, whom the election and choice of all the Realm, does not make
perfect, nor the Nobility of the Gotish Nation, does draw to the height of this
dignity: let him be deprived of all Catholic society, and damned by the c^rse
of Almighty God, by which words is insinuated, that not only the Nobility, but
of Gotish blood, or nearnes by succession was required for the making of their
King, but much more the choice or admission of all the Realm, wherein thi^
Council puts the perfection of his title.

Don Pelayo died in the year of our Lord 737. and left a Son named Don Fauila,
who was King after his Father, and reigned 2. years only. After whose death,
none of his Children were admitted for King, though he left diverse, as all
writers do testify. But as Don Lucas the Bishop of Tuy a very ancient Author
writes, Aldefonsus Catholicus ab universo populo Gothorum eligitur, that is
(as the Chronicler Moralis does translate in Spanish) Don Alonso surnamed the
Catholic, was chosen to be King by all voices of the Gotish Nation. This Don
Alonso was Son in law to the former K. Fauila, as Morales says, for that he
had his Daughter Erm^nesenda in Marriage, and he was preferred before the Kings
own sons, only for that they were young and unable to govern, as the said
Historiographer testifies. And how well this fell out for the Common-Welth,
and how excellent a King this Don Alonso proved, Morales shows at large, from
the 10. Chapter of his 13. Book until the 17. and Sesastianus Bishop of
Salamanca, that lived in the same time, writes of his valiant acts he was
surnamed the great* S^^ast. Episc. Saelam in hist. Hisp.

To this famous Don Alonso, succeeded his son Don Frucla the first of that name,
who was noble King for 10 years space, and had diverse excellent victories
against the Moors; but afterward declining to tyranny: he became hateful to
the subjects, and for that he put to death wrongfully his own brother Don
Vimerano Prince of excellent parts and rarely beloved of the Spaniards, he was
himself put down, and put to death by them in the year of Christ 768. And
albeit this King left 2. godly Children behind him, which were lavvfully
begotten upon his Queen Dona Munia, the one of them a son called Don Alonso,
and the other a daughter called Dona Ximea: yet for the hatred conceived
against their Father, neither of them was admitted by the Realm to succeed
him; but rather his ch^sen german, named Don Aurelio brothers son to Don Alonso
the Catholic, was preferred and reigned peacably 6 years, and then dying
without issue; for this the hatred ^f the Spaniards vva^ not yet ended against
the memory of K. Eruela: they would not yet admit any of his Generation; but
rather excluded them again the 2 time, and admitted a brother in law of his,
named Don Silo that was married to her sister Dona Adosinda daughter to the
foresaid noble K. Catholic Alonso. So that here we seervvice the right
heirs of K. Don Fruela for his evil government were put back But Don Silo
being dead without issue, as also Don Aurelio was before him, and the
Spaniards anger against K. ^ruca being now well aslvvaged; they admitted to
the Kingdom his foresaid son Don Alonso the younger surnam^d afterward the
chaste, whom now twice before put back as you have seen; but now they
admitted him, though his reign at the first endured very little; for that a
bastard uncle of his, named Don Mauregate by help of the Moors put him out,
and reigned by force 6. years, and in the ending without issue, the matter
came in deliberation again, whether the K. Don Alonso the chaste that yet
lived, and had been hidden in monastary of Galitia, during the time of he:
yrant should return again to govern, or rather that his cose^n German Don
vermudo, son to his uncle the Prince, should be elected in his place. And the
Realm of Spay^ed etermined the 2. that Don Vermulo though he were much further
of. by propinquity of blood, and within (...) also should be admitted. True it
is, that after three yeare^ reign, this (...) King V^rmudo being weary of
kingly life, and feeling some scruple of conscience, that being Deacon, he had
forsaken the life Ecclesiastical, and married (though by dispensation of the
Pope, as Morales says) and entangled himself with the affairs of a kingdom
Moric. 28 and 29. an. 791. he resigned willingly the government unto his said
cozen Don Alonso the chaste, and himself lived after a private life for diverse
years; but this Don Alonso who now the 4. time had been deprived of his
succession, as you have seen, deceived the expectation of the Spaniards that
accounted him a Monk, for he proved the most valiant and excellent King that
ever that Nation had both for his virtue, valor, victories against the Moors,
building of Towns castles, churches Monasteries, and other such works of
christianity, as Morales recounteth and he reigned after this his last
admission 51 years, and had great friendship with K. Charles the great of
France, who lived in the same time with him.

And this man among other most noble exploits so tamed the Moors of his
country, as during his days he never paid that cruel^ and horrible tribute,
which before and after was paid by the christians to the Moors. Mor. l. 13 c.
45. an. 842. which was 100 young Maidens, and 50 Sons of Gentlem^n every year
to be brought up in the Religion of Mahomet, among those infidel tyrants. And
finally, this man after so much affliction came to be one of the most renowned
Princes of the World.

After this Don Alonso who left no children, for that he would never marry, who
lived all his life in chastity there succeeded to him by election his nephew
named Don ^anurs, son to the former said K. Don Vermudo the Deacon, that gave
this man the crown, of whose election Morales writes these words. Muerto el
Rey Don Alonso el casto fue eligido por los perlados grandes del reyno, l Rey
Don Ramiro primero deste nombre, hyo del Rey Don vermudo el diacono, Mor. c.
11. That is the K. Don Alonso the chaste being dead, there was chosen K. by the
Prelates and Nobility of the Realm Don Ramiro the first of this name, Son of K
Vermudo the Deacon who resigned his crown to Don Alonso and it is to be noted,
that albeit this Don Ram^ro was next in blood to the succession, after the
death of his uncle Don Alonso without children, yet was he chosen by the
States as here it is said in express words.

Moreover it is to be noted* that albeit this Author Ambrosio Morales and other
Spanish Writers do say, that in the time of this K Ramiro, the law of
succession by propinquity in blond was so revived, and strongly confirmed that
as the kingdom of Spain was made as Majorasgo as he terms it, which is, an
inheritance so intailed and tied only to the next blood as there is no
possibility ^o alter the same, and that from this time forward the King always
caused his eldest Son to be named King or Prince and so ever to be sworn by the
Realm and Nobility, yet shall we find this Ordinance and succession oftentimes
to have been broken upon several considerations, as this Author himself in
that very chapter confesses.

As for example, after four discents from this man, which were Don Ordonio the
1. this man's Son, and Don Alonso the 3. Don Garzia and Don Ordonio the second,
all four Kings by orderly succession, it happened that in the year of Christ 924.
Don Ordonio the second dying, left four Sons and one daughter lawfully
begotten, and yet the State of Spain displaced them all, and gave the kingdom
to their Uncle Don Fruela second brother to their Father Don Ordonio, and
Morales says, Mor. l. 16. cap. 1. an. 924. that there appears no other
reason hereof, but only for that these Sons of the King deceased were young,
and not so apt to govern well the Realm as their uncle was.

But after a years Reign* this King Fruela dyed also, and left diverse children
at man's estate, and then did the Spaniards as much against them, as they had
done for him before, against the children of his elder brother. For they put
them all by the crown, and chose for their King Don Alonso the 4* which was
eldest Son to Don Ordonio the 2. before named, that had been last King saving
one, and this man also (I mean Don Alonso the 4,) leaving afterward his
Kingdom, and betaking himself to a religious habit offered to the Common^welth
of Spain his eldest Son lawfully begotten, named Don Ordonio, to be their King,
but they refused him, and took his Brother (I mean this Kings Brother) and
Uncle to the young Prince, named Don Ramiro, Moral. lib. 19. cap. 20. An. 930.
who reigned 19 years, and was a most excellent King and gained Madrid from the
Moors, though noted of cruelty for imprisoning and pulling out the eyes
afterward of this King Don Alonso the 4. and all his children and nephews, for
that he would have left his habit, and returned to be King again. But this
fact my au^hor Morales excuses, saying that it was requisite for pcace and
safety of the Realm; so as here you see two manifest alterations of lineal
succession together by order of the Common-welth.

Furthermore, after this noble King Don Ramiro the 2. succeeded as heir
apparent to the Crown his elder Son, Don Ordonio the 3. of his name, in the
year of our Savior 950. but this succession endured no longer then unto his own
death, which was after 7 years, for then albeit he left a Son named el enfante
Don Vermudo, yet he was not admitted, but rather his brother, Don Sancho the
first of his name, surnamed el Gordo, who was Uncle to the young Prince, and
the reason of this alteration Morales gives in these words, el succeder en el
regno al hermano, fue por la racon ordinaria de ser el enfante, Don Vermudo
nino y no bastante para ^l goviernoy difenca de la terra. Mor. l. 16. c. 29.
An. 950. which is the cause, why the Kings brother, and not his Son, succeeded
in the Crown, was for the ordinary reason (so often before alleged) for that
the Infant or young Prince Vermudo was a little child, and not sufficient for
Government and defense of the Country. Truth it is, that after this Don Sancho
had reigned, and his son and heir named Don Ramiro the 3. after him, for the
space of 30. years in all, Mor. l. 17. c. 1, 2, 3, 4. Then was this youth Don
Vermudo (that is now put back) called by the relm to the succession of the
Crown, and made King by the name of King Vermudo the 2. who left after him Don
Alonso the 5. and he again his Son Don Vermudo the 3. who marying his sister
Dona Sancha that was his heir) unto Don Fernando, first Earl* and then King of
Castile (who was second Son to Don Sancho Mayor, K ing of Navarras before has
been said) he j^yned by these means the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile together,
which were separate before, and so ended the line of Don Pelayo, first Christ^n
King of Spain after the entrance of the Moors, which had endured now 300. years
and the blood of Navar entered as you see, and so continued therein until the
entrance of ^^ose of Au^tria as before has been said, which was almost 500.
years together. And thus much I thought good to note out of the stories of
Spain, for this first descent of the Spanish Kings after the entrance of the
Moors* neither mean I to pass much further, both for that it would be over
long, as also for that mine Author Morales, who is the most diligent that has
written the Chronicles of that Nation, ends here his story with King Vermudo
the 3. and last of the Gotish blood. Notwithstanding, if I would go on further,
there would not want diverse evident examples also to the same purpose, which
Stephen Garabay another Chronicler of Spain, does touch in the continuation of
this story, weereof for examples sake only I will name 2 or 3 among the rest.

And first about the year of Christ 1021. there was a marriage made by K* John
of England for Dona Blancha his Niece, that is to say, the daughter of his
sister Dame El^nor, and of Don Alonso the 9. of that name, King and Queen of
Spain, which Blancha was to marry the Prince of France, named Luis, son and
heir to K. Philip (surnamed Augustus) which Luis was afterward K. of France by
the name of Luis the 8. and was Father to Luis the 9. surnamed the Saint. Car.
lib. 11. c. 12. This Lady Blancha was Niece as I have said unto K. John and to
K. Richard the ^. of England for that her Mother Lady Elenor was their sister,
and daughter to K. Henry the 2. and K. John made this marriage, thereby to make
peace with the French, and was content to give for her dowry (for that he could
not tell how to recover them again) all those Towns and Countries which the
said K. Phil. had taken upon the English, by this Kings evil Government in
Normandy and Gascoyn; and moreover promise was made, that if P. Henry of Spain
(that was the only brother to the said Lady Blanch) should dye without issue
(as after he did) then this Lady should succeed in the Crown of Spain also; but
yet afterward the State of Spain would not perform this, but rather admitted
her younger sister Dona Berenguela, married to the Prince of Leon, and excluded
both Blanch and her son the King S, Luis of France, against the evident right
of succession and propinquity of blood, and the only reason they yielded
hereof, was not to admit strangers to the Crown, as Garabay testifies. This
happened then, and I do note by the way, that this Dona Berenguela second
daughter of Q. Elenor, the English woman was married (as has bin said) to the
Prince of Leon, and had by him Don Fernando the 3. of that name, K of Castilia,
surnamed also the Saint, so as the two daughters of an English Queen had two
Kings Saints for their Sons at one time, the elder of France, and the younger of
Spain. After this again about 60 years the Prince of Spain named Don Alonso,
surnamed de la cerda, for that he was borne with a great gristle hair on his
breast, called cerda in Spanish, which Don Alonso was Nephew ^o the King
Fernando the Saint, and married with the daughter of S. Lewis K. of France,
named also Blancha as her grand mother was and had by her two sons called
Alonso and Hernando de la cerda, as the Prince their Father was named, which
Father of theirs dying before the King, the Grand father left them commended to
the Realm as lawful heir apparent to the crown, yet for that a certain Uncle
of theirs named Don Sa^cho, younger brother to their father; which Don Sancho
was surnamed afterward el brav^, for his valor, and was a great Warrier, and
more like to manage well the matters of war then they: he was made heir apparent
of Spain add hey putb^ck in their Grandfa^hers time, and by his and the Realms
consent (their Father as I have said being dead) and this was done at a
general Parliament holden at Segovia in the year 1276. and after this Don
Sancho was made King in the year 1284 and the two Princes put into prison; but
afterward at the suit of their Uncle King Philip the 3 of France, they were let
out again, and endued with certain lands, and so they remain unto this day; and
of these do come the Dukes of Medina Celi, and all the rest of the hou^e of
Cerda, which are of much Nobility in Spain at this time, and K. Philip that
reigns comes of Don Sancho the younger Brother. Not long after this again
when Don Pedro surnamed the cruel King of Castile, was driven cut, and his
bastard brother H* 2. set up in his place, the Duke of Lancaster John of Gant,
Gar. l. 15. c. 1. an. 1363. having married Dona Constantia, the said King
Padroes daughter and heir, pretended by succession the said^ Crown of Castile,
as indeed it appert^ined unto him; but yet the State of Spain denied it flatly,
and defended it by arms, and they prevailed against John of Gant, as did also
the race of H* the B^stard against his lawful brother, and the race of Don
Sancho the uncle against his lawful nephews, and that of Dona Berenguela
against her elder sister, all which races do reign unto this day, and these
three changes of the true line, happened within two ages, and in the third and
principal descent of the Spanish Kings, when this matter of suceession was
most assuredly and perfectly established, and yet who will deny but that the
Kings of Spain who hold by the latter titles at this day be true and lawful
Kings. Well, one example will I give you more out of the kingdom of Portugal,
and so will I make an end with there countries. This king Henry the bastard
last named (...) Spain had a son that succeeded him in the crown of Spain,
named John the 1* who married the daughter and he^r named Dona Beatrix, of k
Fernando the 1. of Portugal, but yet after the death of the said k. Fernando
the States of Portugal would never agree to admit him for their King for not
subjecting themselves by that means to the Castilians and for that cause they
rather took for their king a bastard brother of the said late k. Don Fernando,
whose name was Dondulan a youth of 20 years old, who had bin Master of a
military order in Portugal named de Avis, and so they excluded Dona Be^tr^x Q.
of Cast l. that was their lawful heir and chose this young man, and married
him afterward to the Lady Philip da^ghter of John of Gaunt D. of Lancaster, by
h^s first wife Blanch, Duches and heir of Lancaster, in whose right the kings
of Portugal and their discendents do pretend unto this day a certain interest
to the house of Lancaster. Hereby we see what an ordinary matter in has been
in Spain and Portugal to alter the line of next succession upon any reasonable
consideration which they imagned to be for their weal public, and the like we
shall find in France and England.

The eighth Speech.
AS concerning the state of France, although since the entrance of their first
king Pharaniond with his Franks out of Germany, which was about ^he year of
Christ 419. they have never had any stranger come to wear their crown, which
they attribute to their law Salike, that forbids women to reign; ye among
themselves have they changed twice their whole race and lineage of kings once in
the entrance of k. Pepin that put out the line of Pharamond about the year 751.
and again in the promotion of k. Hugo Capetus that put out the line of Pepin,
in the year 983. so as they have had 3 discents and races of Kings as well as
the Spaniards; the first of Pharamond, the 2. of Pepin and the 3. of Capetus,
which endures to this present, if it be not altered now by the exclusion that
diverse pretend to make of the King of Navar, and other Princes of the blood
Royal of the house of Burbon.

I will here set p^sse the first rank of all, of the French Kings, for that
some men say perhaps, that the common wealth and law of succession, was not so
well settled in those days as it has been afterward in time of k. Pepin,
Charles the great, and their discendanta^ as also for that it were in very deed
over edious to examine and peruse all three ranks or kings in France, as you
will say when you shall see what store I have to allege out of the 2. rank
only, which began with the exclusion and deposition of their lawful king
Childerike the 3. and election of k. Pepin, then surnamed le brefe, or the
little, for his small stature (though he were a Giant in deeds) being made king
of France, by mere election, in the year of Christ, 751. after 22 Kings that
had reigned of the first line of Pharamond for the space of more then 300
years, and being so famous and worthy a King as all the world knows reigned
18 years, and then left his States and Kingdoms by succession unto his eldest
Son Charles, surnamed afterward the Great, for his famous and heroical acts.
And albeit the whole kingdom of France appertained unto him alone by the law of
succession, his Father being King, and he his eldest Son; yet would the Realm
of France show their authority in his admission which Girard sets down in
these words Estant Pep^n decede, les Francois esleurent, Rois, Charles and
Carlomon ses fills, ala charge, quils partageroient enter eux, egalement, le
royaume, Gir. du Haillan, l. 3. an. 768. which is king Pepin being dead, the
brench-men chose for their kings his two Sons, Charles and Carlomon, with
condition, that they should part equally between them the Realm. Wherein is to
be noted, not only the elect* on of the Common wealth, besi^es succession but
also the heavy condition laid upon the heir to part half of his kingdom with
his younger brother, and the very same words has Eginard an ancient French
Writer, in the life of this Charles the Great, to wit, That the French State in
a public Assembly, did choose two Princes to be their Kings, with express
condition to divide the Realm equally, as Francis Belforest cites his words,
Eginard Belfor. l, 2. c. 5.

After 3 years that these two Brethren had reigned together K. Carlomon the
younger dyed and left many Sons, the elder whereof was named Adalgise. but
Belforest says, That the Lords Ecclesiastical and Temporal of France swore
fidelity and obedience to Charles, without any respect or regard at all of the
child^en of Carlomon, who yet by right of succession should have been preferred
and Paulus Emilius a Latin Writer says, proceres regni ad Carolum ultroven
entes regem tum totius Galliae sulutarunt, Pa^l. Mil. hist. Fr^nc. that is, The
Nobility of the Realm coming of their own accord un^o Charles, saluted him k.
of all France whereby is showed, that this exclusion of the children of
Carlomon was not by force or tyranny, but by free delibera^ion of the Realm.

After Charles the great reigned by succession his only Son Lewis the first,
surnamed de^onnaire of h^s courtesy, who entering to reig^ in the year 817.
with great applause of all men for the exceeding grateful memory of his
father, was yet afterward at the pur^uit principally of his own three sons,
by his first wise (which were Lothair Pepin, and Lups) deposed Girard l. 1 An.
834. first in a chancell at Lions, and then again at Compeigne, and put into a
monastery though afterward he came to reign again, An 840. and his fourth
son by h^s second wife (which son was named Charles le ch^une, for that he
was bald) ^ucceeded him in the states of France, though after many battles
against his brother Lothair, to whom by succession the same apperteyned.

After Charles the bald; succeeded Lewis the second, surnamed le begue, for his
stuttering, who was not eldest, but third Son unto his Father, an 878. for the
second dyed before his Father, and the eldest was put by his succes^ion for his
cruel demeanure, this Lewis also was like to have bin deprived by the States
at his first entrance, for the hatred conceived against h^s Father Charles the
ba^d, but that he calling a solemn P^rl. at Compeigne as Girard says, Gie l.
1. an. 879 he made the People, Clergy, and Nobility many fair promises to have
their good wills. This Lewis the stuttering left two bastard sons by a
Concubine, who were called Lewis and Carlomon, as also he left a little Infant
newly born of his lawful, fe, Adeltrude daughter to k. Alfred of England which
Infant was K. of France afterward, by name of Charles the simple, albeit not
immediately after the death of his Father, for that the Nobles of France said,
that they that they had need of a man to be King, and not a child, as Girard
reports and therefore the whole State of France, chose for their Kings the
two foresaid bastards, Lewis the 3. and Carlomon the first of that name,
jointly, and they were crowned most solemnly and divided the whole Relm between
them, in the year of Christ 881. and Q. Adeltruds with her child true heir of
France fled into England to her Father, and there brought him up for d^vers
years, in which time she saw 4 or 5 Kings Reign in his place in France one
after the other, for briefly thus it passed.

Of these two bastard Kings, the elder named Lewis reigned but 4 years, and
dyed without issue; the 2d. that is Carlomon lived but one year after him, and
left a Son called also Lewis the 5. and surnamed Faineant, for his idle and
slothful life an, 886. For which as also for his vicious behavior, and in
particular for taking out and marying a Nun of the Abbey of Baudour at Chels by
Paris, he was deprived and made a Monk in the Abbey of S. Denis where he dyed,
and in his place was chosen K. of France, and crowned with great solemnity
Charles the 4. Emperor of Rome, srrnamed le gios, for that he was fat and
corp^lent, he was Nephew to Charles the bald, before mentioned, and therefore
the French stories say, that he came to the Crown of France partly by
succession and partly by election, Girard l. 5. an 888. but for succession, we
see that it was nothing worth, for so much as Charles the simple the right
heir was alive in England, whom it seems that the French men had quite
forgotten, seeing that now they had not only excluded him three times already,
but afterward also again when this gross Charles was for his cruel government
by them deposed and deprived, not only of the kingdom of France but also of
his Empire, which he had before he was King and was brought into such miserable
penury, as diverse write, that he perished or want; and this time I say the
States of France would not yet admit Charles the simple (though hitherto his
simplicity did not appear, but he seemed a goodly Prince) but rather they chose
for King one Odo Earl of Paris and Duke of Angiers, and caused him to be
crowned But yet after a few years, being weary of this man's government, and
moved also somewhat with compassion toward the youth that was in England, they
resolved to depose Odo, and so they did while he was absent in Gascony, and
called Charles the simple out of England to Paris, and restored him to the
kingdom of France, leaving only to Odo for recompense the state of Aquitain,
with Title of a Duke: wherewith in fine, he contented himself, seeing that he
could get no more, But yet his Posterity by virtue of this election, pretended
ever after a Title to the Crown of France and never left it of until at length
by Hugo Capetus they got it, for Hugh descended of this King and Duke Odo. This
K. Charles, then surnamed the simple, and English woman's Son, being thus
admitted to the crown of France, he took to wife an English woman named Elgina
or Ogin, daughter of K. Edward the elder, by whom he had a Son named Lewis, and
himself being a simple man, was allured to go to the castle of? eron in
Picardy, where he was made prisoner, and forced to resign his kingdom unto
Ralph K. of Burg^ndy, an. 927. and soon after he dyed through misery in the
same castle, and his Q. Ogin fled in^o England, where with her litl^ son Lewis
unto her uncle K. Adelstan, as Q. Adeltrude had done before with her son unto
K. Al^red, and one of the chief in this action for putting down of the simple
was Count Hugh surnamed the Great, E. of Paris, Father unto Hugo Capetus, which
after was King. But this new K* Ralph lived but 3 years after, and then the
States of France considering the right title of Lewis the lawful child of K.
Charles the simple, which Lewis was commonly called now in France by the name
of d'Outremer, that is beyond the Sea, for that he had been brought up in
England, the said States being also greatly and continually solicited hereunto
by the Ambassadors of K. Ad^lston of England, and by Will. Duke of Normandy,
surnamed long Speer, great Grandfather to Will. the Conqueror, who by the K. of
England was gained also to be of the young Princes part: for these
considerations (I say) they resolved to call him inte France out of England, as
his Father had bin before him, and to admit and crown him King, and so they
did, and he reigned 27 years, and was a good Prince, and dyed peaceably in his
bed the year of Christ, 945.

This K. Lewis of d'Outremer left two sons behind him, the eldest was called
Lothair the 1. who succeeded him in the crown of France, and the 2. was named
Charles whom he made Duke of Lorrain. Luthaire dying left one only son named
Lewis, as his Grandfathee was, who was named K of France, by the name of Lewis
the 7. and dying without issue after two years that he had reigned, the crown
was to hay gone by lineall succession unto his Uncle Charles Duke of Lorrain,
second Son to Lewis d'O^tremer as is evident, but the States of France did put
him by it for mislike they had of his person, and did choose Hugo Capetus Earl
of Paris, and so ended the second line of Pepin and of Charles the Great, and
entree the race of Hugo Capetus, which endures until this day, and the French
stories do say that this surname Capet was given to him when he was a boy, for
that he was wont to snatch away his Fellows caps from their heads, whereof he
was termed sna^ch^cap, which some do interpret to be an abodement that he
should snatch also a crown from the true owners head in time as afteward we see
it fell out, though yet he had it by election and approbation of the Common
wealth.

And in this respect all the French Chroniclers who otherwise are most earnest
defenders of their law of suceession, do justify this title of Hugo Capetus
against Charles, for which cause Frances Belforest does allege the saying of
W. Naugus, an ancient and diligent chronicler of the Abbey of S. Denis in
France, who defends K. Capetus in these words.

We may not grant in any case that Hugh Capet may be esteemed an invador or
usuroer of the crown of France, se (...) the Lords, Prelates, Princes, and
Governors of the Realm did cail him to this dignity, and chose him for their
King and Sovereign Lord: upon which words Belforest says as follows, I have
laid before oon the words and censure of this good religious man, for that they
seem to me to touch the quick; For in very truth we cannot by any other means
defend the Title of Hugh Capet from usurpation and felony then to justify his
coming to the crown by the consent and will of the Common wealth; and in this I
may well excuse me from inconstancy and contradiction to my self, that have so
earnestly defended succession before; for he that will consider how add what
conditions I defended that, shall easily see also that I am not here contrary
to the same. I think it not amiss also to put down here some part of the
oration or speech which the Ambassador that was sent at that time from the
State of France unto Charles of Lorrain after their election of Hugh Capet, and
Charles exclusion, did use unto him in their names, which Speech Girard does
reconnt in these words, Gir. l. 6. an. 988. Every man knows (Lord Charles)
that the sucaession ^o the crown and realm of France according to the ordinary
Laws and rights of the same, belongs unto you and not unto Hugh Capet now
our King, but yet the very same laws which do give unto you this right of
succession, do judge you also unworthy of the same, for that you have not
endeavored hitherto to frame your life and m^^ers according to the prescript of
those laws, nor according to your use and custom of your country of France, but
rather have allied your self with the German Nation, ^ur old enemies and have
acquainted your self with their vile and base manners, wher^ore seeing you have
forsaken and abandoned the ancient virtue sweetness and amity of the French, we
have also abandoned and left you, and have chosen Hngh Capet for our King and
have put you back, and this without any scruple or prejudice of our consciences
at all, esteeming it far better and more just to live under Hugh Capet the
present Possessour of the crown, with enjoying the ancient use of our laws,
customs, privileges and liberties, then under you the inheritour by neernesse
of blood, in oppressing strange customs and cruelty. For even as those which
are to make a voyage in a ship upon a dangerous Sea, do not so much respect
whether the Pylot which is to guide the stern be owner of the ship or no, but
rather whether he be skillful, valiant, and like to bring them in safety to
their ways end, or to drown them among the waves: even so our principal care
is, that we have a good Prince to lead and guide us happily in this way of
civil and politic life, which is the end why Princes were appointed, for that
this man is fitter to be our King. This message did the States of France send
to Charles of Lorrain in defense of their doings, and with this he lost his
succession for ever, and afterward his life also in prison and the Frenchmen
thought themselves secure in conscience, as you see, for doing the same, which
God has also since seemed to confirm with the succession and happy success of
so many noble and most Christian Kings as have issued out of this line of Hugo
Capet us unto this day.

And this spoken now of the second line of France, I take to be sufficient for
proof of our purpose, without going any further, for that if we do but number
these Kings already named, that have reigned in this second race, from K. Pepin
downwards unto Hugh Capet (which are about 17 or 18 Kings in 238 years) we
shall find that not some few, but the most part of them did both enter and
enjoy their crowns and dignities contrary to the law of lineall descent, and of
next succession by blood. Whereof also there would not want diverse examples in
the third and last descent, since Hugo Capitus his time, if we would pass
further to examine the stories thereof. For not to go further down then to the
very next descent after Hugh, which was K. Robert his Son, Girard affirms in
his story, Gir. l. 6 an 1232. that of his two Sons which he had named Robert
and Henry, Robert the elder was put back, and his younger brother Henry made K.
of France, and reigned many years by the name of H. the 1. and this he says
happened partly for that Robert was but a simple man in respect of Henry, and
partly also for that H. was greatly favored and assisted in this pretense by
Duke Robert of Normandy, Father to our William the conqueror, and in recompense
hereof this King Henry afterward assisted the said William bastard Son to
Robert, for the attaining of the Dukedom of Normandy, after the death of the
said Duke Robert his Father, notwithstanding that Duke Robert had two lawful
brothers alive at that time, whose names were Manger Archbishop of Rone and
William Earl of Argues in Normandy, who pretended by success^ion to be
preferred, Gir. l. 6. an. 1032. and 1037. But the States of Normandy at the
request of Duke Robert when he went to the Holy land (in which journey he dyed)
as also for avoid^ng dissension and wars that otherwise might ensue, were
content to exclude the uncles, and admit the bastard son, who was also assisted
by the Forces of the King of France, so as no scruple it seemed there was it
those days, either to prefer K. Hen. to the crown of France before his elder
brother or D. William the bastard son to the Duchy of Normandy before his
lawful uncles upon such considerations, as those States may be presumed to
have had for their doings. I read also that some years after, to wit, in the
ye^r 1^10 when Philip the 1. of France son and heyr to this K. Henry was
deceased, the people of France were so offended with his evil life and
government, as diverse were of opinion to dis-inherit his Son Lewis the 6.
surnamed le Gros, for his sake, and so was he like to have been indeed, as may
appear by the chronicle of France, if some of his party had not caused him to
be crowned in have, and out of order in Orleans for prevnting the matter.

The like does Philip Cominaeus in his story of K. Lewis the 11d^ clare, how
that the State of France had once determined to have dis-inherited his Son
Charles, named after the 8 and to pu^ him back from his succession for their
hatred to his Father, if the said Father had not dred while the other was very
young a^^ noted before also, that it happened in K. Hen. the 3 of England, w^o
was once condemned by the Barons to be dis-inherited for the fault of K John
his Father, and Lewis the Prof France chosen in his place but that the death of
K. John did alter that course intended by the English Nobi^ity, so as this
mat^er is neither n^w nor unaccustomed in all sorraign Countries, and now will
I pass also a little to our English stories, to see whether the like may be
found in them or no.

And first of all, that the Realm of England has had as great variety,
changes, and diversity in the races of their Kings, as any one Realm in the
world it seems evident: for that first of all after the Britains, it had
Romans for their Governors for many year, and then of them, and their Roman
blood, they had Kings again of their own, as appears by that valiant King
Aurelius Ambrosius, who resisted so manfully and prudently the Saxons for a
time, after this they had Kings of the Saxon and English blood and after them
of the Da^es, and ^hen of ^he Normans and after them again of the French; and
last of all, it seems to have returned to the Britains again, in K. H. 7. for
that his Father came of that race, and now you know there be pretenders of
diverse Nations, I mean both of Scottish, Spanish, and I alian blood, so that
England is li^e to perticipate with all their neighbors round about them and I
for my part do feel my self much of the French opinion before alleged, that
so the ship be well and happily guided, I esteem it not much important of what
race or Nation the Pylot be but now to our purpose. I mean to pass over the
first and ancient ranks of Kings, as well of the British and Roman, as also of
the Saxon races, un^ill K. Egbert me 1 of this name, King of the West Saxons,
and almost of all the rest of England besides who therefore is said to be
^roperly the first Monarch of the Saxon blood, and he that first of all
commanded that Realm to be called England, which ever since has been observed.

This man Egbert being a young Gentleman of a noble house in the West parts of
England, was bad in jelousie by his K. Britricus, who was the 16. K. from
Cordicius, first K. of the West Saxons, as he was also the last of his blood.

And for that he suspected that this Egbert for his great prowess might come in
time to be chosen King, he banished him into France, where he lived diverse
years, and was a captain under the famous K. Pepin, that was Father to Charl^s
the great, and hearing afterward that K. Britricus was dead, he returned in^o
England where Polid^o says, omnium confensu rex creatur, Pol. hist. aug. l. 4.
in sine, That he was created or chosen King by consent and voice of all men,
though yet he were not next propinquity of blood royal, as is most evident,
and yet he proved the most excellent King that ever the Saxons had before, or
perhaps after, and his election happened in the year of Christ 802. when K. Pepin
the first of that race reigned in France, so as this Monarchy of Egbert, and
that of Pepin began as it were together, and both of them came to their crowns
by election of the people, as here you see.

This King Egbert or Egbrich as others do write him, left a lawful Son behind
him named Ethelw^lfe, or Ad^^ulte, or Edolph, an. 829. (for all is one) who
succeeded him in the kingdom, and was as worthy a man as his Father, and this
Adeluulfe again had four lawful Sons, who all in their turns succeeded by just
and lawful order in the crown, to wit, Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, and
Alfred, for that none of the former three had any children and all the latter
three were most excellent Princes, especially Alfred or Alured, the last of all
four, whose acts are wonderful, an. 8^2. and who among other his renowned
Guests, drove Rollo that famous Captain of the Danes from the Bo^ders of
England, with all his company into France where he got the country or Province
named then Neustria, and now Normandy, and was the first Duke of that Province
and Nation, and from whom our William Conqueror came afterward in the 6.
descent.

This man also erected the University of Oxford, being very learned himself,
builded diverse good Monasteries and Churches and dying left as famous a Son
behind himself, which was Edward the first surnamed the senior or elder, Anno
900.

This King Edward dying left two Sons lawfully begotten of his wife Edgina, the
one named Prince Edmund, and the other E^^^ed, and a third illegitimate whose
name was Adelstan, whom he had by a Concubine.

But yet for that this man was esteemed to be of more valor then the other, he
was preferred to the crown before the other two Princes legitimate, an. 924 for
so testifies Po^dor in these words, Ad^^anus ex concubina Edwardi filius rax a
populo consalutatur atque ad Kingstonum opidum more majorum ab Ath^^lmo
cautuariensi Arel lepiscopo cor^natur. Pol. l. 5. hist. ang. which is Adelstan
the Son of K. Edward by a Concubine was made King by the People, and was
crowned according to the old custom, by Athelme Archbishop of Canterbury at
the town of Kingston. Thus far Polidor and Stow adds further these words. His
coronation was celebrated in the Market place upon a stage erected on high,
that the King might better be seen of the multitude, he was a Prince of worthy
memory, valiant and wise in all his acts, and brought this land into one
perfect Monarchy, for the expelled utterly the Danes, and quieted the Welsh
men; Stow p. 136. an. 924. Thus much Stow of the snccesse of choosing this King
bastard to reign, To whose acts might be added, that he conquered Scotland, and
brought Constantine their King to do him homage, and restored Lewis d'Outremer
his sisters Son to the Kingdom of France, an. 940.

This man dying without issue, his lawful brother Edmond put back before, was
admitted to the crown who being of excellent expectation dyed after 6 years,
and left two lawful sons, but yet for that they were young, they were both put
back by the Realm, and their uncle E^dred was preferred before them, an 946. so
says Palidor, Genu^t Edmondus ex Egilda uxore Edvinuus and Edganum, qui cum
etate pueri esse^^, post Eldredum deinder regnarunt, Pol l. 6. King Edmond
begat of his wife Egilda two Sons named Edwin and Edgar, who for that they were
but children in years, were put back, and reigned afterward after their uncle
Eldred. The like says Stow, and yields the same reason in these words.

Eldred succeeded Edmond his b^other, for that his Sons Edwin, and Edgar were
thought to young, to take so great a charge upon them.

This Eldred though he entered as you see against the right of the Nephews, yet
says Polidor and Stow, that he had all men's good will, and was crowned, as his
brother had been at Kingston by Odo Archbishop of Canterbury, and reigned 9
years with great good will and praise of all men.

He dyed at last without issue, and so his elder Nephew Edwin was admitted to
the crown, but yet after 4 years he was deposed again for his lewd and vicious
life, and his younger brother Edgar admitted in his place, in the year of
Christ, 959.

This King Edgar that entered by deposition of his brother, was one of the
rarest Princes that the world had in his time, both for peace and war, justice,
piety, and valor.

Stow says he kept a Navy of 3000. and 600 ships distributed in diverse parts
for defense of the Realm.

Also that he built and restored 47 Monasteries at his own charges, and did
other many such acts.

He was Father to King Edward the Martyr, and Grandfather to K. Edward the
confessor, though by two different wives, for by his first wife named Egilfred,
^hee had Edward after martyrized, and by his second wife Alfred, he had
Etheldred Father to Edw. the confessor, and to the end that Etholdred might
reign, his mother Alfred caused K. Ed. the son of Egilfred to be slain after
King Edgar her husband was dead.

After this so shameful murder of K. Edw many good men of the Realm were of
opinion, not to admit the succession of Etheldred his half brother, both in
respect of the murder of K. Ed. his elder brother committed for his sake; as
also for that he seemed a man not fit to govern, and of his opinion among
others, was the holy man Dunston Archbishop of Canterbury, as Polidor says,
Pol. l. 7. hist. Ang. who at length in flat words denied to consecrate him, but
seeing the most part of the Realm bent on Etheldreds side, he foretold them
that it would repent them after and that in this man's life the Realm should be
destroyed, as indeed it was and he ran away to Normondy, and left Sweno and his
Danes in possession of the Realm, though afterward being dead, he returned
again, and dyed in London.

This Etheldred had two wives, the first Ethelgina an English woman, by whom he
had Prince Edward surnamed Iron-side for his great strength and valor, who
succeeded his Father in the Crown of England for a year, and at his death left
two Sons, which after shall be named.

And besides this, Etheldred had by his first wife other two Sons, Edwin and
Adelston, and one Daughter named Edgina, all which were either slain by the
Danes, or dyed without issue.

The second Wife of Etheldred was called Emma, sister to Richard Duke of
No^mondy, who was Grandfather to William the Conqueror, to wit Father to Duke
Robert, that was Father to William,

So as Emma was great Aunt to this William, and she bare unto King Atheldred
two Sons, the first Edward, who was afterward named King Edward the Confessor,
and Alerud who was slain traitorously by the Earl of Kent.

After the death also of King Etheldred, Queen Emma was married to the Dane
King Canutus the first of that name, surnamed the Great, that was King of
England after Etheldred, and Edmond Ironside his Son, and to him she bare a
Son, named Hardicanutus, who reigned also in England before King Edward the
Confessor.

Now then to come to our purpose, he that will consider the passing of the
Crown of England, from the death of Edmond Iron-side, elder Son of King
Etheldred, until the possession thereof gotten by William Duke of Normandy, to
wit, for the space of 50 years, shall easily see what Authority the
Commonwealth has in such Affairs, to al^er Titles of Snccession, according
as public necessity or utility shall require: for thus briefly the matter
passed.

King E^^ldred seeing himself to weak for Sweno the King of Danes, that was
entered the Land, fled with his wife Emma and her two children, Edward and
Alerud unto her brother Duke Richard of Normandy, and there remained until the
death of Sweno.

And he being dead Etheldred returned into England, made a certain agreement
and division of the Realm, between him and Canutus the Son of Sweno, and so
dyed, leaving his eldest son Edmond Iron-side to succeed him, who soon after
dying also, left the whole Realm to the said Canutus, and that by plain
covenant as Canutus pretended, that the longest liver should have all.

Whereupon the said Canutus took the two children of King Edmond Iron-side,
named Edmond, and Edward, and sent them over into Swethland, which at that time
was also subject unto him.

And caused them to be brought up honorably, of which, two the elder named
Edmond dyed without issue, but Edward was married, and had diverse children.

Eth^ldred and his Son Edmond being dead, Canutus the Dane was admitted for
King of England by the whole Parl^ament, and consent of the Realm, anno 1018.
and crowned by Alerud Archbishop of Canterbury* as Polidor says, and he proved
an excellent King, and went to Rome, and was allowed by that See also.

He did many works of charity, showed himself a good Christian, and very loving
and kind to Englishmen, married Queen Emma an English woman, and mother to
King Edward the Confessor, and had by her a Son named Hardicanutus, and so
dyed, and was much mourned by the English, after he had reigned twenty years,
though his entrance and title was partly by force, and partly by election, as
you have heard.

After this Canutus the first* surnamed the Great (for that he was King jointly
both of England, Norway, and Denmark) was dead, Polidor says, that all the
States of the Realm met together at Oxford, ^o consult whom they should make
King, and at last by the more part of voices was chose, Harald the first Son
of Canutus by a Concubine, King Harald the Bastatd. 1038. Polid. l. 8. Hist.
Ang.

By which election we see injury was done to the line all succession of three
parties. First, to the Sons of king Edmond Iron-side that were in Swethland.
Then to the Princes Edward and Ajerud, sons to king Etheldred, and brothers to
Iron-side that were in Normondy, And thirdly to Hardy mutus, son to Canutus,
by his lawful wife Emma, to whom it was also assured at her marriage* that her
issue should succeed if she had any by Canutus.

After the death of this Harald who dyed in Oxford where he was elected, within
3 years after his election, there came from Denmark Hardicanutus to claim the
crown that his Father and Brother had possessed before him, of whose coming
Polidor says, libentissimis animis accipitur communiqve omnium consensu rex
dicitur, an. 1041. He was received with great good will of all, and by common
content made King, and this was done by the States without any respect had of
the succession of those Princes in Normondy and Swethland, who by birth were
before him. as has been showed, and this is the second breach after lineal,
descent after Elthred.

But this Hardicanutus being dead also, upon the sudden (...) a certain banquet
in Lambeth by London without issue, within two years after his Coronation, the
states of the Relm had de^ermined to choose Aludred for their king, who was
younger b^other to Edw. and for that cause sent for him out of Normondy, as
polid, recounteth, and had made him K. without all doubt (for that he was
esteemed more stirring and valiant then his elder brother Edw.) had not E.
Goodwin of Kent fearing the youngmans stomach raised a strong faction against
him, and thereupon also caused him to be tray^eronsly murdered, as he passed
through Kent toward London, nor had the State here in any respect to Antiquity
of blood, for that before Alured were both (...) own elder brother P. Ed. (who
after him was chosen King, and before them both were Edm* and Edw. the children
of their elder brother, Edmond Iron (...) and this the third breach of lineall
descent.

But this notwithstanding, Alerud being slain, P. Edw. was made King, tanta
publica lat tia, says Polidor, vt certatim pro ejus faelici principatu, cuncti
vota facerent; that is, he was made King with such universal joy and
contentment of all men, as every man contended who should pray and make most
vows to God for his happy reign, and according to this was the success, for he
was a most excellent Prince and almost miraculously he reigned with great
peace, and void of all war at home and abroad for the space of almost 20 years
after so infinite broyls as had been before him, and ensued after him; and yet
his title by succession cannot be justified, as you see, for that his eldest
brothers Son was then alive, to wit, Prince Edw. surnamed the outlaw, who in
this Kings reign came into England, and brought his wife, and three lawful
children with him, to wit, Edgar, Margaret, and Christian, but yet was not this
good K. Edw. so scrupulous, as to give over his kingdom to any of them, or to
doubt of the right of his own title, which he had by election of the
Commonwealth against the order of succession.

This K. Edward being dead without issue, Polidor says that the States made a
great consultation, whom they should make King, and first of all it seems
they excluded him that was only next by propinquity in blood, which was Edgar
Aledin, son to the said Prince Edw. the outlaw now departed, and Nephew to K.
Edmond I tonside and the reason of this exclusion is alleged by Pol. l. 8. in
these words, is puer id aetatis nondum regno gubernando maturus erat, that is,
he being a child of so small years was not ripe enough to govern the kingdom,
and then he says, that Harald son of Earl Goodwin by a daughter of Canutus the
first proclaimed himself King, an. 10^^. and morover he adds, Nond spt cuit
omninoid factum populo, qui plurimum spei in Haraldi virtue habehat, itaque
more majorum sacratus est, which is, this fact of Harald displeased not at all
the people of England, for that they had great hope in the virtue of this
Harald, and so was he annoin^ed and crowned according to the fashion of the
ancient Kings of England, by which words we may see that Harald had also the
approbation of the Realm to be King, notwithstanding that little Edgar was
present, as has been said; so as this was the 4. breach of succession at this
time.

But in the mean space William Duke of Normandy pretended that he was chosen
before by^ K. Edw. the Confessor, and that the Realm had given their consent
thereunto, and that K. E. left the same testified in his last will and
testament, an 1066. and albeit none of our English Authors do avow the same
clearly, yet do many other foreign Writers hold it, and it seems very
probable, that some such thing had past both for that D. William had many in
England that did favor his pretense at his entrance; as also (as Girard in his
French story says) that at his first coming to London he punished diverse by
name, for that they had broken their oaths and promises in that behalf, Gir l.
6. ^n. 1065. And moreover it appears, that by alleging this title of
election, he moved diverse Princes abroad to favor him in that action as in a
just quarrel, which is not like they would have done. if he had pretended only
a conquest, or his title of sanguinity, which could be of no importance in the
world for that effect, seeing it was no other but that his Grandfather and King
Edwards mother were brother and sister, which could give him no pretense at all
to the succession of the crown, by blood, and yet we see that diverse Princes
did assist him, and among others the French chronicles Girard, so often named
before writes Chron. Cassin. l. ^. cap. ^4. that Alexander the second pope of
Rome, whose holiness was so much esteemed in those days as one constan^inus
After, wrote a book of his miracles being informed by Duke William of the
justness of his pretense, did send him his benediction and a pr^cious ring of
^od, with a hollowed banner, by which he get the victory, thus writes Girard
in his French Chronicles, and Antonius Archbishop of Florence surnamed
Antoninus ^art. 2 Chronicles. ^it. 16. cap. 5. s. 1. Saint, writing of this matter
in his chronicles speaks great good of william conqueror and commends his
enterprise.

But howsoever this was the victory we see he get, and God prospered his
pretense, and has confirmed his offspring in the Crown of England more then
500 years together so as now acc^unting from the death of King Edmond I
consider unto this man, we shall find (as before I have said) in less then 5^
years, that 5. or 6 Kings were made in Eng^and one after another, by only
authority and approbati^n of the ^ommon wealth contrary to the ordinary course
of ineall succession by propinquity of blo^d

And all this is before the conquest, but it we should pass any further down,
we should find more e^amples then before, For first the two sons of the
Conqueror himself, that succeeded after him, to wit William Rufus and Henry
the first, were they not both younger brothers to Robert Du^e of Normandy, to
wh^m the most part of the realm was inclined (as Polydor says) Polyd. in vita
Gul. Conq. to have given the kingdom presently after the Conquerors death, as
due to him by succession, notwithstanding that W^illiam for particular
displeasure against his elder son and had ordein^d the contrary in his
testament. But that Robert being absent in the War of Jerusalem, the holy and
learned man Lanfranke as he was accounted then Archbishop of Canterbury being
deceived with vain hope of William Rufus An. 107, good nature persuaded them
the contr^ry, who was at that day of high estimation and authority in England
and so might indu^e the realm to do what he liked.

By like means gat Henry his younger brother the same crown afterward, to wit
by fair pr^mises to the people, and by help principally of Henry Newborow ^arle
of Warwick, that dealth with the nobility for him, and Maurice Bishop of London
with the clergy for that Ans^lme Arch bishop of Can^erbury was in
ba^nishment. Besides this also it did greatly help his cause that his elder
brother Robert, (to whom the Crown by reign appetteined) was absent again this
second time in the war of Jerusalem and so lost thereby his Kingdom as
before: Henry having no there title in the world unto it but by election and
admission of the people, which yet he so desended afterward against his said
brother Robert, that came to claim it by the sword, and God did so prosper him
the^ rein as he took his said elder brother prisoner, and so kept him for many
years, until he died in prison most pitifully.

But this King Henry dying, left daughter behind him named Mawde or Mathilde,
which being married first to the Emperor Henry the fist he dyed wit^out issue,
and then was she married again the second time to Geffry Pantage^t (...). of
Earl of Anjow in France, to whom she bare a son named Henry, which this King
Henry his grand father, caused to be declared for heir apparent to the Crown
in his days, bu^ yet after his disceasse for that Stephen Earl of Bollogne,
born of Adela daughter to William the Conqueror, was thought by the state of
England to be more (...) to govern and to defend the land (for that he was at
man's age) then was Prince Henry a child, or Ma^de ^is mother, he was admitted
and Henry put back, and this chiefly at the persuasion of Henry Bish^p of
Winche^^er brother to the said Stephen, as also by the solicitation of the
Abbot of Glast^nbury and others, who thought be like they might do the same,
with good conscience for the good of the realm though the even^ proved not so
well. for that it drew all England into factions and divisions, for avoiding
and ending whereof, the states ^^me years after, in a Parliament at wal
ingford made a agreement that Stephen should be lawful King during his life
only, and that Henry and his offspring should succeed him, and that prince
william King Stephens son should be deprived of his succession to the crown
and made only Earl of Norfolk, thus did the stat^ dispose of the crown at
that time which was in the year of Christ, 1153.

To ^his Henry succeeded by order his oldest son then living, named Richard,
and surnamed Cordelton, for his Valor, but after him again his succession was
broken. For that John King Henry's youngest son, (...) youuger brother to
Richard whom his father the King had left so unprovided as in jest he was
cal^ed by the French Iean sens terre as if you wou^d say Sir John lacke-land:
this man I say, was after the death of his brother admitted and crowned by the
states of England, and Arthur Duke of Britain, son and heir to Geffry that
was elder brother to John was against the order of succession excluded. and
albeit this Arthur did seek, to remedy the matter, by war, yet it seemed that
God did more defend this election of the Common wealth, then the right title of
Arthur by succession, for that Arthur was overcome, and ta^en by King John
though he had the King of France on his side, anb he died pitifully in prison,
or rather as most authors do ho^d, he was put to death by King John his uncles
own hands in the castle of Roan, thereby to make the titl^ of his succession
more clear* which yet could not be, for that as well Stow in his chtonicle, as
also Matthew of westminster and others before him, do write that Geffry beside
(...) son left two daughters by the Lady Constance his wife, Countess and
he^r of Brit^ain, which by the law of England should have succeeded before
John, but of this small account seemed to be made at that day.

Some years after when the Barons and states of England mi^liked utterly the
government and proceeding of this King John, they rejected him again and chose
Lewis the Prince of France to be their King 3216 and did swear fea^ty to him in
London, as before has bin said and they dep^i^^ed also the young prince Henry
his son that was at that time, but of 8 years old, but upon the death of his
father King John that shorty after insued, they recalled again that sentence,
and admitted this Henry to the Crown by the name of King Henry the third and
disanulled the a leageance made unto Lewis Prince of France and so king Henry
reigned for the 53 years afterward, the ^ongest reign as I think that any
before or after ^im has had in England.

Moreover you ^now from this king Henry the third, d^ take their first
beginning the two branches at York and L^ncastee wihch after fe^^ to fo great
contention about the crown: Into which if we would enter, we should see
plainly as before has been noted that the best of all their titles after
their deposition of king Richard the second depended of this authority of the
com^on-wealth fot that as the people were affected and the greater part
prevailed ^o ^ere their titles either a lowed confirmed altered or disanulled
by Parliament, and yet may not we well affirm, but that either part when they
were in possession and confirmed herein by these Parliaments were lawfu^l kings
and that God concurred with them as with true princes for government of the
people, for if we should deny this point great incouveniences wou^d o^ow, and
we should shake the states of most princes in the world at this day.

And to conc^ude as one the one side pro^inquity of b^ood is a great
^reheminence toward the atteining of any Crown so does it not ever bind the
common wea^th to yield there-unto if weightier reasons shauld urge them to the
contrary, neither is the Commonwealth bound bound always to shut her eyes,
and to admit at ^p-hazard, or of necessity every one that is next by succession
of b^oud as some fa^se^y and fondly a^^meth, but rather she is bound to
consider well and maturely the person that i^ to enter, whether he be ^ike to
perform his duty and charge committeed or no, for that otherwise to admit him
that is an enemy or unfitis but to destroy the Common wealth and him t^gether
This is my opinion and this seems to me to be conform, to al reason, aw^
religion p^ery, wisdom, and po^^icy and to the use and customs of all well
governed common-wea^thes in the world neither do I mean to prejudice any any
princes pretense or succession to any crown or dignity in the world, but rather
do hold that he ought to enjoy his pre-eminence, but yet that he (...) not
pr^judicall thereby to the whole body which is ever (...) be respected more
then any one person whatsoever.

The ninth Speech.
ACcording to law, both civil and Canon (which is great reason) it is a matter
most certain, that he who is judge and has to give sentence in the thing it
self, is also to judge of the cause, for thereof is he called judge, and if he
have authority in the one, good reason he should also have power to discern
the other, so as, if we grant according to the form and proofs, that the
Realm or Commonwealth has power to admit or put back the Prince or pretender
to the Crown, then must we also confess that the same Common wealth has
authority to judge of the lawfulness of the causes, and considering further
that it is in their own affair, and in a matter that has his whole
beginning, continuance and subsistence from them alone, I mean from the Common
wealth, for that no man is King or Prince by institution of nature, as before
has been declared, but every King and Kings son, has his dignity and
pre-eminence above other men, by authority only of the Common wealth: God does
allow for a just and sufficient cause in this behalf, the only will and
judgment of the weal public it self, supposing always (as in reason we may)
that a whole Realm will never agree by orderly way of judgment (for of this
only I mean and not of any particular faction of private men against the
heir apparent) to exclude or put back the next heyr in blood and succession
without a reasonable cause, in their sight and censurre. And seeing that they
only are to be judges of this case, we are to presume that what they determine,
is just and lawful for the time, and if at one time they should determine one
thing, and the contrary at another (as they did often in England during the
contention between York and Lancaster and in other like occasions) what can a
private man judge otherwise, but that they had different reasons and motions to
lead them at different times, and they being properly lords and owners of the
whole business committed unto them, it is enough for every particular man to
subject himself to that which his Common wealth does in this behalf, and to
obey simply without any further inquisition, except he should see that open
injustice were done therein, or God manifesty offended, and the Realm
endangered.

Open injustice I call when not the true Common wealth, but some faction of
wicked men should offer to determine this matter, without lawful authority of
the Realm committed to them, and I call manifest offense of God, and danger of
the Realm, when such a man is preferred to the Crown, as is evident that he
will do what lies in him to the prejudice of them both, I mean both of Gods
glory and the public wealth: as for example, if a Turk or Moor or some other
notorious wicked man, or tyrant should be offered by succession or otherwise to
govern among Christians, in which cases every man (no doubt) is bound to
resist what he can, for that the very end and intent for which all government
was first ordained, is herein manifestly impugned.

From this consideration, of the weal public, are to be reduced all other
considerations of most importance, for discerning a good or evil Prince. For
that whosoever is most likely to defend, preserve, and benefit most his Realm
and subjects, he is most to be allowed and desired, as most conform to the end
for which government was ordained.

And on the contrary side, he that is least like to do this, deserves least to
be preferred, and here does enter also that consideration, which diverse common
wealths had in putting back oftentimes children and impotent people (though
otherwise next in blood) from succession, and preferring more able men though
further off by descent, for that they were more like to defend well their Realm
and Subjects then the others were.

But to proceed more distinctly and more perspicuously in this matter, I would
have you call to mind one point among others, out of Girard the French author,
Girard lib. 3. de l' Estat. page 242. to wit, that the King of France in his
Coronation is new apparalled three times in one day, once as a Priest, and then
as a judge, and last as a King armed. Thereby to signify three things
committed to his charge, first Religion, then Justice, then manhood and
chivalry, for the defense of the Realm.

This division seems to me very good and fit, and to comprehend all that a
weal-publick has need of, for her happy state and felicity, both in soul and
body, and for her end, both supernatural and natural. For by the first which
is Religion, her Subjects do attain unto their end spiritual and
supernatural, which is the salvation of their souls, and by the second and
third, which are justice and defense, they enjoy their felicity temporal,
which is to live in peace among themselves, and safety from their enemies, for
which cause it seems that these are the three points which most are to be
regarded in every Prince, that comes to government, and much more in him that
is not yet admitted thereunto, but offers himself to the Common wealth for
the some pu^pose.

And for that the latter two of these three points, which are justice and
manhood, has been often had in consideration, in the examples of changes
before mentioned, and the first point which is Religion, has rarely or never
at all been talked of, for that in former times the Prince and the people were
always of one and the same Religion, and scarce ever any question or doubt
fell in that behalf (which yet in our days is the principal difference and
chiefest difficulty of all other) for these causes (I say) shall I accommodate
my self to the circumstance of the time, wherein we live, and to the present
case which is in question betwix^ us about the succession of England, and
leaving aside those other two considerations of justice and chivalry in a King,
which are far less important then the other (though yet so highly regarded by
ancient Common wealths) I shall treat principally of Religion, in this place,
as of the first and highest, and most necessary point of all other, to be
considered in the admission of any Prince, for the profit of his Subjects: for
that without this, he destroys all, and with this, albeit he should have
defects in the other two points of justice and manhood, yet may it be helped,
or his defect or negligence may be supplied much by others, as after I shall
show more in particular, but if he want fear of God, or care of Religion, or
be perversely persuaded therein, the damage of the weal public is
inestimable. First of all then, for better understanding of this point, we are
to suppose, that the first chiefest, and highest end that God and nature
appointed to every Commonwealth, was not so much the temporal felicity of the
body, as the supernatural and everlasting of the soul, and this was not only
revealed to the Jews by holy scripture, but also unto the Gentiles and
Heathens by the instinct and light of nature it self. For by this light of
natural reason, the learned sort of them came to understand the immortallity
of the soul, and that her felicity, perfection, and full contentment, which
they called her final end, and summum bonum, could not be in this life, not in
any thing created under heaven, but must needs be in the life to come, and that
by attaining to enjoy some infinite endless and immortal object, which could
fully satisfy the appetite of our soul, and this could be no other then God,
the maker of all himself. And that consequently all other things of this
transitory life, and of this humane Commonwealth, subject to man's eyes, are
ordained to serve and be subordinate and directed to the other higher end, and
that all man's actions in this world, are first of all, and in the highest
degree, to be employed to the recognizing, serving, and honoring of this great
Lord that governs the whole, as author and end of all.

To this light I say, came the Heathens even by the instinct and direction of
nature, whereof ensued that there was never yet Pagan Philosopher that wrote of
framing a good commonwealth as Socrates, Plato, Plutarch, Cicero, and others,
neither Lawmaker among them that left Ordinances for the same purpose, as
Deucalion, Minos, Zaleucus, Licurgus, Solon, Ion, Numa, or the like, which
besides the temporal end of directing things well for the body, had not
especial care also of matters appertaining to the mind, to wit, of
nourishing, honoring, and rewarding of virtue, and for restraining and
punishing of vice, and wickedness, whereby is evident that their end and butt
was to make their Citizens good and virtuous, which was a higher end, then to
have a bare consideration of temporal and bodily benefits only, as many great
men of our days (though Christians in name) seem to have, who pretend no
higher end in their Government then bodily wealth, and a certain temporal
kind of peace and justice, which diverse beasts also do reach unto, in their
congregations and Commonwealths, as is to be seen among Emets, and Bees,
Cranes, Lions, and other such creatures, that by instinct of nature are
sociable, and do live in company, and consequently also do maintain so much
order and policy in their Commonwealth, as is need^ull for their preservation
and continuance.

But nature taught man a far higher and more excellent end in his
Commonwealth, which was not only to provide for those bodily benefits that are
common also to creatures without reason; but much more for those of the mind,
and above all for the serving of that high and supreme God, that is the
beginning and end of all the rest. For whose service also they learned by the
same instinct and institution of nature, that the chiefest and supremest honor
that could be done unto him in this life by man, was the honor of sacrifice
and obla^ions^, which we see was begun and practiced even in those first
beginnings of the law of nature, before the Leviticall law, and the particular
forms of this same law, were prescribed by Moses. For so we read in Genesis
of Noah, Genesis 8. that he made an Altar, and offered sacrifices to God upon the
same, of all the beasts and birds that he had in the Arc, odoratusque est
Dominus odorem suavitatis, and God received the smell of these sacrifices, as a
sweet smell. Which is to say, that God was highly pleased therewith: and the
like we read of Job that was a Gentile, and lived before Moses, Job 1.
Sanctificabat filios consurgensque diluculo offerebat holocausta per dies
singulos. He did sanctify his children, and rising early in the morning did
offer for them holocastes or burnt sacrifices every day.

This men used in those days, and this they were taught by law of nature, I
mean both to honor God above all things, and to honor him by this particular
way of sacrifices, which is proved also evidently by that which at this day is
found and seen in the Indians, where never any notice of Moses law came, and
yet no Nation has ever been found among them, that acknowledges not some
kind of God, and offers not some kind of sacrifice unto him.

And albeit in the particular means of honoring this God, as also in
distinguishing between false gods, and the true God; these people of the
Indians have fallen into most gross and infinite errors, as also the Gentiles
of Europe, Asia, and Africa did, by the craft and subtlety of the Devil, which
abusing their ignorance, did thrust himself into the place of God, and derived
and drew those sacrifices and supreme honors unto himself, which were due to
God alone; yet is it evident hereby (and this is sufficient for our purpose)
that by God and nature, the highest and chiefest end of every commonwealth, is
Cultus Dei, the service of God, and religion, and consequently that the
principal care and charge of a Prince, and Magistrate even by nature is self,
is, to look thereunto, whereof all antiquity both among Jews and Gentiles,
were wont to have so great regard, as for many years and ages their Kings and
chief Magistrates were also Priests: Genebrard. l. 1, Chronol. de 1. aetate
Genes. 25. and 29. Deuteronomy. 21. 2. Paral. 21. and diverse learned men do hold,
that the privilege and pre-eminence of primo genitura, or the first borne
children, so much esteemed in the law of nature, consisted principally in this,
that the eldest sons were Priests, and had the charge and dignity of this
greatest action of all other upon earth, which some temporal Magistrates so
little regard now.

And this respect and reverence toward religion was so greatly planted in the
breasts of all Nations by nature her self, as Cicero pronounced, this general
sentence in his time. Cicero li. 1. quest. tusc. and de natura deorum lib. 1.
Nulla est gens tam fera, nulla tam immanis, cujus mentem non imbuerit deorum
colendorum religio. There is no Nation so fierce or barbarous, whose minds are
not endued which some religion of worshipping Gods.

And Plutarch writing against a certain Atheist of his time, says thus: If
you travel far Countries, you may chance to find some Cities without learning,
without Kings, without riches, without money; but a City without Temples, and
without Gods and sacrifices, no man yet has ever seen. Plutarch adversus
Colotem. And finally Aristotle in his politiques having numbered diverse things
necessary to a Commonwealth, adds these words. Quintum and primum. Circa rem
divinam cultus, quod Sacerdotium sacrificiumque vocant. Aristo. l. 7. politi.
c. 8. In the fi^t place (which indeed ought to be the first of all other) is
necessary to a Commonwealth, the honor and service due unto God, which men
commonly do comprehend by the words of Priesthood and sacrifice.

All this I have alleged to confute even by the principles of nature herself,
the absurd opinions of diverse Atheists of our time, that will seem to be great
Politics, who affirm that Religion ought not to be so greatly respected in a
Prince, or by the Parliament, as though it were their chiefest care, or the
matter of most importance in his government, which you see how false and
impious it is, even among the Gentiles themselves; but much more among
Christians, who have so much the greater obligation to take to heart this
matter of Religion, by how much greater light and knowledge they have of God,
and therefore we see that in all the Princes oaths which before you have
heard recited to be made and taken by them at their admission and coronation,
the first and principal point of all other, is about Religion and maintenance
thereof, and according to his oath also of supreme Princes, not only to defend
and maintain Religion by themselves in all their States; but also their
Livetenants and under governors; we have in our Civil Law a very solemn
form of an oath which Justinian the Emperor, above a thousand and fifty
years agone, was wont to give to all his Governors of Countries, Cities, and
other places, before they could be admitted to their charges, and for that it
is very effectual, and that you may see thereby what care there was of this
matter at that time; and what manner of solemn and religious protestations, as
also imprecations they did use therein, it shall not be amiss perhaps to
repeat the same in his own words, which are these following,

The title in the Civil Law is, juramentum quod Praestatur, iis qui
administrationes accipiunt, the oath which is given to them that receive
governments, and then the Oath begins thus.

Collat. 2. Novella constit Justin. 8. tit. 3. Juro per Deum omnipotentem and
filium ejus unigenitum Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum and Spiritum sanctum, and
per sanctam gloriosam Dei genitricem and semper Virginem Mariam, and per
quatuor Evangelia quae in manibus meis teneo, and per sanctos Archangelos
Michaelem and Gabrielem, puram conscientiam germanumque servitium me servaturum
sacratissimis nostris Dominis Justiniano and Theodosiae conjugiejus, occasion
traditae mihi ab eorum pietate administrationis. Et quod communicator sum
sanctissimae Dei Catholicae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, and nullo modo vel
tempore adversaboret, nec alium quocunque permittam quantum possibilitatem
habeam, and si vero non haec omnia servavero, recipiam omnia incommoda hic and
in futuro seculo in terribili judicio magni Domini Dei and salvatoris nostri
Jesu Christi, and habebo partem cum Juda and cum lepra Giezi, and cum tremore
Cain, insuper and paenis quae lege eorum pietatis continentur ero subjectus.
Which in English is thus; I do swear by Almighty God, and by his holy Son our
Lord Jesus Christ, and by the holy Ghost, that I will keep (...) pure
conscience, and perform true service unto the sacred persons of our Lords and
Princes Justinian and Theodosia his wife, in all occasions of this government,
by their benignity committed unto me. Moreover I do swear that I am
communicant and member of the most holy Catholic and Apostolic Church of
God, and that I shall never at any time hereafter be contrary to the same, nor
suffer any other to be, as much as shall lie in my possibility to let. And if I
should break this oath or not observe any point thereof, I am content to
receive any punishment both in this world, as also in the world to come, in
that last and most terrible judgment of our great Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, and to have my part with Judas, as also with the leprosy of Giezi, and
with the fear and trembling of damned Cain; and besides all this I shall be
subject to all punishments that are ordained in the Laws of their Majesty's,
concerning this affair.

This oath did all the Governors of Christian Countries take in old time, when
Christian Emperors did flourish, and it has remained for a Law and president
ever since to all Posterity.

And if we join this with the other oaths before set down in the fifth
chapter, which Emperors and Kings did make themselves (unto their
Ecclesiastical Prelates, at their first admission) about this point; we should
see nothing was so much respected in admission of a Prince or Governor (nor
ought to be) a^ religion, for that (as I have said before) this is the
chiefest, greatest and highest end of every Commonwealth, intended both by God
and nature, to assist their Subjects to the attaining of their supernatural
end, by honoring and serving God in this life, and by living virtuously, for
that otherwise God should draw no other fruit or commodity out of humane
Commonwealths, then of an Assembly of brutish creatures, manitained only and
governed for to eat, drink, and live in peace.

But the end of man being far higher then this; it follows that whatsoever
Prince or Mag^strate does not attend with care to assist and help his subjects
to this end, omitteth the first and principal part of his charge, and
commits high Treason against his Lord and Master, in whose place he is, and
consequently is not fit for that charge and dignity, though he should perform
the other two parts never so well of temporal justice and valor in his
person, which two other points do appertain principally to the humane felicity
and baser end of man's weal public, and much ^ore of a Christian.

Hereof it insueth also that nothing in the world can so justly exclude an
Heir apparent from his succession, is want of Religion, nor any cause
whatsoever justify and clear the conscience of the Commonwealth, or of
particular, men, that in this case should resist his entrance, as if they judge
him faulty in this point, which is the head of all the rest, and for which all
the rest do serve.

I compare an heir apparent unto a spouse, betrothed only and not yet married,
to the Common wealth. Which espous^ll or betrothing, according to all law both
divine and humane, may be broken and made void much easier and upon far lesser
causes then an actual perfect marrying may, of which our Savior himself
said, Matthew. 14. Quos Deus conjunxit homo non separat. Mar. 10. whom God has
joined let no man separate, and yet S. Paul to the Corinthians determines
plainly, 1. Cor. 7. that if two gentiles married together in their gentility
(which none denies to be true marriage for so much as concerns the civil
contract) and afterward the one of them being made a Christian, the other will
not live with him or her, or if he do, yet notwithout blaspheming of God and
tempting him to sin: in this case (I say) the Apostle teaches, and out of him
the Canon law sets it down for a decree, Lib. 4. decret. Greg tit. 19. c.
7. That this is sufficient to break and dissolve utterly this heathen
marriage, although consummate between these two parties, and that the Christian
may marry again, and this only for the want of Religion in the other party,
which being so in actual marriage already made and consummate, how much more
may it serve to undo a bare bethrothing, which is the case of a pretender
only to a Crown.

But you may say perhaps, that St. Paul speaks of an Infidel or Heathen, that
denies Christ plainly, and with whom the other party cannot live, without
danger of sin and losing his faith, which is not the case of a Christian Prince
though he be somewhat different from me in Religion, to which is answered, that
supposing there is but one only Religion that can be true among Christians, as
both reason and Athanasius his Creed* does plainly teach us: and moreover
seeing, that to me there can be no other faith or Religion availeable for my
salvation then only that which I my self do believe, for that my own
conscience must testify for me, or against me: Act. 23. 1. Cor. 8. 2. Cor. 5.
1. Pet. 3. certain it is, that unto me and my conscience he which in any point
believes otherwise then I do, and stands wilfully in the same, is an
Infidel, for that he believes not that which in my faith and conscience, is
the only and sole truth, whereby he must be saved. Mat. 18. And if our Savior
Christ himself in his Gospel, does will certain men to be held for heathens,
not so much for difference in faith and religion, as for lack of humility and
obedience to the Church: how much more may I hold him so, that in my opinion is
an enemy to the truth, and consequently so long as I have this opinion of him,
albeit his Religion were never so true, yet so long (I say) as I have this
contrary persuasion of him, I shall do against my conscience and sin damnably
in the sight of God, to prefer him to a charge where he may draw many other to
his own error and perdition, wherein I do persuade my self that he remains?

This doctrine (which is common among all Divines Romans 14) is founded upon that
discourse of S, Paul to the Romans and Corinthians, 1. Cor. 1. and 10. against
such Christians as being invited to the banquets and tables of Gentiles and
finding meats offered to Idols (which themselves do judge to be unlawful to
eat) did yet eat the same, both to the scandal of other infirm men there
present, as also against their own judgment and conscience, which the Apostle
says, was a damnable sin, and this not for that the thing in it self was
evil or unlawful, as he shows, but for that they did judge it so, and yet
did the contrary, Qui discernit si manducaverit damnatus est, says the
Apostle. He that discerns or makes a difference between this meat and
others, as judging this to be unlawful and yet eats the same, he is damned,
that is to say, he sins damnably or mortally. Whereof the same Apostle
yields presently his reason, Quia non ex fide, for that he eats not
according to his faith or belief, but rather contrary, for that he believes
it to be cruel and unlawful, does notwithstanding eat the same: and hereupon
S. Paul infers this universal proposition, Omne autem quod non est ex fide
peccatum est, all that is not of faith or according to a man's own belief, is
sin to him, for that it is against his own conscience, judgment and belief,
believing one thing, and doing another, S. Chrysostom. hom, 36. in hanc
epistolam. Orig. l. 10. Theodor. in hunc locum. And seeing our own conscience
must be our witness at the last day, to condemn or deliver us, as before I have
said, he must needs sin grievously (or damnably as the Apostle here says) who
commits any thing against his own conscience, though otherwise the thing
were not only indifferent, but very good also in it self, for that of the
doers part there wants no malice or will to sin, seeing he does that which he
apprehends to be naught, though in it self it be not.

And thus much now for matter of conscience: but if we consider reason of
State also, and worldly policy, it cannot be but great folly and oversight for
a man of what Religion soever he be, to promote to a kingdom in which himself
must live, one of a contrary Religion to himself; for let the bargains and
agreements be what they will, and fair promises and vain hopes never so
great, yet seeing the Prince once made and settled, must needs proceed according
to the principles of his own Religion, it follows also that he must come
quickly to break with the other party, though before he loved him never so
well, (which yet perhaps is very hard if not impossible for two of different
religions to love sincerely) but if it were so, yet so many jealousies,
suspicions, accusations, calumniations and other aversions must needs light
upon the party that is of different Religion from the State and Prince, under
whom he lives, as not only he cannot be capable of such preferments, honors,
charges, governments, and the like, which men may deserve and desire in their
Common wealths, but also he shall be in continual danger and subject to a
thousand molestations and injuries, which are incident to the condition and
state of him, that is not current with the course of his Prince and Realm in
matters of Religion, and so before he beware, he comes to be accounted an
enemy or backward man, which to remedy he must either dissemble deeply, and
against his own conscience make show to favor and set forward that which in
his heart he does detest (which is the greatest calamity and misery of all
other, though yet many times not sufficient to deliver him from suspicion) or
else to avoid this everlasting perdition, he must break with all the temporal
commodities of this life, and leave the benefits which his Country and Realm
might yield him, and this is the ordinary end of all such men, how soft and
sweet soever the beginnings be.

31. Ian. 1647.
Imprimatur

Gilbert Mabbot.

FINIS.

