Mr. PYM, HIS SPEECH.

On Tuesday the 8th of February, To the LORDS, at a Conferrence of both Houses,
concerning the Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the County of Kent.

Delivered to the Lords, February the Ninth, Anno Domini, 1642.

LONDON, Printed for John Hammond, 1641.

Mr. PYM, HIS Speech to the Lords, at a Conferrence of both Houses, Concerning
the Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the County of Kent, on Tuesday the 8.
of February, delivered to the Lords: February 9. 1641.
My LORDS,
THE Bill which by both Houses is passed for the taking away the Votes of the
Prelates in this Honorable House, and dissabling them from temporal
Employment; and for the setting the Kingdom into a Posture of War, for its
defense, has occasioned this present Petition of the Knights and Gentry of the
County of Kent; In which is fully expressed their great joy and thankfulness,
for the happy Congruity, and Concurrence between both Houses, in passing the
said Bills; desiring also therein this Honorable House to go on with the House
of Commons to a through reformation in Religion, according to the Word of God,
To dispatch aid for Ireland; To expedite proceedings against desinquents, to
vindicate Parliament Privileges, to discover, remove and punish evil
Counselors: to deprive the Popish Lords of their Votes; to disarme and search
out Papists, and put them into safe custody, to suppress Mass both in public
and private; To cast out scandalous Minister, plant painful Preachers every
where, And discover who are Church Papists, as well as known Recusants.

MY LORDS,

This Brief Catalogue of all the Business we have in agitation for the good
government, and settling peace and tranquillity both in Church and Commonwealth,
I desire under favor to speak somewhat to every particular, showing the great
necessity to bring to a happy Conclusion our endeavors and intentions
concerning the same.

MY LORDS,

1 Religion is the first thing is desired to be settled and established in such
a manner and form, as may agree with the pure and Sacred Word of God; there
has been many orders made by this present Parliament, whereby many corruptions
in the Ministry and dispensation of the Word and Sacraments, are in some good
measure purged, Many scandalous and vicious Teachers, in their lives and
conversations, removed; and many painful and Learned men restored again to
their offices in the Ministry, whereby the Word of God has been purely taught
since the sitting of this happy Parliament, we have now by this Bill regulated
the chiefest of the Clergy; But yet is there not a through Reformation; the
proceeding of the Parliament, therein having been so much opposed by the Votes
of Bishops and Popish Lords, which inconveniency by the blessing and good
Providence of God, and wisdom of this great and high Court, is for future
time, prevented by this Bill, and proceeded against, as touching the Prelates
opposition; The evils that have happened for want of through Reformation, is
too apparent, men give themselves to all manner of vice and uncleanness;
practicing nor professing rightly, but loosely and profanely any Religion;
Multitudes have forsaken the Protestant, and joined themselves to the Romish
Religion, Many have forsaken our Church, and become Separatists, Brownists and
Annabaptists; yet this whole state seems as it were composed of naught else but
of diverse factions, sects and schisms, and all through want of a full
Reformation of Religion, and settled establishment thereof, whereby God is
highly dishonored, the Gospel shaddowed and eclipsed, public profanation
increases, Division and distractions by this means raised in the State, there
being so many several opinions, that it is unpossible to please all, or know
how to discover disaffected to the True Religion, till the same be really
established.

2. Ireland that distressed Kingdom lies gasping, even as it were ready to
yield up it self into the hands and power of merciless and Cruel Miscreants,
Rebels, and Traitors to their King and Country, enemies to God and his true
Religion; It is high time to put to our helping hand for their aid and relief:
I beseech you, my Lords, let us have a fellow feeling of our brethrens
miseries, let us bezealous for the cause of God and true Religion; let not the
blood of the slain be a stumbling-blocke to our peace and safety, being
united brethren under one God, in one religion, faithful subjects under one
Sovereign, if while it is time we go not out to their defense, to fight the
battles of the Lord, and his anointed against their wicked and rebellious
enemies.

3. To proceed to the punishment of delinquents; My Lords, so long as ill
instruments remain unpunished, we cannot expect either peace or safety, they
still working and endeavoring their own liberties and enlargement to the
destruction and confusion of all that labor to bring them to deserved
punishment for their evil and notorious crimes, be it King or Parliament:
wherefore i^ is of necessity to expedite our proceedings against them, ^est
protraction of time in the same, produce far more evils and troubles in this
Commonwealth then hitherto.

4. To vindicate Parliament privileges, my Lords, if the members of the
Parliament may not freely vote, freely debate and dispute concerning such
things as are by them in agitation for the safety, peace and prosperity of true
Religion, his sacred Maiestiy and his Kingdoms, without reprehension,
accusation or impeachment for the same, then will Parliaments prove useless
and of no validity in this Kingdom, which have been ever esteemed the best and
safest way of government that ever was, or could be for the same.

5. To remove evil Counselors: So long as such remain about the Court, we
cannot expect any good issue of our proceedings in the great affairs of this
Kingdom.

6. The daily examples of the evil practices of Papists and Recusants to
disturb our peace, I hope is sufficient to make us careful and willing to
prevent the same in time by disarming them, and putting the Laws in execution
against obstinate and wilful Recusants, against Priests and Jesuits that shall
be found any where lurking in this Kingdom, seducing his Majesty's good
subjects in their Religion, and alienating their hearts and affections from due
obedience to his Majesty, and the Laws and Ordinances of the Kingdom, made
and enacted by the whole State of the Kingdom, and confirmed by his most
excellent Majesty.

7. To remove Popish Lords from sitting, or having any voice in this honorable
House, to suppress Mass in public and private, to cast out scandalous
Ministers out of the Church, and to place good ones in their rooms, to
discover who are Church Papists, and known Recusants. The necessity of all
which is grounded upon the same reasons as are the other particulars. These
being removed and avoided, the rough way of our proceedings in the great
affairs of the State, will be made plain. Through these difficulties we must
pass unanimously with one consent, in the name and fear of God, in obedience
and dutiful affection to our gracious Sovereign, and in faithful integrity
to the peace and safety of our Country, of whom we are entrusted to counsel,
determine, and conclude of all things that may tend to the e^erlasting peace
and tranquillity of both Church and State: Which that we may do, God grant us
unity of hearts, and magnanimity and courage of mind, to bring to a happy
conclusion all things we have in hand for the quiet and peace of King and
People.

FINIS.

