THE PARLIAMENTS CENSVRE TO THE IESVITES AND FRIARS, Being examined upon
Wednesday by a Committee in the Court of Wards, With their Confessions at the
same time, Also those 18. that were suspected to adjoyn with the Irish Rebels,
with a Pilgrim, and four more Irish soldiers.

Likewise a Relation of him that killed Sir Henry Paget, and many other
Fellons. With the Names of every particular one.

Also the Censure of the Sessions house to 13 condemned prisoners, 6 men and
seven women, one man being called by the Name of Running Jack, was Reprieved by
Sir Paul Pindar, April 23.

Whereunto is annexed, more Exceeding true and joyful News from Ireland,
Describing a great and Bloody Battle fought in the Neweries, April the 18.
1642.

Imprinted at London, for H. Blunon. 1464.

The Censure of the Sessions to 13. condemned Prisoners, April the 23. 1642.
This Court of Justice, and great judicature assembled at the Sessions house in
the Old bailey, has perfected and dispatched matters of urgent consequence, and
being merciful, they deposed but six men, and seven women to condemnation,
being great and capital Offenders, or Malefactors. But one, which vulgarly is
called Running Jack, was first intended by the Bench to be oppressed: in regard
that he first denied the process of his Trial, but having mercy from the
Bench, to consider seriously with himself the atrocity of his crime, and
whether he would undergo that severity or no: the next day his mind was
altered, desiring his Trial, which being performed, he was found to have bin
such a notorious Malefactor, that the Bench did condemn him to die: but he has
since obtained a Reprieve by the means of Sir Paul Pindar. Moreover four of the
condemned women have obtained Reprieves, so that the case is now ambiguous, and
solely rely on the Kings mercy.

THE PRISONERS OF New-Gates Condemnation.
Newgate has not bin more replenished with Prisoners these many years then
now, there being very nigh 300. prisoners committed to that infamous Castle of
Misery.

But not to deviate too far, or to trespass on the Readers patience with a
tedious and preliminary discourse, I will abbreviate Hypotheticall
superfluities, and insist upon the intended subject.

But as the atracity of the crime, so the persons ought to precede: wherefore I
will begin first with the 7. condemned Jesuits, these Popish Priests were
heretofore condemned according to the Law, and Justice of the Realm, being
apparently found such pernicious enemies to the state: but the Kings mercy
being graciously extended to them, they obtained a Reprieve from His Majesty;
Whereupon did arise a tumultuous mutiny among the other Prisoners, who refused
to die without the Jesuits: but afterward they were mittigated in a pacified
tranquillity.

Notwithstanding the Parliament petitioned to His Majesty, that Execution might
be imposed on them; but the King would not condescend thereunto, till His
further pleasure: wherefore they have continued secure in Newgate ever since,
one man being solely accepted, viz. Goodman, who dyed last Good Friday, and at
once deceived both Gregory and Fyburn.

But since the Parliament have repetitioned to His Majesty, that they may be
now executed, in regard they were such obstacles to their assiduous
proceedings: His Majesty replied, that if they were the obstruction, and
hinderance of Reformation in the Church, he desired that they might be
forthwith ^^^^^ted, without any further delay.

The Names of the Jesuits.
Rivers, Canon, Winfall, Norton, Haman, Coleman.
The 18. Irish men, that were suspected to be Rebels, being formerly examined
before the Parliament, all the Servants, Seamen, and Soldiers, were remitted,
only the Master of the ship, the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ancients were
detained, who still continue in the Prison: but they have not come as yet to
their Examination before the Court; wherefore it is to be expected, the
Parliament themselves will censure them.

The 10. that lately were committed to New Gate, five of which were Friars,
four soldiers, and a Pilgrim, were examined before the Parliament: the Friars
were examined last Wednesday was sevennig^^ ^^ore a Committee in the Court of
Wards, who demanded of them their intents, in coming over to Jreland, and to
what effect: four of which very peremptorily denied, and said, that they came
over with occasions of Merchandise, etc. but one of them betrayed the rest, and
affirmed, that they were Friars, and came over into England to save souls for
Heaven.

The other 5. were carried down to Westminster last Saturday was a sevennight,
before the same Committee in the Court of Wards

The Master of the ship being called first, did show a Commission unto them for
his going; they then asked him, vvhither he would take the Oath of Allegiance,
which he was vvilling to take; but when they asked him of the Oath of
Supremacy, he replied, that he was an ignorant man, and did not understand
what it meant: three of the other could not speak one word of English, wherefore
the Master did interpret what they spoke: it seems by the exposition of the
Master of the ship, that they have bin in service under the Prince of Orange
half a year, they were taken Captives at Flanders, they served in France two
years, and half a year in Spain, and now come into their own Country: this was
their true and Real Confession before the Committee.

One Robert Butler, living formerly at the Beyer Tavern in St. Giles in the
Fields, who killed Sir Henry Paget, as was supposed in his own defense, was
called before the Court last Thursday, but his Case is removed by the Lord
Paget into the King's Bench.

One Francis Robson is cast for his life, for taking 100. l. from a Gentleman,
scuffling in company, etc.

Ame Hall is cast for her life, being taken for a Fellon.

One Sparrow likewise is cast, for suspicion of taking a Chest of Plate out of
an House.

More exceeding true and joyful News, from Ireland.
Loving Brother:
ON the 14. of this month, I received your Letter, being sorry to hear such bad
news from you; and whereas you writ to me, to send you word how passages went
with us here, I thought it convenient, to send you these Occurrences, following.

Upon the 17. of this present month, there was a great and bloody battle in
the Neweries, fought between 3000. men of our side, under the Command of Sir
Henry Tichbourn, Sir Charles Coot, and Captain Marro, against 10000. of the
Rebels, conducted by the great Rebel. Mondormo, and after a long and tedious
Battle, they put the Rebels to flight, killed 2000. of them, and wounded the Lord
Mondormo: of our side were slain 400: they are intended to fight a pitched
Battle about the 25 day of this month. We had tidings brought to our Army,
April 12. that Sir Philomy O-Neal has got a great army, intending to give
Battle against us in the Neweries. Captain Marro received a Letter from Colonel
Gore, in the North of Ireland, relating how they had defeated six Regiments of
the rebels forces, but my Lord of Munster has had some loss there.

So I rest, your loving Brother J. Gilbert.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord Howard of Char,
shall attend upon the King, and present some reasons unto His Majesty.

John Brown Cler Parl.


