THE TRVMPET OF THE LORD BLOWN. OR, A BLAST Against Pride and Oppression, and
the Defiled Liberty, which stands in the Flesh.

By a Servant and Messenger of the Lord, who is called into the work of the
Lord, and to blow his Trumpet in England; so that all may be forewarned in this
day of the Lords calm, and be left without excuse, and in the day of his
righteous Judgments be found just and true; in love to all imprisoned Souls.

By a Lover of all Souls, who is called, JAMES PARNEL.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black Spread
Eagle, near the west end of Paul's. 1655.

THE TRUMPET of the Lord blown.
WOE unto you that are called Lords, Ladies, Knights, Gentlemen, and
Gentlewomen, in respect to your persons, who are exalted in the earth, who are
proud, and high, and lofty, who are called of men Master, and Sir, and Mistress,
and Madam, in respect to your persons, because of your gay Clothing, because
of your much earth, which by fraud, deceit, and oppression you have gotten
together, you are exalted above your fellow creatures, and grind the faces of
the poor, and they are as slaves under you, and must labor and toil under
you, and you must live at ease, sporting in day time, and spending your time in
pleasures, 2 Pet. i2. 13.
and Chambring, and wantonness, according to your lustful minds, in Hauking and
Hunting, and bouling and carding, and dicing, in all manner of music pleasure
and delights, in eating and drinking and sleeping, and you must have your wine
and ale, and all your dainty dishes, and all manner of delights and novelties,
and so ye seed the lust; eating and drinking and rising up to play, which is
Idolatry, and you have your fine attire, 1 Cor. i0. 7.
and all manner of new fashions, Silk and velvet, and purple, Gold and Silver,
and you have your waiting-men, and waiting-maids under you to wait upon you,
and your Coaches to ride, and your high and lofty horses is like your selves,
according to your lofty minds, and you sit at ease, Dives like, devouring the
Creation, and spending it upon your lusts, and with it committing fornication,
into it your hearts being adultred from God, who created you, and your
fellow creatures must labor like slaves under you, and works for all this,
when you are at your pleasures, they must be at work and labor, that must
Hunger and thirst and labor, when you are eating, and drinking, and sleeeping,
and here like Dives you sit at ease, and poor Lazarus lies starving without,
and here you are Lords over your Fellow Creatures, Luke 16.^9.20. 2i.
and they must bow and crouch to you or else they must be hated, and punished,
and put out from your presence, and be scoffed, and scorned, and reproached,
and you will be called Masters, and thinks scorn that a poor man should stand
with his hat on before you, and so sets up partiallity, which that Law of God
condemns, upholding that which Christ in his doctrine forbids, who says, be
not ye called Masters, and so by it which you did profess, Mat. 23.8.
you are condemned, and you think scorn in particular, to be thoued of your
Fellow Creatures, which is the Scripture language to one, but you will thou God
and Christ, and yet you will not be thoued, and here you exalt your selves above
God, and Lords over your fellow creatures, but though you be exalted as high as
the Heavens, and set your nests amongst the Stars, Obad. 3.4,
and lay up treasures for many years, thence will the Lord fetch you down, and
cast you into Hell the pit, as he did Lucifer, Dives, Isa. i4. 13, i4. i5.
and Hammen, and Pharaoh, and Herod, and the rest of your fore fathers, who
would have been exalted above the Creator as you would, for it is Lucifer who
is head and is exhalted in you, above all that is called God, opposing God, who
is God over you, whom you serve and worship, for whom the pit is prepared: To
the light in all your consciences I speak, which is honest of God, and
impartial, which will let you see you are guilty and condemn you, 2 These. 2, 3,
4.
but you think to have the pleasure and delights of this world, to be at ease
and peace here, and to have an inheritance in the Kingdom of Good too, and you
have covers for all this, you say your pleasures is pastime and recreation, and
your fine clothes and gay attire, is comeliness and decency, and your dainty
dishes and banqueting novelties and attendance, you say you are able to
maintain it, and it belongs to your places, and so you have covers for all, but
woe unto you that hide your Sins, and covers your iniquities, who covers with a
covering but not with the Lord, but all your covers is found too narrow before
the Lord Christ, Prove. 28. i3. Isa. 30.1.
who will lay all your hypocrisye and deceit before you, and your vain lies and
actions, and you shall be rewarded accordingly, and shall have your portion in
the Lake that burns, which is prepared for you earthworms, whose pleasure is
in the earth, but you think to be saved, and so would make Christ and his
Apostles liars, who said, none could obtain two Kindomes, and no such must
enter who have their portions and delight in the earth, James 5. i. 5.
and you make a profession of godliness with your prayers, praises graces, and
singing and formal imaginary worship, and have a Chaplain or a Priest to preach
to you one day in a week, and all the week after do as you do, and spends the
time as you do, in eating, and drinking, and rising up to play, and lives in
pride and covetousness, and is called of men Master, and you have a place for
him to preach to you, in either in your houses or hard-by, so have all things
at ease, and all this for your money, but the pearl you want, Job. 28.
which is not to be purchased with money, where lies the inestimable treasures:
and you say he is a Minister of Christ, and he says you are Christians, whenas
you all are Heathens both Priest and people, living without God in the world,
and so the blind leads the blind into the Ditch, and so you lead your lives and
spend your time here and thinks to be saved hereafter; no, no, woe, and woe is
coming upon you all who are proud, you must all give an account before the Lord
God, of Heaven and Earth, who is terrible to the wicked, and behold, the day of
the Lord comes, which will burn as an Oven, and all that are proud, Mal. 4.1.
Gal. 6.6, 7, 8.
and all that do wickedly shall be as stubble and such as you sow such must you
reap, he that sows to the flesh of the flesh, must reap corruption, the Lord
abhors all your profession, and your hypocrisye, it is not profession that he
seeks for, it is practice, it is not the sayer, but the doer that shall
inherit, your forefathers said but did not, so do you, but it is not all that
says Lord, Lord, that shall inherit, Mat. 7. 2i.
but he that does the will of my Father; what is the chafe to the wheat? the
Lord looks for fruits, you profess him in words, but your works are the works
of the Devil, and l'o are of this sort who come near him with their lips, Isa.
29. i3.
but their hearts are far from him, in your gay attire, in your new fashions,
in your varieties, in your dainty dishes, in your Gaming and pleasures, and
sporting, in your wealth and earthly riches, in your lofty horses, in your
curious buildings, in your fine Music, in your earthly honor, which is all the
fruits of the Devil, and here outwardly you profess the Lord, with your tongues,
but serve the Devil with your hearts and actions, who is the King of pride, and
here you are in the broad and easy way, James 5.6.
in the first nature, which is in the fall separated from God, whose Kingdom is
of this world, strangers to the life of God, and are at enmity, slaying and
crucifying the just and innocent, and so are no Christians but Heathens both
Priest and people, and the Lord abhors all sacrafycers from Cain, which is the
first nature wherein you live, rove out from God into the earth, your lives
preaches you forth, so all your graces before and after meat, and your
prayers, and your praises and Singing, and formal worships and traditions, the
Lord abhors, Genesis 4.3.5. Isa. 1. i2, 13, i4. 15, 16, i7. Prove. i5. 8.
for they are offered up in the first nature, a sacrifyce of the earth, and
Savours of the earth, and is not a sweet smell unto him, and therefore he has
no respect to it, his soul loathes it, away with it, and they that offer it, for
it is enmity with him, the prayers and sacrifyces of the wicked is abominable,
all prayers or Sacrifices offered ap from Cain, Dives or Hammon, or any in that
nature, is abominable to the Lord, and he will not accept them, for to them he
has no respect, therefore all you high and lofty ones, Hammon like, be ye
sylent and let your mouths, be stopped all you who acts in unrighteousness,
away with all your profession, and now repent and tremble before the Lord, ye
children of the Devil, come down all you high and lofty ones, houl and mourn in
sackcloath and ashes, for the Lord is coming to burn you up as stubble before
him, for you are the fruitless TREES that cumbers the ground, Mat. 27.19.
who are for the Fire, fair and flourishing with Leaves you are covered, but
by CHRIST the LIGHT, ye are searched, and no Fruit is sound on you, therefore
from him you are cursed for fruit he is come to seek for, therefore profess
him no longer in words, but now repent and return from all your
UNRIGHTEOUSNESS, for know you not that no unrighteous person shall inherit the
Kingdom of God, i Cor. 6.9.
no vain person nor drunkards, swearers, no liar, no proud, no covetous ones,
none who delight in gaming or pleasures, spotting in the day time and riotting,
chambering and wantonness, nor no unholy nor unclean thing must enter, for all
unrighteous persons must be cast into the Lake that burns with Fire and
brimstone for ever: now read your selves and your Portions, all you high and
lofty ones, for thither you must go, and there you mustly for evermore, the
Lord of hosts has spoke it, with Dives and Hammon, and all the high and lofty
ones who must be cast in thither, Easter 3.
for you are too high and too Fine, and too lofty to enter in at the straight
gate, as Dives was, and Hammon was, nay, you are enemeis and persecutors of all
those who enters in at the strait gate, as Hammon, and Dives, and the High
Priests, Pharisees, and Rulers was, and all the high ones, because they do not
feed you with your earthly honor, and respects no person, but equalizes all
flesh, as the Lord does so does his people, Acts i0.34.35.
but you proud ones thinks scorn to be compared, or to be equalized with your
fellow creatures, as Dives and Hammon did, but all you proud ones, remember
your father Dives end, for thither you must go into the everlasting burnings,
as he did, whose belly was his God, Luke i6. i9. and Phil. 3. i9.
as yours is, whose end is destruction, who mind earthly things, and then it
will be too late for you to repent, and then when it is too late, then you will
wish you had been as Lazarus was, so that at the end you might have enjoyed the
happiness that Lazarus did, though now you are exalted above your
fellow creatures, Ezekiel i6. 44.
living in Pride, Idleness, and fullness of bread, which was the Sins of Sodom,
but in this day you shall be brought down, and all you workers of eniquity,
young and old, rich, and poor, Lord and Lady, and beggars shall be all turned
into Hell without respect of person, Isaiah 2.42. Heb. i0. 8.34. Heb. 1i. 36,
37, 38. Luke i6. 22.23
then shall it be with the Mistress, so with the maid, as with the Servant so
with the Master, and as with the people, so with the Priest, and all the
righteous simple ones which you despise and scoff at, who are now to you gazing
stocks, and reproaches and pilgrims in the world, because their Kingdom is not
of this world, then shall that be exalted and received into joy eternal, then
you shall see a separation betwixt the humble and the proud, as there was
betwixt Dives and Lazarus, the humble, and loly, and despised ones shall be
exalted, and you high lofty ones, who are despisers and crucifyers of the just,
shall be abased and cast into Hell, then Lord and Lady, Master and Mistress and
all your earthly honor, shall be laid into the fire, then all your worldly
wealth, riches, and earthly inheritance and heir-ships will be gone, wherewith
you ruled as Lords in the eerth,, then you shall find that all your gay
clothing and rich attire was for pride, and not for decency, and that many of
your fellow creatures wanted that for to cover their nakedness which you spent
upon your lusts, then you shall be rewarded for grinding the faces of the poor,
for your oppressions, and for rackings and taxings and your heavy burdens,
wherewith you oppress your fellow creatures, for you are the high Oaks and the
tall Cedars that oppress the little scrubs under, Isa. 2. i2, i3. etc.
whom the Creation growns both man and beasts, but then you will be brought
low, then all your pleasures and wantonness, hauking and hunting, and bowling
and carding, and di^ing and all your Musik shall be turned into weeping and
howling with Dives, Lazarus had none of this, but Dives had, but now Lazarus
has joy eternal, and Dives woe and misery everlasting, and then all your
dainty dishes and novelties and varieties which has fed your lusts shall be
turned into fire and brimstone, and the spoil of the creatures shall witness
against you, and then you shall be stripped of of all your Silks and Velvet, and
Purple, and Gold, and Silks, and all your gay attire, wherewith you decked and
addorned your Earthly bodies, to make your selves seem glorious in the eyes of
other, for the honor and esteem of the world but then you will be as naked as
the beggar, then you shall have no waiting men nor waiting maids, nor Coaches,
nor high and lofty horses, nor curious building, or great houses, no more than
the beggar, then bowing and crouching, and all your heathenish breeding shall
be laid aside, Ezekiel. 22.28. Ier. 13. i. Mich. 3.5.
then all your Priests and false Prophets which you extall now so high because
they daub you up and cry, peace to you, healing you in deceit, because you put
into their mouths, shall stand you in no steed, but shall be tormented with you
hypocrites in the lake, and all your covers will not serve wherewith you hide
your Sin, and covers over your deceipts, in saying your pleasures and vain
talk, and foolish jesting, and tales and stories, is pastime and recreation,
then you would be glad of one hour if you could get to repent in, as Dives
would, but then it will be too late for your portion you enjoy in the earth,
whose Kingdom is of this world, but the Son of man in it had scarce where to
lay his head, and his servants no certain dwelling place, for their Kingdom was
not of this world, such you call wanderers and vaggabonds, who have your great
houses and strong towers in the Earth, but all cannot hide from the presence of
the Lord, who will you call in judgment, and reward you according to your
deeds, Luke 9.5.58. i Cor. 4. ii. Psalms i45. i3.
when his own he does exalt into the Kingdom which for them he has prepared,
which is an everlasting Kingdom, from which the earthworms are shut out, who
says the earth is mime, therefore now before it be too late consider of it,
and let Dives and Hammon and the rest of the proud ones be a warning to you,
and now repent, while it is called to day, now you have been told, now you are
left without excuse, before the just impartial Judge; now prise your time all
who desire mercy at the hand of God, and pardon for your iniquities, for this
is the day of your visitation, Luke i6. i3^
wherein the Lord is handing forth his mercy, and if you will not believe this,
you would not blieve Dives and he should rise from the Dead.

To the light in all your Consciences I speak, which comes from Jesus Christ
the light of the world, John i. 9.
who does enlighten every one that comes into the world, which light is his
witness in the conscience, against all deceit, ungodliness, and unrighteousness
of men, which light in all your consciences is my witness, to the which I am
made manifest, which if you love it, and to it hearken, it will let you see
your selves, and the staite and condition wherein you live, and the fylthy
unclean Image of the Devil which you bear, and your Leoperous spotted
consciences, because of the lust wherein you are drowned, and the same light
loving it and following it, which checks and covinces in the conscience, for
that which is evil and of the least contrary to the will of God, it will lead you
to repentance, and humble your hearts, and bring you down to know the fear of
the Lord, whose power will rend your habitations wherein you have dwelt secure
in your Sins, and this light (loving it) will be your teacher, and will let you
see the Creation and the goodness thareof, and will teach you how to use it and
order it in its place, out of the lust, to the glory of God, and how to do good
with it, so that there be no want in the creation nor cry of oppreession, but
the hungry will be fed, and the naked clothed, and the oppressed set free, and
here is the blessing restored to the Creation, but while these things is under
and you live in the lusts, with your abundance, nourishing your hearts as in a
day of slaughter, the curse is upon you and war abundance, and you are the
adulterers and adulteresses, Titus. 2. ii. i2. James 4. James 5.
whose hearts are adulterated from God, committing fornication with the
Creation, and the grace of God which should guide you out of the lust and
ungodliness of the world you turn into wantonness, and your teachers who cause
you to err by their sorcery and enchantments, and James the Son of thunder
uttered forth his voice against such, and thus says the Lord, because the
Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and wanton
eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet,
therefore the Lord will smite with the scab the Crown of the head of the
Daughters of Sion, in that day in that day the Lord will take away all their
bravery of their tinkling ornaments of their feet, Isaiah. 3.
and their cauls and round attire, like the Moon, and the chains and the
bracelets, and the head-bands, and tablets, and the Earrings, and the
nose-Iewels, the changeables suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the Crisping-pins, and the glasses, and the fine linen, and the
hoods, and the vails, and it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell,
there shall be a stinck, and instead of well seat here, bauldness, and idstead
of a stomacher, a girding with Sackcloath, and burning instead of beauty: Now
all you high and lofty Daughters of England, who are sporting your selves in
the day time, and scorning and disdaining your fellow creatures, read your
selves and your portions, howl and lament, for a day of venegance, of rending,
of burning, of famine, is coming upon you, for the Land mourns because of pride.

TO THE LIBERTINE, whose Liberty stands in the Flesh.
WOE unto thee, who art at ease in the flesh, devouring the Creation, and
spending it upon thy Lusts, whose heart is run from God awhoring after other
Lovers, committing, Fornication with the Creation, nourishing thy heart as in a
day of slaughter, Ezekiel. 23.30. Psalm. i0.39. James 5.5. Rev, i8.7. Heb. 10.29.
Mal. 2. i7.
satisfying thy lusts in whatsoever thy heart runs after, and so art at ease in
the flesh, and feels no sorrow nor grief, but the Harlot is exalted in thy
Bosom, above all that is called God, and thou had cast his Law behind thy
back, living withoutt the fear of God and walking dispitefully against the
Spirit of Grace, saying within thy self, he that does evil is good in the
sight of God, and where is the God of Judgment? can we do any thing without
God, is it not by his power we do all things, and can we do any thing contrary
to his Will; yea, thou shall find, that all thou do is contrary to his
will, and thou shall find him, a God of Judgment, for thy Sins has separated
thy Soul from God, Isa. 59.2.
and long in his love and mercy to thy soul has he forborne thee, and has not
cut thee off from off the face of the earth, but has still spared thee, and
waited to be gracious, though thy heart has been wholly gone from him, and
never regarded to do that which is pleasing in his sight, but instead of
serving him, thou have served thy own lusts, with his good creatures to which
thou have had no right, and he to thee has been a merciful God; but will not
the Lord visit for these things? yea, he will not always strive with man, and
though thou take thy pleasure now, remember thou must come to Judgment, And
lo says the Lord, Genesis 6.3. Eccle. ii. 9. Rev. 22.12. Gal. 6.8.
I come quickly and my reward is with me, to give unto every one according to
his deeds. And they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption:
And then thou shall find that power thou have had, and instead of using it to
the Honor and Glory of God, thou have hid thy Talent in the Earth, and lived
wantonly upon the Earth, serving thy own will, dishonouring the Holy Lord of
Glory and Righteousness and then in the day of thy Judgment, thou shall confess
that the Lord has visited thee time after time, and called thee time after
time, handing forth his Mercy to thee, when thou harkned, the Lord was with
thee, when thou walked in his fear, he was not far from thee, but thou have
hearkened to the voice of the Serpent and false Prophet, which has drawn thy
heart from God, into the visible things of the Creation, which pass away, and
has promised thee Liberty and Peace in the same, and it being pleasing to thy
lustful earthly mind, thou art become one with the Harlot, which lies in thy
Bosom, Mat. 4, 8.9.
and thus thou have accepted the gift with which the Old Serpent tempted
Christ, and so art become a Servant to the Devil, of whom thou art brought in
bondage of him, being evermore, and while thou art promising to thy self
Liberty, 2 Pet. 2. i9, 20, 2i.
thou thy self art a Servant unto corruption; and thus thy lusts has
separated betwixt God and thy Soul, and art become the Image of the Devil,
yiedling thy Members servants to uncleanness, and thus thou sets up a rest in
the Devils Kingdom, wherein thou sports thy self and art at liberty, i Cor. i0,
7. i Cor. i5.^8, 9.
eating and drinking in merriness, so if there were sorrow only in this world,
thou art of all men most happy, then our Fathers that are fallen asleep in Christ
are perished, and we are of all men most miserable, if there be joy only in
this world; but out of the liberty of the children of God thou art found, and
by them seen to be in the fall, wallowing in the mire and lust, and so art
unredeemed, living under the Curse, Romans 8.
for this is the redemption from death to life, and thou live after the
flesh, and art dead, the carnal mind ruling which is death, and is at enmity
with God, for it is not subject to the will of God, and so long as this has
dominion over thee, thou cannot obey God, for he that lives in the flesh,
cannot please God, but if through the Spirit thou mortify the deeds of the
flesh thou shall live, Romans 8. i.
and here is the liberty of the Children of God, Who walk not after the flesh
but after the Spirit, but their liberty is not in the flesh, but in the Spirit,
for by the law of the Spirit of life they are set free from the law of Sin and
death: And from Christ their Redeemer, they have received power to become the
Sons of God, Ioh. i, i2.
and in the same have dominion over the world, flesh, self, and the Devil,
death and Hell, and this comes through the Cross, by which they are crucified
to the world and the world to them, and here is the liberty of the Children of
God, Galla. 6. i4.
who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, which liberty no vulterous
eye can see, nor venomous beast shall know, nor the rebellious disobedient one,
therefore do not deceive thy felfe in saying, thou art a Christian and believes
in Christ, and art a child of God; for they that are Christ's have crucified the
flesh, Galla. 5.2^. Romans 6. i6.
and to whom thou yields thy members servants to obey, his servant thou art, to
the light of God in thy conscience I speak, which if thou love it and unto it
hearken, and bring thy deeds unto it to be tried by it, it will witness for God
and his Children, against thee to be a Child of the Devil, and his works thou
do, and thy faith to be feigned like the Hypocrite, and does not purifye thy
heart and so is no more than the wickedest that is, for all say that Christ
dyed for them, but all cannot witness it, For he that believes is born of God,
Ioh. 3.9.
and he that is born of God does not commit Sin, and this light loving it, will
let thee see how thy heart is turned from God, and that thou have more delight
in the things that perish, than in the fear of the living God, which keeps the
heart clean, And is the beginning of the pure wisdom and righteousness, and if
thou honestly commune with it, Prove. 9. i0.
it will let thee see thy secret actions, and all thy hidden deeds done in
darkness, that thou may come to judgment, and condemnation for all these
things, and except thou be born again and become as a little Child, thou art no
child of God, neither can enter the Kingdom of God, but art without in the
worlds nature, in the state of condemnation, in whom the Son of perdition rules
above all that is called God, Sitting in the Temple of God, as God, and says
he is God, and here he opposes God in his Kingdom, and says that is lawful,
and for it pleads which God says is unlawful and forbids, and he tells the
Creature and makes it believe it cannot keep Gods Commandments, and that it
has not power to do that which God commands it, or to depart from evil, and
that none lives but they Sin, and Christ has satisfied for all Sin, though
they Sin daily; that man may use the Creatures as he pleases, seeing they
were made for man's use, and the Spirit of God says, he that says he knows
God and keeps not his commandments, i Ioh. 2.4. i John i. i2. Romans 8.2.
is a liar and the truth is not in him; And as many as receives him, to them he
gives power to become the Sons of God; And the Law of the Spirit of life, makes
them free from the Law of Sin and death, He that commits sin is of the Devil
and never knew God, i Ioh 3. Romans 8. Hebrews i2. i4.
and by this are the Children of God and the Children of the Devil made
manifest and he that abides in him sins not; And he that lives after the
flesh cannot please God, for without holiness none shall see the Lord: and thus
the Devil the Old Serpent who was a liar from the beginning, opposes God in
his Kingdom, daubing the Creature up in that which is evil, making it a
habitation in his Kingdom, while it lives upon the earth, and then must take
part with him in the lake that is prepared for the Devil and his Servants, who
does not dare to call God a hard Master, as if he would lay a tax upon the
Creature which it is not able to perform, and thus he deceives the Creature,
and draws out of the commands of God, and out of the fear of God, which
preserves from evil, and so he draws into carelessness and slothfulness,
Coloss. 3.5.6
and begets a liberty therein, and because of those things comes the wrath of
God upon the Children of disobedience, as it was in the beginning when God said
that in the day thou eats of the Apple thou shall die the death, and the
Serpent said, you shall not surely dye, for God does know that in the day you
eat thereof, you shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil, Genesis
and thus he deceived them, and drew them out of the commands of God and out of
the feast of God into the disobedience, and so came the curse of God upon them,
by harkening to him, and entering into his temptation, and then they found God
just and true, and the Devil a liar, whom they had believed; now read thy self,
to the light of Christ in thy Conscience I speak, which searches the heart,
and knows the secret thoughts and intents of the heart, which will witness me,
and condemn thee who walks contrary unto it, be not deceived, God is not
mocked, for such as thou sowest, Gal. 6.7
such must thou reap, for God is a just God, and will not acquit the wicked, for
thou art found a sloathful servant, who has hid thy talent in the earth, and
think not that thou shall receive the reward of the righteous and faithful,
for if the righteous scarcely be saved, what will become of the wicked and
ungodly, therefore repent while its called to day, i Pet. 4. i8,
harden not thy heart, least the judgments of God come upon thee at unawares
and sweep thee away, and give thee thy portion amongst the sloathfull
hypocrites and unbelievers, for by the light of God thou art seen and found in
the Sins of Sodom, and the plagues of Sodom is coming upon thee, therefore be
afflicted and mourn, and let thy laughter be turned to mourning and thy joy
into heaviness, for to judgment thou must come, Iam. 4.9.
and thy liberty; to the light of Christ in thy conscience I am made manifest,
which if thou loves it, will let thee see thy self, and tender thy conscience
and will lead thee into the fear of God following of it, and will humble thee,
and bring down thy high and lofty looks, and bring thee under judgment and
condemnation for thy stiffneckedness, disobedience, and rebellion against the
Son of righteousness, here will be thy condemnation, out of thy own mouth will
the Lord judge thee in righteousness by the light in thy Conscience, which he
has enlightened the withal, which now thou Kickest against, which will thy thy
torment be, this is a warning from the Lord unto thee, and now thou art left
without excuse in the presence of the living God, by the light of God, this is
the day of thy visitation, and the day of thy judgment draw nigh, now thou have
time prise it: For the day of the Lord will be as a Thief in the night, i
These. 5.2, 3.
to all the children of darkness, as it was to the Sodomites, and verily I say
unto thee, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of
Judgment than for thee, if thou do not repent, who have tasted of the love
and mercy of God, and have trampled it under foot, and have rebelled against
the Spirit of Grace.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, as a warning to all who are in the
fleshly liberty, by a witness of the true liberty of the children of God
through death, which liberty stands not in time, nor in any thing in time for
all things in time perish with time, but this remains when time shall be no
more, and this is pure unspotted of the world.

JAMES PARNEL.

ALL you that scoff, and scorn, reproach, and revile at the Children, Servants,
and Messengers of the most High God, whom you nickname quakers, and under the
same name persecute them, as a people not worthy to live, and have no ground
for it, neither knows any evil by them, but all along their lives and
conversations condemns yours, and therefore you hate them, revile them, and
reproach them in whom the power of the living God is made manifest, the same
which ever was, Which shakes the Earth and makes the strong man to bow
himself, Eccles. i2. 3.
and the keepers of the house to tremble; and the same power which all the
Children of God in all ages witnessed, and passed through, which then by the
same Generation suffered, both by Magistrates, Professors, Priests, and People,
who were, and are strangers to the life of God and his Power, and therefore
reproached, Scoffed and scorned it, as you now do, 2 Timothy 3.3.
but it is that the Scripture might be fulfilled upon you, Who are despisers
of those that do good; Isaak the seed of the promise trembled, Genesis 27.33. Who
was mocked by Ishmael the Son of the Bondwoman, who was cast out as the same
seed; and now by you Ishmalites who are the Children of the Bondwoman, who are
cast out and are found without, mocking and scoffing the Righteous seed, Genesis
21.9. i0. Gal. 4.30. And Moses a Servant of God quaked and trembled, who
counted it greater Riches to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to
enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season, Heb. 12. 2i. Heb. ii. 26. and this you
now call madness and folly, who know not that godliness is great gain, i Tim.
6.6. and David who was a King quaked, and trembled, and roared, and watered his
Couch with tears, Psalm. 69. i2. Psalm. 22.14. Psalm. 38. Psalm. 6.6. and Drunkards
made a Song on him, and some shut out their tongues, and wagged their heads and
gaped upon him with their mouths, Psalm. 64. Psalm. 122.7. and this you Sing in
your Steeple houses like Hypocrites without knowledge, Psalms 35. i6. and yet
scoff and scorn and reproach those in whom the same Power is made manifest and
yet you will say as he said, you are not puffed in mind, nor have no scornful
eye, etc. but he spoke the truth, and you lie, Psalm. i31.1. and thus you
deceive your souls and loves to have it so, your leaders cause you to err,
Isa. 9.16. and Job a Servant of the Lord quaked, who by the same generation was
laughed to scorn, Job 4. i4. Job i2. i4. and Jeremiah, a Prophet of the Lord
quaked, who was then persecuted by the same generation Ier. 23.9. and Daniel a
Prophet of the Lord trembled, who was cast into the Lions Den, because he would
not deny his God, Dan. i0, ii. Dan. 6.16. but by his power he was preserved, as
we are now from those Lions whelps who would us devour; and Habbkkauk a Prophet
of the Lord his belly trembled, and his lips quivered, Hab. 3. i6. and Paul an
Apostle of Jesus Christ fell down and trembled, Act. 9.4.5.6. who was reviled,
reproached, and persecuted even to death, who was one that hazarded his life
for the name of Jesus, Act. 6.26. and said all the day long was they killed,
and accounted as sheep to the slaughter, Romans 8.36. now these was all quakers,
who then suffered with patience by the same generation, now read what
generation you are of, for they that were after the flesh allways persecuted
them that were after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29. there was always a generation by
which the righteous ever suffered since Cain the first born upon earth, in
whose way you are found, who envy, who are in the wrath, Jude 10. you kill the
just, and he lies slain in the streets, Iam. 5.5, 6. at whose hands his blood
shall be requited. Mat. 23.35. and the Son of man was to eat his bread with
quaking, and drink his water with trembling, Ezekiel. i2. i0. out of which life
you are found, who are at ease in the flesh, feeding without the fear of God,
spending the Creatures upon your lusts, i Cor. i0.7. Iam. 5 scoffing and
scorning them who are not one with you in the same liberty, but fears before
the Throne of God, i Pet. 4.4. Romans i3, i4. i Cor. i0.3i. and thus you err,
not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, Mat. 22.29. therefore behold,
ye despisers and wonderers, and perish, I will work a work in your days, which
though you see it, you shall not believe it, Act. i3. ^i. is it not apparent
before your eyes, the wicked man returns from his wickedness, and the ungodly
from his ungodliness and the drunkard from his drunkenness, and the profane
one from his prophainness, and now seeks after God, and fear his powerful
name, and this you see and cannot believe, but despises, scoffs and scorns the
power by which this work is done, for it is no new thing but the same which was
and are, you are in the same adulterous generation, which cannot see the Signs
which follow the truth, Mat. i6.3, 4. from whom the Gospel is hid, whose eye is
darkened with the God of the world, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. and so speaks evil of the
things you know not, Jude ii. putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness, evil for good, and good for evil, Isa. 5.20. you are the scoffers
that the Apostle foretold of to be in the last times, Jude, i8. who are
despisers of those that are good, incontinent, fierce, Traitor, heady, high
minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having a form of
godliness, but deny the life and powers, 2 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5. and here you are
both Priests, people, and professors, who are scoffing and scorning, slandring,
reproach, reviling, and persecuting the righteous innocent servants and
messengers of the most high God, who is uttering forth his voice through them
in power, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who will you call
to judgment, and convince you of all your ungodly deeds, and all your hard
speeches, which you have wrongfully spoken against him and his power, and will
reward you accordingly, Jude i4, i5. Rev. 22.2i. Therefore to that which is of
God in all your consciences I speak, which is my witness against your ungodly
lives, which turning your minds to it, and unto it taking heed, will let you
see you speak evil of the things you know not, loving darkness rather than
light, because your deeds are evil, Job. 3. i9. therefore fear the Lord God
and repent, and take heed of mocking, least your bonds be made strong. Isa.
28.22. for God will not be mocked, such as you sow, such must you reap, Gal.
6.7. therefore fear before the Lord, and try all things, and hold fast that
which is good, i These. 5.2i. and despise nothing before you know it, least you
speak evil of Gods elect, for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God, Heb. i0.3i. therefore take this for a warning, as from the
mouth of the Lord, for no ignorance is to be pleaded before the throne of God.

This was given forth in vindication of the power of God, which is now
manifesting in his Sons and Daughters, least the simple who are not yet
acquainted with it, should stumble at the name.

By a friend of the truth and a lover of these people, which you who are out of
the truth scornfully call quakers, but the scorners God will judge, and the
righteous God will bless who work out their salvation with fear and trembling,
for says the Lord, to such a one will I look, that is of a humble and contrite
spirit, and trembles at my words, Pro. i9.29. Phil. 2. i2 Isa. 66. i, 2.

JAMES PARNEL.


