A TRVE RELATION OF A BRAVE DEFEAT Given by the Forces in Plymouth, to SKELLUM
GREENVILE, On Tuesday, the eighteenth of February, 1644.

Written thence by a sure Hand to a special friend in London, and confirmed by
many that were eyewitnesses of the same.

With the taking of one Lieutenant Colonel, one Major, four Captains, four
Lieutenants, two Ensigns, 92 Common Soldiers.

There were also taken about 300 Arms, good store of Mattocks, Shovels and
Faggots.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Francis Coals, dwelling in the Old Bailey. 1645.
1644

A True RELATION Of A BRAVE DEFEAT, Given by the Forces in Plymouth to SKELLUM
GREENVILE, on Tuesday the 18 of February, 1644.
SIR,
THe good success it has pleased God to give our Forces lately, makes me
once more set pen to paper, thereby desiring to inform you; That on Tuesday,
the 18 of this instant February, our Plymouth Forces were drawn forth to all
Quarters of the Town, the Enemy having the night before with a considerable
number of Horse and Foot gained an Hill over against the Town, the water being
between, where formerly we had a Work called by the name of Mount Stamford,
which we lost about a twelve-moneth since, and was open my Lord Generals
advance into the West quitted by the Enemy, and slighted by us: To this place
the Enemy no^ came again, and in one night did, with the help of some
hundreds of Faggots, which they brought with them, make up a very formidable
Work, at the least twelve foot thick, with a Brest-Worke drawn from each
side in manner of a Line, which they completely manned with Musketeers, and
stood in that posture, intending the next night to finish the Work, which then
would have been impregnable, from whence they might shoot into the Town at
their pleasure, and have so annoyed us, that no Shipping could have layne in
Catwater without danger of sinking or fiering, which is the most convenient
place for Ships to ride in, that must unload at the Key. But blessed be God, by
his help and the vigilancie of our Commanders, all this was prevented by a
timely sallie (delays in such cases proving dangerous) the weather did prove
so advantageous, that both Horse and Foot went so cheerfully, so universally,
to all the Works, that neither the Enemy without, or the stander by within,
could imagine where we intended to fall on. About noone there were a
considerable number of Foot and a strong Party of Horse conveied in Boats over
the water, to a Work we have under the Hill called Mount Batten, it not being
much above two flight shot from Mount Stamford, then in the Enemies Possession;
and being on the height of the same Hill, out Forces were commanded to march up
against the Enemy, who lay within their Works and Line, being well manned
both with Horse and Foot ready to encounter ours, yet not so strong as was
supposed: the Enemy having drawn off a great part of them to the other side
of the Town, when they rather expected we should fall on; but we crossing
their expecttation, fell on where we were least looked for, the weather
proving so clear, and we approaching so openly, gave the Enemy warning
enough, we could not stir but they must see us.

Well, our Foot, who were most Seamen, marched up resolutely, the forlorn
hope of horse going before, and the reserve with them in the bottom, who had
the advantage of some hedges which they lined with Musketeers, who fired upon
the Enemy while the rest advanced, the Enemy firing very fast upon them also;
and while our Foot were getting up the hill, our horse and the Enemies met, who
disputed not long, the Enemy rather trusting to his Horse legs, then their
own swords; our Horse followed them amain, and it is verily thought kept some
of them from coming back again thither any more.

Our Foot seeing what good success the Horse had, went, or rather ran up to
the Enemies work with their colors in their hands; and in a very short time
made the Enemy fly fort; yet before they quitted the work, they blew up their
Powder, and then betook them to their heels: our men entered the Work, and
placed their colors upon it: our Horse cha^ed the Enemy a mile and better
while they ran, as the old saying is, and never looked behind them: I mean
never made halt, unless to take breath, till they came to a Work they have
two miles off; by this time the night coming on, our men retreated to their
Fort which they manned all night, intending to make even with the ground,
contenting themselves with the beating the Enemy out of the field, and the
taxing 104 Common Soldiers and Officers, whereof one a Lieueenant Colonel, one
a Major, four Captains, and the rest Lieutenants and Ensigns; there were
taken also about 300 Arms, and in the work good store of Mattockes, Shovells,
and Faggots: On our part we have but one man slain, and that by an accident,
some few hurt, and one they say taken by the Enemy: This is no small
encouragement to our Soldiers, who are never better then when they are a
fighting. In the mean while, both from the Ships and Forts, on that side the
Town were at the least sixty great Gunnes shot off, which beat up the dirt
bravely about the Cavies ears: some there were slain upon the place, but not
many, but without question many of them hurt, for our Horse were in amongst the
Foot, slashing them amain, whom they routed totally, and made them run away
basely. Which had you seen as I did, though at some distance, you would have
laughed heartily, as I did.

Sir, you need not question the truth of this; I assure you, I saw many of the
Rogues brought in: I know you will receive this Relation from better hands, but
being such good News, I could not omit to give you an account of it: If I have
not expressed my self in proper Phrases, excuse me, for I am no Soldier, We
shall have one day this week set apart for a special thanksgiving for this
great mercy: So humbly beseeching God to give us thankful and cheerful
hearts, and such courage, that we may neither fear man, or distrust God, I
humbly take my leave, and rest

Your Servant, I. P.

A List of the Prisoners taken at MOUNT-STAMFORD.
Lieut. Colonel Mohun. Sergeant Major Rich. Heel. Four Captains.
Lieutenants taken.
Lieutenant Guilt. Lieutenant Weringe. Lieutenant Manwaring. Lieutenant
Ashford.
Ensigns taken.
Ensign Batishill. Ensign Halfer.
The rest inferior Officers and Soldiers.

FINIS.

