CHRISTIAN REFORMATION: BEING AN EARNEST PERSUASION To the speedy practice of
it.

Proposed to all, but especially designed for the serious consideration of my
Dear Kindred and Countrymen of the County of Cork in Ireland, AND The People
of Riegat and Camerwell in the County of Surry.

By RICHARD PARR A. M. Pastor of Camerwell in Surry.

Psalm. 119.59. I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

verse 60. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

Prove. 28.13. He that covers his sins, shall not prosper: But whose
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathaniel Brook at the Angel in Cornhil. 1660.

To my Honored Friend and Patron, Sir EDMOND BOWYAR of Camerwell Knight: And
the Lady HESTER BOWYAR, his virtuous Consort.
SIR,
MY obligations to you as my Patron from whom I received that Portion of
subsistence here at Camerwell, which Providence cast upon you to bestow, and on
me to receive for the support of the Ministry in this place; together with that
Relation I have to you, and kindness for you, as a friend and care of your
soul as a Pastor, have put me upon the dedication of these few serious thoughts
about saving Reformation.

I cannot better express my Love and Respects to you, then by wishing and
laboring for you that you may be Eternally saved; and no way can I find out
otherwise to be effected, then that you be a real sincere convert.

I have observed for some years past, that you make it much of your business
to keep up communion with God both in public and private, which puts me in a
great deal of hope you are in a fair way, both to receive further counsel, and
to use all good means to bring about that in your soul and life which may fit
you for that glory which is above in heaven.

I offer therefore these (though but weak endeavors of mine, in comparison of
those many worthier labors of those Authors you have to converse withal) to
your serious consideration; and if these add any thing to you, my mite will
prove a mighty blessing.

The subject is weighty, and if the arguments be so too, then they claim your
subjection; for you must yield to Reason, and you must follow the Directions,
or else you sin against the Reason of a man, and the Rules of Religion, and the
happiness of your own soul; If you read what I have written without prejudice
and prevarication, and ponder without lightness and wavering; if you put in
practice every duty commanded, and renounce every sin, and forsake with
invincible resolution in good earnest, and without procrastination, those sins
be they many or few, profitable or pleasurable, open or secret, which you your
own self are tainted with, and follow Christ fully, and deny your self wholly,
and believe in the Lord Jesus, and live Holily, and continue so believing, and
so living to your dying day: Then nothing in this present world can hinder your
everlasting happiness when you go hence; But if you or any man follow their
own inbred naughtiness, and walk after the flesh, and put off Reformation,
and live impenitent, and die unconverted; all the Angels in heaven, nor men on
earth, nor treasures of riches, nor all honors of this world, nor greatness,
policy, learning, nor any thing, nor all things, can procure your
justification, pardon or salvation at last. Nay if you live and die impenitent,
and in a state of unregeneracy and unconverted, Christ himself will never own
you, nor will his precious blood be a propitiation for you; This I suppose you
know already and believe, yet this I am bound to acquaint you withal as my
full persuasion, and after this rate (you can testify) I have always preached
for all the space I have been your monitor in this place: and oh that both you
and I, and all that desire to be saved eternally may reduce all the doctrinalls
about this point of Reformation into our constant practice, and espouse the
thoughts of these things into our most retired and serious consideration, which
will prove the rarest pleasure in the world, and give the fullest satisfaction
to that soul which is preparing for heaven.

Sir, I need not say much more to you, but to entreat you to peruse at your
leisure these short monitions, being An earnest Swasion to a speedy
Reformation, and if they give any advantage or help toward your great work,
that one thing necessary, give God the praise and thanks.

And Madam, For an advantage to those many good wishes I have for you, your
nearness of blood to one that is dearest to me of any person in this world,
makes me attempt this little tender of my Counsel to you also, hoping that by
your serious perusal you may either resolve to attain to what is wanting to
make your conversion complete, or take occasion hereby to bless God that it is
already begun in you, and in some good degree wrought, and so labor to go on
in a course toward greater perfection, in order to the accomplishment of that
ever to be sought after and mightily to be longed for happiness in heaven at
your departure hence, which is the enjoyment of Christ, and the completely full
and filling joys at Gods right hand in the kingdom of glory.

And this is all the harm I wish you, and that this may be both your Lot, that
you may be heirs together of the same grace which may put you (through Christ)
into the full possession of the same Glory, is the earnest desire to you and
for you both, of him who is one that loves you upon the best account, And

Your friend and servant for the work of Christ, RI: PARR.
Camerwell, Jun. 25. 1660.
The Contents of the Chapters in this Treatise.
CHAP. I. The Introduction. Persuading every Soul to heed his own Salvation,
and endeavor it as his chiefest concernment, and to consider it speedily,
seriously, and wisely. page 1. CHAP. II. The hopeful sinners prayer. p. 14.
CHAP. III. Of Reformation in the notion of it, as it is intended for practice.
p. 20. CHAP. IV. Of man's state before Reformation, implying the necessity of
amendment. p. 23. CHAP. V. Containing a catalogue of sins which are altogether
inconsistent with the state of saving grace, and do most necessarily infer
damnation to them that are guilty, and will not be reformed. p. 31. Sect. I.
Wilful Ignorance. p. 34. II. Infidelity. p. 36. III. Unrighteousness. page 38.
IV. Idolatry. p. 40. V. Adultery, with Fornication, Effeminatenesse, Buggery,
Beastiality. p. 43. VI. Drunkeness. p. 46. VII. Gluttony. p. 49. VIII.
Covetousness. p. 52. IX. Murder. p. 56. X. False and vain swearing. p. 61. XI.
Lying. p. 66. XII. Theft and Sacriledg. p. 69. XIII. Disobedience and
Rebellion. p. 72. XIV. Pride and Vainglory. p. 81. XV. Schism and Heresy. p.
85. XVI. Witchcraft. p. 92. XVII. Hypocrisy. p. 95. XVIII. Apostasy. p. 103.
XIX. Making light of Gospel-mercies, and neglecting them. p. 111. XX.
Unfruitfulnesse under gracious means. p. 123.
CHAP. VI. An Enumeration of more sins and ways by which man offends God, and
contracts guilt to his soul, of which he must be reformed ere he dies. p. 132.
Sect. I. Evil motions of lust, the taint and corruption of nature. p. 137. II.
Vain thoughts. p. 139. III. Idle words. page 143. IV. Idle life. p. 146. V.
Omissions. p. 149. VI. Dreams. p. 152. VII. Worldly Joy and Sorrow. p. 155.
VIII. Unthankfulness and murmuring. p. 160. IX. Inconsiderateness and rash
attempts. p. 161. X. Worldly Confidence and trust. p. 161. XI. Vain and
Erroneous opinions. p. 164. XII. Recreations. p. 164.
CHAP. VII. Containing some reasons of specifying sins in the foregoing
catalogues. p. 168. I. Reason. That thou may examine thy heart and life by
them. p. 169. II. Reason. Of the quotations in the margent, that ^^e may be
fully convinced of the infallibility of the execution of Gods decree. p. 170.
III. Reason. Of the persuasion that you may see there is no impossibility of
the thing persuaded unto, viz. Reformation. p. 171. IV. Reason. Of persuasion,
because impenitency is a cursed state, and that which all thy sins could do if
repented of and forsaken, that impenitency will do it will damn thee. page
172. V. A considerate sinners reasoning resolution to amend. p. 173, 174.
CHAP. VIII. Containing the main swasion and motion for a final resolution and
speedy practical repentance and reformation. p. 176. CHAP. IX. Of some
considerations about sin which may move a considerate person to loathe and leave
his own sins resolutely without dispute. p. 190. Sect. I. Consideration. p.
192. II. Consideration. p. 195. III. Consideration. p. 199. IV. Consideration.
p. 201. V. Consideration. p. 208. VI. Consideration. p. 210. VII.
Consideration. p. 212. VIII. Consideration. p. 221. IX. Consideration. p. 226.
X. Consideration. p. 229.
CHAP. X. Of some more moving thoughts which may help, and draw a poor sinner
to speedy resolution without further delay. p. 236. I. Thought. p. 238. II.
Thought. p. 243. III. Thought. p. 246. IV. Thought. p. 250. V. Thought. p. 252.
VI. Thought. p. 254. VII. Thought. p. 255.
CHAP. XI. Of Temptations, with their Answers. I. Temptation. p. 256. II.
Temptation. p. 260. III. Temptation. p. 263. IV. Temptation. p. 269.
CHAP. XII. Of Queries. I. Querie. p. 273. II. Querie. p. 274. III. Querie.
ibid. IV. Querie. p. 275. V. Querie. ibid. VI. Querie. p. 276. VII. Querie.
ibid. VIII. Querie. p. 277.
CHAP. XIII. Of Directions. I. Direction. page 280. II. Direction. p. 281. III.
Direction. p. 282. IV. Direction. p. 284. V. Direction. p. 286. VI. Direction.
p. 288. VII. Direction. p. 289. VIII. Direction. p. 291. IX. Direction. p. 293.
X. Direction. p. 294.
CHAP. XIV. Of Motives. I. Motive. p. 297. II. Motive. p. 299. III. Motive. p.
300. IV. Motive. p. 301. V. Motive. p. 302. VI. Motive. p. 304.

AN EARNEST SWASION TO A Speedy and Practical Reformation, Carefully to be
heeded, and effectually performed by every particular person, as indispensably
necessary to his Salvation.
CHAP. I.
Persuading every Soul to heed his own Salvation, and endeavor it as his
chiefest concernment, and to consider it speedily, seriously, and wisely.

THE INTRODUCTION.
CArest thou O man who art of a choice extraction, S. 1.
endowed with supernatural gifts, made Lord of, and more excellent then any of
this visible Creation; to whom the eternal God has committed Talents of
Reason, Consideration, Will, Affection, and an Immortal Soul; whom God has
designed to sublime employment, and immediate enjoyment of thy Creator, to make
thy full and everlasting happiness which is yet to come; should I doubt thou
carest not whether thou be saved or damned, be for ever miserable, or for ever
happy, when thou go out of this world?

Thou art hastening apace to thy long home, S. 2.
to an unchangeable State; consider shortly thou must die, thy Soul and body
parted asunder, and from this world and present enjoyments within a few days,
(it may be hours) thou must appear in another world, to abide either with God,
Angels and Saints in Heaven, or with Devils and Reprobates, and damned wretches
for ever in Hell; and shall I doubt thou believe not this? or that thou
carest not which of these two so contrary events befall thee, or that it is a
thing indifferent to thee to be saved, or damned, in the other world?

Far be it from thee, S. 3.
precious Soul, to be careless of this thy so great concernment.

I have met with some indeed that have made a mock of sin, S. 4.
and heard of others that have made a jest of Hell, and a scoff of Heaven; but
such are either fools or madmen, besotted, deluded, beguiled, inconsiderate,
desperate wretches; bellowing beasts, not believing men.

But thou (I hope) although a sinner, S. 5.
art not so far gone, as desperately to throw away thy precious Soul at once;
nor yet so proud, so obstinate, or hardened, as to refuse, reject, and despise
these saving Counsels now put into thy hand; that may deliver thee from sin and
misery, and dispose thee for Holiness and happiness, if thou take them up
into thy mind, and considerest them seriously.

A sinner thou art as surely as thy mothers child, S. 6.
thy judgment corruptly blind, thy will perverted, thy affections disordered,
thy whole nature polluted and spoiled; thou have been, (and art thou not so
still to this day?) one that has brought forth an innumerable spawn of Actual
sins, of vile and ugly shapes, in several kinds.

Thou have repeated those acts of sin, S. 7.
(to the Aggravation of thy guilt and shame) thou can not tell how often:
Thou have (it may be) uttered many a vain, unnecessary and false oath, thou
have spoken thou know not how many idle, unsavory, reproachful, revengefull,
passionate, bitter, wanton, unholy, unchristian words with that tongue of
thine; thou have forged and told in jest and earnest many a lie and falsehood,
have thou not?

Thou have (it is likely) conceived and declared much prejudice against the
ways, worship, and servants of God; S. 8.
and carried thy self contemptuously toward all the means and persons that
would reclaim thee.

Have thou not been intemperate in meats, S. 9.
and drinks, clothing, recreations; so as thou can not reckon all thy
excesses this way?

Did thou never wrong any one in name, S. 10.
body, soul, goods, nor requite (to other) evil for evil, and very frequently
evil for good, to the great dishonor of God and Religion, and prejudice of thy
neighbor, and thy own poor soul?

Have thou not been an enticer or tempter of others to sin, S. 11.
who (it may be) are either hardened in those evil ways, or damned already,
for those sins thou wast the occasion of, by thy example, encouragement,
counsel or toleration?

Thou have neglected to pay thy vows and engaged homage to God thy Creator, S.
12.
Redeemer, and Preserver, and that very often.

Thou have (it is probable) come before the Lord, S. 13.
as others, with an unwilling mind, and have offered to him in Sacrifice the
blind, and maimed, and hypocritical heart, cold and discomposed, distracted
prayers, when thou have prayed by thy self or with others.

Thou have, S. 14.
(it may be) hated from the very Heart the strict ways of holiness in soul
and life, and turned from saving admonition as a detestable thing.

Thou have slighted Gods invitation, S. 15.
resisted grace teaching, refused Christ reigning, reproched and scoffed at the
Ministers of Christ earnestly persuading: these things thou have done, and in
all or some of these cursed courses, thou have continued so long, that it is
grown to a custom, and as natural to thee to sin in one kind or other every
day, as to breathe the air, to move, eat, or drink, or sleep, is it not?

And to make up thy measure full of wickedness, S. 16.
all this while thou have abused the wonderful patience, mercy and
long-suffering of the Lord thy God.

But we are sure that the judgment of God is according to truth against you
that commit such things; for that, S. 17.
they which have committed such things should repent and forsake them all, yet
do not, but adding this to all, Romans 2. v. 4, 5, 6.
that by despising the riches of Gods goodness, forbearance and long-suffering;
not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee (not to sin, or continuance
in sin, but) to repentance; but by this thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasu est up unto thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of
the righteous judgment of God, who will render to every one according to his
deeds.

O read and consider well this dreadful place, S. 18.
and see does it belong to thee? art thou such an one as is herein condemned?
bethink thy self what thou have been, and what thou art, what thou have done;
consider thy ways, and the frame and tendency of thy spirit.

It may be thou have been guilty in all these ways of sinning, S. 19.
and if thou were, it is pity thy life, it is pity such a wretch, such a monster
should be nourished: But alas! if thou art in a state of sinning habitually,
though but in any one kind, that were enough to destroy thee for ever, and cut
thee short of happiness: yea although it were (which I am past doubt it is
not,) that thou had not been notoriously guilty of any of these sins which
are the Issues of depraved nature, and natural product of the evil
disposition in thee, and which are necessarily brought forth in the outward man
if not restrained; yet if these be frequently in thy thoughts, if they be
nourished and allowed there, it is all one to him who sees the inwards of the
Soul, and with what company it keeps; the Laws of God reach unto the heart,
Ps. 50.21. Hos. 7.2.
they are spiritual, and Christ rules the inward man as well as the outward:
do thou not know that all thy sins, where and when committed, are upon Record
before the Lord?

But if this make thee not yet know thy self, then know farther, S. 20.
and let this be to thee as it is in it self, and eternal Truth, a decreed Law,
That except thou (whoever thou art, either notoriously bad or seemingly
tolerable to thy self) be converted, reformed, so as to leave off in heart and
life all thy known sins, and lay apart all thy ungodliness, and lead an holy,
sober and righteous life, and that to the end, thou can not be saved.

Before Conversion comes, S. 21.
before that gracious method of Regenerating souls pass upon thee, and thou be
reformed and brought out of the state of sinful nature into a state of holy
reformation, there is no hope for thee of thy salvation: Nature and sin note
thee a child of Adam; Grace and conversion declare thee a child of God, and an
heir of a glorious Eternity.

Well then, S. 22.
thou art either unreformed in whole, or reformed but in part; to the one all
is wanting, to the other something is yet lacking to make thee a sound
Christian; each of you is the person to whom I address my present swasion.

And I hope thou (so bad as thou have been hitherto) art not past all cure
remediless; S. 23.
and I am sure thou art not, unless thou still refuse, and hardness has taken
up thy heart as a judgment from God, I doubt not but, through the grace of God,
in the use of these spiritual means, thou may of a vile Barbarian become a
sound Christian, of a child of wrath an heir of glory, of a foul sinner a fair
Saint, if thou be not resolved against thine own happy reformation.

Poor soul, S. 24.
thou have so much to begin withal toward thy saving change, thou have
Reason, will thou let it but work, and will thou yield to reason?

Thou have Faith, S. 25.
some kind of faith; will thou believe what God by his Word has revealed of
his mind concerning thee and every man in thy case, and consent to Truth?

Thou have Consideration; S. 26.
will thou be serious, and consider wisely for thy self thy own soul, how thou
may become reformed, that thou may become happy? Consider wisely, it is thy
own concernment, it is thy own soul must pay dearly for it, if thou art not
reformed soundly and speedily; it is thy own soul shall reap richly by
conversion, if thou defer not to come in, and give not out until it be
completed.

Thou have now an opportunity put into thy hand, S. 27.
thou art once again called to, and persuaded to be reformed; will thou follow
this Call, and yield ere it be too late? Now again it is offered thee, Christ
is ready, and grace is ready, grace to assist thee, Christ to receive thee, the
Word of God to guide thee, and holy Spirit to convert thee, and I thy hearty
well-wisher to thy excellent soul, do in the Name of Christ earnestly entreat
thee. -- Now it is put to thy choice, whether thou embrace it or no, now is the
acceptable time, the day of grace: To day therefore (O thou that carest for thy
soul) after so long a time, while it is to day; for if night come, if death
come before thy work of conversion be finished, thou must lie down in sorrow,
and possess an eternity of horrid darkness and woeful misery.

Come Man, S. 28.
I think thou have so much Reason, so much Faith, so much Consideration, so
much Experience, as to understand and believe that thy eternal happiness lies
not here below in this terrestrial world, but in Heaven with God above in
glory; and that thou were made for some higher end than to live among visible
creatures, to eat, drink, work, play and sleep; sure thou art persuaded there
are other things to be looked after by one of an immortal principle, than to
gather terrene riches, and to taste bodily and sensual delights and honors in
this present life.

Know excellent Creature, know, S. 29.
believe thy Creator and mine has appointed us for more excellent work, and
most transcendent happiness.

And this I am persuading thee to seek after, S. 30.
and provide for, I have no design with thee or upon thee in this business that
is low or base, but high and noble. I come not thus to thee from any earthly
Prince, to beg or command thy worldly goods, but from the King of glory, to
entreat and command, and beseech thee to part with thy shame and misery, thy
sins, and turn to Christ and holiness, and to beseech thee that thou would
yield to be made gloriously happy; all the harm I mean thee is that thou may
be saved, and this is the best, the very best thing I can wish to thee and my
self also, and all that I would have thee part with is nothing but that which
is worse then nothing, and that is sin: Which all Gods children are glad at the
heart they are rid of, and that they are gotten out of the dominions and
regions of sin, into the Kingdom of Christ and under his rule.

Then that we may reason together to some good purpose, S. 31.
be but plain-hearted and honest in this business, lay aside all prejudice,
make no shifts, no evasions, fear nothing Man if thou meanest to be good and
holy in good earnest, there are no invincible Giants in the Kingdom of
Christianity; put on the resolution of a man and thou will be victorious, mean
but as well to thy soul as I do, and then to be sure thou will be as earnest
with God for to reform thee, and as careful to use the means and take the
opportunity, as I am to persuade thee to it.

Be but as willing to submit to the teaching of grace, S. 32.
and to accept of the proffered help from Christ, and then shall thou quickly
be rid of thy damning sins, and be brought into a holy and saving frame of
spirit and course of life.

I observe (and so may you, S. 33.
) that when Christ had a mind to do good, and show a special favor to any in
distress, (And our dear Lord Christ has still the same mind toward every poor
sinner to this day to do him good,) his first question to such is, Will thou be
made whole? And, John 5.6. Mar. 10.51
what will thou that I should do unto thee? And no sooner the poor sinner can
find in his heart to be willing to be helped and healed, and to seek unto
Christ in good earnest, but immediately Christ says, I will, be thou whole,
Take up and walk, Mat. 8 3.
I will, be thou clean; and the Text says, And immediately his Leprosy was
cleansed.

And likewise take notice, S. 34.
that the cause why a miserable sinner continues unreformed and under the power
of his sins, is because he will not, has no mind to be altered, does not
earnestly desire it. That this is so, you may see Jeremiah 13.27. I have seen
thy abomination, Jer. 13.27.
Woe unto thee, will thou not be made clean, when will it once be? and Ezekiel.
18.31, 32. I have no pleasure (says God) in the death (that is, Ezekiel. 18.31,
32.
damnation) of a sinner, but rather he should turn and live; and that the cause
of men's ruin and destruction is from themselves, rather then they will turn
they will die. Why will ye die? turn you from all your transgressions, why will
ye die? So likewise our Savior Christ in John 5.40. tells us why men lose their
Souls and happiness, Joh. 5.40.
it is, They will not come unto me that they might have Life.

And I observe also when a man is convinced of the necessity of Salvation, S.
35.
and by the consideration of the greatness of his sins, and necessity of
leaving them all, yet the difficulty of conversion and parting with old
friends, (as a sinner thinks his lusts and sins are) he cries out, what must I
do to be saved? Act. 16.30.
as the Jailer did Acts 16.30. Which is the first quere to be made: and when a
sinner comes to this once, to be willing and seriously desirous from his very
Soul to be made whole and clean, and then earnestly to seek out how he may act
that he may be saved, then Christ takes him to cure, and then directs him by
his word, and helps him by his Spirit, first to Reformation here, and then to
Salvation hereafter.

Now precious soul, S. 36.
is it in thy heart to desire, and do seriously ask what thou shall do to be
saved? (If so,) I have it from God to tell thee that thou may be saved, If
thou believe in the Lord Jesus, repent thee, and turn thee from all thy
ungodliness, to serve the living God in Righteousness and true holiness, from
this day to the end of thy life, and submit to Reformation in heart and life,
thou shall be saved.

Will thou submit to Reformation, S. 37.
would thou be made clean, and be effectually turned from all thy sinful
thoughts and practices? O poor sinner art willing?

Then first try thy heart, S. 38.
whether in good earnest thou desire it; can thou go in secret, and pour out
thy soul, and utter thy desires before the Lord, in this or the like prayer,
for this very thing that thou may be reformed? If thou art willing then to be
reformed from thy very soul, thou can speak thy Requests to God, to help thee
through the work, and then thou will be willing to take up advice and
consideration, and yield to the entreaties, and fall upon the practice without
more ado, speedily without delay, if thou can thus pray from thy heart, there
is great hope of thy Reformation.

CHAP. II.
The hopeful sinners Prayer.

O Most glorious, S. 1.
holy, just and gracious Lord God, thou who art the knower of hearts, and lover
of souls, thou have said, Ezekiel. 33.11. 1 Timothy 2.4. 1 Pet. 3.9. Mat. 9.13.
Thou have no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather he should turn and
live, and art not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; and to this end thou have sent thy dear Son Jesus Christ into the
world, to call sinners to repentance; who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem poor sinners from all their iniquities, and purify his redeemed ones: 2
Cor. 5.20. 1 Timothy 4.20. 2 Timothy 4.12.
thou have likewise given thy Spirit to sanctify our hearts, and with thy Word
to convince and convert such as shall be saved; and that poor sinners might be
converted and turned from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God,
that they might receive the forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among the
sanctified. Thou have appointed thy Ministers to call sinners, to invite,
beseech, exhort, reprove, admonish, guide and direct poor sinners, to reclaim
them, to bring them off from their evil ways, and to show them the way of
Heaven; and have promised eternal life to those that obey thee to their lives
end, and have threatened eternal punishment to every impenitent unconverted
sinner.

O Lord, S. 2.
how wonderful art thou in mercy and goodness! I am one of those vile and
miserable sinners whom thou have often called to amendment, to whom thou have
sent thy servants, importunately beseeching, that I would cease to do evil,
and learn to do well, that I would but turn and live; but hitherto I have not
fully yielded, I have (dear Lord) too too often and too too long put thee off
with excuses; and when I could say nothing for my continuance in sin, nor
against holy living, and speedy reformation, yet then have I delayed my
necessary duty with a promise of reformation, delaying from day to day that
which I have promised, and continually going on in that which I should
renounce, even to this day, O Lord, thou know it.

Many opportunities have been given unto me, much grace offered, S. 3.
many Sabbaths, many Sermons, many Counsels, many a check of Conscience, many
rebukes from the Lord in sad dispensations, and all to reclaim me; and long
have thou waited for my return, that thou might pardon and be gracious: But
alas! alas! I have abused thy long-sufferance, made light of thy invitations,
and all thy sweet and kind persuasions and fatherly corrections. I have heard
thy Messengers speaking to me time after time from the Lord, saying often with
tears in their eyes to me, Regardlesse, hard-hearted Wretch, Oh do not, do not
the abominable things which I hate, O why will thou die? But all in vain; my
obstinate hard heart has said, There is no hope, I will not change nor amend.

Yea, S. 4.
Lord, although thy severe and dreadful threats have come to my ears against
such sins, as I alas! as I my self am guilty of, and there is nothing that
keeps me on this side hell all this while but thy wonderful mercy,
forbearing execution on such an evil doer as I have been; and yet for all this
my foolhardy heart is set upon evil still.

I have heard from thy Word, S. 5. Mat. 18.3. John 3.3.
as it were from Heaven to me by name, that Except I be converted I shall never
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet I have not seriously minded it, but
to this day I have continued to follow lustful desires and unchristian
practices, alas, to this day too long!

But dear Lord, will thou be entreated by me a vile sinner, as I am now, to
move my heart effectually, that I may set upon reformation to purpose? Lord, if
thou will thou can make me clean, holy, just, sober, and a sound convert;
thou have bid me (although a miserable sinner) to ask according to thy will,
and thou have promised to hear and grant.

It is thy will, most holy God, S. 7.
that I should turn and live, and it is the desire and earnest request of my
soul, that I may leave off all my ungodliness, worldly lusts, vanities, and all
my sins: And that I may become a new man, a sincere and holy Christian, Lord
help me, and never leave me; begin and finish my Reformation in heart and life:
make this little book an happy Instrument of mine Amendment. Let the truths
from thy word convince me, let the Arguments persuade me, let the reasons move
me to a speedy practical resolution, let my many sins yet unreformed shame me
and weary me; let thy Threats deter me from sin, let thy promises allure me to
Holiness.

Let thy Grace accompany my Endeavors this way, let the few days I have to
live, S. 8.
and the great work I have yet to do for my soul, drive me to hasten my
Resolution; let not sloth, nor delusions, nor any temptation or secular
Interest whatsoever entice my poor soul from this work of self-Reformation.

I am Resolved to read, 9.
consider and practice; dear Lord, help my Resolutions, and further this happy
work of reformation in my heart and life. Say Lord, for Christ's sake, to my
soul, Go on and prosper. Amen, Amen.

Now if thou can truly from thy heart bewail thy former neglect and
miscarriage, S. 10.
and beg heartily of God to assist thee in this thy so great concernment, then
art thou hopefully prepared, and in a fair way both to receive further
Instruction and Resolution for thy saving Reformation.

And accordingly I shall in the name of God proceed with thee after this method:



To show what is meant in this design by SAVING REFORMATION, that you may
understand your business.

To prove the absolute necessity of such a reformation in order to salvation,
that you may believe it.

To discover those sins which are in every instance in consistent with saving
reformation, which if not forsaken in heart and life, will infallibly bring
destruction to thy soul at last; that when you know them, and the dreadful
consequence of them, you may be induced to repent them, to renounce them all,
without any further delay or hesitancie.

To give you some special Directions about this thing, that it may prove
Effectual, that your labor may not be lost, but through the grace of God
successful.

To urge the duty upon you with undeniable arguments, to move you to be speedy
and practical in Reformation.

And this is done in this first part about Reformation, as it comprehends a
turning from all Evil in heart and life, a ceasing from sin in all its
instances and appearances.

I do in the Second part of Reformation, which consists of an holy Life, 1.
Propose the practicals of saving conversion in all Christian performances, and
right orderly heavenly Conversation.

And show likewise the absolute necessity of such a course of holy living, to
make our reformation complete, and our salvation sure.

Lay down some Directions for the holy ordering of you life, both fot Time and
Duties.

Lastly, I do conclude with earnest motions to perform all the requisits to
thy salvation constantly to the end.

And no man can set himself against, or refuse to yield to all that is here
moved for, nor delay his reformation, but he that has forfeited his reason,
and all his interest in Christ, and has sold himself to wickedness, and
resolves to be miserable in despite of God and good Counsel, and is grown
desperate, and means to cast away his precious soul for ever. But I hope thou
that have read so far as this art not such an one; and therefore I entreat you
would seriously consider what is said to thee in each particular about thy
speedy Reformation.

CHAP. III.
Of Reformation in the notion of it, as it is intended for practice.

REformation (which is the subject I am about to treat of, S. 1.
) is a word not very frequently used in Scripture, but the thing I mean by it
is in many places described. And I choose this term of Reformation, because it
comprehends what I mean to exhort you to, and as it is a Vulgar word best known
to such as I am writing to; and you understand thus much by it, that when a man
has been vicious, vain, worldly, naught, and has left off those wretched
courses, and is become sober, just, serious, humble, charitable and good, now
(say they) he is a reformed man or a changed man, another manner of man then he
was before, he is now reclaimed, a man of an other nature and life; I mean by
it much the same thing as you understand it; but in this latitude I mean no
less by Reformation then a through Change of disposition and life from that
which is bad, displeasing to God, and disadvantageous to thy own precious soul,
to that which is good, and commanded by God, and of necessity to be done by
thee in order to thy salvation.

And if you understand better the meaning of your duty by these expressions, S.
2.
Conversion, Repentance, Regeneration, Renovation, Sanctification, Returning,
then whatever is comprehended under any or all these terms I mean by
Reformation, and so much I aim at by this persuasion to a speedy Reformation.

For the word in its own proper signification is a state unto which either
persons or things disordered and out of course are reduced, S. 3.
as unto their first form or state wherein they should be, either by creation,
or appointment and Institution: now every sin, and Inclination to it is a great
disorder, and holiness is the Rectitude and right frame of soul. Therefore
until I am reformed I am out of order, and out of the way to eternal
happiness, and in a course leading to eternal misery; so that Reformation is a
Reducement of the heart and life of man, every man that means to be saved, to
that state and frame of soul and life as is meet for heaven, such as unto which
God has promised eternal life.

And when I persuade you to think on your sins, S. 4.
and be sad at the heart, grieve and lament that you have been so bad by
inclination an evil practices, and hereupon to leave off all your
transgressions, and turn to God and holy living, then I mean true repentance by
reformation; when I entreat you to change your evil disposition of heart, of
your mind and disordered affections, and evil actings of your life, to live
unto God, to adhere unto him, to serve him in all things, to lead a pure and
holy life, then I mean sound conversion joined with sanctification by
reformation.

And you must grant, S. 5.
That sincere repentance and sound conversion is absolutely necessary to
Salvation; and every one that is come to years must repent and be converted, or
else he cannot, for he shall not, be saved.

CHAP. IV.
Of man's state before Reformation, implying the necessity of amendment.

HAving declared what I intend by Reformation, S. 1.
I shall show you that such a reformation God requires of thee, and every one
that means to be saved, as absolutely necessary to thy salvation: It Is not a
thing indifferent, as though it may or may not go well with thy soul, whether
thou perform it or no; but, in plain terms, be reformed and thou shall surely
be saved, be not reformed and thou shall assuredly be damned; and until
reformation come on thee, thou art no better than a child of wrath, a servant
of sin, and so in a state of enmity against God, and consequently under the
power of Satan, and a subject of his horrid Regiment, and a vessel fitted to
destruction.

The first state of mankind (you believe) was a state of perfection; S. 2.
God made man upright, holy and good, without sin, or any actual disorder or
deformity; and if man had stood to this, and continued in his Primitive
Integrity, there had not needed but adhesion to God to have secured the
eternal happiness on man, there wanted not Reformation, for there yet was no
deformation.

But the unhappy defection that our first Parents made, S. 3.
brought themselves and mankind (unto this day) into a dreadful state of sin
and misery; and being defiled with sin, dishonored, disordered and spoiled, we
are no more to be accounted of but as enemies to God, a company of lost and
miserable wretches, carrying in our very nature the marks of shame and misery;
and until restoring grace comes, we are but (O sad to say!) the children of
wrath, being first enemies to God, God is become a God lothing (but justly
lothing) us in this state (as it is said) Zach. 11.8.
Their soul abhorred me, and my soul lothed them, Romans 3.9* 10.
for there is none righteous (before restoring grace come) no not one; for all
are under sin, the power, guilt, and filth of sin, Ephesians. 2.2, 3.
And by nature the children of wrath.

Now as long as any man is in his natural estate, S. 4.
acting according to the disorder of his soul, following the sinful motions
and lustings of his own depraved heart, he is still under the power of sin, and
curse of the Law, and has nothing to do with God as a Father, nor with heaven
as an inheritance; sin cuts him off from those relations, and continuance in
sin debates him quite from any benefit of Christ's coming in the flesh, only
there is afforded possibillty to be saved, through the Commiseration of God
toward miserable man, and to repair in man what was defaced, and to restore by
Christ what was lost by Adam.

And if thou return in time while grace is offered thee, S. 5.
and Christ is calling thee, if thou leave off thy sins, and become a new man,
if thou submit to reformation, and do repent thee of and forsake all thy
sins, and leadest a new life, walking in the commandments of God constantly
and sincerely, if thou art thoroughly converted in heart and life, thou may be
saved; but otherwise, if thou continuest unregenerate, and abidest impenitent,
and art not converted, and wilt not be reformed, never hope to be saved, but in
terror and trembling of soul expect to enter into that horrid and black
eternity of misery, unavoidable, unrecoverable, when thou art taken by death
(in thy sins) out of this World.

If you are not yet persuaded of this, S. 6.
consult these following Texts impartially, which render what I say (and
therefore I affirm it constantly) undeniable, being the decreed Law of God
about this very thing, and undoubtedly shall be made good.

This truth is that we must acquaint you withal, S. 7.
and this is that I mind you now of from the Lord, Esai. 3.10.11.
Say unto the righteous, it shall go well with them, for they shall eat the
fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall go ill with him, for the
reward of his hand shall be given him. Ezekiel. 3.19.
If thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his
wicked way, he shall die in his Iniquities. Now this is said to thee, who ere
thou art, in thy sinful course, or in any one way which is sinful, and if
thou do not turn from that thy wickedness, thou art a dead man, a lost man;
this will not be repealed, thou must turn or die, slight it not, it is thy
particular caveat as much as any is in the world.

There is another such like place, S. 8.
Ezekiel. 18. v. 20. to the end of the Chapter. The sum is this, Ezekiel. 18.20.
that though God takes no pleasure at all that the wicked should die, but that
he should turn and live, yet the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon
himself, and he that commits Iniquity, and dies in them, for the iniquity that
he has done shall he die; but if the wicked will turn from all his sins that
he has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live. Then the counsel is this, v. 30. Repent and turn
your selve; from all your transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruin,
wherefore turn and live. Can there be any more just and plain dealing then
this? Which is fitternow, that thou should turn from thy wicked ways, or that
God should abrogate this Law of his after all this warning given thee? Consider
this, sinner, and turn, or expect to burn for ever.

The next proof I bring out of the New Testament, S. 9.
which shall not leave the least refuge of hope to any unreformed man, that he
may be saved and not converted. I desire you be serious and consider them well,
and do not turn them slightly over, with an I hope I may be saved for all
this: for certainly as thou art alive thou must be reformed or thou can not
be saved. Will thou believe what Christ has said? Mat. 18.3. Verily I say unto
you, Mat. 18.3.
that except ye be converted, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of Heaven:
Jo. 3.3.
and John 3.3. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
What think you of this? do you believe this in good earnest? can you evade it?
If you think that God of his grace may save you without such a reformation,
then see what Gods saving grace teaches all that may hope to be saved, Tit.
2.11.
Titus 2.11. The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared, teaching,
that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously
and godly in this present world. And when this is done in sincerity, then the
13. verse bids us, Look for that blessed hope of heaven: But until this
Reformation be wrought, a turning from evil, all ungodliness, and living holy,
there is no hope of salvation.

And if you hope Christ will pardon, and he will save thee without all this
ado, consider what he himself has said, that an unreformed man shall not be
saved. And Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the kingdom of heaven, but he (and only he) that does the will of my father
which is in heaven. And it is the will of God thou should reform and become
holy, just and good.

And know further, S. 10.
that Christ gave not himself for us, that we might be saved without passing
the strait gate of Reformation and conversion to heaven, or to bring men per
saltum immediately from their sinful and ungodly practices to heaven without
any more ado; No, see Titus 2.14. Who gave himself for us to redeem us from
all iniquity, and to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works.

See once more, S. 11.
that Reformation, which is a sorrow for, and forsaking of all sinful ways,
and a turning to God and holy living, is absolutely necessary before God will
pardon, much less save any man. Acts, 3.19.
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out. No blotting out of
sins, no pardon without Repentance. Esai. 55.7.
So Let the wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and
let him return to the Lord, (i. e.) by an hearty and practical Reformation; and
then see what follows, and not till then, he will have mercy, he will
abundantly pardon. You may likewise find that 2 Pet. 3.9.
God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; which does infallibly imply, that he that comes not to repentance,
and a reforming repentance too, must perish.

And we find men that are not in a conformity to the will of God in heart and
life, and will not be reformed, S. 12.
nor by any means brought to their Creators will, and do that which is good,
carrying upon them the black mark of desperate wickedness, and a son of
perdition, a reprobate. Psalm. 50.17.
To the wicked God says, what have thou to do with my covenant to mention it,
as though it belongs to thee? for it does not, seeing thou hate to be
reformed, thou hate instruction; until Reformation be wrought, no promise of
salvation to thee, Pro. 24.30, 31.
Because I have called and ye refused, and have set at naught all my counsels,
and would none of my reproof, nor leave off your folly, your wickedness,
therefore shall destruction and anguish come upon you, and you will cry and
call upon me, but I will not then hear you, you shall not find me, but shall be
Recompensed according to your ways. Pro. 29.1.
He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy.

Many more Texts might be brought to confirm the point; S. 13.
for the mind of God touching this very thing is so fully, clearly and
frequently revealed in Scripture, of purpose to deter and drive sinners from
their evil courses and secure presumption, and lest any excuse might be left to
any wicked man, why he does not reform, leave off to do evil, and learn to do
well, seeing there is such a necessity for such a Reformation, if a man means
to be saved.

But I think I have sufficiently proved the duty and necessity of a sound
Reformation; S. 14.
by which you may perceive it is not a trivall or indifferent thing I am
persuading you to, but weighty, and of as much concerment to thee as thou
valuest thy salvation; for as it had been better never to have been, then to be
for ever miserable, so assuredly as thou art a man or woman, thou shall never
attain heaven, nor escape eternal misery when thou die, except thou reform
both in heart and life what is to be reformed while thou live in this present
world.

CHAP. V.
Containing a catalogue of sins which are altogether inconsistent with the
state of saving grace, and do most necessarily infer and procure damnation
to them that are guilty, and will not be reformed.

HAving shown in the foregoing Chapters both the nature and necessity of
reformation, I come next, and now to acquaint thee with some particular sins,
S. 1.
which to practice and continue in is death, and every one, if an actual
sinner in any of these does not speedily repent of and reform; and also if thou
love or likest any of them, though not brought forth into act in the outward
man, yet must be mortified, resisted, subdued, or else there will be no hope
for thee of salvation, being inconsistent with a gracious frame of soul, and
saving Christianity.

Reader, S. 2.
I would not peremptorily charge thee as guilty of any one damning actual sin,
much less of all those, any of which is more then enough to render thy state
miserable and deplorable, but none of them shall actually procure thy
damnation, if thou heartily repent for, leave off, and in time, ere it be too
late, in this thy day of continued grace to thee, do reform form, by
renouncing them all in heart and life, and withal do affectionately embrace,
and actually perform instead of them the contrary virtues, which are opposed to
the sins thou art guilty of.

For when a sinner is brought to the knowledge of his faults, S. 3.
and immediately repents, imploring the grace of God for his sincere amendment,
and withal sets himself against them all, and enters (without delay) upon a
course of holy living, and continues in a watchful observance of his sinful
inclination, and checks the motions, and prevents the acts of sin in every
kind, and withal turns to God, to think and act that which is pleasing to God,
and observes to do his will in every Instance, both for avoiding evil, and
doing good, this man is in a happy estate for the present, and through Gods
grace assisting him in such a course to the end of his life, he shall
undoubtedly be pardoned, and in Christ accepted of, justified, that is,
acquitted of the guilt of his former sins, and saved eternally.

But on the contrary, if thou reform not, but go on still in thy sins, S. 4.
repeating the acts when temptation comes, and settling the habit of an
irregular, inordinate disposition and course of ungodliness, though mixed with
some acts of seeming religion, there remains no sacrifice effectual for such
an one to expiate his sins, or to make an atonement for him; nor men, nor
angels, nor Christ himself can do him any more good, no more then for him who
has renounced Ch is it and Christianity, and has proceeded to commit the
unpardonable sin: but he, such an one who ere he be, must remain hopeless for
ever, either to escape the horrors of hell, much more is he left without hope
of being saved, except he repent and change his course in time.

This being so, does it not concern thee, S. 5.
and every soul that has any regard to his own eternal well-being, to look
into his heart and life, that he may know his danger? and so if he find himself
charged with any sin, which to live in is death by the decreed Law of God, thou
may forthwith renounce it and all, and turn from it, and all that are a kin
to it, that so thy precious soul may escape the severe stroke which is falling
on such a sinner.

Come then along (considerate soul, S. 6.
) and take a veiw of those sins and dispositions of heart that carry with them
the black characters of death, condemned to the pit of Hell, by an unalterable
decree; and every one that is guilty of them all, or any of them, and does not
repent, and forsake them utterly, is the person that must expect to be
condemned for living in those sins; because he does not reform by a speedy,
hearty, and voluntary change of life: pray God thou be not he that resolves to
continue in them. If thou be guilty,

Consider, S. 7.
I beseech thee, thy case and state, and examine well thy self, whether these
following sins may be charged upon thee, or which of them belongs to thee;
mark them as you go, and read their doom with trembling, and never give rest
to thy soul, until thou art rid of them by Reformation.

. I. Wilful Ignorance.
S. 8.
if it be, thou art a perishing man in this state, till saving knowledge and
faith come; thou art a child of darkness under the power of Satan, if when
means of knowledge afforded are neglected, when means offered are rejected by
thee: And such is thy state, if so it be, that after so long living with the
means of knowledge, so much hearing of the word of faith, and so much helps
for instruction in the knowledge of God, and ways of Godliness; if it be so I
say; that after all this thou art ignorant of the true God, and know not thy
Savior Christ, and upon what account he is thy Savior, and what he is, and
did to redeem thee; and if thou know not yet what thou art by nature, how
hateful sin is to the Holy God, how sin defiles, and will ruin the soul if
permitted; if thou know not what it cost Jesus Christ to purchase thy pardon
and acceptance with God; If thou understandest not the conditions, on thy part,
to make thee capable of the benefits of Christ's purchase:

If thou art yet ignorant of this, S. 9.
thy State is woeful, for it is in thee wilful; thou have neglected, or refused,
or resisted this knowledge, and thy ignorance (seeing thou have the use of thy
reason, and thy senses,) is thy sin; And because it is about the necessary and
weighty things of thy salvation, and yet supinely neglected, or wilfully
refused, it is now a contracted, superadded guilt; and except thou come out of
this thy ignorance, and labor to know and understand so much of God in Christ,
and the Holy Ghost, (at least as is necessary to thy salvation,) thou can not
be saved. For, if to know the only true God, John 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, be life eternal, as Christ has said, then
not to know him as he is to be known, must needs be death eternal: and
consider well, that the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his
mighty Angels, in flaming fire, 2. These. x. 7, 8, 9.
taking vengeance on them that KNOW NOT God, and that obey not the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ: and mark the dreadful allotment for such ignorant
persons in the 9. verse, Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction,
from the presence of the Lord, Prove. 5.12, 13, 23. Ephesians. 3.18. Hos. 4.6. Esaias
27.11. Psalm. 95.10, 11. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
and the glory of his power. Read also these Scriptures in the margent, if you
would have more proofs of the danger of wilful ignorance: If our Gospel be
hid, it is hid to them that are lost, they are lost who are ignorant of the
contents of the Gospel.

. II. Infidelity.
S. 10.
art thou still an unbeliever? And thou art an unbeliever, if thou
acknowledgest not, nor believe in the only True God, the Father of Christ,
and Creator of the World, as revealed to thee in the Scriptures; if thou
believe not in Jesus Christ, the only Eternal Son of God; If thou confess
him not to be the true Messiah, not acknowledgest him to be HE that was
promised, and in time was sent into the world, born of a virgin, and took
humane nature into his Godhead, and suffered here on earth, death, for the
Redemption of mankind, who were lost by sin, and under the curse and power of
Satan; if thou take him not for thy Savior and Lord; if thou yeildest not up
thy self, thy mind, Will, affections, and actions to be sanctified, and ruled
by him, thou art yet an Infidel.

If thou believe not the Holy Ghost to be God, S. 11.
and proceeding from the Father and the Son; and yet equal with the Father and
the Son, and that the FATHER, SON, and HOLY GHOST, are one only God in
essence, nature, power, dignity, infiniteness, according to the Scriptures,
thou art an Infidel: Nay, if thou believe not the holy Scriptures of the OLD
and NEW TESTAMENT to be of God, given unto us for a full Revelation of the mind
of God concerning our faith, and life; If thou believe not the promises and
threats of the Gospel; If thou believe not reward for the Godly, and
punishment for the wicked; a day of Judgment, where and when all mankind shall
be Judged according to their works done in this present World, in the
Resurrection of all the dead at the last day, when men shall receive the final
sentence, from the mouth of Christ, either for the enjoyment of Heaven, or the
torments of Hell, from that time for ever.

If thou believe not all this, thy state is Infidel, thou art yet an
unbeliever; S. 12.
and if thou continuest so, this must be thy doom, read it and tremble, Mar.
16.16.
He that believes not shall be damned. John 3.36.
He that believes not the Son, (which is Jesus Christ) shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides on him. Rev. 21.8.
The unbelieving shall have their part in the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death.

Consider this, and see if thy case be unbelief, whether it does not concern
thee speedily to reform in this particular, and become a true believer.

. III. Unrighteousness.
S. 13.
I mean one that is unjust in thy dealings with men; do wrong either friend
or foe, in goods, name, or life? Is it thy custom in trafficking with others
to cheat, deceive, defraud, any one? do thou keep back for thy own use that
which is not thine own by consent, or purchase, or gift, from the right owners?
have broken thy promise and covenant made with man, wilfully? have thou stolen
from, or robbed any man of what was his, or another in his keeping? have
received stolen goods, knowingly, and consenting to thieves and robbers? do
usually do to others in any case what in no case thou would have them do
to thee? Then art thou an unrighteous person, in jurious to man, a wronger of
thine own soul, and highly offensive to the Just and Righteous God, who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity; and have sinfully transgressed that
excellent Rule of thy blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has said,
that whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, Luke 6.21. Mat. 7.20.
S. 14.
do ye even so unto them.

Now if thou art guilty of unjust and unrighteous dealing you must repent of it
speedily, and quit it absolutely, away with this evil frame and wicked practice.

Leave off to walk unrighteously, S. 15.
if thou meanest to be reformed and saved; but if thou will not, then take
notice that this remains against thee, Deuteronomy. 25.16. Romans 1.18. 1 Cor. 6.9. S.
16.
All that do unrighteously are anabomination unto the Lordthy God; And then
know that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Now will you dare to do unrighteously any more? or will thou not much rather
reform in time, then undergo thy exclusion of heaven, and loss of thy
happiness to the ruin of thy soul for ever, for thy unrighteous dealing?

Then be persuaded to rid thy hands of unjust gain, S. 17.
and thy heart and mind from all unjust and unrighteous thoughts and
contrivances; that it may be said of thee, such was I indeed, but now I am
reformed, I have left off all my unjust unrighteous dealing, through the grace
of God, convincing me of my sin, warning me and helping me to forsake it. Add
this consideration, to further thee in thy REFORMATION, what will it profit
thee, yea what is any man profited, if he shall gain the whole world by
unrighteousness, Mat. 16.26.
and lose his own soul? alas, what will all thy getting do thee good, when
thou shall pay so dear for it, even the unvaluable loss of thy precious soul
at last?

. IV. Idolatry.
S. 18.
Art thou guilty of that? If thou have worshipped a false God, any of the
Heathen Idols instead of the true God; Have thou worshipped, or prayed to, or
before an image, directing thy service to it, or to God by an image of man's
making? Have thou adored, or worshipped a piece of bread, as though it were
really and materially the very body of Christ? or have thou adored a crucifix,
and prayed unto it? Or attributed any divine power to a piece of gold, silver,
brass, wood, made after the fashion of a cross? Do thou give the honor, and
worship due unto God, to any creature or likeness of any thing? thou then art
guilty, thou art found a gross Idolater.

Nay further, S. 19. Romans 1.21.
if thou in thy fancy do conceive of the eternal invisible GOD, who is a
pure spiritual being, as though he were like unto any thing thou ever saw,
and do worship him under that imaginaty shape, thou wrongest God, and have
set up an Idol in thy imagination, and so art thou an imaginary Idolater,
though thou have no picture before thine eyes: yea further, if thy heart, mind,
will, affections, be laid out upon earthly things, and thou payest more true
love to, and devotest thy self to the pleasures, profits, and honors of this
world; If thou servest the creature more constantly, affectionately and
willingly then the great God, then art thou an Idolater; for what is Idolatry
else but the setting up the creature in the place of God, and to give the
creature the preeminence in our hearts and minds? and what is it to commit
Idolatry, but a serving the creature, and adoreing it Romans 1.25.
more then the Creator, who is blessed for ever? And therefore the covetous
worldling is branded with this abominable title of Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5.
For this ye know, that no covetous man, who is an IDOLATER, has any
inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God.

Now it mightily concerns thee to examine thy self speedily and narrowly, S. 20.
whether thou art guilty of Idolatry any of the forementioned ways; whether
thou worshippest an Idol for thy God, or the true God by an Idol; whether thou
servest and prayest to the eternal Spirit, framing to thy self any likeness of
God in thy imagination or fancy.

Whether thou servest the world, or any thing in the world, with thy dearest
affections and desires, delighting in them, and seeking more them then God: If
so, then art thou deeply tainted with this foul sin of Idolatry. Therefore now
(dear soul) be advised, if thou find thy self guilty, though but in the
least, to repent and reform, rid thy self of this damning sin, which God does
hate, and will not tolerate in any one but such as those are determined for
hell; for all Idolaters are abominable to God, 1 Pet. 4.3.
and God would have his children keep themselves from IDOLS, from the sight,
and from the service of Idols; John 5.21.
My little children keep your selves from Idols. And now if you will not come
off from all Idolatry, then see what will befall you, you shall be shut out of
heaven, and shall be shut up in hell, 1 Cor. 6.9. Rev. 22.15.
Idolaters shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

Without are Sorcerers and Idolaters, which shall never be admitted into the
kingdom of heaven.

Sorcerers and Idolaters shall have their part in the Lake that burns with
fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. Phil. 3.19.
which is the second death.

Now judge thee, friend, whether it does not nearly concern thee to try thy self
whether guilty, and then speedily to reform, and let fall all thine Idols, and
serve the living God in spirit, sincerity and truth, and believe in him, and
love him with all thy heart, mind, and strength of soul.

. V. Adultery, Fornication, Effeminateness, Buggery, Beastiality.
S. 21.
as the two latter, being abominations so much against nature, but that the
wickedness of some men has been so great, as to abuse themselves with their
own sex, and abominably defiled themselves with beasts; so luxurious have been
their lusts, like that of Sodom, and it is to be feared some to this very day are
given to such abominations, and have been found out, and put to death for such
cursed crimes, by men, and condemned to the fire of Hell, for their burning
lust this way. Now if thou art guilty of such cursed wickedness, oh how quickly
will the Lord find thee out, and how soon will damnation overtake both soul and
body! Rev. 21.8.
The abominable shall burn in Hell, shall have their portion in the Lake which
burns with fire and brimstone.

But not only such exclude from heaven, but also those other acts of
unchastity, S. 22.
(1.) If thou in a married state have at any time committed folly with any
other, in lying with any other carnally, it is adultery, and thou art an
adulterer or adulteress; yea if it be in thy heart to lust after another, and
desire it, and delightest in the thoughts of carnal fruition of the party
forbidden, them our Savior Christ says this is adultery; whosoever looks on
a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5.28.
has committed adultery with her in his heart. (2.) If thou in a single state
have before marriage known any one carnally, This is FORNICATION.

(3.) Under the notion of EFFEMINACIE, S. 23.
you are to judge your selves guilty of that when you give your self to
venerious, lascivious thoughts, loose words, embracements, gestures, attires
that are alluring, and enticing to wantonness and bodily uncleanness, when you
are contriving with delectation to satisfy those inordinate fleshly lusts, and
attempt ways to accomplish that fleshly design, such an one that does so is to
be accounted an unchaste person, and EFFEMINATE.

Now examine thy self whether any of these sins be thy sin; S. 24.
art thou guilty of any of these, and will thou not be humbled at the heart for
it, that thou have been so naught, so wicked, and by and by cast off far from
thee all such thy thoughts, desires and practices henceforth for ever? all
these works of the fleshly appetite abandon speedily, and keep thee chaste.
Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication and all uncleanness let it not be once named among you, much less
practiced by any of you.

But if thou have been so unhappy as to have fallen into any of these sins, S.
25.
alas, it is too much if thou have been faulty but once, take heed, continue
not in it, under pain of the loss of HEAVEN, and punishment of HELL; for if
but once, yet thou art an adulterer or fornicator, and without repentance, and
that to a reformation, howcanst thou hope to escape this sentence? for the
truth of God speaks it; For this you know, Ephesians. 5.5.
that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance in the kingdom
of God: Nor fornicator, nor adulterer, 1 Cor. 6.9.
nor Effeminate nor abusers of themselves with mankind, shall inherit the
kingdom of God. But their portion lies deep in hell; Rev. 21.8.
Whoremongers, and the Abominable, shall have their part in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. Gal. 5.19.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, ADULTERY,
FORNICATION, UNCLEANNESS, LASCIVIOUSNESS, etc. of which I tell you, that they
which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

I persuade thee then that thou would strictly examine thy life and heart,
S. 26.
and try if thou have been guilty any of these ways, as that the terms of
adulterer, or fornitator, or effeminate, belong to thee, either in heart, or
deliberate consent, or practice.

Then do I earnestly entreat thee, as thou hopest for pardon from God, S. 27.
and to see him with comfort hereafter, speedily to betake thy self to an
hearty repentance, reformation, and a sincere amendment; and henceforth keep
thy vessel pure, be chaste in thoughs, words, and refrain consenting to
lustful motions this way, and abhor acting any more so wickedly, (...).
Isidor. Col. 3.5.6.
and either seeing lust not, or lusting look not; but do as Paul exhorts
Christians to: Mortify therefore the members which are upon the earth,
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence: For which
things sake, the wrath of God comes upon the children of disobedience.
Marriage is honorable in all, Heb: 13.4,
and the bed undefiled; but WHOREMONGERS and ADULTERERS God will judge.

. VI. Drunkenness.
S. 28.
and thou art guilty of this sin more ways then one; men think themselves for
the most part then only to be guilty, when they have drunk to that excess as
to wallow in their vomit, and have lost both reason and senses; This indeed is
to forsake the manhood, and to be transformed into a beast and worse, for a
beast is not capable of sinning by excess; but a man sins woefully in so doing,
for he breaks a Law of God, and sobriety, abuses the creature, dishonoreth and
debaseth his own soul, exposes himself to shame and scorn, and gives a foul
invitation to the devil to drive him to many other sins, as swearing, cursing,
whoredom, murder, and the next wickedness is at hand; a fit instrument for
the devils service, but in no wise fit for the service of God, Deu. 31.20, 21.
Pro. 23.21. Esaias 28.1, 3. 1 Cor. 6.10.
nor works of his calling; a grief to his relations, the reproach of Religion,
the shame of mankind. And his doom is dreadful, they shall come to poverty,
woe to the drunkards, they shall be trodden under foot, and drunkards shall not
inherit the kingdom of God.

But will thou say, Obj.
for a man to drink himself into such a condition, is worthy to be deemed
drunken indeed; but there be that keep company, and maintain good fellowship,
and sit by it too, and yet are not so overcome as so to abuse themselves or
others, and is that any fault? I answer, That excess of drinking, Answ.
whether thou art quickly overcome by it, Vinum plus justo sumptum venenum.
Aug. Mal. 24.49.
or whether thou be strong to overcome much drink, or if thou sit long at
it, tippling, and keep company with riotous persons, or forcest or
perswadest others to drink excessively, and delightest to see others through
drink stammering, reeling, fooling, or erring, thou can not defend thy self
from being faulty, thou must leave it off, and reform in these things also, and
have nothing to do with such practices, but avoid them. And that thou may see
I would not go about to abridg thy liberty, nor cross thy appetite as to these
circumstances, Luke 21.34. Romans 13.13.
or beg thy reformation in this, but upon unquestionable grounds from
Scripture, read feriously Esaias 5.11. Woe unto them that rise up early that they
may follow strong drink, that continue until night, till wine inflame them:
And Esaias 5.22. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to
mingle strong drink: And Habb. 2.15, 16. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor
drink, that put thy bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou
may look on their nakedness. Thou art filled with shame for glory; drink thou
also, the cup of the Lords right hand shall be given unto thee, and shameful
spewing shall be on thy glory,

Now by this thou see what thou art to S. 29.
reform about drinking; look therefore what have thou been, and how thou have
been guilty, and repent, and amend speedily, if thou would come to any thing
in Religion that may do thee any good for heaven, and say now you are warned,
and do no more so madly, so foolishly, so wickedly. I charge thee not as
guilty, but if thou have been guilty any of these ways, I charge thee in the
name of God, beware for the future, and repent for thy former exceedings about
drink.

. VII. Gluttony.
Gluttony is an excess about meats, as that is about drinks, S. 30.
and a sin that carries guilt with it too, yet a sin little taken notice of,
though often committed: It Is not eating or drinking that is sinful, No^ cibus
sed appetitus est in vitio.
meats and drinks in themselves make us neither offensive nor acceptable to
God, but yet abstinence is a partner with Virtue, and excess in eating is a
vice in morality and Christianity too, 1 Cor. 8.8.
and therefore not permitted to them whom God will own; we find glottony
condemned and the gluttonous in the number of those wretched ones which are
excluded heaven; eating too much and overmuch charging nature is surfeiting,
and our Savior gives special caution, Luke 21.34. Take heed lest at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness: Luke 21.34.
Now gluttony is immeasurable eating, beyond the bounds of Christian moderation
and temperance in feasts or banquets; and those that frequent (with delight)
feastings and full tables, with studied varieties, are in danger, and
oftentimes feeding without fear are betrayed by their appetite to exceed the
boundaries of temperance. Jud. v. 12. 2 Pet. 2.13. Luke 16.19.
It was one of the rich man's sinful practices, whom we hear to be tormented in
Hell, that he fared sumptuously every day; when one lusts after and purveyeth
for the panch, and studieth and contrives meats for the belly, adding the
advantages of curiosity to tice the taste, to please the bestiall appetite, such
make their belly their God, whose end is destruction, Phil. 3.19.
so says S. Paul, Phil. 3.19. And certain it is that those that study to
pamper the flesh, and spend much cost and time this way, sacrificing to the
draught, may have fat bodies, but to be sure lean souls; they that are so much
for their guts, are but little for their souls; they look little after grace
that care so industriously for their palates and paunch; what an ugly, nasty
Idol does the glutton serve!

And of such as offend this way says the Apostle, S. 31. 1 Cor. 6.13.
Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy both it
and them. Epicures sure are none of those that serve God (as all must) both in
soul and body, and therefore can have no expectation, until they reform, of
being made happy with the delicates of Heaven; they that take delight in, and
are so studious for bodily eatable dainties, or to exceed in ordinary and
common meats, are not innocent of gluttony, but must learn to renounce this sin
of gluttony also. And therefore my request is that you would bethink your self,
and examine your disposition and appetite, and usual practice as to eating,
feasting, banquetings, and the like; and if you have transgressed repent; if
you are liable to be enticed, or inclinable of thy self to exceed in eatings,
put a restraint upon thy appetite, and beware of falling into the sin of
gluttony. Solomon gives this advice, Pro. 23.1, 2, 3.
When thou sit to eat, consider diligently what is before thee, and put a
knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite, that is, if thou be
wise put a restraint upon thy appetite, bridle it, and satisfy it not in its
lustings. And the reason is in the 3. verse, be not desirous of his dainties,
for they are deceitful meat; there is a snare in dainties and varieties, and
many are overtaken when they consider it not. Well then, is gluttony (as is
here described) thy sin? leave it, be reformed in this, and learn temperance,
abstinence and sobriety in thy feedings, or else thou will never be accounted
of for a true convert, but be dealt withal as drunkards shall be, and they
(you know) shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

. VIII. Covetousness.
Covetousness? S. 32.
have thou a craving eager desire of earthly riches and abundance? do use
arts and devices? whether thou gettest what thou so desire, or gettest it
not, yet the coveting is thy sin, and rendereth thee a worldling, thou art a
guilty person. This disposition is more easily discerned in another then a man's
self, men will not be persuaded they are so, though they be so; it is a damning
sin, yet he that is most guilty, will not believe it his sin, or not a sin,
there are so many reserves and excuses for covetous desires, that now, Loving
the world, and heaping up riches, or desirous to do so, are adopted into the
fellowship of good-husbandry, and honest providing for future necessities and
contingencies, which indeed is no better then one of the artifices of Satan to
make men call evil good. And I think I may appeal to the consciences of men,
when they examine themselves, and go about to repent them of their sins,
whether they ever bewail this cursed disposition, but rather account it one of
their perfections, when alas God abhors the covetous, Psalm. 10.3. Col. 3.5. 1
Cor. 6.10, 11. Ephesians. 5.5. Hab. 2.9.
and covetousness is no better then Idolatry in Gods account. And the covetous
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven: not covetous, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God. Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to
his house, that he may build his nest on high, that he may be delivered from
the power of evil.

This sin lies close in the heart, S. 33.
and the symptoms of it are a desire of abundance of these worldly things, a
love to riches, and esteem of them, and a studying, contriving for to gain
them, as things conducing to make up thy happiness, a caring disposition about
the things of this life; see it in that speech of our Savior, illustrated by
the example of a certain rich man, Take heed and beware of covetousness, Luke
12.16. etc.
for a man's life consists not in the abundance of the things which he
possesses: and then you shall find it in the parable following, which
expresses the thoughts of the rich man, v. 17. And he thought within himself,
what shall I do? And he said, this I will do, I will pull down my barns, and
build greater, and there will I lay up my goods: and then mark his repose, I
will say to my soul, thou have goods laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry; here was his account; but then see what Gods account
is of such an one, v. 20. Thou fool, this night shall by soul be required of
thee; then whose shall those things be that thou have provided? Even so is he
that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God; Therefore said
Christ to his disciples, take no thought for these things of this present life,
Luke 21.34.
let not worldly cares possess your souls.

And some think themselves far from this guilt, S. 34.
and as far off from it as the extreme prodigality, and can in their
extravagances boast of this, that they are not covetous, when alas they are
deeply guilty of this sin also. The prodigal mentioned in Luke 15th. he
coveted and desired his fathers substance, Luke 15.12, 13.
and got it up together to spend it on his lusts; he coveted it to spend it,
not to feed the hungry, and relieve the poor, but to feed his lusts. Jam. 4.2.
So we find S. James says, they lust and desire to have, there is their
covetousness; that ye may consume it upon your lusts, this their prodigality:
and indeed it is easy to find many that spend lavishly upon their pleasures, in
gaming and rioting, revelling, clothing and feasting, do exercise covetous
practices, as the Apostle Peter expresses it, calling such cursed children to
feed their lusts, 2 Pet. 2.14.
but the poor or charitable uses, alas, but little do they care for, or give
to such; they are free to themselves, but penurious to others; all too little
they can get to themselves, and the least too much they lay out to the needy.

Now covetous practices are easily seen whereby we may know a covetous heart;
S. 35.
art thou one that do eagerly pursue these earthly abundances? do use wrong
means to get riches? art an usurer, extortioner, unjust in thy dealing? art one
that love the world, and desire a great portion here? and when thou have
gotten what thou desire, do keep it when the necessity of the poor, and the
Church do call for thy bounty and liberality? have thou reaped plentifully,
and yet do thou sow sparingly? Mat. 9.21, 22, 23.
This is that which our Savior says, how hardly shall a rich man be saved? So
that if thou study, contrive, thirst after, with greedy desires, abundance of
the things of this life, and accountest of them as the things to make thee
happy, and love the having and keeping of these earthly riches, Mat. 7.21,
22, 23.
then art thou a covetous person.

And besides the guilt of the sin on thee, S. 36.
there is a filth in covetousness which defiles the man, and makes thee odious
to the bountiful God, and obnoxious to his wrath, and infallibly excludes
every covetous man from the kingdom of God.

Therefore examine thy self, S. 37.
and if thou find thy heart after covetousness, and thy practices be after that
cursed disposition, repent and mortify that worldy lust, and never more enter
on covetous practices, as thou tenderest the favor of God here, and eternal
weal of thy soul hereafter. Covetousness the root of all evil; they that will
be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition; for the love of money is
the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
which while some coveted after they have erred from the faith. Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world, 1 John 2.15, 16.
for he that loves the world, the love of the father is not in him.

. IX. Murder.
S. 38.
have killed or bereaved any man of his natural life? (1.) Art thou a private
man, and have at any time, to satisfy thy malice and revenge, either upon
deliberation or sudden passion killed man, woman or child? then art thou guilty
of this sin, then have thou done that which thou can never repair; thy
repentance must be lasting and deep, or thou must burn in hell for it for ever.
Yea (2.) art thou a soldier, and take up killing weapons with resolution to
slay, and have not commission from thy lawful Sovereign, and a just cause? All
those thou killest are upon thy account as the murderer of them so killed, and
all thou command to be so slain. 2 Samuel 12 9. compared with 2 Samuel 11.14, 15.
(3.) Yet further, have thou commanded, contrived, consented to the death of
any? thou art guilty, thou art a murderer.

(4.) Art thou a magistrate, and give sentence of death, S. 39.
and command execution upon any man, without or against the Law; and causest
the life of a man to be taken away that has not merited condemnation? then art
thou not guiltless of murder, but must be accountable to God, who is the
revenger of innocent blood, upon the heads of those that have shed it
themselves, or caused it to be spilt by others.

(5.) Moreover, S. 40.
if I have been the voluntary occasion of the unnatural and untimely death of
another, either by mixing poison with meats, or drinks or otherwise, though
given by the hand of another, and if it take that cursed effect, I am guilty
actually; if it does not kill outright, I am intentionally guilty of murder.
(6.) If I have provoked or enticed and one to that excess of drinking or
surfeting, so as the man's body is endangered by it, and he thereby has
contracted a killing disease, I am not free of this sin, though the law of man
take no hold on me for it. (7.) Or if I provoke a person to kill or make away
himself, I am accessory to his self-murder. (8.) Furthermore, if I do not when
it is in my power rescue the innocent from violence, or if I suffer any one to
famish or starve, when I might, or have an opportunity to preserve life, I am
no better then a manslayer: yet again, Mat. 5.21, 22.^
our Savior Christ, the best interpreter of the mind of God in this point and
all other commands, tells thee that within the compass of this sin of murder
come the beginnings of this sin in the heart, though it go no further then the
intention, as malice, hatred, causless and inordinate anger, revengefull
desires; and also if it proceed to violent railing, and reproachful language.

(9.) If thou yet suffer thy passion to break out to an assault of another with
blood or wounds, S. 41.
beating and hurting the body of a man, or puts him in fear of his life; any of
these and every of them is a branch of this sin, and renders thee guilty. (10.)
And if thou enter into the lists with thy equal, either challenging thy self,
or answering another challenge, to fight upon what account soever, thou do
thereby hazard thy own, or the others, and sometimes both your lives, and so
you become guilty of self-murder, or killing another; and if thou kill him in
the quarrel (though thou may escape the law of man) yet thou art a murdere,
and many years of deep repentance will not suffice for it; and if thou die in
the duel, thou go to hell without remedy.

And if you think this too severe an exposition of the command, S. 42.
as to include anger and malicious words, read Mat. 5. 21, 22. Thou shall not
kill, and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the judgment: But I say
unto you, whosoever is angry with his Brother without cause shall be in danger
of the judgment, and whosoever shall say Thou fool, shall be in danger of
Hellfire. Where you may see the same judgment is allotted for malicious,
angry, revengfull men, as to actual killing, (that is,) they are to be
accounted guilty of this sin, and judged as murderers.

Now in the Name of God I entreat thee whoever thou art that meanest to the
saved, to examine thy heart, S. 43.
disposition and practice, whether thou art not guilty of some of these things;
and if thou art, condemn thy self for it, and repent heartily, and reform
presently, for if thou live in this sin, thou can never approve thy self
innocent, neither will God acquit thee, except thou repent and leave it.

And that ye may know that anger, S. 44.
malice, revenge, hatred, railing, evil speaking are no small matters, you
shall find that all of them are both forbidden and condemned, and the persons
here guilty in this present life shall (without reformation) be excluded
heaven; Romans 1.29.
see Romans 1.29. wicked men of this kind are under Gods wrath in ver. 18. and
worthy of death, ver. 32. are such as verse 29. are described malicious, full
of envy, murder, debate, malignity, back-biters: and Galatians 5. are found
among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
the which if men do and continue in them, they shall not inherit the
kingdom, are these, hated, variance, wrath, strife, envyings, murders: and in
Romans 12.19. Christians are entreated not to seek revenge, but leave it to God;
Avenge not your selves therefore, but allay your wrath. And in Ephesians. 4. Ephesians.
4.29, 30, 31.
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouths; let all bitterness,
and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you, James
3.14, 15, 16.
with all malice. For all these kinds are earthly, sensual and divelish.

And hence you may perceive what you are to look after, S. 45.
and if you are guilty to repent speedily of every one; for know that murderers
shall have their portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
Rev. 21.8.
which is the second death. A bloodyminded, a bloody-handed, and a
killing-tongued man, shall never to heaven. Take heed therefore if thou be
guilty in any of these lesser matters (which thou think not so severely to
be censured,) yet consider, if they be light and common, they are the more
easily forsaken, and if thou forsake them not, so slight as you make of them,
yet God will account thee disobedient, and lay a punishment as heavy as that of
hell upon thee one day, if thou repent not of them and forsake them in time,
and that very speedily; remember thou art now warned that not only he that
kills, but also he that hates his brother, (that is, any man) is a murderer,
and no murderer has eternal life: 1 John 3.25.
mark that well.

X. False and vain swearing.
S. 46.
and sworn to confirm a lie? then thou art a perjured person: have thou broken
a lawful vow, and nor performed thy promise, having bound thy self by oath?
have thou rashly sworn to do a thing which is not in thy power, or
presumptuously engaged thy self by oath in a thing unlawful? do solemnly
swear by the name of the glorious God in a trifle, or for any lower end then to
put an end to all strife, or for the determining of some weighty matter, which
without thy oath could not be ended? examine what oath thou have taken, before
whom, in what causes, to what end, and with what solemnity, and accordingly
shall thou know whether thou have sinned by solemn swearing; for an oath is a
sacred thing, and he that swears must swear by the name of God, in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness; but he that swears deceitfully or falsely, Jer.
4^.2.
or to maintain an unjust cause, or to do evil, or to be constant to conceal
or uphold the designs of wicked men in their wicked purposes; or that swears
inconsiderately, Hos. 10.4.
not knowing what an oath is, nor to what end, such an one is guilty of false
swearing, that is, every one that does so has sinned either in the manner, or
matter, or end of an oath, and is to repent for it heartily, and confess his
fault, and to sin no more in swearing. And indeed every true Christian (though
he be not absolutely against taking a lawful oath to a right end, for the
determining of a weighty controversy, which nothing but his oath can put an
end to,) yet one that truly fears God does fear to take an oath, Eccle. 9.2.
and shrinkes to lay his hand on the Bible, and trembles to take the name of
the glorious God into his mouth, knowing well the Lord will not hold him
guiltless that takes his name in vain; Exo. 20.7.
how much more dreadful is the severity of God against false swearers and
perjured persons? read Zachariah 5.3, 4. Zech: 5.3, 4.
This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole earth, for every
one that swears shall be cut off: and this curse shall enter into the house
of him that swears falsely by my name, Ezekiel. 21.23.
etc. and Malachi 3.5. I will come near to you in judgment, and I will be a
swift witness against the sorcerers, and against FALSE SWEARERS. He that calls
God to witness in his vanity, falsehood and deceit, God will witness against
him, and judge him for it, and cast such out of his sight; and none shall pray
for false swearers, Jer. 23.10. with verse 15, 16. Jer. 23.10, 15, 16.
But besides this of solemn swearing, by which men become guilty of
dishonouring Gods name, and foul perjury, and breach of faith, there are too
many (and it may be thou art one of them,) that are given to vain swearing, and
oaths are become customary and a bravery; and ungodly wretches they are also
that use to swear in their common talk; and to do so, is as great an evidence
of base irreligiousness and a profane heart as possibly can be discovered; it is
to speak like a fool without reason, without pleasure, without honor: such a
custom of vain swearing renders a man detestable to God and all good men, and
all good men are offended at thee, and ashamed of thee, and all godly persons
pity thee and grieve for thee; considering that quickly such an Atheistical,
stupid, irreligious fool must be in the flames of insupportable, yet
everlasting torments for his swearing.

And if thou think this will be too great a severity for sudden eruptions of
passions, S. 47.
and inconsiderateness, and petty oaths, and swearing by things that are not
God, and without any malicious design, then know, that though thou make as
light of the guilt as of thy swearing, yet by it God is dishonored, Christ's
Law against swearing at all is violated as often as thou swearest; and if you
think it is no great matter to swear, yet consider it is not a small offense to
rebel against the Lord Jesus, and so easily and customarily to cross his will
and violate his Law. And surely if for idle words we must be accountable at the
day of judgment, as it is evident, Mat. 12.36, 37.
how much more shall the idle swearer be censured in that day?

It may be thou in thy customary swearing do not always swear by the
greatest, S. 48.
thou do not use the name of GOD, LORD, CHRIST JESUS, nor HOLY GHOST; it may
be thy oaths are not, by his wounds, blood, cross, passion, or the like
invented oaths of wretched and ungodly persons; yet it is guilt enough to render
thee for ever miserable, without the mercy of God upon thy sincere repentance
to pardon it. If thou usest to swear at all by any thing, any creature, or any
name of a thing real or fained, as such inventions men have sometimes, or by
heaven, earth, sun, moon, stars, trees, herbs, stones, beasts, men, the names
of men, body, or the members of the body, as by the head, hand, foot or the
like, or by my soul or life, or faculties of the soul, judgment, will,
affections, or by any of the graces of God which he vouchsafes to man, as by
my faith, or my charity, or by my hope, by my conscience; all which when used
in the form of an oath, and in common discourse are utterly forbidden by our
Savior, in his Sermon 35, 36, 37.
Mat. 5.33, 34. Ye have heard, that thou shall not forswear thy self; but I say
unto you (also,) swear not at all, neither by the heaven, nor the earth,
neither by Terusalem, neither shall thou swear by thy head: James 5.12.
And S. James gives the same prohibition from our Lord Christ; Above all
things, my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven nor earth, neither by any
other oath, but let your communication be yea, yea: nay, nay. That is, either
affirmative or ne gative, I or no, without any oath, for whatsoever is more
then this comes from evil, 12. ult.
in the later end of the 12. verse, and let your Yea be Yea; let it be truth
which you affirm, lest you fall into condemnation.

Now upon this account I beseech thee, S. 49.
(as thou art chary of thine own soul) if thou art any way addicted to
swearing, either by great or little, by God or his creatures, or any other
oath, that speedily thou repent for thy sin committed this way already, and
reform immediately, or else thou will abide in a deadly state, and under the
guilt and curse of swearing falsely and vainly: Remember thou art minded of
this, do not slight the admonition, lest you fall under the condemnation of
hell.

. XI. Lying.
If thou have been a liar, an inventer of a falsehood, S. 50.
and uttered with thy tongue words contrary to the truth, with an intention to
deceive others, or to please others by thy lying; if of fear, or for favor, or
gain, thou have spoken that which thy Conscience tells thee is not the truth, or
have divulged that for truth which thou have received, and yet know it to be
false, and not so in it self what you endeavor to persuade another to believe,
then art thou guilty of lying. S. 51.
If thou seem to others what thou art not, either in word or deed, then art
thou a dissembling liar; and if thou would seem religious outwardly, and yet
in heart thou love and likest any sin, or dislikest the holy righteous ways
of God, then art thou an hypocritical liar; if thou have born false witness in
any cause, though never so trivial, or for whatsoever advantage to thy self or
any secular or religious interest, yet it is an heinous sin, and thy lie brings
more dishonor to God and Religion, Romans 3.8.
and damage to thy own soul, than any advantage can amount to, by thy lie.

If we mean to be the children of God, S. 52.
we must not do evil, nor make a lie though we think good may come of it; yea,
all liars are said to be the children of the Devil, Who is a liar from the
beginning, and the father of lies. Joh. 8.44.
And that you may understand the odiousness of this sin, as no wise consistent
with saving grace in the soul, nor with true holiness. The Apostle Paul, in his
exhortation to Holiness, wishes the Ephesians (if they mean to be truly holy)
to put away lying, Ephesians. 4.25. Col. 3.9.
and commands every one to speak truth, and nothing but the truth, one to the
other, and one of the other.

And to show the perniciousness of lying, David, S. 53.
when he thinks of reforming or constituting a religious family, He that
works deceit (says he) shall not dwell within my house, Ps. 101.7. Psalm.
119.163.
he that tells lies shall not stand in my sight. I hate and abhor lying, but
thy Law do I love.

Lying is most odious, S. 54. Pro. 6.16, 17, 19.
abominable, and contrary to the God of Truth: These things does the Lord hate,
a proud look, a lying tongue, and a false witness that speaks lies; Pro. 12.32
for-lying lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly are
his delight. And the son of Syrach tells it, that though a thief be a vile
person, yet, says he, a thief is better than a man that is accustomed to lie,
Ecclus. 20.25.
and they both shall have destruction to heritage.

Therefore if thou that read this, S. 55.
have been guilty of lying, repent heartily for thy sin; and if thou art apt to
it, and usest it, amend speedily, put away lying far from thee, or thou will be
put away as far from God as hell from heaven. Be advised in time, and amend
this great fault; never make nor love a lie, unless thou resolvest to be shut
out of heaven, and shut up in hell. See what Truth says in this point, Rev.
21.27.
There shall in no wise enter into it, (i. e. Heaven) any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie. Rev. 22.15.
For without are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
Whosoever LOVES and MAKES A LIE.

And to make short work concerning all liars, that they shall be shut up in
hell, S. 56.
and all liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 20 8.
which is the second death.

Is it not much better to leave thy lying here, while thou art warned now, than
to lie down in hell for evermore?

. XII. Theft.
There are many more guilty of theft than will acknowledge it, S. 57.
yet there is no thief, great or small, rich or poor, but must pay dearly for
it one day, if he repent not to a forsaking this sin, and except he henceforth
observe that of St. Paul, Let him that stole, Lev. 19.13 Ephesians. 4.28.
steal no more.

It may be thou have been meddling with that belongs not to thee, more or less,
he that has stolen (though but to a small value) is a thief, the sin is
committed though not discovered: secret stealth is thievery, and violent taking
away that which is another goods, is sinful Robbery; which some thieves call
Plunder, and think the name of Enemy makes their robbery tolerable. If thou
art, or have been a soldier in thine own Nation, and have been in such
robberies, repent for it, and if thou art able, make restitution of things so
gotten. If thou art, or have been a son or a servant, Pro. 28.24
and have filcht from or cheated thy Parents or Master of any thing, either in
thy custody committed to thy charge, or taken it to thy self, or conveyed it to
others; then repent and do so no more; make some satisfaction to the parties
wronged, either with confession of thy fault with a desire of pardon, or
restitution some way or other; ask God forgiveness and promise amendment, and
do no more so wickedly.

Have thou been entrusted with the portions and maintenance of Widows and
Orphans, S. 59. Esaias 10.1, 2, 3. Pro. 22.22
or with the proportions of Charity for to lay out upon the Poor, and have
turned that so received, or any part of it, unto thy own use and property, or
spent it upon thy lusts? thou art an unfaithful Trustee, a robber of the widow
and fatherless, and of the Poor; thy theft is highly criminous, a life's
repentance is very much too short for such a villain, and treble restitution
too little recompense for so great an injury.

Oh if thou that read this be guilty, consider of it and repent in time, or
else thy doom will be severest, and no sin will be forgiven thee, except thou
give again what thou have robbed. Eze. 33.15


Again, S. 60.
have thou cheated any one of his Estate, or any part thereof, by craft and
subtilty, by Diceing and gaming, or the like? then art thou not far from this
transgression; thou art a cheat, and what is that less than a thief, S. 61.
can you tell?

If thou art one that have coveted and taken things set apart and devoted for
the service and worship of God, for the propogation of the Gospel and Religion,
be it house, or lands, or moneys, or increase of lands, by Art or industry, or
what by devotion and piety of men has been bequeathed to the Church for the
maintenance of the Ministry of the Gospel; Mal. 3.8, 9
if thou have bereaved the Church of this, the curse of Achan attends thee;
Jos. 7.11, 12, 20, 21.
and if thou do deprive the Church of its dues, being consecrated to the
service of the true God, the sin of Ananias and Saphira is upon thee; thou art
a sacrilegious thief, Acts 5.1, 2, 3, 4.
thou have robbed God, and have an accursed thing with thee; and if thy outward
Estate prosper with it, it is a very rare thing, but be sure if it be not a
cancker to thy Estate, it will be to thy soul, and one day shall thou pay dear
for thy sacrilege and theft. You are cursed with a curse, Mal. 3.8, 9
for you have robbed me, says the Lord. Now if thou have practiced any of
these things, and art guilty of any of these things either to God or man,
secretly or openly, though man find it not out, yet God knows it, and that is
enough for thy woe.

Therefore I exhort thee to examine thy S. 62.
life, and actions, and also what is with thee which thou have gotten any of
these ways, repent and make restitution, and sin no more this way, lest that
come upon thy body, estate and soul, the curse which thou will never be able to
claw off; Psa. 50.18
and if this, I say, will not be heeded by thee, see what the Truth says
concerning thieves and robbers, and all confederates with them; of which if any
one be good, there is none of them bad, but altogether they that are such shall
not be received into Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.10. Ex. 20.15.
Nor thieves, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of heaven. If thou
have been so wicked as to steal and break the command of God, which says THOU
SHALL NOT STEAL, be now so wise as to repent for it, and if thou can by any
means make satisfaction to those thou have wronged, and for the future be thou
resolved never to steal, or rob, or cheat any more for ever; it is the holy
counsel of St. Paul, Let him that stole steal no more, Ephesians. 4.28,
and that no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, because that
the Lord is the avenger of all such, as I have forewarned and testified, 1
These. 4.6.
1 These. 4.6.

. XIII. Disobedience and Rebellion.
And now because in these later times iniquity does abound, S. 63.
and therefore souls are in great peril of being tainted with every wickedness,
and that both natural and religious ties and obligations are broken, to the
wounding of men's consciences and shipwreck of Faith, and it may be thou may
be one of those that art guilty of the sins of these perilous times, and
amongst others these are specified, 2 Timothy 3.1 to verse 6.
Disobedience to Parents, Truce Breakers, Treason or Rebellion.

Such kind of sinners there are too many, S. 64.
who notwithstanding the command of God, which is that we should honor and
obey our superiors: Ephesians. 6.2.3 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, 17. Ephesians. 6.5. 1 Timothy 6.1
Tit. 2.9, 10
1. Such as are our natural parents from whom we descend. 2. Our superiors by
Gods appointment, as (1.) the King as supreme, or (2.) Governors appointed by
him, for so is the will of God, (3.) and also Masters and Heads of families
must be obeyed by their servants in all lawful, possible and just commands, or
else servants trangress the Gospel rule. (4.) And Ministers, such as have a
power over the people to rule and guide them in the business of their souls,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12. 2 Cor. 5.20. 1 Pet. 4.19.
who are called Pastors, spiritual Guides, and Ambassadors of Christ, and
Ministers of the grace of God, for the good of souls, and to such we must give
obedience in the Lord, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your
selves, Heb. 13.17.
for they watch for your souls.

Now it may be thou have been under all these relations, S. 65.
and yet art under them, and have been a transgressor of the Laws of the Gospel
concerning these several relations, as a child, as a subject, as a servant, or
as under the Gospel Ministry: Examine thy heart and actings, and see wherein
thou have been faulty: And

1. If thou have at any time, S. 66.
or art now, in a state of disobedience to thy natural parents in their lawful
commands; if thou have reviled, reproched, stricken, cursed them, or thy heart
rise up against them in hatred, or contempt, or scorn of them, or if thou
bear not due respect to them; Ex. 21.19. Lev. 20.9. Pro. 20.20 Deuteronomy. 27.17.
Pro. 15.20
if thou have crossed and vexed them by thy looseness, vanity and wickedness to
the grief of their souls and undoing of thy self by thy naughty courses; if
thou have already engaged in any company, course and marriage, or intendest to
do any of these contrary to the counsel and consent of thy natural Parents, who
intend and seek thy good, then I advise thee to repent and leave off to be
disobedient, and learn obedience, and exercise love, reverence, respect, and
hearken to Parental admonitions, and follow their counsel, cease to displease
them; for, assuredly, as long as thou art in a state of disobedience to thy
Parents, thou can not be assured of the favor of God, nor his blessing; nay,
thou art all this while under the displeasure of God, and a rebel to his
commands, and until reformation come, thy Case is sad, read the texts Deuteronomy.
21.18. Romans 1.30. 2 Timothy 3.2. 1 Samuel 2.25.

2. If thou being a subject, a person born or living within the dominions of a
lawful King, S. 67.
whose right it is to Rule under Christ within his dominions over the outward
man by Gods appointment, and art bound in conscience to submit unto him, and
yield obedience in all things lawful according to the will of God, as it is Gods
will thou should; for Magistracy is the ordinance of God: Therefore, let
every Soul be subject unto the higher powers (ordained of God.) Whosoever
therefore resists the power, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves DAMNATION: For he is the Minister of God to thee for good; Therefore
must ye needs be SUBJECT, not only for wrath, but also for CONSCIENCE sake.
And another command is, submit your selves for the Lords sake to the KING AS
SUPREME; or unto Governors, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for
the praise of them that do well; For so is the will of God, that you Love the
brotherhood, v. 17.
Fear God, Honor the King.

Now this being a clear duty, as thou art a Christian to submit to, and obey
the chief Christian Magistrate in all things lawful and honest, and to honor
him and love him: Therefore if thou have at any time resisted his person or
office, or have a rebellious disposition against him, seeking by secret and
treacherous conspiracy to subvert his rule, or mischief the life or safety of
thy Sovereign: If thou have spoken reprochfully of him, or cursed him with thy
mouth, or despised government: If thou have done these things, then art thou to
be accounted of as such who are condemned for presumptious, lewd sinners, and
have this mark on thee, who do boldly speak evil of dignity, Jude v. 8. 2
Pet. 2.10.
and despise dominions, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, ver.
13. And they that RESIST their lawful owned Prince and Sovereign, SHALL
RECEIVE DAMNATION, for so Resisting: If they repent not. Traitors and Rebels
shall not escape the revengefull hand of God, Romans 13.2.
his Justice will find them out; 2 Samuel 20.22.
Zimri that slew his Master had not immunity, nor Sheba that rebelled against
his Sovereign, nor Absolon that rose up against king David, 2 Samuel 18.9, 10.
Number. 16.1.32.
nor Korah and his associates who appeared against Moses their Prince.

Therefore if thou have been guilty of this disobedience and rebellion, Repent
thee speedily; lest thou come to ruin both body and soul.

And if thy sin be aggravated by thy actual fighting against his person and
authority; S. 70.
and in pursuance of thy Malicious design have shed the blood of others, or
hazard thy own life, to accomplish thy rebellious purpose; then have thou added
murder to rebellion: and if thou have violated a sacred oath, and perfidiously
broken a Covenant; then is thy sin yet the greater by perjury; And if thou have
imbrued thy hands in the blood of thy Sovereign, or contrived his death, or
consented to it; then have thou heightened thy guilt to an ABOMINABLE CRIME,
such as nature and nations, and all good men, and true Christians abhor, and
such as the Scripture condemns; and the righteous holy God will one day
punish with, hell, except thou repent speedily, severely, deeply; and unless
this thy repentance be accompanied with many prayers, and many tears, and
great manifestation of thy sorrow for this sin; I cannot think of any way
imaginable, how thou may escape the condemnation and damnation.

Oh then examine thy heart and actings, S. 71.
and see how thou art guilty of this sin of resisting lawful authority, and
repent in time, lest the curse overtake thee, that is, the reward of
disobedience to Magistrates, treason and rebellion.

3. Have thou or art thou a servant under a Master, S. 72.
and have thou disobeyed thy Master in his lawful and possible commands? have
thou been unfaithful to his honest trust? have thou wasted his goods or
wronged his person? have thou betrayed him out of malice, or for reward into
the hand of his enemies? have thou hated thy master, and studied to mischief
him, in life, liberty, goods, children, or reputation? then thou have been a
disobedient servant, a false and wicked person, I exhort thee if guilty to
repent of this also; lest the curse of Judas who betrayed his Master fall upon
thee.

Art thou one that have owned Christianity, S. 73.
for thy profession; and Christ for thy Savior and Lord, and the word of God
for the rule of thy faith and life? and yet do in thy heart and practice,
renounce, despise, and gainsay the ministry of this dispensation? If thou
refuse this subjection and obedience to the faithful dispensers of the Gospel,
the Pastors, and Ministers of Christ, over thee in the Lord, for the good of
thy soul?

If thou hate the Ministers of the word for their works sake, S. 74. 1 Kings
22.8.
if thou continue and despise them, and their ministry; if thou mock or any
wise abuse, vilify, and resist them in their ministry: Luke 10.16. 2 Chronicles.
36.16. 2 Kings 2.23. Deuteronomy. 17.12. Hos. 4.4. Acts 5.39.
if thou make light of their serious exhortations, admonitions, and reproofs,
from the Lord by them, and refusest to conform thy heart and life, thy
judgment and actions, (so far as it concerns thy soul) to the doctrine of
Christ concerning faith in him, and imitation of Him faithfully and truly
preached by the minister of Christ; Then art thou guilty of the sin of
disobedience and rebellion against the Minister of Christ, and in him against
Christ, who has said, he that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. And as
Paul speaks their office and work, Luke 10.16. 2 Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray
you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.

Now examine how thou have carried thy self always to the Gospell-Ministry, S.
75.
that ordinance of God, and toward those pastors set over you in the Lord; and
know if thou art in any of these forementioned Instances guilty, either by
wronging their persons, or slighting or reproching their office in the ministry
of Holy things: then must thou repent, and become a reformed person in this
point also, unless you will venture to bear the wrath of God, and the
punishment for such wickedness; 2 Chr. 36, 15, 16.
see in Chron. The Lord God sent to them by his messengers, because he had
compassion on his people; but they mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose against
the people, till there was no remedy: And thou mourn at the last, when thy
flesh and thy body is consumed; and say, how have I hated instruction, and my
heart despised reproof; and have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, Pro.
5.11, 12, 13.
nor inclined my ear to them that instructed?

Now I have warned thee of these things, S. 76.
because thou live in an Age very sinful, in these kinds of disobedience;
and I have told thee thus much, lest falling among perilous men of these last
and perilous times; thou it may be have been seduced, and art fallen unawares
into this sin of resisting thy Superiors in the Lord; and art one of those
that despisest dominion, 2 Pet. 2. Jud. v. 8.
and speak evil of dignities, and art fallen under the temptation of wicked,
gainsaying, and reproachful men, whose mouths are full of cursing, and hearts
and hands full of violence and malice against the Lords Ordinances, Magistracy
and Ministry: And if thou art yet pure as to these sins; Bless God for it, and
be careful, and pray lest thou fall into this temptation of disobedience to
Parents, lawful Magistracy, Masters, and Ministry; and at last for thy sinful
disobedience fall under the condemnation of Hell, Romans 13.2.
for they that resist the Ordinance of God shall receive to themselves
damnation; therefore look to thy self in time.

. XIV. Pride and Vainglory.
Art thou tainted with Pride and Vainglory? S. 77.
a sin it is, hateful to God, and destructive to souls, a temper no wise
consisting with true Grace in any one, but stands in opposition to Christ and
Holiness, for Pride of life is not of God, Jo. 2.16.
but of the world. Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the
Lord, and he shall not go unpunished: Prove. 16.18. Psalm. 119.21. Esa. 2.11, 12.
Jam. 4.6. Luke 1.51. Mal. 4.1. Prove. 8.13.
The proud are cursed, and the lofty, haughty, proud man (whoere he be) shall
be brought down and made low; for God resists the proud, etc. and will
scatter the proud in the imaginations of their heart, and they shall be as
stubble to the fire of Gods wrath that are proud, for God hates pride in any.
All this is against Pride, and all this is against thee, if thou be proud or
haughty in heart or life; therefore examine now thy self, see if this pride be
in thee, if thou art guilty of pride. Art thou lifted up with a conceit of thy
self, as more excellent then others? and despisest those whom thou undervaluest
to thy self, by thy supposed advantages of birth, Breeding, Beauty, Power,
Place, Parts, Gifts, Riches, Raiment, Gate, Arts, Tongues, Learning, Wisdom,
Policy, etc.

A fond desire and seeking for Fame, S. 78.
Reputation, Applause; if thou proceed to bragging, or boasting of what thou
seem to thy self to be, and would be accounted and esteemed of as such,
and art angry if disappointed of thy expectation, or when contradicted and
reproved, then art thou a proud person, pride has seized on thee.

Do speak great words of vanity, S. 79.
glorying in thy self, and bring thy self to the view, that thou might be
admired for some singular excellency? then art thou a vainglorious person, and
seek praise of men, and pride has exalted it self in thee, and thou art
grievously infected.

Yet further, S. 80.
there is a kind of pride which lies at the bottom of grace and holy duties,
which duties would be acceptable to God, were it not for the pride that does
infect them: Spiritual pride spoils all Spiritual performances, when men
think there is a worth and merit in what they do, (though but their duty.) If a
man be proud of his humility and charity, and that he can pray much, and (as he
thinks) well, and when he looks contemptuously upon those beneath him in gifts
of the Spirit, knowledge, religious discourses, and ability of disputing for or
against the Truth, and thinks himself every way above instruction, and stands
in need of no farther direction from Gods word, but living in his pride as
above ordinances, and conceits himself perfect in all excellencies, free from
infirmities, and any the least spot of sin in thought, word or deed; this is
the height of pride, vain glory and arrogance; and all that have lifed up
themselves thus, Pro. 3.17.
are fallen at once from grace low into the sin of Pride, as the proud Angels
from heavenly excellencies to hellish shame and horror; and so will thou that
art guilty in this kind, except thou repent.

Again, S. 81.
if thou art envious at those above thee, and discontent with thy portion and
talent, because not so much as another, and refusest to do any thing in thy
duties, because thou can not do better then others, and get thee praise to thy
self from others, this is the Pride of thine heart too.

If thou take pride in thy shame, S. 82.
if thou gloryest in thy wickedness, and declarest thy sin with an impudent
forehead, and a profane tongue, and wretched actions; then have thou lost
modesty, and all that is morally good, and art become a damned catiffe, a devil
incarnate.

And farther, S. 83.
if thou scornest admonition and spiritual counsel for thy soul, if thou
slightest the most hearty and serious invitations, directions, exhortations,
and reproofs from Gods word and his Ministers, and think thy self more fit
to teach, then to be taught, more able to give then receive good counsel; then
art thou also a proud person.

I exhort thee therefore in the examination of thy self, S. 84.
to search deep after this sin; for it is a sin so hid from a man's own eyes, that
he himself hardly finds it out; but oftentimes more discernable to another then
thy self; for the expressions of it are many, as boasting words, though
oftentimes gilded with seeming self-denial, and a lofty gate and countenance;
high looks, vain apparel, costly ornaments, undervaluing expressions of others,
censorious scofs and gybing and railing at others, uncivil carriage,
uncourteous behavior, reducing all degrees and qualifications of men to an
equality, allowing no more to those above thee in civil respect then to thy
equals; all these are the expressions of Pride, and some of them under a show
of humility.

When thou art seeking after the Pride of thy heart, S. 85.
do it by the help of humility and prayer, and whatever is Pride in thy heart,
or life, or like unto it, bring it down, repent of it, hate it, forsake it; for
the proud man (had he no other sin,) yet his own sin of pride would keep him
out of Heaven, and throw him into Hell; and take heed when thou do reprove
pride in another, do not do it proudly, considering that so thou may be
guilty again of that thou have condemned in another: Leave off pride, and be
clothed with humility, for God resists the proud, and he gives grace to the
humble: Remember thou art warned to repent for, and speedily to forsake pride
and vainglory.

XV. Schism and Heresy.
Schism and Heresy are near akin, S. 86.
both works of the flesh, the wicked product of depraved nature, forged in an
ill head and a naughty heart; where pride and parts meet in any one, there
Heresy and Schism will not long be strangers; Heresy is the greater, nullum
schisma non sibi aliquam confingit Haeri sin. Hier. Com. in Tit.
an overgrown Schism, and Schism is a less Heresy, growing and tending to it.
He that is guilty of Schism will not long be free of Heresy; a schismatic is
but an heretic concealed, and an heretic is a schismatic revealed.

Heresy is a perverse opinion contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of
Christ, S. 87.
and Schism is a peevish separation from the Communion of the Church of Christ.
The first is against the Truth of the Church, Schisma vinculum pacis dirumpit,
charitatem scilicet. Musc. lib. cap. de schismate. Gal. 5.19.
the other against the Peace and Charity of the Church of God: Both injurious
to Christ, and both destructive to thy own soul, if thou art either Heretic or
Schismatic, and continuest therein, both excluding Heaven, see Galat. 5.19.
Now the works of the flesh are manifest, sedition, (i. e.) The raising or
furthering divisions and disorders in the Church, and Heresies (i. e.) venting
strange opinions, cunningly devised fables, or teaching such for truths as were
thus invented, or yielding to them, 2 Pet. 1.16.
or maintaining of them contrary to the Scriptures, and received professions of
the holy true Catholic Church: They which do such things (says Paul, (...). 2
Pet. 2.2.
) shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and heresies are called damnable, and
bring swift destruction upon the inventors of such evil things, and the
teachers of them, and the followers of them too; the Apostle bids all good
Christians to avoid (as a pest,) all such as make rents and divisions in the
Church. Now I beseech you brethren, Romans 16.17.
mark them that cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye
have heard, and avoid them; for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple,
v. 18.

Now it may be thou that read this art one of parts, S. 88.
and delightest thy self in novel and curious speculations, and have taken
liberty to let thy thoughts and inventions run from the simplicity and
incorrupt truth that is in Christ; framing to thy self and others some other
articles of faith then what the Sciptures assert, and the true Church in all
ages has received; or it may be thou art one that does contradict, gainsay and
oppose the revealed and received Truths concerning God, Jesus Christ and holy
Ghost, or any other foundation Truth; if so, I entreat thee (if pride,
obstinacy or implacable malice against the truth have not possessed thee,) that
you would recant your damnable opinions, and become sober, humble, penitent,
and a lover of that truth which formerly you have opposed; and if thou have
been a leader or seducer of others, and have infected them, then thy sin is the
greater, and thy labor must be to undeceive them if thou can; and if thou
have been a professor of Religion, and have used the form of godliness, the
better to accomplish thy ends, and propagate thy damnable Doctrines, and to
corrupt the judgments of others, then yet the greater is thy sin, and thou
have made seeming holiness a cloak for thy mischievous wickedness; which
Christ will not endure: So likewise for SCHISM, if thou have divided and
separated from the true Catholic Church, and refusest Communion with the
members of the true Church; and out of pride, faction, interest, or conceited
singularity, withdrawest thy self, and drawest others after thee, setting up a
Church against a Church, from which thou have separated thy self: Art thou the
head of such a faction, or the member of such a distinct and opposite body?
then art thou guilty of Schism; thou art a troubler of the Peace and Unity of
the Church of Christ.

And if thou repent not for this wrong done to Christ and his Church, the guilt
of causeless separation, and dividing things which God has put together; for
God would have no schism in his Church, and woe unto them by whom such offenses
come, for by one spirit are we baptized into one body; and Christ's Church which
is this his mystical body is but one, though it has many members, and those
members ought not to oppose one the other, or be independent one on the other,
or divide in a way of uncharitable subserviency and communion one from another;
and all this Christ forbids, lest there should be a schism in the body. Reader,
consider the 12. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, from first to
last.

Therefore be thou persuaded to consider thy principles, S. 89.
as to thy judgment and thy practice, if it be heretical or schismatic,
and if thou be guilty of either, amend with speed, and be reformed unfeignedly,
and remember, the Heirs of Heaven must be servants of Truth, and not the
Innovators and Revealers of Erours and false Doctrines; neither must they be
breakers of the Peace, and Unity, and Harmony of the Church of Christ, which is
one and the same in Faith and Charity, both for things to be believed, and
duties to be performed; and if thou think it but a small matter to be of any
opinion, though never so distant from, or opposite to the foundation-Doctrines,
and Catholic faith, and pure Primitive Church-practises; (so thou live
otherwise soberly, and art of a moral good life,) yet know, that filthy,
unsound, false opinions defile the soul, and make thee guilty of spiritual
wickedness, and renders thee one of a filthy spirit, and therefore detestable
to the holy God, who would have thee keep thy self from all filthiness of the
flesh and of the spirit also. 1 Cor. 7.1.


Yea, S. 90.
for making of parties, and sidings with good Ministers in a way of faction in
the same Church, is that with is utterly forbidden, as a note of a carnal and
unregenerate man of who ere does so; you may see how the Christian Corinthians,
(who had Paul, Apollo and Cephas, that is, Peter) for their teachers, were
accused as carnal because Schismatic, and Schismatical, because they
received the Gospel with respect of persons: Paul, Apollos and Peter, were all
three true Ministers of Christ, gracious and good spiritual Preachers, and
preached the same truths, and had the same end, and all agreed as disciples of
Christ; yet when men would divide into parties, and set up a Paul, an Apollos,
a Cephas, to head each faction, and in a way of distinction, as though the
ordinances received their worth and excellency from man, and not from God; from
the gifts of men, and not from the Spirit of God; or that the Ministers of
Christ should monopolize to every ones self. Now the people are much in fault
this way, when they cry up one in opposition to another, or in a way of party;
and glory in this, I am of such a man's way and Church; but I, says another,
like such a man better, I can walk in such a Communion; and I, says another,
can edify more under such a man. O, says one, he with whom I walk, teaches
very powerful and plainly, and I am for him; I, but says a second, I am for
such an one, for he preaches elegantly and powerfully too, he pleases the ear,
yet searches the heart too; I, but says a third, I am for neither of those,
but such a man he preaches movingly, he is all spiritual and inward, he is not
so strict-laced, not so much for good works and duties; a very Gospel-preacher
indeed, he uses no terrible threats, but does deal by love and promises, with
privileges of believers; he is none of your legal preachers, he does not take
upon him to reprove and rebuke for sin as others do; every body may please
themselves, but for my part, I am neither for that, nor the orher you named,
though they may be useful in their way; but I am for this man I speak of: and
if you would forsake your way, and follow this way, you should quickly see a
difference; come, be of our way, and join with us. And thus men that seem to
themselves wise, are carnal indeed, while they make parties and divisions,
fractions and factions in the Church.

Now if thou be one of these siders and gatherers, S. 91. see 1 Cor. 3.3, 4.
if thou art one that do not labor to preserve the peace of the Church of
Christ, and do not obey the truth without respect of persons, because it is
the doctrine of Christ, 1 Cor. 3.9.
then art thou guilty of this fault here condemned; and you must amend and
reform this fault also, and that without delay; remember you are told of the
sin and danger of Heresy and Schism, take heed of them both: Take with thee
the exhortation of Paul touching this thing, Now I beseech you, brethren, by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10.
that you all speak the same things, that there be no divisions among you, but
that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

. XVI. Witchcraft.
There is no abomination imaginable but the corrupt nature of man is apt to
close withal, S. 92.
even to a familiarity with, and seeking to, the very devils themselves; hence
it is that witchcraft and sorcery become so frequent sins among those that bear
the name of Christians, but yet truly are of the devil, and consederate with
evil spirits, and hold commerce with them: there is much witchcraft and sorcery
exercised now adays, and many pretenders to Conjuration, and Judicial
Astrology, therefore many witches, and many that are bewitched by them; there
are some that pretend by their strength of Fancy, and help of Art, or familiar
spirit, to discover secrets, to determine of future contingencies, to tell of
things lost, and many such tricks (by which the ignorant people are befooled
and cheated;) yet all this shows what men would be at, some would be accounted
Wizards, and (as the vulgar sots call them) cunning-men; and others are so
impious as to seek unto such as an oracle, and in this their practice are no
better then those poor wretches of some parts of the world that worship the
Devil.

Now if thou have made any compact with the devil, S. 93.
or have at any time endeavored or wished a combination or commerce with
familiar spirits, under what likeness soever discovering themselves to thy
senses or fancy, suggest to thee, work in thee, or for thee, thou art a
sorcerer, one that deals with and by the help of the evil spirit, and have a
familiar: And if thou have used spells and Charms, or any art or suggested
device, either for to bewitch any person, place or thing, thou art, or
pretendest to be a witch, thou art faulty; and if thou have invoked the name of
God to thy devilish art and practice, yet art thou not one jot to be esteemed
of the better, or feared the more, or believed at all; but rather the more to
be hated, abhorred and denied.

And if thou that read this have been one that has gone out after such kind
of men or women, S. 94.
or art ready to do it upon any occasion; and have sought or art minded to
seek unto any such who are esteemed either Conjurers, Judicial Astrologers,
Witches, Fortune Tellers, Cunning-men or women, either to know secrets from
them, or to be revenged upon others by help of their witchcraft, or to find
things lost by help (as thou think) of their casting a figure, and would
know things to come (which God has reserved to himself,) and thou believe in
them and their Art, and relyest upon them, 1 Chronicles. 10.13.
then have thou forsaken the Oracles of Gods word, and against them seek
thou (as Saul did) unto witches, and as Pharaoh and Manasses; Lev. 19.26. Deuteronomy.
18.10. Exo. 22.18.
which practice is expressly condemned in them, and all others are forbidden to
use it; Thou shall use no witchcraft, and thou shall not suffer a witch to live
upon the earth.

And never did one religious man or woman in Scripture seek to such, S. 95.
nor any that truly know or fear God, or believe savingly in Christ, will ever
seek unto, require, or procure the help of witches, or any likeunto them, as
Conjurers, or those that pretend to South-saying or Sorcery; and therefore if
thou have been guilty of either the thing, or going to such, repent thee
heartily, break off thy league, cast away all thy abominations, and humble thy
self before the Lord, if peradventure he may pardon thy crime, and restore thy
soul, and reform thy heart, judgment and practice.

For, S. 96.
witchcraft and sorcery are the works of the flesh, and they that are such
shall be excluded Heaven for ever, and sent down into the horrid flames of
endless misery, For the works of the flesh are manifest, as, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, etc. Gal. 5.20.
And they that do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God; And, Rev.
21.8.
all Sorcerers shall have their portion in that lake which burns with fire and
brimstone: which is the second death. And elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11, 12.
there shall not be found among you any one that uses divination, or an
observer of times, (i. e.) (for fortunate or unlucky, good or bad, white or
black, cross or prosperous,) or an inchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a
consulter with familiar spirits, or a wizard, or a necromancer; for all that
do such things are an abomination to the Lord.

. XVII. Hypocrisy.
Hypocrisy is a mere cheat in Religion, a seeming to be religious outwardly,
S. 97. 2 Timothy 3.5.
but inwardly irreligious; a show of godliness without the life, heart and
power of Godliness; a profession without practice, a fair tongue but foul
heart and actions; it is a dissimulation, or hiding of evil by similation or
feigning ones self to be holy, just, good, devout and godly, when he is nothing
so; a representation of what a man should be, Esa. 32.6.
but (God knows) he is not in reality such an one as he would seem to be;
Hypocrisy is a religious lie, a counterfeit golinesse: our Savior Christ sets
forth an Hypocrite (for he knows them well enough) under the likeness of a
painted, whited sepulcher; ye are like (says he) to whited sepulchers, Mat.
23.13, 14, 15. v. 23. v. 28. v. 33.
which indeed appear beautiful outward, but within full of uncleanness; who
appear righteous to men, but within are full of iniquity; and he pronounces a
woe unto them, and a greater damnation, calling them serpents; but for all
their craft they not escape the damnation of Hell.

Now to pray much, S. 98.
to pray often, to profess Religion openly, to discourse of godliness, to
talk of Heaven, to speak against sin, to hear the word of God, to receive the
Sacrament, to profess self-denial, to set apart times for, and to join in,
public or private humiliation, to make scruple of omissions of good duties,
and to be strict in smaller matters, or the like, are not acts of Hypocrisy;
for these things should every religious man perform; but yet he that does all
these may be an Hypocrite while he does them, (i. e.) if he rest in the outward
performance, if his heart does not the same, if his intentions be not really
such as his professions are, if he does these things only to appear to men
Religious, or if he does any of these in pretense, that so he may secretly
bring about worldly ends, that he may deceive others, and betray them into a
good opinion of him, making Religion a cloak to hide his wicked designs and
practices from the cognizance and discovery of men; that so under the pretense
and appearance of Religion he may cheat, defraud, beguile, oppress, and draw
men to his party and defense, in his secular and worldly interests, or
erroneous principles, this man, I say, is an Hypocrite; a damnable impostor,
abominable to God, who judges of every man not by outward appearance only,
but by inward intentions and frame of the heart, in all religious performances;
which only then are well pleasing to God, Psalm. 51.6. Jo. 1.47.
when there is truth and sincerity in the heart, without guile: Now one would
think that no man living that professes faith in Christ, or that believes
truly that God is the discerner of the hearts, thoughts, intentions, designs,
and all the actions, (with all their circumstances,) should be so mysteriously
wicked, profane and Atheistical; this is a wonder indeed, and such as the
charity of the sincere and upright Christian does not easily believe, which
hops and believes other things of professors of religion: yet that there
are, and have been such mountebanks, juglers and dissemblers in the Church, is
beyond doubt, the more the pity, and the greater their damnation; of all
sinners to be sure they shall not escape the damnation of Hell; for Hypocrites
are odious to God, and he best knows them, Mat. 23.33.
and will pay them fully.

And although Hypocrites may for a long time carry it so secretly, S. 99.
having the advantage of the serpents subtilty, and plausible discourse, and
retiredness from vulgar observance, and open abominations; and withal having
to befriend them the wronged charity of the guileless Christians, who dare not
judge rashly, lest they should by accident condemn an innocent person instead
of, or with, the guilty; and the godly man's charity has this property, to
think no evil, 1 Cor. 13.6, 7.
and to hope and believe well, where nothing appears to the contrary; yet
oftentimes it comes to pass, that some time or other, in some thing or other,
there is a discovery made of the Hypocrites Hypocrisy, and his vizor and mask
is plucked off, and his proper complexion apparent; that it may be said of him,
Lo, this is that man that made a show of religion; this is the Hypocrite, that
had only the form of Godliness; this is he by reason of whom Religion has
been evil spoken of; this wretch made the holy institutes to serve his fleshly,
worldly, devilish designs and interests; this Hypocrite must prove a woeful
subject of Gods wrath against Hypocrites in hellfire, prepared for Hypocrites,
Mat. 24.51.
if he repent not of this his sin, and turn from it to godly sincerity, real
religiousness, without partiality, Jam. 3.17.
and without Hypocrisy.

Now my advise to thee is the same of Christ's, take heed and beware of
Hypocrisy, S. 100.
it is as much damning as Atheism; for an Hypocrite is a religious Atheist, one
that in heart and works denies God, whom he professes he knows and serves.
Examine therefore thy self, and observe well thy own heart and life, whether
thou be Hypocritical; I say not (to thee,) thou should judge and censure
another for an Hypocrite, but look unto thy self, and see whether thy self be a
religious dissembler or no.

If thou had rather seem religious then take pains to be religious indeed,
S. 101.
if thy religion lies most in forms and bodily performances, and art zealous
for them, but neglectest the inward worship of the soul, and devotion of the
heart, then art thou guilty of Hypocrisy.

If thou be never so punctual and frequent in the outward duties of religion,
S. 102.
on set times, days and opportunties of public humiliations, fastings, and
hearing the word; and yet for all this thou neglectest thy private and secret
addresses to God in prayer, and other thy duties, then thou art not clean of
Hypocrisy.

But if thou perform all acts of devotion, S. 103.
both private and public, and yet if thou neglect or oppose acts of Charity,
or live in worldliness, oppression, swearing, drunkenness, Psalm. 50.16. to
ult. Esaias 1.11, 12. v. 13, 14, 15, 16. Jer. 7.4, 9, 10. Ezekiel. 33.31.
unrighteous dealing, or any other sin, wittingly and wilfully; then art thou
(for all thy outward show or acts of service) a gross and damnable Hypocrite:
God hates all thy acts of service, (which otherwise he would accept,) because
thy heart and course of life is not suitable to thy Profession, because thou
seem to be devout, but really art vicious; -- Again, if thou resolvest to
keep thy sin, Psalm. 66.16.
and would not be reformed, although thou mighrest, but love and likest thy
sinful practices, though thou do make many prayers and confessions, and
speak never so much against sin in others, yet art thou (for all this) no
better then an Hypocrite.

Moreover, S. 104.
if thou take up a religion, or some form which seems to be religious, for to
gain thereby the favor of men of such a way and form, or some other secular
advantages which are usually gotten by men of such a shape and religious mode,
as the times and persons in worldly power do smile on, and are benevolent to,
then if that religion be false and erroneous, thou art a most profane
Hypocrite; and if it be the true religion, yet if thou becomest seemingly
religious in that way for base low ends, as worldly advantages, or favor of
men, and seem for a while zealous in religious duties, to the end thou may
win the good opinion of the godly, and gain something by it, and so make gain
thy godliness, then art thou a dissembler indeed, a foul Hypocrite.

Furthermore, if thou seem nice, S. 105.
tender and scrupulous, for or against some indifferent circumstances about the
service of God, or humane institutions, and upon that neglectest the main and
substantial duties of religion, and thereupon fallest into grosser sins, as
Schism, violating and breaking the rule of charity, and bond of peace, Mat.
23.23.
to a separation from the divine institutions of God in his Church, hearing,
praying, receiving, under a pretense of scruple about some circumstances; then
art thou an Hypocrite, thou seem tender about lesser and lower matters, but
make no scruple of sins that are sins indeed, nor of neglect of spiritual and
holy performances, which God requires at thy hands.

Finally, S. 106.
If thou art severer and more bitter against others for some lesser failings
and irregularities, Mat. 7. v. 3, 4, 5.
while thou thy self justifiest, or suffer in thy self, thy familiars and
favorites, groster faults, or although but as bad as those you accuse and
condemn in others; and wilt not reform thy self as well as seek (seemingly
zealous) to reclaim others, then art thou an Hypocrite, not because thou
find fault, and art severe against the least sins, but because thou art not
so against all sins and evil practices in thy self too; for if thy soul be
upright, it must be set against all sin, it will not allow of any the least
irregularity in thee, though it could be hid from the eyes of others.

Now having given you some instances by which you may be helped to try and
search your own heart, S. 107.
as to this sin of Hypocrisy, I earnestly beseech thee that read this to
consider seriously thy state, and be very diligent in the search; for
Hypocrisy (though it be damnable,) yet it lies very close, sheltered under
religion, and men do very seldom suspect themselves to be guilty of this foul
sin, while indeed they are foully guilty; and many seemingly religious go to
Hell, not for their religion, but their Hy ocrisie, not for their seeming
religious, but for not being religious.

And that you may reform speedily, S. 108.
if guilty in the least, and become plain-hearted in religion, consider, the
many cautions Christ gives to his, to beware of Hypocrisy, and those many woes
pronounced against Hypocrites; and if there be any torments in Hell severe, it
is for the Hypocrites, they shall have the greater damnation of Hell; and when
the Scripture would express an high degree of torments for the vilest sinners,
it says, they shall have their portion with Hypocrites. Take heed therefore of
this, and remember I have warned thee from the Lord.

XVIII. Apostasy.
If Hypocrisy be not repented of, S. 109.
and thou speedily reformed and changed from thy dissembling, into a sincere,
honest, devout heartiness, in the belief and practice of godiness, in the sight
of God, as well as outward appearance, then it will not be long ere thou turn
Apostate, and become a Bankrupt, as to all true religion and practice of
Godliness, after the will of God; for the Hypocrites very form is quickly blown
away with a breath of temptation, worldly interest, or false doctrine, when the
show of religion will stand an Hypocrite in no stead for worldly advantage, and
a contrary opinion be of more easi attainment then the truth, as it is in
Jesus, according to strict holiness, inward and outward too, then Hypocrisy
will ease and empty it self into Apostasy, for Apostasy is but Hypocrisy
detected and brought forth: The Apostle Paul to Timothy speaks of some that
will fall away from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.12.
and give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrine of devils, and they are such
as speak lies in Hypocrisy, having their consciences seared; first an
Hypocrite, and then a backsliding Apostate.

When religion is not rooted in the heart, S. 110.
and bearts not fruit in the life of a professor, all his flourish is but like
the leaves of a tree in summer, and his religion will fall as they do in
Autumn, and come to dirt or nothing; Mat. 13.21.
it may dure for a time, but because religion is not rooted and well grounded,
it dureth but for a while, Luke 8.13.
for they fall away when temptation comes; for a while they may believe and
make profession, but no longer will they then safely they may without prejudice
to their outward safety, worldly advantage and interest.

Now Apostasy is a cursed alienation of mind and affection from the truth and
practice of godliness as it is in Christ; S. 111.
it is a departure from the truth in judgment, or affection, or conversation, a
leaving off to believe in Christ as thy Savior, and obeying and following
Christ as thy Lord and example: Apostasy is signified by the terms of turning
away from the faith of the Gospel, by falling away from the profession and
practice of godliness, by backsliding and drawing back from a Christians
former love and zeal for it, and diligence in Religious performances after the
rule and manner of the Gospel; Isa. 1.4. Jude v. 19. 1 Timothy 1.19. 2 Timothy 2.18.
Heb. 3.12.
by forsaking and going away backward, by separating from the Gospel, Truth,
Rule and Order; and making shipwreck of Faith and a good conscience, erring
from the Truth, and departing from the Living God.

Apostasy taken any of these ways is a very great sin in whomsoever it be in
the least degree; S. 112.
and if it be not speedily repented of, and thy decaies and lukewarmeness
amended, and thou quickly make haste out of that indifferency as to all (or
no) Religion, halting between God and Baal, quickly will such an one fall into
that state of Apostasy as is irrecoverable, and dreadful is that state (God
knows.) Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, the good word of God, if they fall away, to renew them again to
repentance, seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God, and put him to
an open shame, (i. e.) put the greatest indignity upon Christ and his Gospel,
as though he himself were an Impostor, and his Gospel a lie.

And it is a sad Truth, S. 113.
that there are very many in these last days who are come even to this pass,
even to this state and degree of Apostasy, and of whom there is very little
hope of recovery, but a great deal of fear they will be Eternally damned for
their Apostasy, if God by his Almighty power and miracle of mercy does not
bring them to their right judgment, mind, will and affections again, and so
restore them.

Dreadful is that sentence, God shall send such (as are declining from his
Truth) strong delusions, S. 114. 2 These. 2. v. 10.11, 12.
that they should believe a lie, because they received not the love of the
Truth that they might be saved; they shall be damned, who believe not the
Truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

See how God nauseates and abhors the lukewarm professor in that Laodicean
temper, S. 115.
which was a decaying of zeal and fervor in Religion, and so but a lesser
degree of Apostasy; yet says Christ, I know thy works, that thou have a name,
that thou live, but art dead, and that thou art neither cold nor hot; because
thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth; Rev. 3. v. 1.
cum v. 15, 16, 19. S. 116.
be zealous therefore and repent.

And there is another remakable passage in the second Epistle of Peter, 2 Pet.
2.20, 21.
which sets forth the nature and danger of Apostasy, thus; If after they have
escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, (that is, when a man has embraced once the Truth of the
Gospel, and is in a way of reformation and amendment of Life, according to the
Rule of Faith and Life,) if such a man shall be entangled again and overcome,
(that is, look back and withdraw from Christ's profession and practice of
Religion, and yield to the temptation, to that cursed return to former
infidelity and worldliness, or any kind of vicious living again,) the latter
end of them is worse then the beginning; (that is, their sin is greater, and
their return by Repentance harder,) for it had been better for them not to have
known the way of righteousness, (though this had, been bad and damnable
enough,) then after they have known it to turn from the holy Commandment
delivered unto them: Pro. 14.14. Pro. 1.30, 31.
For the backslider in heart, he that is a fugitive from Wisdoms rules and
godly conversation, shall be filled with his own ways, (i. e.) shall be
requited accordingly; they shall be answered in their own kind, God will turn
away his favor and love from them; for God takes no pleasure in those that
draw back from following after Truth, Righteousness and Holiness.

Well then, S. 117.
be persuaded to look unto thy self in time; art thou one that have made some
profession of Christianity, and some progress in Religion after Christ, and
art engaged in Religious courses, and have tasted some sweetness in the ways
of Godliness, and resolved to frame thy faith and life according to the
Scriptures? Then take heed of falling back, turn not from the right way to any
bypath of error or loose living as long as thou live: Let no body, nor any
thing prevail with thee to Apostatize, or make the least defection from the
love of the Truth of the Gospel, or to remit of thy care, diligence and zeal
after Truth and Holiness to thy dying day.

And if thou have been so unhappy, S. 118.
through thy sloth, easiness and folly, to have been tempted and overcome, as
to yield to any dislike of the Truth and ways of God, or remisness in the
duties of piety, love and zeal in thy heart; or if there be in thee a wavering
indifferency, and thou hangest loose to the Doctrine of Gospel Truths, and
Practicals of Godliness, and art weary of well-doing, as one uneasy and
unwilling in the service of God and pursuit of grace and heaven; if thou have a
mind to forsake the way of the GOSPEL OF CHRIST, to embrace and take up some
other new and strange opinions or course of Religion, either besides or
contrary to that in the SCRIPTURES; or if thou art already turned back, or
fallen from thy first love and Baptismall vow, and art in a state of offnesse
and separation from the Gospel Truths and practices, and fallen into another
hidden Apocryphal mysterious course of Religion, not warranted in its
principles and practicals by the word of God, or opposite to the Scriptures,
then in every of these cases I exhort thee (as thou tenderest thy souls safety
and Gods favor) to repent thee speedily, and endeavor a REFORMATION; get out
quickly of this cursed Apostatizing temper and backsliding disposition,
recover thy decaies in Religion, come out from among them that have erred from
the Truth, lest thou partake of their plagues, and fallest into a final
Apostasy, and find no place for repentance; (which is the case of very many
of the Apostates of these times we live in,) and thou with them must be left to
thy self, until thou come to Julians state, to die blaspheming, and fall
into eternal flames of endless torments, which will be the portion of
Apostatizing hypocrites and hypocritical Apostates. Take this warning, and
repent in time (that is,) speedily.

If this be the case of Apostates, S. 119. Object.
and a man may be in danger, if he engage in the true Religion, either by
Formality, Hypocrisy or Apostasy, is it not safer to be unfixt as to all
Religions, and to make no more ado about any way, but to account of all as
vanity and a needless thing, being as safe as easy to slight and neglect the
Gospel it self, and not account of it, or give it any entertainment, or consent
to it: nor look after salvation by it, nor regard it, or affect it, much less
to be tied to the conditions of it, etc. Seeing the case is so, is it not
better to be of no Religion at all, or of that which is easier and cheaper, and
not dangerous, though a man be but formal in it, or forsake it at pleasure,
and take another?

It Is true indeed, S. 120. Answ.
many seem to be at this pass already, and stand off from the life of
Christianity, and close not with proposals, offers and rules of the Gospel, and
give it but slender entertainment in their hearts and practice; that value
abundantly more their earthly concernments then all the riches of grace in the
Gospel; yet such must know, that besides the loss of the benefits which come to
the soul which obeyes the Gospel, and closes with the offers of Christ and
Salvation upon Gods conditions, I affirm, that besides the loss of having the
privilege of having the Gospel with all its contents, he that neglects,
slights, refuses or despises those invitations to Salvation, (which God sends
to every one unto whom he has sent the Gospel) DOES SIN GRIEVOUSLY against
God, and wrong his own soul. It Is not a light sin to make light of Christ and
Salvation tendered in the Gospel: and although it be a foul fault to fall from
grace and obedience of the Gospel, and damnable to continue in that sin, yet
thy sin is not one jot the less if thou refuse to be a religious Christian. If
thou make light of Salvation, and all those conditions, promises, invitations,
and doctrines, and performances leading to it, it will become a damning sin to
thee, if thou make light of the means of Salvation, or be unfruitful under
them, as you may perceive in the following Sections.

. XIX. Making light of Gospel-mercies, and neglecting them; a great sin, never
to be pardoned without Repentance and Reformation.
The first and greatest evil that crept into this humane world was sin; S. 121.
for by it man became miserable, under bondage, wrath, rule of Satan, and
liable to calamities here, and everlasting torments hereafter; which
undoubtedly must seize all without exception, if a remedy be not granted by the
same God that is offended with sin, and that remedy as sincerely accepted by
man, as it is seriously proffered of God to man.

And the greatest and most miraculous mercy and favor that was ever shown to a
sinful world, S. 122. Romans 5.6, 8. 1 Timothy 1.15. Jo. 3.16.
was Gods sending Christ into the world to save sinners, and the Gospel or
Message Revealing him, and offering him to a soul with most earnest entreaties
and calls of God to every one to accept of him, and with him pardon of sin, and
reconciliation with God and Salvation for their precious souls: And the better
to effect this mercy, and to persuade men to accept of it heartily, cheerfully
and chiefly, Romans 10.15.
he has appointed the Publication of this (as the gladdest tidings to poor
souls) by his Ministers, Esa. 52.7.
whom he has commanded to wait on this business, and as his Ambassadors to
sinners with Articles of peace, 2. Cor. 5.19, 20. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.
reconciliation and salvation; committing this so excellent and heavenly
treasure to Earthen Vessels, that the power and mercy might appear to come from
God; for it is the glory of Gods grace in Christ which we are to discover to a
company of poor souls; to help, under Christ, to the Reformation and Salvation
of such souls as are by the Word and Spirit of the Gospel brought to believe,
to love and follow the Lord Jesus.

Now when any one shall refuse, neglect, despise or make light of this grace of
God in Christ bringing Salvation to thee a poor wretch, S. 123. Tit. 2.11.
which have forfeited all thy interest in happiness, and art utterly undone
without Christ and Salvation:

When thou do slight this high favor and grace of God, S. 124.
this GREAT SALVATION, and those means which bring Christ, and his salvation,
and thy soul together, thou committest a sin of the highest nature, a sin
against the greatest mercy, it is an undervaluings of CHRIST and HEAVEN, it is
all one as if thou should say of God, Christ, and holy Spirit, grace and
salvation, depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, and that we
will not have Christ to reign over us, but reject him and all his benefits, Job
21.14. Luke 19.14.
and refuse to give him any entertainment or hearty acceptance; and is not
this a great sin?

What is it less then the trampling under foot the Son of God, and accounting
the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, S. 125. Heb. 10.27, 28,
v. 29, 30, 31.
as an unholy thing, and doing despite to the spirit of Grace? Is there any one
sin marked with a more terrible character and severity then this? If he that
despised Moses law died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall he be
thought worthy of that despises and slighteth this grace? why, no less then a
certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall
devour; for God has said, Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense; and
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, whose mercy,
love, favor, grace, Christ, Salvation and Gospel is despised and slighted.

Why this making light of Christ and Salvation offered in the Gospel to thee,
S. 126.
for the eternal welfare of thy precious soul, is as much as to say to God and
Christ, You may keep your grace and salvation to your self, I have no such need
of it, I esteem not of grace and salvation so highly, I can be without it, I
will have none of your favors on such terms, I will not part with my present
pleasure, ease, profit and enjoyments, for your rich grace, and glory
hereafter; let me alone with my own matters and concernments; I have other
business to look after, which to me are of greater weight, then the things you
would press upon me, etc. Now can you think that God can take this kind of
dealing from any one well? or do you imagine that God will be pleased with one
that values or sets more by an Ox, or piece of metal, a field, barn, rottering
house, or a moment of fleshly pleasure, then by Christ and salvation?

That men should make all things else of great concernment to them, S. 127.
and make light of Christ and glory, which are ten thousand times ten thousand
times more worth to thee then all things else, put them all together; and yet
to hear of these things but as a tale, which may or may not be true, and to
account of these rich mercies proposed but as a strange thing, or of no value;
or of very little advantage to one; is it imaginable that God should not be
highly displeased with that soul that despises, and slights and neglects that
God sets so much by, and so highly esteems, Hosea 8.
and by which he sets up and declares the honor and excellency of his free
grace to poor sinners? Yes, sure enough, God is so much displeased at such,
that they that despise him shall be lightly esteemed by him; and those that
make light of his invitations to mercy, he is always wroth with till
destruction come full home upon your souls; and those that by excuses put off
Christ and grace, as of a lesser concernment to them, 1 Samuel 2.30.
and pretend secular business and interests as an answer to those sent from God
to invite them to mercy and salvation, Mat. 22. v. 5, 7.
upon the terms of the Gospel to close with Christ, and do actually refuse to
come; but either turn away their ear from hearing the message, or shut up their
heart from receiving of Christ, or take no great heed to li^e according to the
Gospel of Christ, of such God has determined, that they shall never reap the
benefit of grace, Gospel and glory. Read Christ's own words, Luke 14. v. 16.10
25.
For I say unto you, that none of those men which were bidden, shall taste of my
supper, no though it were provided for them, and intended for them; yet because
they made light of the invitation, and used excuses, and undervalued the great
things of their souls to base, worldly, bodily, beggarly things and
employments, therefore is the Lord angry, to this conclusion, SUCH SHALL NEVER
TASTE OF MY SUPPER.

And you may further guess at the sinfulness of this slighting salvation, S.
128.
by that which is said of those who despise the word of grace, and ministry of
this mercy; who so despises the word shall be destroyed; and, Pro. 13.13. Heb.
2.3.
how shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?

The Prophet Esaias makes mention of an intolerable wicked people by this, S. 129.
that they will not hear the Law of the Lord, but say unto the Seers, See not,
and to the prophets, Prophecy not unto us right things, but get you out of the
way, turn aside, cause the holy one to cease before us; Wherefore thus says
the Lord, because ye despise the word, therefore this iniquity shall be to you
as a breach ready to fall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant, as the
breaking of a potters vessel that is broken in pieces, etc. Romans 2.4 v. 5.
So also see the aggravation of such men's sinfulness in that of St. Paul's
correction to the Romans, Despisest thou the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, not considering that the goodness of God leads to repentance?
but after thy hardness, and impenitent heart, treasurest up wrath against the
day of wrath, etc.

And this very slighting of the great things of God which he has provided for
the good of souls, S. 130.
is one of the commonest sins under the Gospel, and one of the most dangerous
that can be named, and yet men make light of it, and scarcely will men be
brought to be sensible of the neglects and slightings they show toward Christ
and salvation, and therefore are seldom brought to repentance for it; and yet
may they not read that place of the Proverbs? Because I have called, and ye
refused, I stretched out my hand, Prove. 1. v. 24. to the end.
and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none
of my reproof: -- and for this, because they refused, and would not take
counsel, but despised, God shall make as light at your calamity when it comes
as they did of his counsel, and will no more hear them in their misery to help
them, then they would hear God when he would offer them means for prevention of
their misery.

Now seeing this making light of Gods gracious offers of Christ and salvation
is a sin so great, S. 131.
so common, so dangerous, so unanswerable, and the dreadful judgment of God so
unavoidable for this neglect of salvation, so freely purchased by Christ, and
so fully offered in the Gospel to thee, be persuaded, (1.) to consider
seriously whether thou art one of those who is guilty of this sin, whom God may
charge with this sin of making light of Christ, and Gospel, and grace, and
salvation; (2.) And if thou art guilty, that forthwith thou would repent, and
henceforth to thy dying day take heed thou never make light of the matters of
thy salvation again any more.

Examine thy self, S. 132.
look into thy soul, consider, whether art thou not he that have had a mean,
low, cheap estimation of Christ and salvation? I mean, whether the things and
business of religion, and about saving thy soul, have not been more neglected
by thee and slighted, and less care, cost and time spent about these then about
earthly, worldy things, that concern but the body and fleshly part; and so it
is, and thou are guilty of this great sin:

1. If thou have an ear to hear, S. 133.
and yet refusest to give a listening ear to the publication of the message (by
the messengers of the Lord,) which reveals Christ and salvation to poor
sinners; but turnest away thine ear from hearing this Gospel preached, as a
thing that deserves no greater heed to be taken of, or of no great concernment
to thee, then do thou undervalue and slight the rich, excellent, and chief
favor of God to thy soul, and sinnest against the mercy of God.

2. If thou have hitherto been careless, S. 134.
negligent or slothful about the great things of salvation, then have thou
made light of it, thou art guilty, and a grievous sinner this way. --

3. If when thou go to hear the precious and sanctifying saving truths of
the Gospel in the ministry of it, S. 135.
and thou heedest not the things that are spoken to thee, nor receivest them
with delight and much affection, but art careless and vainly-minded, drowsy
and dead-hearted, weary and impatient while the Ministers of Christ are
seriously treating of the doctrines of man's salvation, and applying them to thy
soul, and do either dislike or loath the heavenly Manna falling upon thee,
then art thou one that lie under this great guilt.

4. If thou neglectest the improvement of Gospel Truths, S. 136.
by meditation and serious consideration by thy self, or with others, and
refusest to order thy life according to those heavenly directions, then do
thou render thy self a man which indeed has no great mind to, nor belief of
them, but one that regardest little or nothing the things that are spoken unto
thee from the Lord.

5. If thou art one of those who laiest out more of thy time, S. 137.
strength, thoughts, industry, to gain worldly and fleshly pleasures, wealth,
and honors for thy body, then to gain the riches of Christ, grace and heaven,
for thy precious and immortal soul, and seek after earthly things more then
heavenly, then it is evident thou art one that make light of thy salvation;
for thou valuest and esteemest more of the body then the soul, earth then
heaven; thou studiest much more how thou may be rich then holy, to be great
then good, and gloriest rather to be a wanderer in the broad way which leads to
Hell, then to enter in at the strait gate of holiness, and that narrow way of
sincere devotion which leads to immortal life and endless happiness.

And can you think the holy and merciful S. 138.
Jesus can take this well at thy hand? can you imagine you shall be accounted
wise at last in so doing, or that you shall ever have this rich pearl of the
Gospel to make thee rich, that wilt not part with all thy other treasure to
purchase this pearl of grace, so much more worth then all things in the world
else, Mat. 13.14.
as heaven is more worth then earth? Heb. 2.3.
Oh how will thou escape the greatest damnation that neglectest so great
salvation?

Be persuaded then, dear soul, S. 139.
to look into thy self, consider what thy carriage has been toward the
Gospel-invitations, truths, promises, and the entreaties of Christ and grace
brought unto thee for the eternal good of thy poor soul.

And if thou have been faulty in slighting and making light of the mercies and
means of grace, and motions of Gods Spirit, S. 140.
then repent thee heartily and speedily, and for time to come give better heed
to the things of the Gospel; be more industrious about the business of thy
soul, do not, O do not as long as thou live make light of the concernments
of thy salvation; neither do thou henceforth value any earthly, temporary,
bodily advantage, like to this of grace and heaven; rather forsake Father,
Mother, Children, Houses, Mat. 19.28, 29.
and honors, and all that may be named, then forgo Christ, God, and thy
interest in heaven; for, alas! what will it profit a man to gain the whole
world and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26. S. 141.


And at what a cheap rate do men sell their souls and salvation, while they
must pay so dear for a little sloth, fleshly indulgence, an Ox, or a Farm, a
little pleasure, and a little profit, which the men of the world value to a
scorning, deriding, slighting, neglecting the ways of God and true practical
Religion.

O be not thou so foolish, seeing thou have a precious soul to save, S. 142.
and such rich mercies before thee, and such excellent means afforded thee,
such offers made to thee, and such warnings given thee, to attain that
everlasting glory provided for thee by thy blessed redeemer Jesus Christ; if
thou make not light of it, be not so unwise (I pray thee that art wooed,
entreated, beseeched, and that earnestly and seriously) to slight or make light
of that price put into thy hand to get the best wisdom and the best
inheritance.

Remember I have warned thee of this in love, S. 143.
do not thou despise this admonition, lest thy sin prove incurable, and thou
be thereby for ever miserable.

. XX. Unfruitfulness under gracious means.
Our gracious good God, S. 144.
as he has provided great things for us, and laid out rich mercies on us, so
does he require of every one a suitable return of love and obedience; he would
not have any one to slight his favors, nor be idle and unfruitful with the
talent he gives thee, nor disobedient to his positive commands, by neglecting
to answer his will and demands; seeing God commands not things impossible, nor
beyond thy strength, affording thee with his commands his gracious aid, help
and direction; and likewise has instituted such means as are (if improved)
fit to bring forth those effects through the assistance of grace, such as he
will be well pleased with in Christ.

And therefore if thou be idle with, or wanting to the grace of God, S. 145.
and the tallents he affords thee. God is already displeased with thee, and
if thou continue unfruitful he will condemn thee to the portion of Hypocrites,
Mat. 24.51. Mat. 25.30.
and the workers of iniquity; Caest ye the unprofitable servant (that is, he
that hid his talent, and improved it not) into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Now though it were so with thee, S. 146.
that none of these forementioned crimes, those cursed fruits of the flesh,
could be charged upon thee, as actually guilty of them, yet for all this, if
thou remainest fruitless as to those holy performances which are the necessary
effects of the holy Spirit of God in the truly regenerate, thou art so much too
far from the kingdom of God, that thou will never come up to it, nor the
enjoyment of it; thy unfruitfulness will render thee for ever miserable.

It may be this will seem a hard saying and unpleasing, S. 147.
because thou have not considered well how equal and just it is with God to
exclude those from the benefit of the promises that perform not the conditions
of promise; it is equal and right with God to reap where he has sown, and to
require fruit of those trees which he has planted, dressed, manured, nourished
and preserved: art thou not one of those whom the Lord has gathered from the
heathen world, and now (through the mercy of God) art within the pale of his
Church, under the daily influence of most gracious dispensations, watered with
the dews of Heaven, breathed from the Spirit in all Gospel Ordinances?

Have thou not been taught the mind and will of God concerning thy conversation
in this present world? S. 148.
have thou not the best example, even the Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou art
commanded to imitate, 1 John 2.6.
and to walk as he walked? are there not most full commands and most clear
directions to be fruitful, and how to be fruitful in good works and holy
duties?

Are there not promises freely made, S. 149.
great reward richly prepared for all that are fruitful in well-doing, and as
severe threats and menaces of severe punishments for all that are unfruitful,
Esaias. 5.12.3, 4, 5, 6.
negligent and barren of good works? so that it may be truly said of thee as of
the vine in the Lords vineyard, Now judge, I pray you, betwixt me and my
vineyard; what could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done?
wherefore when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth
wild grapes. Therefore now will I lay it wast, it shall be trodden down, it
shall be PRUNED no more, nor dug more, but there shall come up briars and
thorns; I will also command the clouds that they shall rain no more upon it.

Now: S. 150.
surely God does look thou should bring forth fruit suitable to all the Lord
has done to thee in reference to thy fruitfulness, and if thou have not, or
meanest not, to do it in it is season, then must you expect that God will be
angry with thee to a severity, cut thee up by the root, and commit thee to the
fire. You have this determination in several Scriptures from Christ's own mouth
recorded; Mat. 7.19.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the
fire; and in the Parable he says unto the dresser of the vineyard, behold,
Luke 13.7.
these three years I come seeking fruit on this tree, and find none; cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? and Job. 15.2, 8. Every branch in me that
bears not fruit he takes away, John 15.2, 8.
and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth
more fruit: Here in is my Father glorified, (says Christ) that ye bear much
fruit, so shall ye be my disciples.

And sure enough, S. 151.
if it be our indispensable duty to bear fruit to God, it must be our sin to be
barren and fruitless; Omission of what we should do is as much against Gods
will as the commission of what we should forbear; we are to be judged at last,
and sentenced to eternal pain or pleasure, according to our works, good or bad:
2 Cor. 5.10.
God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by patient
continuance in well-doing, eternal life; but unto those that obey not the
truth, indignation and wrath. There is a severity pronounced to the
unfruitful, Romans 2.6. v. 7, 8. Heb. 6.7, 8.
as there is a blessing to the doers of his will: For the earth that drinks
in the rain that comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for him that
dresseth it, receives blessing from God; But that which bears thorns and
briars is rejected, and nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. So it is
with every man accordingly as he does or does not answer the provision, care,
love, guidance and mercy of God, in an holy fruitfulness.

It Is remarkable very much that determination of our Lord Christ at the last
day concerning all men, S. 152.
as to their everlasting condition, he will then judge them, and those that are
sentenced to that horrid eternity of woe and misery, are thus condemned for, not
doing, but neglecting the works of charity, pity and compassion, which was
required of them; they omitted to show charity to the distressed, and therefore
are excluded Heaven, and sent down to hell, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41, 42.
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Why? what have these poor wretches
done, that they must undergo this dreadful punishment? why, in the next words
you shall see that there is no mention made of what evil they had done, but
what good they had omitted, which they might and should have done; For I was an
hungry, and ye gave me no meat; thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye
clothed me not; a stranger, and ye took me not in, etc. that is, you had many
objects of charity before you, which if you had relieved, I would have taken it
as done to me my self; and seeing you have not exercised that good work of
charity, you have merited the condemnation, and have lost your reward; and
seeing you have omitted to do good, I Will omit to give the possession of heaven,
and where will you obtain heaven if not from me? And by this may thou see
it is evil enough to damn thee that thou have omitted to do the will of God,
suitable to the means and opportunities afforded thee to be fruitful and
abundant in the service of God; For he that knows, or may kow Gods will, and
to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin, and he shall be severely
punished with many stripes.

Now do I in the name of Christ most earnestly exhort thee, S. 153.
(seeing it is a matter of such dreadful consequence to remain barren and
unfruitful as to faith, James 4.17. Luke 12.47, 48.
piety, righteousness, charity and sobriety under the Gospel-teachings in the
Church of God,) that thou would no longer continue loitering, lazy, idle and
unfruitful, but henceforth walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing,
which you can never do until you be fruitful in every good work. Col. 1.10.


It may be thou art but a young man, S. 154.
or woman, yet thou have heard often the word of faith, and love, and charity,
and patience, and meekness, humility, and God does expect some fruits of that
word; Have thou exercised these graces, and brought them forth in action? do
thou believe and act according to that word of grace? do the fruits of the
Spirit appear in thy conversation yet? if not, hitherto have thou been
unprofitable, it is all cast away upon thee what God has done to thee, then
have thou received the grace of God in vain.

I advise thee (as young as thou art) to repent thee heartily, S. 155.
and bewail thy former barrenness, and lay thy heart, and set thy self to the
practice of all good duties; be much in prayer, self-denial, and frequent acts
of piety and devotion, and show thy charity and goodness to those that are in
distress, what thou art able, and have opportunity.

It may be thou art a man or woman of full years, S. 156.
and art of a longer standing, it may be twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty
years, thou have all this while enjoyed the plentiful means of grace, and so
long has God been bearing with thee, still expecting from thee somewhat of all
that beneficence of his toward thee; and now at last coming to thee, and finds
no fruit on thee, only a few leaves of profession, may he not say in high
displeasure, never fruit grow on thee more henceforth; by this time thou
might have been strong and well rooted in faith, abundant in charity, and
well knowing in the things of God and of thy own soul, able by thine own
experience and example to instruct the younger; by this time thou might have
been able to resist the strongest temptations, and have understood the wiles of
Satan, and deceitfulness of sin, and have been sufficiently guarded from their
prevalencies; by this time thou might have overcome the world, and have been
crucified to all the worldly pleasures, honors, riches, and have had thy love,
delight and happiness placed on God and Heaven; long ere this hour of the day
of thy life, (had thou not been unfaithful to thy Lord and Master, Christ,
and unfruitful under the means of grace,) might thou have been one prompt
and ready to, and zealous of good works, and thy life might have been an
ornament to the Gospel, and the doctrine of our Savior in all things of piety
and charity, Titus 2.10.
and thou thy self a shining light, holding forth the word of life and faith in
all manner of good works, Phil. 2.16. Mat. 5.16.
as becomes Christianity, to the glory and praise of Gods free grace toward
thee; but is it so with thee or not? have thou continued all this while, as at
first, unfruitful?

Try thy heart and ways, S. 157.
and if thou have profited and labored in the things of religion, piety,
charity, humility, righteousness, sobriety, bless God for it, and go on to
perfection, and give not out to the last moment, being never weary of
well-doing, abounding always in the work of the Lord, Gal. 6.9. 1. Cor. 15.58.
2 Cor. 7.1. Heb. 12.1, 2.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, lay aside every weight, and run the
rest of your race before you with patience, looking to Jesus, the author and
finisher of your faith, believing that your labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. But if hitherto thou have been unfruitful, then let the consideration of
it prick thee to the heart, repent, repent thee speedily for all thy
unfruitfulness and barrenness, and redeem thy time; for all is lost, and thy
soul will be lost for ever if thou repent not of this sin, even this of
unfruitfulness, and henceforth learn to do well, and apply thy heart withal
to bring fruit unto the Lord, even the fruit of his care and Gospel-mercies in
Christ unto thy soul. Do not slight this admonition and warning, it is from the
Lord for thy good, therefore see to it in time.

CHAP. VI.
An Enumeration of more sins and ways by which man offends God, and contracts
guilt to his soul, of which he must be reformed.

I Have in the foregoing Sections given you a particular of some of the most
gross and notorious fins, S. 1.
their names, nature and condemnation; all or any one of them, if thou art
guilty, and meanest to live in, will bring damnation to thy body and soul most
certainly.

And there are many more sins then those mentioned which lay claim to Hell for
their reward, S. 2.
which the holy book of God and the spiritual guides of thy soul (if thou
consult them,) would sufficiently instruct thee about how thou may either
avoid and prevent them, or repent and forsake them all, though lying within thy
heart, thoughts, words or actions; for Gods Spirit would conduct thee also.

And further, S. 3.
things sometimes tolerably lawful to be done, may through circumstances, time
and place become unlawful, and a sin to thee if thou do them; and there are
some things some persons may do at some times, and in some cases, which
another may not do without a sin, nor the same person at another time, or
under another relation, but it will be a fault. It were easy to instance in
examples of this kind, but they would be a subject fit for determination of
cases of Conscience, which now I am not about; yet this I would advise thee (if
thou meanest to walk circumspectly, and exercise a good conscience always,)
that in things doubtful and disputable take the surest part, that part of the
question which is surely no sin: for instance, is dicing or carding lawful? or
to wear black spots, as the manner of some is? or to put money to usury? With
some this may be a question, but for my part I would thus resolve it; that it
may be unlawful and a sin to play at cards or dice, or to put on those strange
fashions, or to practice usury, etc. but not to play at either, or with either,
at any time at all, nor to lend upon usury, nor to conform to the fantastical
fashions of dressing, is doubtless no sin; and a wise soul would take the
safest course, and walk in the surest way, and avoid all appearance of sin as
well as all sins; and he that does not do that, that is, shun as much as
possible all appearance of evil, transgresses a Gospel-rule, 1 Thessalonians. 5.^2.
Abstain from all appearance of evil.

There are also other sins which lie somewhat closer, S. 4.
that make not so great a noise, nor so suddenly wast the conscience, yet the
amount of them may prove an eternal guilt, and men may often flatter themselves
into hell with them, under pretense that they are but little ones, and sins of
infirmity only, which (as men are apt to think) have a certain divine
indulgence waiting on them of course.

And indeed many foul and il-favoured sins, S. 5.
to which men give full consent and delight, are choked with the name, and
maintained in heart and practice with an opinion that they will be accounted of
as lesser irregularities, deviations, humane frailties and infirmities; for men
are pleased to think they may live in sins of infirmities safely and laudably,
and therefore are willing to believe that all their omissions of good duties,
and commissions of evil works, are but as so many infirmities, and easily
pardoned, without either forsaking them, or striving against them, or repenting
of them.

But say the best thou can of thy infirmities, S. 6.
either natural or moral, either thy inclination and propension of nature to
evil, or slipping into a fault through a sudden surprisal and violent
temptation, or ignorance and inconsiderateness; or suppose they be only the
defects in our duty, as wandering thoughts, sometimes dullness, drowsiness and
weariness in our service of God, or thy backwardness to every good work, thy
want of proportionable zeal for Gods glory and the Church.

Or grant it to be but weakness of judgment, S. 7.
erroneous opinions, though but in lesser truths, or thy knowing not, nor
searching after thy secret sins; be it but a sudden eruption of passion into
anger and shrewd words, or desires after forbidden and unlawful objects, or
immoderate desires after things lawful in themselves, yet all these, and all
other infirmities (to speak the most favorably of them) are the disease,
sickness and disorders of the soul, and ought to be the matter of our sorrow
and humiliation, and must be confessed to God in the enumeration of our sins,
and pardon must be begged in Christ's name and for his sake for them; and except
thy soul be humbled for all thy secret sins, and all thy infirmities, if not in
every instance, yet in the whole sum, and thy labor and watchfulness be for
the suppressing of their rise, and preventing their reign as much as possible,
yea even they (so little as they seem to thee) they will prove mortal at the
last; and thy plea of Infirmity will not serve thy turn except thy sins of
infirmities be pardoned, and they will not be pardoned any more then greater
sins but upon thy repentance; and that which far greater offenses could not
do, if repented of in time, and forsaken in heart and practice, that these
sins of infirmities will do, if not repented of in time and amended (to what
degree is possible for thee,) even these will procure thy damnation at the last.

Now concerning all those sins which the vulgar sort of men who pretend to
Christianity account either no sins at all, S. 8.
or very lightly of them, as small and inconsiderable, yet by a long custom
and frequent repetition are become habitual, and so very sinful, and so very
destructive; and besides, men that think them so small and innocent, seldom
(if ever) charge them upon their souls as sins to be grieved at, repented of
and amended; when they examine their lives and actions as to other sins which
are noted with a blacker character; by reason of which neglect those smaller
sins are let alone unmortified, and men go to their graves with impenitency as
to those sins, which will sink a man as deep into the gulf of misery, and drown
the soul in destruction and perdition; and if they be but foolish lusts, yet
they are thus hurtful to the soul. 1 Timothy 6.9.


To instance in some things of this kind for thy fuller conviction.

I. Evil motions of lust the taint and corruption in nature.
There are in every man's nature the seeds of all evil, S. 9. Genesis 6.5. Mat.
15.19, 20. Jam. 1.14, 15. Col. 3.5.
which are the beginnings of all actual sins; man's nature is tainted and
corrupted, naughty Concupiscences and lusts are born with us, which are
defiling and corrupting the whole man; the heart of man is full of them, and in
their first motions they are sins, even that proneness and inclination to evil,
and aversness and indisposedness to good which is in thee, which thou may and
must take notice of as a matter of sorrow and complaint against thy self; as it
is thy unhappiness and misery, so it is thy sin and thy death, and such a
disease it is, that (if not healed and pardoned in thee by regeneration) will
leave thee under wrath and the curse: Gal. 3.22. Romans 5.12. Psam. 51.5. Romans
7.5.
This that I mean is that which is understood by the name of Original sin,
that is, the corruption of humane nature by the sin of our first parents,
propagated to the whole kind of Adams race and posterity, which is every man
and woman as they receive life and birth; these motions of sins do work in our
members to bring forth fruit unto death.

Now though this be every man's case, S. 10.
scarce any man makes it his own particular grief; men make light of it, and
are so far from watching over and resisting the first motions and lustings
after evil things, and mortifying these corruptions, that they are most apt to
plead it by way of excuse for their faults and actual transgressions, which
are the issues and effects of this corruption and lust from within.

But if ever thou hopest to be savingly reformed, S. 11.
this old man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, must be put
off, that is, must not be served nor yielded unto, but resisted and prayed
against; and indeed for my part had I no other sin that might be laid to my
charge, yet I find this inbred wickedness, this natural proneness to evil so
exceeding sinful, that I should account it a choice mercy to be quite rid of
it; and it is for this I have cause to hang the head and mourn; and it is that
the moving corruptions may be quite destroyed and mortified in me, is the
prayer and care of my poor soul, for my joy cannot be full until my enemies,
that is, my sins, both root and branch, seed and fruit, be plucked up and
withered, and until Christ alone, his grace and virtues, be formed in my soul,
and triumph in my conversation.

O do not make light of that which put thee under the wrath of God and power
of Satan; S. 12.
that may not be slighted by thee which is in thee, the cause and original of
all sins, that set the whole man upon evil, the cause of all disorder and
confusion every where in thee, and every where in the world: in a word, it is
exceeding sinful, all evils lie folded up in thy original concupiscence.

Take heed therefore and take a special view and measure of this thy sin; S. 13.
and because thy flesh will never be weary in it is sinful motions, then be
thou never weary nor give over resisting these lusts in thy self, and weakening
this body of sin, and hinder the progress of it, and if thou can not get it
quite discharged, suffer it not, what ere it cost thee, to reign in thee, or
prevail over thee; listen not to lusts solicitations, entertain no treaty with
lust, believe not its promises, fear not its threats; when God has said and
commanded one thing, let no arguments make thee believe the contrary.

II. Vain thought.
Thy thoughts though they lie hid from man, S. 14.
and free from the laws and censures of men, yet to God are they known, who
discerns the inward counsels of the heart, and are judged by him according to
the agreement they have with, or dissonancie from, or repugnancie to, the laws
of sobriety, righteousness and holiness. And what ever is uncomely or undecent
to speak or act, is as much to think, and as much a sin as the word or act
would be, though not so apparent; and if it be an evil to speak or practice
evil, so is it to think evil, and a man that would search and try himself for
discovery, may know what he is for grace or sin by his thoughts; one may know
another by words or actions, thy own thoughts to thee are the Signatures of thy
own heart, whether sanctified or unholy; by these fruits may thou know the
tree, by these streams the fountain, by these sparks the fire, by the sent of
this smoke the fuel. Mat. 15.19.
Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts; which expression of Christ shows that
some thoughts are evil; and the great wickedness of man is thus resolved, Gen:
6.5.
that the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were evil, and that
continually; and Solomon knew the malignity of thoughts when he entitles vain
thoughts to sin, Pro. 24.8.
he that devises to do evil shall be called a mischeivous person, Psalm.
119.113.
the Psalmist speaks of vain thoughts as matter of his detestation, saying, I
hate vain thoughts, but thy law do I love. God calls upon us to banish all
vain and evil thoughts, and to give them no lodging within us, but calls every
one to repentance even for the sins of their thoughts, saying, Jer. 4.14.
Wash thine heart from wickedness that thou may be saved; how long shall thy
vain thoughts lodge within thee? And for our reformation, if we intend it to be
according to the design of it, it reaches to the very thoughts, and the evil
of them must be banished, and our thoughts, yea every thought, 2 Cor. 10.5.
brought over to the obedience of Christ.

This account is given in Scripture of wicked and vain foolish thoughts, if no
worse can be said of thy imaginations, then that they are but frivolous, vain
and foolish, yet of such the Scripture says, that the thought of foolishness
is sin, Pro. 24.9.
much more then are they wicked when mischievous, envious, ambitious, wordly,
luxurious and lascivious; and thy thought-sins are liable to the same
condemnation (and therefore call for like reformation,) with the sins of those
thoughts which are brought to light and practiced; for sure if Adultery, or
fornication, or murder, or theft, or covetousness, or any other abomination be
sin, the thoughts and desires of the nature of either of them is a sin also;
and if there be any indulgence for either, (which I think there is none without
repentance,) it rather looks toward those that slip suddenly into a fault,
without fore-thoughts of pleasure or advantage in the sin, and so foiled at
unawares without full consent, then toward those evil thoughts which are
delighting and abiding, though they keep within the limits of thoughts and
imaginations; for the abatement of the guilt (if, I say, there be any such
allowance) will be to him that sins and would not, rather then to him that
would act sin though actually he does it not; for he that wills and does not is
worse then him that does a sin and wills not, that is, it is against the bent,
resolution and intentions of his mind.

Yet men are apt to think that their evil and vain thoughts are neither
offensive to God, S. 16.
nor hurtful to themselves, but are innocent and harmless; and once I thought
so too, but it was before I knew either God or my self as I should; but now I
repent me that ever I gave way to naughty imaginations, and have learnt
(through grace) to be more watchful over and to reject and resist evil and
vain thoughts, and not to suffer them to abide with me long; though sometimes
so unhappy I am as to be surprised with them, and now do I hate vain thoughts,
and desire to be humbled for, and thoroughly reformed in my thoughts, neither
shall I think to have attained any considerable victory over my corruptions,
nor come to the true worth and state of saving conversion, until my mind be
sanctified, 2 Cor. 10.5.
and every imagination and thought be brought under the obedience of Christ,
which now is the main work I have to do within my own soul, to wit, to get my
spirit cleansed from the filthiness of vanity and evil, that so perfecting
holiness every day as long as I live, I may at length get my reformation
completed, and my soul saved.

And this I earnestly persuade thee to, S. 17.
(being well assured that he that gives liberty to himself to think evilly, and
delights in vain thoughts, has no inward holiness,) that therefore you would
be watchful over your thoughts, and account it the greatest part of your duty
to reform them, and to be very careful to entertain good things in them, and
banish quickly out of thy thoughts all manner of evil, for as a man's thoughts
are good or bad, so is he that thinks such things; and if thou have been one
of a vain, wanton, worldly, proud, malicious or revengeful mind, then repent
thee of all thy thoughts of any of these kinds, and labor to reform thy
thoughts, Jer. 4.14.
if thou mean to be holy indeed, and saved at the last.

. III. Idle words
The tongue is but a little member, S. 18. Jam. 3.6.
yet very apt to transgress, and very full of evil; a little world of iniquity
which hardly can be kept in or tamed, yet it must be reduced to limits and
rules, or else thou sinnest. Men think that to talk much, to talk vainly, to
speak foolishly, is no great hurt, except there be poison and venom in every
word; yea men are apt to think there is no sin in words, and therefore do most
men make light of words as wind, not considering that all good men and prudent,
ponder well and consider what is fit to be spoken ere they speak, lest they
offend God, themselves, or others by their speech. Psalm. 39.1. Pro. 17.27. Pro.
10.19. Eccle. 5.3.
I will take heed (says David,) lest I sin with my tongue: And Solomon says,
he that has knowledge is sparing of his words, for in the multitude of words
there wants not sin, but he that refraineth his lips is wise. So that I
conceive many words that men speak may well be spared, for I am sure many words
that men speak are sinful, for they are unseemly, foolish, empty, vain, to no
good purpose, but very often of very evil consequence: there are many unruly
and vain talkers (says Paul to Titus) whose mouths must be stopped, Titus
10.11. Ephesians. 5.4.
which subvert whole houses, etc. And foolish talking is numbered for sin with
fornication and uncleanness.

Now if thou art one given to looseness of tongue and vanity of talk, S. 19.
that speak much and any thing comes first into thy mind, either to vent a
folly or a passion, to speak unseemly or unwisely, gibing or scoffing, tatling
or talking, frothy complements without reality, and lying jests to provoke
mirth, tedious stories to no purpose of good to edification; if thy tongue walk
in this road, and thy speech be but after this rate of vanity, though free from
blasphemy, oaths, reproaches, rottenness, railing, etc. yet is it not free from
sin, for thy words are vain and idle; and when reformation comes, it will
reduce thy tongue to, and bring it into the obedience of the laws of wisdom,
of sobriety and piety. And lest you should think this a vain monition
concerning words, consider what Christ our Lord says of idle words; I say unto
you, that every idle word that men shall speak, Mat. 12.36.
they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment; for by thy words
thou shall be justified or condemned. For there is not a word in my tongue O
Lord, Psalm. 139.4.
but thou know it altogether. Therefore though thou art but apt to
transgress with thy tongue, either by speaking wickedly or vainly, idly and
foolishly, repent thee of thy former folly, and for time to come put a watch
and a guard on that little member of unruliness, and a restraint, lest thou
offend again, and so be put to a sad repentance for thy little folly; for if
the instance be but little in which we offend, yet the sin is great, because we
continue in that folly which is more easily reformed, the temptation to it
less, the profit and pleasure small; but sound words or prudent silence, are
far more advantageous to the esteem of wisdom and godliness, then vain,
frothy, idle talkativeness.

If thou meanest to be religious to any purpose, S. 20.
bridle thy tongue, let thy words be few, Jam. 1.26.
sober and good; For if any among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not
his tongue, this man's religion is vain.

If you say your words are out before you are aware, and it is your infirmity,
then be persuaded to repent it and amend it as it is an infirmity; for this can
be no excuse for thy sin, because it is but (as you suppose) a little one, when
ye see how much and strictly we are warned to take heed of our tongues, that we
sin not with them in any case, not so much as by idle talking.

. IV. Idle life.
An Idle life is as much to be accounted for as idle words, S. 21.
and as deeply to be lamented thoroughly and reformed; for a man, a rational
creature, to live in the world to no purpose, or only to take his pastime
here, and to be good for nothing but to eat, drink, sleep, play, etc. or, as
some are, to be very busy in doing nothing, that is, nothing to the purpose,
that for which he has received his life, time and talent.

And it may be thou art such an one, S. 22.
of whom if one should ask, what good have thou done since first thou
receivedst breath? that though thou have received much good, yet have thou
brought forth little, -- alas, men do not consider the sin of idleness, nor
the danger of it; it is a dangerous thing to be without a lawful calling, and
as bad to be idle in it; to have nothing to do, or to do nothing in a lawful
employment, doubtless is that which is neither pleasing to God, nor innocent in
it self: God made nothing in vain, it is a sin confessed to do evil, and so it
is not to do some good or other. The servant that had a talent, and hid it, is
condemned by our Lord Christ, Cast ye the unprofit able servant into outer
darkness, Mat. 25.30.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. And the fig tree which bears
no fruit is cursed.

Yet this is not thought on any whit by those that are idle and vain persons,
S. 23.
who spend their life and precious time either in doing nothing at all, or that
which is beside the business of a Christian man, as doing that which is evil:
the devil commonly sets such on work whom he finds idle; and what an empty vain
thing it is for men and women to have nothing to employ themselves in but to
receive and pay unnecessary visits Acts 17.21.
and complements, to tell or hear some new thing; to spend their time and
invention in the vanities and trifles of sports, and deckings, and dressings?
Their tailors and sempsters, their glass and their combs, their beds and
boards, their Plays and Romances, their visits and vain discourses, consuming
all their study, time, wealth, strength, so as nothing of all is left them for
the greater concernments of their precious souls and countries good.

Such kind of lives do many live, S. 24.
and this is but to be dead while they live; and it may be you that read this
may be such an one, and then my serious counsel to thee is to repent for thy
idleness and mis-spens time, and betake thy self speedily to some honest
Christian employment and course of life, wherein you may expect a blessing from
God, and whereby you may bring some good to somebody, that it may not be said
when you are gone that you can well be spared, for that you lived to no
purpose, and wast good for nothing: but this will not be the worst of it, that
men may say so of thee, but God thy Lord will call thee to account another day,
how thou have spent thy time and self in this present world, and how you have
employed and improved your talent for Gods glory and the good of mankind.

Beware therefore, S. 25.
and be doing daily of that which thou would be found doing when thy Lord
Christ comes, that you so may expect that blessing from Christ your Lord and
Master which he has promised to his faithful doing servants, Mat. 24.46. Mat.
25.21.
Blessed is that servant that when his Lord shall come shall find so doing:
Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

. V. Omissions.
There is another conceit men have, S. 26.
and their practice is according to it, which must be reformed, or else thou
can not attain to a state of saving grace, and that is Omissions; men think
(it may be) it is a sin to commit evil, to do hurt, but none to omit the doing
of good; to do no evil should be our care, but though a man do no evil and
yet does no good, he is an evil man; Luke 12.47. Jam. 4.17.
He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes: And to him that knows to do good and does it not, to him it is sin.

He that wilfully, S. 27.
carelessly or slothfully omits any of those acts of piety, devotion and Charity
which are enjoined Christians as Christians, and leave undone such things as
they should perform in Religion, either in private, secret and public, to him
it is sin; if thou omit the hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, prayers
in and with the congregation, reading, praying in thy family, and in secret; If
thou neglect the instruction, correction and admonition of thy Children and
Servants in matters of religion, and practice of godliness; if thou omit acts
of charity to the souls and bodies of the necessitous in sickness or in health,
thou art far from the kingdom of heaven, and the state of true Christianity:
If thou neglect to uphold and maintain the truth and cause of Gods Church, as
much as lies in thee, both by word, prayer and deeds, it will become thy sin:
And thou may conceive how much thy omissions are sinful, offensive to God,
and prejudicial to thy salvation, by what sentence and judgment at last will
pass upon men for their omission of acts of piety and charity, namely, Depart
from me (Christ will say one day) ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I
was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick, and
in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they say, Lord, Mat. 25.41, 42.
etc.
when saw we thee an hungry, athirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in
prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer them saying,
Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not unto one of the least of
these, ye did it not unto me. And for your neglect of good family duties and
service of God, there is a sad imprecation of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 10.25.
Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that fear thee not, and upon the families
that call not on thy name.

So that what a man does not do in matters of piety and charity, S. 28.
is as severely sentenced as he that does contrary to both; yet men will not be
persuaded of this neither, repent for their Doe-nots, nor lay it to heart, when
they are charging themselves with some evil accounts which they have done.

But I am persuading thee that read to repent for thy omissions, S. 29.
and amend this thy fault, or God will certainly shut thee out of heaven; for
not he that says Lord, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that does (says Christ)
the will of my father which is in heaven: And surely he that omits to do does
not do the will of God.

I beseech thee then make not light of thy omissions of doing good, S. 30.
but be very careful to do that good thou ought, and art able to do, in
all the acts of Piety, Charity and Righteousness, every thing in it is season,
that is, of every opportunity offered thee, or that thou can attain unto.

. VI. Dreams.
I would mind you something about dreams, S. 31. Eccle. 5.3.
for, as Solomon writes, That a dream comes through a multitude of business,
commonly they are the remainers of many such thoughts and inclination of men,
and temper of body; sometime they are less harmfull, but for the most part
vain, and sometime very sinful; they are not voluntary indeed, yet as a fools
voice is known by multitude of words (as the wise man says,) so a man may
guess very much of what passes his thoughts while waking, by his night-visions
in dreams. I have heard of some that they never dreamed, or very rarely; how
true it is I cannot affirm, but I wish I could have said so truly, or that any
dreams had always been (but as sometimes they have) good and edifying: I have
been disciplined by dreams, some of them have been the occasion of comfort,
some of sorrow and much affliction to my soul, since I knew from whence they
sprang; bad, from an ill principle, vain, ambitious, worldly, filthy, fleshly
mindings and thinkings in the daytime; the good from God: and look what a man's
intentions, and discoursings, and companyings, and thinkings have mostly been
when awake, commonly the man dreams about when a sleep, though in much
confusion; and as the nature of those things acted or minded, and the desires
and end are about them, either honest and holy, or sinful and wicked, so are
thy dreams to be accounted of either good or bad; and as you would repent for
an ill act waking, so must you repent and be humbled for your dreams of the
acts thereof, if with delight and complacency in the same; and as you would be
sorry to be found doing or minding with delight those vanities or wickednesses
you dream about, so must you be humbled in your selves for dreaming such
things.

And if ever thou come to be truly and soundly converted, S. 32.
you will find your dreams either to be sanctified, or else both them and your
vain thoughts to be your great burden; and you will still be begging of God to
heal the distempers of your great burden; and you will still be begging of God
to heal the distempers of your souls this way, and free you from sinful
dreams; and in the mean time to remember always upon your examination, that the
guilt of your vain thoughts on the day, and vain dreams in the night might be
pardoned, and the filth of them washed off your soul with the blood of Jesus
Christ. And this I advise thee and exhort thee to, that if after all thy care,
prayer, and watchfulness over thy thoughts, discourses, actions and company,
(lest thou offend,) yet (I say) if that after all thy circumspection thou be
haunted and acted with vain, filthy, worldly, and any impure visions in thy
dreams, that then in the morning, every morning in thy addresses to God in
private devotions, after such defilements, thou humble thy self before the
Lord, and repent thee heartily, and bewail that infirmity, and beg thy pardon
for what is past, and entreat the Lord for Christ sake to heal thy naughty
nature, and that God would by his grace prevent the evil spirit suggesting, and
thy fancies acting, or awaken thee as soon as ere it seiseth upon thee.

For that man that truly fears God, S. 33.
and hates sin, would not if he could have any fellowship or delight in vanity,
either waking or slumbring, by day or by night, with others or alone; for God
is about thy path, and about thy bed, and knows thy up-rising, and
down-lying, every thought, and every word, and every action, yea and every
dream too; and thy God is holy, and hates all impiety, every where and in
every person; therefore be mindful of them, and be watchful over thy inward
and outward self, every hour, in every place and action, as thou ever hopest to
avoid sin, to keep thy self pure, and to please God; for Jude the 8th. verse
speaks of Filthy dreamers who defile the flesh, etc.

. VII. Worldly Joy and Sorrow.
I entreat likewise you would be warned about your joys and griefs, S. 34.
for as they are more or less about worldly concernments, so are they more or
less sinful: It Is true, we, the best of us, are but men at the best, and
easily are we surprised; we have these passions in our nature, and of
themselves are not sinful, but our failings are about their measures and their
objects; and the more our delights are in the fruition of the object, according
to the value and esteem we have of the thing, so the more is our sorrow arising
from the want of or parting with our beloved, whatever it be.

And this may be sometimes good and gracious according to the sense and
apprehension we have of good things, S. 35.
(to wit) to rejoice exceedingly, and delight much in the presence and fruition
of God and grace, his word, and religious duties, and hopes of heaven after an
holy life here, it is good, and a duty; as also to grieve much, and sorrow
heartily, for the absence of grace, or breach of covenant and faith with God;
to be grieved at the heart for sin committed, or interruption of communion with
God, by failings in our duties of Religion, etc. this I say is godly joy, and
godly sorrow, and needs not to be repented of: but commonly this is not the
kind of that joy, delight, sorrow, and perplexity which men and women are so
much in; alas, it is otherwise, indeed it is sinful too much, for it is worldly
too much, and yet how few take notice of their joys and griefs, whether they be
sinful or holy, hurtful or profitable to their souls!

To be a worldling is to be a sinner, S. 36.
and he can never joy or grieve much about worldly concernments, but he must be
one that loves and prizes earthly things beyond their proportion irregularly
and sinfully; Godly sorrow works Repentance to salvation not be repented of,
2 Cor. 7.10.
but the sorrow of the world works death: So to delight, rejoice, and glory
in the Lord, is good and pleasing to God; but to set ones heart upon riches,
honors and pleasures, and to rejoice in any of these is a sin, and such a joy
should be turned into heaviness, and such laughter into mourning. Jam. 4.9.


If thy joy and grief lie about worldly things and trifles, S. 37.
if thou have more comfort in a good bargain, or a friends legacy, or some
worldly emoluments, then in the favor of God, then in the pardon of thy sins,
then in the means of salvation, then art thou yet in fault: And if thou can
grieve and lament with tears the loss or disappointment of some benefit, or the
unkindness of a friend, or the crossness of an enemy, or chains of a tyrant,
etc. and yet can not sorrow for thy sins, the loss of Gods favor, nor of
missing an opportunity of grace and communion with God, then thy joys and
sorrows are worldly and sinful, and you must not permit such worldly joys and
sorrows to prevail, but you must repent for them, and leave off to spend your
comforts and your griefs this way, and look to that you should rejoice in, and
lament for, as before has been showed.

And as for all other outward things, S. 38.
our rejoicing or grieving should not be much or lasting; labor therefore to
reform these passions, and set them right: and this you will do if you desire
to be sincere, upright and complete, in the reformation.

And the like do I advise you to do about your impatiencie and discontent, S.
39.
frettings and perplexities about these worldly, temporary, vain, perishing
things; as also with your carking carefulness, your thoughtfullnesse and
distrustfulness about earthly things, to reform in each of these; for all such
dispositions are evil, and hurtful both to soul and body, wounding your own
souls, and tranquillity of spirit, and reputation of Christianity, and does
much hinder the progress and increase of grace and heavenly conversation; and
all our affections about earthly things regulated so, that it may be with us
(as to our taking pleasure in worldly vanities, or confidence and relying as
our happiness or chief support,) that once we may be able to say truly with St.
Paul, I account of all things as dung and dross in comparison of the things of
Christ and heaven. And to this must we come ere we be complete in Christ, and
thoroughly changed in all our affections, to a state wherein we may truly and
freely say, without dissimulation or constraint say, Truly the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world, these worldly concernments move me not
much any way, I see nothing here below (as things below) that deserve either my
joy in their possession, or grief for their absence, nothing that I need be
troubled much about, or that I should rely upon, or put any trust at all in,
for all are flying and lying vanities; therefore do I labor for and seek the
things above, and my treasures are with Christ in heaven, there also is my
heart, and thither will I go for my comforts; and my grief is that I am not
more in love with them, and less in love with the world, and troubles of spirit
about them.

That each of us may say, S. 40.
in obedience to that command, 1 John 2.15. I love not the world, neither the
things that are in the world, because I would not lose the love of my heavenly
Father; For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lusts of the
eyes, and the pride of life, (i.e.) worldly pleasures, or pelf, or pomp, which
are not of God, nor for his children and servants to look after; for they and
this world pass away, 1 Jo. 2: 15, 16, 17.
but he that does the will of God abides for ever. And as I do urge and press
thee to be careful and watchful over your spirits in those forementioned
qualities and actings of your souls about those things, which although they may
seem frivolous niceties to men that judge not of things spiritually, but
according to sense and common apprehensions, yet I earnestly entreat thee, as
thou hopest for pardon, grace and heaven at last, that thou would reform them
all, in every instance; for until you do you are not a true sincere reformed
convert; for though they be esteemed but small things, and inevitable
infirmities, yet their account will be numerous at last, and their burden
intolerable; they will, if not pardoned, sink thy soul as low as hell; and
pardoned they will not be, except thou repent of them, and labor against them,
to a reformation of them all: for, Eccles. 19.1.
as the son of Syrach says, he that despises little things shall fall by
little and little; and experience tells us, that many small leakes will in time
sink the stoutest ship, even so will these smaller sins (if let alone) make
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, Titus 1.19.
and cast away thy soul at last.

. VIII. Unthankfulness, murmuring, inconsiderateness, worldly confidence, vain
opinions, and recreations.
And with the same earnestness do I persuade thee to reform thy unthank
fullness to God for those daily favors he shows to thee a worthless wretch; S.
41.1.
how many blessings have thou received already, and how many more laid up for
thee, and yet how seldom have thou returned thanks to God for all? how many
thy mercies, and how few thy acknowledgments? O! ingratitude is a very high
offense both to God and good men.

Thy murmuring against Gods providence, S. 42.2.
and distrust of his fidelity and truth of performance of things promised to
thee and for thee, whilst thou seek him in his way of upright walking, and
yet how art thou ever and anon complaining, and uttering thy discontents and
hard thoughts of thy gracious good God? O this must be left, I pray thee leave
off murmuring, and learn submission and resignation to divine providence in all
his dispensations, and if thou have thought ot spoke foolishly, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth, do so no more: God cannot endure murmuring nor murmurers,
leave it quickly, if thou mean not to provoke God, as the Israelites did, 1
Cor. 6.10.
and were punished severely for it.

Thy rash attempts and inconsiderateness; S. 43.3.
be no more heady, but heedfull, consider seriously both the nature of thy
actions, and the end of them all; for God accounts all men sinful that are nor
considerate and serious, Isai. 1.3.
because inconsiderate and rash: The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider: Jer. 8.6.7.
For as consideration is the beginning of reformation, so is inconsideratness
an inlet to all vice and villainy.

Thy worldly confidence and trust on vain things must be altered to a trust and
dependence on God only, S. 44.4.
if thou aim at saving reformation; for he that relieth on any thing under
heaven, men or money, arm of strength, or armies of men; wit, policy, friends,
health, greatness, or his own goodness, does much derogate from God, and become
sinful, because he sets his heart upon that which is not to be confided in,
nor set up, as any way able to support, satisfy, deliver or to make one happy.
Man's trust is always to be in God only, and all his hopes and expectation from
him; Isai. 26.4.
Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. But when I lay out my first thoughts and chief hopes upon worldly
things, I put them up in stead of God, and commit idolatry, and go quite
contrary to the will of God; Trust not in man, nor riches, nor Princes, says
David; If riches increase, set not your heart upon them, for you will find a
disappointment in all without God, Jer. 17.5, 7.
and a curse too: Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm, and whose heart departs from the living God: But blessed is the man that
trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. Job (being once very rich,
and always very good, which was his best riches, and abided with him when all
outward things were flown away and gone,) says in his most serious examination
and pleading with God, If I have made gold my hope, Job 31.24, 25, 28.
or have said to fine gold, Thou art my confidence; If I rejoiced because my
wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten it: This were iniquity to be
punished by the judge, for I should have denied the God that is above. You see
what apprehension godly men have had of the trusting worldly things, concluding
it to be sin and iniquity, folly and idolatry; and what is the hope of an
Hypocrite, (what will his worldly confidence come to?) though he has gained
much, Job 27.8, 9.
when God takes away his soul? Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon
him? So that it is not enjoined as a prudentiall thing only not to put
confidence in these worldly things, nor depend upon them, because of their
vanity, inconstancy, insufficiency, but it is a sin if we do, and a great
iniquity too, which every gracious man should avoid, and every convert should
repent of, and be ashamed that he has put confidence in pitiful worldly
things, and made them his rock, shelter and comfort, and resolves he will do so
no more, while he has a God, the rock of ages and time, to fly unto, who will
never fail nor forsake them that put their trust in him, because they trust in
him.

I counsel thee, dear soul, S. 45.
to look carefully what is that you put your confidence in, and if you find the
world or an^things in the world first coming in your thoughts as to trust in
them, then conclude it is from a carnal principle within thee, contrary to
God's mind, and holding no conformity to the Saints, who have said within
themselves and declared to the world too, that nothing in heaven or earth,
within them or without them, should be the object of their trust, saving God
only; a guess of this their frame we may take from Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? Psalm. 73.25, 26.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My strength and my
heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. O
then, beware what thou make thy rock, thy tower, thy defense and portion; be
sure it be God only, and repent if thou have done other.

Thy vain and erroneous opinions in matters abour religion must be regulated by
the Word of Truth, S. 46.5.
and reduced to the obedience of Christ and his doctrine, and that without
prevarication or strife of words, 1 Timothy 6.5.
or perverse disputings and vain bablings to no profit or edification toward
charity and holiness. 2 Timothy 2.14, 16. Pro. 19.27.
Cease, my Son (says Wisdom) to hear the instruction that causes to err from
the words of knowledge; for it is a dangerous thing to be of a corrupt judgment.

About thy recreations, S. 47.6.
and those little indulgencies to thy flesh, which men are pleased to call
refreshments and pastimes, not considering what sin and hurt may be in them,
and how too too often they become fuel to lust, and a temptation to sin,
consumption of time, and exhausting of spirit, and effeminating men, rendering
them soft and unfit for exercise of religious duties, and many other
inconveniences which experience has instructed those that have been much and
often in the service of pleasures, which now they see, but then they could not
perceive, being blinded and beguiled with them: Now concerning such, if thou
(who read) art a man given to satisfy thy lusts with worldly pleasures
under the pretense of recreation, know, that though some recreations and
diversions from our more serious and laborious employments, either of body or
mind, may be tolerable and allowable for refreshment, yet when thou exceedest
in pleasure to unrighteousness, by letting out too great a proportion of thy
soul on them, then the most innocent recreation becomes a snare unto thee, and
thou sinnest in it; when thou usest it as a calling, and do nothing else but
spend thy days, times, strength, talents, study, and passions, as though thou
wast born into this world only to spend thy time in worldly, fleshly and carnal
delights; surely such a state of living (and such is only the employment of
some men) cannot be pleasing to God, but calls for reformation. And therefore I
would entreat thee to be sparing in recreations, and careful in them, lest
that which is allowed thee for the relief of thine infirmities may prove thy
hurt, more dangerous to thy soul then that bodily infirmities (which want
something for its refreshment,) could have brought to thy body without such
recreation.

And now, S. 48.
I would counsel thee also (if thou would be innocent) to leave off those
games and sports which are neither good for bettering thy health of body, nor
yet of refreshing thy mind; and all such pastimes, and thy engagements in them,
which eat up thy time, and raise thy passions, are incentives to quarrels, and
such as indispose thee for holy duties, are fuel for lust, and keep thee from
religious performances, are to be shunned; and if you will follow my counsel,
leave off dieing and carding, revelling and dancing; and I am sure you will
when you mean to be sober and wise, religious, and a sincere downright
Christian, and when you intend to make religion your chief employment, heaven
your aim, and holy performances your delight; then you will see that all
business and avocations from the business of religion are nothing at all
profitable for thee, you will then admit of nothing that shall hinder the work
of salvation, nor do any thing deliberately which shall frustrate your hopes of
heaven. But what ere is good in its self, or may advance this great work of
saving reformation, that thou will do, and no body shall be able to tempt thee
to folly, nor fright thee from thy duty; but thou will then make a conscience
of thy time and employment how thou spendest it, and how much of it, and about
what businesses, that so thou may be able at last to make a fair and clear
account of thy actions to God, when thou shall be called to it; and that will
be very shortly, and for every thing done in the body, according to that he
has done whether it be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.
.

And surely no man will be approved for well-doing that has done little else
then recreated and pleased himself with sports and pastimes, in gaming and
fooling, S. 49.
in sleeping, eating and drinking, in hunting and hawking, and such like
employments; and many men have no other calling: and God knows, that for a man
to study and contrive how he may spend his days in pleasure, and to take his
pleasure in several instances as he has purposed, is but to study and
contrive how he may live to die like a fool, and prepare his back for many
stripes at the last, which such a man must be beaten withal, and thou cast
forth as a vessel of dishonor wherein is no pleasure, for that it had never
been employed to any good use or purpose.

Be persuaded therefore to leave off taking pleasure and sporting thy self in
sin, S. 50.
and also to sin in thy sports and recreations: and this I would entreat thee,
never more choose that for thy recreation which is unlawful or doubtful, or
that wherein you have offended already, or in which you may be in danger to
transgress again, when you may as easily forbear, and in forbearing be most
assuredly certain you shall not sin; and resolve on this, rather to renounce
all sports and recreations then to commit the least sin, or expose thy self to
the danger of a transgression. How much deplorable will the loss be to thee,
when for the pleasure of sin for a season thou must lose thy soul for ever?

CHAP. VII.
Containing some reasons of specifying sins in the foregoing catalgu.

THus have I laid before you in this register such sins as the nature of man
since the Fall is not only prone to, S. 1.
but also miserably fruitful in: And all of them, both great and small, are
contrary to the nature of the most holy God, and each of them a violation of
the righteous and holy commands of God, and destructive to the happiness of thy
own soul, meriting everlasting damnation; and which no man that does them, and
lives and dies in any of them can escape; For the wrath of God is revealed
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men; Romans 1.18.
and it will be executed one day upon them that do evil, and continue so doing,
for God will render to every one according to his deeds: Romans 2.5, 6.
Yet none of these shall hurt thy soul if thou commit them not, and art not
some way guilty of them; and although thou have been faulty any of those ways,
or in many of them, yet shall they not be thy destruction, if thou repent thee
heartily, and leave them speedily and absolutely. And therefore have I been
particular in the enumeration of sins, with their aggravations and dismal
dreadful consequence, to this end, and for these REASONS:

1. Because thou may examine thy heart, life and actions, S. 2. 1 Reas.
whether thou have been guilty of any of them, how many of them, how often, and
how long, and which of them all are thy sins, with what consent of will and
delight, and by what temptations thou have acted them and lived in them, and
against what light of knowledge, checks of conscience, reproves, admonitions,
exhortations, convictions and resolutions thou have committed them, -- Which
considerations will make thy sin appear to thee more odious and exceeding
sinful: And so it will serve as an excellent instrument of thy recovery; for
the consideration of the guilt, filth, defilement and miserable consequence of
sin, every sin (the least sin, every sin being against God, and the eternal
good of thy own precious soul) this (I hope) may bring thee to sound repentance
for, and a lothing of all sin, in the whole kind of it, speedily, resolutely
and heartily, without either farther delay or dispute.

And this is the design of the specification of sins; S. 3.
for now after this, now (I say) that you are told of them, you may not think
to keep them, and act them with impunity, for though in the time of your
ignorance God did wink at, and did bear with your follies then, yet now he
commands thee and all men every where to repent, Act. 17.30, 31.
because he has appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness.

2ly. I have quoted Scriptures in the margent, S. 4. 2. Rea.
and annexed them to every particular sin, because you maybe fully convinced of
the infallibility of the execution of Gods decree of reprobation and damnation
on thee and every man and woman living in such a state without repentance and
reformation; that so neither thou nor any sinner may presume of salvation at
the end of a sinful, impenitent and unreformed life, but that thou may
utterly despair of salvation without sound and timely reformation: and this
consideration also may serve to hasten thy resolution, and to use all means
appointed of God to rid thee of thy sins, and become a new man; which is
absolutely necessary for thee if thou meanest to be saved eternally.

3ly. I do also persuade you (to a reformation in every instance, S. 5. 3 Rea.
and to repent of every sin, and amend every fault) upon sure grounds, because
you may see there is no impossibility, but that you may of a sinner (if you
look to it in time) become a true convert, and be turned from darkness to
light, and be brought from the dominion of sin and Satan, to be under the rule
and guidance of Christ and grace, and so be sanctified, pardoned, justified,
and at last glorified; this I say I persuade thee to by such discoveries as the
glorious good God has made concerning his acceptance of true penitents and
converts, Because thou might been couraged to this reformation without
delay; and to keep thee from sinking into a despair of Gods mercy in Christ
pardoning thy sins past upon thy sound repentance and sincere reformation: and
this consideration also may raise thy hopes and expectation that thou shall yet
find grace and mercy from the Lord to relieve thee, and help thee in thy
misery, and give thee a full conquest over thy spiritual enemies through
Christ, and deliver thee from all thy sins into the hand and protection of
JESUS CHRIST, who will keep thee safe and bring thee to heaven, if thou apply
thy heart in good earnest to this work of self-reformation, and perseverest in
the same unto the end. For if there were no hope, but he that has been vicious
must of necessity be always so, why then should there be given any means for
thy recovery? why should God send to thee, invite thee, entreat thee, rebuke
thee, expostulate with thee, as he does by his Ministry, word and Spirit? if
God did not mean to reclaim thee, that he might pardon thee and save thee, why
has he appointed repentance for thy work, and space for thy repentance, but
that thou might finish thy reformation? And why so many promises (for thy
support) of mercy, for guidance, victory, acceptance and pardon, if God meant
not to deal graciously with thee this way upon thy endeavors at reformation?

4ly. And I have hitherto been persuading thee concerning every sin, S. 6.
to repent speedily and leave off that thy sin, be it whatever, great or small,
without delay:

Because impenitency is a cursed estate in it self; Rea. 1.
though thy sin of which thou art guilty be pardonable upon thy repentance, yet
thy impenitency for the least sin thou know in thy self is unpardonable; and
that which all the sins specified could not effect, if they had been repented
of in time and forsaken, this one sin of wilful impenitency will undoubtedly
effect (viz. thy damnation,) for damnation though it be not to sins absolutely,
the smallest of them, yet absolutely to all impenitent sinners.

Christ has secured the salvation of that sinner who exercises faith in him,
S. 7.
and repentance from dead works by his life, death, resurrection and
intercession: But he did not die, nor does he intercede, nor is he a
propitiation for to save impenitents and unbelievers as such, they living and
dying impenitent and unconverted. And therefore the earnestness of thy Monitor
with thee to be speedy in this work is such, for that thy continuance in any
sin argues thy unwillingness to forsake it, and thy delaying and deferring
repentance is nothing less then a flat denial to reform and amend, until thou
can sin no longer, nor live any longer to sin; and then thou will either miss
of the will to repent thee, or of sufficient time, or because forced from the
apprehensions of terror it will not be accepted: and then alas where art thou?

And this consideration, if it be serious, S. 8.
would conclude in this resolution; I will put off no longer, I Will not defer
till to morrow, for if I die, ere my conversion be wrought, and if sickness and
death seize on me in an impenitent state, what will become of me? I am resolved
to begin now, and to renew again what once I began, and will not sleep, eat,
drink, or take any comfort in any thing, until I am in a mending case, until
my soul and sin be at odds; I Will stay no longer here with this and that sin, nor
will I consent that any sin shall lodge with me henceforth for ever, lest
mischief and a snare, death and destruction over take me, and I lie down in
sorrow.

For I have been and am a great sinner S. 9.
perverse and obstinate in my courses, and too long already have I been so; and
I despair of mercy, pardon and heaven, while I continue in a state of voluntary
sinning, unconverted and unreformed in heart and life: But I see there is hope,
how bad so ever I have been yet I may be reclaimed; and if in time I do repent
heartily, and renounce all my wicked ways, and lay hold on Christ, and live the
rest of my days soberly, righteously and holily, I may find mercy and partake
of an happy eternity of glory. I am resolved therefore now, even this moment,
to put in practice that which I have been long a purposing, even to bid
farewell to all my sinful pleasures and profits, to all my vanity and folly;
and do now forsake the sinful full world, the flesh and the devil, and will no
longer be befooled by my lusts, the world, nor Satan, to the loss of my soul,
for all the present seeming content and advantage may come to me by living in
sin, or complying with sinners: Mat. 16.26.
For what will it profit me though I gain the world by sinning, and lose my
soul for sinning? What shall a man do for another soul to save when he has
damand (or lost) this one by sinning? What shall I do to be saved then at last,
if now I refuse to do that which God is pleased to demand of me as a
condition, and in my power through grace, which is to repent and to turn from
all my iniquities, so sin shall not be my ruin? Alas, then I shall have no
grace to repent, nor space, nor acceptance, nor pardon, nor heaven; I can then
do nothing that can be acceptable, neither will God accept any thing I do; if I
will not hear him to day, he may refuse me to morrow, although I call upon him;
but to be sure if I put off the Lords requests and admonitions, refusing them
now in my health, strength, life, and do not yield, obey, repent and reform, as
(I know) it is my duty, then at last God will refuse and reject me, yea laugh
at my calamity, and empty the vials of his just wrath and indignation upon me,
Pro. 11.12. to the end.
and leave me in misery to all eternity.

S. 10.
Such a consideration as this would make one dread the thought of continuance in
sin, or to defer repentance one day longer, and would bless God he was not
cut off in the last act of sin, or in a state impenitent, yesterday, or the
last week, and resolves to venture no more so presumptuously on the morrow,
while to day is put into his hand for an opportunity. Let this be thy
resolution (O sinner that read,) and be happy in it.

CHAP. VIII.
Containing the main swasion and motion for a final resolution, and speedy
practical repentance, and real reformation.

NOw having made known unto thee, S. 1.
and laid in thy view before thee as in a map, that thou may be the better
able to examine and try thy state, and accordingly understand which of those
sins, and how many of them, thou art guilty of, either in thoughts, words or
actions, or evil inclinations, and you will find, (if you will not be partial
in the inquiry and search,) most of them, either in whole or in some
circumstances and branches, to be thine own as certainly as any bodies else;
and if you have charity to your own soul, or any care or desire for pardon and
heaven, you will be free to acknowledge them, confess them, own shame for them,
and be as ready and willing to beg forgiveness of God for thy faults, as you
were to commit your sins: and speedily to forsake them all, and with full
resolution of soul never to venture on any of them again, or come near the
appearance of sin any more, lest thou be caught in sins snare, and be defiled
with sins filth.

Now that thou may be brought to this happy result, S. 2.
and upon serious consideration to take up an invincible resolution to leave
off the love and practice of every sin, and never to have to do with any sin
for the future, but to fight and strive against it to the death, and expulsion
of it from the borders of thy soul; and withstand all temptations whatsoever
from world, flesh, and Satan, to thy dying day, that would engage thee again in
sinful courses, and when this is done thou will finish this first part of
reformation in thy self, which consists in forsaking all sin, and resolving
against it, in the whole kind of it.

And though this be the harder and most difficult piece of thy duty, S. 3.
to rid thy self of the prevalencie of thy inbred corruptions, and shift thy
life of all thy ill companions, and long acquaintance, I mean thy endeared sins
with whom thou have taken such content and pleasure, and it is a hard matter to
be persuaded out of an habit of such vices wherein men have been long
exercised, and in which fleshly-minded men have taken such delight and
complacencie.

Yet the business is not impossible, S. 4.
nor dishonorable, nor beyond the power and strength of a true resolved
Christian; but if thou call in with fervent prayers and cries, Christ and grace
to thy help in time (who is not wanting to such;) and thou diligently use all
those spiritual instruments and weapons God has appointed for this spiritual
warfare carefully, it will be so far from impossible, that it will be most
succesfull, and you shall find a most happy conquest, and a glorious
deliverance, from both the guilt and powerful dominion of sin.

And to this work and resolution without any further delay or hesitancie, S. 5.
I am now persuading thee by the best arguments I can think of at present; and
if you can think on better and more, and more convincing and prevalent then
what I offer to thee, (so they do the work with thee,) that is, to cause thee
leave off with all possible dispatch and speed all thy evil practices and
sinful follies, I am content; for my design is to bring thee to a speedy
reformation through grace if I can, and if this be done upon thee, thou thy
self wilt be happy in it, and (I say) I am fully satisfied if that be done, so
thou be reformed soundly, whether by these or any other motives.

Now, S. 6.
that you may understand clearly what is that I am about to persuade you to,
know, it is this, and this only, with these ensuing arguments, that you would
be humbled for, and speedily cast off all your transgressions great and small,
in heart and life, in habit and act, so as never more hereafter to return to
any thy sins upon any account again, resolve against them all, never listen to
any allurements to sin, never comply with any temptation or motion to sin
again, never yield to any persuasion to continue in thy sin one day longer,
live not in any sin for any bodies pleasure, nor for any worldly advantage, nor
for fear of any frown from man or temporary loss, or for fear of any affliction
or trouble may happen to thee; if thou leave off to walk in the way of sinners,
but take up the invincible resolution and courage of a Christian that is called
forth to an honorable employment, and a rich reward, and a certain conquest, if
thou stand to it, and do persevere to the end, in the use and exercise of
those means thy God has appointed thee for thy help this way, both to banish
sin from thy heart and life, and to keep thy self from being pollured again
with sins impurity, and from being imprisoned any more under its insolences,
and cheating traps, and crafty solicitations and devices.

And that this may be effectually performed in its measure and time, S. 7.
which are appointed thee for this work, I do entreat thee, and in the Name of
God enjoin, as thou hopest to attain unto that happiness thou wishest thine own
soul by reformation, to follow these few directions;

instance, and with what complacencie and delight, with whom, and in what
place, and at what time, with what temptation, and beg heartily of Almighty God
to help thee to the veiw and discovery of all thy open and hidden sins.

This way all true penitents took having been once convicted, S. 8.
and upon after-failings and miscarriages, Lamen. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again unto the Lord; and that same
convert David tells what way he took at the beginning of his reformation; (to
wit) I thought on my ways, Psalm. 119.59, 60.
and turned my feet unto thy testimonies: And tells us further, that so soon as
ever he was convinced of the necessity of reformation, and the danger of living
longer in his sins, I made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments; and
this true penitent gives thee what he desired of God, it was this, Search me, O
Lord, Psalm. 139.23, 24.
and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. He knew the danger of
sin, and in some good measure the deceitfulness of man's own heart, and the
secret hidings of sin within; and because he would keep none of his sins, nor
favor any of them; he would have them discovered to himself, that he himself
might not conceal them, and this was an argument he meant to be sincere, and
resolved to be reformed to purpose: and the same convert David gives in the 4th
Psalm first a reproof to the wicked, saying, How long will ye love vanity,
Psalm. 4.2.4.
how long will ye continue wicked? and in the 4th. verse he gives a direction
and counsel, saying, Stand in awe and sin not: stop here, go no further in
sin, sin is a dreadful thing; but commune with your own heart upon your bed,
(i. e.) discourse and reason the case with your self in private, consider your
heart and ways, what has been the course of your life? what is now the frame
of my heart? Say to thy self, what have I done? what am I doing? how long shall
I go on in these sad courses? when shall I determine and resolve on amendment?
why not now, is it not yet time? have I not yet long enough been an enemy to
God, a rebel against his Laws, a drudge to my lust, a slave to Satan, a
companion of fools and mad folk, and a wanderer in the broad way which at last
will lead me to endless woe and destruction? shall I any longer consume any the
rest of my time in fulfilling the lusts of the flesh, as I have done too too
much already? or shall I now, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
even now, cease my folly and cast off my sins? oh it is (doubtless) high time.

And secondly, S. 9.2.
you are persuaded to deal roundly and particularly with your self, do not go
about to lessen and excuse thy faults, spare not thy sins, (for thy sins will
not spare thee) give them no quarter, believe none of their promises, for to be
sure if thou let any of them live with thee, they will kill and destroy thy
soul; if it be a beloved sin with which thou have taken pleasure, or by which
thou have gotten somewhat, yet trust it not, keep it not, for every sin (let it
promise never so fairly) is thy mortal enemy, there is a venom and deadly
poison in it, which will infect all thy other performances, and eat out thy
comforts, and cause thee at last to lie down in sorrow and despair.

If it be thy beloved one, S. 10. Judge. 16. to the end.
yet remember so was Delilah to Sampson, who notwithstanding betrayed him to
affronts, bindings, woundings and death, and so will this to thee; if it come
with pretended kindness to salute or delight thee, or to remain with thee in
quietness, yet remember so did Joab to Abner, 2 Samuel 3.27.
yet smote him there; and then, under the fifth rib, so that he died. And so
was the pretended sacrifice of the harlot in the Proverbs, Pro. 7.13, 23.
With much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the flattering of her lips
she forced him: and he goes straitway after her as an ox to the slaughter, or
as a fool to the correction, etc. Till a dart strike through his liver, and as
a bird hastes to the snare, not knowing that it is for his life: Even so will
it do with thee, if thou trust it as Joab did Amasa; And Joab said to Amasa, 2 Samuel 20.9, 10.
art thou in health, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with the that
hand to kiss him; But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joabs hand,
so he smote him therewith, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and he died.
So will every sin that speaks fair to thee, (if thou be led aside by it) do
with thee, for it still has with it an instrument of woundings and death, and
will not spare thee when thou come within its reach and power, whatever hopes
thou have to the contrary; for how true is that of the Apostle Romans 6th after
this question is put to every sinner, what fruit had ye then in these things
whereof you are now ashamed? does he not challenge your answer? and can you
answer any other thing to it but what he concludes? Romans 6.21.22.
the end of those things is death, for the wages of sin, every sin, is death;
and will any event be found other then what St. James speaks of the progress
of sin? that every man that brings forth sin, Jam. 1.14, 15.
being enticed by his own lust, and finisheth it, must die eternally for it, as
certainly as every one that is born of a woman must taste of natural death; with
this only difference, that both righteous and wicked, penitent and impenitent,
must die a like death in nature, but the wicked unregerate only shall die
eternally, that is, be for ever separate from God, and be forever miserable.

How much then does it concern me to labor the death of my sin, S. 11.
that my sin may not bring this death upon me? how should I and every soul cast
out that morsel, though never so sweet, that will either choke or poison us at
the last? why should I dally, or be familiar with that, or keep it under the
roof of my tabernacle, that will cut my throat, and then set all my house on
fire, and put my soul into flames of everlasting burnings? Oh how can I do
this, and act the other sin which does put me under the wrath of my Lords
displeasure at present; and if I continue in it, will procure that final
displeasure which will never be removed? and this is an hell of misery to be
banished from the face and favor of God, and to lie under his wrath for ever.

Shall I then or any body else that loves God and his own soul continue in that
or this sin, S. 12.
which for ought I know (if I continue one day longer in it) may never be
pardoned, though at my dying day I may cry to God for pardon and mercy, and yet
go without it, because I did not in time sue for it by repentance and
amendment? why should either I or you be so like that profane person Esau, who
for one sweet morsel of meat sold his birthright, who after when he would have
inherited the blessing he was rejected? Heb. 12.16, 17.
For he found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears.

Is it not a thousand times better to forgo the pleasures of sin, S. 13.
which are sinful pleasures, and but for a season, then to keep them to the
loss of Heaven and happiness hereafter? Must I part with my sins, or lose
heaven and part from God? Ah' poor soul, lets be wise, and say we would not
lose heaven, nor our happiness in God for ten thousand worlds: what shall we
keep a sin which is worse then nothing, to the hazard of that which is more
worth then all things, even Christ and glory? no, God forbid we should cast
away our precious souls so for a trifle, which cost Christ so much pain and
blood to redeem from hell, and from all iniquity, to serve the living God only
here, and to be happy with him in everlasting mansions of glory heareafter: Ah
me, methinks I should not be so foolish, nor such an enemy to my own happiness.
Must I take my farewell of all my sins, or bid farewell to all my hoped for
joys in heaven? then depart from me all iniquity, and all ye workers of
iniquity, for I am resolved against you all; and welcome Christ and grace, come
repentance, come reformation, let us be acquainted and live together; I would
not lose one moments enjoyment of vision, and favor of Christ in heaven, for
all the pleasure and gain by sinning that might be had, were it always to be
had, and ten thousand times ten thousand more then ever I got by sin, or any
other that has gotten most; for all is but little and short, poor, mean, base,
dishonorable and destructive, the pleasures of sin are but for a season,
Momentaneum est quod, delectat, aeternum est quod cruciat. Greg. Mag.
if any there be in sin, but the torments of sin are eternal; and this I am
sure is real, and will follow sin, as the tail of a scorpion which has the
venom and poison therein.

O my soul, hasten away, consider now and be gone, take thy last leave of sin
and see it no more, keep it no longer lest it slay thee; S. 14. Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent and turn from all thy transgressions, so iniquity shall not be thy
ruin: Shall I live in sin whose pleasures are not any, or last but as long as
I live, seeing when they are ended, the torment for sin is real, and lasts as
long as eternity? shall I live any longer in sin? not I, if I keep one lust I
lose one soul; and what lust so sweet and profitable that is worth burning in
hell for? oh how dear will one sin cost me if I live in it!

Now, if ever you, or any other, resolve to express a gracious disposition, S.
15.
and would thoroughly amend his life, and manifest his integrity to purpose, you
must consider that it is not enough to forsake your evils you have no desire
after, nor strong motion to, but we must leave lusts, our own proper lusts, I
mean those evils to which we are most inclined, and such as we are most often
solicited, and tempted to, or else no man is reformed; for I must amend my own
ways, subdue my own lusts, leave off to do my own sins, in which I have been
engaged, and by which I have fallen so often.

Some men do say they are no sectaries, S. 16.
nor drunkards, nor swearers, nor adulterers, nor sorcerers; why, heresy it
may be is not your sin, and so for the rest; but something else it may be, he
that is not a drunkard may be a covetous, person, may be a liar, proud,
envious, or the like; for every man's lust does not lie the same way, nor acts
it self in every instance, nor runs in the same channel, yet every unregenerate
man has a way of his own, and enough of that to ruin him: thou art not an
open sinner, but art thou not a secret one? thou art not guilty as another man
is in his way, but are not you (even you) a man that have a corrupt nature, and
a way peculiar in sin? Thine own sin will slay thee, not another man's, and
therefore thy reformation must be of thine own faults whatever they are; Psalm.
34.21. Romans 2.22. Romans 14.12. 2 Cor. 5.10.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacriledg? Must not every man give
an account of himself to God? shall not you and every one be judged according
to his own doings?

In the next place, as thou art advised to look into thy frame and actions, S.
17.3.
thy heart and ways, to search diligently which way thy lust works, and what it
brings forth in thy life, and likewise not to spare thy sins, nor deal kindly
with them in the least; so now do I earnestly exhort thee to consider
seriously the tendency of every one of thy sins, the venom, and malignity of
every particular sin; And this consideration, if it be sober and serious, will
bring thee into a dislike and lothing of all and every sin; for the same poison
and destructiveness which is in the whole kind of sin is in every one, in every
specifical sinful motion and act; and no sin, if it be well examined, will be
by thee thought little or venial, seeing it has the same nature and quality as
those hideous sins that are cursed with a curse, though not in the same degree:
you know that one spark of fire is fire, and will blow up as much gunpowder (if
it fall into it) as a torch or live coal of a greater bigness; and one drop of
the salt sea has saltness in it as truly as the whole Ocean, though not so
much: and so it is with the least sin, and it is enough to make thee loathe and
leave it, if you will wisely judge of it, because it is a sin; the very name
shows that it is to be abhorred in every instance and appearance.

Now if you will look on sin as sin, with a single eye abstracted from the
pleasure of it, S. 18.
and worldly advantage by it or any thing else that would make you think well
of it, then you will perceive the sinfulness, exceeding sinfullness of sin.
And that this consideration may help thee to abhor, renounce, and forthwith
to cast away thy sin from thee, as a loathsome and detestable thing, weigh well
these considerations in the ensuing Chapter.

CHAP. IX.
Of some coasiderations which may move a considerate person to lot he and leave
his own sin resolutely without dispute.

THat man that would in good earnest leave his sins, S. 19.
and give a check to his corruptions, and first motions of lust, must make his
sins as heinous to his own view as they are in their own nature, if he can; for
a man accustomed to sin, will not be soon taken off, nor daunted with it,
neither will he be brought to dislike (much less to detest) that way and
practice wherein he has found any thing of fleshly content, or in which he is
engaged, unless he sees something that may change his mind and alter his course
from evil to good. There is a close confederacy between a natural man's heart
and his sin, that the league and cursed amity is not interrupted but by
violence, and that but for a season neither; sin, though it be banished, will
return again with its solicitations and promises; the heart of man
unregenerate, is as ready open to receive and embrace those former motions, and
does as easily do those acts of folly again, and does more greedily pursue the
satisfaction of lusts, desires (if not hindered) then ever; and the reason that
there are so few true converts, and so many notorious sinners, is, because men
either content themselves with a cessation for some little time, (that is)
while the temptation is at a distance, and their opportunities not so frequent,
or some humane restraint, either their laws, their fear, or their favors do
awe them; or because men do not soberly consider why they should loathe their
sin and detest it, no man will be dissuaded from that which is evil, except he
see evil in that thing he is dissuaded from.

And now truly in every sin thou art guilty of there is so much evil, S. 20.
that a serious considerate soul would choose to lie under the greatest
affliction without sin, rather then to commit the least sin, to escape that
temporary affliction, or to gain by sinning all the advantages this world can
procure to the flesh.

The want of the consideration of the heinousness of sin, S. 21. Plas. 51.
was the occasion that let that good man David loose to a sin which afterward
cost him many a salt tear; and it was well for him he found place for
repentance, a melting heart, and a weeping eye, or else his sin had cost him
dear, had it not been pardoned upon his repentance; Against thee only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; which if he had considered before as
afterward he did, he had not fallen into that which was so hard for him to get
out of. And on the other side, the consideration of sin as sin, notwithstanding
the advantage might have accrued thereby, was the occasion that Joseph
withstood the solicitation of his Mistress to an experiment of folly, namely
with this, Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness and sin against-God? and this
consideration kept him from that act of folly, which otherwise he might have
committed to his wounding and endangering.

Now that you may no longer retain any the least love and liking of your sin
whatever it be, S. 22. Job 11.14.
but forthwith renounce and cast it far from thee, And if iniquity be in thine
hand, to put it away, and never more let wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle,
then enter on these following considerations:

First, S. 23. 1.
I consider, (and so likewise do you,) that sin in its self, when it was first
known by the creatures, angels, and men, and by any of either of those two
kinds of creatures committed and acted, became the greatest downfall of each of
those Actors, as ever since (and never before they became sinners) was heard
of. Sin at the first made the first and great breach between God and sinning
Angels, God and sinning men: Man had not known misery but for sin, and the
miseries, and calamities, and natural death of mankind are not half so
dreadful as sin is, nor half so much evil as sin is; and the devils had not
felt torment, and now their unspeakable misery, but for their sin; nay hell had
not been hell, a place of torment, had it not been for sinners, which was
prepared, and prepared only for sinning angels, and sinning men; and all the
Miseries that have befallen any since the creation, or that ever shall be
inflicted upon any, are but the woeful consequences of sin, the first and
single transgression of a law of God, and that by the most choice of the
creation, and by their single act; and being but once committed there fell on
them the immediate curse and misery, which to this day, and to the end of the
world, and will for ever continue as long as sin is sin, and that will be for
ever: For Christ himself never undertook to abrogate the law of God, nor to
make it a law that transgression of those laws should be no sin, nor that
transgressors should be accounted innocent, when they sin by disobedience and
transgression, nor that they should be approved of by God, and saved eternally
in a way of disobedience, that is, in a way of habitual and actual rebellion
against God.

Now when I consider the venom and perniciousness of sin in its first
infection, S. 24.
and in one single act, that it defiled and destroyed by rendering them for
ever most miserable, so great a number of once most glorious and happy angels
that sinned but once before their fall, and the first sin that ever was
committed, yet for that once sinning were cast down in disgrace presently from
heaven, and of glorious angels made wretched devils, and reserved in chains
of darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude v. 6.
never to be restored upon any terms to the least hope of recovery and
reconciliation with God.

Yet again when I consider that for one sin in our first parents, S. 25.
Adam and Eve, which came upon them by the instigation and cheat of Satan in
the time of their pure innocence and integrity, what an hereditary misery it
brought with it, yea such an infection and pollution, that not only they which
transgressed became miserable slaves, wretched persons, deprived of their
excellency and paradise, but even all the whole race of mankind are fallen
under the misery of pollution in our very nature, and thereby in a state of
wrath, and liable to eternal misery; can I, when I consider this, (the woeful
consequences of one sin in such as those once glorious angels, and these once
most happy men,) choose but I must entertain most dreadful apprehensions of the
nature of sin, and flee from it, and lotheit as a poisonous serpent, and fiery
dragon issuing out of the bottomless pit of hell, pursuing thy soul to the
death and destruction?

2ly. I consider the exceeding sinfulness of sin, S. 26.
and I think with Abhorrency of soul on that venom in it and detestableness,
that when the immaculate, most innocent sinlesse lamb, the holy and
ever-blessed JESUS took man's nature, and undertook to expiate the guilt, and to
satisfy the justice of God, and to intercept the wrath of the offended God,
pouring out upon the whole race of mankind for the first and
after-transgressions; see although he did but bear our sins (for he had not
one sin of his own to answer for, not the least, sinless he ever was, and
sinless he will for ever be;) yet consider what expense he was at, and what
chastisements he bare, what agonies of soul he labored under, what woundings
he suffered, what blood he shed, what death he died, and all ignominy, and ten
thousand times more then I can express, did he pass through, and all because
he (in infinite love to mankind) would interpose, and was content to be reputed
as a sinner, that he might satisfy for sin committed, and repair the ruins
sin had made, and restore the loss sin had procured; yet when I consider what
woeful work sin made on the humanity of the ETERNAL JESUS, while on earth,
though being but laid on him, not found in him, how can I keep my blood from
rising up against sin, my sin that fetched the heart-blood of Christ my Lord,
and crucified the Lord of Life, the Lord of my Life too, and caused his death
for a season? But had he been tainted in himself with the least sin of his own,
or been gui^ty of the least transgression, or had he made the least failer in
any of those many transactions enjoined him by his Eternal Father for the
redemption of mankind fallen, or had he admitted of the least irregularity in
all his life, in thought, word or action, the nature of sin is such, where ever
it cleaves and sticks, that the least scruple and mote would have infected a
world of men, and an heaven of angels, and if Christ himself had been tainted
with the lest sin imaginable, he must have ceased from being a Savior and
Redeemer of others, and from being God who is glorious in holiness, and have
sought for himself a Savior and Redeemer, or have lain under that guilt and
pollution that his own sin had brought upon him: and this the devil knew well
enough when he attempted our blessed Lord Jesus with temptations of diverse
sorts, that he might bring him to commit a sin which would have frustrated the
merit of his redemption, and undone both him and us, if such a thing had been
possible that Christ could have committed a sin. So great an evil, and so
poisonous a plague is sin, that it will do that by it is own maglignity which
all the devils in hell cannot do to me, except I commit sin, and yield to the
solicitations and motions of mine own lust.

Can I now, S. 27.
(if I have but the least love to Christ) after such a consideration as this,
think sin to be no evil, and that there is no great hurt in it, much less think
it lovely? should I not rather think sin to be the greatest evil in the world,
more terrible then all the most astonishing and loathsome diseases that are
incident to humanity? is it not far better for one to undergo all the
afflictions and bodily punishments in this life, then to have his soul infected
with sin, or to lie under the guilt or burden of one sin alone? is it not much
better to be a poor Saint then a rich sinner, an humble penitent then an
honorable reprobate? would I not a thousand times rather have my whole life
accompanied with variety of troubles without sin, then to be quite freed from
all afflictions, with the being and adhesion of one sin, though but one, and
that the least? Oh my soul, God may love thee though never so sorely afflicted,
(as sometime Job was;) and his love is life and riches, and far better then
all; but if thou be never so rich, and great, and healthy, and be hated of God,
Oh how miserable art thou!

Shall I continue in sin then? S. 28.
God forbid. Never let my soul close with that which God so perfectly hates,
and will as certainly punish, first or last, where ever he finds it, and him
with whom he finds it; and who can hide himself or his sin, from the all-seeing
God, or withstand his power punishing? alas not one in the world.

And shall I attempt to sin, S. 29.
which I may do, and then to hide it, which I shall never be able to do, from
the eye of God? nor shall I ever be able to withstand the stroke, or stand
under the wrath of him that will not spare when he means to take vengeance of
sin; and then poor wretch what will become of thee, when thy unpardoned sins,
thine own wickedness shall be laid on thee, and together with them the
insupportable wrath of the Almighty? Ah sin! thou have undone millions already,
and wilt ruin me also if I keep thee: I am sorry I have been so well
acquainted with thee so long, that I have been deceived by thee so often; it is
too much I have served thee and the devil by sinning. O Lord that I may
henceforth renounce all my wickedness, and loathe every one of my sins, and the
womb that bears them, Jam. 1.14, 15.
even my lusts; it will never be well with thee, O my soul, until I am
delivered from the power, guilt, and filthiness of my sins.

3. I consider, S. 30.
that if sin in its nature be so pestilent, and of such dreadful consequence
and malevolent aspect, working the destruction of the subject where ere it
fastens and remains, then must I expect the same dealing from my own lusts and
sinful acts if I continue in my sin, nourish and feed my lusts, as others have
by sad experience found from their sins; and it is past dispute that every sin
in particular, every transgression of mine, every evil motion within me, every
act of sin is of the very same nature and tendencie, and has the same
poisonous quality, and the same contrariety, enmity and malignity against God
and goodness, as the whole kind of sin in the mass; it is bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh, and of the same father the devil, and bears his very
image, and does the same thing, it sights against heaven and my own souls
happiness; it will destroy infallibly if I keep it and cherish it with me.

If I practice theft, or covetousness, S. 31.
or whoredom, or drunkenness, or lying, or swearing, or any other sin
frequently, or but once, am I not a sinner? have I not transgressed the whole
law? St. James tells me, that if I offend in one point I am guilty of all, Jam.
2.10.
that is, I have broken the Law of God, and am guilty of the breach of the
whole law by so doing; not that I have committed every individual sin
forbidden, but I have contracted (transgressing in one point) the guilt of high
treason against my Sovereign Lord the supreme lawgiver.

And why should I imagine that the littleness of my sin should lessen the
transgression? S. 32.
My Lord Christ says, That whosoever shall break one (but one) of these least
commandments, Mat. 5.19.
(the least of them,) he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven,
that is, he shall be despised and rejected by God in the day of judgment, and
cast out as an offender and rebel; be it but rash anger of malicious design,
or looking on a woman lustfully, though it proceed not to actual murder or
adultery, though it seem but small while in the first motions of lust, yet it is
a breach of the spiritual law of God, and I am a sinner and a rebel; and if I
so continue in these seeming little faults, I am exempted from pardon; for in
every single sin there is a complicated viciousness, and an accumulated
treason, and that is enough to bring me to condign punishment; and if one of my
sins will be strong enough to wound me and slay me, and has malice enough to
attempt it, how then can I be safe? how can I think to escape and deliver my
soul, while I keep my sin, and act my folly?

S. 33.
For I may consider that every single sin has these in it common with the whole
kind of every sin I either love or act, and the more I practice, and the more
frequently I commit it, the more heinous is my sin, and I by every single act
of every of them add more to the measure and heap of wrath, and in each act of
the same sin, or addition of a new sin, the more rods and scourges are
treasuring up for my final chastisement and eternal punishment.

4ly. For this I consider, S. 34.
that the least sin that can be named, be it but the sin of a vain word, an
irregular thought, an impertinent and unprofitable action, is able to undo and
overthrow millions of angels, and a world of men, if laid and charged on them;
and the reason is, because of that poison that is in it, and it is enough that
it is sin, and whatever has the nature thereof, is insupportable by any or all
the concurrent strength of angels and men.

Now if I have but the least exercise of my reason or religion, S. 35.
how can I contentedly keep my sin? how can I but I must forthwith renounce,
suppress and cast quite away my sins, be they great or small, many or few? For
first, when I shall seriously consider these following things;

1. I consider that every sin is against God, and every time I sin I fight
against God, and use it as my weapon with which I oppose, resist, offend,
contradict the GLORIOUS MAJESTY of my gracious God; that it is a contrariety
against him,

1. To the holy nature of God; S. 36.
sin is set forth in Scripture, and that does show the maliciousness and
exceeding desperateness of it, where sin is termed Romans 8.7.
enmity against God, Act. 7.51.
resisting the holy Ghost, Act 5.39.
fighting against God; and sinners are said (while in their sins) to walk
Levit. 26.21, 28.
contrary to God, and Isai 45.9.
striving against God, yea rising up in Micah 2.8.
rebellion against God: And all these are expressions which demonstrate the
nature of sin in the root, and every branch and spring of the tree is of the
same venomous quality in its measure and proportion; and can any man think well
of that which sets him against the glorious God, and renders me an enemy to
God, and provokes Gods displeasure against me? Woe unto that soul that striveth
with his maker; Isai. 45.9.
how can the pot-sheard prevail against his maker? how can chafe stand before
the wind? how can a bramble withstand the fire?

2. Sin is against the holy and righteous laws of God, S. 37.
and by my sin I go about to evacuate and null the just and holy laws of God
made to rule us by; and when I sin I do in effect say, I will not be ruled by
those laws of God, nor obey the will of God, but I will resist his will, and
break his commands, and will not have God for my God to reign over me, but
follow my own will, the will of the flesh, and obey the devil, and his
commands will I follow whatever the issue may be; and what a damnable
resolution is this, yea what a desperate conclusion? what woeful and dreadful
consequences will my sinning bring upon my soul, if thus I set my self, act
against the commands of God, which one day will be justified against me vile
sinner?

3. My continuance in sin, S. 38.
in any sin, is contrary to that most gracious design and purpose of God by
which he wills my freedom from the dominion, filth and guilt of my sin, and
to put me in a state of holiness and happiness.

1. God sent Christ his dear Son into the world on this design, and on this
errand he came, and for this he spent his precious blood, and laid down his
life, to redeem me from my sins to be a sacrifice for me, to destroy the work
of the devil in me (to wit) my sin, to slay that enmity in my cursed nature, to
abolish sin, to rid me of my sin, to make me a new creature, to purge out the
old leaven, to separate me and my sin; he gave himself for me, to redeem me
from all iniquity, and to purify me, Tit. 2.12, 14.
and make me holy, to teach me this lesson by his holy life and holy doctrine
to avoid sin, to resist temptations, to live spotless in the world, to renounce
all ungodliness, to call me to repentance for all my sins past, and to lead a
sober, righteous and godly life in this present world; and by his meritorious
life and death has procured this grace for me, that through him I might be
able to crucify all my corruptions, overcome all my sins, and free me from
every damning practice, and so reconciling me to God, and to turn my enmity
against God to a harred of every false, unholy, disobedient way and practice,
and to be at peace with God: And do I not by my continuing in my sin frustrate
this merciful design, and render my blessed Savior undertaking, and his great
expense, of no such great effect to me? do not I while I keep my sin, and act
my shame and misery, put a scorn upon Christ's undertakings, and trample his
precious blood (one drop of it being more worth then mountains of gold and
precious stones, 1 Pet. 1.19. Heb. 10.27.
) under foot as an unholy thing, as a thing not effectual to redeem me from my
vain conversation? do I not by my continuance after all this in my sin, render
my self in such a state, in which there is nothing can be expected less then a
certain fearful looking for of judgment? see it plain, Heb. 10.26. If we sin
wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation which shall devour the adversary, etc.

2. My continuance in my sin is contrary to the gracious design of the Gospel,
and ministry of it, which is appointed of mercy to my soul, and to this end
published to thee, Act. 26.20.
that it might be the happy instrument of thy conversion, and to work thee off
from thy sin, and to persuade thee to let thy sins go, and to build thee up in
a most holy faith and life; Act. 20.21.
to turn me from sin to God, from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God.

And what are all those calls, entreaties, S. 40.
invitations, wooings, complainings, menaces, promises in the
Gospel-administrations, and all the labors, watchings, prayings and
preachings, and studies and tears, and admonitions and warnings? and to what
end are sermons, and sabbaths, and sacraments for me? why does God rebuke, and
correct, and inflict punishments upon sinners? what are all these from the
gracious God to me, but so many varieties of arguments, and so many
importunities and instruments for this very end, that I might leave off and
cease to do evil, and learn to do well? to what purpose is all this cost, but
to bring my soul, (my life) and sin asunder? what is it for but this, to cause
me to leave and forsake that which God hates perfectly, and that will undo me
certainly (if kept?) it is to persuade me to yield to do no more any such act as
God hates; O do not the thing that I hate (says God,) by all these his
dispensations; and that is the upshot of all.

Now while I continue in any sin, what do I any less then cross the design of
God by these means, S. 41.
and so render my self inexcusable, and oppose God in Christ, and resist the
Spirit of God in his word, working and endeavoring by all means my conversion?
what am I less injurious to Gods grace and Christ's love by my obstinacy and
wilfullness then they of this sort which our Savior speaks to in tears, Luke
13.34. Luke 19.42.
How often would I have gathered thee, as a hen does her chickens under her
wings, but ye would not? O that thou had known, even thou in this thy day,
(and by these thy means) the things that belong unto thy peace! but now they
are hid from thine eyes: thou knew not the time of mercies visitation, but
crossest the gracious design of thy invitation, thou will not leave thy sin,
and now mercy is hid from thee; and so my continuance in sin is a mere
contradiction to my pardon and forgiveness you see.

O how should this consideration cut me to the bone, S. 42.
and pierce me to the heart, when my continuing in sin is no less then the
opposing the grace of God, Its design is to bring me to repentance and
forsaking sin, that I might find mercy and favor from him; who (but a mad man
or a fool) would continue in his sin against such grace, and so cross that
design of God to bring thee (poor wretch) to happiness?

I consider, that as my sin is against God, S. 43.
for it is a pollution, and so against his most holy nature, which has no
defilement, and it is against his holy laws, his good will, purpose, and
gracious designs, and makes the sinner and God at great dispute and
controversy, which is a state bad enough for a poor wicked wretch to be in,
yet I may further consider, that my sin is against God, and so bad enough,
though God notwithstanding my enmity and contrariety, can well enough secure
his own honor, holiness and eternal happiness, without impeachment, or the
least interruption or diminution, yet it is bad enough to me, that I by my sin
am become an enemy to God, and God an enemy to me, which is death and misery
sure enough to the sinner.

offer violence to my own soul, my sin is against my own self, it is the
greatest wrong and injury I can do to my self, and if I had any true love to my
self, that is, to the eternal welfare of my best self, my soul, Pro. 8.36.
I should forbear sinning. He that sins against me, that is, against Christ,
wrongeth his own soul, all they that hate me love death: If I live in sin, and
will not repent of it and forbear it, I work the greatest mischief I can
against my self: sinning is self-murthering, I lay violent hands on my self, if
I would study to ruin my self for ever, there is no way imaginable like this
now mentioned, of sinning and repeating the acts, and continuing in any sinful
course, to effect my utter destruction: every sin is a deaths-wound, and
although it kill me not our-right, yet it leaves me for dead, I am a condemned
man, I am dead in law, and dead as to the acting any life of grace; it may be I
may have for a little while a name to live, but indeed I am dead, dead while I
live in the world. Such an one a sinner is, as the Angel of the Church of
Sardis reproves, Rev. 3.1.
I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and art dead.

When I commit a sin, S. 44.
I consider I do that which for ought I know I may neither have the grace nor
the space to repent of, I may forget it, I may make light of it, or I may
excuse it, or defend it, or maintain it; I may be hardened in it, and add more
to it, and draw others to countenance and practice my sin, and so still infect
another with my plague, and become an exemplar and promoter of wickedness, and
teach others to sin too, and propagate iniquity, and bring subjects to the
devil, and enlarge his kingdom; O what an innumerable many of mischiefs do I
bring upon my self and others, when I sin! And after all this, if I do seem to
be sorry for my so doing, at the end of a vicious life, I can have none
assurance that I shall be pardoned; but on the contrary, most certain it is, if
I continue in my sin until death, I must be damned for all my repentance; for
Judas sinned, and repented, and despaired, and was damned for all his
repentance; his sin for which he was accused, and for which he hanged himself,
was but a sin* and my transgression is a sin too: and if Judas, or Cain, or a
Simon Magus, or a Julian be damned for their sins, what advantage will it be
for me if my sin be not so deep a dye, so grim a complexion, so horrid a sound
as treasons and murder, a betraying my Master, and killing my Brother, if I be
cast into hell for my omissions of Gods commands, and doing such things, though
but in the least instance, which God has absolutely forbidden? When I consider
this, methinks I should dread sin as an ugly fiend, as a devil of hell, and
shun it as a pest and a killing plague, and repent me heartily that ever I
committed any, and resolve to commit it no more; and the more I consider, the
more I should detest, loathe, shun, renounce all and every wickedness, and the
more should I raise my resolution to sin no more as I have done, lest as bad a
thing befall me as has befallen any of those whose destruction was most
dreadful: God grant I may, I hope I shall.

3. I consider again, S. 55.
that when I sin I injure my own soul; (1.) I wrong my knowledge, I know I
should not commit the sin I commit, and yet I do it against my knowledge. (2.)
I wrong my reason and judgment: my reason and my judgment (if it act clear)
tell me that there is no reason why I should serve sin, but all the reason in
the world why I should not sin thus; and if I would yield to reason I should
not yield to sin, and yet I sin against my reason and judgment, and wrong both.
(3.) I wrong and offer violence to my conscience when I sin; my conscience
minds me that I must not commit this and that sin, and it smites me when I do,
and it accuses for my sinning when I have done it, and yet I sin, I do act
against my conscience when I sin at all, and how will my conscience endure
this? will not my conscience one day complain to God of me that I wronged it,
and did things contrary to it in despite of it? and do I not wound, and gash,
and tear my bosome-friend, when I sin? do I not make conscience my enemy too,
as well as God my enemy every time I commit a sin?

4. Besides all this, S. 56.
when I sin again wilfully, with consent, deliberately, I break my baptismal
vow, and my rational Christian conscientious resolution; I am engaged by vow
and promise to forsake the devil, to resist his temptations, to renounce
worldly lusts and fleshly lusts, and every way that is contrary to Christ and
holiness, and I have or should peremptorily resolve against all manner of sin;
and yet when I sin voluntarily I violate my vow, and break my promise, and
contradict my resolutions, and render my self a covenant-breaker, a perjured
person, an unfaithful and unconstant, a fickle and vain fool, and bring guilt
and disgrace, sin and ignominy together upon my own soul; and do I not wrong
my self extremely in so doing? can I do a greater mischief to my self then I do
when I sin after all this? can any thing disgrace me more, debase me lower,
revile me more deservedly then this, when I commit a sin and live in it? is
there any thing can deface the image of God in me, (which is my glory and
honor, my beauty and perfection,) then sin? If I be poor and holy, yet am I
rich in grace, and so am I honorable too, though I want both worldly riches
and honors; but if I am a sinful wretch, though never so rich and great in
the worlds account, yet am I but a vile and deformed person, a scorn, and
contemptible before God and Angels: O there is nothing makes me ugly and
deformed, vile and contemptible but my sin; do I not then wrong my self by
sinning? or is there any way imaginable whereby a man can do a greater or so
great a mischief to himself then by acting and repeating his sins? sure there
is not any.

5. When I consider the damage and irreparable loss I procure to my precious
soul by my own sin, S. 57.
I must conclude within my self, that when I sin I wrong my own soul, and fight
against my own happiness, and content for my own undoing. 1. When I commit sin
I make a breach between God and my own soul, my sin is the makebate; not
poverty, nor affliction, nor sickness, nor meanness of birth, nor deformity of
body, nor any thing but sin does make God at a distance from my soul; but by
sin I lose my innocence, and sin away that which nothing can procure me, which
is much more worth then gold, that which gold cannot purchase again, the peace
of conscience; Isa. 57.21.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked; I provoke Gods anger and
displeasure, and tempt him to withdraw his favor from me, and to bring forth
treasures of wrath against me; all the while I live in a sinning state I lose
the benefit of repentance, the benefit of Christ's sufferings and intercession,
I bereave my soul of the indwelling of the spirit of comfort, and banish by my
sining Christ from my soul, and grieve the holy Spirit of God so, that he
withdraws himself and leaves me desolate; and alas, what a sad loss has the
soul that has lost Christ and the Spirit! what a miserable condition is it to
be without Christ and the Holy Ghost? to be one that has banished Christ and
the Holy Spirit from his soul? O how deplorable is that man's estate! and yet
such is the state of a wilful sinner, every man and woman that lives in the
love, liking and practice of sin, and does not repent and reform, he does not
only lose his best friends and best friendship, but provokes them to be his
very enemies, Christ who loved thee, and pitied thee, and laid down his life
for thee, and weeps over thee, and bled for thee, and spared not his life to
redeem thee from thy sins, that he might have thee; and yet for all this his
unparallelled and unspeakable love, and tender compassion, will thou offer him
all affronts, and pierce and wound him with thy sins, and trample upon all his
worth, and banish him quite away with thy unkind dealing? what way could thou
ever have thought on more ready and certain to deprive thy self of all the
benefits of Christ's transactions for sinners, then by sinning still as thou
do? Nay what way could a wicked heart have chosen (that would study his own
eternal loss and misery) like this of sinning still and going on in his
wickedness? can thou contrive any thing that will make Christ (the best
friend that ever poor sinner had,) thy mortal enemy, then by continuing still
to do wickedly? Those mine enemies (says Christ of impenitent, implacable, and
unruly rebels and sinners, Luke 19.27.
) that would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them
before me. Where I see it is possible that Christ may become a revenger; and oh,
Psalm. 2.12.
and oh, when his wrath is kindled, yea but a little, how dreadful will be the
appearance of this Lamb of God! how will all such sinners be forced to cry, O
mountains and rocks fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the throne, Rev. 6.16, 17.
and from the wrath of the lamb: For the great day of his wrath is come, and
who shall be able to stand?

2. I do not only sin away my dear Jesus Christ, and his spirit of comfort, S.
58.
my best friends, and make them my enemies, (which yet is bad enough God knows
for me,) but I also sin away and lose by sinning my felicity, my comforts, my
peace, my happiness, all my heaven on earth: Alas what a poor miserable,
uncomfortable creature is a resolved sinner! what is a man worth that has lost
the rich enjoyment of Gods favor, and his own good conscience? what an hell of
darkness and horror is that soul in, who has lost the light of Gods
countenance, and peace of his own conscience? Many sorrows shall be to the
wicked, but he that trusts in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about; so
that the righteous and upright of heart, the holy penitent may be glad in the
Lord, and take joy, and delight themselves in the Lord; he, and he only, that
is reformed, has those comforts and delights which wicked men know not, nor
can ever attain unto as long as they continue wicked.

David, though a great and potent Monarch, found not that happiness in his
crown which the world may think to be a felicity: S. 59.
He does not say, I am a King, and have many subjects at my command, and a
large dominion, and much revenue, Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8.
and therefore am happy; no, but when he would comfort his soul, and recount
his worth and treasures, says, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance
upon us: give David but Gods favor and love, and he will single out him from
all to make his joy full and his happiness complete; Lord, thou have put
gladness in my heart, more then in the time when their corn and wine was
increased; I will lay me down in peace, etc. how comfortably does he take to
his rest, when he lies down in Gods favor! And had he kept his sin he had lost
his peace and happiness, for you may see a glimpse of the sadness of his
soul, and unquietness, in that 51. Psalm, when he cries out, O his sin, his
sin! Why David? what have thou done by sining? what damage has fallen on thee
by thy sin? why you shall see, he lost his peace, he lost the presence of Gods
favor; and by this his only comfort and felicity he had lost: The best Jewel
in his Crown was dropped out when he lost Gods favor; he cries heartily for
mercy, the mercy of pardon, the mercy of purification and cleaning from the
filth of his sin, and the mercy of his restoration to those joys, comforts and
happiness he had in Gods favor, which then were hid from him, which was his
misery; Purge me, and I shall be clean, cleanse me from my sin, and I shall
have joy and gladness again; Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation once
more. See how he mourns and prays, and for what is it? why it is that his sins
may be abolished, his guilt pardoned, and his comforts restored, which he had
lost by his folly, and which could never be restored but by repentance and
leaving off his sin; and until this was gotten, he knew he could never see
happy day, nor enjoy a minute of true comfort in all the world, though it had
been one paradise of pleasure. And thus it will be with every one that goes on
in his sin. Ah! at what a loss does a sinner act and keep his sin? And this is
my case already, and shortly it will be worse with me; I know God and my
Conscience will not long hold peace and be silent, I am sure I must leave my
sin or lose my comforts, lose my quiet, lose my felicity, and espouse a quarrel
that will admit of no reconciliation; if I keep my sins I must never look God
in the face more, or expect to have the least good look of favor from his
grace, nor any friendly dealing from my own conscience, but must be under
perpetual rebukes and accusations of a wronged conscience; and when this comes
to pass, then farewell happy day, no more comfort when God and my own
conscience are against me: As my sins increase true felicity cease, and my
comforts wither and decay; and alas how sadly does that poor wretch think on
death, when it will prove but the execution of a rebel, and a changing of this
miserable life for an eternity of horror and reproach? Ah! let me now consider,
whether my gain by sin any way will countervail this loss; is it not more
eligible, and should it not be a matter of my choice infinitely rather to enjoy
the favor of God, and peace and tranquillity of my own conscience, then
whatever pleasure, gain, or other emolument might come to my flesh by sinning,
with the loss of my innocence, integrity, my happiness in Gods favor, and that
inward peace which is a continual feast, passing all outward delights
whatsoever?

3. Sin does not only banish God and happiness from my soul here for a season,
S. 60.
but the loss goes higher still by my sin and continuance in it, it loses me
the hopes of heaven, it disappointeth my expectation of heaven; how can I once
hope to be saved while I practice those things which would throw me out of
Heaven, if it were possible for one to think on with delight in heaven? how can
I with reason conclude I shall be saved, and yet live in a course contrary to
the promises of salvation? Heaven is a place of holiness as well as of
happiness, and no unclean thing shall enter into it; there is not one there,
nor ever shall be, that lived in actual sin, and died out of this world
impenitent and unreformed: how then can I with any face expect to be saved with
my sin, when God says I shall not? is heaven at my dispose, or at Gods? is it
not his to give to whom he please? can I force in against his will? has he not
passed his word, that no wicked man, nor unrighteous, nor adulterers, nor
whoremonger, nor theif, nor drunkard, nor liar, nor any impenitent sinner of
any kind, shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. And shall I think God will
revoke his decree, and comply with the expectation of any vile sinner against
his own truth, honor and holiness? may I hope to get to heaven whether God
will or no? no, certainly I must leave my sin, or leave off to hope any more
that I shall be saved; I must despair of salvation, or I must depart from mine
iniquity, and get my sins pardoned, and soul sanctified by a timely repentance
and sound reformation, or quit my claim to salvation, and let fall my suit and
expectation though I seek it, beg for it, desire it, cry for it in my settled
course of sinning: I shall not find it nor attain it; nay though I had to give,
and would freely give all I have, Micah 6.7, 8.
and ten thousand times more then the whole world is worth to purchase heaven
at the end of a vicious life, it would not be accounted of, it would not open
heaven-gate to me, it could not procure for me one glimpse of that glory which
the Saints enjoy, much less that full enjoyment which is laid up for those that
repent and believe, and live holily here, and so persevere to the end of their
days. And now let me consider, had I best leave my sin, or my claim and hopes
of heaven? I may not keep both, I must forgo one, either my sin here, or my
happiness hereafter; will my sin be a sufficient compensation for the loss of
heaven, or heaven for the parting with my lusts? will a base lust be of greater
advantage to thy soul then heaven, that thou make so much of it, and so
little of salvation? can not brook the thoughts of parting with thy sin, and
yet can well enough endure the thoughts of the loss of heaven? is sin so
pleasing a thing, and holiness and heaven so uncomfortable, that thou should
take such pleasure in unrighteousness, and account grace and salvation such a
burden and loss? can thou not sustain with patience the loss of a child, a
friend, the disappointment of a little carnal contentment, or to be crossed in
thy gratifying a vile lust? and can bear with contentedness the loss of thy
God and Savior, thy joy and felicity for ever? O sordid stupidity! O stupid
folly! O desperate madness! is it imaginable that such a thing as this should
ever enter into the heart of any man that has not forfeited his reason, and
sold himself to work wickedness, or resolved to throw away his soul, and undo
himself for ever, and resolves to continue in his sin, though it be with the
loss of his salvation.

But consider, S. 61.
is the loss of heaven nothing? is it no great matter that thy sin deprives
thee of when it shuts fast the gate of heaven against thee? can I think those
five foolish virgins, mentioned in the parable, sustained no loss when they
lost that opportunity of going in with the Bridegroom? did they think their
condition as happy as that of the other five that passed into heaven? seeing
they knocked so earnestly, but too late and in vain, the door was shut, was it
no trouble think you to them that they had lost their opportunity, that now
they could not enter into those joys? will it be no trouble to a sinner at
last, when he shall see the Saints in glory in the kingdom of heaven, and the
vile hard-hearted, impenitent, unconverted wretch shut out for ever? Alas! who
can brook or bear the dreadful apprehensions of the loss of heaven, that has
but, the least regard to his own precious soul, and the worth of heavens
happiness? Can a man think of any loss so great as the loss of heaven is, or is
there any such a loss again, that which comprehends so fully a misery for a
man to think on as this? May I not safely guess that the greater part of horror
and misery of the damned is their reflecting thoughts of their not improving
their opportunities in their day of grace in this world for the attainment of
heaven, and their poor afflicted souls lying under those deep and endless
agonies of their loss, their loss, their loss! Once I had a fair offer of
heaven, but I would not, now I would, but may not, that opportunity is lost,
heaven is lost, and I am lost, and lost for ever; O happy souls that are in
heaven! O miserable we that are excluded thence! Think and think again (sinner)
on this, and then know, that if thou continue in thy sin as they did, that thou
must be as they are, even as they were once deluded with sin, and are now
banished from all hopes of happiness for ever; think seriously on this, and
then continue in thy sin if thou can; thou can not think of living any
longer in thy wickedness, unless thou meanest to take thy lot with them that
have passed to those regions of misery, and there with them to abide, with
weeping and gnashing of teeth to all eternity. Mat. 8.12.


Is it nothing to lose heaven, that I put it every day to the hazard by my
complying with sin, S. 62.
and venture my interest there, purchased with the blood of Christ for penitent,
believing, holy men, and to be conferred on such when they go out of this
stage of the world as the crown of all happiness to their immortal souls? is
it a trifle I lay at stake, when by the next act of sin I put it to a doubt
whether I shall be saved or no? shall I commit this sin, and take the pleasure
and the profit of it, and forgo my hopes of heaven, or shall I not? Men do not
well consider that every time they consent to and obey a lust, and execute its
command, they put their salvation to the hazard; and do I do well or wisely in
so doing? are the joys of heaven no more to be accounted of, then to be so
prodigal of them, and all thy happiness with them? do thou know what thou
losest when thou have lost salvation? or can thou be any where else so well,
or well at all any where else, but in heaven when thou go hence?

Is it nothing to miss of heaven, or to come short of salvation, S. 63.
where only my soul can be fully and completely happy, where there is only and
nothing else but soul-satisfying ioys and contentments; where only I can
neither sin nor die any more, where I can neither fear nor feel pain, sickness,
sorrow, want, reproach, nor any thing that can in the least interrupt, diminish
or suspend my happiness, much less put an end to my full and perfect bliss?
There is more fullness of joy then I can be expressed, Psalm. 16.11.
and more pleasures then can be numbered, and these joys at Gods right hand are
for evermore, more and for ever. And is it a small matter to miss of all these?
Oh who would live in sin that must suffer such loss for it? Surely he loves
his lusts too well that will part with heaven and happiness to gratify the
devil, and satisfy the lusts of his flesh as every wilful finner does: But
shall I continue in my sin and lose this happiness? God forbid. Shall I deprive
my self, and rob my soul of that unspeakable comfort, rich enjoyment, and real
filling contentment and endless happiness I may have above in heaven, rather
then cross my lusts, and part with my folly, my shame, my sin? no, no, let all
go, let my sinful pleasures go, let the world go, let my life go, let all go,
rather then those joys which are in prospect in heaven pass by me, and go
beside me; Lord what shall I do if I miss of heaven? I am undone for ever if I
do go without it; shall I keep a sin which is worse then nothing, and lose the
bliss of Angels, the vision of the All-glorious God, whose presence, favor,
and everlasting love fills the soul with most admirable delights, and ravishing
pleasures? shall I lose the portion of Christ's redeemed ones, Heb. 12.22, 23,
24.
and never come to that heavenly Mount Sion, the City of the living God, to
that innumerable company of Angels, to the general assembly of the firstborn
which are written in heaven? shall I hinder my self of the happy condition of
the spirits of just men made perfect? Oh shall I disappoint my soul of the
sight, fruition and eternal enjoyment of my Jesus, my Lord, my redeemer, who
loved me and died form, and is in heaven preparing a place for his followers,
all true believers? shall I miss him whom my soul loves? can I endure to be
any where but where he is? will any place content me for my rest and hapess but
his arms and eternal embracements? Oh Jesus! how can I now without breaking
my heart once think of being separated from thee one moment? it would be an
hell upon earth, to think that it should be a separation for ever from that
lovely, loving, melting heart and bosom of my Lord and Savior: Yea cursed be
that tempter and temptation, that would make me do that again that might
deprive my poor soul of the enjoyment of my Lord Christ, which is all the
heaven and happiness I desire, so I may be with him for ever, with thee dear
Jesus for ever: And this is enough, I crave no more, and with less then this
enough I cannot be satisfied; I must have Christ for my heaven, and my heaven
where Christ is, or I am undone; give me (says my soul) Christ or I die: let
me have him, let my portion be Christ, and then I shall be richly satisfied;
dear Lord, bring me home to thy kingdom where thou dwell, where thou
reignest, that I may be where thou art for ever; I desire (I say) no more, and
thus much I cannot be without.

Now sin will not only deprive me of this happiness, S. 64.4.
and put me under this irreparable loss, but it will (if I continue in a state
of sinning) bring me into, and leave me for ever under INSUPPORTABLE TORMENTS,
my sin will infallibly bring me to HELL, I must be damned for it; it is a quick
word, a severe word, and a terrible word DAMNATION is, and yet the expression
is not so significantly dreadful as the thing, the term pincheth not the
sinner, but the thing will; hell is a place of torment as well as darkness, not
one drop of water to cool the inflamed tongue, or to quench those everlasting
flames; not one accent of comfort shall ever be heard spoken to a damned
sinner, nor one moment of ease shall ever be had. After Christ has once said,
Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me thou cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his Angels, then immediately is the miserable sinner clapped into prison, and put
into the same state with devils: how does every word of that sentence pierce
the heart of a condemned sinner, DEPART? alas! whither shall I go? mu^^ I
depart whether I will or no? is there no remedy for me, alas? from thee Lord?
why, to whom should I go then? if I must depart from thee, I am lost and
undone; what from my Lord, in whose presence is joy, in whose favor is life
only? no happiness but with thee, and must I depart from THEE, may I not be
admitted to stay so much as in thy sight, where I may have a glimpse of THEE,
and be blessed sometimes with a crumb of thy favor among thy meanest servants?
No! depart from me ye CURSED: oh killing accent! what must I depart, and from
thee, and not have thy blessing? not so much as I bless thee in the name of
the Lord, and go in peace? what not a kind word from thee to comfort me in my
distresses? must I have thy curse with me too? oh this is wounding! my Lord can
say no more to the very devils then to call them ACCURSED; and must I fare no
better? Oh cursed the day that I was born! why did I ever see a day to come to
this dark and dismal day, to be CURSED, and banished with a CURSE? why if it
must be so that I must depart from thee, and with a curse at my back, let me be
banished into some corner of the earth, let me be buried under some mountain,
let me lie as one forgotten, let me hear no more of my faults, nor feel my
misery: No, no, depart from me ye cursed into EVERLASTING FIRE. Oh terrible!
what into fire? must I burn and be tormented? why who can endure to be burnt?
must I lie down in flames? oh that I might be quickly consumed then and cease
to be, that I might feel no pain then; it is a thousand times better not to be,
then to be thus miserable; may I not have the favor to be turned into nothing
rather then into burnings? or let me be tormented but for ten thousand years,
and then gain at length thy favor; Voluisset reprobus si potuisset sine fine
vivere, ut posset sine fine peccare, Greg.
No, it is too easy a punishment for such a sinner, who would sin eternally
if thou had been to live eternally on the earth; thou did continue in sin
all thy lifetime, which was all the eternity thou had, and would do so
always if thou had been to live always; therefore now thy lot is an eternal
curse, an everlasting fire, without mitigation, without limitation; no ease
there, no redemption thence, no end of that torment, it is everlasting fire.

But will not the Lord abate somewhat of the heat and fierceness of that fire?
S. 65.
No, it is PREPARED, and prepared for Gods greatest enemies; it is such, and
altogether such as is prepared for the torments of devils: Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, PREPARED for the DEVIL and his ANGELS: what must
a vile sinner have no better company in his misery then the cursed devils and
his cursed crew to all eternity? No! no other; they that were thy companions in
evil will be thy tormentors, thou will curse them, and they will curse thee,
and all will curse themselves, and Jesus Christ will curse them all; and to all
eternity shall those wretches that live in their sin, and will not be in time
reformed, be cursed, and shut up into that condition with final despair, for
the reprobate wretch shall be tormented to all eternity, and they shall know so
much, and despair shall seife upon them as a part of their torment.

O sinner, whoever thou art that read this, reflect on thy self now, S. 66.
and seriously consider what it is to live in sin here, and to refuse amendment,
and to despise admonition, and not to reform thy life, and get thy sins
pardoned, and soul sanctified, and thy self thoroughly converted ere it be too
late.

Consider (I say) what thy sin will bring thee to, it will bring thee to
hell torments, S. 67.
to the region of horror, to flames unquenchable, to Legions of devils, to the
spirits of wicked men made most miserable, to an innumerable company of cursed,
damned wretches like thy self, and to insupportable, yet endless, misery: And
is it no thing to lie under effectual wrath, and that for ever? is it a thing
to be made light of by thee sinner, is to inherit the curse, and hell for thy
portion? can thou endure the everlasting burnings, and laugh at thine own
calamities? shall not the thought of I SHALL NEVER BE RELEASED NOR EASED be
pleasing to thee then? Will not this be thy hopeless wish, Oh that I might die
and be no more for ever? fain the poor wretch would die, but die he shall not,
and yet live he cannot be said to do, ever dying and never dead, ever breaking
and never be broken, ever burning and never be consumed? oh what woeful pass is
the sinner brought to! oh dungeon of darkness, horror, pain and sorrow! oh
wretch that I was, oh miserable that I am, oh that I had never been born to
this, or that I had been a dog, a toad in the ditch, any thing, nothing rather
then a sinner to come to this, to suffer thus as I now do! are all my sweet
morsels of sin and sinful pleasures come to this at last? is this that which I
sinned so vilely against God for? is this the recompense of my rebellion, my
scorning and hardening my heart, and shutting my ears against counsels,
admonitions, warnings, menaces and rebukes, while I lived in the world? oh how
dear do I pay for all my folly, wilfulness and madness! I would not be reformed
time was, and now I may not though I would, and now I cannot deliver my own
soul, and Christ will not deliver me, I am tormented, tormented, tormented in
this flame; Oh what an hell is this! what company is here! what horror is here!
what anguish do I feel within me! what a rack of torture am I upon! what
trembling of joints, what gnawing of conscience, what hellish groans and
moaning accents, what harsh affrighting, afflicting gnashings within, and round
about the poor damned sinner! what ghastly looks, what hideous out-crys! alas,
alas, who can express the misery of the damned? oh to what a woeful pass is an
impenitent now brought to! where are now his carnal delights? where is his
worldly greatness and riches gotten by sin, and enjoyed in sin? what is become
of his joviall company? where (wretch) now is thy presumption and vain hope,
and foolish confidence, and dull security? what would give for one minutes
ease now, which thou would not believe was not to be found in hell, or that
thou should ever be brought to this case by thy continuance in sin? you put
then the thoughts of this evil day far from you, while the seasonable thoughts
thereof in time might have prevented it, and now (poor wretch) thou can not
remove thy thoughts from thy misery, now thou would do any thing to release
thee, but then thou would not hearken to do the least matter toward the
preventing of this thy misery; who can pity thee? who will pity thee? no, the
time of pity and mercy from the Lord is gone, Qui voluntatem Dei spreverunt
invitantem, voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem. Aug Isai. 66.4, 24.
and gone for ever, and thou art lost and lost for ever: I will bring their
fears upon them, (says the Lord) Isai. 66.4. because when I called none did
answer, when I spoke they did not hear; but they did evil before mine eyes, and
chose that in which I delighted not. And they shall go forth and look upon the
carkesses of the men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall
not die, neither shall their sire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring
to all flesh. Oh who would live in sin to pay so dear for sinning? would any
but a profane Esau sell away his happiness, the blessing of heaven, to
purchase the curse and hell? and yet every sinner that goes on in his
wickedness does so, he takes up the pleasures of sin for a season, and
exchangeth for it heaven, and undergoes for his short mirth and ETERNAL MISERY.

O stubborn, S. 68.
O wilful, O careless sinner! will thou not yet consider this in time while
deliverance may be had, while thy damnation may be prevented? Psalm* 50.22.
Now consider this ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be
none to deliver you: Will thou rather die eternally, then take some pains to
turn from thy sinful courses and live? shall it be all in vain that thou art
forewarned? will it not be one day all in vain that thou wishest thou had
been reformed, if thou refuse it now? O poor soul if thou have any regard to
thy self, if thou will ever escape the damnation of hell, think on it now, and
sin no more, do no more so foolishly; it is enough thou have done already, and
too much; let it suffice thee, and repent thee that thou have lived so long in
that state which will bring thee to thy misery, if not speedily reformed; let
hell, the portion of impenitent sinners, and its everlasting torments, the
punishment for such sinners, be thought on by thee, and quickly, quickly,
without delay come out of that way which leads to this destruction, which will
infallibly be met withal at the end of a vicious sinful course.

And now that thou may be brought by these considerations to a speedy,
effectual, S. 69.
and practical resolution, forthwith to leave off every sinful way that thou
have gone on in sinning, which is so odious to God, so much against him, and so
much against thy soul, so much against thy happiness, and so much to thy loss
and damage; how should the consideration of all these things work upon thine
heart, and hasten this resolution, and without more ado bring thee to this
conclusion, Therefore will I now return, now will I no longer abide in my sins,
I have done too much already, if God will accept of me, yet I will provoke him
no more, I would not lose my God, my soul, my happiness; but I will part with
my sins, all my sins, and return no more to folly; by the grace of God this
will I do, I see there is reason I should, I see there is a necessity for it if
I mean to be happy, and I would not be damned, but with all my heart I desire
to be saved eternally. Psalm. 39.13.
O spare a little good Lord, that I may have some space yet to repent, to
amend, and that I may recover some strength ere go I hence and be no more.

But lest thou should defer to put this resolution into practice, S. 70.
and so suffer thy time to pass away, and to put off to another day, and for
the present rest in thy good resolution, which is but the be ginning of
reformation, and will not be accepted without actual performance and
perseverance in the duty, I do now in the next place exhort thee to be speedy
and resolute in forsaking and casting off all thy transgressions without any
further delay; To day, Heb. 4.7.
while it is said to day, after so long a time if you will hear his voice
harden not your hearts: For be the work hard, or be it easy, done it must be,
there is a necessity for it, sin must be left, corruption must be mortified,
and your life must be reformed ere you die, and the present opportunity is the
fittest opportunity, if not the only acceptable day; And if you are still
about to amend, and intending to reform, and yet do it not, but rest in thy
almost being resolved, and about being resolved, you do but flatter your self,
and lose your time, and give sin the head, and suffer corruption to take deep
root, and every days deferring gives God the denial (who calls to day,) and
renders the duty more difficult, and thy self more sinful, and religion more
unpleasing, and makes grace more feeble and ineffectual; and so putting off
from day to day, shortly death will come (which will not be put off) and thy
work undone, thy sins not left, thy lusts unsubdued, thy God offended, thy soul
wronged, thy sorrows drawing near, thy appearance in judgment at hand, and thou
all this while a guilty, unholy, impure soul, summoned to answer for all thy
delays, and thou then sentenced to misery for thy neglecting thy day of grace,
and putting away far from thee thy reformation, which a long time thou had
been convinced to be necessary, and it may be have been about it, and about it,
but have not endeavored it effectually: This is the case of too many, and if
it be thy case, then my earnest request is that you would speed your
reformation that it may be effected before you die: -- I am sure it will do
you no harm to leave off your sensual devilish courses, and that speedily too,
unless it hurt you to be pardoned, cleansed, and eternally saved; and certainly
this can be no wrong unto thee to persuade thee to desist from doing such
things, which to do and continue in, is not only thy shame and loss, but thy
undoing for ever; be serious then in what further is offered in the following
chapter for thy consideration, to hasten thy reformation, and to silence all
objections to the contrary.

CHAP. X.
Of some more moving thoughts which may help, and draw a poor sinner to speedy
resolution without further delay.

HAving in the foregoing Chapter shown both the odiousness and miserable
consequences of sin, S. 71.
and dreadful expectation of a man going on in his wickedness, I would now in
this Chapter mind the sinner of what behooves him to do in the case, in answer
to the merciful forbearing, long-suffering, and goodness of God which leads to
repentance: that so Gods lengthened-out patience toward thee a sinner to this
time of thy life, may no longer be abused by thy continuing any whit longer in
thy sins, which mercy will be wronged and affronted by thee, if after all this
forbearance, accompanied with so many testimonies against sin, and so many
gracious calls and invitations to return from thy evil doings, to serve the
living God in new obedience; if thou should persevere and go on still in thy
evil ways any further after such convictions, how would it aggravate thy sins,
and heighten thy misery? Therefore I would persuade thee to do that speedily
(which all wise men have done) even now thou know thy faults, to amend thy
faults without putting off, or objecting against, thy speedy reformation: Say,
I have the corruptions of my nature to be mortified, my diseases to be healed,
the power of my lusts to be conquered, the image of God to be repaired, my
sinful practices to be amended, many Acts of grace to be performed, many
temptations to be resisted and disappointed, this present world with all its
blandishments to be crucified, this heart of mine must be brought to love
Christ above all, and all this cannot be done in a moment, and then shall I put
it off any longer? have I any time to spend idly or vainly? any more that I
can well spare from such employments as these are, to squander away about other
foolish matters, having so much to do of my own work? yea say further, I
thought on my ways, and I am resolved to turn from all my evil courses, and I
will make have and not delay to keep thy Commandments. Thus did that true
penitent David, recorded for thy imitation in this point, Psalm. 119.58, 60.
(who says) I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy commandments, I
made have and delayed not to keep thy commandments. Now let me consider,

First, S. 72.1.
and why should not I do so also? is not my soul as dear to me as his to him?
am not I as much engaged to Christ as he? will not my sins undo me as much as
his would him? do I not as much need reformation as any body, if I am not
already reformed? or can I turn too soon? may I fear of being too good a
Christian, too much a convert, too much holy?

May I not rather have cause to fear that if I do not reform now forthwith it
may be too late hereafter? S. 73.
I may not have space, Deus poenitentibus veniam promisit, sed omnibus
paenitendi tempus non concessit, Greg.
or if I have, I may not have the grace to repent; and may I not be jealous
(having so much to do in the business of my soul) that I shall not have time
enough to do all my work? There is no too much of that of which there can never
be enough; and I have heard that repentance may be too late, but never can it
be too soon: one would think it reason a man should repent the very next minute
after the committing of sin, and yet men commit many, sins and live long in
them, and think it yet too soon to leave them and repent of them; or that they
may do all the work of Reformation at once, in a very trice, as though there
were a kind of slight and dexterity to dispatch the great work of
through-saving reformation in a moment, when alas the whole life of the longest
sinner is but enough, scarce that, unless we husband and improve our
opportunities better then most in the world do this way, and is it not yet time
to look after thy souls reformation, since there is so much past of thy life
already, and so little behind to come, it may be not one week, and thou have
much to do? I am drawing near to my end, my sins increase, and my time
decreases; if I have time enough, yet it is but enough for the great work I have
to do, and I cannot command time as much as I please, for if it be not in my
power to prolong my days, and set me more limits to my life, if I cannot say I
will live till such an age and continue in perfect strength, judgment and
affections till that time, if I cannot command repentance at pleasure, and be
my own judge and carver as to proportion how much and so much will serve my
turn, if I may not limit God to my proportion, and allow him to accept as much
of it as I am willing to perform, and at what time, and in what degree, and
then that God shall seal me a pardon, and give me heaven upon my own conditions
whether he will or no: and sure this were high presumption, and an arrogancy
not to be born by a mortal, much less by the glorious supreme Majesty of
heaven, who is Lord of all men, their lives, their strength, their souls, and
all they have, who has the sole power and disposal of all things temporal,
spiritual and eternal, all graces and glories; and shall I dare think, much
less how can I hope that God will alter his decree, and deny his prerogative,
and cancel the conditions of salvation, and divest himself of that eternal
Sovereignty, and give it to me a base wretch, only that I may be wicked, and
continue as long in my sins as I will, and then to make God serve my ends, and
countenance my rebellion, and reward me for all the contempts of his offers,
and abusing his patience and long-sufferance, with heavenly joys and a crown of
glory at the end of a life that has been spent in a direct contradiction to
his most holy will? Oh my soul, let never such profaneness enter into thy
secrets, let no such thoughts abide with thee, let me never prescribe, but let
me stand to and yield to Gods prescription, and let me repent and reform
speedily, even now let me turn from my evil ways and thoughts, and make no
dispute of it: this may be the acceptable day, this is the day of grace, if God
does now move thee, and thou art now under conviction that thou need
repentance, and that it is high time for thee to amend and to cast off all thy
transgressions; you must confess at least that it is very fit you should,
though it may be you will not see it so absolutely necessary, because of that
blindness that is in thee.

Yet know that if thou have any conviction, S. 74.
it is an hint from the Lord that this is the time you are to resolve, and to
st p, as to your former course of sinning in any kind any more, and to set
heartily about the work of reformation in your own soul and life, and you may
expect Gods grace will not be wanting to thee to assist thee in, and carry thee
through the work, and so will it prove the blessedst day thy eyes ever yet
beheld.

But secondly, S. 75.
if this consideration move thee not to be speedy in thy reformation, then
think with thy self thus: would I take it well and as sober counsel from any
man, especially from one I think that loves me, and that knows my danger, and
sees me going on in a course absolutely destructive to me, and that will
inevitably procure my utter undoing, if he should not only let me alone in it,
but persuade me to continue in that way, which will certainly bring me to
ruin? saying, well friend, I perceive you are almost past recovery, and the
date of mercy is near expiration, and you are come to this point, that except
you turn speedily, even now, and alter your course, you must perish eternally
without remedy, yet seeing you have no mind to leave off your sins, go on; and
although God has said, except you repent and be converted you cannot be saved,
do not believe it, let not that trouble thee, thy sins and wickedness, the
devil and hell may prove better friends to thee, and be more for thy
advantage, and bring more content to thee and happiness, then timely
reformation or pardon, or the favor of God, Christ or Heaven; do not hearken
to any counsel that may reclaim thee, let no argument prevail to dissuade thee
from following thy own lewd and lustful practices, let no entreaties deter
thee; why should thou consider anything, or those preachers, the holy
messengers of the glorious God speaking unto thee, though they woe thee with
tears in their eyes, saying, Oh, do not these abominable things which God
hates; do not yield so timely, nor give back in the least, oppose thy self, thy
sins, to all they say or can do for thy eternal good; if you die you die, you
can be but damned at last, and is that so great a matter, that thou should
cross thy self in the least, or deny thy selt any of those sweet damning
sinful actings? no do not, is it not much better to perish eternally, then to
undergo now for a moment such a loss as to part with thy beloved sins? or to
contract the reproach and scoff of a few of thy ungodly companions, whose favor
and friendship in a way of sinning is far rather to be priced then the love and
favor of God; why will you hazard your interest in the pleasures and profits
of the world, and sweet company of your lusts now here in the flesh for heaven
hereafter? is heaven so much to be valued? is the loss of that happiness, or
losing heaven so great a loss?

Now how would you brook such doctrine as this? S. 76.
is this good counsel? would this be acceptable to you? would you account such
an one your friend indeed that should thus persuade thee? or would thou not
take such language as the greatest Sarcasme, most bitter taunt, scorn and jeer
that any man in the world could put upon or insult over thee withal? would
thou not account him either a stark fool, or one quite out of his wits,
distracted and mad, that would counsel thee after this rate? could you ever
think such an one thy friend, or that he means thee well, or that he speaks
what he thinks that would argue thee out of thy happiness into thy misery thus?

Yet alas even so it is that my own heart deals thus with me all the while I go
on in my sin, S. 77.
and delay my reformation; every suggestion from my self, to which I yield to
put off my repentance and amendment, is just such a counsel, and the counsel
of a naughty man's heart that hindersspeedy resolution to become a new creature,
are the very same when articulated as you have here read.

O then why should I ever yield to that in my self, S. 78.
and do that by my own counsel which I should dislike from another? why should
I delay my reformation upon that account which I should be ashamed to offer to
another, and abhor any other should propose to me? and yet for all this I do
the same thing all the while I continue in my sin, or wave, or delay my turning
from all and every one of my transgressions to serve the Lord Christ; have I
all this while cheated and befooled my self, and shall I continue to do so
injuriously still? God forbid!

Thirdly, S. 79.
let me consider further, that all the while I defer and delay my repentance,
I do nothing less then give God the denial, who calls upon me now to break
off my sins by repentance; and every such denial is a provocation, and I sin
as much by refusing to do that presently which I should immediately perform:
Therefore turn ye even unto me Now, Joel 2.12. Heb. 3.
says the Lord, with all your heart; And to day if ye will hear his voice
harden not your heart: This NOW is to DAY after so long a time, while it is
called to day, -- and sure this is the present time that God looks for my
return; and if I put off by excuses or delays, do I not declare that I will
not obey God, and that I love my sins, in that I will not part with them yet,
although I lose Gods favor by keeping them? Is it not a proof that I intend to
gratify the devil and my lusts, and do comply with him and my sin, who would
that I should this day say to God, go and come again to menow, for I will keep
my sins this day also, and so the next day, and every day as well as this, for
all that God says or can do? what is this but a tempting of God to cut me off
in the midst of my sin? can I do any thing that savours more of contempt and
gainsaying then this? Is it any other then giving sin and Satan the preeminence
in my will and affections, and a setting light by God and grace? will my God
endure this at my hand? can I imagine he will take this well, that I should
deal so unworthily with his grace; and that I should give that to the devil and
lust, which I should pay unto God, that is, my ready and willing obedience? how
wicked a thing is it say, I Will serve the devil to day, and God to morrow? and
yet does not he resolve so that says, I will not hear thee O Lord to day as to
this matter of repentance and reformation, although I know it is thy will I
should, but to morrow or next week I may think ont'? and then -- and what then?
why then thou will be as bad, yea worse then now, and more ready to stand off
then now; for then the work will be more difficult, thy ^^ns increased, thy
heart more hardened, thy God more highly displeased, those cords of thy sins
will be twisted to a ^^ronger bond; and that which this day a ^^nner might have
broken off (through grace assisting,) hereafter for thy wilful delay thou will
not be able to break; for how can he repent when grace has forsaken him, and
his sins have taken such fast hold on him?

O then let me never serve my God with such put offs, S. 80.
let me never more gratify Satan and my lusts, and give God the denial by any
more or further delays and deferring reformation; why should I make any more
rods for my back? why should I add more weight to my burden? why shall I by
this days delay make much the more work for repentence, while I have enough and
too too much already, as many sins as I can bear, or am able to repent of as
long as I live? and surely if ever I become a true penitent I must be grieved
at the heart that I deferred so long, and of putting it off this day also; if I
be so foolish and presumptuous to adventure my soul upon continuance in this
days sins with me all night, which for ought I know may be the night my soul
may be taken out of my body, and then what will my loytering come to, or what
shall I be able to answer for my delays from day to day to the last day of my
life? we had sad examples of this in the parable of the rich man, promising
himself much time to sin in, and pleasure in his sin, Luke 12.16, 17, 18.
yet is cut off in a night for all his hopes. So we read of the vicious
servant, But if that evil servant say in his heart, Mat. 24.48.
my Lord delayeth his coming, and shall smite his fellow servants, and eat and
drink with the drunken; The Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut him
asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites; there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. O then let this be a warning to thee, and do not delay
thy reformation; God will not delay his coming (though fools abu^e his
patience,) nor will he spare thee if he find thee in thy sins, in a state
unconverted.

Fourthly, S. 81.4.
if I mean not yet to repent and turn from my evil thoughts and doings, let me
consider with what face can I ask leave of God to sin any longer against him?
may I entreat him for Christ's sake to let me alone, and be well pleased with me
that following year, though I defy him to his face, and trample the blood of
Christ under foot, as I have done? shall I say, good Lord spare me, that I may
follow the flesh, world and devil, and fulfill the lusts of the flesh; let me
be thine enemy a little longer, let me spit in thy face, and abuse thy
patience, mercy and long-sufferance yet a while, that I may fill up the measure
of my wickedness, and after I have done what I am able to despise thy grace,
and grieve thy holy Spirit, then receive me into thy glory, and give me the
largest portion of the inheritance with thy Saints and faithful servants in
heaven.

But I pray thee tell me sinner will this be fit to be said? S. 82.
dare thou ask this of God? if not, why how do thou dare to continue in
that state, which thou art ashamed and afraid to ask a blessing on? will thou
beg of God leave to offend thy God, to dishonor religion, to contradict and
violate his most holy laws, and to murder thine own soul by sin, for whom
Christ died to save it from sin, that it might live for ever with God?

O dear soul, think, and think it seriously, S. 83.
that he that means to continue in his sins does mean also that God must either
countenance his sinning, and approve of his sinful dealing, or that God will
smite him and cut him off in his high displeasure; and which of these two is it
likely the most holy and just God will do? must you not then conclude, either
to leave off your sins speedily, and by so doing to procure a pardon and mercy
for Christ's sake for what is past, and do so wickedly no more for after-time;
or to dare God to his face, and bid him do his worst, for you mean not to turn
nor amend yet, nor to go back from your purpose of staying a little longer in
the old track of sinful walking? But methinks a man that has but the lest
right, sound reason left him, or counsel, would not long be deliberating what
to do in this case, seeing it is so evident that he dare not pray or ask leave
of God to continue life, that he may live to sin, or that God would accept of
his sinful disobedience for an holy service; but at last should he resolve to
go no further in sins way, but now with speed immediately turn from his sins,
ere he closes his eyes to sleep, lest it may prove his last nights repose on
this side hell.

Fifthly, S. 84.
let me consider, for a speeding motive to a speedy practical resolution,
whether or no is it of indispensable necessity and special concernment for me,
that some time or other ere I die I must be soundly converted, and cease to do
evil, and to take off my heart from the love and consent to lusts motions, and
lead an holy, harmless and heavenly life? if it be necessary, as no question
it is, then why is it not as necessary to me now as at another time, as much my
duty to day as to morrow? Before I committed any sin actually, it was my duty
to abstain and forbear; but after the first act of folly and evil immediately
it is my duty to repent, leave it off, and cease from doing any more of it; and
if it had been good for me that I had never sinned, sure it must be my next
advantage to leave it as soon as possibly: For next to that of committing no
evil, the best course I can take is to repent betimes; and if it seem to any
one that hereafter will be a fitter time then this present, then it will fall
out when hereafter comes to be thy present, it will be as much against thy will
then as now it is: and therefore unless I intend to put off my repentance and
amendment, my conversion and reformation for altogether, and never to think
ont' more, otherwise let me do that which I think to do this year or seven
years hence Now FORTHWITH, and that is to forsake all that God dislikes in me,
and all that his holy word has witnessed against, and my conscience reproves
me of without any more ado: for I must not befool my self any longer with this
opinion that sin will cease of it self, and if it does, then sin leaves me, I
leave not sin; Si autem vis agere poenitentiam quando jam peccare non potes,
peccata te dimiserunt, non tu illa. Aug.
or that pardon will be more easily obtained when I have sinned as much and as
long as I can, or that repentance will be more acceptable to God, when I am
forced to it, and then too when my age and strength, my understanding, memory
and affections fail me; or that God will be pleased well enough with the refuse
of my service after I have served the world, the flesh and the devil with my
prime and full strength, and best affections; Irrisor est, non poenitens, qui
adhuc agit quod paeniteat, and non minuit peccata sua, sed multiplicat. Aug.
as though God which deserves infinitely more then I can perform, would be put
off with any thing, or pleased and contented to be mocked by me a most vile
wretch, while I seem to offer that fag-end of my life which is fit neither for
time nor ability to perform that service which God will account of for true
repenoance and thorough-reformation.

O let me never put the fair hopes I now have of obtaining mercy from God, S.
85.
(if I now set my heart to this my duty, of reforming my life speedily) to the
hazard, but while a price is put into my hand, let me not be such a fool to
cast it, and so my self away, and that for ever.

Sixthly, S. 86.
methinks I should not delay any longer my reformation, but speedily set my
heart upon it, and endeavor it to purpose, considering that I would nor for
any worldly good miss the day of grace, or that death should meet with me in my
unregenerate state; and for any thing I know to the contrary this may be the
last day of my life, or the last day of grace, beyond which God will not wait
any longer, or give me any motion or help toward my conversion, but he may in
judgment seal up my heart, harden it, and sear my conscience, that I may never
so much as think on my condition any more, or desire him heartily to heal me
and convert me; many men have come to this pass, even to outlive the date of
that mercy intended for them, which if they had in time accepted would have
brought a saving pardon and reformation to their souls; and why should I
adventure my salvation on an uncertainty, while I may be sure of it, if I take
the offer while I may have it? Besides, why should I provoke God to withdraw
his grace, and cut me off in his displeasure? for all the while, every moment I
live in sinful impenitency and unconverted state, I have nothing to do with
any promise of mercy, pardon or heaven; I am under the curse of the law and
power of Satan, and go in danger of death and damnation; and if death overtake
me in my sins I am a lost soul, and who can tell how near he is to his last
hour? are you not hastening on to your end? will time stay for you? or can you
call back yesterday? whether I eat, drink, sleep, play or work, yet my time
consumes, and I am drawing toward my long home of eternity. Oh that I may think
still on this, and make this concluding resolution of it, even to speed my
work, the great business of my sound reformation, and put it off for nobodies
pleasure, no not for any objection to the contrary, nor any worldly advantage
might be had upon the account of continuance in my sin; if I rest in an
unconverted state I am in a lamentable condition.

Seventhly, let me consider, S. 87.
why should I delay this duty any longer, but rather make have to it, and be
diligent and constant in it, seeing all the objections that have ever been made
against speedy reformation, and all the excuses and pretenses for delaying this
necessary work, are both frivolous and of no weight, and treacherous and
pernicious; how fully have they all been answered? and how easy is it for a man
of the meanest capacity to satisfy himself of the unreasonableness of all
arguments may be produced by the most cunning Sophister against reformation,
and for procrastination, and continuing in sinful practices from day to day,
or but for one day longer? And why then should I hearken to any thing that may
he further insinuated to me from Satan, or any of those his instruments which
would cause my delay, to the wrong of my poor soul?

CHAP. XI.
Of Temptations, with their Answers.

. I. Temptations answered.
MY sins are not so great, S. 1.
or not so many, nor have I lived in them so long, that I need make such have
out of them, that I ought to be so much troubled for them, or that I should
despair of salvation though I never leave them.

This favorable conceit of sin (I believe) has betrayed many an unwise soul
to their undoing, S. 2. Answ.
and men that have no mind to change their course have a mind to lessen their
faults, and to reduce them to a narrow compass and minute instance; how easy
it is with men to do wonders in this kind when they have a mind to it, but how
difficult are far more easy matter when they are actions to be done? with what
facility does a wicked man make his great sins little, his many sins few, and
his little sins and few none at all, or nothing? but God will not be so
indulgent to thy sins, although thou art.

Now can you not easily repel this temptation, S. 3.
and refute this smooth opinion, that it prevail not with thee so as to cause
thee lay aside thy repentance for the present? Thus; my sins they are not
great, but are they not many, are they many, and are they not great? nor many,
nor great? But are they any at all? though they are not many, nor great, yet
they are more then I can reckon, and greater then I can bear; if I am guilty
but of one kind of sin, yet that is too much by one; if I have acted that sin
but once, yet that is by once too often; if I have lived but one day without
repentance, it is a day too long; I should not have sinned at all, there was no
necessity for it, I had no command from God to sin, neither did any decree of
his enforce me to commit a sin; but since I have been so unhappy to fall,
though but once, there is now a necessity I rise again by repentance, and
recover my loss by reformation; and if I have lived a year, a week, or day in
that sin, and have repeated the act, or have rested without repentance, I am
guilty.

And yet it is too evident, S. 4.
that though a sin be but one for title, it is multiplied in the act, and he
that commits one sin commits more then one fault, Jam. 2.10.
he breaks all the whole Law of God; and he that transgresses the whole Law of
God is not without much guilt, nor many sins; and shall I defer my repentance
upon the account of little or few sins, if it were true that my sins were small,
and of them but a few? nay should not this be an argument to hasten my
repentance, and to cease from my sins, because but few and small, for that they
are more easily forsaken, and more readily pardoned upon my true repentance,
and by leaving them speedily I shall prevent the growth, both for number and
bigness, and accomplish with far less difficulty that desired and necessary
repentance?

But yet I must not leave this temptation so, S. 5.
there is more in it then may safely be over-looked, for the conceit of little
and few, when applied to sins, is dangerous; how can a man be humbled for his
sins, or be heartily forry for them, when he thinks they are neither heinous
nor hurtful, that they will not at all hinder his salvation, nor very much
offend God, seeing his sins are not many or great, but the common frailties and
infirmities of humanity; Oh, how many has this fond favorable opinion
lullabied in fast security, and made them proof against all reproof and
counsel, to the ruin of their souls!

And is it not an argument I would sell God's favor, S. 6.
and procure his displeasure at a cheap rate, when I will not refrain to do
evil, and forsake my evil doings, which as you say are but few, or small? it is
little a man would do either for God's sake, or his own soul, if he will not
forsake a few and small sins, a trifle and a folly.

But now to put off all delays that might be entertained upon this account of
small and few sins, S. 7.
let me consider, that in truth every sin, be it never so little in man's
esteem, is against an INFINITE GOD; it is a violation of his Law by a direct
opposition to his Sovereignty, it is a wound and a poison, a spot and defilement
to any man's soul that does the least of sin, that keeps and loves it, that
would excuse it and make easy of his sin, as though it were innocent and
harmless; and though the instance be but small by which I offend, yet my
offense is great, because for so small a matter I offend so great a God.

Our blessed Lord has resolved this point (saying,) S. 8. Luke 16.10.
He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and he
that is unjust in that which is least, is unjust also in much: and surely the
least sin I commit is a great injustice, and a very unfaithfulness; O let me
not then be betrayed into a putting off my repenance and deferring my
reformation with this temptation, that my sins are not great or but few, or if
many not great ones, seeing the least are too great, the fewest too many, and
the time too long already I have been familiar with my sins, though but from
yesterday I have continued in them, why should I listen to any arguments to
make me linger it off, that might in the least hinder my speedy reformation? I
pray God I may never think my sins so little as to need no sorrow or
repentance, or this present hour too soon to forsake and leave them all.

II. Temptation answered.
There is another temptation, S. 9.
near of kin to the former, it is this; The best Men sin, they have their
failings and infirmities, and why should I think to be better then good men, or
judge my self worse then them, while I am but as they were? S. 10. Answer.


Indeed this unhappy comparison vain man makes between himself, and which is
the worst in good men, has betrayed many an unwise soul, to like well of
himself, while in a sad condition and sinful; but should I not with all
consider that the best men's infirmities were those best men's faults, their
blemishes and their shame? did not those good men bewail them and repent them,
and could never be at quiet not at peace within themselves, until their sins
were pardoned and they reformed? were the sins of those saints and servants of
God the best of them, or the worst? and shall I imitate them in that which they
abhorred in themselves? but if I have followed them in their sins, and acted
folly as any of them did, should I not follow them also in their repentance?
their faults were not recorded for my imitation; and if I would be pardoned as
they were upon their repentance, I must repent as they did, or I shall never be
pardoned.

It is a pitiful shift sinners are put upon, S. 11.
when the refuge they have is that others have had their faults and faylings,
as though the very worst of godly men (even those things which if they had
lived and died in, without repentance, had made their religion of none effect
for salvation to them,) should be a sufficient warrant for my evil practice?
would it not better become a Christian to cease from evil speedily and amend
his faults, not only because it is my duty so to do, but also because I should
not follow the best man in the world, where he fails in his duty, and I am
sure God did never allow any man (how dear soever to him) to commit a sin, much
less to live in any sin without repentance.

Alas, S. 12.
why should I plead that for my excuse which all good men complain of as their
misery and their spoil? let me rather imitate the worst men in their best
actions, then the best men in their worst miscarriages; let me be sorry I have
done any thing unseemly and unholily, though it has been no other then some
Saints have been overtaken with heretofore, and let me ever think that if I
continue in my sins I shall be damned for them, though some dear Saints have
been pardoned for the like after they had repented and been converted. A
Christian must follow the best examples of others, and in the best things, and
not the example of the best men sinning; I would follow no man where he
follows not Christ, nor plead any man's faults for my security; for if I do I
am sure I have no warrant for so doing; nor shall I deliver my soul from the
guilt, until I deliver my self of the sin, and become a true penitent, for how
can I think to be guiltless when I continue to do that which made Adam the
first good man (and every man since) guilty: why should I imagine that God will
like me well enough, though I continue in my sins, seeing he never liked them
in any since the world began, nor will he ever approve of the least as long as
the world lasts, nor for ever?

III. Temptation answered.
There is a third temptation which too much prevails with poor sinners to their
hurt, S. 13.3. Tempt.
keeping men in a carnal security and dangerous delay; a sinner is convinced
that he must repent and leave off his sins some time or other ere he die, yet
still puts it off, and thinks within himself (being deluded by a deceitful
heart,) That the time is not yet come, I may as well reform hereafter, many
have lived I hope longer in their sins then I have done, and yet have proved
true penitents, and I have heard of one thief that at the hour of his death
upon the cross repented, and was accepted, and therefore I need not be so holy
yet, I hope I have time enough, and God has as much mercy in store for me as
for another, and why may not I be as well accepted as the thief on the cross
at last?

A man may quickly answer to this and repel the temptation thus, S. 14. Answ.
that bendes the unmannerliness of giving GOD the denial when he calls thee to
repentance, and that impudency and madness which is in every plea and
suggestion for countenance of and continuance in unful practices, against all
reason, conscience and religion, there is (I ^ay) besides that a great deal of
folly and presum^tion in this temptation.

As (1.) you think the time for repentance and a ^endment not yet come; S. 15.
why can any sinner repent too soon? have you not more reason to fear the time
of acceptance may be past, then that the time of reformation should not yet be?
has not God long enough born with thee already? have thou not put his
entreaties off long enough? am I sure of an other day after this? or of
acceptance when I please? are the days and times of grace in thy power? would a
man that has drunk poison, say to his Physician, I am poisoned, and begin to
swell, and I fear my death, [and you have only that which may help and recover
me, yet I desire you to forbear a day or two and let me alone, I Will try whether
I may not do well enough without your physic, and that only remedy which is
proper for one in my case; do you think such a one did much regard his life,
that would deal so imprudently? certainly every sinner that does put off
repentance and reformation deals worse and more foolishly with his soul
though he means to be saved: for sin is a poison which has seized on the
vitals, and nothing but true repentance can help a sinner; and yet will thou
put this off? Oh how has ^n bewitched thee! is not the time come yet for
remedy? and yet now this present time, even this moment thou art infected, and
even drawing on and expiring thy last.

(2.) You think you may reform as well hereafter as now, S. 16.
and you hope many that have lived longer then you, and have resisted as many
calls as you, and given as many denialls as you, and have sinned against as
much knowledge as you, have proved true penitents for all at last.

How easily may sober wisdom repel and quickly stifle this foolish
imagination: S. 17. Answ.
AS WELL HEREAFTER? and why not as well now as then? now thou may do it,
hereafer thou may not do it: the present opportunity is safer, if not better,
and would not a wise man choose the safest and the best? nay this present is the
time thou once resolvest on, when formerly thou did resolve upon hereafter. O
how many hereafters are come and past already with thee sinner! and yet have
thou still an hereafter to count upon? shortly, thou will not have a hereafter
to reckon upon, unless you mean to reform and repent in hell, which is indeed
the hereafter for a now delaying and lingering sinner; but be persuaded to cast
out that foolish thought, and let not God and the necessities of thy soul have
any more of that go and come again to morrow, there has been too much of that
already.

And if you hope that sinners that have delayed longer then you have found true
repentance at last; S. 18.


Pray consider it is but a supposition, S. 19.
how can you tell that they have? O it is a question, and a thousand to one
whether any such presumptuous sinner (that gave Gods grace and reformation the
denial so often) ever found true repentance or acceptance: If repentance and
reformation were finish able in a day or hour, or in a few sad words, and
sorrowing expressions, then there were some more probability, but until that
can be made clear (which I am sure never yet could be to me,) that a late and
deathbed repentance, and wish of conversion, was ever sound and saving after a
vicious life, I shall never hope it will avail for my self, if I put off
purposely my amendment until then. God forbid I should.

And to that of the thief upon the cross, S. 20.
I am sure that is not my case nor any man's case that lives in sin, impenitent
after all the Gospel-calls, discoveries, rebukes and admonitions. (1.) For who
can tell whether he was not converted and brought to repentance while in
prison, as soon as he heard of Christ, and was moved to it by the spirit of
God, and on the cross only made a confession and declaration of his faith in
Christ and sorrow for sin? or (2.) can I tell whether that were not the first
call and opportunity ever was offered unto him, and he took it? this is not the
first to thee and me by many: and shall I think to fare as he did at the last,
that every day despise that which he accepted when first offered? or (3.) How
can I tell whether ever I shall ever have so long a time, and Christ so near me
as he had while on the tree? I may be taken away suddenly, and I am sure Christ
will not again die on the cross, or come in the flesh to do such a miracle at
his death as to convert and save a sinner in the same day; or if it were
possible to be imagined, yet would it not be a hopeless expectation, to think
that Christ should come again to save any more sinners with a miracle, seeing
he has appointed (with no less then a miracle of mercy) salvation now upon
the account of true faith in him, and sound repentance from sin, and an holy
reformation, and by no other devise nor by any other means to be expected?

S. 21.
And why should any thing prevail with me to delay my duty, seeing this example
you bring is no example for thee, nor me, or if it be, 'its but one of a
thousand millions, and I think the first and the last of that kind, and shall I
hazard my salvation upon that which I am not sure was ever paralleled, nor ever
can in all circumstances? And if you say God has as much mercy in reserve for
you, as for another; to this I answer, it is true if you do not abuse his mercy
no more then any has which did partake of that mercy: suppose it possible that
the mercy of God may come on a sudden, and that repentance may be suggested in
a moment, it is but a peradventure, there is no promise that it shall, many
threats against that man that ^resumes on it, there is very little likelihood
of it, and is it not madness for any man to break his neck wilfully upon a
presumption that there is skill enough, and to make experiment of the art of a
bone-setter? but God has no saving mercy for thee, nor me, nor any other,
except we answer the ends of his mercy; that is, to convert and reform, to
repent and obey in time: But if I by continuing wicked abuse his mercy, God in
justice will punish me, for my so abusing, as well as for any other sinning,
otherwise there is mercy and forgiveness with God that he may be feared, not
that he may be abused and resisted. He that fears not to continue in his sin,
abuses the grace and mercy of God, and resists him.

. IV. Temptation answered.
There is a fourth suggestion from the flesh which much hinders reformation, S.
22.
procures a poor sinner to delay it, if not quite to put it off for altogether,
and it is this: for as a sinner is persuaded sometimes, it is so easy a thing to
become a true penitent and a sound convert, that it may be done in a trice, and
at any time, with great facility and in any condition, in old age, sickness,
languishing, dying, with a few half words and two or three good wishes faint
and feeble. So on the other hand, men are apt to believe to their damage, (and
therefore set not about soul-reformation) that it is a business of exceeding
difficulty, trouble and vexation, and a man may go a great way in it, and yet
come short of what is required, it is but in vain to set upon it, as good never
a whit as never the better, it is an imposition and task next to an
impossibility, I cannot endure the severity of repentance nor strict and holy
living, alas what a burden? farewell all my comforts, when once I begin to
reform, and to be religious.

This temptation would be quickly repelled and easily overcome, S. 23. Answ.
if a man would consider the absolute necessity of conversion, and the
possibility of it, and also the helps God has afforded for the perfecting of
this which is so necessary: It Is true, the work is hard and difficult, but not
impossible, and it must be performed and completed in its time, parts and
degrees, or else it will not avail for justification except it be complete, and
to flesh and blood it will prove a task very unwelcome, cross and burdensome:
But then let me consider, I have a soul to save, and directions of Gods word,
and absolute commands, and if I set upon the duty I have the promises to
encourage me, and the grace of God to help me, and the examples of the Saints
gone before me in this work: I have no sins nor corruptions but may be
mortified, nor any grace or virtue enjoined me as my duty but I may through
grace perform acceptably, the fear being more then the task, the apprehension
of the difficulty greater then the difficulty it self.

But let be that it be hard at first, S. 24.
so is every art and trade at the entrance into it, and can thou not endure
the severity of repentance, the injunctions of self denial, the duties of
sobriety, righteousness and piety? why how then can you endure damnation? How
wilt endure the wrath of God, the pains of hell, the loss of heaven? had I
rather burn in hell for ever then forgo the pleasures of sin for a season?
will it be a sadder condition to live an holy life here, then to live for ever
in misery when this life is ended? if it were true, (what unregenerate men
imagine of holy living) that it is a life of sadness, melancholy, and void of
comfort, which is most false, and as great a reproach as the devil can cast upon
religion, yet seeing it is the way to bliss, eternal joy and endless
happiness, what if I went mourning to my grave, what though I lose all my
carnal pleasures and worldly contentments for it? should I be any loser by so
doing? would not heaven at last answer all my pains and travail, all my
watching and praying, and all duties of Christianity? will not the enjoying of
Christ and favor of God be a sufficient recompense for all my labor? would
not this one sentence fill my heart with joy at the last, Well done thou good
and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Master? But if you hold off
with this, that you cannot do this as you should, it is indeed because you will
not do it as you may; you say you cannot, but indeed you will not. If you would
but set about mortification, and self-denial, and resisting temptations, and
devote thy self to holy living, thou would be able to do one hundred times
more in it toward reformation then now you do, if you would not yield to flesh
and blood, nor make provision for your lusts, if you would not make use of
excuses to keep you from your duty, if you would not by delays and
procrostinations put off the demands of God and thy poor soul, repentance and
reformation would not be so difficult nor terrible to thee.

But to be short, S. 25.
thy through reformation be it hard or be it easy, be it a matter of joy or
grief, be it a burden or be it a pleasure, and what ever can be said against
it, it must be performed both by me, and every one, while the time of grace
lasts, while I am in this present world, or else I mustnever look to be
saved, this is the short and the long of it, and after all disputes, excuses,
lingerings, delays, it must come to this conclusion, I must return, repent, and
be converted, or else I must never hope to see the face of God with comfort;
when all is said that the wit of man, or the craft of the devil can invent
against SPEEDY REFORMATION and sound conversion, yet this word must stand, that
except I be converted (as Christ has said) I shall never enter into the
kingdom of Heaven: Mar. 18.3. Joh. 3.3.
and why should any body think that this plain and positive decree of Christ
concerning us, should either be baffled or abrogated? O why should I listen any
longer to any plea or excuse can be brought, that might cause me either to put
off quite or delay my REFORMATION? O that I may never more decline my necessary
duty by excuses, nor gratify satan and wrong mine own soul by delays!

CHAP. XII.
Of some Queries.

NOW for thy further conviction and speedier resolution about this great and
necessary work of saving reformation, S. 1.
I would entreat thee sinner in the Name of God to weigh seriously what is here
offered unto thee, and resolve to give an effectual answer, as you shall see
cause, and no more do I desire thee to do in this point, then what in
conscience you shall judge fit to be done in this case of speedy practical
Reformation, and if you cannot rationally except against what I propose, that
you would forthwith yield and be persuaded to the thing, and without more ado
set about this thy own work.

First of all I demand whether the things which I have been persuading thee to
all along be thy duty, S. 2. Qu. 1.
and of absolute indispen sible necessity in order to thy eternal salvation? Or
whether you think it an indifferent thing, whether you be a true penitent and
sound convert or no? if you you do -- if it be of absolute necessity, how can
you in reason and conscience neglect it, if you mean to be saved? if it be
thought but a matter of lesser moment and a thing indifferent, then why IS
CHRIST, and why are all his ministers, and the Scriptures so earnest with thee
to reform? and why is Satan, the world and all the enemies to thy souls
happiness so industrious to keep thee in thy sins, and in an unreformed and
unconverted estate? you cannot conclude it a thing indifferent, except you make
it a thing indifferent whether you be eternally saved or damned eternally: O
then art thou persuaded of the necessity of reformation? set about it speedily,
neglect it not.

Whether in good earnest do you not believe that JESUS CHRIST is very much
offended, S. 3. Qu. 2.
and his grace and favor exceedingly abused, and the worth of his blood
extremely vilified by thee all the while thou continuest in thy wilful
sinning, and in despite to his holiness, and all he has done and suffered to
redeem thee from all iniquity to serve him in new obedience all the days of
thy life?

Whether if you refuse to amend and to cast away all your iniquities, S. 4. Qu.
3.
and become a sincere convert, can you have any ground or reason to hope you
shall be saved by Christ, seeing he himself has aid, Except you be converted,
Mat. 18.3.
you cannot enter into the king dome of he aven?

Whether do you think that those sins thy self art guilty of either in thought,
S. 5. Qu. 4.
word or actions, those thy omissions and commissions, if not repented of and
pardoned, will be any hinderance to thy salvation? or do think that GOD does
esteem of thee never the worse for all thy evil practices, but gives thee leave
to be as bad as you will, and will never call you to an account for all your
misbehaviours? have you any reason to be persuaded of this? or of the contrary?
you cannot sure be so desperately wicked as to think so wickedly of God and
Christ, that he should be either pattern or patron of wickedness in any one
living.

Whether do you in your judgment account happier, S. 6. Qu. 5.
he that continues still in his sins and vicious course of living, and dies
in that estate, or he that does repent betime, and lead a godly, sober and
righteous life, and dies in that state? which of these would thou be? and in
which of these conditions would thou be found when God shall call thee hence
to appear at the judgment of the great day? surely you cannot but wish you
might dye the death of the righreous, and fare as a godly man fares at last!
Oh then why will you not conclude to live as the godly man lives now?

Whether do thou not think that the time past of thy life is not enough and
too much that thou have served thy lusts, S. 7. Qu. 6. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.
and followed the devices and desires of thy naughty heart? is it not now high
time forthwith to forsake all sin, and to betake thee to an holy life? have not
Satan, sin, the world and vanity, had too much of thy hearts delight and
affections, but will thou give them yet more, and serve them yet longer? Alas
how long! can thou do better then to rid thy self of those sins, and get
clear of them that will slay thee, and are ready every moment to make an end of
thy days and happiness together, if thou nourish them, or spare them, or give
but way to them?

Whether you suppose it a blemish or disgrace to thy birth, S. 8. Qu. 7.
breeding, place, relations and parts, to become a true hearty penitent, an
holy person, a disciple of Christ, a child of God, and an inheritor of
immortal glory, and of a vile person made an honorable Saint? or is it not
much more a blemish, disgrace and dishonor to be a servant of sin, a slave to
Satan, an enemy to Christ, and a firebrand of hell, as every wicked,
unregenerate, unholy man is? is there any honor or credit like that of a
Saint, or any shame or ignomy like that of a wilful beastly sinner? sure there
is not.

Would you not judge that man hard hearted and obstinate, S. 9. Qu. 8.
foolish and mad, (were it not thy own case) who does wilfully continue in sin
and impenitency after all those gracious invitations and beseechings from the
Lord to return, after all those menaces and rebukes for sin, after all those
cheeks of thine own conscience, and convictions of the necessity of
reformation? would you not deem that man worthy of damnation that in despite
of grace and all saving means will make away his soul, and murder himself
wilfully? does not he deserve to die eternally that will not receive a pardon
upon such conditions as God does promise a pardon? which is, that thou
should repent and lay down all rebellious thoughts and actions, and return
to thy obedience to God and his most holy just laws and government.

Surely you would not esteem such an one meet for mercy that does sin against
mercy, S. 10.
and that perseveres in wickedness: Oh then dear soul let it never be said of
thee that thou art the man that do do so, that it never be reported of thee
that all the favors, mercies, and motions of Gods holy Spirit have been cast
away upon thee; Let it never be said of thee that God would have reformed thee
and saved thee, but thou would not be reformed nor saved this way, by ceasing
to do evil: Let it not be upon record against thee, that all the means, as
preaching to thee, praying for thee, reproofs, exhortations, admonitions,
counsels, calls, directions from all the holy messengers of Christ, beseeching
thee, and weeping to thee, could never prevail with thee vile sinner (with all
the pains they have taken for thy poor souls good and safety) to turn from thy
sinful courses and evil practices, but as they found thee so they must leave
thee, a wretched soul and hardened rebel, and instead of giving up their
account of thy conversion, must give in witness against thee, that thou would
not obey the word of the Lord, nor believe their report, nor leave thy sins:
Let it never be told of thee, that thou had thy day of grace, but have lost
it, once as fair an opportunity as any, but now it is gone; Oh let it not be
objected henceforth against thee, that either thou refusest to reform at all,
or that thou do put off and delay from day to day that so necessary and so
happy a duty: why should God wait on thee any longer? why should God spare thee
any longer? is it not long enough I have sinned already? have not I abused Gods
patience too much already? Oh that thou wast once brought to this point of
resolution, I have done foolishly (and wickedly,) I will do so no more, now,
even now will I return to my God, and my obedience; shall a little fleshly
pleasure, worldly profit, or any thing hinder me of my eternal happiness? God
forbid: No, I am resolved by the grace of God to stop here, and go no further
in sins road; but will now turn into the strait gate and narrow way of holy
living, which leads to that eternal glory which none can come at but such as
do lead a godly life, and follow the Lord Jesus fully, and deny themselves
wholly.

And because heart and life-reformation is the way to all happiness, S. 11.
and in the first place a man must leave off his sinful practices, and
renounce all wickedness, and cease to do evil, and repent of the evil he has
done already, I shall conclude this first part of reformation with a few
directions, showing what you shall constantly do to accomplish this (so happy)
reformation.

CHAP. XIII.
Of some directions to facilitate this work of real reformation.

HAving pressed by all arguments I could for present think on, S. 1.
to prevail with thee to a speedy reforming thy heart and life, and without any
more delay to set upon the work; I add some directions, which if you will
conscientiously observe, will facilitate the work, and make it successful.

I. Direction.
1. If you mean to be a really reformed Christian indeed, S. 2.
enter forthwith upon serious consideration of thy past life, what it has
been, and likewise thy present state and habitual frame, what it is; examine
wisely and strictly thy self wherein thou art apt to offend, and what
temptations haunt thee most, what thy heart hankers after, what is thy beloved
sin, where thou lie most open to be betrayed and overcome; examine and search
thy self, that thou know where thy disease is, and the nature of it; the cure
is half done if thou understand thy grief, it is but applying the remedy
carefully, and thou will quickly be cured: try if thy sins be inward, and keep
residence in thy mind, thoughts, will or affections, be watchful what guests
haunt these rooms; if vanity be in thy mind* sin in thy thoughts, worldliness
in thy affections, if thou have a proud or envious Atheistical mind, if thou
have a stubborn rebellious will, if thou have covetous or fleshly, unchaste
desires and speculations; if thou have inordinate affections, if thou art one
of a vain, vi^^ous, worldly, filthy tongue; if thy actions be any way unfull,
the issue and product of a naughty evil heart, try whether thy thoughts, words,
actions, or any thing of them, think, speak or do, contrary to the laws of
sobriety, charity, chastity, justice or piety, and which of all thy sins are
more frequent and habitual, and that which thou have lived longest in, and art
ready to break out into act on the least touch of a temptation, from within or
from without thee, that so by diligent inquiry and strict scrutiny, you may
come to the knowledge of your state and condition; and do not give over this
work until you have found out your sins, and which way they act.

II. Direction.
2. Then your next business will be to aggravate your sins by all
circumstances, S. 3.
by bringing them to the test of Gods word, and see what account God makes of
them, how he dislikes thy sin, and every man's sins that are like thine, and see
what commands of God thou breakest by thy sinning, thus and thus, and what
little cause thou have to provoke God, and break his most holy and righteous
laws; and remember that by continuing in sin thou do no less then oppose Gods
mercies, and Christ's merits, and slight his redeeming blood, which he shed to
deliver thee from thy sins, and to cleanse thee from thy filthiness; which is
all cast away upon thee, if thou continue in thy sins, and will prove an
aggravation of thy guilt and damnation.

By no means do not go about to lessen, S. 4.
extenuate or excuse thy faults, but say of every sin as David of his, Against
thee Lord have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; have mercy upon me,
and cleanse me from, and pardon me this my great transgression.

III. Direction.
3. Then lay before the Lord by Confession, S. 5.
and spread them with all their aggravations, and set them in order before
thine own eyes, and take up a lamentation, weep and mourn, beat thy breast, and
wring thy hands, and spend thy tears and groans, and bemoan thy hard case, thy
sad condition, and never think thou have sorrowed, complained, confessed and
despaired enough, until thy heart be broken for, and broken from thy sins; and
know this, that no man has sorrowed to repentance sufficiently until he does
loathe and leave heartily and willingly all and every one of his abominations;
no man has repented savingly of his sins until he has attained a perfect
hatred of his sins, and remembers them with lothing and detestation: When
conversion comes, that is, when a man is on sound reformation, and God has
touched his heart, and is giving a new heart and nature, Ezekiel. 36.31.
Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that have not been
good, and shall loathe your selves in your own sight, for your iniquities and
for your abominations.

And this direction may serve to cut off all queries which deceived unsound
hearts are asking, How long, S. 6.
and how much, must a man grieve and sorrow, and mourn, and be sad? Answer, why
so long, and so much, until thy sins become odious and grievous to thee, and
thou leave off to do them any more; and when this is done, then have thou
performed that part of repentance thoroughly which consists of sorrow and
mourning, and not till then: Be therefore humbled thoroughly, bring your soul
low, and have a deep sense of misery because of sin; and do not in this matter
as most do, only believe your duty as an article of your faith, but let who
will do it for you, only believe it your duty and that is all: Oh this will
undo you, therefore do it as truly as you believe it truly to be your duty.

IV. Direction.
4. Now presently fall upon the work of mortification and self-denial, S. 7.
you must now take up your cross, that is, cross and deny thy sinful
appetites, and lustful desires, be sure you be careful to avoid every new sin,
and never sin actually again in any instance if it be possible; and take up a
firm resolution, with earnest prayer, that you will never willingly or wilfully
consent to, or act again your former follies, or any other which you your self
have committed, or any body else has or may do; for notwithstanding former
repentances, yet if you live henceforth after the flesh you shall die, Romans
8.13.
but if through the spirit you mortify the deeds of the body you shall live;
therefore if you would be successful in this great concernment of reformation,
you must crucify and crush the first motions and risings of lust, and all
inclinations to this or that sin: look to this first, that the fountain of all
must be stopped, for all thy sins have a root, and before they be acted have a
kind of being in lusts; as the fruit virtually is in the root, and a cockatrice
is in the egg, and as the streams are from the fountain, so thy actual sins
are of the same smack and nature with their original from whence they are
derived: Therefore nip the bud, Ibi maxim oportet observare peccatum ubi nasci
solet. Hier. in Ep. ad Demet.
crush the egg, dry up the fountain, take away the cause, and the effect will
cease, and so will your work be more short and easy; suppress the beginnings,
suffer not lust to rise, or if it move check it presently, entertain no
parlying with Satan, nor thine own naughty reasoning heart, that will plead for
consent or connivance, for thou art in danger when you treat, and undone if you
yield; Mortify therefore your members that are upon the earth, fornication,
uncleanness, etc. that you may be able to do this, the Apostle adds by way of
counsel and direction in the same verse, (viz.) inordinate affections, evil
concupiscence, Col. 3.5.
and covetousness, which is idolatry. And take heed you stop from going any
further o^ acting any more sin, with consent, delight, or in compliance with
thy former custom, or as the manner of the world is; for every new sin is a
great disadvantage, because it brings in question all thy hopes, and undoes thy
former labor in repentance, and makes all as done to no purpose, and after a
new sin you must begin again as though you had done nothing toward repentance
ever before; good therefore is the advice of the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 7.8.
Jo. 5.14.
Have thou sinned? do so no more, but ask pardon for thy former faults; add
not sin to sin, for in one a man shall not be unpunished; and that of our
Savior to one whom he had pardoned, Go and sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee.

V. Direction.
5. Take heed of all the occasions to sin, S. 8.
and avoid them wisely; nemo diu tutus periculo proximus; vigilandum est ergo
maxim tentationis initio. Greg.
where there are many baits there is much danger, and there lies a snare in
almost every thing, in enjoyments, in company, in riches, in gifts, in
recreations, and it is hard for an ordinary Christian (that is not acquainted
with the deceitfulness of sin, and treachery of a mar^^ own heart, and the
measures of things lawful in themselves,) to escape the sin while they enjoy
the liberty in the use of things allowable and tolerable; Licitis perimus omnes.
and when it is hard to be discerned between sin in appearance, and the
appearance of sin, it is hard to keep a man's self without fault, for he that
does all he may will soon lose his innocence, and do that which he should not.

Therefore beware of every occasion which might but peradventure seduce thee to
commit folly, S. 9.
and then as thou shall have no excuse for thy sin by reason of the temptation,
so shall thou prevent the sin by avoiding the occasion: a man shall never be
drunk in an ale house with lewd companions if he enter not in, and sit not with
such vain persons; a man shall never commit murder except he enter the list and
quarrel; nor can a man commit actual adultery and fornication, except he keep
company with lewd women, and frequent them by his, or yield to their whorish
solicitations; neither can a woman betray her chastity, except she admit of
courtship, dalliance, gifts and privacie with men of unchaste desires, and soft
and smooth persuasions. If I attempt not a temptation, and seek it, or stay not
with it when I am overtaken or surprised, but resist or flee it, I may be safe
and keep my innoceney through grace; but if I seek an occasion to be foolish,
or embrace the several offers and occasions of sinning, I shall easily and
quickly fall, but not so soon, or with that facility rise again; and how much
safer and better is it to decline all engagements wherein I may sin, then get
loose and come off without a scar and a wound, a reproach and a shame, when once
engaged? therefore shun the occasions and companying with sin, so shall thou
keep thy soul from many inconveniences which otherwise will render thy hopes of
heaven more uncertain, and thy sincerity of grace more suspected, and pardon of
former failings more doubtful.

VI. Direction.
6. When any lusts and sinful desires stir within thee, S. 10.
and move toward any sinful act, or any temptation from the devil, the world,
or naughty men, consent not to it, flee from it, to Christ, the sanctuary of
thy safety, and withstand the temptation, as a Christian should remember always
thy baptismall vow, and that thou art not free to do the will of the flesh,
thou art under covenant, and the government of Christ, to serve him and to
exercise thy Christian warfare against all manner of sin, to destroy (as thou
art able) the kingdom of sin and Satan; thou know not, nor ownest any
ruler, nor foreign power or jurisdiction but Christ's; I may not, I must not
suffer sin to reign over me while I live, Ephesians. 5.11.
I must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but must
shun and reprove them all; I am not my own, I am bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.20. 1 Pet. 1.18.
Christ has bought me and redeemed me from a vain conversation, that I might
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of my life: Luke 1.74, 75.
I dare not, nor cannot, with any color of reason or conscience break my vow,
my covenant, my trust and fidelity, to comply with any temptation to sin,
though I might get any pleasure or emolument by sinning, no not for the whole
worlds riches or honors, I must not deny my Master Christ to whom I am a sworn
servant, he is one that will maintain me, and keep me, and stick by me, and
give me heaven at last, if I forsake him not, and cast not off his yoke, nor go
back from my engagement, he will never leave me nor cast me out, if I never
leave him, nor turn Apostate, as I shall do if I yield to sins motions, and
consent to sins temptations, and return to that filthy vomit of former sinful
practices: remember always thy vow, forget not thy obligations, thy duty, and
thy Master Christ, thy Savior, Lord, Redeemer, thy own soul, and the last
judgment, and then this will both take thee off from thy sinful course, and
preserve thee from falling again into the hand of temptation, and practice of
sin any more.

VII. Direction.
7. Call thy self every day to an account for what every day you do, S. 11.
whether you have omitted your duty, or committed a sin, and repent every day;
this is a work will prove advantageous if well performed, for by this practice
you will learn to know your self still better and better, and amend more and
more, and you will be happy if Christ find you so doing when he calls you to
account.

Besides, S. 12.
if you do this constantly and sincerely every day, you shall have but a days
sins to repent of, and the same day you are a dying, and then the last act of
your repentance will be the completing of all the former acts of penitence, and
then only will deathbed repentance be accounted of when it is the conclusion
of a watchful, serious, holy, penitent life, and the last act of that
habitual grace: but if all be left to the last day or minute, and that which
should have been done every day has been put off to the last, O what a burden
of foul sins will lie then upon thee poor weak wretch, if all be let alone till
then! Oh how can thou think that God will pardon all thy sins upon the last
minutes repentance, when that last is thy first and last? a sorry repentance it
is indeed, if it be but a little sorrow, an expiring sigh and groan after an
ages sinning and a vicious life: Therefore now begin, and continue till thy
dying day, to reckon with thy self every evening for what thou have done the
day, and every morning for what thou have acted in darkness of night, and what
thou have done foolishly repent; and for what thou have done well in the duties
of sobriety, chastity, charity and piety, rejoice and give God thanks, when
thou have fallen into or by a temptation, be sorry, and more watchful for
afterward; and when upon examination you have found you have resisted and
overcome a temptation, and avoided a sin, give God the praise of his assisting
and preventing grace: and likewise for thy conscientious tenderness, that would
not let thee commit a sin, nor omit a duty.

VIII. Direction.
8. The next counsel I would have thee consent to follow is this, S. 13.
That you take heed (in all the work of reformation) of a shifting and
deceitful heart. Jer. 4.9.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, it will
pretend one thing and do another; there is much double-dealing, it will seek
evasions, and find excuses to put off a duty, but especially this of real
reformation, thy heart will hold up fair shows with foul practices, it will
make many proffers and promises of repentance and amendment, and if you trust
your own heart you shall have nothing of it but promises and good purposes f^r
afterward; still I will repent hereafter, and amend hereafter, next week, or
next month, or next year, and yet delayeth still, and will do so until death,
and then it is too late; Oh how often has thy heart deceived and betrayed thee
already to defer until a more convenient time? how long have thou been about
to repent and reform, and yet nothing done toward it but a company of promises
and pretenses? and all this while instead of doing your necessary work, you
have added sin to sin, and day unto day utters excuses, and this day the
heart says to reformation, go and come again to morrow; and what is this but
heaping up wrath, and filling up the measure, and adding more weight to the
burden of sin, and binding my self faster with the cords of my own twisting,
and rendering my bands more irrefragable, and my guilt more damnable? and yet
thus it has been with every man that trusts a deceitful heart, and will be
so with thee if thou admit of its excuses, and let it alone to shift, cog
and deceive, and to play such pranks as the heart of foolish inconsiderate man
does delight in.

Now if ever you will be serious and do any thing to purpose in the necessary
business of thy eternal concernment, S. 14.
never give way to delay thy reformation, let the pleasures be never so fair or
ever so many; be not deceived by thy self, but be thou a doer of the work, and
not a pretender to it only: it is a deceiving and a deceived heart that makes
thee hitherto either defer the duty, or do it slightly.

IX. Direction.
9. If you would be thoroughly reformed, S. 15.
converted and saved in time, then forthwith give up thy self to Jesus Christ,
and to the word of his grace; let Christ be thy Physician go to him which is
the fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, Zac. 13.1. 1 Jo. 1.7.
it is the blood of Christ that cleanses from all sin, flee unto him, and yield
up thy self unto him, show thy wounds, and beg his healing, carry thy burden
and let him ease thee; Come unto me, says Christ, Mat. 11.28, 29.
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Let the word of Gods
grace reach thee and rule thee, be often at those ordinances where Christ is
applied to thy soul, and the Spirit of Christ is working conversion, give up
and resign thy self to the teachings of the spirit by the word, hear that word,
and obey it which discovers and debaseth sin, and searches the heart; and
frequent that preaching that advances Christ, and holiness, that wooes thee
off thy sins unto Christ and holy walking.

If thou be converted it must be by those means that God has appointed to
convert souls, S. 16.
and bring them to saving faith and repentance; all true converts can say that
God of his own will begat them with the word of truth; Jam. 1.18.21, 22.
Wherefore lay apart all filthiness, and receive with meekness the engrafted
word, which is able to save your souls; But he ye doers of the word, and not
hearers only, deceiving your own selves: and every one that is made a new
creature must say, being born again not of corruptible, but of incorruptible
seed, 1 Pet. 1.23, 25.
by the word of God which lives and abides for ever, and this is the word
which by the Gospel is preached unto you.

Therefore yield thy self freely and wholly to Christ, S. 17.
and the word of his grace, and thou may then be seasonably and savingly
wrought on and converted.

X. Direction.
10. Do thou intend to reform thy heart and life? S. 18.
would thou be a true convert, and have thy faults pardoned, and thy life
amended? then be fervent and frequent in prayer to the God of heaven for this
very thing, pray (I say) mightily, fervently and frequently; if ever thy
reformation be wrought it must come from God, and he will be sought unto by
prayer, and the desire of thy soul must be with earnestness, that God would
pardon thee and heal thee, and separate sin and thy soul, sin from thy
conversation, and instead thereof implant grace, and nourish holiness, and make
thee a new man, by renewing thy judgment, will and affection, and introducing
the image of the holy Jesus in thy soul and conversation.

It Is true, S. 19.
God has made free and gracious promises that he will give grace to convert
and change the heart from evil to good, that he will cleanse and purisie by his
Spirit, saying, I will give grace, I will pardon, I will heal, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26,
37.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean from all your
filthiness; A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and give
you an heart of flesh, and I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes: -- God will do all this for and to a poor sinner, and
except God give it and work it, no man living can get it; yet, says the Lord,
I will yet for all this be inquired of the house of Israel to do this thing for
them. God gave David a aew heart, and pardoned his sins, yet see that 51. Psalm.
51.10.
Psalm David prays heartily, Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a
right spirit within me: Our Savior Christ bids us, ask, Mat 7.6, 7.
and you shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened;
for every one that asks, receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him
that knocks, it shall be opened. -- Therefore if ever thou will be savingly
converted seek it earnestly of God, cry incessantly and mightily to the Lord,
and give him no rest until he give thee conversion and pardon; pray that thou
may get it, and pray that thou may keep it, pray for this spirit, and pray
with it, and never leave off praying as long as thou live: And I am persuaded
that no man shall attain unto saving reformation, but he that begs it of God,
and seeks earnestly after it; and I am also persuaded that he that begs it
earnestly and constantly shall not be denied it, if he neglect not to endeavor
to practice what God commands.

Thus have I given you those directions, S. 20.
which if you will speedily and carefully follow and put in practice, will
prove very succesfull toward your reformation, those means God has appointed
to bring about this so great and necessary a work of reformation, if
conscientiously and diligently used.

-- Now I would persuade you to use all means possible, S. 21.
and with all speed possible, that might be any way conducing to thy
reformation, by these motives following.

CHAP. XIV.
Some Motives to provoke men to be speedy and in good earnest about the one
thing necessary, which is sound Reformation.

I. Motive.
1. REmember that all thy weal and happiness depends upon this very thing, S. 1.
even that thou art worth in an other world; If thou art converted in time thou
art made for ever, but if thou put off thy reformation, and wilt not yield to
become a penitent, and thoroughly reformed, it will be thy marring for ever;
this must be done, and done perfectly, or else thy poor soul will be quite
undone, and a lost man for ever thou will be; it is as impossible for a man
that lives and dies in an unregenerate estate to be happy in another world, as
it is for one damned in hell already to come thence, or to be there happy where
he is: Now or never is the time to provide for heaven by timely reformation,
here or no where must every one that means to be saved look to it, for when
death shall part soul and body, there is no more working nor reforming; here
and now is the time and place in this present world, to do all we have to do in
reformation, in the other world every one must be rewarded according to what he
has done in this world, and receive a final unalterable sentence, and the
decree of the Almighty will be executed on thee, and for ever must thou lie
under it, whether it be unto life or death, salvation or damnation, nor will
there be any revocation or alte^^ation of that unalterable decree; Oh then how
much does it concern thee and every one that thou be sincerely and wholly
reformed in this world, seeing thy everlasting making or marring depends upon
it, forasmuch as thy eternal weal or woe is determined and fixed according as
thy heart and life is reformed or not reformed.

Do not therefore (O Christian) neglect the doing of that speedily which may
put all out of doubt, S. 2.
and give thee a comfortable assurance that heaven shall be thy portion which
thou may depend upon, if thy heart be converted and thy ways amended; and as
sadly may thou sink in thy hopes of heaven, if this be not fully wrought in
thee: O then let not any thing in the world make thee put off thy reformation,
or baffle thee out of thy duty, or betray thee into vain hopes, to be happy
without it.

II. Motive.
2. The next Motive to provoke thee to hasten thy reformation, is this, S. 3.
that all the while you defer it you lose your time, and are doing that you
must undo again; for the best of all that you do else are but trifles and
toies, and nothing at all to the purpose of true happiness, and all this while
you are making more work for tears, lamentation and repentance; and if ever you
come to the happy state of conversion, hereafter you will be much afflicted and
troubled that you continued so long a fool and a wretch, as you are all the
while you put off and delay your amendment: how bitter will it be to a devour
soul to remember how long he continued at a distance from Christ, how long he
did live after the flesh and the world, how many days and how much strength he
spent in the service of sin, how many excuses and delays he used? Oh! he will
beshrew himself to think how often he put off the kind entreaties of Christ,
and those many invications to holiness; it will trouble thee if ever thou come
to be converted that thou were not converted sooner, that God and religion had
not thy heart and service long ago, that thou did not yield and resign up
thy self when first thou wast moved to it, that sin had so much, and Christ so
little of thy will and affections; O then, dear soul, defer not any longer,
but do that with all speed which you have now a fair opportunity to perform,
that is, forthwith to leave off your known sins, and betake your selves to a
sober, serious, holy life; so will you prevent your own molestation and your
own misery.

III. Motive.
3. Let the danger and dreadfulness of an unconverted state move thee speedily
to get out of it by all possible means; S. 4.
alas! all the while I live unreformed I am under the curse of the Law, and
power of Satan, a stave to lust, and a son of perdition; and if I chance to die
in this estate, my case and the already damned in hell will be the same, they
who died in their sins are miserable wretches, and so shall I be as they are,
there is but a step between me and their sad condition; and while I am on this
side the grave, in a sinning course, following the motions of my lusts, I am in
a worse condition then the worst of creatures, a toad in my ditch is better by
much then a man in his sins, unconverted, unreformed: And all the while I live
in my sins I am unpardoned, and am hastening to an eternity of misery, I am in
that broad way which leads straight on to destruction; Oh then let my soul
get quickly out of that way, and from that state in which I walk in so much
danger, and which will most certainly carry me to the chambers of death, and
bring me under the eternal wrath of God.

IV. Motive.
4. Let the consideration of the brevity and uncertainty of thy life move thee
to hasten thy reformation, S. 5.
this night thy soul may be taken from thy body, if not then, within a very
short time it must and it will be called to an account, and oh what a sad day
will it prove then, when death opens the passage from a sinful life to an
endless misery, when death puts an end to the pleasures of sin, and gives a
beginning to the pains of hell never to end!

Therefore if you mean to prevent the miseries of a dying sinner, S. 6.
you must destroy the sin ere you die, and this requires your care and
diligence, your speed and quick dispatch; Oh that you would be wise concerning
your later end, and leave not that to do at the last, which can neither be well
done nor accepted if it be put off till the last.

V. Motive.
5. Another Motive to a speedy reformation let be, S. 7.
that none of thy most pleasurable sinful practices are half so pleasing to
thee a sinner as the ways of godliness and exercise of virtues are to the true
convert; reformation, if it be sound and universal, will prove the rarest
delight and content in the world, and be of excellent satisfaction to thee;
Pro: 3.15. 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Timothy 6.6.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; and godliness
with contentment is great gain, profitable to all things, having the promise
of this life and that which is to come: No life can be compared to a godly life
for pleasure, profit and contentment; how quiet is the conscience of a devout
holy Christian! how sweet his sleep! how calm and serene is his spirit that is
at peace with God! how does he rejoice in the Lord! what a merry life does he
lead, and goes on his way cheerfully to his home, to his inheritance, to his
joys in heaven which he has in prospect, and is at the end of his race! how
does that soul triumph in his victories that is daily resisting temptations,
and slaying his corruption! how sweetly does he pass his time that spends it
in communion with God, and delights of heaven! But it is far otherwise with a
wicked man that serves the interest of sin, and studies to gratify and serve
his lusts in sinful actings; Oh what a many plots does he lay, and pains does
he take to bring about his sin, and then what shifts must be make to hide, to
excuse, to maintain his sin! what a many perplexing gripes of conscience, and
often terrors has a wicked man within himself! and besides the bitterness in
the end of sinful actions, what a toil and weariness it is in the exercise of
it, so that truly a man may say of sin, WHAT A WEARINESS IT IS! to what purpose
is all this cost and loss of time, and exhausting the spirits? and after all,
what pleasure has a man, or what content can accrue to any man upon the
remembrance of his evil actings? is not a holy harmless life spent in the
exercise of purity and charity infinitely more to be desired, for content and
satisfaction (were there nothing else to be found in the practice of godliness
and virtues then what we find in themselves) then in all the forms and modes,
in all or any the ways of vitiousness that can be named, (were there nothing
else to be expected by way of punishment for my sinning) then the enjoyment of
the pleasures supposed to be in sin? O then, dear Christian, let nothing keep
thee back from leaving off every sinful course, nor from taking up the
practice of holy living, seeing nothing can bring true pleasure nor content
unto thy soul until thou be habitually employed in the duties of religion and
practice of godliness.

VI. Motive.
Finally, S. 8.
Let this be a Motive to cast off all thy wickedness immediately, and forthwith
to follow Jesus Christ in an entire imitation of his holiness in a godly
affection and conversation, forasmuch as God has born long enough with thee
already, and thou have lived long enough in thy sins already; Oh do not live
any longer, or spend any more of thy time to the will of the stesh, but to the
will of God, for the time past of our life may suffice to have wrought the will
of the Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, excess of wine, and other
sins; it is enough, dear soul, it is enough and too much that we have done
foolishly, it is high time to cease to do evil, and to learn to do well: and
likewise consider what an honest, how honorable, how pleasant, how profitable,
and how comely a thing it is, to live a godly, holy, and heavenly life; Oh let
it never be said of thee that thou chusest thine own undoing by refusing to do
what God requires of thee, seeing all that God does ask of thee, and what ever
is here exhorted to, is for thine own eternal good, glory, and endless
happiness.

And therefore, to conclude, S. 9.
I do in the name of Christ exhort thee Reader to be mindful of thine own
concernments, and if there be any thing herein, which if you follow to do would
prejudice thy salvation, then do it not, but if the things here exhorted to,
(that is,) a speedy through reformation in heart and life) be of absolute
necessity, (if thou meanest to be saved eternally) then upon pain of damnation,
and as thou hopest to see Christ in glory, and to be glorified with him, do not
forget to put it into speedy execution, lest when you would (if now you refuse)
you may not, it may be too late, or not accepted.

I beseech thee therefore, S. 10.
precious soul, if there be in thee any hope of consolation from God, if any
love to Christ and thine own soul, Romans 12.1.
if any mercy or tenderness of compassion toward thine own soul, ready to be
undone by reason of sin, then think on these things, Ephesians. 4.22.23, 24.
and accordingly I beseech thee therefore by the mercies of God, that you be no
more conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind,
that you put off concerning your former conversation the old man which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your
minds; And that you put on the new man, which afier God is created in
righteousness and true holiness; so shall you prevent eternal damnation, and
through the mercies of God in Christ obtain everlasting salvation; which
damnation cannot be avoided, nor this salvation ever attained without a sound,
entire, timely, holy reformation* which is the sum and final conclusion of
this my earnest persuasion, by all those foregoing arguments in this first
part; the rest shall be set in order for thee in due time, when this shall be
so well proved, as that by renouncing all thy sins thou will be in that blessed
frame and serious Resolution to devote thy self to a godly course of holy
living, and therein to abide with God, to

THE END.

