David Restored.

OR An ANTIDOTE against the Prosperity of the Wicked AND The Afflictions of the
Just, SHOWING THE Different Ends of Both.

In a most Seasonable discourse upon the Seventy third Psalm,

BY THE Right Reverend Father in God EDWARD PARRY Late L. BISHOP of KILLALOE.

Opus Posthumum.

Let not my afflictions be esteemed (as with wise and Godly men they cannot be)
an argument of my sin; more then their Impunity amongst good men is any sure
token of their Innocence.

(...). Printed for JOSEPH GODWIN Bookseller in OXFORD. Anno Recreationis
M.DC.LX.

To the Right Honorable, JAMES Marquess of Ormond, Earl of Ormond and
Ossory, Vicount Thurles, Lord Baron of Arcloe, Lord of the Regalities and
Liberties of the County of Tiperary, Chancellor of the University of Dublin,
Lord Lieutenant General, and General Governor of the Kingdom of Ireland,
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in England and Ireland,
Lord Steward of his Majesty's Household, Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter.
But that I know Your Lord-ship's unparalleled Goodness, which can easily
pardon the Crimes my ambition throws me on, I should not have presumed (after
those many deserved Triumphs your Honor has met abroad, and those louder
acclamations that crown your return) to disturb your Lordship by so mean a
present.

But the Author having had in his life time the honor of being well known, and
obliged to your Lordship for many very noble favors, I could not, without
being injurious to the Dead, (whose Gratitude commands it) and the Dignity of
your own merit (which ennobles any object it lights on) have presented this
Tribute to any other person then your Self.

And indeed (my Lord) besides the obligations of the Author, this little Volume
belongs to none more properly then Your Self, who next his Majesty are one of
the most illustrious Patterns of afflicted Virtue the world can boast of,
having tasted of all those unexpected changes Greatness is liable to, without
any in your self, no storms being able to shipwreck your undaunted Loyalty,
shake that Heroic Constancy you are the happy Master of, or eclipse the Piety
of your soul.

So that after all those wonders you have seen abroad, you are become a Greater
one your Self, having contracted all the rarities of other places into your
self, which proclaim you (though a Subject) greater then other Princes.

When I cast my eye on those Comforts which long bleeding Ireland did taste of
under your Conduct, how many Orphans tears have been dried up, and widows
Groans stopped by your bounty; how with Moses you stood in the gap, and opposed
two high destructive factions, how that afflicted Church owes that little life
it as yet has, to your memory, and which it struggles to preserve in hopes of
your noble protection.

When I consider how many of the Reverend and pious Clergy of that nation
(stripped of all by an enraged enemy) had fainted to death, unless held up by
your Arm, and their drooping spirits revived by your Munificence, and by the
Pious, and unparalelld Charity of your most honorable, and most Incomparable
Lady.

When I consider how nobly you ever owned both the Callings, and Persons of the
Ministers in their lowest Condition, and undauntedly protected both against all
Contempt.

When I reflect on those high Qualities which render you deserving the highest
Favor and employment of your Prince, when I cast my eye on these and those
many more excellencies you triumph in, I must justly proclaim that Church
happy, which shrouds its self under so noble a wing, and that Kingdom to
have outdone it self, which produces so Loyal a Subject.

To flatter Your Eminent Virtues (my Lord) were to wrong them, and to think I
intended to do so, were to wrong me; I shall not much study for an Apology,
because the world will not only pardon, but applaud this Choice; nor can there
be any better way of reviving the Acknowledgments of the Dead, whose memory
cannot have a Greater honor than your Lordship's owning of his labors, nor my
self a higher, then of being my Father's successor in part of your Honor's
esteem, and of being admitted into the number of

Jesus College, OXON. July 1660. Your Honor's most humble and most devoted
Servants IOH: PARRY.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
THAT Religion is often made a Covering for ill designs, is no new piece of
Policy; but that sins of the blackest hue, and Persons of notorious villainies,
should ride for many years in an uninterrupted triumph; and at length dye
quietly in their beds, has startled too many to somewhat more then wonder;
even to question a providence, which may peculiarly interest it self, in these
unexpected revolutions.

For although the tenderness of Gods mercies, or the severity of his
judgments are most conspicuous to an impartial unpassionate eye, yet
experience tells us, that the causes of events are often so occult and obscure,
beyond our reach; as that our puzzled thoughts are blindly led on, too often to
substitute chance to be the cause of that, which is unsearchably ruled by God;
or profanely, to cast black obloquies (if any thing happen contrary to our
desires) even upon God himself.

Whereas if, but with patience and serenity men would expect the end, they
would quickly change their opinion, and discern Gods glory and his Churches
good, to break through those dismal appearances; and that those disorders
which carry a face of horror to us, look with another kind of aspect toward
God.

Thus when the air is covered with black tempestuous clouds, our senses torn
with thunder and lightning; all things may seem to be in an irreconcilable
confusion below, though the same calmness interruptedly sits in Heaven; so,
whilst the World lies in a distemper and all things be together by the ears
below on earth, our judgment may be darkened, and our passions be active, yet
that confusion can never continue so long, or reach so high, but God can turn
these greatest disorders to a perfect harmony.

They that confine God to be only a General beginning of a confused motion, do
strive to rob God of one of his most glorious attributes, omnisciency, as if
once he should command a River, to contain it self within its prescribed
channel; but yet; not be conscious and intent, upon every winding curle of its
stream; by which opinion as we strip God of his glory, so we deprive our
selves of very much comfort, for if man were nakedly exposed to the injuries of
the creature, freely acting according to the rule of nature, without a more
eminent hand to restreine their fury, he would quickly find a want of that
help which he voluntarily does abridge himself of.

And although man is always too prone in his discontents, to indulge his
corruptions in a denial of a peculiar providence; yet he never more greedily
runs into this piece of Atheism: Then upon the prosperity of the wicked, and
the afflictions of the just; when he finds persecuted innocence wandering in
banishment, and drooping under a load of chains, whilst impiety wantonly
roules it self upon a throne: when they dare father their wickedness upon
Heaven, and yet prosper, and do grow great by being prodigiously sinful.

But how poor and unfortunate an argument a little success is, of a good
cause, (as all ages so) the late stupendous alterations of providence, (which
has unexpectedly taken off the wheels of wicked men's Charriots, leaving them
in that dirt they sprung from, and restored a too-long-afflicted David to his
own,) do sufficiently make good.

To endeavor after an eminency in Religion ought to be every man's ambition,
but to pretend Heaven merely for our ends on Earth, is but the outside sanctity
of an hypocrite, which (under so specious a cover) does far more harm then an
open profaneness.

Those prosperous streams which some men's actions have been wafted in, have
not only betrayed weaker minds into an opinion of their Justice, but even
sweld the Authors themselves, into a conceit, of being favorites of Heaven;
and that their actions, are no longer crimes, but services, and carry a
certificate from Heaven by their felicity.

Others there are, who amazed to see mischiefs (such as honester infidels would
blush to hear) wear so uninterruptedly the mask of Religion, and pretend Gods
cause; do renounce all, and (actuated by corrupt unsteady principles) think it
a kind of refuge to turn Atheists, desparing to find any truth of Religion
there, where actions are so notoriously contrary to the profession; and where
little else is breathed but Enthusiasmes, which under color of Revelation
banishes humanity, and the very ordinary expressions of generosity and Justice
amongst Men.

By which grand Temptations, too many (reduced almost to their wits end) do
amazedly with David run about, account all Religion vain, and question not
only the providence, but even the existence of God; Atheistically denying
knowledge in the in the most high, Since such prodigious impieties should not
only find so long an impunity, but even Crown themselves with those Laurels
which their guilt did set upon their heads.

To undeceive these, and to reduce them to a more sober and Christian temper;
that those that have fallen may the more easily get up, and their heels be no
more tript up, upon the like temptation: To confirm those that have been too
long staggering; To lay before us those high sins and dangers which attend the
temptation to Atheism from wicked men's prosperity and good men's afflictions,
is this present Treatise made public.

Here men may learn to avoid that desperate mistake of thinking Heaven guilty
in compliance with wicked actings, or of questioning the purity or Justice of
our Maker.

This ingenious Antidot reaches a remedy, which may compose our passions when
they view wickedness escaping any trouble, or scourge, and at length expiring
in a seeming tranquillity and peace: It tells us that there is the more
behind, that the larger reckoning is to be in the other World.

Here appears the vanity of what ever the Worlds prosperity can boast of; that
envy which their glittering toys may causelessly produce in us, is most
rationally allayed.

Here the brutishness of Atheism, the unfading comforts of Innocence and
goodness are fully set off.

This tells us, that though a David may faint, yet he shall not expire; and
wicked men may force him to a groan, yet never to despair.

We find here that no storm can shipwreck a good cause; nor the most Halcyon
impiety fit for ever in a calm; That Ill-got greatness is surely brought
down sometime or other.

The prond man's swelling tumor, the insulting oppressors rapine, and violent
hand; his uncontrouled licentious tongue, which has a fling at all goodness it
can meet with, and those other boisterous companions of prosperous wickedness,
may here read their fate, even contempt; ruin, and destruction. Here both the
difformity of those that mock Heaven by their dissimulation, or question its
providence and Justice by their passionate profaneness, may find their doom.

Here Gods unparalleld goodness to Israel in several Capacities, the truest
support of an afflicted spirit, the surest Anchor in the midst of storms; The
happiest way of resolving difficulties, which a tempted soul may be entangled
in; the support and eminent priveledges of Gods servants, the happiness of an
attainment to an assurance of Gods favors in this life, and the longing
desires of a ravished soul after Glory, do all find here their luster, and are
discourst of, with that satisfaction and new variety, which its little volume
could bear.

To praise the Reverend Author according to his merit, would appear to them
that knew him not, perhaps too much; and to those that did nor too little,
would it well become so nearly related a pen.

A Judicious and knowing Person put us in hopes of a large account of his life,
but the distance of Place (he being in Ireland) the unhappy miscarriages of
letters, and the quickness of the Press, has deprived us of that favor for
the present.

In the mean time I shall crave leave to insert a short Caracter, which a
Reverend Divine (of great Intimacy with the Reverend Author whilst alive) was
pleased to honor me with.

A short Character of the Author sent from a reverend Person.
He was a Person of very quick and ready parts, of a clear head and (which is
rare) happy in as great a Memory as Judgment; of Indefatigable industry, as
being (notwithstanding his many other Employments) a very constant Preacher all
his life time.

He was of a most eminent and singular Piety, of an exemplary holy life (such
as the World could not cast the least stain upon,) of a winning (though
serious) deportment, and of an hospitable spirit.

He was (as you can witness (adds the Reverend Person to me) a tender and
affectionate Father, and (as I can) a most sincere faithful friend; a vigilant
Pastor, and such a Preacher that as I have heard from good hands, an Honorable
Peer of England a Person of no mean Judgment upon hearing of him, equaled
him to any He ever was an Auditor of.

In a word, He was a true Son of the Church, and a most loyal subject to the
Crown of England.

Not all the frowns which were cast upon Episcopacy, nor the calamities
wherewith that Sacred Order was threatened, could frighten him from an
Acceptance (for he never in the least manner sought for it) of a Patent from
his late Majecty of glorious memory, even then, when (as I have often heard him
protest) he looked for nothing but persecution.

To Sum up all: He was really composed of those excellencies which Sant Paul
requires in the making up of a Bishop indeed. -- Thus far that Reverend Person.

And as for this work (which some others may follow if this find entertainment
abroad) it needs no other Rhetoric but its own to commendit, and I hope the
Reader will never find cause to repent either his Money or perusal.

Jesus Coll. Oxon. July 1660.
Psalm. LXXIII.
TRuly God is good unto Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

2. But as for me, my feet were almost gone: my feet had well nigh slipped.

3. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

4. For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm.

5. They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they plagued like other
men.

6. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain: violence covers them as
a garment.

7. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they have more then heart could wish.

8. They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak
loftily.

9. They set their mouth against the heavens; and their tongue walks through
the earth.

10. Therefore his people return hither: and waters of a full cup are wrung out
to them.

11. And they say, how does God know? and is there knowledge in the most high?

12. Behold, these are the ungodly: who prosper in the world, they increase in
riches.

13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence

14. For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.

15. If I say I will speak thus: behold, I should offend against the
generation of thy children.

16. When I thought to know this, it was too painful for me.

17. Until I went into the sanctuary of God: then understood I their end.

18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down
into destruction.

19. How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.

20. As a dream when one awaketh: so, O Lord when thou awakest, thou shall
despise their image.

21. Thus my heart was grieved; and I was pricked in my reins.

22. So foolish was I and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.

23. Nevertheless I am continually with thee: thou have holden me by my right
hand.

24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

26. My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

27. For lo, they that are far from thee shall perish, thou have destroyed all
those that go a whoring from thee.

28. But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord
God, that I may declare all thy works.

The Contents of the Chapters.
CHAP I.
THe Preface of the whole Psalm handled. Gods Verse. 1, Goodness to Israel.
SECT. I.
Gods Goodness Absolute or Relative. His relative goodness may be certainly
known to man. 1. By Scripture. 2. By demonstration. 3. By sense. 4. By
experience. Application. Gods goodness to Israel 1. As a Nation and so to
every Nation. 1. In giving necessaries to their Being. To their well-being; He
destroys no Nation but for ingratitude. 2. Gods Goodness to Israel as a
Visible Church, and so to every visible Church. 1. In entering a Covenant with
them: His commands carry Honor and Privilege. The Difference betwixt the Law
of Nature, and Gods Laws to his Church. 2. In giving his Church a Conditionate
Right to the Promises, and means sufficient for performance of the Condition.
SECT. II.
3. Gods goodness to Israel as a Type of the Invisible Church. 1. In giving
actual right to the Promises. 2. Peace of Conscience. 3. Regard in affliction.
4. Special acccesse by Prayer. 5. Peculiar Commands. Perseverance of the
Catholic invisible Church an absolute gift.
Practical uses hence. of the first.
1. God intends not primarily the ruin of a Nation. 2. The punishments of
Nations Just for ingratitude.
Uses of the second.
1. Gods Goodness not limited to things merely temporal. 2. Temporal
blessings make not fully happy, hence a necessity of a new Covenant. 3. Sins of
Professors more heinous.
Uses of the third.
1. Not to content our selves with offers of favors* but to interest our
selves therein by sincerity and pureness of heart. 2. to continue in Gods
goodness; perseverance exhorted unto. 3. From Gods goodness here we may
gather the greatness of his goodness to the Church Triumphant.
CHAP. II.
THE first occasion from without, of the Prophets Temptation, wicked men's
Prosperity. The danger of the Prophets fall generally described, and the height
of these wicked men's prosperity set out in six degrees. 1. In health. 2. In
exemption from labor. 3. In exemption from calamities. 4. From Trouble. 5. In
being courted by others. 6. In having more then heart can wish.
SECT. I.
Judgment and reason supporters of the soul. Verse. 2.
Men led by passion step awry. The way to cure our passions. Good men subject
to errors, and Passions. Means to prevent both. Wicked men are lawless,
foolish and proud. Verse. 3.
Health a great part and blessing of Prosperity yet common to wicked men. Uses
therefrom. Labor most common to men of a lower and mean condition. Verse. 4,
5.
Exemption from labor, dangerous not to be boasted in. Evil men usually not
subject to calamity. How and by what means? How to still our thoughts That
wicked men are not always visibly aflicted?
SECT. II.
Verse. 12.
Wealth without trouble a great part of prosperity. This not much to be boasted
in. Verse. 10.
Compliance, Presents and gifts usually attend great men's Prosperity: Meant by
waters of a full cup wrung out unto them. Whether and in what cases Gods people
may carry presents to wicked great men? What it is to be a time-server? A
dangerous piece of prosperity to be courted by others. Verse. 7.
Wicked men have more then Heart could wish. Why Providence blesses them so
much? The good uses to be made thereof. 1. They have more then they did ever
expect themselves. 2. They have more then in probability others could believe.
3. More then good men can lawfully wish unto them. Whether it may be lawful to
pray for the abatement and change of wicked men's prosperity? 4. They have more
then reason can desire.
CHAP. III.
THe second occasion from without of the Prophets Temptation. Wicked men's ill
Manners. Verse. 8.
1. Pride, the Nature and Inconveniences thereof. 2. Violence and oppression.
How, prosperity works it with four reason, thereof. Oppression a sin hateful
to God. 3. And ill tongue, The disorders thereof. How and in what respects
wicked men's tongues are said to walk through the Earth, Verse. 9.
and to be fixed against the Heavens? In several particulars. 4. Atheism; Verse.
11.
their denial of knowledge in the most high. The irrationality and original
thereof. The occasion of the Prophets Temptation from home. 1. His own
afflictions. Verse. 14.
Good men are ordinarily afflicted in five capacities. 2. His own piety to
God, Verse. 13.
and righteousness to man, by cleansing his heart and washing his hands in
innocence. The comforts of Both. In four particulars. Helps and motives to
innocence in 3. particulars.
CHAP. IV.
Verse. 3. Verse. 13.
THe Temptation it self, Which the Prophet felt. 1. Envy, the Nature thereof. 2.
To think Religion vain. This foolish and unreasonable, confuted. 1. By
experience of temporal happiness, arising from observation of Justice. 2. By
Gods power, goodness and faithfulness. This opinion portends a fall from
virtue and all true comfort. Times of calamity subject to this Temptation.
Means to fortify our faith of Gods being a rewarder. Verse. 15.
David's recovery in part. That which startled him. To think Religion vain is
dangerous in it self, and injurious to Gods Children. The fear of giving
scandal ought to keep from Heresies and evil actions. The benefits of Mutual
condescentions. Six rules concerning scandals in matters necessary, and in
things indifferent. Verse. 16.
The Prophets ingenuity and wisdom toward his own satisfaction the benefits of
deliberation. The difficulty, of answering objections will not excuse the
conclusion against a fundamental truth. Which is to be stuck to against all
objections. Satisfaction of doubts is had by clearing the understanding and
judgment. Reformation by force ineffectual. Three things make men capable of
being taught by God. Gods sanctuary a place of satisfaction, Verse. 17.
where that was and is now. Places of public worship to be honored.
CHAP. V.
WIcked men's Prosperity will have an end in the mean time. 1. Their places are
slipery. 2. Full of Terrors. Verse. 18.
3. It is but a dream, yet it is significant. 1. Of Gods goodness. 2. What
our gratitude ought to be. 3. Of our temper. 4. Of the dimensions of the fall.
The end of them destruction, utter, sudden, Verse. 19.
and final. Gods Truth known makes error condemnable. Self condemnation though
difficult, yet just, Verse. 20.
and profitable in several particulars. Good men have a sense of afflictions.
Verse. 22.
Four Priveledges of the Saints. 1. Verse. 21.
Being with God necessary, decretory, special, general, present, future. 2.
Priveledge, support by Gods hand. Verse. 23.
The benefits thereof. 3. Priveldge guidance by Gods Counsel. Not to be denied
in times of ordinary Providence. 3. Useful cautions in this point.
CHAP. VI.
Verse. 24.
THe fourth Priveledge of Gods Servants. Thou shall receive me to glory. Future
glory is the hope and expectation of Gods Servants. Arguments proving a future
reward. 1. General, as consent of the best. 2. Such as prove it possible Gods
power and the souls immortality, Such as prove it certain as 1. The
correspondency of providence to the created desires of the soul. 2. Gods
Justice. Objections answered. 2. Special reasons of a future reward. 1. Gods
Promise, the performance of this promise proved. 1. By Gods actions toward
Christ in five particular. 2. Confirmations of that promise given by Christ in
seven particulars. Uses: Why this reward called glory, etc. The Saints receive
glory notwithstanding afflictions. Calamities work a greater weight of glory.
Saints are passive receivers of glory, etc.
CHAP. VII.
THe Prophets profession, Verse. 25.
whom have I in Heaven but thee, etc. It is man's prerogative to reflect upon
God. God the object of man's desires and whole soul, and that worthily for four
Reasons. Of man's elective desire of God, passing by other things. The choice of
God above and before all things appreciative. The choice of God alone with
exclusion of other things. How far other things may be desired? The
reasonableness, Justice and benefits of a subordinate love of other things in
reference to God.
CHAP. VIII.
THe Prophets reflex meditation concerning himself. 1. His disease. 2. The
remedy. Verse. 26.
Delay of fruition of God troublesome. The remedy against this Anxiety not in
taking it away, but 1. In making it single. 2. In preventing disordered
actions. 3. In helping to bear it. The first part of the Remedy, That God is
our portion. Why so called. Second part that God is a strengthening Rock. God
strengthens. 1. By persuasion, and that by Rational arguments: and partial
mercies. 2. God strengthens by influence 1. Of readiness of mind. 2.
Assurance. 3. Strength. Uses.
CHAP. IX.
Verse. 27.
THE Prophets Meditation concerning others. Sinners far from God in 4. Respects.
Idolatry, spiritual whoredom and why so called. The end of wicked men, they
shall perish. 1. Because God removes the influence of his favor. 2. God casts
them from him. 3. God with his own hand destroys them.
CHAP. X.
Verse. 28.
THE Prophets last conclusive Resolution upon the whole. How good men draw nigh
to God. Resolution and practice to be joined. The nature of trust in God its
difference from Assent. The connection betwixt trust in God and declaration of
his works, in several particulars made good. The conclusion of the whole
Psalm.
ERRATA.
Page 40. l. 9. (...) ib. l. ult. (...) p. 42. l. 4. (...). ib. 19. (...) p.
43. l. 4. (...). p. 46: l. 12. (...). ib. 19. (...) p. 66. l. 6. (...) p. 77.
l. 24. (...) p. 78. l. antep. enarranda. p. 114. l. 9. (...) ib. 11. (...). p.
116. l. 15. (...). ib. 16. (...). p. 136. l. 5. oriatur. p. 191. l. 23. terras.
p. 213. l. 1. (...). p. 220. l. 24. (...).

Preface dele Nor.

INDEX.
A.
Atheism unreasonable p. 86. Proceeds from the Devil p. 87. Afflictions
ordinary to good men who may suffer in many Capacities p. 92. Afflictions often
esteemd a partition wall p. 192. Remedies against Anxieties of not enjoying God
p. 273. The nature of affiance in God p. 301. The difference betwixt Assent and
trust. p. 301. What Connection there is between affiiance or trust in God and
declaration of his works? p. 205.
B.
THe Body and Soul Sympathize. 188. Of Being with God, the Comfort thereof. p.
190, etc. 195. Man's Blessedness in the enjoyment of God p. 201.
C.
WHether the Catholic Church may totally fail? p. 22. The Benefits of mutual
condescensions p. 130. etc. Consideration a sign of ingenuity and honesty
which leaves not virtue willingly p. 142. Consideration often prevents a fall
143. Self-condemnation difficult, just and profitable p. 182. Guidance by Gods
counsel a great privilege p. 200. Calamities increase glory p. 236. The choice
of God p. 255. etc. 259.
D.
DOubts to be satisfied by clearing the understanding, and judgment p. 150.
Gods direction never against his revealed will p. 204. When special direction
is not be expected 208. Whether and how others things may be desired when they
come not in competition with our duty to God. 260. The benefits of
subordinating of our desires to God. 266. Delay of fruition of God irksome
270.
E.
EAse a great Privilege 46. Envy, the nature thereof foolish and unreasonable
113. etc. Error made condemnable in the soul by the light of truth. 18.
G.
GOds goodness to Israel as a nation as a Church as a Type of the invisible
Church. 1. God primarly intends not the ruin of a nation 24 Whether and when
and how far good men may comply with and court wicked great men 55. Glory the
Privilege hope and expectation of Gods servants. 211. Saints receive glory
notwithstanding afflictions 236. Saints are mere passive receivers of glory
208. God the object of man's whole soul worthily 249. etc. The choice of God
above and before all thing appreciative 255. The choice of God alone with
exclusion of all other things. 259. How good men draw near to God -- the
benefits thereof. 296.
H.
HEalth a great blessing yet not to be boasted in 41. etc. How hands may be
defiled 105. Hope deferred is troublesome 270.
I.
JVdgment and reason the supporters of the soul 35. Innocence described by
washing of the hands and why? 104. The true comforts of Innocence 107. etc.
Helps to keep it. 110. Idolatry spiritual whoredom why so called? 290 Whether
Christians may be guilty of Idolatry? p. 291. The end of Idolatry. p. 292
K
THE denial of Gods knowledge down right Atheism p. 85.
L.
THE benefits of experimental knowledge of Gods love. p. 29. How God is in his
Law in 4. particulars. 287. The chief work of the Lords day to praise God.
309.
N
THE sins of the Nation are sins of ingratitude. 24.
P
MEN led by passion step awry. p. 35. The best men may be led by passion and
misapprehension into mistakes. 38. Pride the nature of it, and the
inconveniences of it. 68. etc. True piety consists in cleansing of the heart
and why? 99. The nature of a portion how God is a Portion to the soul. 275,
276. etc. Places of public worship not to be despised. 160. Wicked men's
prosperity has an end. 163 Their places are slippery. 164. Their prosperity
full of terror and a significant dream. 166. etc. The end of their prosperity
ruin and destruction. 171. How God persuades by experiences of his mercies.
28.
R
TO think Religion vain a great sin. p. 126. and 118. etc. Reformation by
violence unsuccessfull. 152. A future Reward proved by several convincing
arguments. 212. etc. Why termed Glory, wherein it consists. 232. How God is a
rock and strengthens. 278. etc. Resolution of good to be joined with immediate
Practice.
S
THE fear of giving scandal ought to keep us from sin p. 129. Rules concerning
scandal in matters necessary and indifferent. 135 Gods sanctuary a place of
knowledge. 155. Where that was under the Law. 156. How Christians have their
sanctuaries. 158. Whether any other place besides Gods Sanctuary can show us
fully* the end of wicked men's prosperity. 173. etc. Four Privileges of Saints.
189. etc. Support by Gods hand the comforts thereof. 198. etc Success no
infallible sign of Gods special direction. 204. Sinners far from God in 4.
respects.
T
WHat it is to be a time-server 65. An ill tongue discovers the heart. 77. etc.
Difficulty of answering objections will not excuse the conclusion against
fundamental truths. 145. A plain revealed truth to be stuck to against all
objections of flesh and blood. 146. What makes men capable of being taught of
God. p 155. A sense of trouble in good men. 187. The nature of Trust, 301. Why
those that trust in God can best declare his works. 35.
V
VIolence Why wicked great men are usually violent. 71. etc. Violence a sin
severely prohibited and punished. 76. etc.
W
WIcked men lawless, foolish and proud. 40. How to still our thoughts when
wicked men are not always visibly punished. 49. Wealth without trouble a great
privilege. 50. How wicked men have more then heart can wish 57. Whether it may
be lawful to pray for the abatement of wicked men's prosperity. 62.
Gods goodness TO ISRAEL.
CHAP. 1. V. 1. Verily God is good unto Israel and to such as be of a clean
heart.
CONTENTS.
Gods Goodness absolute or relative.

His relative goodness may be certainly known to Man. 1. by demonstration. 2.
by sense. 3. by experience. 4. by Scripture.

Gods goodness to Israel as a Nation, in several Particulars.

Gods goodness to Israel as a visible Church in several particulars.

Gods goodness to Israel as a Type of the Invisible Church in several
particulars.

Many Practical inferences from the Whole.

CAP. I. SECT. I.
Psalm 73. v. 1. Truly God is good unto Israel, even to such as are of a
clean heart.


ALthough Good men do usually meet with many shrewd rubbs in their motion
toward Heaven, yet nothing (for the most part) proves more dangerous, then a
long and uncontrouled prosperity; for as when it lights upon themselves, it is
apt to produce a wantonness, and to swell them beyond their bounds, so when it
falls upon those whose Principles and actions proclaim them notoriously
wicked, whose villainies find a success answerable to their wish; then it
strikes deep, and commonly raises those doubts in Religion which are not
easily allayed, and shakes that very foundation, which many years care had laid.

For experience tells us that nothing puts the soul more to a stagger, then
Prosperous Impieties, nor gives a deeper wound to Religion, then an unexpected
thriving in its deadliest opposers; to see those rouling themselves in plenty
and ease, whose oppression had wrung so many tears from others; to find an
Ahab, unconcernedly sporting himself in poor Naboths vineyard; to see his
eyes stand out with fatness which he robbed from those, who lie ready to famish
in the streets; and after all, to see such violence, die in its bed, to be laid
in the grave, with a dry winding sheet in a full age: after it had cut off so
many in their prime; To see (I say) all this, and much more, may prove an high
temptation to the best, an Encouragement of Atheism, to the licentious, and
does usually shipwreck more souls, then the lowdest storm, or the sharpest
calamities can master.

This Good David gives us, in this whole Psalm a large certificat of, from his
own example; Who although he met often with those snares, which cost him many a
wet eye, yet they could never shake the Principles of his Religion: whereas he
assures us, Here, that a reflection upon that height of prosperity, which
wicked men uninteruptedly dwelt in, did put him to an amazed stand; almost
struck up his heels, and threatened ruin to that very root which so many
years experience of a peculiar providence had been a making fast.

If this temptation forced even a David to the distrustful cry of a verily I
have cleansed my hands in vain. If it brought him so low; We cannot blame Him
for after an happy escape from these shelves, to hang up his tables on the
shore; and out of a true sense of the greatness of the delivery, particularly
to describe the danger, and sharpness of the conflict. with how much care does
he point out those rocks, which he was like to have split against? and how
thankfully dos he point out those quicksands wherein he had almost shipwrackt
both his faith and conscience?

And lastly with how great a Triumph does he own that happy star that lead
him out? how Ingeniously does he acknowledge his own buritish folly and
Ignorance? how gratefully does he Kiss that hand that guided him out of that
Labyrinth; and being full of thanks he empties himself in a Preface which a
sense of Gods goodness, pathetically forced him to, and from those particular
occurrencies to infer a General observation, Verily God is good unto Israel
and to such as are of a clean heart.

Preface.
Which words (if we reflect upon the passage and good David's thoughts thereupon)
are an Inference made of Gods goodness, to his Glory; but if we we respect the
Psalm they are a divine Preface, or a Peremptory position made good, and
proved by a subsequent discourse.

Curiosity of a division is superfluous. We find here 1. Elohim the Almighty
God mentioned with his active, relative Goodness. 2. The object. 1.
Indefinitely expressed. 2. More particularly explained; Lastly a Patheticall
asseveration Truly, which Implies the certainty and truth, of the thing
affirmed; recommending it, to the belief of others.

Gods Goodness may be considered either as absolute in Himself, or relative
toward others. Thou art good O Lord and do Good Psalm. 119. This carries a
difference from each other. The 1. is his essence; the 2. a stream running
from that fountain upon the creature. 2. The first is absolutely necessary,
(it not being possible that God should be otherwise then good;) the second is
free as being an act of that will, which is absolutely free. Thirdly Gods
essential goodness, is ever equally perfect and admitts of no degrees, either
of Intention or Remission more or less. Whereas that which is relative is
Imparted in a thousand varieties, and expressed, in an unequal diversity.
Thus, though all Gods creatures be good yet they are not equally so, those
claiming the Prerogative, and out shining the rest, who do the more nearly
resemble their Creator.

This later Goodness is that which the Psalmist mentions and which is founded
in the former, because God is good in himself therefore he does good to
others. This is that which God proclaims himself Rich in, and most
delightfully to plead with; of those 13. Glorious Attributes which God is
pleased to cloth himself withal Exodus 34. nine are of Goodness.

From which it may be concluded; Aplic.
that if we carry Gods Image as men, and be conformed to Christ as Christians
we must testify so much by the relative expressions of our Goodness, to
others. None comes so near that heavenly pattern as he whose goodness in a
cheerful and more noble stream flows down upon others. Mat. 5.44, 45.
Though God be truly good, yet are not we left at our liberty; and to a cold
indifferency of being so or no. For there are strict obliging preceps which
bind us to mutual love and endearements; and we cannot do harm, without the
unhappy contracting of guilt and consequently of Punishment:

Men may (by an imaginary reflection upon their Majesty or conceited Parts)
fancy themselves more then ordinarily high, yet the Apostle assures us, 1.
Cor. 13. that though he had an Angels tongue, and were accomplished, with what
ever knowledge his soul was capable of, yet still without charity he is
nothing; He therefore who ambition's the similitude of his maker, and aims at
a pleasing sacrifice, let him cheerfully do good, and freely communicate, for
as he acts like God in these, so he perform what is truly acceptable to him by
so heavenly Employment.

The object upon whom this peculiar goodness descends would claim our next
thoughts; Truly.
but, that the Psalmists Truly, his earnest asseveration interposes it self in
this observation.

Doct.
Obs. That the Doctrine of Gods Relative goodness is not only in it self
true; but also such, as man may abundantly be persuaded of. Those rays of
goodness wherewith he inlivens all that is without, are so eminently visible,
as that they are capable of being entertained with the certainty of a Truly
with an undoubted Asseveration.

Man may be assured of truth 4. ways.
The assurance of any Truth represented to man's understanding, may be gained
either 1. By demonstration. 2. By sense. 3. By Experience. or 4. By Scripture,
the three former being common unto all, the last only to Christians.

Scripture.
1. As for Scripture, every Period almost ends in his mercy and goodness; every
Page takes it for the burden of its song, and the whole composure of that
heavenly fabric, seems to aim at nothing more then a peculiar discovery of
Gods Goodness to the Creature; and therefore it might be endless to run into
particulars.

2. Demonstration.
2. As for Demonstration which is by causes and effects that is fully
evidentiall here. For to be God is to be fully perfect and Alsufficient, and
therefore as the Suns being light, and the fountain of light proves that all
light is from the Sun so Gods essential goodness evinceth every good and
perfect gift to be from him.

3. Sense.
As for the effects they are undeniable, as upon our Reflection upon the Object
will shortly appear.

3. The third way of certain persuasion is sense, which God has been so
indulgent to, as not to impose a belief of any thing contrary thereto if
rightly disposed: David assures us that he had instantly fainted had not seen
the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living Psalm. 27.13. and he Kindly
invites us to Taste how good the Lord is.

This of sense and demonstration is so universally evident; That all, who ever
believed a God, did believe him good. Tertullian repeates it as a Testi-of the
soul; Deus bonus, homo malus. The blindest Heathens style ran Jupiter Optimus
Maximus, and from goodness, their reason inferred a God and its notion was so
fixtly impress't as that by occasion of it some fell to Idolatry, for Goodness
being owned by them as Proper to God, they thence inferred that what ever is
good, is a God and so ran to their knees, to the Sun, and adord the Moon and
Stars which though it were but a sottish conclusion from the premises yet it
is an argument with how great a certainty they were persuaded of Gods Goodness.

Lastly Gods Goodness may be had by a personal experience; 4. By Experience.
This the Ancient Patriarcks and Prophets are a cloud of witnesses of, This often
kept tired David from fainting: unless I had seen: and a sense of its
sweetness streaches forth his loving hand to others O Taste -- and here it
forct him to a Preface Truly God is good unto Israel. This the Blessed Apostles
happily maistered themselves, and Romans 8.38. and earnestly press't the
attainment thereof unto others. Ephesians. 1.18. Ephesians. 3.18.

1. From hence it may be concluded, Aplic. 1.
that they who have no acquaintance, with that goodness of which there is so
legible a character engraven upon the whole Creation; they who are blindly
ignorant thereof, do, (though in the fairest light) grope in darkness, wherein
an excuse cannot without a blush be thought on; being that it proceeds not from
the defect of convincing arguments; or from the want of a capacity within
(being that they are ennobled with Rational souls, by whose power they may when
inferior, irrational creatures cannot, apprehend it;) but it flows from a
careless, supine negligence, and an heedlesse spirit which is blind and
unapprehensive of the cleerest occurrences; scarce thinking the highest acts of
Providence worth their notice and application.

2. It may safely be hence concluded, also how highly it concerns us to
endeavor the attainment of a full persuasion, yea of the personal experience
of Gods relative goodness in our selves; for besides that high and unvaluable
treasure we shall be the happy owners of thereby, This (which is seasonable to
our Present discourse) will be found experimentally true; That an heart fully
grounded on the faith of Gods goodness will be able to uphold it self in
sharpest calamities: The greatest storms will but give the deeper root to that
soul which has so sure a footing; and by their furious onsets they will make
it but the more resolute and unmovable whilst it is found bottomed on so
undeceiving a foundation. Though good David be shrewdly put to it, yet his
drooping spirit will not fail of a revivall, whilst he believes to see the
Goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living, Psalm. 27.13.

1. The Object of Gods relative Goodness, is Israel, what Israel was when
David penned this Psalm, and swaid that Scepter, needs not much inquiry: this
may be at present sufficient for our purpose.

1. Israel represents a Nation; it being at that time a flourishing Potent one.

2. Israel was a Visible Church under the Law shaddowing out a Visible Church
under the Gospel.

3. Israel notes an elect, peculiar people, and so is a type of the invisible
Church of Christ.

I shall crave leave briefly to point out Gods goodness to Israel in each of
these capacities.

1. Israel as a Nation, and so each society, God is good to every Nation.
the remotest Nation and People of the World do liberally participate of this
Relative goodness of God. If inanimate creatures be full of it and if these
that reach no higher then sense be visited with peculiar refreshments, Psalm.
10.25.27. Man (as Man) is not forgotten. That this may be fully evident these
following conclusions may be accepted of.

1. 1. In giving necessaries.
Conclus. That which concerns the necessary subsistence of every Nation is
sufficiently dispensed unto them by God.

Indefinite acts of Providence are not shut up from any: The Unjust as well as
the Just are warmed by the Suns Influences Math. 5.45. Though Nations walk in
their own way, yet God leaves not himself without a sufficient witness, in
that he did good dropping rain into their bosom, and food to their gladded
hearts. Act. 14.17.

And this certainly is attainable and enjoyed by man at a very easy rate. The
Earth given to him, (though distributed amongst a numerous offspring) does
without much toil yield that which is necessary unto her children, and is
easily entreated to lend without much labor a subsistence to all. Her bosom
is not utterly shut up in its most barren parts, from nourishing its
inhabitants.

And although it be too familiar with us to find every corner groaning under a
laborious Master, to see every Brow filled with sweat, and meet every were
solicitous cares, distracting thoughts, and wearisome Employments; though one
runs himself out of breath, to the lands end, another scorning the dangers of
the deep outride all storms and undergo many hazardous expeditions. Though we
find every place swollen with hateful contention and bloody encounters, yet we
must still remember, that as all these are for superfluities which are wantonly
pursued, and do arise, from covetous, proud restlessely-ambitious lusts, which
warring within produce these unhappy effects of their violence and greediness
abroad. That which is necessary needs not all this ado; as being dispenst so
liberally as man scarce needs do any thing more then receive. Deus and natura
non deficit in nessariis Every Nation may subsist by it self without the
greedy invasion of another right.

2. Conclusion. God is good in dispensing what may conduce to their wel-being.
2. Conclus. God dispenses unto all Nations that which may be for their
well-being.

Well-being may by taken. 1. for quiet of conscience within; and then there is
the Law of nature and reason which they may live by, and by framing their lives
according to it, they may enjoy the benefit of an excusing Conscience Romans
2.14, 15. if they find any swelling tumults, and disquiets within, they do
arise from a wilful disobedience to this Grand Law.

2. Take Well-being for worldly prosperity and Temporal happiness; this Law
and obedience thereunto will afford it: for when a Nation proportionably to
their God do glorify him, then Authority will be cheerfully obeyed, mutual
wrongs, and violent injustice avoided, when they live conformably to the
dictates of reason and do, as they would be done unto, then peace and
prosperity will necessarily follow: when every thing observes its own due
limits, not swelling beyond its bounds, then it will quietly stream down,
without any tumult or confusion; It may be an observation of as ancient a date
as the world, that disobedience in one kind or other to this Law, is the
greatest disquiet of the earth.

3. Take Well-being for Gods favor and we may find that shuts not up all
means from any Nation of coming to his Knowledge: For the Apostle assures us
Act: 17.24, 25, 26, 27. that the Nations when clouded in their darkest
ignorance, might have discerned light enough to have found him out He not being
very far from any of them.

The high and remarkable acts of Providence wherewith Men (as such) have been
eminently visited with, may be a 3d Evidence of Gods goodness Nations. As the
107. Psalm bespeaks this in a thousand varieties, so whoever turns over the
4. famous Monarchies; he that takes notice of the ingenuous Inventions and
admirable Improvements of Learning, He that views those heroique spirits that
triumphed in, and were an honor to their times, what high examples of virtue,
and wisdom adorned their several orbs: how every age was cherisht with the
influence of some greater and more noble luminaries; may very well take up the
Psalmists patheticall Apostrophe. Psalm. 8. v. 4. Lord what is man that thou art
so mindful of him, or the son of Man that thou so regardest him.

This lastly may be taken as an undeniable evidence of Gods Goodness, That he
never cut off any Nation but for their Sin, their monstrous Ingratitude, and
irrational contempt of his Blessings His forbearance waited long upon man's
impiety before he sunk the world in a deluge 1 Pet. 3.20. whose overflowing
waves never covered the drowned earth until man's wickedness in its prodigious
height threatened the very heavens Genesis 6. Sodom was not overthrown until it
grew so black as that fiere was forced to come and cleanse them from Heaven
whether their cry reached. Genesis 19. The Amonites were not cast out, till their
sins were full. Never was there any Nation that Repented who were not by an
heavenly Goodness received to favor as the Prophet is assured Jerem. 18.7, 8,
9, 10, etc. Though a peremptory sentence be gone out against Ninevie yet the
execution is stopped upon their repentance: with acceptance to mercy that it
solely proceeded from a compassionate tenderness in God; Passionate Jonah
(though transported very far with petishnesse) did fully own and acknowledge
Jon. 4. verse. 2. For I know that thou art a gracious God, and Merciful, slow
to Anger and of great Kindness and repentest thee of the evil, and that great
satisfaction which God himself condescended to give to the Angry Prophet. v.
11. whose goodness looked with a passionate regard to the Infants of the
uncircumcised Assyrians, not excluding the meanest Cattle from his
consideration and care.

From all which it may be safely concluded That Gods active Relative goodness
plentifully streams it self unto every climate, every nation in some degree
liberally participating thereof.

As Israel was a nation, and as such had a taste of Gods goodness, so

Secondly, God is good to Israel as a Church visible.
It was a visible Church under the Law and the Type of a visible one under the
Gospel, from whence this conclusion may be easily made good That every Visible
Church and society of Christians do very eminently taste of the high and
compassionate goodness of God.

This may be sufficiently evident if we consider,

1. That those Tender acts of Goodness formerly mentioned which all and every
Nation did communicate in both their Being and well-being, do all belong to
Israel the Visible Church.

2. Besides all this; In entering a Covenant with them.
the Visible Church tastes of Gods eminent goodness, in a blessed Covenant of
Peace: That which God made with obedient Abraham and his chosen posterity is
every where recorded as a special favor. Moses challenges any Nation to show
the like expressions of love, Deuteronomy. 4.7, 8. What Nation is there so great who
has statutes and Judgments so righteous. Good David and the rest of the
Prophets mentions it as the Grand pledge of Gods love to his.

Thus Christ's Visible Church are within this happy sept; and all of that
society this Covenant bears a respect unto. Heb. 8. hence the Apostle makes an
eminent difference betwixt the Ephesians in their ruder state of Gentilisme and
within the Church; as being (before that merciful reception) Aliens from
Israel, and strangers from the Promise of the Covenant Ephesians. 2.12.

His Goodness in his Commands
His Godnesse will appear to us in an high transcendent luster as it mercifully
shines upon his Church if we take a view of these particulars.

1. The very commands and Precepts which God honors his Church withal, in the
Covenant, do eminently bespeake his Goodness.

Though there be too many who look upon Gods commands with a sullen eye, Gods
Commands carry honor and a privilege to us.
as restraints only of their will, who own them as a tiresome yoke and a
Burden which lies upon their shoulders, yet these are too dull and Melancholy
reflections: for as Christ assures us the contrary that they are both easy and
light, (and as the Apostle assures the 1 John 5.3.) no way Grievous.

Though it be most certain That whatever command flies from God, carries with
it an Obligation and he (to whomsoever it comes) is in duty bound to obedience
whatsoever it be. Yet we may remember that sometimes Gods Commands, and the
Intimation of his will to us carries with it that honor and Privilege which
is peculiar.

Thus in our civil Relations though our duty oblige us to obedience to our
Princes Commands, yet we often look upon it as an high piece of honor to be thus
or thus employed.

This evidently is the difference between the peremptory commands of the Law of
Nature given to all, and those which are dispensed to the Church. The
difference betwixt the law of Nature and those of the Church.
Those come with the absolute intimation of a necessary obligation, of a
supreme and austere Authority, these with more intimation of undoubted
privilege and honor to be so commanded.

Hereto 1. In the mann r of delivery.
We may observe the Manner of Delivery. The Law of Nature was breathed out to
Israel with thunder and lightnings attended with a foggy darkness and the
trumpets sound, striking all those near into terror and a trembling
amazement, penned in a peremptory imperious style Thou shall and Thou shall not
etc. Whereas God speaks to his Church in a more easy familiar dress a
serious exhortation, a Passionate entreaty. 2. Cor. 5.20. We beseech, We pray.
An heavenly advice, an affectionate council Rev. 3.18. Prove. 1. a loving
invitation Come unto me, Math. 11.28. is that pleasing dialect in which it is
pronounced: it delights not it self in those harsher accents, but though it
may command, yet it condescends to a milder delivery. When a King utters that
in a desire which he may in a command, It is deservedly looked upon as an
honor: and if the Ruler of Kings condescend to signify his will in the same
precarious manner to us, it may justly challenge from us the highest thoughts
of veneration, and to embrace obedience as a privilege and an advancement.

2. In the substance of the commands.
If we reflect upon the substance of these Commands we may find that they carry
honor enough in their obedience, Loyalty often esteems that some employments
(though perhaps dangerous services) do deserve thanks for being made use of in
them. And some commands God vouchsafes not to accept some men's observances of;
some will meet with a What have thou to do to declare my statut's or to take my
Covenant within thy lips, Psalm. 50.16.

As the dispensing of Laws to Israel is owned as an high transcendent
Privilege, Psalm. 17.19.20. So the gracious revealment of Christ's mysterious
Gospel, in a greater luster outshines all before it conveighing a beauty to the
very feet of those that are Bearer of so happy news, Romans 10.15. Those hearty
entreaties, those Kind invitations, those preceps that look at nothing more
then our advantage, are all but so many breathing testimonies both of Gods love
and our honor, nay even our sharpest suffering in so good a cause but a
glorious piece of triumph and Priveledge, To you it is given on Christ's behalf,
not only to believe on him but even to suffer for his sake, Philip. 1.29.
Though to believe and suffer are commands which carry an obligation. Yet to you
it is given, intimat's an high peculiar Prerogative in being called thereto.
The thought of this made the Beaten Apostles glory in their stripes, and
triumph in their being counted worthy to suffer for his Name, Acts. 5.41.

His goodness in his promises.
2. Thus as the Commands of Gods Covenant so the high and noble promises of it
do most eminently proclaim Gods goodness to his Church: Thus Israel in a
reliance on Gods promise of being theirs, may easily defy all opposition, and
Christ's Church is heartned on, with high and unvaluable promises To be made
pertakers of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. An happy remission of sin, a
blessed reconcilement to an offended God, and eternal life, do every where
offer themselves in a gracious tender to his Church. Gods Goodness in giving
his visible Church a conditional right to the Promises.


3. Gods goodness to his visible Church is further evident in that they have a
conditional Right to those precious rarities, all being theirs if they
perform the Condition. Remission is theirs if they believe, so is Salvation
too if they truly Repent, Col. 21. etc. Heb. 4.

Lastly Gods Mercy is eminent in his Church in his Gracious Provision of means
sufficient for the performance of the condition. In giving means sufficient
for the performance of the condition.


The spiritual armor is impenitrable, and the weapons of this Nobler Warfare
not to be blunted by opposition; Satan may soon be uncas't, and his strongest
holds ruined about his ears, by right handling these powerful Instruments.
Here is a glorious dispensation of light to direct; and of Grace, to enable,
and the Covenant is not only a bare manifestation of Gods laws, but also a
more Inward Ingravement of them upon the Heart. Heb. 8. verse. 10.

From all which it may be safely concluded that the Honor of Gods Commands,
the Inestimable value of the Promises, the right granted and the Grace
afforded, to his Visible Church, do most eminently Proclaim, his high active
goodness thereunto.

SECT. II. Gods Goodness to Israel as a Type of the Invisible Church.
AS Israel in the capacity of a Nation, and of a Visible Church has largely
tasted of Gods Goodness, so

Thirdly as an elect and peculiar people, and so as a type of Christ's Invisible
Church do most eminently triumph therein:

The name Israel imparts not only a society, visibly owning the profession of
true Religion, but it expresses the Church invisible: It being more to be
Israel then to be of it. Romans 9.6. hence the Apostle bestows his peace and
blessing upon the Israel of God. These are they whose heart and mouth sweetly
conspire in an harmony, sincerely obeying Christ's Gospel, whose circumcision
is not without, whose purified souls distill themselves in acceptable streams
both to God and others. 1. Pet. 1.22, 23.

These are they whom the prophet here more especially reflects upon, as the
object of Gods peculiar Goodness to whom he allows the description, of a
clean heart. Its Original (...) signifying that which is Purged, Purifyed,
choice and sanctified, void either of dross or corruption.

This is the necessary qualification of a true Israelite, a soul sincerely
affected with the truth of Religion and acting in a suitable, entire,
obedience, not contented with the outward marks which discriminate only from
Aliens, a bare admission or a naked profession only of Christianity; but
cleansing its hand, and purifying its heart, this alone can justly challenge
the Title of the Israel of God, which is termed Invisible, not but their free
innocent lives, their exemplary persons, their resolute profession appears
visibly to the world in an open luster; but because there lies a costly mine
within, which man's eye cannot reach unto. Their hearts are naked only to their
Maker, and their faith and sincerity soar upon too high, and too refined wings
to be mastered by the dullness of sense. Their better part though eyd by God,
yet is Invisible to man.

That Gods goodness peculiarly attends this True-cleane-hearted Israel, will
be evident, If we consider

First, 1. In giveing them an Actual right to
That whatever Goodness is dispensed to Israel as a Nation, or as a visible
Church, (formerly mentioned,) does belong unto this pure hearted Israel.

2. Besides all this, The Israel of God has not only a potentiall,
conditional right unto the solemn privileges of the Gospel; but they are
Cround with an actual immediate right, and these children of Promise have an
high and actual communion with the Father and the Son 1 John 1.3. Their
Justification is past and their pardon sealed Romans 8. and being adopted, have
passed from Satan's darker territories to a Kingdom of light Col. 1.12. the
chained Lion crouches at their feet, as overcome 1 Ioh. 2.14. they have burst
asunder deaths frozened bars Ioh. 5.24. and claim all things as theirs, since
they are Christ's and Christ is Gods 1 Cor. 3.23. This is their happy
unparalleld estate at present which arises from the performance of the
condition. They have truly Repented, vigorously believed, and sincerely obeyed
and so are Christ's spouse; Branches of that noble Vine, and members of his
body. And therefore the Apostle Romans 11.22. might well turn to the Ingrafted
branches with an Ecce Behold the goodness of God to thee a goodness actual,
present and performed.

Peace of Conscience.
Thirdly, They have that which sweetly flows from hence the quiet repose of a
cheerful conscience. Romans 8.6. breathing out a Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. 1 Pet. 1.8.11.

They are owned in adversity.
4. Though calamities be common, and those sufferings which Gods servants may
groan under, may render them highly contemptible, and though they may be looked
upon as Sheep marked out for the slaughtering knife; though profanesse, may
scoffingly insult over their meanness, yet neither the most amazing Perils,
the most disconsolate Poverty, the sharpest Persecution, can in their ugliest
visage scare a true Israelite from Gods favor, or work a divorse from his
love in Christ.

5. In the Greatest Pressures and narrowest difficulties they can be urged
with, They have a peculiar access to God.
they are animated with a peculiar boldness of access to God. Romans 5.2. for
although as all flesh may present their prayers and Gods style may be an hearer
of them: yet there is a freer recourse, and a more easy admission to the
Father, of Sons, then of Servants, and Strangers.

6. Hence we may meet with Counsels, commands and Exhortations which are
proper only and peculiar unto them. They have peculiar commands, and
exhortations.
As that they grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. which presupposing a regenerate
being, cannot reach to others. Tbat they rejoice always, Phil. 1.26. and that
their very temptations should be embraced with a smile, Jam. 1.2. which cannot
be applicable to all the world, affording too many, who have sufficient cause
to turn to howling and tears when their desolation comes. Christ's fear not
little flock, Luke 12.32. does not well suite with wolves, Nor can the Apostles
Be faithful to the end square well with those who never truly profess't: nor
does an advice to Christian constancy concern those who never began to fight
in Religion.

These Peculiar exhortations therefore, meet with Israel only as the truest
objects to fasten on, upon whom no command lies under penalty of Gods
disfavour, but an happy perseverance, and constancy in grace received:
continuance in Christ's word is the best evincement of being his Disciples Joh.
8.31. Victory and Conquest is that which must Crown all; Revel. 2.24, 25.
toward the attainment of which God sufficiently dispences what ever may be
requisite thereunto.

As all that are of a clean heart, who make up a Particular Invisible Church,
may claim an interest in all this as True; The Catholic Church actually has
the privilege of Perseverance.
so we may reach one step higher, That the Catholic invisible Church, are
actually crowned with that very privilege of constancy and Perseverance.
Conditionatum transit in absolutum, that which is a Command to a Particular is
a Gift to the Universal Israel of God.

There are stepped up some wild disputants of late, who take the altering of the
state of the Question and the Peremptory denial of fundamental truths, to be
the readiest and compendious way to determine Controversies by. Thus Purgatory
and Prayers to Saints they confute, by denying the souls Immortality, or at
least by asserting that it sleeps in the grave where it takes a Napp until the
last Trumpe awakes it.

The Quere about Christ's presence in the Sacrament, receives a quick dispatch,
by affirming his body to be only fantastical, not really humane; and the
question about the being of the Church, where it was in the darkest
superstitious times, is cut off, by a concession that Christ's Church may
totally fail, and be wholly extinguished.

Whether the Catholic Church may totally fail?
And this is thought proveable. 1. By the Nature of Christian Religion, which is
made up of Commands and Promises, requiring obedience from a will not
necessitated thereunto. 2. Because individualls, and every Particular Church
they conceive liable to this total failing; and therefore they infer that
that which consists of such particulars may do so too.

This Argument which carries so grand a fallacy of division, will not hold: a
divisis ad composita, from Individualls to Collective bodies, is but a weak
inference. Though this or that or every individual may choose whether he will
marry or no; yet it follows not, that the whole mankind may fail. Though a
slender strength may snap in two a single arrow, yet a Bundle may surpass its
skill: so although it should be (for once) granted that Individualls may fall
back; and particular Churches fail; yet this will not hold in the Catholic.
There is in things collected and joined together somewhat more then can be in
individualls considered in themselves: a twisted thread carrys more strength
then many single ones that make it up; There are more reasons that makes
marriage certain in all mankind, then in all the Individuals singly
considered. Though this or that, each singly considered, might fail in the
Church, yet (supposing the Truth of the Gospel once sufficiently revealed,) It
is not possible all should jointly leave it; for that which sways one will not
move another to desert a truth much less all together.

To which if we add, that peculiar providence under whose wing it shelters it
self; and that undeceiving promise of Christ; we may be easily assured that
the Church Catholic, is founded on a rock which Hell gates shall not prevail
against; there will be some though perhaps few, with whom he will be to the end
of the world.

From all this discourse it may be manifest how eminently Gods active
goodness, extends to Israel as a Nation, a Visible Church, and as a Type of
that which is Invisible.

Some Practic conclusions from these premises may not be unseasonable, Aplic.
which may be represented as appliable, not only to multitudes and Nations, but
even to every Individual in his suitable rank, Quality and Relation.

For first if David from Gods Goodness to himself triumphantly takes up this
general conclusion. That God is good unto Israel, it will be no inconsequence
from the General to infer the same; and to conclude it of individuals.
Especially being that

Secondly, In homogenials there is the same nature in the Parts as in the
whole; every grain of wheat is the same with the heap: and every drop of
water participates in nature with the Ocean, and every individual of a society
is of the same temper with the whole, and we may be assured

Lastly, That as the same Sun which bestows its rays upon the world,
impartially shines on every thing within its View, so Providence as it extends
to Nations and Societies; so it does proportionably reach to Individuals. If
the meanest sparrow be cared for, and our hairs numbered; our Persons are not
exempted from so Fatherly an eye. But to be particular.

Use. 1. From Gods goodness to Israel as a Nation. He intends not primarily
the ruin of any Nation.
If therefore God be thus good to Israel as a Nation, to every Nation. It may
teach us

First that God does not primarily intend the ruin of any Nation, for his
being so good unto them that they might seek and find him, stands not with any
such intention. Nay that which the Apostle from his new experience positively
laid down to devert Cornelius Act. 10.35. is universally true That in every
Nation he that fears God and works righteousness is accepted with Him, who
is no respecter of Persons. and therefore the Manifestation of Gods Justice is
with much caution and diligence so to be taught and expounded as that it may
not thwart, that Goodness which he delightfully dispenses to Man. Use. 2. The
Sins of every Nation are sins of Ingratitude.


Secondly we may learn hence. That the sins of every Nation are sins of
unthankfullnesse against that Goodness so variously expressed unto them. This
the Apostle accuses the Barbarous gentiles of, Romans 1.21. That they were not
thankful but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened. And consequently, that the punishment inflicted upon them for their
sins, was deserved, though it seemed to carry an outward severity, yet it
vindicated Gods Justice, which the Apostle largely proves in the 1. 2d. 3d.
Chapter of that Epistle to the Romans. And if we cast our eye upon the
punishment of the old World, the eversion of Sodom, and expulsion of the
Amorites and others, we may easily find God to be clear in his dealing: And
therefore (what ever fear there may be of an irrespective, absolute Aeternall
rejection,) every one must heartily beware of a Just respective extirpation,
founded on Man's ingratitude, and the base dispisal of his goodness.

3. Use 3. To depend upon Gods goodness.
Gods goodness to Israel as a Nation argues it more eminently to Israel as a
Church, and therefore we may with an assured confidence depend thereupon. For
if from Gods clothing of the Lilly, providing for the forsaken Raven; from
his care of the muzled Ox, an higher Providence, may be concluded to watch
over man; then, from his goodness to every Nation we may as easily infer
that a more peculiar and a more eminent goodness waits upon that society which
are entitled His, who are called by Him and gathered in his name. And with
Pathetical David justly cry out, Psalm. 31.19. O how great is thy goodness
which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou have wrought for
them that trust in thee before the Sons of Men.

From Gods goodness to Israel as a Church visible.

Use. 1. That our hopes and endeavors be not confined to this world.


And being that Gods goodness to His Church Visible is so eminent (as has been
formerly made good.)

It may be concluded. 1. That this goodness is not limited to things merely
Temporal: Israel as a people within the Covenant injoyd that which the Nations
at large did not, and Christ's Visible Church, has those unsearcheable
treasures exhibited to it in Precepts, Promises and Priv'ledges; which those
without have the want of. And therefore

Let not our desires, hopes, and endeavors be confined, to the low narrow
conveniences of this Life only. Beyond which the solicitous gentiles do not
seek, Math. 6.32. But let us follow our Saviors advice seek first The
Kingdom of God and his righteousness and then these things shall be added unto
you, Verse. 33. Hercules his non ultra engraven on his Pillar, stopped men from
sailing further; but late experience, has found out a large plus ultra, and
scorning to be stopped by those ancient bounds does compass Sea and Land. And
we, (having so firm an assurance, that Gods goodness extends far beyond life
and wordly enjoyments, freely vouchsafeing an heavenly influence of Spiritual
blessings in Christ, to those societies that profess his name.) must not limit
happiness within the circle of things merely temporal nor fix our heart upon
them, as the highest good.

And here for a motive thereunto it may very pertinently and seasonably be
considered that since there is that measure and influence of Gods goodness to
a visible Church, far more high and noble then can be found abroad; it may
naturally follow: That certainly all that which can be attained unto without
the Church cannot make us happy.

As there were some formerly, who confidently expected blessedness without, so
there are some since, that think they may do well in any Religion: whereas if
both, would but in a serious recollection, reflect. 1. That Gods making a new
Covenant argues the old imperfect and unsufficient, Hebr. 8. Last. 2. That God
would never propound new and spiritual promises were temporal rewards only
requisite to man's happiness. 3. That if the Law of nature and mere obedience
thereunto, or if Moses Law could have done the deed, God would not in all
likelihood have revealed his Gospel and sent his Son to point out unto us a
more perfect way. If I say this were heartily reflected on; none would rest
satisfied with being, without the Church, or be contented with any Religion.

Nor does the imbraceing of Christianity, drive away all enjoyments, or debarr
us of wordly comforts. Christ promises an addition of these things, upon our
seeking, first the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 6.33. So that the advantage clearly
lies on our part, for they that are without, want that which the visible Church
is honored with and injoys. Whereas they that are within are furnished, with
what ever they that are without can pretend to, and somewhat more: Godliness
being profitable for all things and having the promises of this life and of
that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. 2. Use 2. The sins of Gods visible Church
are sins of great ingratitude.
From hence it follows that the sins of those, that Profess themselves Gods
people are sins of monstrous deep ingratitude: Had not God made a more peculiar
address to Israel nor blessed them with a more noble influence then others,
there might have been some color for a tolerable excuse; but being that his
goodness to them, was so transcendent, their ingratitude was of the more deep
a dye, and so heinous as the Prophet amazedly bids the heavens be astonished at
it. Jer. 2.11.

He who glories in the title of Christian, who is honored with spiritual
Commands, and with the merciful tender of grace and salvation, and yet ignobly
dispiseth those inexhaustable riches, of grace and goodness; cannot possibly
find any Cloak for his sin: Nor any way exclaim at the severity of
punishment. If God deal sharply with Apostate Ephesus, for forsaking her first
love; or with Luke warm Laodicea, it is but Justice. The Offers of Gods
goodness do not Priveledge; but highly aggravate the guilt of a despisal of
it. You only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I
punish you for all your iniquities. Amos 3.2. The conclusion is not therefore
you have a Priveledge and exemption, but therefore I will punish you, etc.

Uses. From Gods love to his Church Invisible, we may be persuaded. To an
entire union with Christ.
Lastly, That high and transcendent love, which Gods Church invisible, does so
freely taste of, should move us. 1. That every man, should not content himself,
with a belonging unto Christ by a bare profession, and outward Communion, but
should heartily endeavor after a more near, firm and more entire Union. The
open, free tender, of those many high and precious promises, made to us in the
Covenant, graciously revealed to the visibile Church; is a great mercy, yet
unless by a ready embrace, we receive Christ, and all good, in him; unless we
entitle our selves actually thereunto, and (making our calling and election
sure) enter within the vayl; and accept of that kind invitation, to participate
of those treasures; we shall scarce be the better: All which unspeakable
benefits cannot be actually possessed, but by a due performance of the condition;
we must evidence the truth of our profession by our lives and the answer of a
good conscience. He that truly believes in Christ, cleanses his heart, The
benefits of that experimental knowledge of Gods love to His.

1. Esteem of Gods promise.


and hand; bids a resolute farewell to impiety; and yields a sincere obedience
to those commands; he is honored with; as he may experimentally taste of Gods
goodness in the land of the living by the sense of so great a mercy. So

1. He will value that goodness, far above any earthly enjoyment. Whilst the
naturalist, savouring not these spirituals, undervalues them; He that is more
heavenly finds the highest relish imaginable, in them and concludes them far
above the reach of our duller senses, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. 2. Joy.
He will hence be swollen with an unspeakable joy in the happy fruition of Gods
love. The most earthly sensualist, cannot be so much pleased with a full barn,
and an overflowing cruse; nor can any plenty, work in us, a gladness, in any
degree equal to that, which the one glance of Gods countenance can fill us with
Psalm. 4.6.7. Conjugall love exceeds all comforts; and when the soul injoys here
spouse; it is not capable of an addition of delight.

3. This will work an affection to Christ's Church, Love to the Church.
and highly conduce to a mutual peace and concord. My goodness extends not
unto thee, (cries David, Psalm. 16.2.) But to the Saints that are in the earth
and to the excellent in whom is all my delight. If we consider why every corner
is so full of rash peremptory judging of one another; why so bitter revilings,
hard censures, mercylesse oppression, and bloody persecutions, are so much in
fashion; even with those who pretend otherwise; Christ affords us the reason of
it, Joh. 16.3. Because they know not the Father nor me; though their lips may
own, yet their heart, totally denies him: whereas He, whose Spirit has
experimentally tasted Gods goodness in it self, will never be injurious to
others, least he may harm those, who may be dearly related to God, and a touch
of whom may be esteemed a thrust at the apple of Gods eye. Thus an
experimental knowledge of Gods goodness will produce Lenity, Meekness,
Justice, Charity, and Peace, toward others.

Use 2. Gods goodness should persuade us to constancy.
2. If Gods especial goodness fills once our souls; Let us persevere, and
continue therein: Let us consider that that word of Truth, which assures us,
that the Catholic Church invisible shall not fail; does exhort particular
Churches unto a Continuance. Whether this may arise, that a single Arrow is not
in that same case with a bundle; or that the promise of absolute perseverance,
is to the universal Church only? I will not now discuss. Yet certainly, unto
perseverance are invited and advised. 1. Particular Churches: Thus Smirna is
advised to be faithful to the end, Revel. 2.12. And Thyatira to hold fast till
I come. Verse 25. The same counsel, Individuals are the objects of, too; Joh.
8.31. If they continue in my love. And in many more places, Joh. 15. If they
abide, etc. 2 Pet. 3.17. If you fall not from the steadfastness, Use 3. From
His goodness here we may gather the greatness of his goodness hereafter.
and Romans 11.22. Behold Gods goodness to thee if thou continuest in his
goodness.

Lastly, If God be so good unto his Israel here, whilst they are in their
clayey houses, and in some respect absent from him; whilst they are in their
melancholy Pilgrammage here, supported by faith, the substance of things not
seen, and breathing in hopes of a better Country.

How great then, how transcendently high shall this goodness be to them, in
the great day of retribution, when he shall perfectly accomplish all that ever
is promised?

How great! When the fire, shall restore that which it is prodigious flames
devoured, the earth, open it is vast bosom and the Sea deliver unto them their
consumed bodies, when that which was sown in Corruption shall be raised up in
incorruption; that which was sown in dishonor, appear in honor; and that
which lay down in impotency, and weakness; mount up in power? 1 Cor. 15.42.43.

How great! When they carry death about in Triumph, challenging it for it is
sting, or the devouring grave for it is victory?

How great! When the Lord Jesus appearing in all his royalty with the splended
equipage of Saints and Angels comes in Majesty and Glory: when they shall see
Him, whom they so steadfastly believed, and sincerly obeyed, bringing his Reward
with him?

How great! When that comfortable sentence come ye blessed of my Father receive
a Kingdom prepared for you; fills them with joy?

How great! When that which is perfect is come, and that which is imperfect be
done away; when their souls shall be enriched with the most absolute treasures
of grace, and glory: when their understandings Triumph in the full clearness
of a Divine light?

How great! When they shall see the chained Lion trod underfoot, and their
merciless persecuters rouling in flames, and begging the mountains for a
covering and the hills for a sepulcher?

How great! When fears are banished, and sorrw flies away?

How great! When the seat of Divine Majesty shall be their place of residence
and habitation, when the noble Prophets, the blessed Apostles, the victorious
Martyrs, the Holy Angels, shall be their daily companions, and when they shall
perfectly enjoy Him, who is the Author, and finisher of their faith, and
salvation?

How great! when God with all his glory, Majesty, Mercies, comforts, and
beauties incomprehensible, shall dwell with them in that fullness of perfection?

How great! Lastly, when they shall bath themselves, in these Ravishing
streams, possess all these inutterable glories, to all eternity, World
without end?

Thus, from all this discourse, there is a short view given unto us, of Gods
high eminent goodness. We have been first lead into the outward Court, the
Nations, abroad; and seen there, His goodness, in Atrio Gentium, eminently
dispens't there.

We have been next in the inner Court the Church visible, where high, and
comfortable rays of goodness shined upon us.

We have opened the Temple doors, and entered into a contemplation of the
invisible Church, of Christ, where still greater expressions of goodness
appeard before us: And

Lastly, We have been brought within the vail, into the sanctum sanctorum, The
Holy of Holies, the Glorious, Heavenly Kingdom; where goodness it self, in
open, full streams, communicates it self, to the Church Triumphant.

If to these low concepts, and weaker expressions too dull, (though helped by an
Angels, utterance) for so high a subject as Gods goodness; every man please,
to add both this discourse, and what either a Cherubin can express, to his
own thoughts, all will come too short, and we may all take up the Psalmists
admiration for our conclusion, Psalm. 31.19. How great is thy goodness, which
thou have laid up, for them that fear thee; which thou have wrought in them,
that trust in thee, before the Sons of Men.

CAP. II.
Verse 2. But as for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped.

V. 3. I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.

V. 4. They have no bands in their death, but their strength is firm.

V. 5. They are not in trouble as other Men's neither are they plagued like
other Men.

V. 12. Behold these are the ungodly who increase in Riches.

V. 10. Therefore his people return thither and waters of a full cup are wrung
out unto them.

V. 7. Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart could wish.


CONTENTS.
The first occasion from without of the Prophets temptation, is wicked men's
prosperity in 6. degrees. 1. Particular discourses upon each. Cases of
conscience resolved. How far good men are subject to error and passion. How
far there may be a compliance with wicked great Men? What it is to be a time
server? How wicked men have more then heart can wish, in 4. particulars.
Whether it may be Lawful to pray for the abatement of wicked man's prosperity?

THE Preface of this Psalm thus despatcht; The Contents of it now challenges
our thoughts. Wherein may be considered these 3. parts. First, An Historical
declaration of what befell him, to the 22. verse.

Secondly, An humble confession of what was amiss.

Thirdly, A Religious profession, of his careful, holy demeanor toward God
from the 23. verse to the end.

In the first, Ver. (the Historical declaration of what befell him,) we may
find these particulars. 1. The danger wherein he was like to be plunged, to
the 17. verse. And secondly, those happy means, whereby he escaped it; to the
22. verse.

The danger is. 1. Generally propounded, verse 2. But as for me my feet were
almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipped. Secondly, More particularly related
unto. The 17. verse.

As for the danger in general; The danger generally described.
He tells us that his feet were almost gone. The word signifies to bow, or bend
under one. My steps had well nigh slipped; or poured out, Kept not within their
true bounds; but like water poured out, and not confined, runs aside.

Though these expressions be metaphorical, and seemingly dark and cloudy: Yet
they clearly represent unto us this truth: That his understanding was
misguided; His judgment was corrupt; Judgment, and reason the supporters of the
soul.
his affections disordered, turbulent and guilty of too great a passion: And
this, the consequents, verse 22. (When he acknowledges himself, ignorant,
foolish; and brutish) do sufficiently evidence. Our understanding and judgment
may well bear the comparison to feet, for as the one, in our motion, supports
the body. So the other, in humane actions, and all employments underprops the
soul. The affections also are as paths and steps, as these of the feet, so
those are the prints and expressions of the judgment and mind.

If the affections be heady, disordered and misplaced man's steps are boundless
too; Men led by passion step awry.
and they who are guided by exorbitant lusts, and transported by passion, do
err, and wander out of the right way. And being that all sinners are led by
lusts and predominant, fleshly affections, a suitable character describes them
to have corrupted their ways, Genesis 6.12. And Turners aside, Psalm. 14.3. And
dwellers in a crooked path.

He that once gives himself over to his own fancy, and takes that for the rule
of his actions; he who follows his own passionate affections, may fall into
those precipices, which are not easily maistered. And run into those heavy
inconveniences, which too many in the World do groan under.

He therefore who would not willingly transgress his right bounds, nor diviate
into crooked misshapen paths, must have an extraordinary eye both to His
understanding and judgment.

For if those grand Pillars tremble, the whole will droope: If once we be
leavened with errors and perverse, corrupt opinions, if being destitute of
truth, the vanity of misleading principles sway us, our steps will soon run to
mischief and disorder. The original of the Gentiles amazed wanderings are
blindness and vanity of Mind, Ephesians. 4.17.18. Whereas he who upon an happy
renewall of the Spirit of his mind, preserves his judgment right, and entire,
will easily master his affections; keep them within their true, modest
compass; and keep in that way unerringly which will bring him safely home.

And whereas it may be pleaded, That many who are furnished with a fair
competency of knowledge, do lie under those lusts, and passions, which are
brutish, and exorbitant.

It may be returned; that there is much difference to be made betwixt, a
constant, permanent, habitual sway of lusts, and a temporary or occasional.

Some there are, who are fixed, in a settled, pleasing slavery unto their lusts,
in whom sin bears a Scepter, and reigns, whose only trade, and custom, is
sinning: of these, we may easily determine that what ever Theoretical knowledge
they appear owners of; yet, are they not, in their judgments, truly persuaded
of the truth of those good principles; nor masters of that persuasion, which
carries an influence unto self-application; though they may sufficiently
apprehend them, yet do they not believe that they concern or belong unto them:
If they laid them as they should, to heart, they would more conscientiously,
bridle their passions, and rectify their way.

Others there are, the Bent and Inclination of whose souls, are wholly taken up
with piety and goodness; and if at any time, a turbulent passion or a partial
affection, transport them occasionally, it cannot be denied, but that in that
particular their understanding, and judgment fail them.

He therefore that would preserve to himself sanctified thoughts, and
affections, and correspondent actions; must have an eye, that the maine
supporters of his soul, be firm, and incorrupt, rightly founded upon the word
of Truth. This, is that Method which Gods Spirit always makes use of to a
through conversion; their dark understandings are first unscaled, and then
their judgments are convinced of the truths revealed.

From hence it may be concluded, that they, who scoffingly refuse instruction,
who hate to be reformed, who despise any endeavors of others to better them;
scorning to be persuaded to a right understanding or to be convinced of their
errors do but cherish and strengthen violent affections which will soon force
them to crooked, perverse and disordered turnings.

This danger generally described cannot well be dismissed without taking some
short notice of the Person whose heels were almost thus struck up, even David,
(for I account him the Author of this Psalm, though it bear Asaphs title, who
was the famous composer unto Music and harmony. 2 Chronicles.) so upright a man's
crying as for me my feet was almost gone may offord us these practical
reflections.

1. That men of greatest sincerity, and conscience are subject. 1. Unto
mistakes, Misapprehensions, and misconceits of Judgment.

2. Unto passion and disorder of affections, their feet may be weak, and their
steps awry. Thus the meekest Moses's spirit may be so provoked as to speak
unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 106.33. Miriam and Aaron may speak against
Moses, and Samuel may mourn immoderately for Saul. Good David may be unhapply
tempted, to number the people; and the angry Disciples, wish for fire from
heaven upon the Samaritans. Saint Peter may be so far amiss; as to give Saint
Paul occasion to tell him that He did not (...) walk rightly: and who is there
in this veil of flesh, who may not sometime or other be pointed at, as an
instance of failing; there is none, whose judgment may not be sometimes
clouded, and whose passion may not let loose it is self, to too high a stream,
and swell beyond it is channel. From hence we may gather a reproof, Use 1. Not
to think ourselves infalible.
for the too high conceited Arrogance of some, who account themselves seated
far above error or mistakes, who glory in their treadings, as so firm, as if
not capable of a blow; whose tongue ownes nothing, below perfection; and are so
far from being conscious to infirmities, as that that unerring infallibility
which the Roman chair would ingrosse to it self; These peremptorily claim a
share in, as more eminently theirs.

2. If there be so great a facility of failing in the best, then He that stands
must take heed least he fall. 2. D. to look to our standing.
1 Cor. 10. Which diligent care of a slip may be improved.

1. In not taking in things upon trust, 1. To not laking things upon trust.
without a particular impartial disquisition, nor lightly admitting an implicit
faith, but in a serious, sober exercise of reason, and of the judgment of
discretion, to put things to a trial, before they, be entertained.

2. In restreining our affections, in not permitting them to get on horse back,
and rule us, 2. In restreining our passions.
or to act without the precedence of right reason; He that is most master of
his passions, is so of his feet too, and so more sure from a fall: whilst he,
whose head is disordered, by so unuly guests, do easily reele into
inconvenience.

The general description of the Psalmists danger thus viewed, the more
particular relation of it, and the high temptation follows, which consists of
two parts. 1. The occasion given or taken, which is the stumbling block or
offense. Secondly, The sins and inconveniences, which he either actually did,
or was like to fall into.

1. The occasion is made up. 1. Of somewhat without and 2. some what within.

In the former we have. 1. A certain Kind of Men spoken of with their estate.
2. Their manners. 3. Their respect from others.

1. The Men spoken of.
As for the Men they are pointed at and set forth by two attributes.

One is that which is twice repeated (...) Improbi (...), wanderers or sinners,
wickedness being as Rabbi Levi says, declinatio ab eo quod justum est and
quod decet. And because this deviation is with the breach of what is just;
hence they are turbulent, restless men, who neither live orderly themselves,
nor suffer others to be in quiet.

Secondly, They are termed (...) which the Septuagint renders (...) Lawless
Men, (...) is (...), 1 John 3.4. That Law of Religion and righteousness which
God has given, these are so far from yielding obedience to, as that they
neither fear God, or care for Man. And being under no command, they
acknowledge, no duty.

Foolish.
But Holelim signifies fools or madman; not much better are they, who will not
submit to Gods Laws, but fly out into frantic disorders; for whilst they
disowne that Law which makes wise the simple, Psalm. 19.7. It cannot be expected
but like the untamed colt, they are destitute of understanding or judgment.

Proud.
Lastly, the word has it is original from (...), which signifies in a good sense
to praise, and magnify, in a worse to vaunt, and boasting to lift up ones self.
Thus the root of disobedience and not submission is innate pride; which
scorning to be directed, restraind or curbed, kicks against any Law as below
them; and looks upon the most honorable command, as a burden and a yoke.

2. Their estate.
These then are the Men, mad, foolish, ungodly, impious, turbulent, unjust Men.

2. As for the estate of these men it is generally, comprehended in the word
(...) which signifies peace and prosperity, of which one is the happy
consequent of the other: it seems therefore (by the way) that they are not
acquainted with the Language of Israel, who hope for prosperity by involving
themselves and Kingdoms in a bloody war; These though they be strangers to
that language which expresses Peace and Prosperity by the same word, yet may
they learn it, from the sad experience of those miseries, which we and our
Country suffer by war, and as they hope for prosperity pray for Peace.

From hence we may observe how fallacious an argument it is, to look upon
Prosperity and Temporal enjoyments, as the most eminent sign of special
election and of divine favor. He is too peremptory, who with barking Shimei
count men Reprobates if once they see them, (though the meekest David) in
adversity: Here we find mad, ungodly, foolish men carrying an high full sail,
they may be in power and spread themselves like a green bay tree, Psalm. 37.35.
and grow so high as to put good Jeremy to the Interrogation Jer. 12.1.
Wherefore does the way of the wicked Prosper? Wherefore are all they happy
which deal very treacherously? And here they are at that height, and fatness
which few good men attain unto: which a view of the prophets notable
description in his several particulars will make good.

The 4. verse presents us with the first, There are no bands in their death,
but their strength is firm: First part of their prosperity Health.
of the sense of the latter part there is no doubt; They are of a fat, sound,
healthy constitution being of a robustious, lasting composure, such as scorns
any disease that is emaciating and consumptive. But of the meaning of the
former; (There are no bands in their deaths) there is some variety.

The seventy translate it (...) there is no Recognition. Whence the vulgar non
est respectus; according to that of St Hierome, non est cogitatio de morte,
They minded not, nor thought of their latter end; but since the Prophet here
speaks of their Prosperity not of their Sins, we may look for another sense.

The Hebrew word signifies a Band which is knotted or tied: and then the sense
may be; They have not that which might bind them over unto a speedy and
troublesome death; hence Castelio non sunt necessitates quae eos enecent, There
are no necessities that threaten their death; such as variety of distempers,
sicknesses and diseases those messengers of death; Aquila therefore renders the
word (...); There are no pangs or distempers, no sorrows or sicknesses says
Aynsworth: They are not bound over to death or Execution, by the variety of
diseases, or by the power or Injury of others. The prophet by telling us their
strength is firm, expounds this Phrase: and let us know that these wicked men,
had lives spunne of even threads; without danger of raveling or breaking. They
had lusty bodies, strong limbs, sound vitalls, without agonies or ruptures;
Lived as those that had no cause to fear death: and when they expired it was
without much antecedent pain; they fell as ripe Aples from the tree.

Had we leisure to take a full view of this grand blessing Health; we should
easily with the Prophet rank it in the first place with the rest of those good
things, that make up humane prosperity, it being one of the choicest Jewels we
can be owners of; The Epigram upon the gate of the Delphian Oracle was (...).
Plato gives it the pre-eminence. The Romans kneeld to the Lady Salus as a
Goddess.

1. This is that, without which all other enjoyments are sour, and
comfortless. The fairest crown sits too heavy, the greatest wisdom turns to
discontent, and the largest revenues are dull and cold comforters when once
this is away.

2. Though the soul, be a spirit immortal, yet it exercises all its
operations by and with the help of the Body. The Quickest Understanding, the
highest Memory and Judgment, depend much, upon the Temperature of the brain;
Acts of Courage and resolution do owe very much to the Heart and Vital
spirits. Use 1.
Weakness of Body soon breaks the Spirts and causes ingenuity to wither.

First how much are they to be blamed therefore, who make use of other men's
service and yet grudge them a subsistence. The common Carrier though he load
heavily yet he will as sufficiently feed his horse. Yet some Egyptian task
masters, will exact a large tale, though they take away the straw: How can
Masters expect a laborious service, from those, from whom they detain their
wages; and scarce afford them what will keep life and soul together: How much
is expected from the poor Clergy and yet how little is contributed to their
assistance; they are never thought to take pains enough, and yet any little
pittance is thought too much for them; and that which all Laws allows them, the
people commonly part with as unwillingly, almost as so many drops of blood;
They upon all occasions must spend themselves and yet are scarce afforded that
which may keep out famine and discontent.

Secondly, How grand a folly are they guilty of, who defer their living well
to a bad time, and shift off Repentance (that heavy burden) to so weak a back
as old age or sickness? how can we expect that our thoughts may be wholly; (or
to the purpose) taken up about our souls; when we find such Tumults in the
body, as usually there are? when Breath scarce finds a Panting passage, pain
and convulsions making the whole to tremble.

And truly me thinks it is none of the meanest blessings of health that
thereby they are freed from Physic and its Prescribers. The bitterness of
Pills and Potions, which assault natures self at every Receipt. The rarity of
a Gallen or Hippocrates, men of ability and skill; The Multitude of Empericall
Mountebanks whose knowledge goes no further then an Ill pronounced hard word;
The too-usuall-neglecting of those Patients that are poor; The lengthning of
diseases for multiplication of fees; the long observation of too much Atheism
in that profession: with the common shipwreck of a good Conscience made by too
many, has given occasion to a Proverb, Qui medice vivit misere vivit, and
makes it an unanimous prayer of all: That our life may still be crowned with
the continuance of health.

To which prayer though many will give a willing Amen with their tongue, yet
cross it in their Actions, whilst by excessive drinking and other luxurious,
disordered courses, they weaken their bodies, Impair their health, consume
their estates, and by their deboist enormities, they contract such diseases, as
render them a burden to themselves, and utterly unserviceable, either to God
or their country.

If Lastly those who are described here so eminently wicked have such
athletick, robustious, bodies, and not troubled with any thing that should bind
them over to death. It concerns us not to boast too much of this peace of
prosperity; Though we meet Job covered with sores yet it is too hasty to
pronounce him more disfavoured of God, then his healthful friends; Health,
though it be a blessing yet it proceeds from that indefinite Providence, which
causes the Sun to shine on the unjust as well as just. The Psalmist here, and
Job in his 21. chapter; points out those hatefully spending their time, in
Jollity and mirth, to whom they allow no other title then of mad, foolish,
wicked men.

Thus Health as it is a blessing in it self; so turned into wantonness, may
occasion much evil: to the Religious, it proves a comfort, and fair
encouragement to goodness; to the wicked a strengthening to sin; and it were
far better, for them, that they were strecht upon a sick bed, then to be busy
actors of those impieties which their Health enabled them unto; which very
abuse of strength, they must give one day an account of; It being a Mercy which
gives occasion of active obedience to God, and adds content to the enjoyment of
other blessigns; and it is dispenc't, unto us by God for the Better and more
eminent employment of our endeavors in is service.

SECT. II. The second part of the wicked man's prosperity. Their Ease.
AS the first part of these wicked men's prosperity is Health, so the second and
third parts of it, the 5. verse does present us with.

They are not in trouble like other men, neither are they plagued like other
men.

They are not in trouble,] Our translation seems by two phrases to express the
same thing, and the latter to be an explication of the former.

But the Hebrew (...) is the same with the Greek (...) which signifies hard,
toilesome, painful labor, and accordingly the Septuagint (...) In labor
mortalium non sunt. Junius and the Vulgar, Humanis laboribus non agitantur.
Castle.

It was told Adam and in him his fallen posterity. In the sweat of thy face
thou shall eat bread Genesis 3.19. and Job tells us without exception that man is
borne to labor: Yet this task lies hardest upon him that is (...) mean,
infirm, low and calamitous and of the poorest condition.

For whilst the owners of a large estate, stretch themselves upon their Ivory
couches, and the imperious Landlord sits at ease at home: the Shepherd and
laborious Husbandman, toils hardly and watches parch't with heat, and nipt
with frost; the solicitous Tradesman must either work hard or starve. Whilst
the purple Conclave, rule in pleasure, and give laws to the most part of the
Christian world; The Inferior Clergy looks pale in the weighty discharge of
their Ministry, Poverty and Meanaenss lays men, most naked to trouble: which
the persons here described are exempted from; by their great Enjoyments: they
need not harden their hand at the Plough and weary their arm at the spade.
They need not sweat hard for Knowledge, nor beat their brains in writing
knotty Controversies: they need not run from one court to another: nor be
encumbered with perplexed cliencies. They (doing nothing) do eat the fruits of
other men's labors. Their Rents most punctually fly in upon the day, and
whilst they sleep they grow rich; it fareing with them, as with Themistocles
Picture, whom one drew a sleep, and fortune driving Castles and Towns,
Victories and Kingdoms into his net.

And truly if we reflect upon this freedom from toil and trouble as it is in
it self; we may find it to be a great Privilege. hence amongst those
Blessings, mentioned to Israel, one was that they should not toil for what
they did enjoy. Cities which they builded not; Houses full of good things which
they filled not; and Wells which they dug not: Vineyards and Olives which
they planted not, Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, etc. And then what can we imagine shall
follow those that are thus provided for, but jollity, mirth, pleasure, and
ease; whilst labor, and hardship, is shut out of doors.

Yet even in this Privilege; there must not be founded too much of boasting,
and applause. for

First as it may fall into the lap of those, who are notoriously wicked. so

Secondly all exclusion of labor gives pleasure and ease, time and opportunity
of opening the gate wide unto vice. Honest labor preserves the soul from many
a temptation, for the Devil cannot find him at leisure; Employment keeps out
many an idle fancy, and evil object; whilst idleness and ease betray us to
riot and wickedness. The conscientious performance of our duties in our
calling, keeps us at our innocent homes and prevents occasions of sinning. The
soul will not be idle, and if it want matter will find it; Even these men
here will have their employments; which (upon our view of their manners) will
hereafter appear.

The third degree of these men's prosperity is, that they are not beaten,
smitten or plagued like other men. Non afficiuntur plagis. Jun, non patiuntur
clades. Castle. (...), they are not whipped or scourged.

Jobs General rule Man is full of trouble, seems to meet with an exception in
these men; no outward evils of Calamity be falls them; no plague overtakes
them, they seem privileged and exempted, from any thing that may harm them,
as men; as Religious. for first their Health and Ease sheilds them from those
troubles which men are subject to; The one affords them the freedom from
inward distempers, and the other gives them the avoidance of all those dangers
which they that compass Sea and Land for maintenance, do daily Run into.

Secondly Good men because of their Religion and Virtue are liable to many
evils: The troubles of the Righteous being many Psalm. 37. which these men
escape, as being as mad and wicked as any.

To be particular. Godly men's troubles and calamities do often arise, from their
enemies, Satan and wicked men; whose malice raises tempests and persecutions
against them: But the men described here are well enough secured from these.
Wolves seldom fight with one another yet will all bend their clutches against
the poor sheep. Satan is to cunning to cast out Satan, for then how will his
Kingdom stand; nor will the world hate its own. Joh. 5.19.

Suppose the storm seem General yet these can shift well enough, and coast
about; They can embrace any religion, all is alike to them: they will never loose
for that; they will readily Join with any faction and swear any oath; serve
the time; comply always with the strongest and turn which way you will, for
their own advantage: with the cat they will always light upon their feet and
secure themselves.

3. The Godly may be chastized by their heavenly father that corrects them.
Heb. 12.6, 7. etc. which is both an act and testimony of his love unto them. As
many as I love I chasten, Revel. 3.19. which God often times refuses to do, to
such as these not condescending to correct them Hos. 4.14. I will not punish
your daughter, when they commit whoredom.

And whereas it may be pleaded, How to still our thoughts that wicked men are
not visibly punished always.
That their Impieties deserve a Visible Punishment: It may be answered: That
though this be true yet God is pleased often to defer and withhold it; nor would
we, (as it is too usual with many) be troubled and think much at this if we
heartily reflect upon what we ought to believe of God, as

1. That he is Independent and Sovereign, who may do with his own as he
please either punish or not, as he thinks fit.

2. That he is most good and therefore that this deferring of the punishment of
ungodly men proceeds not from any liking or love to sin. 3. That he is
omniscient, and therefore it cannot proceed from want of notice of these men's
behavior. 4. That he is most wise and therefore the time when to punish, or
when to forbear must be left to his discretion. Providence must not be limited
to our faint, narrow apprehension. Let us consider, that God may forbear for
their amendment, Romans 2.3. and may lead them to Repentance. 2 Pet. 3.9. and in
case of their stiff-neckt continuance in their perverseness, they will be more
inexcusable when they are called to an account. Lastly this may assure us, That
exemption from Temporary punishment is no infallible sign of especial
election. That sins are not the less in guilt, because God forbeares; and
therefore, that no prosperity or Impunity should win us to consent with the
thief, partake with the Adulterer or strike hands with them that are given to
change.

The fourth degree of their prosperity.

Wealth without trouble.


The Fourth height of prosperity described the 12. verse contains. They
increase in Riches, the Seventy (...) they lay hold on wealth. The Hebrew They
multiply or (as our Translation renders it) they increase in riches.

It is observable that the (...) in Hebrew signifies also strength, vigor,
munition, force, because of that high opinion, men court riches withal, in
accounting them a sure stay, a defense which may help best at a pinch, and
wherein they may safely confide. There is nothing that carries an higher
Ascendent on our thoughts then this: for experience tells us. that

1. The very hope and desire thereof makes men adventure very far, run about
the world, hazard their lives and their consciences too; refuse no hardship,
gasp out their spirits, and multiply their cares.

2. And if once success answer their Endeavors, then with Jacob seven years
hard labor will be esteemed but a petty service of a a few days, for the love
of his Rachel. The shrewdest Pangs are forgot when a child is borne: and if
once their Riches be heapt up, then they conceive all travel and pains well
employed: forgetting those great perplexities and dangers they have run
through: The Rich man's thoughts were (...) full of perplexed doubtings. What
shall I do because I have no room where to bestow my fruit: Luke 12.17. his
labor of pulling down and building up (though very cumbersome, and vexatious)
yet all is quieted in the success and his gladded heart forgetting all, sings
a requiem to his soul, soul take thy ease.

If therefore this be the common disposition of the wicked, to think so highly
of, and act so vigorously for Riches, though the Apostle 1 Timothy 6.9. assures
us, That they that will be rich fall into temptation and a snare; and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition.

How much more then will it be esteemed, an high point of Prosperity, when they
grow rich without trouble, and with the lilies beautiful without spinning or
weaving. When their revenues, come in high without toil: when they reap
plentifully where they sow not; and liberally gather, where they did not plant;
when they swell in possessions without active trouble or disturbance, as these
men here mentioned were happy in. Though this be true.

Yet even this grand piece of prosperity must not be too much boasted in,
seeing that the wickedest commonly has the largest share therein; The Heathen
made their Plutus Blind; as not choosing any in his dispensing his gifts: a
vast estate may be left to a fool; and the rich man for all his purple and
dainties, may go to hell. Luke 16.

And therefore when ever our estates increase let us not set our hearts
thereon; either as good in themselves absolutely, or as infallible testimonies
of Gods favor; Let the Apostles command to Timothy concern us. Charge them
that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded nor trust in
uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who gives us richly all things to
enjoy. 1 Timothy 6.17.

The fifth piece of prosperity. Compliance and gifts of others.
The 5. piece of Prosperity here described (I conceive) may be contained in the.
10. verse. Therefore his people return hither, and waters of a full cup are
wrung out unto them.

And yet I must confess, that I have not the full and uniforme consent of
Expositors. Most by People expound the People of God, as the Septuagint and
others: yet some do render the words following in a different sense, and
according to the Greek render it thus. The People of God return and consider
all this; and find the wicked so absolutely prosperous that full days are
found in them; the Neernesse of the Hebrew words which signify waters and
days, give occasion to this interpretation.

Others (of a very learned head too) restraining the sense of waters, expound
them of affliction and sorrows wrung out: Interpreting the verse thus.
Therefore the Godly are afflicted, and in bitterness of a deluge of watery
Tears do return, That is eo rediguntur, that tossed two and fro, as waters
are, they break out into these passionate speeches. Thus Castle. Bell. Jans.
Answ. Jun.

But I shall crave leave to contribute my mite, to that unfolding of the Text.

1. I conceive the speeches mentioned verse. 11. (they say how does God know? is
there knowledge in the most high?) not to be the words of Gods people, but
rather of the wicked men in prosperity: as hereafter (in my discourse on them)
I may have occasion to show, and such a Temptation as the words import, he lays
not to the charge of any but himself.

2. Adhering to the Translation of our Church though full waters or waters of a
full cup do often represent adversity and affliction, yet sometimes the Phrase
expresses Prosperity. Thus Prove. 5.16, 17. Drink waters out of thine own
cisterne, and running waters out of thine own well: Let thy fountains be
disperc't abroad, and Rivers of waters in the streets. That is make use of
these blessings which God vouchsafes thee: The full waters of thine own
cisternes; and as a fountain, plentifully powers out rivers of waters to
enrich the meadows; so out of thy store contribute thou to others.

Thus Joel. 3.18. The Rivers shall flow with milk and all the rivers of Judah
shall flow with waters. and Psalm. 23.2. He leads me beside the still waters:
v. 5. my cup runs over: all which (if Junius deceives us not in the
exposition;) cannot be meant of sorrow or adversity.

This then may be the meaning, that besides what these men have of their own,
they have Rivers of a full cup wrung out unto them, That is gifts and rewards
are heaped upon them; presents are daily sent wherewith they are courted, unto
an increase and addition of what they possessed.

If we cast our eye a little, upon the Custom and Manners of these People, and
the times wherein this was writ we may find this very likely.

For first seldom were men of Greatness and place visited without presents.
The first salute of Abraham's servant to Rebecca is with a Golden ear ring and
Bracelet. Genesis 24. verse. 22. and upon his departure, he presents them with
Jewels v. 53. Jacob sends a fair drove of Cattle to bespeake a calm reception
of Esau Genesis 33.8, 9, etc. and upon his sending of his little Benjamin to
Egypt he commands his sons to take a present with them. to unknown Joseph Genesis
43.11. without which they appeared not before him, v. 25. Saul intending to
come to Samuel to find his lost asses, is very solicitous for a Present. If we
go what shall we bring the man, for the bread is spent, and there is not a
present to bring unto the man of God. 1 Samuel 9.7, 8. The conquered Assyrians
bring gifts to David, 2 Samuel 8, 6. The Philistines send Presents to Solomon, 1
Kings 4.21. David tells us Psalm. 68.29. Kings shall bring presents unto thee:
and the wisemen after a wearisome search having found whom they sought for,
presently opened their Treasures. Math. 2. verse. 11.

Secondly there is a great inclination in men to court greatness. The Poet
thus expresses it Semper eris pauper, si pauper es Aemiliane;
Dantur opes nullis nunc nisi divitibus.


The greatest obsequiousness, the largest presents* and the most acceptable
rarities that can be thought on, are all to little to court power and Greatness
withal: we may find whole troops attending at their thresholds: and thither
The people to return.

But who are they that will thus court them and woe their favor? Whether and
when good men may court wicked great men?


1. Many determine it that by People here may be interpreted the People of God,
and very possible it is; that they be agents herein: in these cases it may be
lawful.

1. When the omission may redound to their prejudice and be Interpreted, as an
undutifull neglect, as when such men are in authority.

2. When they may gain those oppertunities of doing God further service in
their places and callings.

3. When by their respects they appease the wrath and fury of such men and make
them more tractable.

Lastly wisdom and discretion may afford them frequent occasions of thus
addressing themselves to such men, without incurring justly the censure of
being Timeservers.

There are that fasten this imputation rashly on some; if they do not presently
break off all bonds of civilitie and respect; because that furiously they will
not oppose men, that are Rich, and Great, because they are such etc.

What it is to be a time server.
But they are too hasty in this aspersion; for they properly deserve that Title
of Timeservers, who when they see a Potent, rich, prevalent faction can
contribute thereunto; strengthen and supply them and so far comply with them,
as to serve them, in actions of disloyalty, sin, irreligion, and Profaneness:
These are they to whom that sneaking title of Timeservers does belong: and of
which (I fear) there are two many about us notoriously guilty.

2. If Gods people will not return hither yet discipuli Epicureorum (as one
Interprets it) the disciples of these Epicures, will be forward enough in this
action, They will Court, fawn, flatter, and bribe them, nor will there be a
want, but too many will have their persons in Admiration, because of advantage.

But why are the People thus complying said to return?

1. The Hebrew word will bear the sense of a direct turning unto.

2. Though there be somewhat in these men that may cause others wholly to turn
from them; yet the occasions may be such; as some in wisdom, some, out of
flattery, comply with them; and so may be said to return unto them.

When these great men therefore, see waters, of a full cup wrung out, by their
own selves; when they view how much they are fawned on, and adored by others;
when they find, all men's eyes fixed upon them, and all hands open, to increase
their treasures, then they conceive themselves, as in an happy, prosperous, so
in a settled condition; whereas if they should but look upon themselves as they
should do, they may find this piece of prosperity to be most Dangerous.

For first, it is usual with men, It is dangerous to be courted by others.
out of an innate wantonness and Pride; to be elevated, with the croutchings
of others; and they who find nothing but obsequious respects from others, are
apt to forget themselves; and rely upon other men's opinions, even for the
knowledge of themselves. What they see is by other men's eyes; and make most use
of other men's ears; and pass a judgment upon themselves according to those
fawning hyperbolies, they are courted with, by others. Whence it comes, that
those vices which they have, are hid and nuzled up in them and so they go on
without any remorse and conscience of amendment.

2. Men upon the view of their painted feathers, of that height of prosperity
they are surrounded with, and upon other men's crying Peace Peace unto them,
(adding withal by presents and gifts, what may serve to lengthen their
Tranquillity;) do live, as if they were passing through the World in state; and
are as in a dream, without the least thought, of death, affliction, or future,
possible changes; they hope they shall never be moved: And in this supine
oscitancy; of neither caring for a Reformation, nor fearing a change, they are
subject to many high misdemeanors, great miscarriages, and a very notorious
corruption in manners as shall hereafter be mad good.

The sixth and last degree and height of their prosperity here described the
17th. verse affords us. The sixth degree of their prosperity.

Having more then heart could wish.




Their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more then heart could wish.

Their eyes stand out with fatness; a consequent of their health and full
feeding and thence taken to express a swelling prosperous estate, Deuteronomy. 32.15.
But Jesuram waxed fat and kicked, Isay. 34.6. Jerem. 5.18. They are waxen fat
they shine: Psalm. 17.10. They are enclosed in their own fat, etc.

He adds, They have more then heart could wish; They have out done and
overpast the imagination of heart. So Castellio and Junius.

This must be understood in reference to their own hearts, or to the hearts of
others.

In the former reference, this doubt may seem to cross the application. That
the disposition of worldly men, is always craving more; and the more they
possess, the more they covet: Thus a dropsied body, still cries for drink, and
the more they have the more thirsty they grow. Fortuna multis nimium dedit,
nulli satis.

More then they could hope for, or expect.
However being that nemo repent fit dives, These men climbd up to these
heights, not at once. But by steps, and degrees; If we look upon their hearts
whilst they were a climing up, if we dive into their imaginations whilst they
were plotting, contriving, and industriously working out their own prosperity;
Then we may understand them to have, more then their hearts could then wish,
expect or hope for.

And truly daily experience makes it good, how usual it is with Men to attain
to that honor wealth and height of prosperity, and to meet with such success
in their actings, as antecedently and while they were buisy in the prosecution
of their designs, and hot upon the sent; did far surpass their hopes, and
outstript their wishes, and designs.

Little did Abraham expect a Son, when his desire reached no farther then; O that
Ismael might live a little; little did either Saul or David think of a
Kingdom, when the one would have thought the finding of his fathers straid
asses, very good fortune; and the other was contentedly keeping sheep. Joseph
had little hope of Preferment, when he was in that Pit which his unkind
brothers threw him in; or when he was sold, and imprisoned in Egypt.

When Cestius Governor of Syria made his approaches with a strong Army to
repress the Jews, who had run into rebellion; and beseig'd their City, their
fears were high; but he, beyond all expectation, retreating, from those walls
which he might have easily mastered, received a greater overthrow then ever was
given the Romans, by that Nation; and a more entire victory fell to his Enemies
then ever they could have hoped for.

Should I here adventure upon a Catalogue of those infinite examples of Men,
suddenly raisd from the dunghill; I might be infinite. How many may we find at
first capable only of the thoughts of some small petty designs? The restoring
of a broken fortune and the unwinding of themselves from their Creditors hands,
or some such low business, was the highest they durst ever aim at, yet how
unexpectedly have such (their projects, encouraged by success) made whole
Kingdoms to totter; and Crowns to lie under foot? How many from a prison have
been carried to a throne, and from approaching death unto preferment.

And from all those unexpected occurrences which both good and bad may share
in, a peculiar overseeing providence, may visibly be read, in so large a
Character as men may be certainly persuaded of it. For to see men prosper
beyond their intentions; how success does very much out vie, both the means
they lay hold on, and their endeavors in the use of those means; he may
assuredly conclude, there is an heavenly moderator at the stern; a divine power
both above and without them; whose hand plentifully administers such unexpected
success unto them.

It is true, that it must be men of integrity, humility, and ingenuity, that
will make this conclusion. It being too familiar with many, (as these men here
described do,) to attribute, the works of Providence to their own wit,
industry and contrivance; and so do sacrifice to their own net, Habacuk. 15.16.
But notwithstanding this abuse, that we ought to infer this collection, and
upon all occasions turn up our eye to providence, will be evident if we
consider.

1. It is accounted an high piece of wisdom, from various dispensations, to
collect a peculiar providence; and to make a pious observation, upon all
occurrences that may happen: thus when weather-beaten mariners escape a
shipwreck; and those, that are brought by sickness to deaths door, and yet
recover; if from this they are brought to understand Gods loving kindness and
praise him for his goodness; Then the Psalmist assures us, Psalm. 107.43. That
it is wisdom to make this observation: Who so is wise and will observe these
things; at length he will discern, an all disposing providence to shine out of
the darkest cloud.

2. They are deservedly reprooved whose looks go no higher then themselves;
and acknowledge no other hand then their own in what befalls them; If the proud
Assyrian cry, by the strength of my hand have I done it, and by my wisdom, for
I am prudent, Isa. 10.12.13.14. The Lord will quickly send leanness amongst
his fat ones, and kindle under his glory a burning v. 16. If Judah knows not
(says God) that I gave her Corn, Wine and Oil, (that is will not acknowledge
them for his gifts) I will return and take them away, Hos. 2.8.9. And in the
106. Psalm, we find Isreal's ingratitude, highly aggravated from their not
remembrance and noting of Gods high transcendent mercies toward the^.

This good use and Improvement is strictly injoynd the servants of God,
witness that general confession to be made by Israel in Deuteronomy, as is
evident, and accordingly they acted: Good Joseph makes no other use of his
Brothers course dealing and cruelty toward him, then, That God sent me before
you: Faithful Moses, Joshua and David still attributed the blessings which
they received from God. And that beyond all humane thought and reason the
refused stone was made the head of the Corner, the Apostle tells us, is the
Lords doing, Act. 4.11.

2. If we take these words (More then heart could wish,) with reference to the
hearts of others; these wicked men transcend the thoughts of other men's hearts,
take these thoughts for thoughts of probability, or for thoughts, of wishes or
desires.

1. 2. More then is probable.
If any one conceive it to be very improbable that wickedness should flourish,
they may have many grounds to think so as.

1. The great dissonancy, and disagreement between the means, and the end;
wickedness being in nature so far from being the means to prosperity, as that
it naturally plunges men into Calamities; it being that crooked perverse Road
that Leads to destruction.

2. Every page almost of Scripture assures us how dreadful wickedness is
threatened and what dismal plagues are allotted unto it, Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm. 11.

3. The infinite variety of examples in all ages, of wicked Men, whose sins
have pulled down eminent remarkable judgment: their consumed Bodies, their
consciences, and estates having been punished for their impieties.

And therefore (though God has not, notwithstanding all these, tied and
limited himself always to these Rules, in the actings of his Providence, and
though, for causes in his wisdom thought fit, he may not only permit, but
even operatively contribute to the prosperity of the wicked; Though considering
all this, they may think it possible, for wicked men to flourish yet) by reason
of those formentioned grounds they dare not think it probable, nor dare they
deliver it for a Doctrine; That wickedness is the high way to prosperity; nor
dare they promise unto themselves, That they shall grow great, by prosecuting
evil courses: And so, in this respect wicked men's prospepity is more then they
could conceive probable or hope for, in themselves.

More then good men can wish unto them.

Whether it may be Lawful for the Godly to wish wicked men's prosperity may be
abated.


Secondly, Take the hearts of men for wishes or desires. They have more then the
Godly wish unto them.

For although by Christ's pure Laws, we may wish no man any positive or
absolute harm yet may Gods people wish and desire that the power of wicked men
may be cut short; and their cursed horns blunted, their means may be less and
their prosperity not so full.

1. Because by those desires we prove not Eenemies but friends unto them.
prosperity to a wicked heart being highly dangerous, and may throw him, into
many great miscarrages, and abuses of those good things he injoyes. As then, in
a storm we wish not that vessel to carry a full high sail, which we know may
easily be overturned by it; so prosperity being too great a sail for ungodly
Men, we may in love, wish, and in charity desire, that their estate may be
such, as may suggest unto them, thoughts of humility; that may keep them in a
more even steady course; and which may let them know that they are but Men.

2dly., The promotion of fools is but sword in a mad man's hand, and does arm
with power to do harm. Who grindes with an oppressive hand but the Rich, Jam.
2.9. Who devoutly devours Widows houses? Who takes the bread, from the
fatherless, and robs God of what is his? Who devours the Church, and
persecutes the Saints? Who does tread under foot the blood of the Covenant? Who
prostitutes their Country to blood and rapine? Who glories in the death of
Innocents? Who does all this and more, but the hardhearted Pharaohs, the proud,
insolent Nebuchadnezars, the zealous Hypocrite, and such, who being slaves, to
their ambition, and lusts, do thrive, and meet with great success in their
actings. And therefore in regard of that high mischeife, they are Enabled to
execute by prosperity, it were to be wished (If God so please) that there cursed
horns were cut short and their power less.

A brief addition of one particular more may shut up this point.

There are some moderate Spirits in the World who consulting with reason, do
not hunt after great things, have no ambition for riches and prosperity. 1.
They see the loftiest Cedars most subject to thunder, and a fat estate liable
to envy and danger. 2. They view that Opes are Irritamenta malorum, And that
prosperity brings with it many vices, corrupting commonly men's manners into a
vile degeneracy.

From hence it is that many expositions do with the Septuagint interpret these
words. They have passed into their own Imaginations, followed their own
lusts, made their own phansies their Pictures, and their own, vicious,
corrupt hearts the sway of their actions; and because height of prosperity is
of this deadly malignant influence;

Therefore, men of ingenuity, and wisdom are afraid of it, seek not after it,
and being furnished with that which may sustain nature, and which may keep them
from being ridiculous, for poverty; They value not much more; food and raiment
they are contented with, moderatly acquiescing in their low enjoyments, not
soaring high or hunting after greater matters, especially in such times when
there is so eminent, an inconstancy in greatness; so remarkable changes every
day produced; when that which seems surely built is easily thrown done, and
that which is planted is torn up by the roots.

Thus the wicked men here described, have more then heart could wish, more then
ever they could expect themselves, more then in all probability other men might
conceive would have befalne them, more then good men would or lawfully might
wish unto them, more then wise, reasonable, moderate, ingenuous Godly Men could
look for, wish or desire.

CAP. I.
Verse 6. Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain, violence covers
them as a garment.

V. 8. They are corrupt, they speak wickedly concerning oppression, they speak
loftily.

V. 9. They set their mouths against the heavens, and their tongue walks
through the earth.

V. 11. And they say, how does God know? and is there knowledge in the most
high?


CONTENTS.
These second occasion from without of the Prophets temptation, is wicked men's
ill manners here described. 1. Pride, the nature and inconveniences thereof. 2.
Violence. Why wicked men are commonly violent in their greatness. Hateful to
God. 3. An ill tongue. The disorders of an unruly and ungratious tongue. How
wicked men's tongues walk through the earth, and are fixed against heaven? 4.
Their Atheism, and denial of knowledge in God. The irrationality and original
of this sin.

The occasion of the Prophets temptation, from home. 1. His own afflictions.
Good men are ordinarily afflicted. As men, as members of a Commonwealth. As
Holy. And as chastis'd by God.

2. His own piety toward God, and righteousness toward man expressed by
cleansing of his heart and washing of his hands in innocence.

The comforts of both.

SECTIO I.
THE several degrees of the wicked men's prosperity here described, thus,
dispatched. The Corrupt Manners of these men, claim our next thoughts: for,
even this (partly) concurd in the occasion of the Prophets temptation, and was
an ingredient in it.

The general Word (...) they are corrupt, V. 8. Tabuerunt, signifies such a
corruption, and wasting of the body, as arises from rottenness, putrefaction
and infection of blood or other humors, as impostum's in the stomach, lungs or
liver: and transferred to the mind, and manners, does signify corruption of
affection and actions.

The Prefixed Illative therefore, which infers their manners, (They are in
prosperity therefore pride compasses them about; They are not in trouble like
other men therefore they are corrupt;) gives us this Observation. Observe.


Prosperity lighting upon, and happening unto evil disposed, wicked Men; makes
them more impious, and corrupt, then otherwise they would be.

As in man's body if the humors be corrupt, in any part, the nourishment that
is good and otherwise wholesome, proves an occasion of increasing the disease;
nay (the corruption of the best things being worst.) the better the
nourishment, the more foulely it putrifies in a corrupt stomach; so, in an
impious, wickedly disposed soul, prosperity often proves fatal, making it worse
then it was before. Unto the defiled nothing is pure, Tit. 1.15. The newest
Wine put into unsavory bottles grows musty and corrupt: and an unclean heart
infects what ever is infused.

From hence we may learn. 1. To vindicate the effects of Providence from the
common imputations of men; who often lay the fault of their miscarriages upon the
occasions, and the blessings they enjoy: Adam he blames the wise God had given
him, Genesis 3.31. The Women thou gave me, and she put the fault upon the
Serpent; whereas in deed, if they set the sadle upon the right horse; their
itching corrupt nature, their perverse will, is that, from whence it came. It
may be also observed that the word in the Original is not passive but active.
They have corrupted themselves willingly, and of their own accord.

Prosperity in it self is an high blessing of God, and may be well used.
Abraham may grow mighty: Moses great; David powerful: and Solomon Rich: Yet
all, use their treasures to Gods glory; whatever taint it receives, that
proceeds from that infective wickedness, wherewith the receiving vessel is
corrupted.

2. We may hence see the reason why wise, sober, discreet men, do not earnestly
covet, nor greedily hunt, after prosperity: not out of any Cynical humor any
harsh censure, of honor, and riches, in themselves; but out of a
cautiously-jealous suspicion, of their own infirmities; and of too great a
pronenesse to abuse them: The wise man cries give me neither poverty nor
riches; feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and
say who is the Lord: These wicked men's first sin.
or least I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in vain, Prove.
30.8.9.

Pride.
The first piece of corruption (that we may descend unto particulars) is Pride,
Therefore pride compasses them about as a chain.

The Nature of Pride.
We need not go very far for a definition of Pride, It is for the most part set
out unto us in an high and lofty look. Prove. 9.17. Prove. 21.4. Isa. 2.11. Isa.
10.12, The Psalmist. Psalm. 131.1. in the negative description of his humility,
tells us that his heart is not haughty, nor his eyes lofty. It may suffice for
the present that pride may be termed an Height and elevation of the mind
testified by the looks. The nature and signs of Pride may be pointed at
according to the several objects of the looks.

1. The Proud man's first object is himself, and then, how dearly does he Hug,
how much greatness, excellency and perfection does he attribute to his beloved
self? Whilst Abraham's humble spirit cries I am but dust and ashes, and
aflicted Job acknowledges himself Vile; whilst, modest, impartial souls, take
things really as they are: lofty, Vain, proud spirited Men, do always look
double upon themselves: do always magnifye whatever they find; nay do often
swell unto so conceited an height; as scorning to be contented with what the
earth can afford, do arrogate a divinity to themselves. To be the Son of
Jupiter did scarce satisfye that ambitious Grecian, no less title will serve
the Persian Monarch, then to be brother to the Sun; and to be adored, as a God,
will scarce content, Caius that vain glorious Roman.

2. If the proud man looks upon others; then it is, with a contemning scornful
eye: He looks upon all as below either his person, or merits; he meets every
one with a Tum ego illum contempsi prae me. The Pharise brags I am not as other
men or as this Publican Luke 18. verse. 11.

3. If a proud man looks upon God, his blessed Ordinances, his Word, his Laws,
his Scripture his Sacraments; He accounts these all below his care; and claims
an exemption from them: He places himself above these constitutions, The
Natural man neither is or can be subject to Gods Law, Romans 8.7. The wicked in
the pride of his countenance will not seek after God, God is not in all his
thoughts. Psalm. 10. verse. 9. He hates to be reformed, scorns to be Taught;
swells at reproof; and exalts himself above all that is called God.

This high Proud Temper though we are all very prone, and always inclined to,
yet Prosperity gives it a lift; and helps it to swell beyond its bounds.
Pharaoh will readily cry Who is the Lord. Vzziah will grow bold to a
sacrilegious incroachment, if Prosperity attend upon their proud spirits;
Sodoms sin is pride, fulness of bread, and contempt of the poor; which are
usually found joined together, Ezekiel. 16. verse. 49.

And therefore in this respect (were there no other) Great prosperity proving
so dangerous; and usually threatening Shipwreck against this Rock; it may
concern us to weane our thoughts, from hunting after superfluous high
vanities; lest our hearts prove, (as feilds too liberally rained upon,)
Luxuriant, and full of high growing weeds. And if ever Providence bestows
plenty upon us, without either our ambition or seeking; it is a piece of
highest discretion, to keep our souls unswolne, and not puffed up, by the largest
enjoyments.

And to this end let us seriously. Consider. 1. That the greatest worldly
prosperity, cannot even in reason be any Justifiable cause of pride: because 1.
These riches are neither really true, nor in themselves valuable: The Mammon of
unrighteousness (falsely so called) is the best title they are worthy of. 2.
Because they are fleeting, and unconstant, and carry nothing of Permanency.

The inconveniences of Pride.
2. Reflect on those high inconveniences which this sin is attended with.

humor which the party infected with it, may much applaud himself in; yet all
other men count it intolerable, do hate, and very much dislike it. No man can
endure pride in another, though he be tainted therewith himself.

faithful friend; nulla inter superbos vera amicitia for how can he
participate of this bond of Society, and great comfort of life, whom
scornful, petulant humors, render incapable, of intimacy, or Trust.

beyond the capacity of virtue, and Reformation; full vessels admit of no more
liquour, though you would pour in the best; and he, whose head is swollen up
with these fumes, is prepossest, and denies admittance, to a more sober guest.
And what ever remedies, may be applied for a cure, in other diseases; will but
augment Tbis. If God, by a Gentle meekness deals with a proud spirit; he will
soon attribute his blessings to his own wit, and merits; if God sharply
touches him, it produces in him, little else but a murmur, as if he were
injuriously dealt with; and if his neighbor endeavor his cure, he receives
his correction with a disgrace, and his Counsel with contempt; and takes him
for an Enemy, for this act of love.

4. It is a sin which God perfectly hates, and consequently betrays to a
certain punishment. A proud look is an abomination in Gods sight, Prove. 16.5.
And he proclaims himself a profess'st enemy thereunto, and extraordinary
judgments, (even in this life) do usually accompany it: It is very remarkable
that amongst the many evidences of omnipotency, the Lord himself proclaims the
bringing down of the proud for one, Job 40.11.12. The eyes of the lofty shall
be humbled is as certain, Isay. 5.15. As that God resists the proud but
gives grace to the humble, 1 Pet. 5.5.

As Pride is the first Sin of these rich prosperous Men here described, so the
second sin, Their second sin violence. V. 6. 1. 8.
(their Manners are corrupted with) is Oppression, Injury and Rapine; which is
expres't by two words (...) and (...) both which, though they signify the same
thing in event, yet with some diversity in the manner: The former signifying
such oppression, as is done by a violent, strong hand; as Beasts seize on their
Prey; the other; such Rapine as is done by colorable, fraud, and
circumvention, These men, here like the greater fishes openly devour the
less; and with those of the old world are filled with violence. Genesis 3. If
force cannot conveniently do the deed; then they turn themselves unto fraud;
and bring them into their net with circumvention if they cannot conveniently do
it by open violence.

It might well be expected, That men (who fared so well) should live at ease;
and (having more then heart could wish) should rest themselves contented and
quiet; for a Lion (satisfied) calmly couches in his den; and the Wolf (when
his belly is full) Lies still; the more deep, and fuller of water, a river is,
the more smooth it is, and runs along in a silent channel; and they that want
nothing, might be expected to mind nothing but that peaceable enjoyment of what
they already have.

But that Prosperity and worldly height should work this violence, Tumult and
disorder, is nothing strange. This the Prophet of old complained of; what
snares and traps were set, how full of deceit their houses were, who were
waxed great and rich Jerem. 5.25, 28. David assures us that the Wicked in his
pride does persecute the Poor, he murders the Innocent and privily lays wait
for blood; and He croucheth and humbles himself that the poor may fall by
his strong ones etc. Ps. 10.2. etc.

Why great wicked men are commonly violent.
Some reasons why these great Prosperous men often grow violent and tempestuous,
may arise, 1. From being often resisted; and stopped in their actings, either by
Good Laws; or by the strict execution of them; when those good men, to whose
hands they are committed, cannot (out of conscience, and Justice) comply with
them; from hence they break into violence; to crush all opposers; the second
chapter of the book of Wisdom handsomely describes their violent resolutions
verse. 10. etc. Let us oppress the poor, righteous man; let us not spare the
widow, nor reverence the ancient gray hairs of the aged; let our strength be
the law of Justice. For that which is feeble is found to be nothing worth.
Therefore let us lie in wait for the Righteous, because he is not for our
turn. He is clean contrary to our doings. He upbraideth us with our offending
the Law, and objecteth to our infamy the transgressions of our education etc.
He was made to reprove our thoughts. When prosperous wickedness finds it self
resisted it swells into a tumult; not sparing those, whom its merciless
clutches can light on: a Lion (though never so full yet) if he be chaft, will
rouse his fury; and a deep current, (though never so smooth, yet) stopped in its
course, or limited in its windings, will rage and foame, beyond its channel.

2. Though there be no opposition, yet there is a causeless (though natural)
antipathy between these wicked men and those that are Good; their crimes do
appear more black and ugly, when innocence stands by: and by a virtuous life
the deformities of the wicked appear more extravagant; therefore to take away
these eye-sores, they will (upon all occasions) oppress and ruin them.

3. Though these men have more then heart could yet they never think they have
enough, as is before mentioned; Man's desires of these Riches are not natural,
appetites (as that of hunger of beasts) for then they would (as hunger is) be
satisfied: but they are boundless, and looking for more then they have, they
do forget what they do enjoy, and are as eager, as if they were really empty,
and had nothing. In which greedy pursuits, They often find denialls and
noncompliance: The state, Interests and desires of other men not suiting with,
nor answering their desires: and therefore they storm, make use of Violence
and strive to oppress. This Covetuous Ahabs dealing with poor murdered
Naboth fully evidenceth, 1 Kings 11. The Crown and Kingdom of Israel contents
him not. Naboths Vineyard is Commodious, and it must be had v. 3. Naboth
complies not, represents his legal Interest, and propriety. v. 4. Hereupon his
Crown, Scepter, and Royalty please him not. He is as discontented as if he
wanted all things. Therefore, there is no other way but violence. Naboth is
unjustly accused, Condemned, and stoned, and then Ahab takes possession.

predominant in Greatness, commonly, an humor of domineering, though they
aim at no Profit by it, yet they love to rule the roast, and bring the world in
subjection under them; all must lie low at their feet and become their
Vassalls. This Humor reigns especially in men of prosperity. The very breach
of command, (though no way prejudiced,) mads Nebuchadnezar, Will you not bow to
the Image that I have set up: some minds are so Mischievous that they cannot
but do harm, Si non aliqua nocuisset mortuus esset, This is noted by the
phrase of Violence covering them as a garment or compassing as a chain: They
count it an Ornament to Curb and crush and a glory to see men subdued when
they can.

Whether any one or all these Joined together, be the cause, it is too clearly
evident that our sad age has made it good. What oppression, was till within
late years few of us knew; but now it over flows to a doleful experience;
such as no age can (since the conquest) parallel; nor can the world afford us
more unhappy examples of cruel oppression and violence. The crown saves not
the Sovereigne, nor Holy Orders secure the Clergy, nor will the shield of a
Reformation, defend from Enthusiasts, Men are bent upon spoil, and the greater
success they have, the more they are resolved upon oppression: while innocence
in the mean time is every where struck at, the cries of orphans and the
groans of Widows are multiplied, and the Kingdoms run to ruin and
confusion; and too many of us, who before would have thought any one piece of
Injustice horrid, do shamelesly comply, and (in an unbecoming slavery)
prostitute our selves to the wickedest, (if successful) designs of our great
Masters.

That this violent, tumultuous humor is no praise of these prosperous men, but
a part of the descripti-of their impieties; the frame and contexture of this
Psalm fully resolves us. It might be urged how unseemly it is for Men to
injure and oppress one another, who are first (if not of the same society,
Religion and profession: yet) certainly of the same nature and blood. And
secondly, to act this, for mere superfluities; when they are furnished, with
understanding and reason to discern, that the eye views more then the belly
will contain; and that nature, is well contented with a little; Thirdly that
there is a conscience within them: that tells them that they would not be so
dealt with themselves; and that they should do as they would be done by.

Violence a sin severely prohibited and punished.
This only at present I shall insist on; That the Creator of all men, has This
sin, in highest detestation and hatred.

1. He has severely prohibited it; and imposed the strict command, of Just,
righteous dealing; Thou shall not oppress the Stranger is almost every where
enjoined; show mercy and compassion every man to his brother, Oppress not the
Widow nor the Fatherless, the stranger nor the Poor is severely commanded,
Deuteronomy. 7.9, 10. and that we should love our Neighbor as our self; is a large
general precept.

2. That the dreadful threatenings of revenge, against this sin; are high and
numerous; and the groans of the afflicted, will soon pierce his ear. He is a
swift witness against the oppressors Mal. 3.5. If the cause of the fatherless
be not Judged, and the needy be oppresst; God puts himself to an interrogatory
Shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? Jerem. 5.28, 29.

3. That in all ages, God has made good these his threats, shouring out open
Judgments, upon such men, This sunk the old world, plagued Egypt, and
destroyed oppressing Pharaoh, for this the dogs likt up the blood of Ahab, and
Jezabel; and this was one of those many crimson sins, that turned Jerusalem to
an heap.

If therefore wicked men rise to such an height, as that neither Reason,
humanity, or compassion; that the Laws neither of God, or Nature, can be a
curb, sufficient to restrein men from their violent oppressive actings; We
must submissively leave them, to the just Judge, of heaven, and Earth; who will
recompense them according to their deeds.

A further degree of the corrupt manners of these prosperous Men, is their Ill
Tongue. Their third sin and corruption an ill tongue.
They are not content to keep their poison within, but they vent it abroad to
infect others. They speak wickedly; concerning oppression, they speak lofty:
which may present us with some observations.

1. That man's heart (though never so reserved or yet) does ordinarily discover
it self (some time or other) by the Tongue.] Out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks. Pride and Oppression is that which these are guilty of, and
they cannot hold their tongue they must speak of oppression, and that loftily
to.

For although it cannot be denied, but that men can dissemble, look one way,
and row another; their heart and tongue, not meaning the same thing; their
present advantage leading their expressions, Yet if we view the common
discourse of these men; We shall ordinarily find that these streams resemble
their fountain: (...). and the most dissembled thoughts will some time or
other betray themselves: Men take it ill to be censured by others; but if they
bewray themselves by their discourse, they have greater reason to bethink of
amendment in themselves, then of regret, against others.

Does not he give to great cause to Judge, that his spirit is profane; whose
mouth is filld with nothing but Blasphemy, and curses? That malice and
revengefull envy lodges in his breast; whose tongue, vents nothing else but the
poison of Aspes against others, That covetuousnesse takes up his heart, whose
discourse, is still upon a hot pursuit of Gain, where and how it may be
attained? May we not well conceive that he has an impure, infected, spirit
whose words are commonly lascivious, and corrupt? That he is habitually unjust,
who speaks wickedly concerning oppression, and that his spirit is proud, and
high; whose words are lofty? there cannot be a more excusable Judgment passed
upon the tree then by the fruit.

The way to rectify all, is to make the Tree good and then the fruit will be so
to: if the fountain be clear the streams will be so to; and purify the Heart,
and the expressions will be savoured with grace: a good treasure will
necessarily afford us good things.

But to return to the men whose manners are here described; the Prophet
further instanceth in the disorder of their Tongues, They set their mouth
against the Heaven and their tongues walk through the earth. v. 9.

We will begin with the latter, Their tongue walks. The word is metaphorical
and intimates

1. That as walking is a slow deliberate pace; so these men take time and
council what and whom to speak of, how to frame their words according to
their own humor and phansy, hence one says upon this place Their tongue
walks, ut explorator, ad audienda, and enaranda mendacia, as an Inquirer
after what they may speak of.

2. As Walking, is a pace, of freedom, without fear, or disturbance; so these
men (without thought of impunity; and without any fear of control) take a
liberty of speaking what they please, and scorning a curb cry Our tongues are
our own, who are Lords over us Psalm. 12.

3. Whereas it is said: Their tongue walks through the Earth, this shows the
Boundless and unlimited disorder of the tongue. The earth carries a numerous
offspring of Men; who are of several habits, states, and Conditions, which
give occasion of variety of discourses and different kinds of language: These
men spare none, their tongue walks through the Earth and leaves, nothing
unspoken of. If men be poor they talk of oppressing and mastering of them. If
they oppose; they discourse of violence and suppressing. If they be of a
different Nation; they have some National jeere, to put upon them; If they be
in Adversity they scorn and deride them; if they be present, they revile them,
if absent, they load them with slanders.

If in this perambulation, they meet with truth, they darken it with lies, and
home-made inventions: if with innocence; they brand it with false accusations,
and bitter aspersions. If with a strict Government, and good Laws, then they
cry, Let us break their bonds in sunder, and cast away their cords from us. If
with Religion, they term it Heresy, or superstition. If with patience they
term it obstinacy and perverseness: if with the Church; they think of nothing
less then of devouring it, and cry let us take the houses of God in
possession, if with the thoughts of a resurrection, and of future hopes, let us
eat and drink cry they, for to morrow we shall die; Thus no corner is left
unsearcht, by the by their abusive tongue which walks through the earth.

Nor (which is strange) do they rest here; for they set their mouths against
the Heavens: Coelum ipsum petunt stultitia. In Heaven there is a God, that has
set up his throne: A God that has declared himself the Ruler of Kings, the
Creator of the World, the Wise, Powerful and just disposer of all things, and
the impartial revenger of all disobedience, Him, they aim at, and speak
against; and that especially. They may walk over the earth, but they will set
their mouth against the Heavens. Here they stay, stand fixed and resolute, and
take that place, as a special white, they would hit: What they say against it
shall be, shortly considered. In the mean time it may safely be hence
concluded; Jam. 3.6, 8. etc.
That the Apostle Saint James, his description of those effects which proceed
from the unbridled tongue do seldom part from it. The tongue, is a world of
iniquity, defiles the whole body, sets on fire the course of nature; and is set
on fire of hell; There is no man can tame this unruly evil; full of deadly
poison; which generally diffuseth it self, in a boundless extravagant,
unlimited infection, into all parts, and by its restless activity meets with
all.

The Basalisks eye (though infectious) sees not every thing, and there is a
distance, which it passes not; That foot which is most swift to blood; cannot
be every where, nor tread upon the clouds: the most active hand of violent
Oppressors, has, but its reach; it may strike, crush, and wound, those that
are within its clutches: but no farther; whereas neither heaven, nor earth, can
escape this unruly little member: for it stately walks through the one; and it
is fixedly set against the other.

In the Saints of God two things may be remarkable in this paticular.

1. That they always apprehend a great danger in this evil, and were fearful
of it: and earnestly praid against it: These sharp swords, and envenomed
arrows good David often prays against Psalm. 64.2, 3.140.2, 3. etc. and a
deliverance from this backbiting enemy they esteem an high mercy. David looks
upon it, as no mean goodness in God, to keep him secretly, in a pavilion from
the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31.20. and Job counts him blessed that shall be
hid from the scourge of the tongue, Job. 5.21.

2. That Good men for themselves were very careful to restrain their tongues:
This Good David, kept a vigilant watch upon, and desires God to do so too.
Psalm. 39.1. Psalm. 141. verse. 3.

If therefore we are not better then they, we are not to slight the danger, nor
less obliged then they to the same care; yet if we cast our eye about us a
little, we may find a most extravagant license in these days, where the sword
keeps down all laws, and gives liberty to the broaching of any thing but what
is true: where the uncontrouled tongue runs about in a license as audible as
that of the sword; and the hand that wields it, is visible: Upon one hand we
may find a religion made up of legions, on the other nothing but
enthusiasticall phansies: which are asserted as Infallible: those excellent
things (for the enjoyment of which we have been thought happy,) are now blasted
with the breath of Poisonous lips and imbittered with Gall, flowing from
extravagant pens. The Breath of our Nostrils lies under black obloquies; That
Church Government which so many ages acknowleged Apostolical, is now termed
Babilonish, and Antichristian. That Liturgy which some good men defended with
their blood; is now termed superstitious, and the order of ministers it self
defamed, and prostituted by those, who own no such degree; and who look upon
Christ's Ministers as the offscouring of the world; the utter ruin of whom is
accounted the highest sevice to God.

But we may consider, that the Men whose walking tongues, are here mentioned by
the Prophet are wicked ungodly men; which may give us this second observation.

That a wicked disordered tongue is the sign of an ungratious ungodly man: for
if the transgression of Gods law will denominate a man such; This, will: for
how can it be well imagined, that God should give laws to restrain the eye,
the hand, the feet; and leave the tongue at random. The Apostles command is
let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.25. Coloss.
3.8. It may be observable that where the Apostle purposely treates of man's
corruption by sin; Rom: 3.13. among the rest, This comes in: Their throat is an
open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit: The poison of Aspes
is under their lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and Bitterness, v. 14. And
Saint Peter terms those that speak evil of things they understand not,
little more then natural Brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed 2. Pet.
2.10, 11, 12. Nor is that of Saint James, less Memorable: Jam. 1.26. If any
man among you, seem to be religious and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives
his own heart; This man's religion is vain: Though he be a constant frequenter
of holy exercises; yet if his unrestrained tongue runs to railing, his religion
is vain: And what is that? Vanity in Scripture is opposed 1. To Truth. 2. To
fruit and benefit.

This man's religion then is vain 1. There is no truth in it; it wants that,
which it seems; a mere shadow, without substance. It is vain without fruit
such, a seeming religion will do him no good; and stand him in a very little
stead when it comes to trial.

To conclude this, with the addition of this one thing. Men have no great cause
to applaud, themselves, or to boast in this license, of an uncontrouled tongue:
there may be a permittance, and a divine forbearance for a time; but at length
there will an account be taken as well of words as of actions Math. 12.36, 37.
Jud. verse. 15.

Those punishments, which are inflicted, on the wicked, do not skip over this
Member; one of Dives his requests is that Lazarus may with the tip of his
finger dipped in water cool his inflamed tongue Luke 16.24. And those upon whom
the Angel powered out his Viol, gnawed their tongues for pain, Revel. 16.10.

And therefore the Apostles exhortation, Coloss. 4.6. may much concern us: Let
your speech be always with grace seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye
ought to answer every man. The fear of God, and due respect to others, will
keep this member in; which is so apt to lash out: and so, we shall not fall
into the condemnation of the wicked; but with those very tongues wherewith we
glorify God here; we shall in endless Halleluiahs praise him hereafter.

Their fourth sin Atheism.
A farther description of these wicked men's corrupt manners (I conceive) may be
presented in the 11. verse.

And they say how does God know? and is there knowledge in the most high?

In which demand we may consider; 1. The intimation of the persons, that make
it. 2. The Person concerning whom it is made: God the most high. 3. The thing
inquired of Him; How does God know?

Some Questions are Problematical, proposed for logical and rational
discussion, and determination: Some are Rhetorical, and figurative; which often
mean a negative when they are affirmatively given out.

This Interrogatory here is not of the first kind, our Questionists in this
place, intend not to dispute or Inquire a determination of the Problem de modo
scientiae divinae, Whether God knows things by their species, by induction and
demonstration or by one entire view and Vision? Whether future contingencies
come within the comprehension of his Understanstanding, as well as things
present or Past.

But the demand is Rhetorical, absolutely and negatively meaning: That there
is no knowledge in the Almighty etc.

For the Demanders, there is not a full agreement in expositors who they are?
some do attribute it to good men, who upon a view of that height of prosperity
which wicked men were in, do in their passion, break out into this
expostulation: And truly we may find that such demands as these, and upon such
grounds have been often made by men not altogether ill affected.

Cum rapiunt mala fata bonos, Ignoscite fasso,
Solicitor nullos esse putare deos.
But the 12. verse. seems to point at those who made the Querie: Lo these (that
thus say and demand) are the Ungodly, who prosper in the World: and here the
Psalmist is still upon the prosecution of the Manners, and impiety of these
men: and had we leisure a little to cast our eye upon other places of
scripture; we might find these sayings here to be very consonant to others of
theirs elsewhere recorded, God has forgotten. Psalm. 10.11.13. The Lord shall
not see, Ps. 94.7. Ezekiel. 9.9. are the usual expressions of these men: and
truly if we but view the black nature and Grounds of that impiety, which works
out this Assertion, we shall easily make good this conclusion.

That to deny a knowledge in God is a piece of the highest and most monstrous
Impiety, En quo res prospera mentes Perducit miseras, This is that pillar upon
which nil ultra, no wickedness beyond this may be justly engraven. Which will
be evident, if we reflect upon its nature, and ground.

1. For its nature it is no less then Plain down right Atheism. For

First here is a denial of Gods knowledge, How does God know? they will not
afford heaven, to be so much as a spectator of their Actions, for we must not
imagine, that these supposed a God; and only denied him knowing: but they deny
that there is any such God who does know.

2. By taking it away; they deny, a providence, and Divine care, of things
below.

3. Hence also, they denied a prudent, supreme Management of things, here
below: constituting blind chance, or Man's will, the only knowing entity, in
their phansy to moderate and govern, all.

4. They deny an Omnipotency, of power, or any such, as is greater then
themselves.

5. They deny a Divine Justice, that should render to every man, according to
his works.

So, that if all this be put together: To deny Divine Knowledge, Providence,
Government, Power and Justice; we may find, it does amount, to nothing less,
then direct Denial of God.

As for the grounds of this impiety, those will heighten the sin: It may seem
very strange, that Man's heart, endued with reason, should give admission to so
irrational a thought. Especially, considering.

1. That very reason, and their soul, wherewith they are innobled, might teach
them the contrary. He, that teaches, man knowledge, shall not he know? Things
without, in their abstruse causes, and effects, their properties, and
qualities, natural, and moral, may stoop to man's knowledge; which, he, never
came unto, by the instruction of beasts; who never had any; nor did it flow,
originally from himself, no more then his own being. And therefore, it must
stream, from an heavenly fountain, which could not dispense knowledge to us,
unless it had it, it self.

2. If, these men, do consult with every thing without them, they may find,
the whole creation, the heavens, and the inhabitants of the earth, and Sea, the
managements of Kingdoms; the affairs of the World, and the consent of all
Nations, to rise up in Judgment against them.

But as when we find, much rubbish and dirt cast upon the shore, we easily
assign it to the violence of that liquid element; whose waves forced it
thither. So when such desperate and blasphemous conclusions come abroad, we
may easily know that they proceed, from those wicked men's hearts; who foame out
their own shame; The inward rolling thoughts toss't up and down by the devils
secret suggestions, are the original of all this Atheism and Blasphemy.

I said the Secret suggestions of the Devil: for he never has or will be
willing, to be the known Master of Atheism: Amongst those whom he was
permitted to be most visibly conversant with: he was not ambitious, to tempt
them farther, then to the worship of himself, and he well knows that should he
appear to be the Master of Atheism, to teach it; the very evidence of his own
being, would confute him and his doctrine: for it might be rationally
concluded; That if there were intellectual spirits (such as the Devil is,)
There must certainly be a first Being, a God who gave them, both their being
and knowledge.

Every man has some notions of Good and Evil; honest, and dishonest;
imprinted in his soul, which are undeniably clear: when such men as these,
then view themselves, wholly conversant, in things evil and dishonest; Their
own conscience, accuses them; and assures them withal, that they deserve to
be dealt with proportionably to their wicked actings: hence arises a fear of
punishment which is both augmented and confirmed in them by the general
belief, of all men, (besides themselves) that there is a God. Whose wrath, is
revealed from heaven, against all unrighteousness. This fear they strive
against; and are willing to be rid of it; their own prosperity helps it on;
their present immunity persuades them, and the Devils secret suggestions
confirm them: and thus at length, (as Man, is easily induced, to believe that
which he likes, and to disbeleive that which would trouble him) they resolve,
and conclude, and say. How does God know?

And thus affected it is no wonder, they should be so wicked, as they are
described to be. For having cast off all fear of God; trampled all Religion
under foot; what can be expected of them, but that they should be proud,
oppressors, bloody, inhumane; and live according to their own blasphemous
thoughts, pleasures, and Atheistical principles.

Nay certainly it were hardly conceiveable, that they should be so wicked,
unless they had antecedently denied that first principle of all goodness.
That there is an all knowing God -- nunquam -- tam perfidus ac perjurus fuisset
si putasset esse deos. -- Heu primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris, naturam
nescire dei.

For he, whose soul, firmly beleives, That there is a God: That all things lie
open, and naked, to his eye, whom we have to deal with. He neither will, nor
can, be so presumptuously wicked: A thought of this kept tempted Joseph, from
uncleanness with his wanton Mistress; and to cry, How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. A reflection upon Gods omniscience
quickens good David's devotion. Psa. 139.1, 2, 3. And from thoughts of this
Hannah takes the assurance to reprove the wicked, 1 Samuel 2.3. Talk no more so
exceeding proudly, let not arrogance come out of thy mouth, for the Lord is a
God of knowledge and by him actions are weighed. This kept from Idolatry shall
not God search out this? for he knows the secrets of the heart?

But here, it may be objected. That in these latter days, after so long, and
undeniable experience of Gods knowledge, the same sins are committed: men are as
eminently active in violence, oppression, and blood shedding, as ever: and this
Psalm is too sadly fulfilled, men are proud, revengefull, restless; that (not
long since) happy, flourishing Kingdoms are at their last gasp; and yet never
higher profession of Gods glory, or more zealous pretenses of Reformation of
Religion.

It may be answered; That the Antecedent cannot be denied, things are too
manifest. Yet truly we are yet to seek, how the committall, of such impieties,
can stand with the true belief of God, and his knowledge: The verbal
profession of God and his glory excuses not such workers from real Atheism:
These very works being denials both of Gods knowledge and providence. Let us
not be too secure; whilst we are totally bent upon exclusion of Popery, another
Enemy proves as dangerous. What is it that has robbed us of our friends and
estates? But Atheism. What is it that has shed the blood of so many
innocents, and under the cloak of a pretended Reformation, has Triumph't in
the disturbance of our peace, and the ruins of our Kingdoms, but Atheism?
He, only he has reduced us to these miseries and wrought our woe; that says
in his heart there is no God: and imperiously demands, is there knowledge in
the most high?

As, for those demure pretenses, wherewith they speciously guild their actings;
They are so far from excusing, as they make their Atheism more horrid; and
serve, to render it more perniciously effectual, spreading and contagious;
should men openly profess, They fear not Gods knowledge, they would not have,
so many applauding followers; but now whilst they politiquely, pretend his
service; and yet deny him, in their actings; they endanger many, who look no
farther, then their hypocritical pretenses, to help them on; and to partake of
their sins.

Applic. 1.
That this point may be improved to practice we may lay down these uses.

1. Seriously to examine our own bosoms in this particular; if we firmly
believe, that there is an all seeing eye, and a Divine providence which
searches the most secret corners, and disposes of the most confused actions
of men. Then we may comfortably (in this respect) exempt our selves from the
number, and society of those, whom the Prophet here, describes, to be wicked,
and ungodly.

2. If we at any time, feel some unhappy flashes, such as these: We must
immediately strive to quench, and put them out.

And being that (as the Psalmist here and else where assures us) prosperity is
that great season, wherein such thoughts as these, take heart, grow
presumptuous and assault the soul; fullness often breeding contempt, both of God,
and others. We may hence seasonably learn;

1. Not to murmur at a low estate, which may occasion the happy prevention of
so great a danger.

2. Not, greedily to hunt after these temptations least we, be full and deny
God; and cry who is the Lord? Prove. 30.9.

3. When ever our lot falls into a fat pasture, let us cautiously, preserve our
souls, from being prostituted thereunto; let us in the greatest pressures, look
upon an hand, that providentially disposes of all estates; let us fix our
faith on Gods omnisciency; and then these rising thoughts, will be easily
repress't. To this end.

1. Let us remember, how fully and plainly, Scripture delivers this truth,
Psalm. 139. 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Psalm. 94.9, 10, 11. Heb. 4.

2. Let us observe, those strange, and stupendous providence, those eminent
deliverances, which every age, and particulary our last, has been filled with.

Lastly let us, frame our lives so, as may testify, our true owning of Gods
Omnisciency: live, as in his sight, behave our selves, as in his presence, be
frequent in pious, holy, addresses; Which may be a means, of thriving: upon
performance of which there will be little cause, to doubt of a Divine
knowledge, and care, of things below. He knows the way of the righteous; and
if we meditate in his Law; and avoid wicked men's counsels, there will be full
experience of it. Though Lot, be in wicked Sodom, Yet even there he will
experimentally cry; The Lord knows how to deliver the Godly. 2 Pet. 2.9. Every
true Son of Abraham will find God to be a Sun, a shield and exceeding great
reward.

SECTIO II. The second part of the occasion of the Prophets Temptation from
home.
THe occasions from without given from the prosperity and manners of the wicked
men of the Prophets time, His own sad estate and afflictions.
has been discourst of.

It follows now, that we consider That part of the occasion taken by the
Prophet from home, from himself and his own estate. V. 14th. For all the day
long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning.

It is ordinary for good men to suffer.
Which (as you see) conteins a Complaint of his sufferings: wherein is 1.
somewhat general and ordinary. 2. Somewhat extraordinary.

1. That which is ordinary is that he was scourged and plagued, which may be
termed ordinary, it being no strange, or unusual thing, to hear of Godly men's
complaints concerning their sufferings and their groans, under their
afflictions. Jacob tells us, that few, and evil were his days. And Moses
cries, make us glad according to the days wherein thou have afflicted us and
the years wherein we have seen evil. Psalm. 90.15. We may often find good David
mourning like a Turtle, and roaring for the disquietnesse of his heart. Psalm.
38. Disconsolate Job curses his birth and his troubles come before he eats;
and his roarings are poured out like waters. Job 3.24. Our blessed Savior,
has been in an agony, and his Apostles groaned under persecutions, which all
that live Godly must expect. 1. As having some imperfections.
Nor will this put us to wonder if we consider,

1. That the holiest amongst us, are Men partakers of flesh and blood; and
consequently subject to infirmities, wearysome diseases, disquiets, Passions
and discontents.

2. As members of the Commonwealth; They have their share in the troubles and
changes thereof. 2. As members of a Commonwealth.
The best compacted Kingdom, is but a great body, which has its sickness and
distempers; sometimes height of prosperity breeds too many humors which vent
them selves in civil discords. Sometimes storms from abroad, and invasion of
foreine enemies, bring it to a consumption. In each of which a Divine
providence is active. God either is a Physician, by blood letting and by
administering of bitter potions, curing the distemper of a Commonwealth; or as a
Judge he makes a sinful Kingdom an example of his Justice and a terror to all
Nations. But in all this, Gods servants have their portion of this cup. Oh that
my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep
day, and night, for the slain of the daughter of my people: cries lamenting
Jeremy. Jerem. 9.1. If the Children of Zion swoon in the streets his eyes will
fail, and his bowels be troubled and his liver poured out upon the earth, for
their destruction: Lament. 2.10, 11. They are not only sensibly touched with
their brethrens Calamities, but are personally concerned in those common
afflictions; as being often carried captive with the multitude: Robbed of their
estates and deprived of their lives.

3. As they are holy and righteous, 3. As holy and good, they have many
enemies. 1. Satan.
severed from the World, and it is corruptions for virtues sake, and Christ's
name,

1. They are most liable to Satan's malice which is most eagerly bent against
them. That roaring Lion being chiefly their adversary. 1 Pet. 5.8. He will not
cast out himself whereas they who demolish, and pull down, his black
territories they that by Gods grace, have renounced him, and his works, are
those, against whom, his spite does principally aim. The heavenly Angels do
rejoice, more at the conversion of one sinner, then of many righteous that need
no repentance: and the hellish Spirits more triumph in the ensnarement of one
righteous, then the present possession of many prisoners. Luke. 22.

2. Wicked Men.
2. As good. They have many Enemies, even amongst those of the same nature.
Beware of men, is a frequent caveat, of Christ to his. Math. 10.17. You are not
of the world, therefore the world hates you.

There is a strange antipathy, betwixt the wicked, and the righteous, but it is
more desperate, on that side then this: These, hate the Vices, separate from
them, and reprove them; but wish well to the Persons; and pray, and endeavor
their reformation; whereas wicked men hate goodness it self; and for it the
persons of the righteous. And the more, because their holiness, proves a foil
to them; and a shame to their deformities, Wisd. 2. Thus the Pharisees, hated
Christ, because he was so good, and they so evil: if Cain become poor Abels,
Murderer, it is, because his own works were evil and his Brothers good, 1 John 3.12.

4. These, though regenerate, and sanctified. Yet the sanctification is not
full, perfect, and absolute for degrees: they carry flesh, and blood about
them, and are subject to be tempted, fall, and sin; and hence comes
chastisments and troubles.

1. From the reflect disquiet, of their own consciences; for as upon the
fracture of a joint, the pain proves exquisite; so, when an even upright,
heart, is transported, and tempted, to an unlawful act: no horror, sorrow,
remorse, and trouble like his: whilst other men can carry their sins easily.
This proves to Him, a burden, to heavy to sustein; whilst others, can
lascivously revell it, and riot with jollity; every day run into deboistnesse;
The being once overtaken, proves a trouble to a righteous Noah. If upright
David fall into the unhappy murder of Vriah, how many sad thoughts, how many
sighs, and what a deluge of tears it cost him is evident. And the very fear of
these afterclaps of disquiet, is, They are chastis'd of God as his Children.
and ought to be, a seasonable Caveat, to all Good men; for a wise and a wary
behavior.

But secondly, this is not all: If Gods servant wilfully transgress; he will
chastise, and correct him: and not let him go without a scourge, being a
testimony of his love, Heh. 12.5, 6, 78. This David is an eminent example of,
he no sooner kills Vriah but he smarts for it: His child dies, His Son Amon is
slain, and Absolon rebels, His Wives, are openly abused: and he himself, is
in danger of loosing his Crown: and the reason of all, is, because thou have
despised me, 2 Samuel 19.9. And made the Enemy to blaspheme: They that open
blasphemous mouths, by their own wicked actions; may, very well fear, that the
greatest presumption he can have upon his election, or Adoption, cannot stop,
or prevent, his chastisement.

As for the reasons, why, and how, it comes to pass, usually, that good men,
are thus chastis'd, I shall not stand upon many: The very frame of the Covenant
of grace sufficiently bespeaks it. For 1. the promises, are with this Mixture;
and presented as it were, with this condition. Mark. 10. With tribulation. v.
30. 2. Amongst the precepts are commands of patience. Luke 12. Heb. 10. Some of
fortitude, and putting on the whole armor of God. Ephesians. 6. All which import
the occasions of the exercise of these and the like virtues in times of danger
and trouble.

Thus it is no strange matter for a David to be plagued and scourged: but that
he should feel these strokes all the day long and every morning; This seems
somewhat extraordinary: not unlike his other complaint day and night thy hand
was heavy upon me. Psalm. 32.4. And to Jobs restless condition what is man,
that thou should try him every moment? Job 7.18. And to the Apostles, always
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus. 2 Cor. 4.10. All which
may seem more then common.

For although every good Man has his share of chastisment, yet ordinarily it
is with vicissitudes and some interposed times of comfort and refreshment. Our
Maker knows best the strength and temperature of our nature; and as our
spiritual father in Christ, knows the frame and disposition of a regenerate
soul; some to be of less, some of more able constitutions, hence he is pleased
to suffer some to be longer under a burden; as knowing both their strength, and
the power of his grace: as was answered of Paul. 2 Cor. 12. to whom upon his
desire of the removal of a temptation, it was returned that Gods grace was
sufficient for him, etc. And for others, the rod of the wicked shall not
always rest upon the lot of the righteous. Psalm. 125.3.

Uses.
From hence it may be concluded. 1. That the full contentment of holy good men,
is not attainable in this life: and therefore it may not be looked for here. it
being as Christ's Kingdom is, not of this World.

2. That God is manifested a Savior and deliverer of men more in his Church
and amongst the faithful, then in all the World besides. True it is,
providence, yea saving providence, every where breaks out both by Sea and Land.
Psalm. 107. But a confluence of storms, and heaps of evils gather in the
Church; and good men are liable to afflictions as Men, as parts of a
Commonwealth, as good men: out of all which variety of troubles God delivers
them; and these having more need, are more specially saved.

V. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain and washed my hands in
Innocence.

We have run through that part of the occasion, The Prophets Manners described.
Piety and Innocence.
when offense is taken from home. There remains now one thing more which
aggravates the occasion and offense taken: and this is a description of the
life, Manners and course of the Prophet. As his estate is described directly
different from the condition of others. They in prosperity, free from labor
and plagues; and himself subject to a daily scourge and chastisement: so here
does he represent his course of Life; as directly contrary to theirs and their
Manners.

They were 1. Impious and Irreligious toward God. 2. Violent oppressors and
unjust toward men. But he unlike to them was. 1. Pious and Religeously served
God: which he expresses by this phrase, I have cleansed my heart. 2. He was
just and righteous toward men. He washed his hands in Innocence: Thus their
high looked fortunes could not make him, according to the fawning, servile,
custom of the World, comply with them: nor was he moved by their pernicious
example: He still keeps the way, clean contrary to theirs; and both in Manners
and disposition toward God and man. He was as unlike as light to darkness; a
beauty to a Black-moor; as good to evil.

But to descend to particulars: The Prophet here describes his Religion, True
piety consists in cleansing of the heart.
and piety toward God by the cleansing of his heart: and we may receive it as
a truth, That the truest piety and devotion is and consists in the cleansing of
the heart. The Greek, renders it (...), I have made perfect, and upright my
heart. The Hebrew I have purified it.

And by this of a pure, upright, perfect heart; true piety toward God is often
expressed. Thus good David's Religion to his God is intimated by a perfect
heart; and Solomon's Idolatry (contrary thereto) by the turning away of his
heart. It is Asa's praise, that his heart was perfect all his days: 2 Chronicles.
15.17. And create in me a clean heart; is the request of David's prayer. Psalm.
51. And the full conversion to Gods service is included in the purifying of the
heart. Ast. 15.8, 9. The reason of this expression may be worth the inquiry, for

1. We cannot rationally conceive that God in acts of Religion requires the
heart more then in acts of righteousness toward Man: for as he forbids
profane, irreligious thoughts against himself; so does he prohibit all
pernicious plots and devices all malicious thoughts and evil Counsels which
may prejudice our neighbor. Beware that there be not a thought in thy wicked
heart against thy poor Brother, is an often repeated precept. Deuteronomy. 15.6.
Devise not evil against thy neighbor is the wise man's advice. Proverbs 3.29.
And has a woe denounc't Micah. 2.1. against it.

Nor secondly can the reason be that the heart when clean will yield cleerer
streams of devotion; for this holds equally true in matters of righteousness
too, for where the root is sound and the tree good; Justice, compassion,
goodness and righteousness toward Man will be the happy fruit of it. Liberal
things will issue from a liberal heart.

But positively the reasons are. 1. Because the sin of Irreligion and
Profaneness; Why piety is expressed by cleansing of the heart. 1. Reas.
(which the Prophet before spoke of and mentioned in a wicked Man,) is
principally seated in the heart, gives a deadly tincture to it and desires not
much to show it self further.

For our observation may inform us: That Atheism, (though too common and
ordinary a sin,) yet is very much ashamed of it self; and unless passion or
prosperity so far transport the soul, as to give a vent unto it: (as it did in
these men) it will be loath to appear in the eyes, or approach the ears of
Men; the prophanest spirit scarce desires to be known and noted for a person of
that black temper an Irreligious Atheist. His denial of a providence will be in
his heart. Psalm. 10.21. And the fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
The singularity of this sin which the rouling heaven, and the silent earth, the
hosts of both, the unanimous consent of all Nations; (though never so much over
grown with Barbarism and wildenesse) do fully condemn; the common
detestation of Atheists; (if known,) and the severe Law's against blasphemy,
force them so far to repress themselves, as to mask their thoughts from
common notice: that rather than they will seem so, they will speciously pretend
Religion to cloak this malignity and venom.

The Prophet therefore in opposition to these and to testify how far he was
from their temper, expresses the Religious integrity of the soul toward God by
the cleansing of the heart: It being impossible for him to be an Atheist whose
complexion is so innocent, whose heart is clean.

2. It is very observable that there is a difference between acts of Piety and
acts of righteousness; both in the matter and manner of acceptance by those to
whom they are directed.

For outward acts of Justice toward men are counted fully satisfactory to
humane Laws; are accepted for good; yea and are rewarded too, be the heart,
what it will; Though it be full of malice and venom. Man's Law reaches no
further then to an outward conformity of just dealing abroad: nor can man
himself further judge of the heart, then by the outward action; but rests
contented therewith.

But in our demeanor toward God and in that which concerns his worship, it
comes more home. His Law is spiritual; and his all seeing eye reaches the most
inward disposition of the heart as he assures Samuel 1 Samuel 16.7.

And therefore be the outward deportment never so fair; the words never so
Religious, and full of holy Scripture phrases; though the tongue be never so
demure; yet if the heart look awry; if that be not upright, the service is not
accepted by God: but is owned for nothing but hypocrisy and abomination. The
inwards of the beast was the best part of the legal sacrifices; and my Son give
me thine heart, is a known postulation. A lip honor tendered without the heart
is rejected by God; and disapproved with detestation. Isay. 29.13, 14. He that
sets up his Idols in his heart, though he come to the Prophet, yet must he
expect to be answered according to the Idols of his heart. Ezekiel. 14.14. Though
the Israelites may gravely come and sit beforre God as his people and applaud
what they hear; yet if their heart be absent or awry; they shall know that a
Prophet has been among them, and by experience of my dissacceptance they shall
find that a Prophet has been contemned by them.

From all which it may be gathered, why Piety and a Religious service of God is
expressed by the cleansing of the heart. A practical improvement

1. To look to the substance of our Piety.
Out of the premises there appears ground sufficient for home examination; and
to discern whether we belong to this wicked tribe. The Prophet here openly
declares himself Religious, in opposition to others; and it concerns us to
approve our selves like unto him; and really to be ( what the cleansing of the
heart imports) Piously zealous in Gods service and resolved to be his. This is
that which good Joshua protests in the face of all Israel, but as for me and my
house we will serve the Lord Josh. 24. verse. 15. This good David earnestly
exhorts Solomon to 1 Chronicles. 28.19.

And for incitements thereunto, in these Irreligious desperate times let us
consider.

God is most worthy of all Religious worship: the four and twenty elders
profession. Revel. 4.70. ought to be heartily ours. Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive glory and honor, and power, he is worthy to be known as the most full
and highest truth; worthy of obedience as the most righteous Law giver: worthy
of our love as the chiefest good; worthy of our fear, as most powerful; worthy
of our confidence and hope as most faithful; in a word, there is not one
faculty of our souls, or one motion of our affections, which may not fully
spend it self in a Religious flame upon God; upon the most transcendent and
most deserving object.

this is no more, or less then our duty, even founded in our nature and being.
What ever we are or have flows from him; and therefore to serve and
Religiously worship him the Law of Nature and reason obliges us unto.

be in vain. 1 Cor. 15. He that requires our belief has proclaimed himself
rewarder of them that seek him. Heb. 11.6. The promises made to Godliness are
eminently high and precious; both of this life and of that which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. Whilst the despisers of him escape not his hand, Who renders
vengeance to them, that know not God.

To look to the manner of our piety.
As we must carefully eye the substance of our piety, so the Manner claims our
care: our Religion is to be cordial; and Piety expressed in the service of the
heart. The Poet observing wicked men's golden denaries, rich presents offered to
God, derides all their splendid offerings and affirms that a pure honest heart
makes the tender of a little wheat more acceptable.

Compositum jus fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto
Hoc cedo ut admoveam templis and far litabo.
To worship God in Spirit and in truth is our Saviors advice: Joh. 4.24. Our
hearts must be purified if we intend comfortably to draw nigh unto God. Jam.
4.8, This is that which the promises do press and urge; if no sacrifice smell
sweet, no prayers or outward performances be acceptable without a clean heart;
we may safely conclude that so necessary a frame, and so cordial a disposition
is of highest concernment to our souls.

And whereas it may seem a piece of presumption in David to affirm that he had
cleansed his heart; and too much to exhort men, Object.
to this work being beyond their reach and the work of God.

It may be returned. 1. Answ.
That this act we are plainly exhorted unto. Circumcise your hearts; make you a
new heart; and a new spirit; purify your hearts, are often the burdens of the
Prophets and Apostles advices.

2. That God do that which we are advised unto is no contrariety. 1. There are
means appointed for this work by him. 2. There is an assistance of grace that
works to will and to do, and therefore may be attributed to God. Man's acting by
the assistance of grace and his making use of the designed means, is his
work, and so attributed to him.

And therefore an exhortation to stir up this grace and to use the means of
cleansing the heart may very much concern Man, and toward the attainement of
a sincere spirit it may very much conduce if we 1. Set God before our eyes, and
our selves in his sight; with full persuasion that he is the searcher of
hearts; and that none of those hidden closets are reserved from his knowledge.
Secondly, if we eradicate our headstrong, known and most pleasing corruptions;
for when these are, we shall quickly be clean. Thirdly, if we carefully attend
upon that word which has a cleansing quality. Psalm. 119.6, 10, 11. Fourthly, a
frequent recourse to the Father of Spirits, making it with good David our
earnest request; create in me a clean heart O God and renew a right Spirit
within me. Psalm. 51.10.

The first part of David's profession, his Religious piety toward God, thus
dispatched: The second part follows which conteines a profession of his
Innocence and righteousness toward Men. The wicked, prosperous men he
described, were violent oppressors: but he washed his hands in innocence.

(...)
The Hebrew word, signifies Purity; and is frequently used to express this part
and species of Purity, which is Innocence opposed to wrong done unto Men. Thus
Jonah. 1.14. Lay not upon us (...) Innocent blood, Innocence is described by
washing of the hands and why?
and Jerem. 2.34. In thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of poor (...)
Innocent.

This kind of wrong is attibuted to the hand, not as if it stained and defiled
that part alone: for as this sin streams from within; so it defiles and makes
common the whole Man. Mat. 15.29.30. but because the hand is the most active
and visible Instrument in the execution of this sin.

This phrase of washing hands, is elsewhere made use of to testify Innocence.
Thus Psalm. 26.6. I will wash my hands in Innocence; The ground of which may
be, that legal purifications were much performed by washings: but especially
it was an appointed ceremony for Elders and Judges to testify their Innocence
and guiltlessnesse by, Deuteronomy. 21.6. and it is obvious in humane writers, how
frequent the heathen were in their lustrations (those ceremonies of purging
sins) by water, -- puram circumtulit undam
lustravitque viros --
From hence likely the Popish Holy water. Virg. Aenead. lib. 6.
Thus Pilate, (either having borrowed this ceremony from the Jews he converst
with; or from his fellow Heathens,) took water and washed his hands to clear
his Innocence Math. 27.24. The like ridiculous action the Poet seems to put a
jeere upon Heu nimium faciles, qui turpia crimina caedis,
Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua.


This being premised, the hands are defiled, How the Hands may be defiled?
either 1. by receiving a reward against the Innocent, as the phrase is Psalm.
15.5. 2. By taking away wrongfully that which is another. The Guilt of the
former is contracted, when Judges, or others, for a bribe and reward pervert
Justice; Justifying the wicked for a reward, and taking away the righteousness
of the righteous from him Isay. 5.23. Mic. 3.11. Mich. 7.3. Thus Judas betrayed
Innocent blood for a little money, Math. 27. and Balaam loved the ways of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. The acceptance of a Bribe may seem a low
offense, because That which is given comes voluntarily, yet we may still find
it reckoned by God amongst the crying sins. In thee have they taken gifts to
shed blood is one of the chief in the catalogue of Jerusalems sins; Ezekiel.
22.11. It carries an heavy curse along with it, cursed be he that takes a
reward to slay an innocent person, Deuteronomy. 27.25. and the Prophet Amos assures us
Amos. 5.12. It is a mighty sin.

2. The hands are defiled by unjust taking or detaining. When they take away
the goods, Possessions, lives or blood of others; Isa. 5.

When therefore the Prophet professes that he had cleansed his hands; The sum
is, That he had not received bribes to prejudice the state or cause of innocent
men; That he was free from unlawful gain extortion and violence, that he
entertained no stolen goods in his house, nor did any man's blood, lie at his
door. he washed his hands in Innocence.

Innocence full of comfort and Goodness.
And well might the Prophet record this as no mean part of his righteousness.
For

1. This has been cheerfully owned by Gods servants, as their integrity. This
Moses openly rejoices in: And afflicted Job remembers with comfort Job.
29.12.13. etc. Good David seems every where in an high contentment of spirit,
to record his Innocence in this case in a kind of Triumph ore the wickedness
of others.

And surely however for the present, Balaams unrighteous ways may seem
pleasing: and goods heapt up by rapine and extortion, seem gain; yet one time
or other they will lie heavy upon the soul, and raise such tempests, as cannot
easily be allayed; and heighten such troubles and disquiets of conscience as
are tormenting and may prove uncurable. We find poor David, Psalm. 51. in an
heavy condition, upon his injurious acting with Vriah; and Judas running rather
to an halter then enduring the flashes of his conscience.

Though men may for a while sport themselves in the undoing of others, and
please themselves in their unjust possessions; yet if once their drowzy
consciences awake they may find an Hell (even in this life) in their bosoms;
when their horrid violences appear in their own colors; when those streams
of blood they have waded through to their usurpations; when the groans of
devoured widows and undon Orphans and the ruins of a flourishing Kingdom
present themselves before their eyes: whilst an Innocent soul speaks nothing
but comfort, peace and content. -- hic murus abeneus esto -- nil conscire sibi;
the greatest confusions abroad cannot terrify him to a disorder within.

And if we take a view of those many fountains in an innocent conscience,
whence this cheerfulness and comfort may flow; this part of Righteousness may
be very heartily commended to us.

1. The first comfort of Innocence.
Innocence cheers it self with conscience of correspondency to the Law of
Reason and God.

Nature has not given to man any one Instrument of violence. The Lion is armed
with its Paw; the Dog with ravenous teeth; the Boar has his tuskes, and the
Bull his horns, whilst man is framed without any such instrument of
mischief; and therefore may easily conclude, that he was not borne for such
violent courses; It is malice not nature; sin not the creation that makes man
harmefull to others. His Nature and reason tells him, He would not be oppress't
or hurt; and the same reason dictates unto him He must not do to others, what
he would not have done to himself.

To fortify all this, Religion opens it self in full direct precepts of
Innocence. The flood is scarce off the first world when the eating of the
beasts blood is prohibited, as being the life of the beasts, Genesis 9.4. If so
much humanity is to be used toward them, man may expect more: and if their
blood be not to be eaten; much less is man's blood to be shed. And what else
did those other Prohibitions of not killing the dam with the young, of not
seething the Kid in the mothers milk; of not muzling the Ox that trod the
corn; what did these import? but how free and Innocent men ought to be from
doing mischeife. And as for the Positive commands, given by Moses and the
Prophets in this kind; they are both many and clear Exodus 22.21, 22. Zach.
7.19. and those of Christ in his Gospel, are open and most strict and severe.
We must not only, not do ill, but even not resist it by repaying it. Mat. 5.39.
Though we may be as wise as serpents, yet we must be as Innocent as Doves Mat.
10.16. Though Wisdom care and circumspection be not denied us; yet still that
wisdom is to be preserved which St James describes chap. 3.17. Peaceable,
Meek, gentle, easy to be entreated. The Evangelists word whereby he expresses
Christ's meaning is suitable to the Apostle's Romans 16.19. Phil. 2.15. (...)
without horns.

This true Reghteousnesse then being substantially consonant to the Law of God
and Reason; and the soul reflecting upon it self and its conformity thereunto,
there does arise in the soul a peaceable conscience, and cheerful warmeth of
well doing; which fills all parts with harmony and rest.

Secondly, As innocence cheeres it self in its correspondency to the Law of
nature, and God; so it has the conscience of being like unto Christ who was
harmless Heb. 7.26. in whose mouth no guile was found. 1 Pet. 2.22.

Thirdly Innocence assures a man, that he is free and not under those terrible
Judgments, which God has peremptorily denounced, and severely executed
against wrongfully mischievous men. This the old world perished for; and Ahab
was punished, and thousand others smarted for. Nor does Innocence apprehend
only an exemption from Punishment; but even concludes it self under the
promises of Gods favor, of dwelling in his Tabernacle Psalm. 5. verse. 21. of
being his child, Math. 5.

Fourthly, Amongst those many evils which attend upon in justice, it is one,
that guilty hands can never tender an offering acceptable to God. I will not
hear; their hands are full of Blood. Isa. 1.15. Sacrifice is in vain unless
there be made a reconciliation first, Math. 5.24. and the most solemn fast is
despised if it be for strife Isa. 58.9. David will wash his hands in innocence
before he compasses Gods Altar Psalm. 26.5. And we find Piety and innocence,
the cleansing of the hand and heart often joined together.

As therefore a greater discontent cannot befall any, then to find his service
disaccepted, (this forced Cain to his bloody resolutions against his Brother,
Genesis 4.) so it follows that it is an high piece of comfort, for man to know
that his Prayers will be heard of God; and that he will accept of his religious
service?

Helps to keep innocence.
Thus you see Innocence is no matter of Indifferency, all Laws oblige unto it:
and (that we may the better preserve that which is so little regarded in these
times of violence, Injury, and oppression.) we may accept of these helps in
the keeping of it.

1. We must labor to repress our domineering Passions, of Anger and Revenge.
-- Qui non moderabitur Irae, infectum volet esse dolor, quod suaserat, and
men's, A Revengefull heart, and a greedy vindicative hand cannot be innocent.

2. We must deny our selves and those Vanities which come in competition with
an innocence; how many in opposition to Christ's doctrine pretend Honor and
Reputation for duells? It is but a poor honor, that abjures Christianity; and
a deceitful reputation that makes a man renounce his part in Christ which we
may conclude him guilty of, who to promote a swelling tumor, to salve somewhat
(he calls credit) can shed his brothers blood.

3. Let us modestly acquiesce in our bounds, contentedly triumphing in our food
and raiment; for covetousness (as it is the root of all evil so) it makes man
more ravenous to his neighbor. and sharpens him for the prey; the most
unnatural fightings are heightened by these lusts; and if once men desire to
Have, likely they will kill, Jam. 4.1, 2, 3. Whereas a sober, Christian,
contented mind will not basely seek to wrong his neighbor; but preserves his
hands in innocence, that so the blood of Christ may wash him from all his sins.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 3 For I was envious at the foolish when I saw the prosperity of the
wicked.

V. 13. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain.

V. 15. If I should speak thus I should offend against the generation of thy
children.


CONTENTS.
The Temptation of the Prophet: and the sin he was almost or actually fallen
into. 1. Envy. The nature thereof foolish and unreasonable. 2. To think
religion vain or unprofitable: Is foolish and unreasonable. This opinion robs
us of virtue and true comfort. Times of calamity subject to this temptation.
Means to fortify our faith, Gods being a Rewarder.

David's Recovery in part, That which put him to a stand laid down. To think
Religion vain is dangerous in it self, and injurious to gods Children.

The fear of giving scandal and offense ought to keep from heresies and evil
actions: The benefits of mutual condescension: Rules concerning scandal, in
matters necessary and things indifferent: The Prophets ingenuity and wisdom
toward his own satisfaction. The benefits of Predeliberation: difficulty of
answering objections will not excuse the conclusion against fundamental
truths, which are to be stuck to against all objections: Satisfaction of doubts
is had by clearing the understanding and Judgment. Reformation by violence
uneffectuall. Three things make men capable of being taught of God. Gods
sanctuary a place of satisfaction where that was and is now. Places of worship
to be honored.

SECT. I.
THE occasion of the offense taken by the Prophet has been dispatched; and we
found that it fully consisted and was made up of two things: 1. The wickeds
prosperity notwithstanding their corrupt and impious Manners. and 2. His own
troubles, notwithstanding his piety and Innocence. Both these (I say) concurred
to make up the offense taken. He would not be offended at their Prosperity, if
he had been prosperous too: nor at their manners had he been like to them. His
own good courses had not given him sinister thoughts, had they freed him from
distress. nor his troubles, had his courses been such as theirs; But to see
them wicked and prosper, Himself righteous and scourged, this amazed, tempted
and offended him. The temptation it self first sin envy.


The Temptation it self now follows; the sins and miscarriages which he fell
into, or was like to be overwhelmed withal, claim our next thoughts.

The 1. that appears is envy, I was envious at the foolish.

The rational Particle (for) I had well nigh slipped, For I was envious
concludes, what esteem he had of envy, as of a slip; and may afford us this
observation.

That Envy wherever it is harbored, is a fall and a bruising sin. It might be
a sufficient evincement of this truth, to produce that divine Law wherein it is
prohibited. Be not envious against the workers of Iniquity Ps. 37.1. is often
required; and this sin, the Saints still endeavored carefully to avoid. But
that its corruption may be more discernible: It may not be amiss to dissect
and open it by parts.

This Caution may be only premised, That whereas in envy there is the rising
of the heart with displeasure: This absolutely and abstractedly taken, is not
the sin thereof, because there may be a rising of the heart, and this
accompanied with anger and displeasure, with Hatred and Grief, and yet no sin.

Hence it is that the Hebrew word (...) and the Greek (...) is often taken in man
for a virtue, (...) Covet earnestly or be zealous of the best gifts 1 Cor.
12.31. 1 Cor. 12. verse. 31.
and is sometimes attributed to God I am a Jealous God: The water and its
muddinesse are to be differenc't and the motion of a displeasing heart is to be
severed from its corruption, which makes up envy. Which being premised we may
affirm,

That envy is a fretfull displeasure of the heart, for some good that is in
another. The object of envy is Virtue, Knowledge, Courage, or Prosperity I was
envious at the prosperity etc. Prosperity is good; even that of wicked men
(though abused by them) is good to, as being an effect, and act of the
influence of a divine Providence; that heart therefore cannot but be corrupt
which rises against good things, seeing that that which is good is the proper
object of love and desire.

Envy betrays its baseness in spightfully looking at that good which a man
wants himself. I was plagued and scourged therefore was I envious etc. by this
we grudge that good to another, which we do not enjoy our selves. From these
two particulars I cannot (though but by the way) but lay down these two
conclusions.

1. That God is no way capable of envy, nor can it be any way attributed to
him. 1. Because he is most holy and cannot dislike any thing that is Good or
from himself, from whom every good and perfect gift proceeds Jam. 1.17. 2.
because he being a most absolute and perfect alsufficiency in himself, wants
nothing that is good.

2. Conclus. That envy for the most part lodges in Inferiors against
Superiors, in fools against wisemen; cowards against the valiant; Ignorance,
against learning; Poor against Rich; Subjects against Magistrates and
consequently is a sin against the fifth Commandment.

3. Reason which evidenceth the folly of this sin persons of Men. This may be
clear if we consider 1. That the Envious man wishes that his Brother had not
or were not partaker of the good things which he envies him for. 2. It excites
man to acts of enmity against his brother; To prejudice, to disparage, to
disgrace him. This moved Cain to play the Butcher, Genesis 4. and the Patriarchs
to sell poor Joseph Genesis 37.11. Act. 7.9. It is the envious man that drops
Tares where the wheat was sown; This eggd the Pharisees against Christ, who
knew that for envy they had delivered him. That Charity which envyeth not 1
Cor. 13.4. is broken by this sin, for where envy and strife is, there is
confusion and every evil work. Ja. 3. v. 16.

Let us therefore when ever we find any motion to this sin immediately
repress it, Envy foolish and Vreasonable.
and suddenly stifle it in the cradle; and to this end we may take this one
Argument more which opens its sinfullnesse, and discovers the means to meet
with this sin, which is this

My feet were almost gone; (says the Prophet) for I was envious. Hence
(suitably to the exposition made of these words,)

Envy is a passion without Judgment, and Understanding, violent and
Unreasonable, and therefore ought to be banished from our souls.

1. Men of Low inferior quality as has been formerly mentioned, are subject to
it. That which the Poet concludes of revenge, may suit with this Nempe hoc
Indocti, and quorum flagrantia, nullis,
Aut saltem levibus, videas praecordia causis.
Envy slays the silly one cries Job. 5.2. The Hebrew (...) signifies a
simple, deluded, foolish man; the Greek has it (...) deceived, Aq. (...) one
easily to be caught with any bait, Symmach. (...) a very fool.

2. Let any man consult with reason and he will find there little ground for
envy: for That for which we cast an envious eye at our Brother may be good in
our esteem only, not really in it self so; then there is no true cause, but a
mere delusion.

2. But supposing it good in it self, then it is either such as is given him
without his Acquisition; (as Indowments of nature, of Body, or Mind, of estate;
as fortunes of a great Inheritance; Nobility and honor descended from long,
glorious Ancestors, or spiritual gifts) or they are such as he has acquired
by his own Industry and Care.

In the former, envy is unreasonable, because it involves a displeasure against
Providence which dispenses gifts according to pleasure; and is it just that
man's eye should be evil because Gods hand is liberal? is it rational for us
to love him the less merely because he has those good qualities, for which we
ought to love him more.

In the latter sort they are things temporal as Honor, Riches, Preferment
etc. or gifts and graces of the soul; which are habitual as knowledge, virtue,
Temperance, patience etc.

Things Temporal are gotten Justly, or unjustly, if unjustly he has more need
of Pity then envy, Saint James his words well suiting with Him, in that
condition. Go to now ye rich men weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. Your Riches are corrupted and your Garments moth-eaten, your
gold and silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against
you and shall eat your flesh as it were fire: ye have heaped treasures
together for the last days, James chap. 5. verse. 1, 2, 3.

If Justly; yet we may remember how many troubles, cares and sorrows attend an
high great estate. Solomon throws all away with a This also is vanity and
vexation of spirit.

Lastly if we envy a man for his habitual acquired parts of Learning,
Wisdom, Justice, Humility, etc. by that very act we condemn ourselves, for
were we not either idle or wicked we might have attained the like, and surely a
fac tu similiter, were a more seosonable advice; and a turning of envy into an
imitation of his virtues.

The second sin to think Religion vain.
The second sin the Prophet was tempted unto, was to say and think That his
religion and Innocence were vain and to no purpose.

Men are apt to come to this height. What is the Almighty that we should serve
him? Job. 21.14, 15. Wherefore have we fasted and thou see not? Is. 58.2, 3.
Ye have said it is vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept
his ordinances; and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of hosts?
and now we call the proud happy, yea they that work wickedness are set up, yea
they that Tempt God are often delivered. Malach. 3.15. This then was the maine
temptation here, to think (and conclude in his heart) That all his devotion and
service of God, all his righteousness, and Justice toward man was Vain;
without any Profit for the present, or expectation for the future.

That the danger of this Temptation, and the greatness of this sin may
appear, we may observe

1. That the Prophet calls this a Species of the failing of his steps, and the
sliding of his feet. And well might he term it so; for without great Ignorance
and blindness of the understanding, without high corruption of Judgment and
predominancy of error and passion, it cannot be thought or said that Religion
and obedience to God is vain. For of such men who are infected with these
thoughts (and it is to be feared too many in these times have yielded thereto)
and been carried away therewith, I would fairly and rationally demand whether
they do firmly believe there is a God, or not?

1. If they do not; they are not worthy of any rational discourse, as denying
received principles; However for the matter in Question, the strength of this
cause is such, as that they may be convinced, though we should suppose there
were no God, and that the precepts of Religion were the mere Inventions of men.

Let them Imagine with me, That men would, as they are reasonable, wholly bend
themselves to follow these precepts of nature, and reason. That no Magistrate
would use his power, to the Oppression and grieving of his subject. That the
subject would yield all lawful and cheerful obedience, to Authority, and
both concur to strengthen and countenance each other, suppose States would not
for interest, and ambition Incroach upon; or invade each the other. That in
common wealths just Laws might be the rule. That in Families Conjugall love
were preserved; and the mutual duties of Parent and children, Masters and
servants observed.

As for private Persons; That they would abstain from oppressions,
covetousness, and Revenge; doing as they would be done by. That the second
Table of the Moral Law were observantly stuck unto. If (I say) all this (which
is in it self not unimaginable nor carries an impossibility,) were duly
followed, would not mutual love be continued? would not all things turn to
the cheerful support of each other? would not out of this pleasing harmony,
Peace, Plenty and Prosperity arise, as Naturally, necessarily and inevitably,
as light from the sun warmth from fire and fruits from the seasonable
Influences of Heaven. Nay more certainly then health, from the observance of a
tempered diet. for 1. Though a good diet may preserve, from inward distempers,
and diseases, yet it cannot defend from outward Heat, cold and these other
unusual assaults. Whence Justice and Innocence in a Kingdom keeps safe from
all. 2. The Body (upon the contrariety of principles to each other) does
naturally wast; whereas the Principles of Injustice and Innocence, are
consentaneous and subordinate, and being in a lasting prosperity as being
Truths that are immortal.

If these men would but rationally examine from what coast all calamities and
troubles do fly; They might easily find they issue out of division and wars,
Civil and Foreign; and whence do wars? but from those inordinate lusts which
violating and disobeying the law of Justice, act contrary to Nature and reason.

Thus though men should arise to that height, as to deny Providence; yet clear
experience, and undeniable demonstration manifests that it is not in vain, to
cleanse the heart, and wash the hands in Innocence. Nay that this will
exceedingly conduce unto Peace, prosperity, and fulness of all temporal
happiness; it being irrational to but imagine the contrary.

And whereas too many with the Prophet here malecontent; may say that they
disbelieve not that there is a God; but only what profit is there in the
service.

It may be returned. If God be not a Rewarder of them that serve him whether is
it so, because he cannot or will not? He that affirms he cannot; derogates
from his Omnipotency; and so denies what he says he believes: for he cannot
believe a God that denies his power.

He secondly that affirms God will not. 1. Attributes not to God that Justice
and goodness, which many men are endowed with: for Men, commonly in gratitude
love them that are respectfull, and requite good for good; can any in reason or
Justice, entertain meaner thoughts of God?

2. He charges God with breach of promise; for in the same word, where he has
so fully revealed himself; and wherein he commands, holiness and
righteousness, he has openly engaged, to honor them that honor him, to
reward those, that love and fear him. And whatever the thoughts of men are; he
is immutably faithful; and inviolably keeps his promise.

Thus we may perceive how many unreasonable absurdities they fall into, how
grossly they thwart the principles of their own reason and belief; that say,
Religion is in vain, and well may the Prophet in this conceit, acknowledge
himself a fool, and a beast, V. 22. So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as a
beast before thee.

To proceed: we may observe secondly, That the Prophet expresses this
temptation and sin by the notion of a fall, well nigh gone, my steps slipped.

Which in this matter he might well say: For a man that understands not,
becomes like the beast. Psalm. 40.20. He loses himself and turns Brutish,
which in this case two respects make evident. 1. In respect of course of life.
2. Of comfort and content.

For the first: It is observable that man is in his soul (like to the heavens)
ever in motion, and that to profit. There is in him a desire of wel-being which
is ever restless, from the seeking after which he can no more command himself
then a stone rest in the air forgetting it is center. His soul must be still
working out its best profit and advantage.

When therefore his understanding and judgment are so corrupt that he thinks
piety and righteousness is not the way to his profit and happiness; it must
follow that he will zealously endeavor to bring his ends about by the breach
and neglect of all Laws humane and Divine; That he licenciously devote himself
to impiety and injustice; And not stick at any thing right or wrong for his
advantage. And so becomes highly odious to God and injurious and cruel toward
man; and unfit for humane society.

As a man loses himself in his course of Life, by thinking piety and
Innocence vain: So secondly he loses himself in respect of comfort and
content, for by the intervenement of this wild conceit he falls from his best
hopes and most rational comforts. For if in this life only we have hopes we
are most miserable. 1 Cor. 15.19. Although Man injoys what ever the World can
yield; yet he will at length find all experimentally to be but vanity, and his
unsatisfied heart will throw all away with a vexation of Spirit: what comfort
therefore and contentment can survive in him, whose hope can go no further?
Purer souls do know that Innocence of a good conscience and present hopes of
future happiness promised by God, that (in sum) in God and in his word is
man's best comfort which he loses and bereaves himself of, that thinks
Religion vain, and the fear of God unprofitable; and so becomes Brutish indeed
living only by sense and dying without hope.

Thus we may see into how great a sin and dangerous temptation the Prophet had
like to make shipwreck against. And a serious reflection upon this discourse may
animate us to a more then ordinary watch upon our Spirits; to stop the
admission of so desperate monstrous and unreasonable a thought as this is; and
for the greater diligence we may consider that these are the times wherein this
temptation gathers head, and does more boldly make it is assault. If prosperity
ever vouchsafe to reflect upon Religion it will be with some good thoughts; as
that it deserves no less: but Calamity is the time of this temptation; when
the Prophet was scourged and plagued, then he grew into these melancholy
thoughts. And these being dark, clowdy, dismal, confused times; let every
conscientious soul take heed of this dangerous pitfal.

And to this end that our esteem of Piety and Innocence may be the better
fortified.

1. Let us consider the power of God, able to reward. For I know and am
persuaded that he is able. 2 Timothy 1.12.

2. Let us reflect upon his goodness, which if it extend to good and bad.
Math. 6. How peculiarly will it light upon his own?

3. Let us comfortably examine his faithfulness in keeping his promise and
oath. It being Impossible for God to lie. Heb. 6. Heb. 10.

4. Let us reflect upon those many examples of good men, who were wonderfully
blessed for their piety and obedience.

Let us lastly, fix our selves, in a full persuasion; That our labor shall not
be in vain in the Lord. And then we shall be steadfast and unmovable always
abounding in the work of the Lord.

David's recovery.
V. 15. If I say I will speak thus, behold I should offend against the
generation of thy Children.

The dangerous sin and Temptation which the Prophet was like to fall into being
already run through; Now we come to the second part of the Psalm, wherein we
may take a view of those happy means whereby the Prophet, (thus entangled, got
out of these Briars; avoided the sins, and escaped so great a fall, and so
perilous a Temptation.

In which point, Method, and distinction may present unto us these 2.
particulars.

1. That which made him startle, and to be at a stand, so as he durst make no
farther progress into so desperate a thought. 2. That which cleared all mists,
took away all objections, set him on his feet; held, and confirmed him in an
upright walk.

The former (namely that, which checked his loose and evil thoughts) is
contained in the 1. verse. If I say I will speak thus, behold I should offend
against the generation of thy Children.

Of which we shall briefly expound the terms and then proceed to the matter.

1. Thy Children; this is an Apostrophe unto God, and the Children meant here
are his; Those whom in the 1. verse, He termed Israel, of a clean heart.

The ground of which expression is; That amongst those many high titles given
to the people of Israel, this is one which he vouchsafes unto them; that he
calls them his Sons, Children, and first borne, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Isa. 1.2. Exodus
4.22. Hos. 11.1. Hence it is that being the whole Nation was termed so; That
they in that Nation that were truly Religious, were especially honored, with
this title of which the Apostle assures us Romans 9.7, 8.

In the New Testament, this Prerogative is every where more frequently
mentioned; and the grounds, and reasons thereof more fully, plainly, and
distinctly declared. As 1. that the foundation of men's being the Children of
God, is Christ Jesus, the only begotten Son of God. Romans 8. 1 John 3.8. 2. For
the seed of this regeneration, that is the word, as the Apostle tells us 1 Pet.
1.23. Being borne again not of corruptible seed, but of the incorruptible, by
the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. 3. The means on our part is
Baptism and faith in Christ. Joh. 1. Joh. 3. Gal. 3.

2. Generation here is taken for a multitude of men, una eademque aetate
viventibus; contemporary. The Prophet does not ingross Piety to himself alone;
but acknowledges others feared God besides himself. He does not with Elias cry
he was alone; He knew many even then, who deserved that glorious title of Gods
Children, which he robs them not of. Thus good men will not censoriously
ingross all priv'ledges; so as to account few worthy of them but themselves.
Thus though impiety seem in a black cloud to overspread the earth, yet
providence still preserves a remnant to himself who have not bowed to Baal, and
although prosperous iniquities may force them into corners; yet upon all good
oecasions they will come out and testify that they are the Children of God.

3. The word offend signifies in the Hebrew lyingly, (...)
falsely, or perfidiously to deal with, or against. In the Greek translated to
reprobate, reject, despise, or break off from: some translate it to wrong, or
to be injurious.

This being laid down by way of explication: the sum of what is meant may be
this; That which startles the Prophet and staves him off from so desperate a
thought, was the conscience of perfidious dealing and wrong against Gods
Children. Which (in this case) he should have been guilty of, had he persever'd
therein.



To think Religion vain is dangerous and injurious.
1. Obs. The opinion of the vanity of Religion is not only hurtful, and
dangerous to him that entertaines it; but is perfidiously offensive and
injurious unto the Professors of the true Religion, the Children of God.

This may easily be made good if we consider. this opinion does infamously
brand and cast black aspersions on Gods people.

For it alleges: 1. That there is no watchful eye of providence which
protects them; God has forgotten him, there is none to deliver, is that which
they are flouted with. 2. And whereas Pious spirits do spend themselves in
Religions flames, and are wholly intent upon the service in which they employ
the best of their faculties, their richest endeavors and most of their time;
this opinion unravels all, proclaims that their travel is in vain; their
sweaty labors without profis; their sufferings without fruit; Their toilsome
actions without present advantage, or future expectation. In a word it
peremptorily imputes unto them folly, indiscretion and high impertinency; and
makes them the most miserable of all men.

I need not take the pains to wipe off the wildenesse of these aspersions. Gods
power, goodness, and faithfulness, (before discourst of) has already done it
and sufficiently evidenc't the contrary; hence only we may conclude how
worthily detestable men of this opinion are; how near to sinking they are
themselves; and how perfidiously injurious they are to others; and the very
acting of these aspersions is enough to confute them if we accept of the
Apostles kind of arguing. 1 Cor. 15. Where she silences the opinion of such as
denied Christ's resurrection (not unlike that which the Prophet was here like to
fall into) by the absurd, and base imputations cast upon Christ and his
Disciples.

2. This wild opinion is injurious to Gods Children; great rent and separation,
which thereby is made from them. For 1. the entertainers of this opinion do
therein actually cut themselves off from the communion of saints. This heresy
being of that black tincture as that it excludes a man from the Church, and
cuts him off from being a member thereof. Nor is this all; the Church may daily
increase, by an happy addition and conversion of some from without, against
whom this opinion shuts the door; and puts a bar which hinders their entrance:
And as those fainthearted spies which returned with an ill-terrifying report of
the Land of Canaan did highly perplex and discourage the people: so this evil
report of Religion hinders men from it is profession, and for them who naturally
leek their own profit, it will be a sufficient stop to assure them; (as this
belying opinion does) That they shall get nothing by Christianity.

3. This desperate heresy is injurious, because it throws a malicious
stumbling block before Gods Children; and a just rock of offense.

Vid Chrysostom. Hom. 38. in 11. Matthew. p. 376.
For though it should be supposed that it did not give them a fall: they being
so well settled as beyond their deceit: yet that is no thanks to the contriver
of those snares; who notwithstanding that he fails yet he injuriously and
perfidiously deals with them. For as he who mischievously digs a pit and leaves
it open, though men be so wary as that none fall into it; yet does he thereby
wrong the Commonwealth and humane society. If Sheba blow up a rebellious
trumpet though none follow him yet is he a traitor; and brochers of heresy and
Schism, though they should meet with no followers, yet are they heighly
injurious to God and his Church, by their endeavors of corrupting truth, and
of renting the peace and unity of the Church.

But truly if we examine ages past or reflect upon present distempers; We shall
not cast our eyes upon any heresy so gross, or any principles so fanatic;
which have not found entertainment. Evil words will quickly corrupt good
manners. Let us eat and drink for to morrow we must dye, will easily be
received by a corrupt heart. 1 Cor. 15.32. And that once entertained, Christian
Religion will soon be looked upon as unprofitable and the expectation of a
resurrection, will seem a folly. When these men once come to this height, as
with their tail to draw some stars from heaven; when every corner yields them,
ready fomentors of their conceits; and zealous propagators of their pernicious
errors; when truth lies neglected and ill spoken of, when poor silly women are
led captive, when many are unhappily deluded, and fall from their own
stedfastnes by their deceits, we may safely conclude; that no greater injury
can be done, nor any more desperate stumbling block can be laid in the way,
then to draw men's souls to perdition.

From whence we may conclude, that there is high reason, and just ground of
those many serious admonitions given by Christ and his Ambassadors, That such
infectious Heretics, be heartily avoided. Romans 19. 1 Cor. 15. 3 Epist. of
Saint Joh. etc. Were these men only hurtful to themselves they would deserve
some pity; but being so scandalous to the Church, and infectious to others,
men ought not out of pity to them, to endanger themselves.

The second observation which the words afford That the fear of doing wrong and
giving offense to Gods Children should stop and deterr us from broaching any
thing that is truly offensive and prejudicial to the Children of God. The fear
of giving scandal ought to keep us from sin and from broaching Heresy.


This kept off the Prophet from public declaration; and sealed up his lips from
a further broaching of this Heresy: If I should say thus; I should offend
against the generation of thy Children.

Experience tells us of a vast difference in the dispositions of men. For some
(too many) are so mischeivous, that they make choice of what may do most harm:
If they can anger, fret, offend, or hurt others, the means and counsels
thereunto, are delightfully embraced, taken and prosecuted to the full, Atque
ex alienis incommodis sua comparant incommoda. Oppression, in justice, blood,
and war, scandals, and offenses are but a sport to them. Whilst good and
ingenuous men are harmless and innocent and will choose rather to disprofit
themselves and depart from the Rigor of their own right, then offend others.

Rather then Abraham will fall out with Lot, he will give him the choice of the
Land of Canaan, and prefer his choice before his own. Rather then the
strangers that lodged under Lots roof, should suffer any violence, he will
offer his own daughter to the wicked Sodomites. Genesis 19. Christ who was by all
Law free and exempted, would rather pay tribute then offend. Math. 17. And give
up his Innocent life a ransom for many, rather then all mankind should be
shipwrackt, and come short of the glory of God.

Saint Paul longingly desires to please all men not seeking his own profit. 1
Cor. 10.33. And rather then offend his brother he professes he will never eat
flesh. 1 Cor. 8.13. And before he would prove a burden to the Church, he will
forgo that right which he and other Ministers might have claimed, to require a
petty temporal maintenance from them, that were made partakers of spirituals;
choosing rather to fare hard, and condescending to work with his own hands
rather then to be burdensome to them. 1 Cor. 9.15.19.21.22. Act. 20.34. Such
modest, charitable examples as these, are most fit for our imitation: an awful
respect love and reverence, a brotherly condescension to one another
infirmities is most suitable to Christianity and ought willingly to be embraced
by us, The benefits of mutual condescensions.
for these reasons

1. Because that Christian charity which we must necessarily cloth our selves
with strictly enjoins no less then this 1 Cor. 13.

2. Because this conscientious care and respect of the Brethren, redoun'ds to
our own benefit and advantage, and that two ways.

1. It makes others to be a respectfull of us. sheep and tame hurtlesse
creatures feed most securely; and Innocent, meek, condescending Spirits live
at greatest ease. Who is he that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? 1 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. He seldom wants friends, who has ready
hands to supply others necessities. They that contain themselves from doing
wrong, best secure themselves from suffering it; whilst pride, contempt,
injuries and oppression, stir up anger and revenge, which lies not still until
it retaliates and sets all into flames.

3. This saves a man's self from most certain inconveniences, which otherwise
he would fall into; for though a man may hurt himself without harming others;
yet certainly no man can injure or offend his Brother; but he both must and
will by some act disparage himself. This though it be not much believed yet
experience gives it credit.

Be the injury what it will, oppression by open violence, or a more subtle
fraud; be it infamies and disgraces, cast upon other men; whether it be the
licentious broaching of strange Heresies, the giving of ill example, a fly
throwing of blocks, and scandalls in the way: what ever it be, it will in event
and upshot prove like a stone flung against a Rock bound back and wound him
that threw it.

Had not the Prophet here, condescended to a consideration of others, his feet
had slipped into an irrecoverable pit; and a sore temptation had utterly
overwhelmed him: but now the care of others kept him from, both the sin and the
danger. He that takes heed in this, may save himself and others, 1 Timothy 4.16.
whilst they by whom truth is ill spoken of; who make Merchandise of men's souls;
bring upon themselves swift destruction. 2 Pet. 2.3.4.

3. The conditions of the Persons mentioned, both justifies and requires, that
this respect be had of them; They are the Children of God.

This bespeaks them 1. High and honorably Priviledgd, they have an (...), a
right and power which the greatest earthly nobility cannot pretend unto: the
Person of the meanest in this respect, seeming as it were sacred, and
inviolable, and commands a reverence and awe, as Children of the most high.

The want of this thought, is the ground of disrespect whilst men Judge
according to outward appearance, making an estimate according to the World; too
many casting a scornful eye upon any who lives not in as great superfluities
and wantonness, as themselves. Whereas they, that (with the Prophet) cast their
eye more inwardly upon the generation of Gods Children; they may easily
discern a pearl (though perhaps) immured in get, and may find that within,
which may well keep of any injury or offense.

2. This bespeaks them beloved of God, dear unto him: being Children, they are
received into his household; and more peculiarly resigned up to his care,
tuition, providence and protection. If David highly resented the ill usage of
his Ambassadors by Hanun, how can we expect that God should pass by the
affronts flung upon his Children, whose Angels always behold the face of God.
Math. 18. verse. 10.

Lastly, This must be remembered that the avoiding of giving just offense, is no
matter of indifferency. Men must not think that they are such absolute masters
of themselves, as that they need not care how they displease others, so they
please themselves. For the precepts in this kind are full and peremptory: give
none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of
God. 1 Cor. 10.31. Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours, become a
stumbling block to them that are weak. 1 Cor. 8. verse. 9. Though there be a
Christian liberty purchas't, for us, yet it is ill abusing it to our Brothers
prejudice. Because 1. his conscience is defiled that is by imitation made to
sin: and so brought into danger of perishing v. 11. And secondly because by
wounding a weak conscience, a sin is committed against Christ v. 12. And the
same precept is given, upon the same reasons, Romans 14.13. etc. There is a
peremptory woe denounc't by Christ against those by whom offenses come. Math.
18. verse. 7. And to be drowned with a millstone about his neck is pronunc'd an
easy death for him, who justly offends one of his little ones. Luke 17. verse.
1.2. Scandalous offensive Persons seldom escape severe, and exemplary
punishments: he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment whosoever he be, is
Saint Paul's assurance; Gal. 5.10. Speaking of that false Doctrine, that
hindered the growth of Christianity amongst them. And amongst those over grown
weeds that shall be rooted up at the last day, They that offend shall expect a
visitation. Math. 13.41.

Seeing therefore the precepts, which prohibit our offending others, are so
strict and peremptory, The punishments that attend it so severe and certain,
what remains? But that we frame our lives in a suitable correspondence; and
that we may easily collect our duty out of the premises, these following
derections may help.

1. That we cease to cast odious aspersions upon our Brethren, and to our power
endeavor after a preservation of one another credit and reputation entire and
untoucht.

2. That no dangerous opinion be broached: Though this admonition may seem to
concern Preachers especially; yet since (as these licentious times are) They
presume to Preach who are not sent, they may take along with them this Caveat:
That they add not damnable Heresies to their presumptuous usurpation. It is
more then they can well answer for to intrude into an office they are not
called unto; how will they then appear? When they have by uncouth forms of
unsound, canting expressions made a prey upon the weak sex; and led silly
women captive. Though they may look upon themselves beyond erring, yet if they
reflect upon two things, they may be put in mind that error in them is more
then probable; one is their ignorance of which there is not a greater evidence
then that they keep not within their own bounds. The other is that they run
without their commission. For were their abilities never so high, yet the
defect of that is a just ground that they be given over to strong delusious.

3. It much concerns us to beware of rending the peace of the Church by
faction and Schisms, and to cherish mutual unity and Peace.

4. That we take heed of giving just occasions of scandal and offense, by
opinions, words or actions.

And here I shall crave leave (being that the point of scandal is of high
consequence and of special concernement; and being that some who would clear
themselves, are guilty of it; and some condemn those that are guiltless) to
lay down briefly some rules concerning the doctrine of Scandal. Rules
concerning scandal.


1. Rule: Mere offense given and taken renders not the agent guilty of giving
scandal.] That men fly occasion faulty. 1. Because it is common with wicked
humorists to take snuff and offense at any thing, that crosses their mind.

2. Because good men themselves are subject to Ignorance, and unreasonable
passions often times. Joseph's Brethren are highly incens't against him without
any just cause.

3. Where there is no just ground; the very taking of the offense is a sin.
Thus the Jews by their being causelessly offended at the preaching of the
Gospel and stumbling at that chief corner stone; did contract a guilt upon
themselves. Many there are who have so good an opinion of themselves as that if
they be but displeased; others presently are in the fault, and so measure a
scandal by their own passion which is a deceitful balance; where the ground is
not just he that takes offense, is far more in fault then he that gives the
occasion.

In actions that are good for substance or circumstance, there can be no
scandal or-offence given] Though many be offended at Christ Mar. 6.3. yet that
which he did testified their folly. Melius est ut oreatur scandalum quam ut
veritas relinquatur. says S. Bernard.

But still a convenient circumstance must attend the action: for though the
thing be commanded, yet the manner of doing may spoil amd deforme it.
Affirmative precepts bind with respect to be had to due; Time and Place hence
it is that often times some lawful duties were omitted by some good men, because
they would not give offense. Though Paul earnestly press Christians to use
that part of their liberty, which consists in an exemption from legal
ceremonies yet he circumcised Timotheus.

This Rule may be very serviceable to the case in hand.

As first, in case a truth should be revealed, which seems new; which has not
been received in the Church, nor explained in the Articles thereof, a man must
not presently vent it in the Pulpit; or disturb the Churches Peace; for this
were offensive and would tend to a Rent, but he must modestly expect a
seasonable occasion wherein he may deliver his mind, and open his knowledge:
For where a Church is established, with all things necessary to salvation,
there its Unity and Peace is to be preferred, before a matter of farther
Knowledge; though it be a divine truth. The Apostles Prescription to the
Corinthians ought to be our Pattern 1 Cor. 14.29, 30, 31. where an orderly
Prophesying is commanded, without the interruption of others, and with
submission to the Judgment and spirit of the Prophets.

Secondly, in the delivery of doctrines revealed and established, New, uncouth,
harsh Phrases, or liable to exception, either for novelty or for affinity unto
errors must be avoided. Thus in the doctrine of Justification by faith, such
terms as might seem to take away the necessity of good works, may be well let
go. In the doctrine of the necessity of good works, terms of Merit, of
congruity, condignity; of attributing Justification to charity or Hope may well
be avoided; for though a Scholastic head may fairly expedite himself; and by
his explainall come clearly off; yet the less searching people (not accustomed
to these Phrases; which they hear common in their adversaries mouths, not
being used, to the niceties of a distinction) may stick in the mudd: and cannot
hear those expressions without danger and scandal.

3. Rule. In things and agents simply evil the Though Peter do Christ no harm
yet his very diswasion may be so scandalous, as that Christ may sharply
reprove him, Get thee behind me Satan for thou art an offense unto me, Math.
16.23. This kind of scandal highly receives an aggravation, when (as it too
often happens) Gods Truth is evil spoken of thereby; and others are ensnared to
sin by example and imitation.

4. Rule. In matters merely of their own nature Indifferent though they may
plead an offense given unto them; yet do really themselves give occasion of
scandal and offence] because they thereby oppose the Authority of the Church,
and cross the order and conformity established therein.

If it be alleged, that this Opposition is founded upon conscience, which
permits them not to comply with the orders received: They may do well 1. to
consider, that the things we speak of are in their own nature Indifferent, and
if they conceive they cannot admit a compliance without sin: Let them determine
whether it be not a weakness in them to Judge themselves or others sinners in
things indifferent. 2. Whether a matter before indifferent and for orders sake
required by public authority, can be opposed without offense: Truly me thinks
a modest acquiescency in this (until Authority please to alter its commands)
would more highly conduce to the preservation of Peace and to the maintenance
of Christian liberty; and I wish they that are the most eager opposers of
discipline, may never see the Kingdom smart under that confusion, they unawars
may involve it in, nor ever be over run with Caterpillars.

In things indifferent not determined by Authority in the use of our Christian
liberty, there ought to be mutual forbearance, and a tender care each of
other.]

Christian liberty is twofold; the one Necessary, the other Indifferent.
Necessary Christian liberty is That which a man is bound to make use of as
liberty from circumcision, from legal ceremonies, New moons and its feasts;
from Tying Gods worship to Jerusalem only which the Jews conceived themselves
obliged unto. Such is the liberty of Marriage for all sorts, not being bound to
abstain from such and such sorts of meat.

This kind of liberty is always to be carefully preserved in the Church and
they who would fasten the Jewish yoke on Christians shoulders, were offensive
Act. 15.10. and therefore the Apostles advice concerns us, Gal. 5.1. stand
fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free; and be not
entangled again with the yoke of Bondage.

But Indifferent Christian liberty is that which a man may or may not make use
of: Thus though the liberty of Marriage be preserved; yet this or that Party
may abstain from it: Though this or that meat be Indifferent; yet a man may
upon some especial occasion abridge himself thereof. 1 Cor. 8. All this may
be Lawful, but all things at all times are not expedient. 1 Cor. 10.23.

In such things as these 1. Mutual forbearance is to take place, for
otherwise, each may prove offensive to other. Thus they that Bow upon their
first entrance into the Church may look upon others as careless, and
irreverent; and they that bow not, may think others superstitious, here a
mutual forbearance may be best. 2. Mutual care and respect of each other is
to be had. 1. Because they that are strong, That is more confirmed and have
greater measure of knowledge, ought indulgently to condescend to, and take care
of the weaker, in absteining from such things as may offend them. This the
Apostle carefully discourses of Romans 14. 1 Cor. chapter 8. chapter 10. The subject of
which are things Indifferent. He that looks upon days and meats as indifferent
and is assured of his Christian liberty ought in the use thereof to endeavor
1. That all sophistry and wrangling disputations be laid aside. 2. That he
contemn not, or imperiously insult over him, who is not fully persuaded of
such liberty. 3. That in the presence of a weak brother he do not that which
should offend or induce him to do the like; before his conscience be settled and
persuaded.

4. As for those of the weaker constitution, that they do not rashly censure
and judge others, who in all things conform not to their humors; It is too
often found that they who pretend to be weak ones, and subject to be offended;
are most strong and bitter in their uncharitable censures. Let not him that
eats not, judge him that eats.

In a word, let every man act so as may suit with the happy edification of his
brother; by which sweet corespondence and care, Mutual love will spread into
an acceptable harmony; and the God of love and peace, will delightfully take up
his residence amongst us.

SECT. II.
V. 16. When I thought to know this it was too painful for me.
David satisfied.
THat which put the Prophet to a stand, and startled him in his Temptation, thus
discours't of; The history of his settlement and satisfaction follows, wherein
he relates 1. Where he found it. 2. Those substantial arguments which did
settle Him.

The relation of this former is partly negative, partly positive; The negative
part is contained in the 16. verse. When I sought to know this it was too
painful for me: The sum of which is this discreet axiom. That though he
made use of his highest endeavors and failed not to apply himself to
antecedent disquisition, with revolution of his thoughts; yet after all his
care and search he found the matter hard; and his own abilities of Judgment and
understanding, too short to give him a full resolution and satisfaction in the
matter. Take a brief of the particulars.

1. In that he sought to know, and made conscience of his thoughts; he
testified his ingenuity and wisdom.

1. His Ingenuity: for he looked back and with a second review contemplates what
his opinion was; The Prophets Ingenuity and wisdom in finding out satisfaction.
which evidenc't that the wrong he did unto Religion was not malicious; but (as
it were) constrained to the hard censure he gave of it; and yet upon reflection
that it might be too harsh, he once more comes to the Test, exposes it with the
best of his Judgment, to an examination: as loath to give it longer
entertainment, and to continue of the same mind.

Thus like a person forced to an unwilling exile who ready to take a parting
kiss from his relations; and to bid adieu to his Country, and friends, to but
delay a little time, he speaks Interruptedly to one, presses another hand
with a sigh; and looks with a tender eye upon a third, at length he parts,
though he casts his eye often behind him: so while the Prophet thus inquires
carefully searches and seeks to understand more fully; he seems loath to leave
his Religion thus, nor is he fully or willingly settled in the opinion of its
being vain.

Consideration a sign of ingenuity and honesty which willingly leaves not
virtue.
And truly as there is a vast difference betwixt resolute sinners (who
obstinately follow their corruptions) and those whom infirmities do now and
then unwillingly master, who with the Apostle allow not that which they do Romans
7.15. so is this difference very discernable by these inter thoughts.

If in the matter of sin it self and the leaving of it; the mind often reflects
upon it; and with a faint kind of longing hankers after it, it shows that
there are some relics behind, some corruption within which reteines a liking
thereunto. Thus Lots wifes looking back to Sodom argues her unwilling parting
therefrom Genesis 19. Thus Israel remembering Egypt so often, and licking their
lips after the flesh pots and onyons thereof; their frequent facing about
toward that Coast, testified they were not fully weaned from folly nor did
contentedly believe in their deliverer, with that obedience which was due from
them. And there, where virtue is in danger to be shipwrackt, a looking back
with some solicitous reflections; some interposing, and after-considerations;
argue the Party is not past all grace, nor thoroughly hardened in his impieties;
they give fair hopes that some small (though perhaps fainting) sparks of
goodness remain unquenched. He cannot be wholey past a recovery, who thus
bethinks himself what he is to do: and suffers not malice altogether to
transport him, he is not incapacitated from that tender mercy which professes
he will not break a bruised reed, or quench the smoking flax, Isa. 42.3.

As the Prophets Ingenuity; so secondly his Wisdom is herein very
commendable: for when man is put to his doubts and shifts how can he clear
himself? but by the use of his Judgment and Understanding wherewith God has
innobled him transcendently beyond the visible Creation, and this argues the
Prophets wisdom in taking the right course, to put his Reason to the trial
which undoubtedly was the most ready and most profitable way to afford him
satisfaction and to preserve him from a final fall.

For Consideration and forecast is and prooves often a powerful means to
prevent incoveniences. Consideration often prevents a fall
If it were thoroughly examined why men, so readily swallow down pernicious
Heresies, it would easily appear because they have Rash, itching ears and
heap up heedlessly Teachers to themselves. 2 Timothy 4.3. entertaining opinions
out of faction, and partial affection to the Teacher for advantage sake:
without a serious trial or consideration: and in matters of Practice, why do
men run headlong on gross sins? but because they do not heartily examine
where they are going, or what they are about to do.

Whereas a considerate soul that conscientiously reflects upon its own actions
and intentions, and upon those arguments which rationally may persuade unto, or
diswade therefrom, often comes off fairly; and escapes those snares which
watch't for his fall. Deliberandum diu, quod statuendum est semel is as good,
as old, and the Philosopher sensible of the benefit of Predeliberation gave it
as his best advice to his prince, That when his Passion had moved him to anger
he should repeat the Alphabet before he would put any thing to execution.

Upon this Ground; Theodosius the Emperor at S. Ambros his desire enacted a
Law the occasion of which was, that Theodosius being highly incensed with the
Citizens of Thessalonica, had in his passion commanded 9000 of them to be put
to the sword, for which passionate cruelty S. Ambrose admits him not into the
Church; and upon the Emperors repentance obtained a decree that 30. days
might be interposed betwixt the sentence of death and the execution.

In a word, as the serious consideration of what is done, often works Repentance
2 Cor. 7, 8, 9. etc. (for if we thoroughly search our ways we shall easily turn
unto the Lord Lamen. 3.40.) so preconsideration before the perfecting and
accomplishment of sin, is of sufficient efficacy to stifle our lust; and to
make it become abortive, and therefore it concerns us, to look before we leap,
not to be too hasty and rash in our actings. Let us make use of our reason, in
a due reflection upon what we are about to do; that so that which is ill may be
prevented; and this is the safer way, for although Thoughts after sin do often
(yet they do not always) prove successful. Though Esau would afterward have
inherited the blessing, he was rejected and found no place for repentance
though he sought it carefully with tears Heb. 12.17. Judas after his betraying
of his Master may sensibly cry I have sinned, in that I have betrayed innocent
Blood, yet that will but hasten his despair to an halter.

To proceed to the 2d particular: Though the Prophet took all this pains, yet
all his premeditated considerations could not afford him satisfaction; he found
the nut too hard for his teeth, and he confesses it was too painful for me;
from hence we may infer,

That there is an high danger, and a powerful prevalency of the Temptation,
for when a man by his greatest inquiry, by the strongest use of his reason and
Judgment, cannot answer his doubts; nor unwinde himself out of difficulties;
it argues that the temptation is high and that he has a very hard task to
struggle with.

Here a querie may interpose it self: Object.
whether this search did nor concude the Prophet excusable in these his
thoughts of religion; considering that having used his best endeavors to untie
this knot he could not with all his skill and strength perform it: and
therefore, these thoughts might seem to have been somewhat of necessity more
then will.

To which Querie it may be returned. Difficulty of answering objections will
not excuse the conclusion against fundamental Truth.
That much may seem plausibly alleadgable in this case; That it is as natural
to man to follow the dictates of Reason, as for beasts to be led by sense. That
where his Reason fails, his Thoughts may do so too, and his footsteps slip.
That things above his Reason involve him not in Guilt; and Necessity may make
him excuseable.

Yet it must be remembered that though it be necessary that offenses should come
Mat. 18.7. Yet there is a woe to the world because of offenses and it were
better for those by whom they come that they had been buried in the sea, then
be the unhappy cause thereof.

There are many who out of a contracted habit, and a pernicious custom in sin
cannot cease from sinning, 2 Pet. 2. verse. 14. Some there are who are so
stained as they can no more wash off the spots, then the Aethiop his
blackness. Yet this Temper is so far from excusing as that it is a provocation
of greater Judgments. Therefore will I scatter them as stubble, Jerem. 13.23,
24. Though Oportet Haereses esse be true, yet neither the Broachers nor
entertainers of Heresies are free from guilt.

I confess much is to be granted to humane frailty and infirmities; Dent
veniam quilibet aliud opinantes; ego magis credo tanto Apostolo in suis and pro
suis literis Juranti, quam cuiquam doctissimo de alienis literis disputanti.
Aug. ad Hieron. Ep. 19. p. 50.
but this favorable grant must not be in errors fundamental, which strike at
the head and are contrary to such truths as are to be believed under pain of
separation from Christ, of which kind is this Heresy which the Prophet had well
nigh fallen into; That Religion is vain.

The Pretense of Reason's being given us by God will not excuse, for our
affections are equally his gift to; and both the one as well as the other may
be depraved and corrupt and consequently inexcusable. In those cases where the
strength of our reason fails us, it is our duty to know That where God gives
the conclusion, we must hold it fast against all arguments made against it.

We may to this purpose observe; That as Gods Laws carry in them the greatest
perspicuity, and plainness; A plain Truth revealed to be stuck to against
all objections of flesh and blood.
so are the fundamental principles of Religion delivered with that easy
clearenesse, as their sense may be understood of all; (as the Articles of the
Creed do evince.) As therefore in matters of Practice we are to stick close to
the clear precept of Christ, although our own fears or advantage may advise
the Contrary; so in matters of Faith we must hold the conclusion against all
the Arguments which flesh and blood can oppose; and though our Reason may seem
to comply with the latter, yet we must not suffer it to be convinced, but must
rather deny our own Judgments then recede from Gods truth.

Thus in the case in hand: Though the Arguments that appeared opposite
surpassed the Prophets skill to answer; yet should he have steadfastly (in an
unremoveable resolution) held the conclusion That Religion has and shall have
its reward.

Nor is there any thing required in this but what is just. 1. God is truth and
what ever he delivers is so too. Joh. 17.17. Thy word is truth: he can neither
deceive nor be deceived, and therefore it is most safe to adhere to his word.

2. Arguments against fundamental truths, may be reduced to these two heads:
either they are drawn from our not comprehending or understanding of the true
reasons of that Truth, or from other cross motives, and diswasions.

Of the former; Nicodemus may be an example who entertaines the mysterious
doctrine of Regeneration with a demand How can these things be? Joh. 3.9. He
apprehends not the mystery, therefore could not believe; in this case it is
man's Ignorance, not Gods Truth is in fault. A blind man is not excused from an
untruth in denying the Sun to shine because he sees it not; nor can he be free
who denies the Trinity of Persons, the Deity of Christ; the Resurrection of the
dead, (Truths for the (...) plainly delivered, and revealed) because he cannot
fathom the bottom; understand the Reasons of them or how they can be so; And
therefore we may conclude that it is far more safe to rely on God who cannot
deceive; then to lean upon our own broken Reeds; to stick to our selves who
may both err and be deceived. Vbi sentitis vos non intelligere credit tamen
divinis eloquiis. Aug. ep. 46. advinc. p. 105.


If secondly it be not want of apprehension but cross arguments which move us
to infer conclusions. contrary to Gods truth: these two things may be
interposed.

1. That these argmuments are of our own coining and so are but chains and
fetters of our own Making from which if we cannot unwinde our selves, the blame
must lie at our own doors. He who by a pernicious Custom contracts upon
himself an habit of drunkenness; though in respect of that habit he sins
necessarily; and is not easily able to leave that vicious deboistnesse yet this
shall rather condemn then excuse him, in that he has brought so unhappy a
necessity upon himself. He who binds his own hands and feet, and then casts
himself headlong into the Sea; will not be excused by a plea that he was
drowned because he could not swim.

So when men entertain fleshly corrupt Principles, and ensnare themselves
therewith, though thus taken they necessarily err: yet can they not be
excused; since they have framed the fetters (wherewith they are chained) for
themselves.

2. The second thing which may be offered, is this certainty, That all that God
reveals being truth, every conclusion contrary thereto, must be false, and if
the conclusion be false, the Premises, one or both must be so too. Thus as in
matters of Practice, Gods commands are good, and therefore what motives or
Arguments soever draw us to sin (though taken from the most specious profit,
largest pleasure and highest preferment, though they seem never so conformable
to our desires, and mask themselves under a demure look, yet) they are really
and in themselves Bad, and unrighteous; so the Arguments proving any Heresy,
though they may appear in reasonable colors, and carry applause with them;
yet they are direct untruths and contain falsehood: as is evident in the case
in hand: for suppose the Prophets Argument were thus framed: If the wicked
thrive and good men be afflicted in this life, then Religion is vain. But so
it is etc.

Here the Assumption is not altogether True, for all wicked men do not thrive;
and for the Proposition, the consequence is wholly denyable; as being false for
it will not follow that because the wicked are exalted and the good oppress't,
Religion is vain; but of this more fully hereafter. In a word, the arguments
brought against any one article of the Creed (for instance) may be easily found
false and unreasonable.

And therefore (as is formerly mentioned) Gods truth is a rock, from which
neither tempests, nor flatteries must remove us. Ipse dixit is to bear us out,
and will do it against the suggestions of our own ignorance, or the plausible
persuasions of flesh and blood: and though whilst we are clouded with a veil
of flesh, we cannot attain to a full satisfaction; yet when that which is
imperfect shall be done away; we shall find cause of Triumph, that we have
taken God upon his bare word; and not expected demonstration in mysteries of
faith. Then shall we receive the reward of our self denial and constancy; the
end of our Faith the Salvation of our souls. Whilst men that glory in
Sophistry and Sceptically dispute every thing, either wish they had less
reason or used it Better.

Verse. 17. Until I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I their
end.
The Prophet having showed how his first attempt for satisfaction succeeded
not, proceeds now to a positive declaration of that which procured it to him,
when he found his own abilities too short to fathom; and the greatest search
of his understanding to shallow, to comprehend this Mystery, He presently makes
recourse to Gods sanctuary, where he understood their end.

In which words, three particulars are observable,

1. The Proper subject wherein this satisfaction was received. His
Understanding, I understood. 2. The Author of this satisfaction, God 3. The
place wherein he found it, the Sanctuary of God.

For the 1. Though his Understanding as an agent, was insufficient to work out
this satisfaction; yet was it not de facto indeed or esteemed by him a
needless or unprofitable faculty; Satisfaction of doubts is made by clearing
the understanding and judgment.
for therein as a Patient shines the light, and from what was received there
in, did arise his full and contenting satisfaction.

This with Him, is common to all men. The beginning of all satisfaction must
issue from the Illumination of the Understanding; and right clearing of the
Judgment. He that doubts must be made to understand before he be satisfied;
the eye must receive sight before it can apprehend any other object; and those
arguments which convince, must affect the Understanding and clear the
Judgment, otherwise they will have no great effect.

It may be granted, That for the Reforming of men, Good examples have their
efficiency: and afflictions are commended as excellent prescriptions: but we
may observe that these all do that work mediante Intellectu. Afflictions do
therefore induce an amendment, because they open man's scaled understanding,
discover what he saw not before, his own Guilt, weakness and misery. Dat
intellectum vexatio; And reformation cannot find an admission There, where
there is a resolution of shutting the eyes against the Truth. They that make
their faces harder then a Rock will not grieve though they be smitten but will
refuse to return Jerem. 5.3, 4. These are the foolish for they know not the
way of the Lord. And as for examples, they have no farther Influence then as
they are apprehended, either possible or fit for our Imitation.

From hence may be confidently concluded that they take not a right course to
clear men, or the Church from erroneous opinions who use such means as
deprive men of their Understandings: which they are guilty of who violently rob
men of their lives because they are different in opinions from them; men's
thoughts expiring with their breath. Did men rightly consider they would
acknowledge that course of physic to be too desperate, and to conduce to a
confirmation, Reformation by violence, or death, or such Means as take away the
understanding.
rather then a taking away of Error. A word may separate body and soul, but not
faith, or opinion from the soul. He that uses violence, gives us cause to
distrust the opinions he would move us to; since we see him more confident of
the strength of his sword, then the truth he pretends; to and the power of his
reasons. Experience makes it good, that persecution (usually amongst men) is
more prevalent to render the sufferers objects of commiseration and pity; then
different opinions can make them odious. And whatsoever the opinions of
Servetus were, yet we find that he was more pitied for his being burned, then
Calvin got honor for the prosecution.

Light shakes of darkness without violence, or tumult: careful Doctrine,
discreet reproof, and sound instruction in righteousness, is the only way to
clear up the errors of the mind; and therefore it becomes Christians to take
this more sober, and rational course; and in Meekness to instruct those that
oppose themselves. 2 Timothy 2.25. Christ took no other way but this to his
Disciples. Luke 24.45. then to open their understandings; and toward the whole
World, he who with a word could have commanded Legions of Angels to prosecute a
conversion; yet rather sends to teach, Math. 28.19. To open men's eyes. Act. 26.
And for the accomplishment of this work has left behind him his holy word,
sufficiently profitable for Doctrine. 2 Timothy 3.16. By which alone the Church
was founded, the World converted; Idolatry expelled; Heresies overthrown: and
when a Reformation was wrought, it was not the confederate swords, but this
word did it; with the preaching of those, who with evidence of truth,
recommended themselves openly to the consciences, and understandings of Men.

From hence secondly we may gather that (in case of doubts and Temptations
thereupon) 2. Use.
it will concern us to provide for our understanding and to mind chiefly the
satisfaction thereof with principles of truth. Men too commonly strive to put
of their doubts, by their own devised phansies; as that other men are of their
opinions; or by running to some Worldly diversion: and to shake of their
doubts, by recreations: but this will scarce do it.

He that is Hungry does not send for a Painter, that his curious pieces may
delight his eye, nor a Musician, to ravish his ear; nor for a perfumer to
gratify his nose, nor for others that are full; nothing in this case will
content but somewhat to break his appetite: And in cases of doubt, all other
means are vain, unless the understanding be satisfied; and the Judgment
settled. Then a calm began to cover the Prophets soul, when he could say then I
understood. This is the ground of the Apostles earnest prayer. Ephesians. 1. verse.
17, 18. That God would give them the Spirit of wisdom, and Revelation in the
knowledge of him; that the eyes of their understanding being enlightened they
might know, etc. For this reason, Prophesying is preferred before speaking with
tongues. The understanding being more edified in the one, then in the other: 1
Cor. 14.2, 3, 4. And the Apostle assures us, that he had rather speak five
words with his understanding that he might teach others, then ten thousand
words in an unknown Tongue. v. 19. And they who deliver Gods will and instruct
others in a clear doctrinal Method; may well hope for an happy and a very
comfortable return: For the understanding once satisfied, and the judgment
once convinced, The will, and affections will more easily come in and be more
readily wrought upon and made pliant.

God a clearer of doubts.
The subject which received satisfaction the Prophets understanding thus
discours't of; the Author of this content, even God is the next thing to be
reflected on. I went into the Sanctuary of God; there he received it.

Though our Reason and invention may be at a loss, yet is not the matter
desperate; for God can supply our failings and manifest as his power in our
weakness, so his wisdom in our ignorance. He is the Father of lights; the
fountain of wisdom; the giver of understanding. His Spirit searches all
things and reveals that which none of the worldly Princes could reach unto. 1
Cor. 2.8. David still makes recourse to him for understanding and to be taught
in the way. Psalm. 119.

Although this may seem extraordinary and peculiar to those persons and times
wherein Holy men spoke as they were inspired; yet we may remember that it is a
promise, though supernaturally yet ordinarily fulfilled, in the covenant of
grace. Joh. 6.45. They shall be all taught of God: Heb. 8.10, 11. And the
Apostle assures us. Tit. 2.11. That the grace of God that brings salvation
has appeared to all men teaching us, etc. Though men may highly under-value
these Modern times, as degenerating from the primitive yet the promise still
remains in force, and capable of a performance; we may hope and expect to be
taught of God and to be resolved in those necessary doubts which may concern
us to be satisfied in; though this withal may be added that since
(notwithstanding Christ's open instruction of men) we find so many shamefully
erring, and deceived, It may be concluded: That there are some qualifications,
and conditions whereupon this is vouchsafed unto men, That they are taught of
God. Things make men capable of being taught by God. 1. Ingenuous honesty and
love of truth.
Wherein (for the present) I shall but touch some of those which made the
Prophet capable.

The 1. was the ingenuity and open honesty of his heart: which free acceptable
temper it concerns those to look after, who would be true receivers of truth.
There will be but a small increase in a stony, or a thorny ground; whilst an
honest heart bears fruit in an happy plentiful return. Math. 13.23. Which
honesty of heart two things may make discernable in us. 1. When we love truth
for it self, and would not willingly embrace an error. They who take pleasure
in unrighteousness and love not the truth, are very subject to strong
delusions to believe a lie. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. Whereas he that entertaines not
opinions for faction, advantage, for gain, or byrespects; if he err, his
error is more pardonable, and is in a more likely capacity, to have his foot
taken out of the snare: It being not to be presumed, but that God, (whose
providence reaches to the ravens) will not be wanting to reveal truth to an
heart, that loves it; and abhors, what is false and erroneous.

2. Another testimony of an honest heart may be the not cherishing of known
corruption, a practical, conscientious living according to those truths which
the understanding has already received. Thus an honest heart. Luke 8.15. bears
an opposition to that which is full of covetousness, and a licentious love of
worldly pleasures. And Christ tells us. Joh. 7.17. If any man do his will he
shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God.

2. A desire of being informed.
As an open ingenuity and free honesty of heart, So secondly, a desire to be
rightly informed was very eminent in the Prophet; as it ought to be in us too;
I desired to know this. The Wise man tells us that if we apply our heart to
understands; And incline our ear to wisdom, we shall understand the fear of
the Lord and find the knowledge of God: for the Lord gives wisdom, out of his
mouth comes knowledge and understanding. 2 Prove. 2.2, 3, 4, 5, 6?

2. A going to God.
3. In this desire an honest heart has recourse unto God. I went into the
sanctuary of God; cries the Prophet; and thus must we too in an high confidence
both of his wisdom, and mercy which leaves us not destitute of what is
necessary for us to know. And the place where we may find satisfaction the
Prophet assures us is Gods sanctuary: which is the third particular and affords
us this observation.

Observe.
Gods sanctury is the place wherein full resolution and competent satisfaction
may be had in matters of perplexity and doubt. Gods sanctuary a place of
knowledge. What and were is was under the Law.
] 1. As the times were then, the sanctuary was that place where God promised to
meet Israel and bless him. Exodus 20.24. While Israel was in the wilderness
where ever the Tabernacle was pitched this sanctuary was: after their setlement
in Canaan, it was placed in Shiloh. 1 Samuel 4.3.4. Hence entitled a place
wherein the Lord had placed his name. Jer. 7.112. After this, Solomon's glorious
Temple was Gods sanctuary. 1 Chronicles. 28.10. 2 Chronicles. 20.10, 11. And accordingly
Rab. Solomon Paraphraseth this text, I learned this in the sanctuary of God in
Jerusalem.

2. In this sanctuary were the High Priests, the Priests and Levites whose
whole employments were taken up in the service of the sanctuary. Whose office
it was to teach the people. Deuteronomy. 33.10. They shall teach Jacob thy judgments
and Israel thy Law. The book of the Law (as a signal token thereof) being
deposited in the Ark. Hence that of Mal. 2.7. For the Priests lips should keep
knowledge and they should seek the Law at his mouth. And this in obedience to
Gods command. Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10, 11. Hence it is that Aben Ezra renders the
Prophets words, I went to the Priests, and the Italick Bible I went unto the
Doctrine of God: according to that of Isaiah. 1.19, 20. Should not the people
seek to the law and to the testimony.

3. The Sanctuary was the place of prayer I say. 56.7. Math. 21.23. Which is a
known means for the attainment of understanding. If any lack wisdom let him
ask of God that gives to all men liberally and it shall be given him, Jam.
1.5. And this we often meet with, as the subject of good men's prayers. Psa. 119.
Ephesians. 1.17, 18. Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16. etc.

And whereas it may be here objected that Israel was honored with daily
peculiar Prophets raised unto them; David appeared from his sheepfold, and
Elisha from his plough; Amos is called from his Cattle and Isaiah from his
college; so that Prophecy was not chained to the Temple; nor teaching confined
to the sanctuary.

It may be answered, That as God (in his stupendous government of the World)
is not tied to the ordinary common couses of nature; but when he pleases does
act wholly by miracles, a bove and contrary to nature, so in the Church, Gods
Spirit freely (like the wind) blows where it lists. Those extraordinary
inspirations which the Prophets were wrapped in; did particularly bespeake Gods
will, yet they did not disannull that commanded recourse to the sanctuary, or
seal up the Priests lips who were furnished with commodious Synagogues for
prayer, and for to expound the Law in; and had a stately Temple for their
services. These our Savior Christ condescended to grace frequently in his
public Ministry.

As for the Prophet here whether having entered into Gods sanctuary, he was
answered by Vrim and Thummim, or by a dream, or Revelation, or whether he
obtained this satisfaction by a diligent reading of the Law, or by prayer, I
define not, as certain; this may at present suffice us, that he went into the
sanctuary, and there he received a full and a large content.

How Christians have their sanctuary.
If it be here demanded what is all this of concernement to us now? It may be
answered that, every particular may proportionably look at us. For

1. We are not Priviledg'd from such doubts as may bring us into dangerous
Temptations; witness those melancholy wounds of Spirit, those troubles of
disquieted minds, (never so common abroad as now) those high miscarriages of
our actions.

2. We are happily furnished with places of public worship dedicated to his
service; which may (without injury) be termed houses of prayer, (I wish they
may never be made dens of theives;) and where two or three, be met together,
there is a gracious promise of a Divine presence.

3. We are honored with an holy refined Law, and an inspired word of Prophecy.

4. We are adorned with Ministers whose whole office is to edify, and govern
us; and to preserve us from being wantonly tos't about with every wind and
every specious pretense of Doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.

What remains then, but that in case of doubt and Temptation, we have an
early, and cheerful recourse to the word, Ministry, and sanctuary of God for
advice and satisfaction; and that we do not follow the infected humor of too
many now, of despising any, or all of these; who in a scornful triumph tread
any thing under foot, which speaks contrary to their phansy.

Had we time now it might easily be made good, (in reference to the primitive
and purest times of Christianity) that Christians.

1. Had as high great and reverend esteem of the Churches, and places
publickly-dedicated to Gods service, as ever the Jews had of Solomon's Temple,
Synod. Laod. c. 28.
hence they called them (...) Dominica, the Lords houses whence the name Kirk,
or Church, Aedes sacras Holy houses. Eusebius. lib. 9. c. 8. Domos dei the houses
of God. Hilar. in Ps. 126. Basilicas, Palaces of the great King Aug. De civ.
dei lib. 1. c. 4.

2. It was their custom besides their private retirements at home, daily to
frequent the Churches: the ground whereof they took from the Apostles going to
the Temple to pray. Act. 3.1. Hence a morning and evening access to Churches
was solemenly commanded can. Ap. c. 59. If (said they) the heathens did
carefully visit their Idols, how much more should Christians be diligent in
their addresses to God, Hom. de incomprehen. dei natura.
And whereas it may be objected that men might pray at home, Saint Chrysostom
answers, he that objects this is in an error, for though those prayers are not
excluded which are made in private yet they do not pierce Heaven with that
vigor which a public joint request does. And though antiquity mentions unto
us Private meetings, yet we may find that they were not set up for a separation
or out of an Opinion that better services were performed there then in the
Church; but they were necessitated thereunto by a Persecution, otherwise they
were held as Schismatics.

3. History assures us, how frequent, and cheerful a recourse they had to
their Ministers, some of whom they made a peculiar choice of, whose direction,
and advice they owned with much reverence and obedience, insomuch as some would
not marry without the counsel of the Bishop.

Lastly in cases of controversy they had their Synods and solemn Convocations
of the Clergy: wherein matters were debated and the Peace of the Church
confirmed.

Despisall of Places of Public worship a great cause of present factions and
controversies.
These are Truths fully proveable by evidences of history and fact. And now
since all things look with a common and promiscuous face; Churches not
preferred before Stables, Public resorts slighted, Ministers most injuriously
ejected: all recourse unto them contemned (men now pretending abilities beyond
the best of their Teachers) Gods word wholly left and exposed to tht
interpretation of Private fancy, how can it otherwise be imagined? but swarms
of Stinking Locusts, and devouring Caterpillars may darken our hemisphere into
a confusion, and that extravagant Sects and unheard of, unparalleld, divisions
break out so thick as men know not of what religion to be of, how can we
otherwise think but that in this strange inconstancy, Atheism will creep in,
get head, and turn all Religion out of doors.

Thus we see what inextricable Labyrinths we either are; or likely may be
involued in, and (I dare freely pronounce) we shall never be able to unwinde
our selves out of these Briars, until much more (then is now given) be
attributed to the holy word, an it is Ministers; until an higher value be put
upon the public assemblies, more esteem be had of Ecclesiastical Synods, and
(in a word) more cheerful recourse to the sanctuary of God. And it may be the
hearty prayers of us all; that God in mercy would restore peace, settle this
distracted, unconstant people, in the truth of Religion; and that once more
(all unhappy breaches made up) we may all in a more lasting unity, join, in a
plentiful reaping of the benefits and grand Privileges of the sanctuary.

SECT. II.
Verse 18. Surely thou did set them in slippery places, thou castest them down
into destruction.

V. 19. How are they brought into desolation as in a moment? they are utterly
consumed with terrors.

V. 20. As a dream when one awaketh, so O Lord when then awakest thou shall
despife their Image.


CONTENTS.
David's victory over the Temptation. Wicked Men's Prosperity has an end. In the
mean time: 1. Their places are slippery. 2. Full of Terrors. 3. Prosperity but
a dream. Yet it is significant. 1. Of Gods goodness. 2. What our gratitude
ought to be. 3. Of our disposition. 4. Of the dimensions of the fall. 5. The
end of them is utter destruction, sudden, final. Full satisfaction concerning
wicked men, cannot be had fully any where, but in Gods sanctuary. Applic:

The light of Gods truth makes error condemned in a Man's self: condemnation
thought dificult; yet Just and profitable Applic. Good men have a sense of
troubles. The first privilege of Gods servants. Being with God which is
necessary, decretory, special, general, present, future. The comfort of being
with God in prosperity or adversity. Second Privilege, Support by Gods hand:
David's perfect Victory over the temptation concerning wicked men's prosperity.
The benefits thereof. Third privilege guidance by Gods counsel: not to be
denied in times of ordinary providence. Three useful cautions in this point.

THE Arguments whereby the Prophet was fully satisfied, and settled so as he was
crowned with a complete victory over the Temptation, claim our next thoughts.
These we may find full and substantial, answering all his doubts, and
stifling the very occasions of the Temptation.

For we may remember that he was tempted to Atheism by two arguments, one
drawn from the prosperity of the wicked: the other from his own, and other
Godly men's afflictions.

To the first the 18.19. and 20. verses mentioned give satisfaction, wherein is
declared the state, event, reward and fruit of wicked men's prosperity, in
several particulars which are considerable. 1. Absolutely in themselves. 2.
Relatively by way of application to the Matter in hand.

1. That the prosperity of the wicked shall have an end. Wicked men's prosperity
shall have an end.
I understood the end of them, prosperitas imperiorum est in momento. says
Rabbi David in this place. The wicked may be seen in great power, and spreading
himself like a green Bay tree: Yet he passes away and lo he was not, yea I
sought him and he could not be found, Psalm. 37.35, 36.

And indeed how can it be otherwise, since they themselves are mortal and must
fail, being necessarily liable to that death, which puts an end to all
thoughts, wisdom, or devices, Eccles. 9.10.

But suppose; they were made up of more durable principles and should last for
ever. Yet the things themselves which make up prosperity wear away, and perish
with the very using. The fashion of this world is transient, and every thing
therein subject to rust, inconstancy, and corruption. The Prophets proclamation
is remarkable, Isay. 40.6, 7.8. The voice said, cry; and he said what shall I
cry? All flesh is grass and all the goodness thereof as the flower of the
field, etc. The voice said cry which imports a thing not so fully apprehended
before, and truly amongst the rest of this Circes enchantments, that is no
small one: that Men heightened in prosperity never dream of an end: their
bewitched thoughts scorn to go below eternity. Psalm. 49.11. Isa. 47.7. Luke
12.19. And therefore a shrill voice must force it into their ears. What is the
cry? flesh and it is Pompous goodness is fading, the flower withers, because
the Staulke does so too. The natural actions of an immortal agent, must be
immortal, and the continuance of the fruit, affords a guess at the lastingness
of the Bulk. The grass fails, therefore so will the flower too; and the tree
cut down, the fairest blossoms droop and perish: man is grass and with him,
all his honor and enjoyments must fall for company; In the mean time.
and therefore, it is a vanity, for to fansy a continuance of our selves or
estates, and therefore we ought, to use this world so, as if we used it not.

1. Their places are slippery.
But this is not all, in the interim and interposed time betwixt the beginning
and end of their prosperity (which though it be but a moment in respect of God,
yet seems to carry some length in reference to man) there is very much variety
of disaster, and mischance.

1. Their places are but slippery: The word in the original signities stick or
smooth, as Ice, or polisht Marble, and is from thence by a Metaphor used for
flattery, hence Aben Ezra renders it: in Locis Adulationis posuisti eos. Thou
have set them in places of flattery. As flatterers sooth great men's minds, in
making them owners of those excellencies which they have not, so does
prosperity too; and as those who are thus flattered, either do, or may find
those smooth applauses to carry little of truth, (thus he whom his parasites
would have made a God, easily became sensible of his wants of nature, which a
Divinity would have been incapable of) so wicked men may, (had they a mind and
leisure to look about them) easily find by daily experience, that they are not
so fast, nor seated so firm, as their prosperity would suggest unto them. For
they may see themselves upon Ice, where every step threatens a fall, and when
they conceive their footing most firm, they feel themselves laid upon the
ground. Examples hereof (had we leisure) might be infinite. Whilst
Nebuchadnezzar is bragging of his great Babel, he finds a change; the Kingdom
is departed from thee, Dan. 4, 31. and he is forced to serve an apprentiship
amongst the Beasts. Beltazzar in the midst of his cups; proud Alexander in the
height of his conquests; Caesar in the midst of his senators, and setlement of a
perpetual dictator, are all suddenly cut off. Ninive, Rome, Babylon in their
glory, were buried in their own ruins. Our preferment flies to us out of the
mortality of other men: (like silk which become a grave to the worm that
weaveth it before it can be a garment for us.) and our Mortality makes what we
possess, the fitter object of other men's desires.

Before this point be dismiss't, these words surely thou have set them in
slippery places; may afford us this observation.

That it is Gods will, decree, and appointment, Obs.
that temporal prosperity should be slippery and unconstant; it is not his
pleasure that it should be a place of firm settled footing. It is Gods will and
appointment that their places be slippery.


This as it may be affirmed of wicked men's prosperity; so even of that temperal
one, of Gods own servants, their state is unsettled, and inconstant; every day
subject to variety of change. Thus Job to day the richest man in the East, to
morrow lies stripped upon the dunghill. Thus David though well settled upon a
Throne; yet shortly he is by a Rebellion driven from Jerusalem, and his Crown
put to hazard by an unnatural Absalom.

good men find it thus uncertain; those that are wicked may well expect it to
be slippery: of which disposal of providence this account may be given: It is
God's will it should be so,

1. That men may not rely upon them; that they should not trust in uncertain
riches.

carefully look to their steps: examine their actions and take a wary course of
life that he that stands, may take heed lest he fall.

Terrors befall wicked men.
As wicked men's places are slippery, so the second disaster they are subject to,
is

That terrors befall them; these are inward disquiets, and discontentments of
mind, with much perturbation.

Of conscience.
These are of two sorts, 1. Emergentes, such as arise out of the working of
conscience, and revolution of thoughts within. 2. Immissae, called the Terrors
of God, which are either wrought by his own immediate hand, as Levit. 26.16. or
by the sending of evil spirits, to all which they are liable, and subject.

1. They are disquieted by their own consciences, being (as they are formerly
described) Irreligious toward God, unjust and unrighteous toward Man, with
which black impieties conscience being alarmed, and meeting with that guilt
they contract, it ordinarily works horror, amazement, and self accusation, Romans
2.15. Thus Cain and Judas smarted under these pangs; And this the Poets meant
by their feigned furies which attended wicked men; and when once this inward
fury play's it is part, their most honorable preferment cannot cheer them. The
largest revenue cannot cure a diseased body, nor can it close up a wounded
spirit, which nothing can support. Cum diri conscia facti men's habet attonitum
-- nothing can still the groans, or quiet the discontents, of a tormenting
conscience.

2. Suppose these men have (as others whom the Apostle speaks of 2 Timothy 4.2.)
2. From God.
Seared consciences which should be dumb, and not trouble them; yet are they
in this kind liable to a Divine hand, which they cannot either prevent, or
Escape. Amongst those many Judgments, poured out on wicked men, it is one that
he sent evil Angels amongst them. Psalm. 78.49. And although we read not that
Saul was much disquieted by his conscience, yet was he troubled with an evil
Spirit from the Lord, 1 Samuel 16.14. Behold at evening-tide trouble, before the
morning he is not; (...)
this is the portion of them that spoil us and the lot of them that rob us,
Isay. 17. verse. 14. Where the same word Trouble is here rendered Terror.

3. Though these men may in joy for a time their good things, 3. Their
prosperity is a dream.
yet all this glittering happiness is but a dream, and ut somnium, evanescit
experrectis as Castle: expounds this place. The phansy of a pleasing dream,
much affects whilst sleep continues, but it carries no solidity, it vanishes
with it. The hungry man may dream, and behold he eats; but he awakes, and his
soul his empty; and the thirsty soul may dream that he drinks, but when he
awaketh, he is faint and his soul has appetite, Isay. 29.8. So these men's
imaginary happiness will dissolve into a cloud, it will prove a dream, it will
appear. 1. That their prosperity is no real sollid piece of good; and all their
enjoyments but a vain shadow, a meteor, suddenly dissolved. 2. That temporal
prosperity in it self, can give no true, real, sollid contentment to the soul;
can no more satisfy the longings of a man's spirit, then a vanished dream can,
the greediest appetite.

This one thing more, by way of conclusion may be here added; Prosperity a
dream very significant.

It shows 1. Gods goodness. 2. Our return of gratitude. 3. Our disposition.



that dreams are often times significant (as history and many men's experiences
can make good) And such is prosperity too; for if men be observant.

1. They may take notice of Gods goodness; whose blessing it is, that they are
multiplied greatly, Ps. 107.38.

2. They are significative of that grateful return of faith, repentance and
obedience, due from them to God.

3. Naturalists tell us that dreams are great discoverers of the temper, and
constitution of the body, or mind; melancholy being usually attended with those
that are dismal, and sad; and the other humors, have their suitable effects.

And this dream of prosperity shows man's disposition; preferments disclose that
temper, which lay hid before. Magistratus uirum indicat. None more affable, and
humane then Herod and Nero, before their height, none seemed better disposed
than they, yet after their advancement their mask fell off, none proved more
bloody and inhumane. Suetonius tells us, that Cajus the Emperor had at first,
chained all men's hearts to him, by his kindness and popularity: and was styled
Princeps exoptatissimus, but going on he concludes; hactenus de principe,
reliqua de monstro, Philo testifies the same. The world was filled with joy and
hope at his advancement, but a little after, his Tyranny and curstness of
nature broke out. Thus prosperity discovers our temper, and gives good occasion
of declaring how good, how just and sober a man is.

4. If men be not what they ought: 4. It shows the dimensions and height of the
fall.
by this dream we may take the dimensions of their fall, how low it shall be:
because God in providence, does often proportion the punishment to the height of
abused prosperity. If Capernaum be exalted up to heaven she shall be brought
down to Hell. Thus prosperity (though it be a dream yet it) is a very
significant one; Math. 6.
I wish we may take such notice of it, as that glory may accrue to God in his
mercy to us.

To return to the words, (and because not any thing material may be willingly
omitted; 4. Their Proving sperity is from permission expressed by Gods sleeping.
) if we follow the exposition of this text; the words import somewhat more
terrible then all this; as

1. That whilst the wicked are climing, their succesfull heights; and glutting
themselves with their pleasing Enjoyments: God seems to be as it were asleep;
which expression should not be ventured on; but that there is a warrant for it,
from Scripture. Thus Ps. 78.65. Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep. Ps.
44.23. awake why sleep thou o Lord Psalm. 7.6, 1 Pss 35.23. Zach. 13.7. awake
o sword etc.

This Phrase is attributed to God, when he permitts matters to come to an head,
without Impeding the success, or calling the Actors to a sudden account; and
it is most commonly attributed in case of sin, or of Godly men's afflictions, or
wicked men's strange success, as the fore-quoted places do evidence.

It Imports then; That the Almighty does not countenance the wicked, nor assist
their extravagant actions with his blessing; either in their advancing of
themselves, or their depressing of the Godly. And though some may seem to doubt
of it, it is very Imaginable, that men of parts, of active hands and
contrivances, would attain to success in their Endeavors, and advance
themselves, if nothing from above did intervene; That Power would master
weakness, strength overcome right, multitudes of ungodly swallow up a few just
men, if God did but (as it were) sleep and permit them. But is it not a poor
comfort for them in the mean time? that they have no better Encouragement, no
greater countenance, from God, in the mannagement of their most earnest
affairs; then the Devil had in his carrying of our Savior Christ to the
Pinnacle of the Temple; A bare Permission. This seriously thought on, may be
sufficient check, to stifle and quash their largest contrivements.

But 2ly God will not be always as one that sleeps He will awake; then their
Image, form, feature, and seeming Majesty, 5. When God awakes They are brought
to contempt.
shall be despised; and they made to appear contemptible, and Low; unworthy of
the earth that bears them. Contemptibiles eos reddes says Rab. David on this
place, He will cause Judgment to be heard from Heaven, and then the earth
shall fear, and none of the men of might shall find their hands. The wrath of
man shall praise him; and the remainder of wrath will he restrain, Psalm.
76.10. When he arises to shake terribly the earth, Men shall run into holes
of the rock for fear, Isa. 2.19.21. As it is in Gods Power to make the
proudest low and contemptible; so he usually executes it upon the wicked. He
pours contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the strength of the mighty, Job.
12.21. The loftiness of man shall be bowed down; and the haughtiness of men
shall be made low. Isa. 2.17. Dan. 12.2.

Thus we may perceive what wicked men's prosperity is in it self: and as it
tends, and hastens to an end so in the interim it is but slippery,
discomfortable and deceiving; it is but an idle dream, liable to disgrace and
contempt.

But now let us hear the Catastrophe, The Catastrophe of of all wicked men's
Prosperity: Utter destruction sudden and final.
the Period and full end of the Tragedy: The Prophet expresses it in three
words 1. (...) desolation. 2. (...) they are destroyed. 3. (...) they are
consumed. 1. Desolation reflects upon their estates, fortunes, and possessions,
and the ruin of their whole prosperous fabric. Thus, when Cities with all
their Ornaments are demolisht, that is a desolation which usually befalls wicked
greatness. Psalm. 37. Isa. 37.20. 2. Destruction, respects their Persons. An
untouched life, and a freedom in Person may be some abatement of calamity. The
loss of estate may be borne withal, if the Person escape; but wicked men
shall feel the Punishment of their sins, not in their enjoyments only; but
even in their Persons. When the Angel poures out his viols upon the seat of
the Beast they shall gnaw their very tongues for pain, Revel. 16.10. The rich
man Luke 16. complained I am tormented in this flame. Upon the wicked he shall
rain snares, fire and brimston, and an horrible tempest; this shall be the
portion of their cup, Psalm. 11.6.

3. Consumption respects all: as being a word signifying perfect Consumption.
The estate shall not secure the Person, nor the Person the estate; the body
shall not prevent the Punishment of the soul; nor shall the soul be able to
exempt the body; time shall perfect the Ruin: and what is wanting before
death, shall be accomplished after; Their ill-gotten goods, will rot even with
their Posterity, and Those for whose sakes they forfeited their souls, will
curse them for their labor: that Honor which they waded to, through blood,
will make their children more Infamous, and their memories will perish like
dung from off the earth: and to complete a wicked man's destruction, he must
appear before Gods Tribunal; and be raised to the Resurrection of
condemnation. vengeance in flaming fire being taken of them for their
disobedience 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. and therefore they may very well houle and
weep for the miseries that shall come upon them and theirs.

And to make this Consumption the more dismal. It shall be first sudden unto
them, as in a moment. Foreseen or expected evils, are with the more constancy,
and less amazement undergon; expectation preparing the mind for a Reception
of them: whereas sudden assaults find little, or no resistance, quickly throws
into disorder, and makes Impressions more desperate. And thus for wicked men to
be overwhelmed in a surprizall, and to be overtaken when they least think of
it, is very common: for they defy any storm to force them from their seat,
they put far from them the evil day; and afford not the least thought upon a
change, hence, they perish in a moment; for when their glutted souls cry peace
and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them as travail upon a woman
with child; and they shall not escape 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

2. This destruction as it shall be sudden, and dismal, so shall it be utter
and final: without hope or possiblity of recovery: no more sacrifice for sin,
no more time for Repentance, when once they are falllen into the hands of God.
Their Perdition shall be everlasting without ease or end.

From all which it may be easily concluded: what the Argument here taken up, is
in it self; and what is the end of wicked men, with all their Pomp, temporal
success and Prosperity.

Before we descend to a Practical Improvement of this discourse, one great
objection may seem worthy of our taking notice of, and of some answer to be
made to it.

Object. Object. Whether satisfaction can be fully had from any other place but
the Sanctuary, concerning the end of wicked men's Prosperity?
What necessity or convenience is there to have recourse to Gods Sanctuary, for
Satisfaction concerning the end of prospereus wicked men? since Reason,
ordinary experience, and observation might have sufficiently yielded it. For
should we but cast your eye a little upon Heathen writers; we might find all
these particulars fully discust by them.

Of the slippery and deceiving inconstancy of prosperity one cries Passibus
ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat
Et manet in nullo certa tenaxqoe loco.


Of Terrors of conscience, upon apprehension of guilt. Another -- quos diri
conscia facti
Juven. sat. 13.
Men's habet attonitos, and surdo verbere caedit
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum
of a dream a third. -- Quorum, velut aegri somnia,
Vanae finguntur species:
Claudian in his first book against Ruffinus 1. sets down a Temptation like
unto this of the Psalmist.

Saepe mihi, dubiam traxit sententia mentem,
Curarent superi terras, an nullus in esset
Rector? and incerto fluerent mortalia Casu?
Then he presents the occasion of these thoughts, the same with the Psalmists
here.

Nam cum res hominum tanta caligine volvi
Aspicerem, caelosque diu florere nocentes,
Vexarique pios, rursus labefacta cadebat
Relligio.
Lastly, he shows how Ruffinus and other wicked men's Punishment took away these
doubts.

Abstulit hunc tandem Ruffini paena tumultum,
Absolvitque Deos; Jam non ad culmina rerum,
Injustos crevisse queror; tolluntur in altum,
Vt lapsu graviore ruant.
From these and many other Passages of humane writers; it may seem that a
Resolution of this case is not proper to Gods Sanctuary.



Gods sanctuary teaches what reason does.
1. That Reason and experience must not be separated, from Gods Sanctuary.
Though the Book kept there, may be above Reason; yet it contains nothing
against it: That truth which is conformable to right reason. is eminently
delivered, and confirmed there. Thus though the Laws of Nature and reason,
(which command religion to God and equity to man) may in many high particulars
be found in Moral Philosophy: yet every Christian does notwithstanding owe his
instruction in these particulars, unto that Grace which bringing Salvation,
teaches us to deny ungodliness, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present world.

This advantage the objection may afford us. That if Humane reason, and common
observation show the vanity of Prosperity, if a Poet conceive it unreasonable
to conclude any thing to the prejudice of virtue, and religion; from worldly
men's success; and that because the state of Prosperity, is deceitful,
slippery, dangerous, and unfortunate: How highly unreasonable and dangerously
unbeseeming is it, for such as the Prophet here was, or for Christians to infer
any such conclusions, seeing that besides what they gain in Knowledge by
naurall reason and observation, they are happy in an additionall advantage of a
more sure word of Prophecy in a free recourse to the Oracles of God.

2. Man at sundry times strangely differs from himself; and is not capable one
time, A man in passion must have a more then ordinary help and Teacher.
of that which he is another: when an amazing fear, importunate anger or
grief transports him. When troublesome doubts or temptations divide or
distract him, violent passions wholly possess him; the common ordinary, means
will not reach to pacify or settle him, and bring him to a right temper.

When a man in a composed calmness, sets himself to meditation: and with the
uninterrupted command of reason, and Judgment, takes leisure of a free and
impartial contemplation; reason and experience may then do much in the
composall of matters and self satisfaction.

But when a man (with the Prophet here) finds his footsteps moved; his
passions eagerly stirred; when envy (on one hand) transports him (through which
colored glass, there is a false representation made unto him, of the
prosperity of those men, whom he hates for their impieties) and on the other
hand he casts his eye upon his Beloved self, with a grief sensible of those
pressures, hardships, and troubles, which (he conceives) do most undeservedly
befall him. When by these men, his distracted thoughts are divided; and he led
into Temptation, doubt and high distrust of Religion: In this case ordinary
Reason, and common experience are of too low an Influence, to give
satisfaction. They are of too mean an efficacy: Gods more noble Sanctuary, must
resolve, and settle him; otherwise, he is shipwrakt and overthrown: for (as our
Savior said) some Kind of Devils cannot be cast out but by prayer and
fasting, so are there some maladies and distempers of mind, which cannot be
cured but in the Sanctuary.

Though men have very low thoughts of the Ministry: yet many examples might
easily make good; what proud presumptuous heights have been levelled; what
dark sorrowful clouds have been happily dispelled; What heavy despairing
Burdens have been removed by the ministry, from distempered souls: how many may
we find upon history, who never would admit of comfort after excommunication
until they were reconciled to the Church and admitted into the Sanctuary? and
(if I mistake not) the incestuous person mentioned 1 Cor. 6. and 2 Cor. 2. may
be a pregnant example; after whose excommunication, so deep a sorrow seized
upon him; as that the Apostle himself fearing that he should have been
swallowed up with it, for the saving of his soul, gave order for his
absolution.

3. It may be answered that though reason and experience, may wade far in the
General; Answ. Somewhat Learnt concerning wicked men's prosperity in the
Sanctuary not so obvious to reason.
and yield much that may satisfy in this case: Yet the Prophet learned some
things in Gods Sanctuary which are not so easy and plainly delivered by
humane reason, as being matters of faith; and (it may be) beyond its reach, and
comprehension: Two particulars of this kind may be instanced in.

1. The Prophet learnt that Gods Providence had the maine stroke in all this.
1. Gods peculiar ordering Providence.
That he by his will and decree had made Prosperity a slippery place, That he
raises those storms of terror in the bosoms of wicked men: That he when he
awakes brings them into contempt; and overthrows them them with destruction.

Whereas if we take a view of humane writers, we may find all this attributed
to diversity of causes. The vulgar heads imputed these events to somewhat which
they called chance or Fortune, (a blind uncertain variable disposer of the
affairs of the world) those of more learning are not of the same mind and
opinion. For

1. Naturalists measured the matter by the Principle of Generation and
corruption, and placed the same necessity of the decay of flourishing estates,
to be with that of flowers, or of man's body, flowing from the natural and
inward distempers, and Impotency of Principles which makes them be but of a
short Continuance.

2. Others (as the Stoics) attribute This to a necessary connection of causes
without, which they Termed Fate; Whereby the beginning, growth, and end of
Prosperity is determined so, as that neither Good, or bad men can exceed their
appointed bounds.

3. The Astrologers referred these changes to the Position and influences of
the Stars, and therefore undertake to show us the Houses of Prosperity, and
adversity, and tell us of the frowning and Smiling aspects of the Planets.

4. If any amongst them looked a little higher yet were they vain in their
Imaginations their foolish heart was darkened with the multiplicity of their
Gods; giving riches to one, and Prosperiy to another, and Honor to a third. If
Crosses, laid-hold upon them they had an Aeolus for the winds, a Neptune for
the storms, and a Juno or some such Deity for their troubles and diseases.

Thus was natural reason put to a stand, and perplexed in Bypath, That there
is one God. all sufficient, all in all, that he acts all things according to
the council of his will, that the wicked often do, may, and shall flourish as
long as he pleases: that when they meet with a change they have it from his
hand. That this he acts out of Justice and Judgment, these were lessons which
the Prophet learned in Gods Sanctuary: and for which he was not much beholding
to humane writers.

2. The certainty of their destruction.
2. As the Prophet, from Gods Sanctuary, learnt Gods Providence, so did he from
thence find that wicked men, should in an Infallible certainty be made
contemptible, and punished with everlasting desolation. This, sense and
experience, may often thwart; as giving instances of some wicked men, who spent
their lives in mirth and Plenty, and according to their desires left their
substance, honors and estates to their Posterity, Job. 21.9, 10, 13. without
any visible smart for their villainies: It being a matter often out of reasons
teaching, that they shall be punished. Nay some expound the 20th verse here
when thou awakest Them, Cum expergefacias Eos exsepulchris in die Judici The
Prophet was taught that after death, they should (in their bodies) be raised to
receive therein, according to their works. Which doctrine of the Resurrection
is none of reasons teaching, soles occidere and redire possunt, nobis cum semel
occidit lux brevis, una perpetuo nox est dormienda Says Catull: Hence when
Saint Paul once named the Resurrection Act. 17. how did the Athenians laugh and
deride him; and they that esteemed themselves the Philosophers contemn both it
and him; and therefore Gods Sanctuary is the Proper place, for the Prophet to
have recourse unto, in this grand doubt and Temptation: and he may very Justly
owe his satisfaction to Gods extraordinary word, and to his Sactuary. First
Because It teaches that which is the Truth of Reason. Secondly because the
Temptation: had so shattered him; as that unless he had taken Sanstuary there,
he had been undone. 3. Because the Points here learned, did exceed Humane
reason to attain to.

Now for application to the matter in hand: The sum is this, The Prophet went
into the Sanctuary for satisfaction, and he neither lost his labor, nor was
deceived in his expectation; as meeting with that there, which was sufficiently
satisfactory; He found that which allaid his envy at their prosperous estate:
Though a lilly may represent that beauty to the eye which may force from us an
admiration of the Creators workmanship; yet none will envy its glorious Being,
which knows the shortness of it, how quickly it withers; and droops its head
to the earth, and the sudden decay of great men's estates Jam. 1.10, 11.
challenges rather our pity, then our envy. For

Since the place is so slippery and the state mutable; since unsupportable
terrors often attend upon it: since it is but a dream, whose last Act is
destruction, this condition, and their abuse of it, deserves that we should
bewail it rather then envy it, and that prosperity it self, be suspected as
extremely dangerous.

And therefore (the Premises considered) much less, is there Just cause, to
asperse Religion, or to lay any black impution, upou Innocence and Equity.

For besides, That whatever the consequence of worldly Prosperity be; Religion
may have its reward by it self: (there being nothing imaginable either in
other men's Prosperity, or in any thing else, that may impede the performance of
so faithful a promise) and we may well conclude that that Tree which produces
such Bitter fruit, Terrors, Change, Death and Consumption, is vain, fatal and
Ominous: and that Religion justly challenges, our highest affections; in that
if it brings with it, Temporal blessings (as it is the most effectual means
thereunto) though it does not change the essence and nature of them though it
makes not that which is in it self slippery, and deceiving; to be firm and
constant: yet it renders it free from terrors, safe from contempt, secure from
consequent thunder claps, of ruin and destruction.

As for the Prophet here the Sanctuary afforded him so full and ample
satisfaction in this case as in a submissive acknowledgement He abhorrs that
ill opinion he had almost entertained of religion; for which he gives himself
no better a censure then that of an Ignorant fool and Beast, v. 22.

As for the thing it self; how brutish and unreasonable it is to impute
vanity to Religion: how great folly, and Ignorance, this wild opinion argues in
its entertainers; unworthily transforming them into Beasts; has been already
cleared up in our discourse upon the 13. verse. This at present remains
observable.

When Gods truth shines upon the soul, it makes error and sin very odious;
Doct.
and detestable to him that entertaines either.

This discernably, The light of Gods Truth makes erorr Condemnable in a
manselfe.
befalls men not only in these objects, as being without, and viewed by visible
beams sent abroad; but as they are reflected upon, in the Person of the seer
himself. He who is happily converted by Grace, from darkness to light; will
not only hate sin and heresy in others, but will detest it in himself: He
will censure, reprove, accuse and Condemn himself, for either. Thus Judah
sensible of his Injustice acknowledges Tamar to be more righteous then
Himself, Genesis 38.26. Joseph's Brethren convinced of their crime, do heartily
ask forgiveness of it Genesis 15.17. and Good David sensible of his misdoings,
often bursts out into I have greatly sinned 2 Samuel 24.16. Rebellious Israel
once made sensible of their pollutions; shall loath themselves for the evils
they have cemmitted in all their Abominations: Titus his command of being
Patient, meek, gentle toward all; is enforced with a reason from home, we our
selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts
and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another,
though after their regeneracy all was happily changed. Tit. 3.2. etc. Saint
Paul once converted acknowledges himself mad, in persecuting the Christians.
Act. 26.11. and that which before he gloried in, as high Privileges, he now
throws away as contemptible, looking upon all, but as (...) dung in respect of
Christ. Thus a true sense of sin and error is attended with an abhorrency of
each: and will inject sorrowful thoughts into a man for entertaining either.
They who to day, ignobly boast of their very sins of their Pollitick
contrivance, may be of another mind to morrow: and then as much accuse as they
do applaud themselves now: and therefore we should neither trust them, nor our
selves; for though we may carry a great confidence, and height in our present
actings: yet we suddenly may, and if (we belong to God) we will repent and have
as mean low thoughts of sin, and our selves, as ever we entertained high ones
before.

Self condemnation.
As for this selfe-condemning work, this may be laid down in reference
thereunto: That though 1. It be very difficult, and hard to be brought to it.
yet 2. it is but very Just and reasonable, in it self. and 3. it is very
Beneficial and Profitable.

1: Difficult work.
1. That it is an hard difficult task, to bring man to such a self abhorrency,
and open acknowledgement of error and sin, daily experience makes it evident.
Though every man is very prone to see a moate in another eye, and to reprove,
and highly aggravate another faults; yet heartily to lay the Imputation of
folly, and bruitishnesse upon himself; to confess errors, and ingeniously to
acknowledge misdeeds, is very Irksome, and rare: Man having far more
inclination to stand in, and cover a fault, then to own a recantation; outward
respects weighing down any Inward guilt: and as one conceives himself, obliged
to maintain his opinions, either because he will not disparage his wit, (which
invented them) or his Judgment (which took them up upon trust) so present
Interest, hopes of future advantage, and custom makes others very loath, to
bid adue to those courses they own, or to confess, Thyt they have been misled.

Yet secondly: when this difficulty is mastered, 2. Just work.
there is nothing done but what Justice, and reason requires, and approves of.
There being in every error, and heresy, a poison and deformity, which makes it
Justly Odious; and in every sin, that filth and crookedness, which may justly
call for our highest detestation; the most loathfull expressions are too clean
to show its corruption: and those titles of folly, Rebellion, Witch craft, and
Madness wherewith it is set off, do impart, how highly Inexcusable it is; and
how greatly they deviate from Equity and reason, who give it entertainment.

Thirdly, As it is Just; 3. Very profitable.
so it is a most profitable work, and may much conduce toward happiness. 1.
It will make constant to virtue.
For 1. He who is brought to a sight of his Sin and detestation of error; will
for the future strive after a constancy and perseveringly adhere to virtue and
truth: Though promises and threats, may have a large influence upon the soul to
Reformation; yet they work only upon the affections, and that which pleases
to day may displease to morrow; that which we put a great value upon now, may
(through the inconstacy of our affection) lie worthless, and neglected, a
little after: whereas if once, error appears in its own colors, by evidence
of the light of truth; the soul will not be easily induced to embrace it; for
the object of the understanding being truth, and of the will that which is
good, the will cannot follow evil as such, nor the understanding assent unto
error, under that notion; hence it is that if man at any time receive a lie, it
is sub specie very; and if he follow sin it is represented as good and
profitable. And this is that (...), the deceitfullnesse of sin; when it makes
it is approaches under a mask; and appears clothed with profit, pleasure, or
preferment; for should it court us, in it is own black hue; and lay open, it is
beastly deformities, it would prove a sure remedy for our love: none would come
within the reach, of being seduced, by it.

2. It intitles to the promises to humility and confession.
2. This work, (once thoroughly wrought upon the foul) makes the person capable
of special respect and mercy from God, which may be evidenced by these two
arguments. First, may be drawn from that virtue which immediately gains it is
birth, flows there from, and is generated thereby, and that is humility. It
being clear that he who, out of a sense of sin, accuses and condemns himself,
does thereby humble himself; and the more humble and low a man is, in his own
esteem; the more acceptable is he to God, who gives grace to the humble: If
Ahab (who sold himself to wickedness) gird himself in sack cloth, his very
humiliation shall find some regard and be recompensed with the reprieve of a
Judgment, though peremptorily denounc't: how much more then shall apeculiar
mercy attend them? Whose humiliation, flows more from a true Judgment, of
their own deserts, and imperfections; then from the passionate fear of a
scourge, and an evil threatened. 2. Confession and self-accusation, has a
peculiar promise of mercy and forgiveness, how often is stubborn Israel invited
to those acknowledgments, with promise of an acceptance. I acknowledged my sin
unto thee and mine iniquity have I not hid; I said I will confess my
transgressions unto the Lord. And thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm.
32. verse. 5. The Prophet, is commanded upon this ground, to let Israel know her
Abominations, Ezekiel. 16.1. The Apostle assures us, that if we would Judge our
selves we should not be Judged; but when we are Judged we are chastned of the
Lord, that we should not be condemned of the World. 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. And if we
confess our sins he is faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us, from all unrighteousness. 1 John 1.9.

And therefore, we may safely hence conclude. 1. Use.
That we ought to receive those with great respect, whose endeavors aim at
the bringing of us, to a true sight of our errors and sins. The Apostle, may
well expostulate, with the Galatians, for their strange reception of his
freedom; Am I therefore your enemy. because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4.16.
His reproof of their errors, and impartial dealing in their good, begets a
disesteeme both of him and his message, and they look upon him as an enemy:
Though It had been far more consenant to Justice and reason, thankfully to have
embraced both; then peevishly to entertain hatred against him; who sought only
to inform them, and to make them better. An ingenous Confession and an hearty
humiliation, will be found far more advantageous, for us, then a peremptory
standing upon our own Justification; and therefore, it very much concerns us,
not to refuse a submission, unto those happy means whereby we may be brought to
a serious acknowledgment, of our errors and imperfections. That condemning our
selves, and receiving an impartial judgment from our own hearts, we may be
happy in a pardon from the hand of God.

SECTIO II.
Verse 21. Thus my heart was grieved and I was pricked in my reins.

V. 23. Nevertheless I am continually with thee thou have holden me by my
right hand.

V. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel. --


WE have already seen that wound which the Prophet received from his view of
wicked men's prosperity, to have been cured; David's victory of the temptation
concerning his own troubles.
and fully satisfied in the sanctuary of God.

Besides those men's success (which was the first part of the occasion of the
offense) there was another thing (as has been declared) that troubled him at
home: those constant troubles, and early chastisments which he groaned under,
notwithstanding his Piety and Innocence. And this so sharply galled his mind,
that he professes his heart was grieved and he was pricked in his reins, V. 21.

The word translated grieved is in the original (...) which properly signifies
leav'ned, and some mean thereby a leaven of sin: which is true, if we consider
the error he had like to fall into; for we often find sin and heresy compared to
it. Luke 12.1. 1 Cor. 5.7. But there is a leaven of tumult hence, Psalm. 71.4.
An oppressor is called (...) and a person that is troubled and oppress't called
(...) Isay. 1.7. Hence our translation rightly renders it, my heart was
leavened, that is, oppressed, grieved, and troubled.

My reins were pricked (...) Pungebar, Good men have a sense of troubles.
which is taken from a sharp instrument, which opens a wound with its sharp
edge, or point.

1. Thus then as good men have their crosses, so have they their sense of them,
and the Symptoms both of pain and grief. Religion does not bring in a
senselessness, or stupidity of affection. God is pleased in these cases to
leave occasions to his servants of testifying their faith, in his promises,
their confidence in his mercy, their hope in his goodness, their patience in
bearing, and their courage in overcomeing evils. All which glorious virtues, do
appear more eminently in trials, whilst the Stoics by disowning all natural
sense and passions, did strive to choke them, and make them abortive.

That Philosophy or Religion, which would divest us of all passions, would
un-man us; and experience tells us that it is as natural to be sad at the
presence of an evil, as to be glad at its departure; why may not our souls as
well as our Palats, be variously affected with sweet, and bitter? Christ did
weep without being vicious, and we by our complaints may show our selves not
insensible; Christ declared himself a man by his sadness, and tears: and we
may show our selves so too, by the same appearances.

The body and soul sympathize
2. For the Prophets expressions here, when he mentions the grief or leaven of
his heart; the pain, and Pricking of his reins, all (it may be) is not
metaphorical.

For the union of soul and body is so near, and the sympathy betwixt both so
great; as that if the body be hurt, or diseased, the soul partakes of the
distemper; and if the mind be indisposed, the head, the heart, and reins, will
sensibly smart with it; and are much impaired thereby. The Physician often finds
his surest remedies to miss of their effect upon the body; until the more
spiritual one, stills, and brings a calm upon the soul.

Concerning this wound (which a sight of his own afflictions, and troubles,
made in the Prophet) we may find, that it received its cure also in Gods
sanctuary, where it had many remedies applied to it; each of which in
particular, would have been a sufficient antidot, against the temptation; and
if we take a serious view of them, we may find them not peculiar to the
Prophet himself only, but to be eminent Privileges, and graces which all Gods
servants, have an interest in: we may find them, to be four in number and
which are the more remarkable; in that the darkest calamity, is not able to
stifle, or put a bar upon them. These words I am continually with thee,
presents us with the first. V. 23. Which may afford us his conclusion. 4.
Privileges of the saints.


That the Godly are ever with, in, and present with God.]

There is a double being, 1. They are always with God.
or presence with God one of conversation, the other of state and condition.

1. Of conversation, such as that of Holy men, who are said to have walked with
God. Genesis 5.22. Genesis 6.9.

When man's soul is fixed, and wholly taken up with the contemplation of Gods
Majesty, power, and transcendent wisdom, in the admiring of him; in his
creatures, providence and mercy, man may be said to be with God. And when he
resignes up himself to a full obedience, then may he be said to walk with God;
For such is the excellent efficacy of true Religion; as that it not only makes
men like God, but it renders them happily united to him and Christ, with whom
it gives them a noble and celestial fellowship. 1 John 1. verse. 3.

But, being that (I conceive) the Prophet here declares not his own
unrighteosnesse, and Justice (for this he had done before; and from hence, did
take an occasion of stumbling, That he who carried so great an innocence both
in heart and hand should be continually plagued and chastized) but does
evidence (that which was his comfort, notwithstanding his troubles) the
happiness of his state and condition. I therefore cease to insist farther
thereupon.

Being with God in respect of State.
2. The second being with God which imports state posture and condition, is
either necessary or decretory and voluntary according to the grounds thereof.

1. Necessary founded in Gods Necessary Actions peculiar only to the Son and to
the Holy Spirit.
Necessary is that being with God which has foundation in the natural and
necessary actions of God, such is that whereby the Son is said to be with God,
Joh. 1.1. The word was with God Prove. 8.22. The Lord Possessed me etc. And this
Being has for its ground the eternal generation of the Son of God; and
communication of the Deity to the second Person in the Trinity. Hence Christ's
Interrogatory Ioh. 14.11. Believe thou that I am in the Father, and the
Father in me? This being with God is transcendent and supereminent, peculiar
only to the Son of God by Generation and the holy Spirit proceeding from the
Father and Son.

2. Directory or voluntary founded in Gods free will.
The decretory or voluntary Being with God is that which is founded in the
actions of Gods free will. And this Being with God is of the Creature and is
either general or special.

In that which is general these two things are observable, 1. Which is general.


1. That before the world, and its creatures had an actual existency in
nature; they were all Ideally in the mind and Council of God: according to
which he works all things Ephesians. 1.11. what ever has an actual being, is but a
representation of that, which God purposed in himself before the foundation of
the World.

2. God having put his decree in execution by actual creation, what ever he
gave an existence to, is so with, and in him, as that it cannot consist without
him. Thus the Apostle Coloss. 1. Having discours't of Christ and of the
creation of all things: adds (...), and in him all things subsist. In him we
live, move, and have our being. Act. 17.28. Of him, as the Author, by him, as
the preserver, as the end, are all things, hence he is said not to be far from
us, for if the whole creation be with and in God; he is (in evidence of reason)
with the creature. This the learnedest of the heathen mean by their several
expressions: Thus the Poet Principio coelum, and terra, etc.
Spiritus intus alit; totosque infusa, Virg. Lib. 6.
per artus
Men's agitat molem. etc. --
And else where-Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque tractusque maris


Thus Theophrastus (...), etc. Seeing therefore that our dependence, is upon God
for our very being, that when he hides his face, we are troubled, and when he
takes away our breath we dye, and return to our dust, Psalm. 104.29. It
concerns us, to cast off any thing that may animate us, to a Rebellion against
him; whose hand once with drawn from upholding us, we must necessarily droop,
and come to nothing.

Special.
As for the special being with God, which belongs to the faithful only, and is
founded on Gods free grace, and mercy; this in respect of man is either future,
Future in glory.
or present. The former is that which the Apostle gives us hopes of 1 These.
4.17. We shall be present with the Lord: This the glorified saints and Angels
participate of: and the Prophet here after mentions V. 34. Thou shall afterward
receive me to glory: of which more fully in its place.

Or present in grace.
The special present being with God: is the state of the faithful in the
Kingdom of grace. Who even here are said to be (...) in him, 1 Cor. 8.6. And
this is that, which Christ prays his own may participate of Joh. 17.21.

And because, this their being with God necessarily imports a Reciprocation, we
may often find this Privilege expressed by Gods presence, and being with his
people. Thus the Patriarcks were often assured that God was with them, and Christ
promised his Disciples, I am with you, Math. 28.20. Whose very name is Emanuel
God with us.

Though therefore in respect of the matter, the Prophet might have as well
said: Thou art continually with me, as, I am continually with thee, all being
one. Yet he, rather chooses this latter expression: and that (as I conceive)
because of the present calamity of chastisment which lay upon him.

Calamity often accounted a partition wall yet it is not.
For it is common with men to conclude of Gods absence, by the presence of
calamity, whether the reason of it may be because, God himself is the chiefest
good and height of blessedness; and therefore there can be no inconvenience
where he is.

Or that because afflictions seem in their own natures to be dark partition
walls, betwixt God, and us: and such heavy chains as fetter us, unto misery,
and restreine us from all comfortable recourse, to any thing else.

Nor is it unusual for those, who have openly professed their confidence in
God; to be upbraided by wicked men, in their distress, with their being far
from God; and forsaken by him, Ps. 7.11. and their saucy inquiry being too
frequent, where is now their God. Psalm. 42.11. When the Innocent Lamb of God
hung upon the cross, how many revilings did the stuborne Jew spit upon him? He
trusted in God let him deliver him now, if he will have him, Math. 27.38. etc.
41. They imperiously insult; as if that calamity, had broken all relations
betwixt God and him.

It is further in this case observeable; that men of Religious tempers, often
carry such infirmities about them; as that they apprehend themselves at a great
distance from God in the days of trouble. Why Lord have thou absented thy
self? Why hidest thou thy face and forgetest our misery? Are sad
expostulatinos, of David in misery. Men are apt with Gideon to cry, If the Lord
be with us why is then all this trouble? Judges 6. Arise come and help us, go
not far from me O Lord, are the frequent requests of a distressed Spirit.

But the Prophet triumphing over the censurs of men: breaks through this black
cloud; and cries: Nevertheless, I am continually with thee. Though he, was
seemingly involved in calamities, yet they were not able to separate him from
God. As Christ was not alone for the Father was with him; so the Apostle
assures us Coloss. 3.3. Your life is hid with Christ in God. Hid, because in
outward appearance, they made no greater show then others; nay (in regard of
that gross contempt cast upon them by the World,) less then others; yet their
life is hid with God, from whence the united force, of the whole creation
cannot force it. If we cast our eye upon those particular expressions; which
God ownes in Scripture; we may conclude, an inseparable union betwixt him an
his. He is termed their Husband; united by a covenant, Isa. 54.5. He ownes a
sympathy, as to be afflicted in their affliction. Isa. 65.8, 9. which consists
not with separation. Those blows which are made at them, he feels; and violent
usage of them, is looked upon, as a persecution of himself.

And truly so high is Divine love to man in Christ, as that it has proclaimed,
that nothing shall work a separation between God and man, but sin, and nothing
else. Sin will do it, Isay. 59.2. your iniquities have separated between you
and your God; and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear.

And as for suffering of calamity, there is no sin in it. For if sufferings be
looked upon; 1. In the notion of those bonds; and bitter imprisonments which the
Apostles and Martyrs endured; They are then undergon, for the Name and truth of
Christ, and for righteousness sake, and thus (notwithstanding the perverse
revilings of persecutors) they are so far from being forsaken by him, as that
in the darkest of those reproaches, the Spirit of glory, and of God rests
upon them, as Saint Peter expresses it, 1 Pet. 4.14. Though the trial may be
fiery; yet God will not absent himself from the three Children though in the
Furnace, nor from Daniel though in the Lions den.

2. Take these sufferings as corrections and chastisments: and so, they are but
fatherly testimonies of Gods love, Heb. 12.7. The act of a father breaks not
off that dear relation; and where love is, there union takes its place: if
therefore the bitterest calamity cannot work a separation; no other contrary
state can strike so high, and therefore a faithful obedient Spirit, may truly
triumph, and say, I am continually with thee.

How justly the Prophet reckoned this as part of his consolation? How high is
the comfort receiveable thereby? How happy, and desirable, this condition is?
And what a blessed privilege it contains, deserves our thoughts; and herein
we may reflect upon these few particulars.

For he who is inlivened with these comforts, The comfort of being with God.
and thus accompanied, let him be either in prosperity, or adversity, he is
happy.

1. In prosperity Gods presence, does sweeten, 1. In prosperity it sweetens it,
and tempers the mind.
and make better, the things possessed. For though the most assisting creatures
are termed useless, broken cisternes; and all other enjoyments, vanity and
vexation; yet this, is not to be understood of them, as they are in their own
nature; (for all things are in their essence good) but as entertained, and made
use of, by men, without God; or when he, out of Justice, opposes men's
expectations of good, from the creature. The Israelites may look for much; but
it will come to little; if God once blow's upon it. Haggai. 8.9. Though David
found much cause of grief, yet the unworthy departure of his friends; the
disloyalty of subjects; the malice of enemies; or the casualties of disasters;
did not strike so deep as an apprehension of Gods removal from him. Thou did
hide thy face and I was troubled. Psalm. 30.7. This, he thought sufficient, to
render him miserable; and all things unprofitable: whereas, his blessed
presence shining upon our enjoyments make them more precious. Though there
might seem somewhat more substantial, and which might command greater attention
in Elyahs boisterous wind, and amazing earthquake, then in the small voice; Yet
he neglects those because God was not in them. 1 King. 19.10, 11, 12. So Gods
peculiar owning and blessing, puts a value upon the meanest enjoyments. The
near approach of this Sun, animates all things to an higher pregnancy and that
which is in it self uncertain, as his gift is possess'st with comfort; who
gives, even abundantly, to enjoy.

2. Whereas Prosperity causes much disorder, and unevenness of mind; either
by immoderate heightning it: or by suggesting farther ambitious desires; and as
the mind is composed, so is prosperity esteemed; all Hamans preferments are
looked upon as nothing, by his discontented Spirit; because Mordecai confronts
him. But that soul, which apprehends it self with God; or God with it. Will
infallibly be fashioned to so sweet a temper, as it shall neither be
ambitiously desirous of more; nor insolently proud, of what it has.

2. The comforts thereof in calamity.
2. He that is thus accompanied, is happy, though clouded in adversity for

1. Though a Job be stripped of all, yet Gods presence makes a supply of all:
Persecution yields an hundred fold, Mark. 10.30. That goodness, which the
creature shines with, is, but a comunicated ray from God; and can be no farther
beneficial, then as imparted by him; and transcendently meet, in that
inexhaustible fountain; of which he that participates of, need not grudge the
want of a few streams; as sitting at the head. Suppose secondly, the calamity
grow so high and exorbitant; as having seized the estate, threatens the Person;
yet even in this a reflection upon the 91. Psalm, may direct the steps; The
subject of which is: God being a refuge and a
One that dwells in the secret place of the most high; shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. Which though it is not pleased, to shelter him from the
danger of trouble, yet it yields a remedy; as Christ does, who though he takes
not away death, yet he grants a resurrection from it.

If calamity press hard, God is to him a refuge; Fortress.
V. 2. The avenger of blood ceased to prosecute him, who had took sanctuary
within the City of refuge; as despairing of success in that Priveledged place;
and violence and trouble will give over, when men fly to God. Thus the
destroying Angel, sheathed his sword at the threshing floor of Ornar, where
David prayed and built an Altar. 1 Chronicles. 21.

In case calamities be instant, pressing and importunate and not cease their
opposition; yet even then, he is a fortress, which shrinks not for the
greatest Battery and violence; and therefore security and freedom from fear,
may well sorround him, who makes the most high his habitation; and therefore it
concerns us to take an early shelter, under his happy wing: of whose
protection, we need then only doubt, when by our disobedience, we forsake him.
Calamities do then become dreadful, and fit objects of our fears; when an open
visible Apostasy (which forces God to forsake man,) do pull them down and
increase them.

The second Privilege of Gods Servants. They are supported by Gods hand.
The second Privilege of the faithful is continued in these words: Thou have
holden me by my right hand: In the Hebrew thus; In thy hand thou have held fast
my right hand.

I need not stand to inform you here that when humane members are attributed
to God; in each such expression some perfect attribute of the diety is
represented. His hand (amongst the rest) implies his active, powerful,
providential support. And God taking man by his right hand; may be taken, from
a careful holding up of Children; who are unable to support themselves. The
conclusion may be this.

Obs.
That God Almighty is the support of his servants who are in his hand and
upheld thereby.

This Privilege Gods servants partake of, not generally only as part of the
creation, The benefits thereof.
(which is wholly underpropt by his arm) but in a more peculiar manner, he
upholdeth the righteous, Psalm. 37.17, 24. And if we take a view. 1. Of the
benefits which a supported soul reapes by this support. And 2. of the grand
necessity thereof we may easily find the excellency of this Privilege.

The benefits that accrue thereby, may be these; 1. strength is participated to
them; and vigor flows from the saving strength of his right hand, Psalm. 20.6.
Our hand may support the infeebled joints of our brother, yet it cannot infuse
strength into them; whereas Gods hand, (in a more noble efficacy) gives
strength, to his drooping people. Psalm. 29.11. And bears them up, against the
most violent, and tempestuous storms, which otherwise would level all before
them. 2. Patience is hereby infused, whereby the mind, stands unbowed under the
heaviest load; which affliction can burden us withal. Though Job be strangely
afflicted, yet he shrinks not, when once he know's that his Redeemer lives.
3. Victory over danger, and an happy rest at last is procured, by this
upholding Privilege; being in all these things, more then conquerors, through
him that loved us. This hand, led Israel through the Sea, and the tedious
wilderness to Canaan; and it will support his own, until calamities be over
past: for they must not be everlasting; the rod of the wicked shall not always
rest upon the lot of the righteous: He that is thus happily supported, shall
look upon the blackest clouds, as below him; and triumph over the most
threatening confusions.

As this support carries benefits: so the great necessity of it is evident.

1. From the large variety and multitude of troubles, which good men are
subject to; The necessity thereof.
for besides those that incompasse them as Men, as creatures, as members of a
Kingdom: (which has its infancy and decrease) besides the weakness of Child
hood, the madness of youth, the distempers of old age; their very Religion,
and piety makes them an eye sore to the Devil, and a mark for his malicious
instruments; who usually shoot their invenomed darts, in a thousand varieties:
and therefore a more then ordinary support is requisite to stave them off.

2. The necessity appears from our own absolute weakness; which (without this
prop) would easily faint, and droop to the earth, for weakness soon grows
impatient; and desperate: and by its disorder, is the more easily swallowed up.

It concerns us therefore in these black tempestuous times, to implore a
Divine supporting hand whereby we may be able to out-ride these storms; with
courage, patience, and victory; and when once we find our selves upon dry
Land, beyond the malice of our Enemies, and the fury of calamities; let us
cheerfully attribute our safety to that support, and Almighty hand, which had
it not snacht us as brands out of the fire; we had been smothered in our own
ruins.

The third Privilege of Gods Servants. Guidance by Gods Counsel.
The third comfort the Prophet glories in is, that God directs him by his
counsel. Thou shall guide, me with thy counsel, 24. V.

To be led by Counsel, is peculiar only to men and Angels: other creatures may
be termed the objects and effects of Gods. Counsel: but those who are rational
only are guided, and directed by it. The Revelation of Gods will being this
Counsel; The word of God called his Counsel and why.
which his Servants do most eminently partake of.

Providence testifies an high regard of Man, in his condescending to reveal his
will, specially in Christ's Gospel, which bears the title of Gods Counsel, Act.
20.27. Which may very fitly be given it. 1. because God has therein manifested
his purpose of Mercy and Salvation, whereto he has especially appointed us in
Christ, Heb. 6. verse. 17. And those promises of grace and favor, confirmed by
an oath, are called the Imutability of his Counsel. 2. It is so called because
we are thereby informed, what to act, and what to avoid, to the attainement of
this special happiness. 3. Because it is a Mystery not common to all Men and
all times; which nothing, but Revelation it self from God, could enrich the
World with, for the happy dispensation of which, Christ himself rejoiced in
spirit: and his Apostles heartily gave thanks for: it is an honor that God
thus advises us, and an happiness to follow it; otherwise this council
rejected, will aggravate the sin, and increase the punishment.

But here somewhat more, To this added council and directions in particular
circumstantiall affairs.
may seem to be employed: The Affirmative precepts, which contain diverse
injunctions of Piety to God; and righteousness to man; do in every head
command some virtues, more eminent in degrees then others: and they have their
circumstances of manner, and time which renders the Action, more or less
seasonable.

Lastly in variety of evils of calamity some are greater some less: in this
case and in actions particular (though Revelation of duties required by the Law
be presupposed.) there may be place, for mature Council and advice; (viz.) how
to improve a Talent to the best advantage; to express an eminent Virtue; how to
accommodate our actions to Times and Persons, and how discreetly to make choice
of a lesser inconvenience before a greater.

For man though he may in general, know his duty yet in some particular
occurrences, his doubts may distract him, his memory fail him; his passions
transport him; a Temptation may startle him; this advantage incite him, and
that fear deter him; in every of which cases he will find a necessity of
council.

And herein this Act of Providence is evidenc't, in the particular expressions
of duty to a particular good.

Thus Abraham was particularly directed in his Journey toward Canaan: and
Moses how to deal with Hardened Pharaoh, and the stiff-necked Jews: and David,
how to avoid the persecutions of Saul: this Christ eminently promised to his
disciples, Mat. 10.19. etc. who thereby converted the world, the great
controversy about the ceremonial Law was determined by the special council
of the Holy Ghost, Act. 15.

This not denied in times of ordinary providence.
And although all these are miraculous and extraordinary; and may seem to expire
with those persons, and times: yet God has not left his servant destitute of
his council, and directions, in cases of special doubt; but as particular
occasions may require, he may warn them of their duty: and in special
occurrences, Instruction may be given (how to demean themselves) by that
spirit which helps our infirmities Romans 8.26. which may seem to be the
Apostles meaning, for although that Text, I find otherwise applied, to the
discountenancing of Liturgies, and to obtrude a belief on the vulgar, that
That which is without meditation, and extemporary, deserves only the title of
Prayer of the Spirit.

But when the Apostle affirms we know not what to pray for as we ought: how
can we conceive that he means this universally of all Saints, of all things?
being that they are furnished with Christ's precepts, which teach what is good
and Just; and what is of a contrary complexion, and being that they have,
particular notice of Gods most gracious promises; and peculiar directions in
the Lords Prayer.

If it be pleaded that the frame, and words are the dictates of the Spirit. It
may be returned 1. That clear ready, fluent expressions, are gifts ordinarily,
dispenc't, and present in temporal affairs. 2. If they only be thought to
have the spirit of prayer, that are not prompt and ready in expressions: what
may we conceive of these who wanting words can only express themselves in
groans and sighs. 3. The help of the spirit, is here plainly said to be, not
in words, Phrases, or Method: but concerning the very things to be prayed for.
We know not what to pray for as we ought. Thus often, in worldly occurrences
politic Counsels, are wrap up things in darkness so, as good men may often be
at a stand; and cannot readily conclude, whether Peace or War, deliverance or
Patience, should be the subject of their prayers, and in matters of deliverance
whether by such or such means; In these cases then, Gods spirit often supplies
our infirmities, and counsels, what to pray for, and this I take to be the
Apostles meaning.

From all this discourse we may learn somewhat to aswage the bitterness of
solicitous thoughts, Use. To rely on Gods directions.
which often arise from the fear of evils to come, wherein often with some
perplexity of doubt, we distractingly forecast how to behave our selves, and
what means to follow, if such or such a danger befall us, in this case
sufficient to the day is the evil thereof: it is a needless burden to add to
the trouble of this day, those fears and perplexities of what shall happen the
next. As for the future, let us cast a submissive depending eye, upon this act
of Providence, Gods counsel. which in the midst of greatest temptation can
make a way to escape, and will act that, which may prove an advancement of his
glory in the greatest darkness. Let us both hope and pray for light and
direction.

And we may be assured that wherever his counsel is pleased to go before as a
guide, The success certainly good.
and is obediently followed; their success fails not either in Doing or
Suffering; and in case success be not answerable, it may (a part post) be
concluded, That the Agent had no particular direction from God. Good David may
entertain pious thoughts of building a Temple, which even the Prophet Nathan
may approve of, 1 Chronicles. 17.1, 2. but a countermand coming from God, we may
conclude that David's intentions and his approbation were the issue only of
their own pious thoughts. In this point these following cautions may be
admited, as seasonable in these times.

1. Caution. Not to make success an infallible sign of Gods special
direction.
1. Caut. That we do not make immediate success an infallible reciprocal sign
that the Action (which wrought it) was by the special advice of God] Though
success always follows the taking of direction from God; and though a man may
conclude because this action had not answerable success, therefore there was
no such particular direction: yet no man, must simply and barely conclude This
has success, therefore its agent had a peculiar council from God for it: for
Providence, often permits, that actions done upon self motion; whither good or
bad may find success: and he that would justify actions, by success; may
find an easy way to Justify all kind of Villainies and Rebellion.

2. Gods Directien is not against his revealed will.
2. Caut. That Council and direction in the ways of ordinary Providence, is
always suitable to his revealed will:] and therefore he never moves man
inwardly, or guides him by council in that which is manifestly irreligions, or
unrighteous. He that perfectly hates and severely punishes sin, never moves any
man to it. His Councels, are as pure and blameless as his precepts; as being
but particular directions to fulfill them.

Thus Gods councels are continually attended with an answerable success; and
so highly beneficial; and advise nothing but Purity, and so Righteous
altogether; and consequently the being honored with so happy a Guide, is an
high and unspeakeable Privilege. From hence it may be concluded

1. That we Entitle not evil Intentions or black actions to Gods Council; or
to the motion of his Spirit: his will is sufficiently revealed in his blessed
word, any thing contrary to which, cannot (by the demurest pretense) become
Lawful; He who Intends or acts any thing opposite to the Law of Reason, or
Christ's Gospel; (notwithstanding his most fiery zealous persuasion, and
confidence) cannot produce a safe warrant for himself, that he does well, for
the nature of things cannot be changed by our apprehensions; and that may very
well be looked upon as a delusion, which would thrust us upon so wild, (though
never so seemingly fair) extravagancies.

And whereas it may be objected that the Jews bloody act in crucifying Christ
was but that which Gods Council predetermined to be done. Objct.


It must be remembered that we discourse not here of Gods Immanent council,
Answ.
concerning that which secretly is determined in Heaven from all eternity; but
we speak of that transcient one, which on special occasions is given to man
for his directions: though therefore that which was don was no other, then what
God in his eternal Council decreed to permit to be done; yet the bloody
Jews, had neither an outward command; or inward advisements of Gods Spirit, to
commit so inhumane an act. Therein the Devils suggestion and their own wicked
hearts did wholly set them on work.

2. Object.
If it be farther objected that Abraham was openly commanded by God, to
sacrifice his Son and the Israelites by borrowing to spoil the Egyptians; and
the Prophet to take a woman of Fornications against Gods revealed word.

1. Answ.
It may be returned 1. That those matters as they were extraordinary; so the
times and occasions, wherein they were acted were so to. Quando Deus voluit
Iumentum est rationabiliter loquutum nec ideo sunt admoniti homines in
deliberationibus suis asinina expectare concilia. Aug. ep. 47.
Whereas Gods ordinary council and directions, is the subject of our present
discourse: he that from such instances will conclude he may do the like or
(upon pretense of a secret motion of the Spirit, shall attempt things contrary
to what is openly revealed;) may as well cenclude that he will fast, because
Moses did so; or that he will eat nothing but what Ravens bring him; because
Elias was extraordinarily fed by them.

2. That some things may seem different and contrary which really are not so.
Thus though it be a general command Thou shall not kill, and another place
tells us who so sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, Genesis 9. yet
this the Magistrate does; and claims an exemption from guilt; and so might
Abraham really intend to slay his Son without guilt of murder; nor was there
any thing contrary herein to the commandment, For God gave not that command
but by way of trial, with full purpose to cross the Act as he did; and had he
not crossed it, he had been no more contrary to Himself then he was in the
exercise of his absolute Power in dividing the waters or putting the Sun to a
stand.

For as although he has fixed an ordinary course of nature, yet he debarrs not
himself of acting sometimes above nature; so though he has tendered precepts
as the ordinary Rules of men's actions: yet (in some cases) the supreme Lord of
all; may enlarge or restrain them according to his wisdom; and the
unfathomable Council of his own will. And therefore as for Abraham, his
intention was no way to cross the ordinary precept, which bound him not in
that Particular; he having received from God a command to sacrifice his Son.
The like may be said of the Prophets taking unto him a woman of Fornication,
done in a sign to Israel, and of the peoples spoiling of the Egyptians.

And whereas some may pretend that they have extraordinary motions and commands
which may dispense with them.

It may be answered that Holy extraordinary men; (who were honored with a
frequent and extraordinary conversation;) had other means besides the general
revealed Law of God; as dreams, voice, miracles, Revelations, Vrim and
Thummim; whereby they were infallibly made acquainted with Gods pleasure.

But as for us, Christ's doctrine is the only means of trying all spirits,
ordinary and extraordinary by; and therefore, whatever suggests any thing
contrary to his preceps is to be esteemed a delusion and if (in prejudice of
these received truths) a sign or a wonder be wrought; there must be no
attending thereunto. Deue. 13.1. etc. and concerning these extraordinaries,
these two observations may be taken up as we pass along.

1. That in those times wherein men had special Revelation from God; yet in
cases of Gods worship, Unrighteousness or oppression, they were not to hearken
to any Prophet teaching the contrary. Deutron. chap. 13.

2. That these extraordinary examples were never drawn into ordinary practice
amongst the Israelites. They never thought it lawful, to Sacrifice their
children, because Abraham was commanded, to offer his Son; nor to rob or
spoil, because they borrowed of the Egyptians, or kill Kings because Josua
did so, or invade Nations, because they had gotten Canaan; or commit
fornication upon pretense of the Prophets example. And

Therefore it may highly concern us not to gape after extraordinaries, or to
wander out after private suggestions; but to stick close to Gods commandments,
And (which follows hence) that we must not hope or expect Gods special advice
in an evil action, or to look after a direction from Heaven in the comittall of
sin.

3. Caution. Not to expect farther direction in case of clear present necessary
duty and obedience to a commandment Revealed.
3. Caut. Where occasion is given of expression of a duty which cannot be
omitted without sin evidently incurred, we must not expect any directions; we
must immediately do our duty: and without delay, yield obedience to Gods
express command.

Though it may sometimes happen that (as in the Primitive times) some may
without sin, confess or conceal themselves Christians. (for I shall not
absolutely condemn them, who did not run to the Tribunalls openly proclaiming
themselves Christians) and therein have recourse to special direction: But when
a Christian is called to the Profession of his faith; and there be no other way
left, but either to suffer or deny Christ; In this case, farther consultations
are to be omitted; and Gods will performed. Thus also in instant requisite
works of Temperance, Justice, Patience, and Charity etc. Present execution of
our duty must cut off all needless deliberations. Thus when Sheba, blows the
rebellious Trumpet, if wicked Cormorants cry Come with us, let us lay wait for
Blood: Let us lurk privily for the Innocent without cause: Let us swallow them
up alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down into the pit etc. Prove.
1.11, 12. In these cases a demur (under a pretense of taking council) is very
injurious, as we are men who should not devour one another: or as we are
Christians honored with express severe, peremptory commands to the contrary.

In all these and the like cases; a seeking of council and direction, is an
open tempting of God: as if we should cast our selves from the Pinnacle of a
Temple, in hope of a miraculous support: Thus Balaam would needs be asking;
though he knew Gods pleasure: and never left his covetous importunity until
God bid him go, which ended in his destruction; and they that seek God (as
they phrase it) in their contrivements of impiety and rebellion may whilst
they abuse others, cheat their own souls, and lie ensnared in delusions.

CHAP. VI.
VErse. 24. -- And afterward receive me to Glory.
CONTENTS.
The fourth privilege of Gods servants Glory, Thou shall receive me to Glory:
future Glory Hopes and expectation of Gods Servants.

Arguments proving a future reward. 1. Consent. of the best.

1. General Reasons 1. such as prove it possible, Gods Power, and the souls
immortality. 2. Such Arguments as Prove it certain: as 1. The Corespondency of
Providence to the created desires of the soul. 2. Gods Justice. Objections
Answered.

2. Special reasons 1. Gods Promise who is faithful; the Performance of this
Promise proved 1. By Gods actions toward Christ in 5. particulars. Uses. 2.
Confirmation given thereof by Christ in 7. particulars. Uses. Why this Reward
is called Glory? This Reward a Glory of Body, Soul, and estate for ever in
Heaven. Gods Majesty by the name of (...). Man's blessedness in the enjoyment
of God. The Saints receive glory notwithstanding Affliction. Calamity works a
greater weight of Glory. Saints are passive receivers of Glory. Weighty
ebjections answered. 4. Reasons thereof.

SECT. I.
THE fourth privilege of Gods Saints is contained in these words, The fourth
privilege of Gods Saints Glory.
Thou shall afterward receive me to glory, v. 24. in which there are three
particulars observable. First, what is meant by Glory, or being received into
glory. Secondly, what benefit and how great is designed by this expression.
Thirdly, the means or the manner how Gods servants attain threunto.

For the first, it cannot be denied that worldly wel-being in this life, added
unto being in profit, pleasure or preferment, is called Glory Eccles. 6.2. A
man to whom God has given riches, wealth and honor; so that he wants
nothing for his soul of all that he desires* and Math. 6.29. Solomon in all
his glory: and 1 Pet. 1.24. the glory of man in this life is but a fading one;
like that of flowers. But that this is not the glory here meant by the Prophet,
is evident by two things. 1. He had before contemptuously spoken of worldly
prosperity as liable to many inconveniences. Secondly he says (...) afterward;
so as it may seem to be like unto that of Job. 19.25. at the latter that is
afterward for the word is (...) hence Rabbi David upon this place, after death
thou shall receive my soul, and Rabby Ezra: as Enoch was translated unto
blessedness.

This then is the meaning: Future glory the hope and expectation of Gods
servants.
the Prophet casts not away his confidence, as if dejected; but elevates it
higher, and seems revived with the hopes of a nobler Glory; the future
recompense of a reward hereafter, and this indeed is the belief, expectation
and hope of all Gods Servants: the Apostle was assured of it, when he tells us
in the 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved we have a building of God, an house not made with hands eternal
in the Heavens. and Romans 8. verse. 23. and not only they, but our selves also
which have the first fruits if the Spirit even we our selves Groan within our
selves, waiting for the adoption to wit the redemption of our Bodies.

In which belief, and expectation of theirs, they are not built upon sand; nor
made up with the slight materials of hay or stubble; Arguments proving a future
reward.
but they are seated on a foundation more durable then the Creation it self;
supported with substantial solid arguments of which I shall represent a few.

1. Universal Testimony.
First, They have the Testimonies of the best and wisest men of the world; of
the Patriarchs before and after the Flood; of whom the Apostle says Heb.
11.39. These all obtained a good report through faith; of the Jews before, and
after the captivity: (the inconsiderable faction of the Sadduces excepted) of
the wisest of the Heathen who firmly believed a reward to come; though they
were not so clear, or constant in their descriptions of it. And lastly of the
Church of Christ unto this day; wherein have been men whose fame for worth and
learning, though it came after, yet not short of any precedent age.

2. Reasons general as 1.
Secondly, They have fully, persuasive, convincing, and confirming, rational
grounds, and these are partly General belonging to all, and partly peculiar to
them, as (...) taught of God.

The General arguments that make faith hereof unto all, Such as prove it
possible as 1. Gods power.
are such as persuade it possible or prove it certain.

1. It is proved possible by Gods Omnipotency (for I count not Atheists worth
the reasoning withal) He that believes this first fundamental principle, That
God is: cannot but but believe him All-sufficient; and this will infer, that
he that can do all things, to whom nothing is impossible, can if he will,
reward and make us happy after this life.

2. The Capablenesse of the soul proves it possible; for the soul in nature
is immortal, 2. The Seuls Immortality.
and never dies, no contrariety works its corruption, it depends not upon the
Body, and is least weary when it is most employed: is spiritual without
composition, not consisting of prineiples into which it may be resolved, and
therefore may afterward receive an addition to any well-being it has had in
this world. 2. Such arguments as prove it Certain as


And thus both the Agent and Patient, God and the soul prove it possible: God
can bring man to Glory; and the soul is capable thereof.

From the possibility let us prove next the certainty of this reward. Now the
certainty thereof, 1. The correrespondency of providence to the created desire
of the soul.
is founded upon the correspondency and mutual sympathy between the works of
Creation and Providence; as Creation makes all things Good, and nothing in
vain; so Providence causes this goodness to display and show it self
running along with the Creature to satisfy and prosper it, in its intended end.

Thus were the luminaries created naturally operative of light; for distinction
of times, and influences to life, inferior creatures also owe their being and
their: serviceablenesse, to the same Hand: and as they were created for an end,
so providence answers this work: looks to the execution of these offices. So
that since the creation none have failed in their works; but have had the
concurrance, and support of providence, in their kind, from the beginning of
the world, and still shall till the end thereof.

Now amongst the works of creation that concerns Man, this is one, that there
is impress't in his reasonable soul a desire of well-being, and such full
happiness, as may satisfy him. This is universal in all men, none excepted,
and it is natural and necessary not to be extinguish't: it is the end of all
his endeavoures here, to make that life God has given, a comfortable, and
contented one.

Now since this is God's work, it is Good, and because good, not in vain; and
therefore we may conclude that Providence has appointed means and chalked out
ways, for man's attaining to, and enjoying of that which shall make him happy:
for else this desire would be vain, as not attaineable, and Providence should
in its efficacy, come short of creation, and not reach to answer the goodness
of the Creature to the full extent thereof, which would be a disparagement to
both works, to providence as being too short; to creation as having made
somewhat needless.

Object.
And if it be objected that this desire is in every individual man and soul of
man; and so providence should be obliged, to bring every soul to Happiness.

We answer that Providence undertakes not for the individuals, this, or that,
of every species, Answ.
or kind: nor do the works of Creation necessarily oblige providence to so
single a correspondence; It fully answers its end whilst it preserves the Kind;
though this or that particular fail. Though the Sun stood still, in Josuah's
time, and went back in Hezekiah's; though this figg tree bears no fruit, or
that seed fail the Husbandmans expectation; yet it follows not, that
Providence fails, and deserts nature.

So though this or that soul (having a natural desire of blessedness) fail
thereof, yet is it not in vain: if one soul attaines the end, Providence
answers the Creature: and shows this desire is attainable; nor is it engaged,
to bring this or that soul to happiness, more then this or that Plant to
perfection; because that unto attainment of this or that man, there is somewhat
more required then a mere desire of happiness; as unto the production of fruit
in this or that Tree; more is required then that it be of this or that kind.

And yet, as Providence works the preservation of Nature, by influence upon
individualls: so does Providence show its infallible Corespondence with this
desire of happiness, by bringing these, and these individual men as Abraham,
David, Peter and Paul thereto.

And further, as in Nature every Individual would certainly produce its
natural actions unto full extent; if not interrupted and impeded in its
course. So would God (in merciful providence certainly) answer the desire of
every soul and make every individual happy: were it not for the malicious
voluntary interposall of sin, which unfortunately steps between and severs us
from blessedness, makes so natural and noble a desire fruitless: and
therefore the works of sin are worthily called (...) as it is Romans 6. verse.
21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed, for
the fruit of those things is death.

2. Gods Justice.
A second thing that confirms the certainty of a future reward, is the Justice
of God; spoken of Romans 2.6. Who will render to every man according to his
works.

Now man's works are of great variety, amongst which those properly, are the
objects of justice which are 1. Morally Good or bad. 2. such as are done
willingly without outward constraint or necessity; for no man is called to
Judgment for actions of mere nature, as eating when we are hungry; nor for
such as are merely, simply, and absolutely involuntary.

But because some men give themselves wholly to the service of God, and to the
obedience of his Law, and others again make it their business, only to be
profane and ungodly; and out of a proud luxurious impiety care for neither God
nor Man: and being that both these run their several roades and keep on
without change, both they and their Actions, become liable to Justice.

Now farther that God is Providentially just, that he takes notice of the
actions of men, that he put a difference between them, and renders accordingly,
two things (amongst many) fully evince.

1. That there is such a virtue as this amongst men; which bears not its self
alike to all agents; but rewards some, and punishes others; and this is
commanded by the Law of nature; proved in reason, required by necessity, as
being the very pillar of all humane society; and as necessary to the World, as
the Sun, or life it self: now if this virtue be here amongst men on earth, we
may well conclude it, much more eminently, and perfectly in God, (who is all
sufficient,) there being no excellency in the Creature which is not infinitely
in God, and derived from him; and therefore we cannot (in reason) conceive, or
expect, he should be alike to all.

2. The experience and testimony of all ages; which give us abundant examples,
of the visible, notorious, punishments of wicked men; and the remarkable
blessings upon some, that have been his servants; and the same History and
experience tells us, of some (yea thousands) that not only receive not their
reward, but are porsecuted, afflicted, defamed, as it is, Romans 3. verse. 39. For
thy sake we are killed all the day long we are accounted as sheep for the
slaughter. And Heb. 11. verse. 36. and others had trial of cruel mockings, and
scourgings yea moreover of bonds and imprisonment. Sealing their faith and
obedience with that blood, which they cheerfully poured out, as a tribute of
their hopes, and a witness of their more glorious expectation. It being a
certain and infallible conclusion; That being, there is a God, which Judges
the Earth, there is verily likewise, a reward for the righteous, which the
Apostle was sure of, when he tells us, 2 Thessal. 1.6. It is a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you.

And if it be objected; that it is rationally conceiveable, that man might do
all this without reward; because God may command without proposing of a reward,
and man (in reason) ought to obey though there be none. I answer it is true
indeed, but yet since God has so manifestly declared himself just, so as none
that believes a God, disbeleeves his Justice, and his Justice is, in rewarding
the good, as well as punishing the evil doers; it follows that as sure as God
is just, if well doers have not their reward in this life, they shall have it
after. So on the otherside: the wicked that escape their punishment here shall
meet with it hereafter.

And if it be further objected: this may seem to conclude, in the behalf of
such good men, as suffer for righteousness sake; but what shall we say of
them, that enjoy their portion in this life; as did Josuah and many other
powerful and famous men.

I answer, God indeed is debtor to none; the blessings received in this life,
are more then can be deserved and yet they come far short of true, and full
blessedness: which is not to be found here below; nor will the blessings, they
receive in this life, more prevent a more full and future felicity; then in
joying the first fruits, debars the reaping of a full harvest. Here they have a
grape or two, but shall hereafter the whole vintage; here they have but in
part, and by way of earnest, a glimpse only, of that glory which hereafter
shall be more perfectly revealed.

And thus much briefly of the arguments which to every soul, that is
reasonable, and Religious, proves, the future reward of Gods Servants drawn
from the universal consent of the wisest and best men; the power of God, the
immortality of the soul, the natural desire of happiness, and the answer of
providence to that desire, and lastly the undoubted Justice of Almighty God.

But besides these arguments, Special reasons peculiar to Gods Servants.
which the Servants of God have in common with others, for support of their
faith, in this particular; they have grounds which are peculiar unto them; as
being taught of God and having a more sure word of Prophecy, given by
inspiration from him.

The particulars of which I shall reduce to this one general head. 1. Gods
promise.
It is the promise of God that he will glorify and reward his Servants after
this life, and from this promise thus presupposed the argument will be this.
Who is faithful.
As sure as God is faithful and true, as sure as he can neither lie nor
deceive; so sure is it, that he will receive his Servants to glory.

I shall not need to spend many words to prove, that God is true and faithful:
for shall we not allow and attribute unto God, that, which we require and
commend in man; or can we in reason, and justice affirm falsehood or untruth of
God, which both reason and Justice teach us to abhor, in the Sons of men,
with whom we deal; and if we find amongst them, some that are exact observers
of their word, much more may we say of God, with Balaam, Number. 23.19. God is not
a man that he should lie, neither the Son of Man that he should repent, has he
said and shall he not do it? Or has he spoken and shall he not make it good?
Assuredly they that know and believe there is a God, cannot but believe he is
faithful, and true, and will perform his promise.

And for the (...) of this, that God has promised eternal life is clear.

It was much that God revealed to the ancient Patriarchs; to Abraham was the
promise made; and what this promise was, the Apostle tells us, Heb. 11.10. For
he looked for a Cry which has foundations, whose builder and maker is God, and
Verse 16. But now they desire a better Country, that is an Heavenly; this
promise was typified by the Sabbath; by the Land of Canaan and rest therein;
and upon the knowledge of this, Moses scorned Egypt, Job triumphed on his
dunghill, with I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25. The Jews overcome
their sufferings and welcomed misery on these hopes at it is, Heb. 11. verse.
36, 37 etc. And it was David's consolation here thou will receive me to glory.

But in the fullness of time Jesus Christ came into the World, and did more
clearly reveal this as the promise of God in regard of which clearness of
Revelation, the Apostle says that he did (...), bring to light life and
immortality through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.

That the same Jesus Christ of Nazareth, that was Borne in the days of Augusty
Caesar, and by confession of all was Crucified, when Pontius Pilat was
Governor of Judaea, and Tiberius the Successor of Augustus was Emperor of
Rome: the same Jesus whose life Acts, and death, are written by the four
Evangelists; and from whom the most part of the World received the happy name
of Christians: that he (I say) promised a future glory in his Kingdom; and
declared that God by him has made this promise, and has given him power to
perform it: these things are acknowledged by all.

Only, whether he spoke truth, whether God made any such promise indeed,
whether Christ can and will be as good as his word, this is so much doubted of,
and too much contradicted by flesh and blood.

But in this we want no satisfaction; The performance of this promise proved.
the same word of truth, that gives us notice that God by Christ has given us
this promise, assures us thereof by many proofs fully effectual to its
confirmation.

1. It is revealed to us, that God has confirmed this promise by the addition
of an oath, which is an end, of all doubt and controversy; and this the Apostle
assures us of Heb. 6.13. For when God made promise to Abraham because he could
swear by no greater he swear by himself. This then is our faith; that as sure
as God will not perjure himself, and break his oath, so sure is this promise.

2. Whereas we are informed that God the Father, 1. By Gods actions toward.
Christ in 5. particulars.
sent Christ into the World to declare this promise, and has given him power
to make it good, as it is, Joh. 17.2. As thou have given him power over all
flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him; our
belief in this, is strengthened by the Actions of God, providentially done
toward, and in behalf of the Person of Christ as.

3. God the Father has declared, asserted, and affirmed Jesus Christ to be his
only begotten Son Math. 3.17. And lo a voice from Heaven saying this is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. A transcendent relation in comparison
whereof, the Angels of Heaven are his inferiors; now if the word spoken by
Angels, and Prophets, was steadfast; how much more is that which is spoken by
the Son of God.

Father has commanded the whole World to hear Christ his Son, that is to
believe his word and do thereafter, which certainly we may affirm he would
never have done; if he had not absolutely decreed, to make good his Sons word
in this.

this and the other World; in his only Son Jesus, whose life, and actions
declare, that he was the best of men; no guile in his mouth, no
unrighteousness in his hands, or ways, and yet it pleased the Father to
bruise him, so that he was looked upon, and esteemed as the afflicted and
smitten of God. He was delivered into the hands of wickedest of men, whose
various injuries and affronts, ended in the worst of deaths. So that the purest
and most constant virtue that ever the Sun beheld expressed in humane nature;
went without its reward in this life. And can we think that God would leave,
such a soul in Hell, and suffer his holy one to see corruption, forget to
glorify his Son who came into the World to glorify him. He did not surely for.

raised his Son Jesus Christ from the dead, and set him at his own right hand
in the Heavenly places; far above all principallities and every name that is
named, not only in this world, but also that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.21. The
Angels are commanded to adore him, at his name every knee must bow, as King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, to whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given, and
all this, confirmative of this promise of a future happiness, for if Christ be
risen again; how can they, that are Christ's doubt of a resurrection. The
Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 15.20. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and
become the first fruits of them that slept, and therefore as it is, 22. Verse,
As in Adam all dye so in Christ all shall be made alive, and as he is the first
fruits of a resurrection; so is he of glory too, and therefore, we are bidden
to look at Christ as the example of our future glory, Heb. 12.2. Looking unto
Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith who is set down at the right hand
of the Throne of God. So that from hence we may believe with our hearts,
confess with our mouths, that he is of all- sufficient power to fulfill the
authority, he has received from his Father, of giving eternal life to all
such, as believe in his name.

Lastly, God has appointed Jesus Christ to be Judge of World as it is. Act.
17.31. Because he has appointed a day in which he will Judge the World in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, if in righteousness, then
will he render unto every man according to his works, even glory, honor, and
peace to every one that works good, Romans 2.10.

And thus much, of the arguments confirming our faith, in this Article, drawn
from the great and providential actions done by God the Father toward, and in
the behalf of Jesus Christ his Son. I should now proceed to speak of those
actions, whereby Christ himself has made faith unto us, of the truth of his
word, and promise, in this particular. But that I must (first) present you with
some uses of the great things wrought by God the Father, (in this particular,)
concerning Christ.

1. We may be assured God will not take any contempt, or disobedience to
Christ, from us in good part; is it not a strange piece of neglect that the
Jews should be more zealous of Moses, the Turks of Mahomet; then many among
us, of a Savior, and his Gospel. They will not be removed from what they
profess, whilst we can vary our zeal with temporal occurrences, and count
that an accident of Religion, which heretofore was esteemed of Substance, and
yet neither had one for their Mahomet, nor the other greater evidences of Moses
Divine authority; then God himself has given us, of Christ's being his Son:
how shall we then, as the Apostle gives us a caveat, Heb. 2.3. Escape if we
neglect so great salvation, and reject the word preached by the Lord; such a
Lord, as in the first Chapter is described, such a Lord, as is declared to be
the Son of God, higher, then the Angels: and the Royal Prophet sutably to this
having declared the decree, published, for the advancement of Christ to be a
King: makes this use, and application, Psalm. 2.10.11. Be wise now therefore O
ye Kings be instructed ye Judges of the Earth, serve the Lord with fear and
rejoice with trembling. And as for those impure and rebellions souls, that let
themselves together against the Lord, and his anointed, he the sits in
Heaven, will laugh them to scorn; turn their wisdom into folly, and their
supercillious counsels into self destruction.

2. Use, Think it not strange that some things in matter of obedience should be
required of thee, which seem hard, and unpleasing; as, to deny thy self, and
thy vain desires; to mourn, fast and pray; humble they soul and become vile:
think it not (...) if thou meet with opposition, discontent, or loss; a
persecuting hand, or a threating sword: and yet, though we believe general
Doctrines, we often fail in particular applications; the funeral of another
presents us with death; which we look on but with a general, and careless eye;
our youth, our health and strength promising, some (perhaps a longer) respite.
So though we hear and know, that Christ is to be obeyed; that afflictions are
incident to the Church; that repentance and patience is man's duty; and these,
are generally believed true; yet when particular occasions are offered of
personal obedience and patience; how often do men exempt, and except themselves,
withdraw their shoulders? and if personal evils unavoidably press; with what
indignity, do they undergo their sufferings? and murmr against providence?

But to take of so unhandsome, and unwholesome an humor; let me demand; art
Thou better then thy Savior, the serva^t, then his Master, remember God takes
no other course with thee, then with his own Son. He would have him, that was
in the form of God, to be made in the form of a servant, and of no
reputatation, to learn obedience by his sufferings, and suffer first, ere he
enter into glory: a few such thoughts will settle thine, and turn thy pride
into submission.

Having given you some uses of the former point; 2. Confirmations of
performance of this promise given by Christ in 7. particulars.
I shall reassume my intended theme; and show how Christ himself has proved
and made faith of the promise; and of his abiltty to perform it. And that

1. By his Miracles which were so many, so stupendous, that they forced
Nicodemus a ruler of the Jews, into that passionate acknowledgment, Ioh. 3.2.
For no man can do those miracles, that thou do, except God be with him; and
hence again as it is Chap. 10. verse. 38. Though ye believe not me believe the
works, amongst which the most pertinent, and remarkable is, that he raised up
the dead to life; giving us thereby, an assured earnest, of what he had so
often promised.

2. His life was such, as renders him free from all manner of suspicion; so
holy, so unblameable, that his bitterest adversary, could not charge him with
any sin; or fasten the smallest blot on his pure and righteous actions; such
and so great was the conscience, and confidence of his own integrity, that he
defies them Joh. 8.46. Which of you convinces me of sin; and to know
impostours by, he gives us this sign; Math. 7.16. By their fruits ye shall
know them. Try him then by this his own rule, and examine his life, how
faithful to God, and zealous of his glory, how affictionate to man, free from
all ambition and wrong; and you will quickly conclude, such an heart as this,
could harbor no deceit, that nothing but truth could proceed, or flow from
those lips, that condemn rash and idle words, as the corrupt fruit of an evil
Tree, Math. 12.35.

3. As impostors and deceivers, discover themselves by the wickedness of their
lives, so are they dicerneable for such; by the malignancy of their Doctrine.
The Heathen Priests and oracles for the cruelty of their sacrifices, their
teaching to worship many Gods, their principles of injustice and inhumanity and
their abominable mysteries, are justly lookt-upon as impostors, you may as
soon marry Heaven and Hell, light and darkness together, as extract
happiness from principles so corrupt, truth and righteousness are the way to
it; not the extravagancies of an ignorant impure zeal.

And this was most fully brought in and taught by Jesus Christ, a pure
spiritual worship of the only, true God, that made the World; an utter
extirpation of Idolatry, a breaking down of all walls of partition between God
and man; a more entire union between man and man with the means tending
thereto; innocence, charity, and righteousness, the expression and display of
all virtues, humility, patience, fortitude, constancy and moderation in all
estates; these are the precepts of Christ, wherein finally, whatsoever things
are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, lovely,
pure and of good report these (and nothing contrary unto these) are prescribed
in his Gospel. The Husbandman manures his ground, but it is the hopes of Harvest
that quickens, and encourages his pains; nor does he sow his seed but with a
pleasant expectation of a greater in-come. So when you read that Jesus Christ
implants grace and the principles thereof, breaking up the fallow ground, of
man's heart, and sowing therein the precepts of piety toward God, and
righteousness toward man; when you consider how he proportions the means to
the end; and by giving Man a holy Religion, fits and prepares, his soul, for a
blessed union with God, and makes it, capable of happiness. You need not, you
cannot doubt, but he will bring the end and means together; and perfect his
grace with future glory.

4. Whereas the high work of conversion by God, who whilst they were under
that power were ruled by it; and consequently guilty of sin and wrath; and this
guilt enough to debar a soul, from happiness forever: making it liable to
eternal death; Christ our Lord by offering himself a propitiation, has by so
invaluable a sacrifice, purchased our remission and pardon; so as now, there is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; and we may be sure God's
Justice being satisfied, both sin and guilt being taken away; there is an
entrance into future glory, administered unto us through him.

death has confirmed the Covenant, of which this promise is the maine part:
hence it is called the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. And he is
declared the Mediator of the New Testament, which he confirmed with his blood,
Heb. 9.15. Now recollect and consider what greater evidence of reality, and
faithfulness can be given upon Earth, then when a man shall be contented to
make good the truth of his promise with his life, and seal his word in
Characters of blood: death leaves no place for dissimulation.

And if it be objected that many have been obstinate to the end, and defended
their Heresies even to death, as Servetus and others; that many have had such
strong delusions, that the fear of death it self could not fright them, from
vainly conceiting themselves to be some great ones; as Montanus who constantly
averred, that he was the Paraclet, etc.

I answer. 1. That delusion in his Person, is not conceivable nor possible
considering what has been said before of him, his holy life, wonderful
miracles, and the high, grand Testimonies God gave of his being his Son; and
the words of Christ, are here fully true, which he gives us Math. 12.26. If
Satan cast out Satan he is divided against himself, how shall then his Kingdom
stand. Satan gives no delusion against himself; now there is nothing in the
World more destructive to Satan and his Kingdom, then the promise of
happiness, and those precepts whose obedience is the way thereto.

2. Though it cannot be denied, that some have been obstinate to death in the
defense, even of errors: yet concerning them, it may be demanded, whether they
were not fully persuaded that the matters mantained by them were true? And
whether if they had certainly known them false; they would have adventured so
far for them: now then, Christ Jesus here promises a reward, and declares that
he will perform it; if there were any thing false, herein he could not but
see, and know it false: now for a man to seal that with his blood for truth,
which he himself knows and cannot but know is false, is as impossible, and
inconsistent, as to be mad with reason.

6. Christ has made faith of his resurrection, Acts 1. verse. 3. That he showed
himself alive after his passion, by many infallible proofs, being seen of them
forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God.

This matter was not hudled up in the clouds of mere probabilities; nor was
there any thing wanting, that might make the witnesses certain of his
resurrection: they were ('it is true) chosen witnesses, but not few not two, or
three only, (though the Law saves in the mouth of two or three witnesses every
word shall be established) but more then five hundred, nor was this done once,
at one time by one means; but at several times, by many appearances made, by
many Remonstrances to their eyes, their ears, their touch; they saw him often,
heard him, handled him, put their hands in his side, and their fingers into the
print of the Nails; they did eat, and drink with him; had all their doubts
fully satisfied; and all this, for the space of forty days; after which in
their presence and view, he visibly ascended up into Heaven. Now what influence
the resurrection of Christ, has to confirm the promise, of our future glory,
has been spoken of before.

truth and faithfulness in other things, confirms it also in this; his
justice, and humanity even among men forbits us to disbeleive him, whom we
know, and have found, exact in his word. The giving of eternal life was not the
only promise and Prophecy made by Christ, he promised the sending of the Holy
Ghost upon his Disciples; the endewing of them, with power from above; that
they should work wonders, convert nations found the Church, and preach the
Gospel, to the ends of the World: he Prophesied, foretold, their chains, and
imprisonments; their opposition, and persecution by men; the encompassing of
Jerusalem with armies, and it is destruction with the ruin of that stately
edifice the Temple; the calamities of after ages; the calling of the Gentiles,
and the not pervailing of the gates of Hell against his Church; in all these
and many other particulars; the event fully verified his words, so perfectly,
and exactly fulfilled; that we confidently challenge the whole World, to show
the least variation of his promises and Prophecies. Has he then been so
faithful in all this, and can we disbeleive him, in this promise of glory? If
we look but with a single eye upon the Earth? How many Characters of a God may
we read therein? When every plant presents a diety, and bespeaks a Creator;
and if we reflect but on our souls; there is not there a grace, there is not a
comfort, but will tell us Christ is as good as his word; all is no more, then
what Christ has promised; and all, but the earnest of what is to come; so that
we may conclude, he that has been thus faithful, in the Kingdom of grace;
will not fail of that glory, he has so fully promised.

I have been the more large in this point of the proofs of a future glory for
two reasons.

1. That it may be known, there is just cause to fear and tremble at the
disbeleif of this point, the grounds of this faer (as may be collected from
what has been delivered) are two.

1. That this is not a single heresy, but an Hydra; a monster, that involues in
it the guilt of many infidelities. He that denies a reward after this life:
contradicts the consenting Testimonies of all men in the World: derogates from
the power of God: makes man's soul no better then a beasts: discards the
providentiall Justice of God; denies the Scriptures to be his Word; Christ to
be his Son; discredits his life, and passion; gainsayes his resurrection; and
takes away all hope, and fear of future Judgment, and overthrows all Religion.

2. This disbeleif is the more fearful by how much more it is inexcusable; and
how inexcusable it is, you may gather by those multitude of arguments given by
God to work and strengthen our Faith.

And secondly being these times are evil and perilous; wherein we may say
with the Apostle, If in this life only we have hope we are of all men most
miserable 1 Cor. 15.19. let us entertain nobler thoughts and Hopes, and out of
this store house of arguments, strengthen our faith; every one that has this
hope purifies himself as the Apostle tells us 1 Ioh. 3.3. this faith will
turn our afflictions into comfort; our losses into gain; make us walk in an
even path, and by keeping us faithful unto the end bring us to felicity.

SECT. II.
THat then we may more fully understand what great cause we have to be
confirmed in this Faith, how real and substantial are the comforts that we
shall reap thereby: I come to the second point considerable, having laid the
foundation sure (...), that there is such a reward for the righteous, the next
thing to be insisted upon is Why this reward is called glory.

Why this reward is called Glory.
In this particular there appears to me a great difference between Humane, and
Divine writers; those use the words in a restrained sense using (...) glory,
for (...) honor, and (...), confining their meaning to that fame and honor
which springs from good actions, and consists in the praise of man. But these
take the word in a more large and perfect sense; meaning by (...) Glory,
Blessedness, and a state made up of the confluence of all good things suitable
to it. 1. The luster, beauty, and light of the Body is called Glory, hence 1
Cor. 15.41. there is one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another
glory of the Stars. 2. The Perfections, and endowments of the mind are called
glory as it is Dan. 4.36. my reason and my glory and hence Christian joy is
said to be a joy unspeakable and full of glory. 3. and lastly height, wealth
and a full prosperous estate is called Glory, hence the liberty of the children
of God is termed a Glorious liberty Romans 8.1. and in this full comprehensive
acception we may take glory here, for this future reward wants nothing of that
which deserves the name of Glory.

1. This Glory shall appear in the body as the Apostle tells us Phil. 3.21. 1.
This reward is a Glory. 1. Of Bodies.
who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like to his glorious
body. The particulars are power, honor, beauty, incorruption, whereby shall be
abolished all diseases, weaknesses, wearinesses, deformities, corruption, pain
and death of which last the Apostle expressly tells us 1 Cor. 15.26. the last
enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

2. The soul shall be made glorious in the perfection of all its faculties;
thus 1 Cor. 13.10. 2. Of the Soul.
but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away: from which will arise perfection of Love, and all other graces,
faith and hope swallowed up in full fruition, and the fear of sin quite taken
away; for all sin arising either from corruption of the mind and judgment, or
rebellion of the will and affections when the most noble faculties of the soul
shall be void of defect; and the inferior affections of disorder, there can,
there will be no place or occasion for sin.

3. Of estate.
Lastly they shall enjoy a Glory of estate too that is, riches, honor, praise,
joy: they shall have a Crown of righteousness, and what can the most covetuous
ambition long for more; the praise that is from God; what greater Euge can we
desire, that joy which cannot be taken away, and what pleasure can be greater
then that which does still fill us with raptures? and those not transcient but
eternal; when our Jubilee shall be everlasting, and our consolation endless:
we shall then find and enjoy that which cannot here be found, or the world
bestow; a full and perfect satisfaction of mind; for the natural desire of the
soul, shall be then fulfilled, and the creature attain to the end it was made
for.

And this content will appear the more full and satisfactory if you consider
two things, 1. the place 2. the time Quamdiu.

In Heaven.
1. The place shall be the Heaven of Heavens, where the Throne of God is; where
his Majesty and Glory is most fully revealed.

2. The Duration of time shall be forever set out in the promise eternal life
and described 2 Cor. 4.18. but the things which are not seen are eternal.

Hens. Arist. Sacer.
Some Ecclesiastical writers are very confident that (...) used in a high and
heavenly sense signifies majestatem divinam, or presentiam majestatis divinae;
and therefore is Nonnus (the Greek Paraphrast of the Gospel of Saint John)
blamed by Hensius that he expresses (...) the glory of Christ, by (...) or
(...) for that (...) that glory of the only begotten of the Father is (says
he) the Deity or divine Majesty of the Son of God; indeed where Moses desires
to see the glory of God, Exodus 33.18. He is answered by God no man can see my
face and live: the Glory of God is the face of God and this is God Himself.

And now being that our future reward consists in seeing of God as is expressed
Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God. And as the
Apostle tells us 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. We shall be ever with the Lord: they may well
be said to want nothing, and presumed to have a glorious body, a beautiful
soul, a perfectly blessed estate, and a never interrupted contentment, that
enjoy the Lord God himself; the Ocean, an original of all Glory the Author of
all happiness.

Behold the reward then of Gods Servants, how infinite and transcendent it is?
Man's Blessedness in the Enjoyment of God.
See the end of all their pious labors; the invaluable reward of Religion and
the love of God; whom none shall serve for naught; and what ye shall receive,
he tells you before hand, to encourage your performances; this made the Ancient
fathers foregoe their inheritances, and undervalue the world, counting
themselves but Pilgrims and strangers for a more durable and happy abode; Saint
Paul scorned the world, and its Treasures, as dung, for those riches that
cannot be taken away; and with joy welcomed his dissolution for this admission;
that he might be with Christ; nor need we wonder that so many Saints even
courted their deaths, if we consider the Glory that was set before them, such a
glory as none shall fail of, that faithfully believes and adores the Giver.

There remains the third particular to be now treated of; which is the way and
manner whereby the Servants of God are made partakers of this glory which is by
being received or assumed thereto. Thou shall receive.

Doctn. 1. The Saints receive glory notwithstanding Affliction.
And here consider it first with relation unto part of the preceding verse
nevertheless and you shall find this general doctrine, Trouble and Calamity
shall not hinder the Saints being received unto Glory.

This is cleared out of the promises, before spoken of: for since God has
engaged his Word and Promise, his faithfulness obliges both his Justice and
Power to make it good, and indeed what can hinder the powerful execution of
his righteousness. The Apostle tells us in triumph, Romans 8. verse. 31. If God
be for us who can be against us.

2. Nothing can hinder Receipt of Glory but that which works man into
disfavour with God, and this is sin, but (as often I told you) there is no sin
in suffering for rightoousnesse sake but a happiness rather as the Apostle
tells us 1 Pet. 3, 4. and in the 4.14. the spirit of Glory rests on pious
sufferers, all our storms here cannot Shipwreck This, no cloud can obscure
Heaven from a pious eye, or ecclips the glory of his obedience and future
felicity; nay (not to conceal a nobler mystery from you) calamities are so
far from hindering that they elevate us more, to increase our Glory; working
out for us as the Apostle assures us 2 Cor. 4.17. a far more eternal and
exceeding weight of Glory.

Calamities increase Glory.
Which though it may seem not only improbable, but ridiculous in the eyes of
carnal men, that apprehend and esteem nothing more contemptible then a
suffering persecuted Christian yet the grounds of it are

1. That Calamities prove as Physic to purge out the old leaven of corruption
that may remain: vexatio dat intellectum; trouble makes men more wise and less
secure or unadvised, and therefore David tells Psalm. 119. before I was
afflicted I went astray but now have I kept thy word.

2. They give occasion to the exereise of many eminent and excellent virtues;
which otherwise would not appear. They work strong confidence, manifest
patience, assured experience; and the Hope which makes not ashamed: it is much
to believe and obey; but to suffer for the name of Christ will be a greater
increase of Glory; according to the merciful providence that gives unto him
that has; and more abundantly to him whose works are more abounding in the
Lord.

And these thoughts taught the Apostle to overcome all his sufferings when he
tells 2 Cor. 4.8. that his troubles could not make him despair, because he knew
the glory that attended them. Calamities rob worldlings of that which they
count their felicity, casts a cloud on their brighest enjoyments, and makes
their treasures unpleasant; a powerful argument would they but consider it,
that felicity consists not in the fruition of these sublunary things, and is
not to be found in such fading possessions; but no trouble can deprive us of
our future Glory; no imprisonment can sequester Heaven nor any losle bereave us
of an invaluable Reward. Why then should we be as men without hope, what cause
can there be either of despair or disbeliefe? our confidence is better seated
then to be so shaken, our hopes are just, if our Consciences be pure, nor can
we suspect the truth of our future happiness, whilst we cheerfully lay hold on
Jesus, the Author thereof, waiting for his appearance whom the world may as
soon divert and hinder from coming to Judgment, as from bringing along with
him the reward of the faithful.

2. Doctr. Saints are mere Passive Receivers of Glory.
A second general conclusion from these words is this. That the Servants of God
are merely passive receivers of Glory at the hand of God] for the Prophet says
not I will ascend or mount up, and assume glory to my self; but in a more
humble strain Afterward thou will receive me to Glory.

And how little the best of mere men do, or can contribuhe to their own
advancement unto glory, how worthily they may be accounted mere Receivers
thereof, not efficients or Agents therein? these following reasons may evince.

1. To and before the attainment to Glory there is required a double
Resurrection in either of which, how small is man's efficiency will be known by
the particulars.

One is that which in the phrase of Scripture is called the first Resurrection
Revel. 20.6. and though that which is there spoken of, is not (it may be) that
which I mean, yet that which I now intend may well borrow that name, I mean
Conversion, Regeneration and Sanctification by Grace. For observe,

The estate of unconverted men is described by this expression, amongst many
others that they are dead in trespasses and sins Ephesians. 2.1. where also the
contrary estate is expressed by a quickening, and being raised: in another place
by the having a new life, but alive unto God by Jesus Christ Romans 6.11. And
that conversion and regeneration must go before Glory, is made evident to us
Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God, and verse. 9. if any man
have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his, and in the 30. verse of the
same chapter he tells us that calling and Justification (which do both
comprehend full conversion,) is before being Glorified.

Now that in Conversion man is merely passive; is not able to convert himself,
I need no other proofs then that of death and Resurrection; which expressions
tell us that as Lazarus contributed nothing to his own revivall; so in
conversion man is of himself breathless, it is the life of Grace must restore
him, and produce so powerful a change, as a return from sin and a more
endless death: the same thing is also intimated by Regeneration, new creation,
man makes not himself; it is God that works in us to will and to do of his
good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. If then man be passive in resurrection and
conversion which is the means to glory, he cannot bring himself to glory, but
is a Receiver of it as of grace.

Secondly, unto Glory it is requisite that there be a Resurrection of the Body
from the grave and the power of death; of which the Apostle gives us a large
account. 1 Cor. 15. from whence observe

1. That though the soul live after death, yet can we not properly say the
whole person is in glory, whilst the body is in the grave; and sees corruption.
Now glory is promised to the whole person.

Secondly Though the soul be capable of a better well being in Heaven, then
this life can afford; yet is it not in its perfect and complete estate without
the body; as having a natural desire and inclination to be united to it:
wherein as it had its first being; so with it, it desires still to be.

Thirdly the necessity and lasting dominion of death was brought in by sin; and
till all the effects of sin be done away, there cannot be full glory and
therefore man cannot be completely happy, till he can triumphantly say O death
where is thy sting, O grave where is thy victory?

Now there is no work nor wisdom in the grave, when man returns to his dust
again, the body submits to a dissolution, and enlivens that corruption and
dishonor it was borne to; This is a privation total, from which no return
can be made by man's own efficiency, for how can he revive himself, that is
altogether livelesse, or act to his own recovery, that is insensible and
movelesse in this; then is man a mere passive receiver. And thus much of the
first reason.

modus agendi, Gods manner of working; man receives and God gives, but what is
the ground of Gods giving and the manner? is it necessary? nay is it not free
and voluntary of his own good will and pleasure? in this we may well say with
the Apostle Romans 9.16. it is not of him that wills nor of him that runs
but of God that shows mercy.

Object.
And if it be objected, that there is in the soul of man naturally a desire of
blessedness which providence is engaged to answer.

Answ.
I answer, Providence answers the natural desire of each species and Kind, by
and in the individuals and to this end the individualls must be such as they
were created; else providence is not obliged, as it is not engaged to make this
or that Tree (worm-eaten) fruitful. Had man continued in that Estate which
creation set him in; it might be thought necessary that providence should have
answered his natural desire of happiness: but since all flesh has corrupted
its way; and by sin and disobedience fallen from God, and that integrity which
God made it in, since man becomes an enemy to God by evil works, Providence
is not obliged to look upon man with favor; if it do, it is an act of mercy
and free grace.

And if it be farther objected, that yet even after the fall whilst man is a
sinner and in a sinful estate, Instan.
This desire still remains; and therefore whilst it remains Providence seems
bound to regard and answer it effectually.

I answer: I will not (though I well might) insist to urge that since man's fall
and corruption by sin, Answ.
this desire is but obscure and confused: somewhat it would have of Well-being;
but it knows not distinctly what: how vain have men been, and still are, in
the imaginations, and expressions of their desires? Some running after honor,
others after riches; or some such triffle; as their Happiness. Nor will I
press how weak, cold, languishing and flaggy, this desire is in a mere
natural man? Yet it rather seems to be a remote capablenesse, then an active,
working desire, but more particularly, I shall tell you.

That man by sin and disobedience whereby He falls from God, forgets all that
is good in him, so that for sin. He is justly deprivable of his beauty,
Understanding, Reason, affections, and deserves to be even annihilated; but it
pleased God not to deal with man according to extremity: He decreed and
determined to enter into a new Covenant with him, and to lay a foundation for
his restitution and reparation, and it is very observable, that before God did
actually proceed to judge man, he first reveals the decree; the seed of the
woman shall break the Serpents head Genesis 3.15.

From this dealing of God with man arises

1. That he inflicted not all but part of the punishment due unto man for sin.

2. That he leaves in man fallen some good things of nature as his parts,
understanding, judgment and affections; which render him capable of Gods
dealing with him, by way of Covenant.

3. Hereupon in the Covenant of Grace he exhibits unto man the means of
Salvation.

Under the second of these is comprehended the natural desire of man to
happiness, which upon supposall of its being left, God in providence will
certainly answer with favor; (in case man do not render himself unworthy
thereof, by new contracted guilt) but the leaving thereof is an act of free
pleasure and mercy originally, not necessity.

3. Object.
But it will be thirdly objected, must not God in faithfulness answer Faith,
obedience, charity, patience and perseverance, with the Reward of Glory and
eternal life?

Answ.
I answer, He must so, because he has said it, because he has promised it, he
cannot deny Himself, and his Word; but then, why did God promise this, and
engage his Word? nothing occurrs for a reason but his own free mercy; he did it
because it was His will and pleasure, thus to oblige himself.

merit, worth, or desert be not here imaginable?

And indeed some have gone beyond imagination and fancy, even to a full
persuasion; the Pharisees had a high opinion of themselves, and were very
confident of the worth of their own righteousness, justifying themselves above
other men, as the only meritorious favorites of heaven.

To them and their high thoughts have succeeded others, who esteem it too low,
to merit in the sense of the Latin Fathers; with whom mereri is but consequi.
to merit is but to obtain: nor do they think congruity enough; supererogation
and a merit of condignity, with such an overplus, as shall reach unto others is
too confidently presumed on.

If the opinion of these men be true, they are very active and effectual
agents in their own Salvation: and that in such an efficiency, as gives
necessary interest, in this case especially. For it is not with God, as with
man; man many times sees not worth, or cannot judge of it, or out of
partiality, commonly neglects it: God cannot do so, where merit is He cannot
but see it; and judge aright concerning it, and consequently do to it as it
deserves.

But I deny the supposition, and affirm man cannot merit future Glory, and
this is the third reason which proves the Servants of God mere receivers of
Glory, propter defectum meriti; for want of merit.

That this is so, is clearly proved by the words of our Savior Luke 13.10.
where are two arguments that batter down the high tower of merit.

1. That we are servants and do but what is our duty, and this is illustrated
by parable verse. 9. who thanks his servant for doing his duty? or what servant
can claim desert, where nothing is done but duty?

2. That we are inutiles servi, unprofitable servants, our obedience adds not
any advancement or advantage to God, therefore no merit.

3. I add, that our Righteousness is but imperfect, and whilst we are in this
world, how subject to failings? how full of defects? insomuch that every day we
have occasion to say, not only humiliter humbly (as Pelagius his gloss was,)
but veraciter truly; Forgive us our sins.

And this answers again that objection, taken from necessary obligation of
providence, to answer the Saints expectation, indeed had man never sinned, were
his actions perfectly righteous, we might lay some claim to merit; but there
being no man thus pure, (except our Savior who merited for us, as being
perfectly righteous) there is, there can be no place for merit.

our works, and the reward of Glory. What our works are, you have heard; and
what, and how great the Glory is that shall be revealed, you have heard in
part; it being beyond expression indeed, or conception, what God has reserved
for them that love him. And therefore, though men that plead for merit (as some
did once for Baal), allege that Justice requires well doers should be
rewarded; if they will stand to this plea; let them remember

1. That it will be but justice; to take notice of failings with all, and this
will deminish much of the Reward.

2. That Justice must keep a Proportion, and not exceed; and therefore the
Reward must not be greater then the desert: in which course, justice will well
enough acquit it self by the providentiall dispensations of good things in
this life, which are as much as our works can challenge. Since then the Reward
Christ brings with him, is above all we can ask or think; we may well
acknowledge, we are but Receivers, out of high and superabundant mercy.

I will conclude this point with the saying of Bellarmine, Tutissimum est etc.
It is the safest way to trust in the mercy of God, and to give him the whole
glory of Salvation, acknowledging without the proud thoughts of an active
merit, that we are but passive objects of his grace, and mere Receivers. And
since (as you have heard) great is the Glory laid up, in store, so certain, so
undoubted; what remains but that we gird up the loins of our minds, and
cheerfully wait for our Salvation to come; it is a Promise of the Covenant, it
rests, but that we perform the conditions of the Covenant and become such as
the Prophet here was: and so after experience of his being with us here, he
will Receive us likewise unto his Glory.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee.
CONTENTS.
The Prophets Profession: Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none
upon Earth that I desire besides thee. It is man's prerogative to reflect upon
God. God the object of man's desire and whole soul, and that worthily. 1.
Because it is commanded. 2. Because there is in God what answers the desire of
the soul. 3. Because God loves man. 4. Because he is beneficial to man. Of
man's elective desire of God, Passing by other things. The things passed by. The
choice of God above and before all other things appretiative. And of God alone
with exclusion of other things. Whether and how far other things may be desired
though they come not in competition with our duty to Christ? Answered. The
Reasonableness, Justice, and Benefits of a subordinate Love of other things in
reference to God.

SECT. I.
THE third and last part of this Psalm comes now to be treated of, The
Prophets Profession.
contained in these verses to the end. Wherein the delivered soul having as a
bird escaped the snare, freely expatiates it self in the wide Heaven; and
being past the danger of a threatening Temptation cheerfully enjoys it self,
pouring out celestial thoughts into as heavenly words.

In them you have first a divine rapture or profession v. 25. 2ly This
strengthened with variety of holy meditations of himself, and the estate of
such as are contrary and unlike unto him. verse. 26, 27. lastly a final
resolution purposed and determined verse. 28, these are the parts without any
further curiosity of division, save such as in the handling of them shall be
required.

The profession of this holy man is very elegant and rhetorical, full of life
and spirit. The Apostrophe (which is a figure of speech directed to another) is
continued; to this is added an eloquent interrogation, which breaths zeal and
fervency of heart; the worthy expressions of a Holy, spiritual and heavenly
soul, wherein observe these particulars, 1. the object or party aimed at. 2.
The Act of the soul set upon this object. 3. The species of this Act.

1. The Object is God himself, The first part of it. The Object of God.
as by the Antecedents, and consequents is evident; God is my portion for ever
verse. 26. To God from whom he had such present helps of Council and support,
in whom he had such excellent hopes of future Glory he turns Himself, and
returns the thankful expressions of his thoughts and words,

This is Man's Prerogative above all Creatures here below, It is man's
Prerogative to reflect on God.
they declare the glory of God but passively, without knowledge or active
acknowledgement, man not only Receives but expresses, and sets forth the
goodness of God by his acknowledgement; and yet though all may do it having
reason to reflect on that good which they have received; yet none do it but
Gods Servants whilst others magnify and applaud themselves; sacrificing to
their own nets. These look up to Heaven as the place of their happiness; and
reflect on God the Author of their Glory; paying the tribute of their
acknowledgements to Him alone. The swine is excusable, that feeds on Acornes,
but never looks up at the tree whence they fell: but so is not man, he must
receive and acknowledge, that he may receive more: it is said Romans 8. verse. 9.
That if any man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his. Now this
Spirit in the hearts of Gods Servants is a Spirit of relation whereby we cry
Abba Father as it is verse. 15. And when the Jews shall be converted, they
shall look on Him whom they have pierced; which looking is not a bare act of
the eye, but such a look and respect, as the Prophets mention often, when they
say or require that Israel should look unto their God.

Let us not therefore content our selves with a bare reception of Gods favors
and Blessings, for this even wicked men do; the Glory of God shines on them to,
but they return to acknowledgement to God. We must have more active and
grateful reflections; send back more lively, and sensible returns then a
thanklesse acceptance, it is better (says our Savior) to give, then to
receive, better to acknowledge a little that we receive, then receive much,
without acknowledgment; by the one we betray both ingratitude and Profaneness,
but by our acknowledgments of Gods blessings we show our feeling, and
dependence; and God thereby looks on himself not as invited only; but as it
were obliged to renew them to us.

The second part of the Prophets profession is the Act upon this object, and
that is, Second part of his profession the Act upon this object desire. God the
object of man's desire and whole soul.
desire of having God. Whom have I in Heaven, but thee? and there is none upon
Earth that I desire besides thee.

An expression of a large and comprehensive vastness, and extent. Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. Man has according to that, which
makes him capable to receive, consequently may be said to have an object in his
understanding, by knowledge; in his judgment, by acknowledgment; in his will by
choice; in his affections, when he loves, beleives, hopes, or delights in the
object. And there is a desire of all these (for Man's desire is not merely of
the inferior and sensitive part) Man desires knowledge, and right information;
chooses out what he desires, and desires what he loves, delights, believes and
hopes for.

This then is the sum of this part of the Prophets profession and declaration
here, he desires to have God to be his God, that is to know and acknowledge
him, to believe, love and delight in him. On God are set all his hopes, in him
are all the treasures of his comforts and happiness; and to him is devoted the
best of service and obedience.

And that worthily.
I wish that there were in every one of us such hearts, so disposed, so
directed, and set upon God; that the having of him to be our God, were our most
passionate and fervent desire: and where this desire is begun or wrought, how
much is it to be wished, that it were confirmed, strengthened, and perfected in
the Soul? Because 1.
Assure your selves, this patheticall and fervent profession of his desire of
God was not groundless: and give me leave O Christian soul, to warm thy
affection, (...), to enkindle this coal of desire into a brighter flame, It is
a command from God.
by these few following considerations.

1. Will a command from God be any motive? this was usually ever prevalent with
men of reason and piety, and indeed deservedly, for what is more fully and
justly binding then the will of God? which in this, is express and full.

1. Thou art commanded to know and acknowledge God. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou
the God of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart. And Act. 17.30. God
has cammanded all men to repent; of what, but ignorance and Atheism they were
so much guilty of.

2. An injunction of his service and obedience. Eccles. 12.13. Fear God and
keep his commandments. And Deuter. 10.12. Serve the Lord thy God with all thy
heart and with all thy soul.

3. To believe, love, confide and hope in him. Deuter. 30.20. Love the Lord thy
God and cleave unto him, for he is thy life, etc. and therefore called the
great commandment, and in the Judgment of a Pharisee more then whole burnt
Offerings and Sacrifices; the holy Scripture is full of precepts in this kind
and I might be endless.

2. Will the Answer of the object to the desire of the soul prevail with thee?
2. Because there is in God what answers the desires of the Soul.
This is the great magnetisme of the world, the powerful motive of all humane
actions, the enjoyment of our desires. One glories in his treasures, another in
his wit or strength, because of this thought, or seeming of correspondency.
This attracts the eye to beauty, the ear to Music, and the mind to pleasure;
ties the knot both of marriage and friendship faster, the hopes of this
quickens the World, and makes men's endeavors lively; how many cold Winters,
and parching summers did Jacob pass for his Rachel? how much does the ambition
of learning and knowledge invite us to? Some plough the Ocean, others the
ground; no industry will prove idle, if once set a work and encouraged by
either actual, possible, or probable hoped-for-correspondence of the object
presented to its desires.

And yet how often are men deceived, how often is the event of much reading,
sorrow; when the things learned, prove false or vain? how often do men choose
that which is bad, or love that which is but a mere outside, a painted beauty:
confide in a broken reed, and find nothing but breach of hopes, which then
prove either vanity or vexation.

But now O Christian, this object God, will not deceive thee, there is in him
that fulness and excellency of perfection, as shall answer all the faculties
of thy soul, and the vast desires thereof.

Do thou desire to know him? he is truth it self: and a truth so far
revealed as shall content thy understanding and settle thy Judgment; does thy
will choose him, and by a pious resolution resign it self to his service and
obedience? He is goodness it self, and all his commands discover it, full of
righteousness and life; is thy love and hope in him only? He can fill thy
hopes with abundant mercies, and answer thy love in raptures of perfection,
fruition, and glory; there is in him that, which will not only satisfy, but
transcend all thy desires.

3ly. Because God loves man.
3ly. Will love beget love? this is usual, sympathy meets with it is like, and
as face answers face in a glass, so does affection, and proves mutual. This
then seems even to confirm us, for Gods desire, and delight is in the
Children of Men. The Lord delights to show judgment, righteousness and loving
kindness in the Earth. Jer. 9.24. Except such of thy affections as carry
imperfection (such as are hope fear, etc. Which in respect of man are not
attributed to God) take all those that are more noble and excellent and these
are from God to man, he knows and foreknowes his, Romans 8.29. Elects and and
chooses them, Ephesians. 1.11. Praedestinates them unto good and loves them with a
love of height, depth and breadth incomprehensible, in token of which love he
sent his Son to be our Savior, and deliverer; a great love, for God so loved
the World that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3. verse. 16. A commended
love, God commends his love toward us in that whilst we were yet sinners
Christ died for us, Romans 5. verse. 8. A manifest love, in this was manifest the
love of God toward us, 1 John 4.9. From whence the Apostle confidently
concludes that if we ought to love one another, much more God.

4ly. Will benefits procure love, common gratitude, 4ly. Because God is good
and beneficial to Man.
(which every man in reason is obliged to) proclaim this; here is then an
infinite obligation, me thinks Gods goodness to the Creatures in general; and
his various disbursments of his favor, and bounty toward them; may well
represent him a fit object of humane desires. I am sure the Psalmist argues,
Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7, 8. Because Heaven and Earth and the very brutes are regarded
by God, Man may well trust in him.

But if this seem an argument of too remote a concernment, draw nearer, look
upon thy self as a Man, remember, it was from God thou received'st that life,
which thou now so mis-employest: from him it was, he that formed thee so
curiously in the womb, that fenced thee with bones and sinews, and covered
thee with skin, and who has ever since preserved that life, from those dangers
it deserved; and strengthened it under those infirmities it still labors with?
But a powerful gracious God.

2. Look upon thy self a Christian by profession, and recollect the blessings,
thou art thereby a partaker of, the Gospel of Christ, a Mystery the wisest in
the World never knew; the Sacraments, which are the seals of his love; a form
of worship enjoined in the Church, neither burdensome, (as was the Ceremonial
yoke of the Jewish Law;) nor superstitious (as were the customs of the
gentiles.)

2. Reflect upon and view they self as a beleiver; and therewithal consider,
that he that spared not his own Son, but gave him, will with him give unto
thee all other things, weigh well thy praedestination unto glory, choice and
appointment unto salvation; thy justification and remission of sins, the
fatherly corrections, support in adversity; guidance by counsel, first fruits
of the spirit, and assurance of future glory; if these things will not mold thy
heart and transport it to the love of God, I know not what will.

And now consider what temper are their souls made of, who have not God in all
their thoughts; flinty, Marble hearts, are too good an expression; to call them
fools, brutes, or prodigies in nature is likewise too mild; there is somewhat
in them worse then that the very Devils are composed of; and that is Atheism.
But I hope I shall not need to be bitter in this kind, every soul will I hope
consider these things: and say with saint Augustine. Domine Deus meus da cordi
meo te desiderare, desiderando quaerere, quaerendo invenire, inveniendo amare.
and with our Psalmist here whom have I in heaven but thee? And there is none
upon Earth I desire besides thee.

The third part of the Profession the Kind of desire elective.
I come now to the third part of the Prophets profession, which is the species
of the Act, or the kind of this desire; and if you mark it, you shall find it
an Elective desire of God, whereby the soul chooses God with passing by of all
other things; if a man have but one way to go, he cannot be said to choose it,
but when of two or three he takes one, this is properly election.

Here two points are to be touched upon 1. the things passed by 2. the modus
eligendi, or manner of choice.

For the 1. Three common receptacles there are of entities and beings. Heaven,
Earth, and Hell, as for Purgatory and Limbus, I remit them to their
superstitious Coyners, and too credulous believers.

Of Hell the Prophet speaks not here, that being indeed the receptacle of woe,
a place of terror not desire.

Heaven and Earth contain something besides, or distinct from God himself: The
whole creation is comprehended under this notion, Genesis 2. Of which the Lord God
pronounced that all was good yea exceeding good.

The Prophet then contemplates the great volume of the World, viewes the Heaven
above, the Earth beneath, and all the Hosts of them; and refuses, passes by
them all; and makes God the only object of his desire: whom have I in Heaven
but thee, etc. This is first point.

The second point is, how this choosing of God with the passing by of all other
things is to be understood? and wherein does the excellency of this Act
consist? In what manner does the soul of a saint choose God with refusal of all
the World?

This is to be understood of such an election as prefers (appretiative as the
Schoolmen speak) God before other things; and desires him (comparative) more
then all other things; or such a choice as takes God alone with exclusion of
all other.

According to the first notion we may conceive of the Prophets disposition
thus. The choice of God above and before all other thing, Appretiative.


He denies not, but that in the Creatures there is, and may be some good that
is discernable, but of all objects presented, God is most ravishing and
delightful to them; and if all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth should
conspire together to court his affection, he perfers God before them all; which
actually are, or possible to be enjoyed by him. Though he rejects not the
knowledge of nature, the contemplation of the Heavens; and it is illustrious
furniture, the glorious productions of omnipotence; or any other science, that
might adorn his nature; yet he passionately prizes the knowledge of the only
true God above all. Though he refuses not the benefits the Creatures reach him,
yet he uses the World, without confiding in it; Gods goodness being the chief
object of his will and choice; though he disdaines not the the ordinances of
men, yet he counts it better to obey God; proposing his Commandments, for the
rule of his life. Lastly, though nature teach him to love his relations; and
generosity his Eenemies yet piety and conscience have taught him to place his
best, and noblest affections on God alone.

And this indeed is that which the true Servants of God have ever really
professed, and zealously declared. Abraham made Nature stoop to it is maker; and
had rather sacrifice his only Son, then seem backward in love to God. Moses
was tender enough, of the peoples good, but more of Gods glory. It was often
the saying of David that he prized Gods Commands, before the greedy glittering
temptations, of gold and precious stones: you cannot read the example of an
Holy man, but you will also read this, in his life and actions; but most
conspicuously and eminently did this desire, shine in our B. Savior above all
men, whose respects for his supposed parents (though great enough) gave place
to the higher concernments, of his heavenly Father; whose buisnesse took up all
his time, and care, and the execution of whose commands was his delight; which
he abundantly testified when the bitterest death, could not fright his
performance, nor terrify his obedience.

Nor yet must he think this, a matter arbitrary: We have a command of exalting
the Lord above all. Exalt the Lord and worship all his footsteps, Psalm. 99.
verse. 5. And memorable also are the words of our Savior, Math. 10. verse. 37.
He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me.

And there is reason for it, because there is nothing in the Creature
desirable, which is not in God in an infinitely-full, eminent manner and
measure, unto all perfection; nay there is no Creature, though never so lovely,
that can fill the desires of the soul; but God is, and has all, that can
possibly satisfy, unto all fullness of content: and if all the Creatures
receive that which is good, or desirable in them, from him who is the Father of
lights, then is all that goodness and beauty of the Creature, more eminently,
excellently and perfectly in God the Fountain.

Which does well deserve our serious thoughts; for although I will not say,
that all disrespect of men unto God, is founded in a plain, direct, immediate
undervaluing of God, (for it must be an heart profane indeed, that says, it
cares not at all for God) yet I may truly say, it comes from an overvaluing of
the Creature; which by consequence brings men to a disesteem, and undervaluing
of God. Did we but weigh the creature in a true balance; and look upon it as
it is, we would neither hope from it, more then it can effect; nor attribute to
it, more then it does deserve; we should not prefer it so much before God as we
too unhappily do; how many are there of whom it may be said, that they honor
their Sons more then God? That with the Pharisees love the praise of men, more
then the praise of God, that serve (...) more then (...) the time more then
God; and complying with their vainer ends; adore their interest, not their
maker; unreasonable, unrighteous men, that dare deal so unworthily with their
Creator, as to make him their after-desires, and put him in a rank below the
creatures; let these men remember, the judgment that lighted on Eli's Person
and family; let them consider the end of the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
terror of that sentence he that dispiseth me shall be despised. 1 Samuel 2.
verse. 30. When besides that punishment which their contempt shall receive from
God himself, the very Creatures they so much trusted, loved, and delighted in,
shall prove their ruin; become to them as the Cananites to Israel, thorns in
their sides, and pricks in their eyes; whilst the true confidents of God, whose
hopes are seated in him only, shall find if not a perpetuity of happiness in
their enjoyments here, yet an enjoyment hereafter more durable and glorious
then to be disturbed.

SECTIO II.
I May seem (by what has been delivered concerning the Prophets choice of God
by way of pre-eminence, and above all things in Heaven and Earth) to have given
you the full scope of the words and of the Prophets mind expressed thereby. I
shall aot conceal from you what I have further thought hereon, that it is more
consonant to the Text, The choice of God alone with exclusion of all other
things.
and to the original words in Hebrew to expound this desire of God alone, by
such a choice as excludes absolutely other things. For to this sense run the
words in the Hebrew (...) there is nothing upon Earth that I desire by or with
thee.

And first herein I must not hide from you, that the phrase of some of these
words is very like to them of the first Commandment, for the words of the first
Commandment translated: Thou shall not have, are (...) non erit tibi; and here
in this Psalm (...) quis mihi erit? And take away the Rhetoric, the sense
will be, nullus alius erit mihi in coelo. None in Heaven shall be to me a God.

And indeed there was as much, or more occasion given for this profession at
the time when this Psalm was written; as when the Commandment was given. That
which the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.23. That some changed the glory of God into
unworthy similitudes, was then too true, Idolatry was then in fashion, and
plurality of Gods their Religion; in detestation of which the Prophet might
well be thought to profess, I have no God in Heaven but thee, none that I will
worship after the custom of Idolaters.

Nor was this the first profession made in this kind. Jacob vowed it, then
shall the Lord be my God, Genesis 28. verse. 21. Josuah made it his profession,
Jos. 24. verse. 15. And the Psalms are full of David's resolutions in this kind
all along, and as it was enjoined by God so was it likewise confirmed by
Christ, him only shall thou serve, Math. 4. verse. 10. And the reason is as
pressing, for there being but one God, none but he ought to be acknowledged or
adored, and therefore I shall not need to give you any other censure or
character of Idolaters, then what the Apostle does calling them Romans 1.22.
fools. And the Psalmist here in another place, they that make them are like
unto them. Psalm. 115.8.

But because there is mention made in this verse, of Persons, and things upon
earth, as well as in heaven; and of desire as well as of having; I will not
restrain this profession of the Prophet to the sense of the first Commandment;
but conceive it may be thus enlarged; I refuse and absolutely pass by all
other things and persons, in Heaven and Earth, and choose thee O God for the
only object of my desire.

A profession not without president, saint Paul all in raptures, professed he
desired to know nothing but Christ Crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. Making the World his
scorn, Abraham expres't the same, when he would sacrifice his Son. Moses
forsook Egypt and it is pleasures that he might more nobly suffer with Gods
people. Whether and how other things may be desired when they come not in
competition with our duty to God?
How many Martyrs has this made, whose deaths have testified their
resolutions, of sacrificing even a thousand lives to the love of their Maker.

And if it be objected; that in such cases, where the things of the World
comply not, with the duty We owe to God; this absolute refusal of all things
may, and ought to take place; and the choice made of God alone. But how may We
determine it in cases, wherein there is no such trial; and wherein both may be
retained and consist together.

I Answer. 1. When other things were actually known and might be known besides
Christ; yet the Apostle resolved to know nothing else, 1 Cor. 2. verse. 2. There
is a difference between the faculties of the soul, and the desire of them;
between knowledge, and a desire thereof, between love, and desire of loving;
between use, and desire of the things used, the faculties make men capable of
the objects; but desire, is a lively, eminent, high, ardent Spirit, that
carries the faculties to the object. Through desire a man having separated
himself, seeks and intermedleth with all wisdom, Prove. 18. verse. 1. And even
in things which may moderately be used, desire is forbidden; We may eat but
without the desire of an Epicure. We may desire riches, but not like those whom
the Apostle reprooves, Jam. 5. That treasured up Impiety; and grow rich, that
they might be more ungodly. Every Creature was made for our use, and enjoyment;
but none must be the object of our hopes, or maine desire but God alone. And
therefore Christ is (...) called the desire of the Nations, Hag. 2. verse. 7.
David sutably in another place all my desire is before thee. Psalm. 39.

2ly. It cannot be denied, but that others things and lawfully may be (in a
sort) desired, and loved with variety, but then observe.

That the love, or desire of man is set upon many objects in a double manner.

1. In dependently and severally, Love is independent or dependent.
for the several particular reasons which are, in the object. Thus David loved
his Relations, and his friend Jonathan, with variety, yet independently; not
one for the other, but each of them for several reasons, more or less.

2. Dependently, when a man does love or desire, one thing first, and other
things in relation thereunto; and because of it. Thus the same David loved
Mephibosheth for Jonathans sake; and Abiathar for his Fathers. Now a true
Servant of God, does not desire and love God and other things, with a love of
independency, that is God for himself, and other enjoyments for themselves. But
first the love of God is shed abroad in his heart; and from thence, diffused to
others. (like rivulets, that pleasingly wander from their spring) affects other
things in dependency to the love he bears to God, and for his sake, as the
things loved or desired, have relation unto him: namely as they are gifts of
God dispensed in providence for our comfort, or as they are serviceable to his
glory, or as he has put a relation upon them unto us, and founded the same in
our necessities, (as food) or in our nature, (as are our relations,) or in his
own ordinances (as marriage and Magistracy) or in the blessings by him
dispensed by their means, or lastly in his own will or command; or in any or
all these put together.

And that the Saints of God do love all things in God, and nothing but in
dependence to that love and relation unto him; is fully evident by this
Testimony. That when this relation of the object unto God cease, and when
love cannot have footing in such dependence and relation; then love, desire,
and the expressions thereof do likewise cease; as if it be not Gods gift, or
cannot be obtained without sin; if it make not for his glory, or he forbid it,
if it should be an occasion of withdrawing their affections from that love, and
duty they owe unto God. Job hated not his wife, yet when she tempted him to so
high and ungrateful a crime as to curse God, he then testifies his
disaffection and dislike, by giving her the just character of a foolish Woman.
The many injuries David received from Saul might well have tempted his revenge
to a full execution, when he had him at an advantage; but the very thought and
memory of his relation to God, in being his anointed, locked up all his
resentments; and he no longer looks upon him as his Enemy, but as a person
more sacred and inviolable. Nor had the primitive Christians any great reason,
to love their cruel, Idolatrous persecutors, whose fury was not satisfied with
whole sacrifices of their Bodies, in stead of Rebelling, they releeve their
Emperors, bury the dead, and return their Ethnic persecutors offices of
love, and all, for the relation they had to God. The powers that were, were his
ordinance, and both they and their Enemies were enlisted together by Christ,
within the Commandment of that love, which men are obliged by to bear and
express to one another.

And this is farther observeable, in that league which Josuah made with the
Gibeonites, which (though it seemed to carry many flawes in it, as, being made
without any necessity, without any direction from God, with a people with whom
no league was to be made, obtained by fraud only, and so prejudicial in all
its concessions, that many of the people murmured against it, and against the
Princes of the congregation for it, yet) they soon, not only submitted, but
approved and vindicated it; and that 1. because it was done by Josuah, and
advice of the Princes whom God had placed in Authority, and to whom he had
given commission for the management of peace and war. 2ly. It was a Peace
confirmed by an oath before the Lord: So that now, God had relation thereto,
and was a witness thereof; which quickly satisfied their resentment; and
disarmed their mutinous passions, in humbler submissions.

By all which testimonies it is abundantly manifest, that the Saints love God
first; and all other things in reference only, and subordination unto him.
Give me leave now to recollect a little what has been spoken; and present you
in short with the three reasons, why the Saints upon Earth may be truly said to
choose God alone, with utter refusal of all other things.

1. Because they make God the sole object of their desire, properly and chiefly
desiring to have him alone. 2. Because that every thing that is loved, is loved
in subordination to this love of him. 3. (Which follows from hence) because
the love of the creature then cease, when it consists not with the love of
God.

And by these three particulars, may every man examine the sincerity of his
heart, and the truth of his love to God; if thou love him so, as that thou
desire nothing in Heaven, or Earth besides him, if thy affections to all
other objects, be with Reference and subordination of thy love to him; if, for
his sake, thou can relinquish all that thou call thine; and nobly throw
away whatsoever is most pleasing to thee, for him. But, if, (after the mode of
the World) thou runnest with open arms after its enjoyments; and for a
perishing fruition, ar't careless of thy God; or if though thou love him,
yet if thy love of Him, and other things, (like two rivers from diverse
fountains) be but separated affections; and thou can not yet forsake thy
carnal interests for Him: Thou art not yet made perfect in Love; nor can
bear a part, with the Prophet here, in this ravishing profession; Whom have I
in Heaven but Thee, and there is none upon earth that I desire besides Thee.

I shall conclude this point with this one observation more. The justice and
reasonableness of this command.
That the Commandment in these three particulars, is Consonant unto all
justice and reason, it is as Righteous, as it is express and peremptory, the
command of making God alone the object of the desire of our hearts; I formerly
showed you; and that for the actual exercise of our love, other things are not
excluded: For we are also commanded to Love our Neighbor as our selves; but
when by the commandment, All the heart, All the Soul, All the mind, All the
strength is required, this effectually intimates, that God alone is the object
of our desire.

And the reason hereof is likewise powerful. For 1. When other things without
Him are desired; they shall never be able to satisfy the soul; but God can. 2.
Since desire is the height, and perfection of Affection, and God (as has been
before said) is the best of beings, it is but just, that the most perfect
object, should meet with the best of our hearts. 3. This command of loving God
with the whole Soul is called (...) the First and greatest Commandment, the
fountain, and foundation of all the rest; all love from this. What thing
soever has any truth or goodness, which renders it desirable, it has it
from God; and therefore if the effect win our respect, it must be with
reference to the cause, it will be but injustice, and ingratitude to taste the
streams and disparage the Fountain.

The benefits of subordination of our desires to God
Lastly consider the great benefit and advantage of this dependence and
subordination in our desires and affections.

1. It will cause the love and affection that is due to other things, to be
right and constant; such as it ought to be when men desire or affect the things
of the world independantly, for reasons merely taken from the creature; their
love proves partial and languishing, neither satisfactory nor lasting: but if
we take the method, to love God first, and ohter things with reference unto
him, we shall find comfort both in the reality and perpetuity of our affections.

2. This method being observed, we shall in the strength of divine love be able
to perform, noble things, we shall (as the Apostle tells us Romans 5.3) even
glory in our tribulations, overcome our sufferings with a kind of delight, and
that which is so difficult to the heart of man, to forgive or forget an
injury; will be to us a pleasure.

3. Without this Method in our love, all our enjoiments will quite loose their
luster, and become unserviceable and indeed, when any thing loses its
relation, and subordination unto God, it then cease to be any more
desirable, and becomes an object of neglect; when Jobs wife proves a fury
rather then a help, she justly deserves reproof, and when Peter labors to
avert our Savior from his holy employment, he was not then a Disciple, but a
Satan and a Burden. There is nothing that is contrary to God, but in that very
notion, becomes worthy to be forsaken, now whatsoever is loved independently,
and without this method of subordination, is quite contrary to this rule of
God, and therefore well merits our highest aversion, and therefore if we fasten
our desires on any thing but God, we abuse our very enjoyments and make them
unfortunate; but if we prudently choose God the first being; for the first
object of our souls, we shall find that which will comfort relieve and reward
us hereafter.

And so much of the Prophets profession or desire of God, his elective desire
of him before all things; and of him alone with exclusion of all other things
as this verse gave occasion.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 26. My flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart
and my portion for ever.
CONTENTS.
The Prophets reflex meditation concerning himself. 1. His disease, my flesh
and my heart fails. 2. The Remedy, But God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever.

Hope deferred is troublesome. Delay of full fruitition of God irksome, and
full of Anxiety.

The Remedy against these Anxieties. The efficacy of this Remedy, not in taking
the Anxiety away, but 1. In making it single. 2. In preventing disordered
Actions. 3. In helping to bear it.

The first part of the Remedy, That God is the portion of the soul. A Portion
is an Estate, 1. Designed, 2. Certain, 3. Beneficial, 4. Satisfying, so is God.
Object: Answered.

The 2d Part of the Remedy.

That God is a strengthening Rock.

God strengthens 1. By Persuasion, He persuades 1. By rational arguments, 2.
By experiences of partial mercies.

God strengthens, 2. By Influence. 1. Of Readiness of mind in pressing
anxieties. 2. By assurance, 3. By supply of strength, Uses.

SECT. Vnica.
THE Psalmists pious and zealous profession in the former verse (whom have I in
Heaven but thee etc.) The Prophets reflex Meditation concerning himself.
is underpropt with the thoughts of his own estate, and of others much unlike
him. The reflex meditation concerning himself, this verse presents us with;
wherein are two things. 1. A disease remembered. 2. The Remedies exhibited.

1. The Disease was universal, and totally spread in his flesh and heart; that
is his body and mind both participated and fainted under the distemper; his
body suffered by not receiving of nourishment (for (...) signifies meat or
food) by the failing of his appetite and his mind was restless through Anguish
and discontent.

Where this distemper took its original? whether from the Body, and so
affected the mind? or whether disquiet of mind, stirred up the humors of the
Body (according to the sympathy between both?) it is not much material, to
enquire.

This may seem to be the same with that which in the 21. verse he complained
of; My heart was grieved and I was pricked in my reins, and it may be thought,
that the occasion of this was, the forementioned Temptation, whose dangerous
Assaults cast him into much trouble and hazard, and filled him with many
passionate and perplexed by-thoughts.

But if we seriously view the matter immediately preceding; we may (as I
conceive) find somewhat more expressed.

The word (...) signifies such a failing, weakness, anxiety, or languishing;
as arises from long expectation or delay of things hoped for.

Hope deferred is troublesome
It is usual with men upon the apprehension of the necessity of a better being,
when the desire and love is fixed upon an Object which is concerned to bring
content along with it; if it be not presently enjoyed (in some proportion
suitable to the desire) whilst it is as yet absent, and expectation waits for
its Embrace; there will arise a kind of languishing and Anxiety. Hope deferred
makes the heart sick, Prove. 13.12. men's eyes may fail with longing, Deuteronomy.
28.32. Thus David longed for his Son Absalom. Amor non patitur moras: and the
weaker Sex do often give experiences of the strength of longing often miscarrying
out of mere desires.

Delay of full fruition of God proves irksome.
The occasion of the Prophets melting condition, may be conceived to be; that
having found out an Object worthy of the highest desires, and accordingly fixed
his passionate heart upon God, which expresses it self here in a languishing
desire, of full enjoyment of Him; the full, and only content of his soul.

And although God never denies Himself totally* to them that love him, for
even in this life Christ's words are true Ioh. 14. verse. 23. They are
continually with him upholding them with his fatherly hand: guiding them with
Council and enriching them with his blessing, Yet God is pleased not to answer
their full desires, a partial knowledge, an imperfect fruition, comforts mixed
with adversity, prosperity with tribulation, The Earnest of the Spirit, is the
height which they usually attain to: and therefore their boundless desires
cannot be satifyed, nor their contents be full, and consequently longing
expectations, disquiets of heart, and the like anxieties take hold upon them.
The thirsty heart pants not so much after the water brook, as David's soul
after God; which breaths out many a longing wish: when shall I come and appear
before God, Psalm. 42.1, 2. The Parched land gapes not so greedily for water as
his thirsty soul after God, Psalm. 84.2. The earnest expectation of the
Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God: for the creature was
made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected
the same in hope, because the creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. For we
know that the whole creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until
now: and not only they but our selves also which have had the first fruits of
the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves; waiting for the
adoption to wit the redemption of our Body: for we are saved by hope, but hope
that is seen is not hope: for what a man sees why does he yet hope for: but if
we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience hope for it, Romans 8.19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

This difficult place is (I confess) diversely expounded, Some by the creature
mean the natural creatures to whom the Apostle by Prosopopeia attributes a
kind of pain; till the redemption of the Sons of God: and if those that rise
no higher then sense seem to carry this affection; what an height thereof is in
those who know that which they wait for and expect.

Others by the creature understand man converted to the Faith of Christ, whose
estate (under that happy influence) is termed a new creation Gal. 6.15. and
themselves New creatures begotten again to a lively hope, which gives birth to
a vehement desire of enjoying; yet even these desires must not be immediately
satisfied; and This may seem to be the meaning of the 20 verse. subject to
vanity, (that is) to the present troubles of a vain world, but not willingly,
yet it is Gods will who has subjected that creature to this hope; that it
should be so for a time, in the interim those passionate affections, wherewith
that enjoyment longed for, is expressed in terms worthy of our observing.

1. (...), an earnest expectation, such as that of little Children, that
attentively stretch out their necks at the Dams bringing of them meat. 2.
(...), It groans, a symptom of Oppression and Anxiety. 3. (...), Travels as a
Woman in her agonies, whose fairest hopes and desires are mixed with pain.
These longing desires are heightened also in those, that seem to have a
prerogative, who are not satisfied with the first fruits. But even we our
selves (says the Apostle) groan within our selves, etc. desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven. Thus, that soul which is
fixed once upon God; is still venting it self in a longing sigh, and a faint;
it both troubles and delights it self in a divine anxiety, which sweetly
streams through all parts, keeping it upon the wing, in a moving posture,
until it light upon God.

But being that man is but flesh and blood, and so may easily be overcome by
passion, a Remedy therefore may seem necessary; concerning which this may in
general be premised: That those desires and Anxieties which arise in the
soul, of enjoying God, are not absolutely cured, and utterly stopped by this
Remedy, nor is it convenient that it should.

To some constitutions a weakness or a disease, The remedy against these
Anxietes.
often proves a prolongation of life; a Flux though attended with some gripings)
may relieve oppressed nature; and therefore its course may not suddenly be
stopped, but with convenience: The efficacy of this Remedy. Not in taking away
the Anxiety.
The letting of blood (even to the fainting of the heart) is looked upon as a
cure of the Plurisy: In these cases a vent proves an help to laboring nature;
whose blood and humors otherwise would heat and putrify to the the danger of
life. Thus whilst we are here breathing after God, if our desires and anxieties
(which issue from our longing after the enjoyment of him) be utterly stopped, and
taken away as to that object, they will soon have recourse to some other, and
as a fountain whose streams are put to a stand; goes back, and settling on its
own lees at length putrifies; so would our affections and desires draw back and
working upon worldly objects, would easily contract corruption by this
intermixture, and therefore did a pure Christian soul well examine its own
temper, it would not wish to be freed from Anxious longing desires after God.

But although the remedy here prescribed does not absolutely take off all
anxiety, yet it makes these several high advantages.

1. It will keep out other incident distempers: But first it makes that single.
Thus Bodily diseases come not alone but are often complicated and folded
together. A Fever and a flux may join hands; The grief of the stomach may be
attended with another in the head, and a wearisome thirst is the natural
companion of the dropsy. And in the soul, height of Anxiety flowing from
longings after God, is often accompanied with doubts, fears, and temptations, of
spiritual desertions, nor will the devil be wanting, to throw in cunningly
some bitterness into the cup.

That Physic therefore which (in these cases) by its virtue shall make the
disease prove single, which shall keep out a fever in a flux, or preserve the
Brain in a fiery distemper, or a wound from rankling, is of a great excellency
and value. And such is the Remedy here described; upon the application of
which, all doubts will vanish, fears kept out, Satan's darts utterly quenched;
and the soul will be possessed only with longing after God, which sweetly stream
about, in a pure uncorrupted, untainted, and unmingled channel.

2. It will prevent disordered Actions.
2. This Remedy will preserve the sick party from many disordered and unruly
actions. Men in their distempers, often time have as much need of being ruled, as
cured. The heat of a fever and drought in a dropsy, causes men to desire
drink without measure, a frowardness commonly attends diseased persons; those
remedies therefore, that moderate the want, of what we desire to our harm, and
calmes us in our extravagancies, do highly challenge our value and esteem. Thus
Our mind strecht to an height of desires (like the highest part of the heavens)
moves fast, and we by reason of the gross mixture of flesh and blood, are
subject to many extravagant, unruly actions, and things not lawful.
Cleombrotus upon reading of Plato's book, of the souls immortality, was forced
to such an high strein, that to participate of it, he threw himself off a rock
into the Sea. And S. Augustine informs us that the Circumcelliones (who were
of the donatists faction in Africa) carried such violent desires of Martyrdom,
as that by many sorts of death they made themselves away. But all such
Passionate, unruly, violent, unlawful attempts, this remedy will preserve us
from, so that he that Believes shall not make have Isay. 28.16.

3. Lastly, 3. It will help to bear it.
this remedy will render the anxiety of longing very tolerable, without any
great heaviness and pressure of Burden. So that a man shall be able to bear
it, and content to ly under it, in an humble submission to divine Providence,
and his will, as long as it shall please God to reserve him in that condition,
and prolong the desires of his soul.

This being premised in General, concerning the efficacy, a more peculiar
disquisition of the nature of the remedy follows now, which we find consists of
two ingredients. 1. That God was the strength of his heart. 2. That God was his
portion for ever.

That which is last named maybe begun with: The first part of the Remidy That
God is the Portion of the soul.
we find Good men, often calling God their Portion. Psalm. 16.5. 119.57. David often
quiets his restless mind with this thought: when his spirit was overwhelmed,
and all refuge failed him Psalm. 142.5. and here being almost ready to sink
into this Temptation, he no sooner takes hold upon God as his portion, but he
looks over all troubles as below him, (with so sure a defense) he rides over
these troublesome waves in Triumph. The Observation that hence ocurr's may be
this, Doctr.
That the Consideration of having God for a Portion may be a full hearts-ease
in any discontent.

This may be easily made good if we reflect that his being our Portion may
import.

The nature of a portion 1. an estate designed.
1. That He is designed and appointed to be enjoyed: a Portion being that part
of an estate, which is peculiarly set apart for his use whom it is bestowed
upon. If we take a view of the Covenant, we may find that, you shall be my
People is answered with, and I will be your God, where we see a mutual
propriety on both hands. This thought truly weighed, will take away that
bitter part of anxiety, which arises from doubt or distrust; whether any good
be possible or no. The particular designation of a portion, dries up this
cloud, and resolves this question, Who will show us any good? and by a very
satisfactory resolution quiets the heart; and then especially when delay gives
occasion to think and say, My master delaieth his coming: and consequently to
be doubted whether he will come at all, then the assurance of him as a portion,
stops all farther enquiry. 2. As this thought takes off distrust, so it
preserves us from unruly, disordered actions; for there being to every
appointment its season; we shall not greedily anticipate the appointed time, nor
incroach upon it, nor hastily seek to obtain it by rash or unlawful means,
but in patience possess our souls, cheerfully waiting our Fathers leisure; and
humbly submitting our hastiest desires to his will: It not being for us to know
the times and the seasons which he has put in his own power Act. 1.7.

2. An estate certain.
2. This expression, of Gods being our portion, implies a certainty of its being
obtained, for a Portion is a share which all equity assists to as certain
Though by concealment of Testaments or by the picking of flaws in them to make
them void, or by power, or collections, many Orphans on Earth may be
Injuriously defrauded of their Portion, yet none can take this Portion from
those it belongs unto; neither death, nor life, Angels, nor Principalities,
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ,
Romans 8.28, 29. a full persuasion of which, takes away all fear and serves to
make our hopes firm, solid and lively.

3. A Portion obtained, brings advantage, 3. It is beneficial.
betters the estate; serves often too pay debts, and to make a man set up and
subsist by himself, all which this fully makes good: It is too mean an
expression to cry he cannot be poor, or want that has it; He cannot but be
rich, high, honorable and prosperously glorious who has him for a portion, on
whom greatness, power, and the Kingdom attends; and in whose hands it is to
make great and to give grace unto all.

4. A Portion satisfies the desires; 4. It satisfies the desires.
after the young man's request, ( Give me my portion Luke 15.) was answered; He
without any further demand or expectation of more, began his journey. Put these
earthly portions, as they are in themselves but low and shadows, so the
content they can afford is but little better. The satisfaction which attends
upon it, is but for a Time; or but in respect of the giver; for there are still
farther desires to be satisfied; and farther endeavors to those desires,
whereas this heavenly portion, yields a full, absolute and a plenary content.
He who has once a fruition of God, neither desires nor looks for any more; but
sits down in a full, pleasing satisfaction; with which every faculty is brim'd
up and abundantly stored with, fatness, and filled with the Rivers of his
pleasures; In which thought, the soul bears with the delay, grumbles not at
the time, but heartily Resolves upon an expectation, with an assurance, that
the Anxiety in the interim, is but petty and low, (in respect of the glory to
be revealed when the inheritance shall be actually possess't) and casts not
away its confidence which has great recompense of Reward. Heb. 10.35.

Use.
If therefore, so singular a comfort, so grand an encouragement, may arise from
this High privilege, and from the due apprehension thereof, it remains that
we make good our interest in this portion, that our persuasion may have a true,
solid foundation, which may be done, when God alone is made choice of, as the
object of desire: when the heart wholly fixes it self upon him, before and
above all things, and upon nothing else but in a due subserviency, and
subordination to the love of him.

Object.
If it be objected that in the mean time whilst the appointed Portion is hoped
for, whilst that which is certain is delaied, the soul may droop, faint and
die in the expectation, nay even the anxiety and impatience of the expectation
may hasten the disaster.

Answer by the second remedy. That God is a strengthening Rock.
It may be answered that even for this, there is a Remedy provided: the second
Ingredient formerly mentioned That God is a rock or strength to the heart;
which not only stifles those discontents which proceed from delay, but it
lessens, and takes off those new troubles and daily calamities, which usually
occur; renewing our vexations, and multiplying our discontents, Gods being a
Rock: fully answers our highest necessities.

This expression which is frequently attributed to God Deuteronomy. 32.4.31. 2 Samuel
22.32. Psalm. 18.31. and elsewhere, imports not only what God is in himself,
not to be overcome or removed, Faithful, Just, True, unalterable; but it
speaks what he is to his People, A maintainer, supporter and strengthner, of
them; hence they often call him, My Rock, 2 Samuel 22.2. The Rock of my Salvation,
verse. 47. of my strength Psalm. 62.7. efficienter, working strength, is meant
here by the Prophets God is the strength of my heart.

Which eminent goodness of God, in this Passage of Providence deserves our
thoughts a while.

That our own weaknesses, undo us; that we are tottering Reeds, and dwell in
clay houses, woeful experience makes good: dust and ashes is all we can pretend
to, and therefore easily broken by the weight of a calamity; a little rain
washes us down, a small tempest scatters us; and every coasting wind drives us
about, and therefore it is necessary, that we should have more strength then
our own; and if once we be so happy as to participate of Gods alsufficiency; we
may cry of that strength, as David did of Goliahs sword; None is like unto that.

That this Mystery may be unfolded in some particulars, God two ways
strengthens his People, God strengthens. 1. By Persuasion.
1. By Persuasion. 2. By supernatural Influence.

For the first of these, since man's desires, hope and expectation of future
good; are properly the the affections of an understanding, and reasonable soul,
not of sense, (for we see that sensitive brutish creatures reach not so high
as to a capacity of believing, Hope or expecting: or any acts thereof:) hence
it is that the hopes of a reasonable soul must be fortified by some rational
inducements, which presented to the understanding and assented unto by the
Judgment, shall preserve this hope and desire alive: It is want of fuel
which puts out the fire; and they who either hope not, or cast away their
confidence, do it either out of Ignorance of, or because they are destitute of
those inducements which might persuade them to continue in their Faith and Hope.

God perswads first by rational arguments.
In this God persuades 1. by Rational Arguments, which are so evident, strong
and convincing, as that they enforce a Reasonable man to conclude the certainty
of his Portion and the continuance of his duty, in holding fast his hope and
confidence to the end: These arguments have been before largely insisted upon,
drawn from the Power and Justice of God: from the souls Immortality, from Gods
promise, and its confirmation by God himself, and Jesus the Mediator of the
new Covenant.

2. By experiences of his mercy.
2. God persuades, and therein fortifies our faith and hope, by giving
experiencies of his mercy and Goodness, in particular deliverances in this
world. Our Savior persuades to a dependence on God, by sensible experiments of
the Lilies growth, and the Ravens being carefully fed. The Apostle tells us
that experience works hope, and hope makes not ashamed Romans 5.4, 5. He that
has once delivered us from danger, breaths into us an hope that he will do so
again. 2 Cor. 1.10.

God strengthens.
And though in the framing of these Conclusions from Arguments and experiences,
Reason may seem to have the work, yet it acts so, as illuminated by the
Spirit, and word of God, and consequently these persuasions are from God.

2ly. As God strengthens by persuasion, 2ly. By influence
so by a supernatural influence he breaths life into his own. As

1. By a present erecting of the mind, 1. Of Readiness of mind, in pressing
anxieties.
so as in the midst of anxiety, and trouble, they shall actually cast their eye
upon God; and bend their soul toward him, as their strength. For we may
observe that there is a great difference, between knowing what ought to be
done, what is man's duty in such and such a case before hand; And the having of
a ready, present mind, which shall enable and move him at an instant, and
pressing occasion. Peter was well informed of his duty, when he answered;
Though all men would forsake thee yet will not I. And yet when the Temptation
came; when he saw his Master betrayed into wicked men's hands; his remembrance
of so confident a promise faild him; he was at such a loss, and confounded,
that he denied him, whom he was resolved to own with his life; and came not to
himself, till Christ with a look recalled him. When David's servants forgetting
all duty and humanity, thought of stoning David, his Spirit was raised up; and
his reflections ready and present; and he encouraged himself in the Lord his
God, and ran unto that sure refuge in his distress. This was that, which
Christ promised his Apostles should be armed with; and without premeditation
should be such, as their adversaries, should not withstand it. And this, likely
was that which the Apostle meant when he says at his first answer the Lord did
strengthen him, a solid firm readiness of mind, and liberty of speech, to
tender such an Apology, as manifested his Innocence.

2. By assurance.
2ly. God does influentially strengthen, by impressing in the soul, an assurance
of the truth of his promise; and their interest therein. This is that which is
termed the first fruits, and earnest of the Spirit, and the seal whereby we are
sealed, unto the day of redemption; whereby substantially and fully they are
ascertained that God is theirs, from which persuasion there sweetly streams a
joy unspeakable and full of glory.

3. By supply of strength.
3ly. Besides all this he furnishes his Servants with an unknown supply, of
supernatural vigor. He gives power to the faint, Isay. 40. vsrs. 28. etc. and
strenghtens them, not only by a consideration of his power (which may command
vigor from us) but by the power, supernaturally infused by the Spirit, in the
inner man; God tells saint Paul that his grace is sufficient, that is, a
special comunication of strength should be allowed him to vanquish Temptation.
This is that, which the Martyrs had an eminent experience of; their adversaries
fawning persuasions were too low, to dissetle them from those firmer ones which
Gods truth afforded. Their assurance of Gods faithfulness, and their own
Interests prevailed against the offers of life and preferment, made by
seducers, and when they were rould in flames, and stretched in those tortures
(the bare thought whereof makes flesh and blood to tremble) they were animated
with a celestial influence, and their drooping Spirits were inlivened with an
unspeakable courage; wherein they triumphed far above their own thoughts; or
the malice of their bloody executioners.

If therefore there be so unexpressible a comfort, assistance, in the having of
God for our Rock; it may concern us, in these confused, disheartning times. 1.
To have an humble, constant recourse to God, that he would strengthen the
feeble knees, and uphold the fainting hearts; that he would assure us of his
love, and (as occasion offer it self,) to give us courage and resolution to dye
for him, and to deal with us according to that power and grace which is
sufficient for us.

2. That we so live as not to commit those Impieties our strength; for 1. Sin
brings with it guilt, and disturbance of conscience, from whenceproceed fears
and disquiets, so as that the wicked flies when none does pursue. 2. When
calamity arises, God ordinarily leaves wicked-men to cope, and wrestle with
it; thereby their fond weakness is discovered: and when this whirlwind, this
anguish and distress, seiseth upon them, he denies any assistance to their
greatest importunities; and therefore they will soon be trod down, and
overwhelmed by the storm. 3. Wicked men do not always sink by a bare
permission only, but God does often multiply the terrors and fears of graceless
and Irreligious men, this was that hornet which he sent before, to plague the
Egyptians and the Caananites with; this he threatened rebellious Israel with
Deuteronomy. 32.25. And this is the portion of sinners.

3. Let us endeavor to receive strength from God, supernatural influence,
which may be affected, by receiving those persuasions of God, and by assenting
unto them.

4. For though of the two, that of influence be the more effectual way, and
infallible, because many know what is their duty, and assent thereunto, yet
occasionally omit to do what is required, out of amazement, forgetfulness, or
height of passion, wherewith in distracting occurances they may be surprised;
but where God infuses vigor, there the happy effect of strength will follow;
yet ordinarily, God strengthens those only, who are persuaded, and do believe,
and if men harden their hearts against the word, they shut them also up against
the Spirit.

I say ordinarily these only are strengthened; with reference to what man in
providence may expect: For Gods providence is not to be limited in his acting
with men; he can break the Rock before he softens it; and at the same time
both persuade, and infuse, but in the usual, and ordinary course of
dispensation, men are converted before they are confirmed; are brought by
degrees to persuasion, and must believe before they be sealed. He therefore
that hopes, for the blessed influence of grace, must not sin against nature and
reason; and he that expects to be established must resolutely believe.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 27. For lo, they that are far from thee shall Perish: thou have destroyed
all them that go a whoring from thee.
CONTENTS.
The Prophets Meditation concerning others. Sinners far from God in 4.
Respects. Idolatry is spiritual whoredom, and why so called.

The end of wicked Men. They shall perish. 1. Because God removes the influence
of his favor. 2. God casts them from him. 3. God with his own hand destroys
them.

SECT. Vnica.
AS the former verse presented us with the Prophets First Meditation concerning
himself; The Prophets 2. Meditation concerning others.
so does this tender unto us his second, concerning others; who are very much
unlike him. His lo prefixed, invites our attention to the words: in which we may
find. 1. The Persons noted. 2. Their end specified, The Persons are described
1. under a general notion. 2. By a specificall action, and to both, event, end
and success, is particularly applied. To the former they do, or shall perish;
to the latter, Thou shall, or have destroyed them.

In the first, they are far from thee. Is contained a descripion of Impious
men; and that not by their position and distance only; for the word does not
only signify adverbiably far of, procul, nor adjectively or participially,
removed, distant, separated, but by their actions; for (...) signifies to go
away, to depart, to recede or to remove one self. These men then, are not put
far of (as a stone cast out of the hand) but voluntarily, Sinners far from God
in 4. Respects.
wilfully, they go away and remove themselves, far from God. Which Scripture
very frequently attributes to wicked men, Isay. 39.13. They have removed their
hearts far from me. Isa. 1.4. Gone backward. Jer. 5.23. Revolted. Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Foresook God. From whence it may be concluded; That sin is an aversion, and a
withdrawing one self, from God. An evil heart of unbelief departs from God, for
although, none can absolutely go from God, because of his omni presency; yet
there may be a distance from him in some respects, which the nature of sin may
discover unto us. This is (...). 1 John 3. God is in his Laws By manifestation.
From this law sinners are far. Psalm. 119.15. Therefore in this respect they
are at a distance from God.

1. Of his will.
For the cleerer apprehension of this: We may know, that God is diverse way, in,
and with his Laws.

1. Per modum voluntatis, by manifestation of his will and pleasure, there
being in it declared, what man should do. Hence we often find the Law termed Gods
will, Mat. 6.10. Joh. 6.38. etc. Romans 12.21. Which will sinners go from, by
not performing it, Luke 12.47.

2. Of holiness.
2. Per manifestationem sanctitatis; by the manifestation of his holiness, and
righteousness. Though rational demonstration may teach to infer this
conclusion, that because he is God therefore perfect, and therefore holy: yet
to us, who take a cleerer view usually of things in their effects; there does
nothing, more evidence Gods holiness, then his commands, which are holy,
righteous, and just. Psalm. 19. Whereby, he severly prohibits iniquity, and most
strictly injoynes, what is holy and good. By this argument the ancient Fathers,
made the Heathen ashamed of their Gods; who were owned as Actors, examples,
teachers, and approvers of such cruelties, lusts, and impieties, as the Law of
reason, and nature did abominate and condemn; whilst the righteousness of
Christ's precepts, testify the holiness of the Lawgiver; and the transgressors
of which are far from, either the expression, or imitation thereof.

3. God is in his Law per modum imperii, 3. Of his Sovereignty.
by way of sovereignty Empire, Dominion, and command. That absolute power which
he has over man, as his creature, he most visibly expresses by prescribing
bounds which he must not pass; by a bridle upon his thoughts, words an
actions. I am the Lord is a fit preface to his commands; he is therefore our
Lawgiver and Judge, because our Sovereign and King. Isay. 32.21. They
therefore, who peevishly withdraw their shoulder from his yoke, Neh. 9.20. That
go from loyalty and obedience, may justly be placed at as great a distance, as
sin (that high rebellion) can make them.

4. God is in his Law per modum faederis by way of Covenant. Deuteronomy. 5. 4. By way
of Covenant.
From which sinners treacherously depart. 2 Kings 17.15. Jer. 11.10. Thus we
see those respects for which wicked men are said to be far from God, too many
with the Samaritans, think they may serve the Lord, and their own Gods
together; be near to God and their own sins; but as it is true in Philosophy,
that one body cannot be in two places at once, so in Divinity too, he that is
with the Creature is far from the Creator. Yet because this is not taken to
heart, and we see those that walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, to stand in
the way of sinners, and to sit amongst scorners, with a delight of being there;
Let us take a view of that end, which the Prophet here proclaims them to. The
end of wicked men. The shall perish. 1.
They shall perish thus, Job 20. verse. 7. They shall perish like their own
dung: The way of the ungodly shall perish, Psalm. 1. verse. 6. Psalm. 9.3.92.9.

That this may be evidenc't, take these particulars. 1. They that go far from
God, remove themselves from the happy influence of his favor, mercy and grace;
and thereby forsake their own mercy. 1. Because God removes the influence of
his favor from them.
The special influence of Gods favor, is an act of his free will, not of
necessity. Though the Sun cannot at pleasure suspend its rays, or withdraw
them from this, to that; yet God, who acts with no such necessity, affords, or
denies, when, and where, he pleases. Upon ground of this certain truth it may
be affirmed: That God will not favor, or bless, a wicked man, nor show them
special mercy, for

1. How can we imagine that God will respect those, that perversely cross his
will; walk in a stubborn contrariety to him, deny his sovereignty, cast off
their obedience, and prove disloyally rebellious. That which he proposed to
Israel was life, or death, Deuteronomy. 7. And he will walk contrary to those, that
do so to him; Levit. 26.16. etc. 2. The name of Covenant evinces this, because
God therein Promises upon condition; which not being performed, he is
disengaged from the promise. 3. Gods holiness (which assures us he will not
regard the unclean, Hab. 1. verse. 13.) His Justice (Which renders to every one
according to his works; Romans 2 6.) Assures the punishment of wicked: and
consequently, that they shall have no favor.) His truth which has passed
peremptory threatening upon impiety) and those obvious examples of denial of
mercy, as to Cain, the bereaving of Israel of those once bestowed, do all in an
unanimous harmony testify, that they who are far from God, whose impieties are
exorbitant, do remove themselves from the influence of his mercy and favor.

2. God does not only remove these men from him; but does cast them from him,
and out of sight, 2. Because God cast them from him.
as he threatened Judah, 2 Kings 24.3. And therefore it must follow that they,
that are thus far of, must perish, (which was the conclusion to be made good.)
there needs no more, to make them dye, then Gods withholding his favor; at the
removal of this Sun, the tree fades, at the departure of this animating
influence, the whole will droop: This light taken away, a pitchy darkness
succeeds; and this happy defense thrown down, all is exposed to assault and
ruin.

From all which it may be concluded, that they that are thus far from God
(notwithstanding that glitterring pomp, they may for a few days pride
themselves withal; notwithstanding those fawnings wherewith their sycophants
may applaud their condition, as happy) are in no thriving condition; the
shadow of death surrounds them; and (notwithstanding those high thoughts
wherein they lie secure, (as beyond an assault;) the bare stop of Gods
influence puts them into a withering condition; and the contracting of those
rays, do moulder them to nothing. Unto a perfect perishing there needs no more
then to be far from God.

The sinners (in general) their end and fate, thus discovered; we may now (with
the Prophet) descend to the Persons more particularly, painted at; and their
success.

Idolatry spiritval whoredom and why to called.
The Persons are such as go a whoring. Had the Prophet meant those that carnally
defise themselves with fornication and adultery, the attribute is truly
appliable, for the Apostle assures us, that whore mongers and adulterers God
will Judge. But the addition (from thee) intimates that spiritual whoredom
which is Idolatry, which often goes under that title, Exodus 34.13. Psalm. 106.
Ezekiel. 16. and in many other places. The ground of which expression is, that
amongst those many phrases God sets forth the union, between him and his
people; that of an Husband is eminent, Isay. 54. verse. 5. a violation of which
Bond, they are adulterously guilty of, who worship other Gods. Jer. 3.20.

Nay even the blind superstitious Heathen themselves, though they were not
under the Covenant whereof Moses was the Mediator; yet were they included in
that which was made to Noah. And as, (though they were not formally and
directly acquainted with the institution of marriage, made by God and recorded,
Genesis 2. yet) nature, reason, and tradition told them, fornication was
unlawful, and adultery intolerable; so did the same right reason inform:
That there is but one God and that he alone was to be worshipped; and therefore
in acting contrary they were without excuse. Romans 1. So that grounding upon
that which ought to have been received; That one true God is to be served and
the soul ought to keep it self entirely for him; It will follow, that their
Idolatrous worship of many Gods was a spiritual whoredom. Thus Idolatrous
Ninevehs uncleanenesse is termed the whoredom of the welfavoured harlot.
Nahum. 3.4.

If it be demanded also whether this wickedness is incident to any of the
Christian Church, being that they neither do, nor (since the dispelling of
those black mists by the Gospel) did worship the Heathen Gods.

It may be answered, that in the despensation made in the fullness of time; by
the Covenant of grace, to articles of Religion, this was added: That there is
one Mediator annexed to the necessary belief of God, 1 Timothy 2.5. Joh. 17.2. It
is further observable, that this Mediator (the Son of God) is the Marital head
of the Church, to which he bears a conjugal Union, Whether Christians may be
guilty of Idolatry?
Ephesians. 5.25, 32. The Marriage of the Lamb with the new Jerusalem is solemnised
with joy, Rev. 19.7. and those whom the Apostle converted, he assures us, he
espoused them a chaste virgin unto Christ.

Things being in this posture, though God only be acknowledged; and those
blind dieties of the Heathen, looked upon with detestation, yet where other
Mediators are set up, Images worshipped, Saints and Angels adored, prayed unto,
confided in for remission of sin; impetration of grace, for mediation, and
intercession; where all expressions of devotion are tendered to these, we may
well conclude that the finest School distinction cannot Salve thm from guilt,
and pollution, nor all their holy water wash away these spots. It may be worthy
of our observing, that the principal agent in the great Antechristian Apostasy,
was represented in the shape of an whore; to assure us, that Idolatry should be
the fairest note to discover it by.

As for the ground for this comparison, there is evident a great similitude
between both.

1. In one there is a base prostitution of Body, and in the other a most
unworthy prostitution of soul; that he who breaths so noble a being, should
give devotion, (the best, and most ardent action of his soul,) to the Devil, or
a dumb stock, deserves not the the title of man; that he who is happily
priveledged, in an access to Christ, should stop at the servant, and croutch
to an image; seems low, and ignoble. 2. In both these sins there is a grand
pollution and defilement. Ps. 106.39. Ezekiel. 20.7.

Thus you see the sinners specified. The 2. particular their end, claim our
next thoughts. Thou shall destroy them, The end of Idolatry. God by his own
hand destroys them.
says the Prophet. Which assures unto us this.

That ruin and destruction from God, is the infallible end of Idolaters.

1. Take the verb in the preter tence. Thou have destroyed, all ages testifies
it, the factious Gaecian, the superstitious Persian, and Heathenish Rome, had
their Idolatry sealed with ruin.

Which their very senseless Idols themselves participated of, Dagon looses his
head; and the Romish Idols were often blasted from heaven with lightning. What
ruined Israel and Judah? What laid Samaria and Jerusalem on heaps but Idolatry?
2 Kings 17.9. Those General peremptory comminations against it, which proclaim
ruin to the very Children of those, that commit it; do sufficiously evidence
that confounded will all they be, that worship carved images.

This we shall be far from doubting of; if we reflect. 1. With what height of
affection the Scriture represents God in, in his proceeding against Idolaters.
As anger. Isa. 65.3. Fury. Jer. 7.18. Jealousy. Exodus 20. If we view secondly,
that high injury done to God thereby; then which, what can be more imaginable,
then to substitute stocks and Devels, in Gods place, which reaches even to
blasphemy it self: For that is threefold 1. when that is attributed to God
which misbeseemes his Majesty. 2. When that which is due to him, is taken from
him. 3. When that which is proper to himself is atributed to the creature. In
the two last respects, Idolaters blaspheme the most high.

The Hebrew expresses blasphemy by three words, every one of which, sets out
Idolatry. 1. By (...) Ezekiel. 20.27. 2. By (...) Isay. 65.7. 3. By (...) which
signifies contumeliis, vitiis, verbis maledicis incessere, which Saint Hierome
Translates to blaspheme. Deuteronomy. 31.20. Jer. 25.15.17. Hence Antiochus his
profanation of the Temple is called blasphemy. 1 Mac. 2.6. In a word, a Wife
cannot possibly offer an higher injury to her Husband, then by adultery, nor
can man, more impiously dishonor God, then by Idolatry, by a base prostitution
of his soul to that; which is no God.

It may be observable that the Prophet says no more, of the Persons formerly
spoken of, but they shall perish, but of those that go a whoring, he affirms
thou O Lord have destroyed them. The dissimilitude of which phrases show both
the certainty, and greatness of the punishment; that shall light on Idolaters,
for if they perish and waste away, upon Gods mere withdrawing of his hand; how
shall these run into ruin, when God streaches out his hand, to further their
destruction. If it be anheavy burden to be bereft of God; how much more
pressing will it be, to have the viols of his fury to be poured down upon them.

Lastly the difference of this phrase may rise from this disposition, and
thoughts of Idolaters, of escaping and of doing well enough. As the adulteress,
(leaving her Husband) may hope for a subsistence from her Paramour, so they,
who forsake the true God, hope for help from a false one; Saepe premente deo,
fort deus alter opem. Thus the Idolatrous Jews expect plenty from their Queen
of Heaven, Jer. 44.17, 18. Men therefore being so apt, to cherish themselves
with vain hopes; The Prophet here assures them, that God will not suffer these
men, to wast only and languish in their hope; but he will arise and destroy
them with his own hand.

And therefore it may concern us all to root out, and resolutely to cast from
us any thing that may win, or entice our souls from a total, and entire service
of our God.

CHAP. X.
Verse 28. But it is good for me to draw nigh to God: I have put my trust in the
Lord God that I may declare all thy works.
CONTENTS.
The Prophets last resolution upon the whole. How good men draw nigh to God:
resolution and practice to be joined. The nature of trust. Its difference from
assent. What connection there is betwixt trust in God and declaration of his
words, in several particulars. The conclusion of the whole Psalm.

SECT. Vnica.
THE Prophets last conclusive resolution, The Prophets lust resolution upon the
whole.
whereby he seals his former Meditations, and the contents of the whole Psalm,
is that on which we are to fix our thoughts at present, which resolution, is
partly Theoretical partly practical; That is a conclusion of judgment, and
determination of action. And yet his judgment is of action, and referred
thereto; and his practice is of what, his judgment and faith leads him unto.

In the former there is 1. a subject, which is an action drawing near unto
God. 2. An attribute, or somewhat said thereof, absolutely, Bonum est, It is
good; relatively, good for me: In the latter is his demeanor. I have put my
trust in the Lord. 2. The end Propounded. That I may declare all thy works.

If we take all in the gross, first we may view the whole resolution turns
it is face upon God, and is entirely taken up, in an heavenly carriage, and
right deportment toward him; from whence we may gather that singular benefit,
which flows from the Meditation, and observance of Gods providential Actions,
and merciful relations to man's soul for from a serious consideration, that God
is his portion and strength, that they perish and shall be destroyed, that are
far from God, and go a whoring from him: There immediately results, this
resolution; But it is good for me to draw near to God, etc. And the like will
easily be raised up in us too, if with a reflecting eye, we do but mark the
occurring providence to good and bad; if in our own lives we meditate upon
those various mercies and patient forbearances, used to us; we should easily be
inlivened to an ardency of love, and feel an influence animating our souls, to
good resolutions and heavenly performances.

The subject of the first resolution here, is drawing near unto God. Which is
properly an access and Motion of the will and heart to God. Which how it is
made, and by what means performed, is discerned by the contrary thereto, (
going far from God already spoken of) for as the nature of sin, informs us, of
true holiness, by darkness we may conceive what is light; as by a description
of the pains of Hell, the joys of heaven may be contemplated on; so, by the
former discourse of going far from God, we may apprehend what it is, to draw
near to him.

How good men draw near to God.
This (to be breef) is done by a conformity of our will, and actions to the Law
of God. Hence righteous men as Enoch, Noah, etc. are said, to have walked with
God.

1. Because, they are near to that good pleasure of his will manifested in his
commands. 2. They are as near as subjects to their Sovireigne, under that
Dominion and command that is in the Law; Prince and obedient People making up
one body, it being Rebellion only that makes them Two. 3. They are near in the
cheerful imitation and expression of that Holiness, which the commandment
represents. 4. Because they are within his covenant; Hence Psalm. 50. They are
said to make a covenant with God. Which phrase though seemingly strange, yet is
most true: for they like the Promises, accept of the Conditions; and take the
Lord for their God. Thus obedience, finds a comfort in being near God, and
though the very thoughts of parting with enjoiments, and of Relations, (when
obedience commands it) may trouble flesh and blood; yet this may breath into us
a refreshment; that in such cases, where both cannot be present with, The
father we are from the Creature, the nearer we are to God. Which will be
clearly evidenc't, by the second thing, that Attribute given here to this
Accession to Him. The Goodness and benefits thereof.


It is Good (sath the Prophet) and Good for me, every one of us may find a
peculiar share in this Benefit.

Good is opposed to the evil of sin, and to the evil of calamity. In both
kinds it is Good.

1. That we esteem Goodness which carries a consonancy to Justice and right
reason. In this Approach there is true Judgment, here there is no failing or
deceit; and in Reason whom can the creature better draw nigh unto then its
maker; or a Son, then to his indulgent Father; or the sheep but to the
protection of their shepherd; under whose wing can we shelter our being, with
better security then his, who gave it to us? 2. That is looked upon as good
which according to Gods commandment, which is absolutely Holy, Just, and Good,
Romans 7. and this is such, Come unto me. Math. 11.28. draw nigh unto God, Iam.
4.8. Thirdly, that is Good which brings benefit and profit with it. This is the
common measure of Goodness, of which there are few that pronounce any other
Verdict. If then (as the Prophet formerly assures us) They that withdraw
themselves, finds Ruin and Perdition to be their portion and lot; It must
follow that they that draw nigh to him find the greatest security; whilst the
heathen cries Procula Jove, procul a fulmine; Christians experimentally
evidence, That the nearer to that shelter, the further from storms, and that
hand which wicked men feel to their destruction; underprops these from danger;
and although temporal calamities, overtakes them, yet no more shall burden
them then they can bear: Those waters shall not overwhelme them: The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, 2 Per. 2.9. and (being
that contrariorum contraria sunt consequentia) That Positive Good, those full
influencies of mercy and favor, which they enjoy, those that are a far of, are
deprived of, and this the relation of these words to the former clear up: They
that are far of from thee shall perish, But it is good for me to draw near.
Good by such a positive goodness, as is contrary to their evil of misery. Thus
the very description of wicked men's calamities give notice of Good men's
blessedness, and often times the peculiar contrarieties are expressed, Isa.
65.13, 14. They shall sing for Joy but ye shall houle for vexation of Spirit.
How highly beneficial this approach is, we need not go farther then this
Psalm, to find out. Good! for God is good to Israel; and teaches them out of
his sanctuary to overcome and triumph over the greatest temptations. Good for
he is the strength of their hearts aand their Portion for ever. Good for they
are present with him and he with them. He upholds them by their right hand, and
will receive them into Glory. In confidence of all which, the Apostle Heb.
10.29. We are not of them who draw back to perdition; but of them that believe
to the saving of the soul. The blessing of security is not only their Portion,
but they are happy in the addition of the positive blessing of salvation.

It does therefore highly concern us not to be befooled out of these high
benefits: nor to be enticed from these mercies; which are our own by eternal
appointment, and temporal Promise, our own by possible interest, and certain
Purchase by Christ: Mercies, in number many, tender in exhibition, and
perfectly, good, and therefore we may safely conclude that It is good to draw
nigh unto God. And the Apostles exhortation Hebr. 10.21.22. may be very
seasonably entertained here, Let us draw near with a true heart in full
assurance of faith etc. having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and our bodies washed with pure water let us hold fast the profession of our
faith without wavering, for he is faithful that Promised. That which follows is

The Prophets second Resolution which is practical, and declared by matter of
fact, I have trusted in the Lord. I have, do and will continue to trust in
him. It is familiar with the Hebrews to express the Tence, past, present and
to come; under one notion and verb, and good men often utter their Resolutions
in the Preter tence: Thus Jacob, I have waited, Genesis 49.18. wherein he reflects
not only upon what He had done, but resolves upon the same to the end. Pilat to
signify his unalterable mind, cries What I have written, I have written. Ioh.
19.22. There is in man a double Resolution, one of that which he will do, the
other of that which he is a doing. That is antecedent, this Consequent to the
act. That is of the beginning, this of the continuance.

Resolution of Good is to be joynd with immediate practice.
In matters prescribed by God, the former is always good never evil; and
occasion may often require, that some time may be interposed, between the
determination of the heart, and the execution. Yet it is more safe and
commendable, not to linger, and defer but to join action to Resolution; for
he, that once begins, has done more then half his duty, And there are some
precepts of God, concerning which, though the resolution be always good, yet
the interposall of time and the not actuating thereof with a present execution,
proves both dangerous vicious and disobedient. God commands the love of
himself, to resolve this is virtuous, but to delay, and in the interim to
turn to the Creature, is perniciously sinful. God Commands all men every
where to repent. And although (I believe) there is no heart so graceless, but
resolves to repent before he dies; and hopes he shall have time to do it; yet
too many delay and put off so necessary a work which is exceeding sinful.

It concerns us therefore in wisdom, to cast a diligent eye upon those
duties; whereof the Apostle says, Now is the accepted time; as faith,
Repentance and casting off of sin, in which as delay is not to be admitted, so
no time to be interposed in the execution, but to determine in doing, and to do
in determining, and to join practice and resolution, that our resolutions may
not herein be of what we will do, but of what we do, and of what we may in
part be said to have done. To those that linger and defer (let their pretense
be never so specious) Eliahs word, may be put to them. How long halt ye between
two opinions. If the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal, then follow him, 1
Kings 18.21.

In the Prophets Resolution two things are to be treated of, first the Act
which is trust in God. The nature of trust in God.
Secondly the specification of the object by such notions, as render him an
object worthy of this trust.

For the first, which is the applying, The difference between assent, and Trust.
fixing and settling of his trust in God, It is an act somewhat more then
belief of assent, and reaches farther, then a mere Conclusion of the
Judgment. For

1. Assent may be where this Trust is not. Thus the Devils are so fully
convinced of the maine, of there being a God, as they cannot but assent
thereunto; yet do not they trust in him: nor do they express any such thing
in their actions, for otherwise they would not be such pernicious enemies both
of God and man.

Secondly, Assent is properly of truth, without respect assent believes that,
which man can expect no profit from; as that there is hell or devils, but trust
is of that which is good and carries profit with it, to the party confiding;

3. Assent in matters divine is given to Gods revealed word, and that according
to variety, whethere it teach or advise, command or forbid. Promise or
threaten; and it is the hearts sentence, That all that God says is most true;
whereas Trust has God himself for the object, it looks upon Him as the Author
of that Good which he has promised in his Word, and is an Act of the soul;
resting, depending and relying upon God for special mercy.

4. This Confidence involves hope and expectation of mercy from God; Hence it
is that Trusting both in Hebrew and Greek is expressed by hope, as here, (...)
spem meam, and 1 Timothy 6.17. That they trust not (...). Man cannot properly rely
or confide in God, that does not hope and expect salvation from him, hence they
are mutually involved in one definition Heb. 11.1. (...). Faith is the ground
of things hoped for, the evidince of thing not seen.

When the Prophet then says He put his trust in God, The full extention of his
heart was in that persuasion of Gods truth revealed. He did confidently rest
upon God for Good, hoping in his mercy, and waiting for his Salvation. And
therein he shines forth as an excellent Pattern for us, for our imitation, for
our examination, exercise and trial; The full exercise of this act of our
Trust will be put to the Test, till the Redemption of the purchased possession
come: And the present additionall calamities of these times, the Tumults of a
bloody war, the madness of unreasonable, disordered men: the great
impression made upon the Reformation, the Persecution of honest, Good men: the
evils already suffered, and the fears of more ready to fall down; do highly
press and urge us, to a lively trust in God: and therefore, it is ill casting
it away, or to be without hope, only let us admit of this caution. That our
confidence do not wind it self out of the right channel; for then the more
we trust, the worse is our condition, if once it fix upon any thing, besides
God. Beware of unbelief; That is, Heathenish, and blind: beware of disbeliefe,
That is, wilful and desperate propanenesse: beware of Misbeliefe for that is
Idolatry.

I cannot pass by the two names whereby the Prophet represents the object of
his Faith, which are material the 1. is (...) the Lord which comes from a word
which signifies a Pillar, or supporter the second is (...) which tells us he
perfectly is, was, and is to come, of eternal, independent Being, and a giver
of Being to all things else; both which names do

1. Represent God, a fit and worthy object of man's trust, for being that a
strong foundation is requisite for that, which carries with it a dependence,
and fixing of the heart upon God, it may be concluded that none deseves better,
so full a confidence then he who is the rock of ages.

Confidence involves Hope, and Hope expects mercy according to promise, and the
name Jehovah informs us, that God both can (according to Power) and will
(according to his being faithful) perform his Promise, and bring it into an
existence; and it may perhaps not be unworthy of our observing; That he
revealed not Himself by that name Jehovah until he came and made good his
promise to Israel, Exodus 6.3.

2. Both these show that our confidence and Trust ought to be fixed on nothing,
but him: all other things will prove too weak, to support man's Trust, and too
empty, to perfect his hopes. David's querie, is unanswerable, Psalm. 18.31. Who
is God save the Lord, or who is a rock save our God.

It may concern us therefore, both to meditate and to be persuaded of these
Truths: for though Trust is more then Assent, yet it excludes it not: there
being no trust without it. Romans 10. and therefore they that assent not to
revealed truths, may well want confidence; for they that trust not in him do
not believe him. If Atheism and Irreligion would permit men to credit God,
their confidence would be more sure, their hopes more active, lively and
heavenly then they are.

One thing more in this point may remain relatively considerable. The Prophet
upon his pofession, That it was good for him to draw nigh to God immediately
adds I have put my trust, which may afford us this observation, That Confidence
is a special way of drawing near to God. Doct.
Thus Hebr. 10.22. draw near in faith, verse. 38, 39. we find faith and
believing opposed to drawing back: many other expressions intimate the same
thing as to receive Christ by, Faith Romans 5.2. That faith establishes Col. 2.7.
and unites Ephesians. 4. from whence we may gather 1. The excellency of Faith, we
need not doubt of those excellent operations that Justifies, purifies,
reconciles and saves, since it thus draws nigh to God.

We may secondly gather the happy condition of those, that are built up upon
this sure and well grounded confidence; who are admitted to the honor of a
free access to God, which their blessed relation has procured for them.

The end of the Prophets professed and Resolved confidence shall put a period
to our discourse, The end of the Prophets Trust. To declare Gods works (...).
That I may declare all thy works.

1. The works (that I may explain the terms) are in the Hebrew expression
works of art which renders them more accurate and curious, and deserving
admiration, as all Gods works do. The Septuagint renders the word (...)
Praises. Thus All Gods works praise him as evidences of his glorious Power,
high wisdom, and Providence, which proclaims him worthy of such
acknowledgments; a sense of which did often put good David to wish O that men
would praise God for his Goodness.

2. (...) signifies not only to declare by word of mouth, but to write down and
record, that present and future ages may read it.

3. The universal particle All, must either be understood de generibus
singulorum, of the works in kind, as Ceeation, Providence, Redemption etc. What
connection there is betwixt Trust in God and declaration of his works.
(for who can singularly number them up) or if it reach to individuals, He must
be understood to mean all he knew, and had experience of. Here we may see the
Prophet discovers his heart, and what he further aims at: The maine end and
intention of his resolution why he both did and would trust in God, was, That I
may declare all thy works.

It may seem strange that there should be such immediate relation between trust
in God, Why those that Trust in God can best declare his works:
and declaration of his works that one should be the antecedent, the other the
consequent; This the end, and that the means thereunto, but as the Prophet
makes it a connection, so we may observe these reasons of it.

Reason 1. Because the chief of Gods works are matter of belief not of present
vision or expression.
1. That being we are not from Eternity but that Being which lately begun, will
as quickly end; those maine and principal of Gods works which come to our
notice, are but matters of belief, not of present vision or experience: Though
somewhat may be seen by us; yet it is inconsiderable, in respect of that which
we believe. All things Past, the worlds creatoin and those passages of so many
thousand years, are to us mere matters of faith Heb: 11.1, 2, 3. The very
glorious mysteries of Salvation by Christ, his acts and sufferings, are Articles
of our creed; all those Promises which we hope shall make us blessed,
Resurrection from the grave, and eternal life, are so to; and therefore the
grandest part of our declaration, is but of what we believe.

2. Without faith the cheef of his works cannot be declared.
2. Which follows from hence, without faith we cannot declare Gods works, for
how shall men speak of him of whom, they believe not, Joh. 17. those who are
merely guided by sense and Passion not being in a capacity of understanding:
how great a silence is there in the heathen world, of those high and glorious
mysteries, which are every day unvailed in Christ's Church. 3. Believers have
more then ordinary occasion given them to declare his works.
As we believe so we speak, and we believe therefore we speak.

3. To those that Believe, there are continually new and peculiar occasions
given, of evidencing those high and stupendous acts of Providence, whilst he
reveals himself to them, and makes them vessels of special mercies, and
Agents, and happy instruments of supernatural effects, whereby the divine Glory
does appear in eminence and luster.

There may many examples be produced, of those who trusting in God, had more
then ordinary occasions offered them to declare his works.

Thus Noah believed in God, Heb. 11. and he saw himself saved in an Arc, when
the world sunk in a deluge, he found his Person and sacrifice accepted; and was
honored with a Covenant.

Abraham believed in God and it was counted unto him for Righteousness. He had
experience of Gods power in a son, whom he received in a figure, when all hopes
past, He had a promise, and was multiplied in blessings. The like experiences
crowned Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph, in their times. Moses in Trust to God,
forsook his hopes in the Egyptian Court, and became a Lawgiver to Israel; saw
wonders in Egypt, miracles in the wilderness, and his Glory in the Mount; for
which Moses sung his praise. David, Trusted in God, and in his green years
overcame Goliath, and from a Sheephook was advanced to a Scepter; escaped Saul's
hands, and at last was seated in the Throne of Israel. How many high
oportunities had the Prophets of declaring Gods works? The Blessed Virgin
believed, and became the happy Mother of Christ. The Apostles believed, and
were filled with the holy Ghost, did participate of high unknown mysteries; In
a word, all that truly believe in Christ, do evidently see Gods goodness in
their conversion, from darkness to light: in Justification and remission of
their sins, in Sanctification of their hearts; in comfortable influences, first
fruits and assurances of Gods spirit.

Whereas incredulous and unbelievers, are bereft of these oportunities: if
Israel refuse to believe, the whole generation that came from Egypt shall loose
Canaan; and the view of all those miracles acted in that conquest. Heb. 3.
Belief was often required by our Savior to the very healing of their bodies,
Math. 8. verse. 13. And his own Country men's incredulity bereft them, of his
good deeds among them, Math. 13.59. Thus

As God takes occasion to render himself glorious to, and in them that believe,
so secondly, he makes them instruments of admirable and glorious effects. Hebr.
11. verse. 32. etc. The conversion of the World, stupendous miracles, issued
from faith. That which fortifies the soul to deny the World, overcome
temptation, vanquish the Devil, quench his fiery darts, to go resolutely
through honor and dishonor; to be faithful and constant to the end; is only
trust in God, without which the soul would droop into ruins.

A 4. Reason of this connection may be, That trust in God is of that powerful
influence that it actuats both the tongue and Pen, and from both, wrings the
confession and declaration of Gods works, Romans 14. Faith will not lie stifled
in the heart; but it is diffusive flame will break out into praises. They that
believe his word, will quickly sing his glory, Ps. 106.2. Moses is scarce out
of the Sea, but he breaks into a song, Exodus 15. No sooner are Sisera and Jabin
destroyed, but Deborah and Barak begin their Music, Judges 5. We scarce ever
find David out of his streine. The blessed Virgin presently triumphs upon the
good news, my soul do thou magnify the Lord, Luke 1. All second causes the
Scripture (which is but a Declaration of Gods works) attributes to God; in a
word, as it is the Religion of the Saints on Earth, so is it the maine of the
service of the saints in heaven. As Rev. 4.8. and many other places of that
mysterious book do evidence.

Let us therefore cheerfully follow this pattern, and testify our trust in God,
by a Declaration of his works. Providence has experimentally manifested it
self to us in a great luster and eminence: in the knowledge of Christ, in the
promises of the Gospel: in many temporal and spiritual deliverances, and in
what ever appertains to life and Godliness. and therefore it may highly
concern us carefully to discharge our selves, of so noble a work. For

Besides that thereby we shall testify the truth of our faith. This will be 1.
An act of wisdom, Psalm. 107. Hos. 14.9. 2. An act of our obedience. Praise
being every where enjoined us.) 3. It is monstrous ingratitude not to do it.
This being all that we can render, or God require. All that David can render,
is but to take up the cup of salvation and to praise his holy name, Psalm.
118.4. This is the end for which God blesses us, Creates and Regenerates us,
that we may be to that praise and glory of his grace, Let us not be outdone by
inanimate creatures, or outstript by those that are below us in being. Praise
of God the chief work of the Lords day.
This we may reflect upon as the chief work of the Lords day.

Among the Psalms, there is one that bears this title, a Psalm or song for
the Sabbath day, Psalm. 92. The Caldee thus paraphraseth upon the title, An
Hymn or song which the first man Adam said for the Sabbath day; whoever was
the Author, Adam, Moses, or David, this is remarkable that the Contents of the
whole, Psalm is of thanksgiving; Gods judgments on the wicked, and his
goodness to the faithful are lively represented there; as if that were the
main work of that days service.

We find that the primitive Christian-observers of the Lords day, counted
these glorifyings of God, the grand employment of that day. Olim certis diebus,
populus conveniebat ad nihil aliud quam ad (...) illic Propheta aut Episcopus
magnificis verbis attollebat divinam in omnes creaturas bonitatem. Populus
psallebat himnis and conticis spiritualibus domino. Erasm. Concion.

Though, on other days (says saint Augustine) we may pray with deep reference
do our own interests and wants, yet on the Lords day we may suffer our selves
to neglect our selves, and to be wholly taken up, in his praises, and
transported with those glorious mercies of God in Christ; or if we do reflect
upon our selves, yet to look beyond our own necessities with farther
references in humble confessions of sin to magnify Gods holiness, purity, high
Majesty, and righteousness. In petition for remission, more for the
manifestation of the power of Gods mercy, then our own mere interest, in
requests for grace, to refer our selves to the glory of that, powerful hand and
our inabling to serve him. In a word in all wants, and dangerous pressures to
profess an humble submission, and a noble mention to the Divine Justice,
goodness, and power; and that every accent be breathed out to the glory of God
through Christ Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.

