THE Government of the People of ENGLAND precedent and present the same.

Ad Subscribentes Confirmandum. Dubitantes Informanduus. Opponentes
Convincendune.



Multa videntur quae non sunt, Multa sunt quae non videntur. Ut uniamur. Vis
unita fortior. two hands clasped in friendship over a tied bundle of arrows,
surrounded by broken arrows
Concordia parvae res crescunt, Discordia dilabuntur. London Printed for John
Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1650.

The Government of the people of England precedent and present, the same.
THe Government of the people of England precedent and present, is the same;
and therefore the Subscription now made or required, is just and lawful. For
the manifesting of which truth it will be necessary to know what Government is.

Now Imperium est jubendi prohibendique potestas, Government is a power to
command, or prohibit others, which command or prohibition they ought to obey,
or for disobedience to he punished.

This Government the Civilians divide into Summum liberum and merum imperium,
and mixtum, the chief free and mere command, and mixed: Now of the chief free
and mere command, there are no bounds for that, where that power is, it may
appoint, decree, ordain, act, do or command, above, contrary, or besides the
Laws, it only and alone makes, abrogateth, interprets, and confirms
Laws, which from the beginning and of ancient time resideth in the people
only, as says Tholosanus, l. 47. c. 20. S. 8. and Daneus, l. 1. polit. c. 4.
says, Populus suo Magistratu prior est tempore, natura, and dignitate, quia
populus magistratum constituit, and quia populus sine Magistratu esse potest,
sed Magistratus sine populo non potest esse, i. e. The people are first in
time, nature, and dignity, before their Magistrate, because the people make the
Magistrate, and because the people can be without a Magistrate, but a
Magistrate cannot be without a people; and Stephanus Brutius vindiciae contra
Tyrannos, quaest. 3. says, Reges sunt a populo, and sunt constituis causa
populi, Kings or Governors are from the people, and are appointed for the
peoples sakes.

And the same Tholosanus, lib. 47. c. 20. s. 9. sets down how the same was
transferred from the people, where he says, Regia lex de imperio lata est per
quam potestas a populo in principens translata est, (that is to say) the Kingly
Law of the Empire, ( viz. the Roman Empire) was that by which the power of the
people was transferred to the Prince.

Which Law he supposes to have been made when the people granted all their
power to Augustus Caesar, and cites Zonarus to that purpose, and says
further, Plena fuit illa lex and sine aliqua reservatione, i. e. That Law was
absolute and full without any reservation to the people.

Which Law never extended it self to the Government of England, neither was
England ever governed by the will and pleasure of any one man; let us therefore
examine who commands and forbids, here in England, clearly the Laws,
which Government Aristotle, lib. 3. polit. c. 7. prefers before all other,
saying, Nihil ita ratum and firmum esse ut leges rectae and salutares, and lex
sine affectu regit, but goes on penes eum qui praeest sive sit unus sive
pluret iis de rebus statuendi arbitrium volo de quibus leges cumulate and
accurate loqui non possunt.

Which is the very Government here in England, for the power of commanding and
forbidding the people of England, is in the laws only, and none other, and
that appears plainly by the daily practice amongst the people, as well
before these times, in the times of those called Kings and Queens, as at
present. All the commands or prohibitions that then came, or now do come to the
people, were and are appointed, directed, and set down by the Laws of
England; so that if any King or Queen did command or prohibit any thing, Co. M.
c. p. 186.187.206.
or in any other manner then the Laws directed it, was void, and the people
were not bound to obey; yea, if they did obey it, and thereby there were any
prejudice, damage, or offense done to the public Government, or to any private
person, they were to be punished, for that no King or Queen could alter the
Laws without consent of the people, and so do our Law Books plentifully
testify; nay, they could not alter the form, and therefore if they varied but
from the form prescribed by Law, the command or prohibition did not oblige or
bind the people to obey the same, a great part of which form is prescribed
and particularly set down in an ancient Book called, The Register of Writs
(but indeed is the Register of the commands and prohibitions) the Laws of this
Nation, according to the several cases, causes, and complaints of the people.

Other parts of the Commands not therein comprised, given and appointed by the
Laws, are by the Common Laws and Statutes also particularly directed, and the
King, Ex merito Justitae debitae, ought to grant, award, and issue those
Commands or Prohibitions to the people for their relief. Co. Magna Charta, 269.

And to prevent a defect of Justice for want of a particular command or
prohibition, according to the peoples varying cases by the Statute of Westminster. 2
cap. 24. it is provided, Et quotiescunque de caetero evenerit in cancellar quod
in uno casu reperitur breve and in consimili casu cadente sub codem jure simili
indigente remedio non reperitur, concordent clerici de cancellaria in brevi
faciondo vel atterminent querentes in prox. Parliamentum and scribantur casus
in quibus concordari non possunt and referant eos ad prox. Parliamentum and de
consensu jurisperitorum fiat breve ne contingat de caetero quod antea Domini
Regis deficiat conquerentibus in justitia perquirenda idonea. And whenever
from henceforth it shall fortune in the Chancery, that in one case, a Writ is
found, and in like case, falling under like Law, and requiring like remedy is
found none, the Clerks of the Chancery shall agree in making the Writ, or the
Plaintifs may adjourne it until the next Parliament, and let the case be
written in which they cannot agree, and let them refer themselves until the
next Parliament, by consent of men learned in the Law, a Writ shall be made,
lest it might happen after that the Court should fail to minister Justice unto
Complainants.

But it must be in the like case, for if it be otherwise, it must be framed and
provided by the people themselves by their Representatives in Parliament,
whereupon Bracton says, lib. 1. cap. 2. Si aliqua nova and inconsueta
emerserit quae nunquam prius evenerunt, and obscurum and difficile sit little
Judicium, tunc ponantur Judicia in respectu usque ad magnam curjam ut ibi pet.
consilium curiae terminet: So that these several supplies of learned Clerks
of Chancery, and of the wise and learned men of Parliament do completely
provide, quod curia non debet deficere conquerentibus in Justitia exhibenda.

And it is true that those commands and prohibitions may be altered, repealed
or expounded, or other made by the people only, that is by their
Representatives in Parliament, in such manner as might seem fittest and best
for their benefit, quiet, and safety, where always was to be observed that
ancient Rule, Salus popu'i suprema lex esto.

Which form of Government suiteth in all things with that so much applauded by
the Philosopher, and by him preferred before others.

And the truth is, the Kings and Queens that sent forth the Commands or
Prohibitions heretofore, were but Deputies to the Laws, to send, or as Conduit
pipes, to convey the same Commands or Prohibitions that the Laws directed; so
that here in this Nation the opinion of Antigonus is verified, Regnum nihil
aliud est quum nobilis servitus; and that other opinion, Reges cum jubent
socundum leges sunt legis ministri.

And that is apparently manifested to be true by a familiar example, viz. A
Master of a Family having diverse sons and servants, directs his eldest
son or chief servant, that whereas one other of the servants owes to his
fellow servants 10. 1. or has beaten his fellow servants, that he command that
servant so owing the 10. l. or has beaten his fellow servants, that he pay the
10. l. or make satisfaction to his fellow servants for the battery, upon pain of
being turned out of his service, which the son or chief servant does
accordingly: In this case the Governor or Comander is the Master of the Family,
and it is his Command, Qui per aliud facit per seipsum facere videtur, and the
eldest son or chief fervant but the instrument he imployeth. Verbum
sapienti sat est.

And that they were but Ministers, Officers, and Servants, to the
Commonwealth, appears as well by their admission thereunto at the time of
their Coronation, by the suffrages of the people, as also by the Oath they then
used to take for the due performance thereof, which is the usual manner of
making and constituting all other Officers and Ministers to the Commonwealth.

Now the Commonwealth, Cicero, lib. 3. de Republica, defines thus,
Rempublicam esse rem populi, populus autem esse non omnis coetus multitudinis,
sed coetus juris concensu and utilitatis communione consociatus.

And therefore I conceive the words Kingly Office in the late Act for the
abolishing thereof, is very proper, if they could properly be called Kings, for
the reasons before remembered; and then, if but Officers, it will follow by good
consequence, they are removeable by the people, viz. their Representatives (who
make them) at their pleasure, or at least upon miscarriage in their Office to
the damage of the Commonwealth; so it has been heretofore put in ure in
former ages, viz. Edw. 2. Removed, and his son Edward then appointed Custos
Regni. And so Richard 2. displaced by the people, and Hen. 4. then Duke of
Lancaster appointed in his stead. And this touching the Government of this
Nation of England, when there is no Parliament sitting, is clear to all from
the constant usage continually from time to time continued, and at this time is
continued the same. But as touching the time when there is a Parliament
fitting, which is that aforementioned by the Philosopher, Cum de Rebus Leges
Cumulate and accurate loqui non possunt, is the more difficult question, which
also upon serious examination will appear, that even the Government then, is,
and ever was, or ought to have been solely in the people, as touching the
altering or abrogating any of the old Laws, or constituting of new, which is
the prime and principal cause and occasion of convoking a Parliament, Scil.
circa ardua Regni, as the Writ of Summons to Parliament expresses it.

And as touching the Government by Kings, Lords and Commons, scil. in time of
Parliament, it is fitly divided into two questions.

First, whether the King had any interest in the Government in time of
Parliament, viz. of altering or abrogating former laws, or making of new.

And that is clear, that he had not, which appears first by his Office and
Oath to perform the same, which is that he will grant and consent unto such
Laws, Quas populus elegerit, which must be construed, which the people shall
choose, or else it is a nonsense, the former part of the Oath being, that he
will govern by and according to the Laws of the Land. And it is also so
expounded by 25. E. 3. Statut. de provisoribus, the words whereof are these, La
Ley de dit Roylme est tiel que sur mischeife et damages que aveignont al
Roylme Roy doit et est tenus per son serement de la consent de son people in
Parliament ent fair Remedy et ley en oustant les Mischeifes et Damages. And
so also is Co. M. C. page 586. and then the King could have no negative voice
rightfully and by Law, it being contrary to the Law and his said Oath.

And if not the King, then a fortiore, not the Lords, they being not so much as
Officers of the Commonwealth, and had nothing there to do, as may seem for
the public, but for their private interest to save them.

And it is agreed in our books, that an Act of Parliament may pass, and be
valid without consent of the late Lords, called Spiritual, 7. H. 8. Cr. 184.
b. Co. Jurisd. 25. and yet Co. Jurisd. 1.2. calls them one of the three
Estates, and says, that they must necessarily be summoned to Parliament as well
as the Lords Temporal.

And truly the Case cited Co. Jurisd. page 25.13. H. 4. N. 20. proves
plainly, that a Parliament might be without the Lords Temporal also, for there
he says, I have read of a Restitution in blood and of Lands, of one William de
Lasenby, by the King, by the assent of the Lords Spiritual, and Commons
(omitting the Lords Temporal) whereupon he says, This we hold is an
Ordinance, and no Act of Parliament, which under his good favor must be an Act
of Parliament, or else is of little or no use, for an Ordinance indureth, and
is of force only sitting that Parliament, and that determined, the Ordinance
is determined, and so the restitution void, and also a restitution in blood can
only be by Act of Parliament, which binds all; and this restitution is to
bind the mean Lords, and all others that are any ways interessed by that
corruption of blood.

However, since all Government is in the people, from the people, and for the
people, touching altering or abrogating of Laws, or making of new, which none
can do without them, and that they are now met by their Representatives in
Parliament, the place where the cure of such grievances, as infest the people,
is to be had, some of which grievances being that pretended Negative Vote both
of King and Lords, thereby thwarting, crossing, and opposing the application of
such wholesome Medicines as might probably recover the Patient, the
Commonwealth, they must in all justice remove them as the cause thereof, or
else no hope of recovery. Pereat unus ne pereat unitas.

And that grievance of the Negative Vote, if not removed, was fatal, and would
have ruined all, as thereby hindering of all applications for recovery, which
was too much verified and manifested, when the last year was a War very
eminently dangerous to the whole Parliament and people here, and that by the
continuance of the Royal Party, Scots and Ormond, the Lords then sitting in
Parliament, in that extremity, refused to declare with the Commons, that the
Scots were enemies to the Kingdom, and being then several times requested to
give their concurrence for Counties to arm themselves, they then making use
of, rather abusing their Negative Vote, utterly refused, which tended to the
utter ruin and destruction of Parliament and people.

And besides, many of the grievances to the people, issuing from King and
Lords, could not otherwise be cured then by taking them away, the one not
regarding his Oath, and the other not esteeming the public good, as they
ought to have done. Especially, the Kings of England, having all the late
Lords, called Spiritual, at their beck and command then, being under their
power, to place and displace at their pleasure, or at least to prefer them; and
also pretending to have power to make as many Lords of Parliament as they
pleased, for that therein imitating the policy of the Pope in the late Council
of Trent, in making titular Bishops at his pleasure, they were thereby as able
to carry all things in the House, called the Lords, touching the Civil State,
at their pleasure, as the Pope was in that Council, to carry on things
touching the State Ecclesiastical.

And we see that by Act of Parliament made by consent both of King and
Temporal Lords this present Parliament, the Lords then called Spiritual, were
secluded from Parliament, and their Votes and Sitting in the House, then called
the Lords, were quite taken away.

And since that time, and before the taking away the Vote from the Temporal
Lords, many Acts of Parliament have been made, and esteemed as well by the
Temporal Lords as the Commons, and all others to be valid, effectual, and of
force to bind the people, and yet the Spiritual Lords are called one of the
three Estates, Co. Jurisd. 2.

And herein is no prejudice to the Public, because the people may now freely
and fully act for the public good without any opposition, and that is the
principal end of meeting in Parliament: Neither is there any prejudice to the
Lords, for what is there acted for the Public good, must also necessarily
extend to them, and they be partakers thereof as well as any others.

Yea, if there were some prejudice to the private, yet that ought to be
endured, to accommodate the Public, Publica and communis utilitas est
praeferenda privatae. And if we examine the first and true Constitutions of
Parliaments, the Lords never had that power of the Negative Vote, thereby to
frustrate the good Laws intended for the Public; for anciently the Commons
and they sat together, as Co. Juris. l. 1. tit. Parliament. and then the
number of Lords being but small and inconsiderable, in respect of the number of
the Commons, their Negative could not much harm, for that it is probable, and
to be presumed, that the number of the good Zelots for their Country, both of
Lords and Commons, would much exceed the opposite number.

So that in substance touching Parliament affairs, there is the same
Government at this present, as of right it was or ought to have been
heretofore: And as touching Government in all other things, there is no more
change betwixt Carolus, etc. and Custodes libertatis Angliae Authoritate
Parliamenti, then there was betwixt Elizabetha, etc. and Jacobus, etc. for that
the Laws were and are the Governors, and not they, as has been plainly
demonstrated before.

And for further proof that the Government of this Nation is by the Laws and
themselves, the late years now last past experience does manifest it, during
which time King Charles transported with Passion, and enraged with fury, that
the people would not permit him to introduce the Monarchical Government, that
is, to command and prohibit what and how he pleased, was not in fit case to act
the part or office of a King of England, yet during that time the Law governed
the people and only used his name, pro forma, in its commands and
prohibitions, which compared to times of peace before, will appear to be the
same; or if any difference be, it was that in those times of his discontent,
the Government was more just and beneficial for the people, the Laws their
Governors, being then more free from straining, misconstruing, and perverting,
then formerly: So that from these premises I may safely conclude, That the
Government of the people of England precedent and present is the same; For
parum differunt quae Re Concordant.

Under which popular Government our Ancestors have lived happily hundreds of
years, which if experience did not testify here what Bodin says in his Book
De Rep. lib. 6.702. a. himself a Frenchman borne, bred, and employed under a
Monarchical Government, as of late times it has been used, one I dare say
will not flatter in this case; his words are these, Libertus autem illa quam in
popularibus Imperiis tantopere vigere putant in eo maxim versatur ut suis
quisque bonts uxore liberis tranquille fruatur, nec sibi aut suis ulla vis
inferatur aut si fuerit illa vindicetur.

But further, to manifest to all the world, that neither the precedent Kings
here, had not, or claimed not that Negative Vote lately pretended to by the
late King, and also the inevitable danger, yea ruin of the people, if they
should have had it and used it, I shall instance in some disceases procured by
Kings, and shall show you how they have been cured; and I shall only remember
such as are probatum^ in Print, and in every man's hands, beginning with Magna
Ch^rta, setting down the disease, by whom procured, and how cured, following
the series of time for my Method. King Henry the third entertaining into his
grace and favor Peter Bishop of Winchester, an evil man, and relying on him
for the managing the Estate, he chooses unto him a man like himself Peter de
Rivallis, who draw the King into an evil opinion of his people, in whose time,
and by whose means Iudicia Committuntur injustis, leges exlegibus, pax
discordantibus, justitia injuriosis, persuading the King to reject in passion
the just Petitions of his Subjects. These two being displaced, the King
entertaineth others as bad as they, who exact of whom they please, what they
please, set prices on all Offices, rain the Law within the rule of their own
breasts; the Great, they enforced not to obey, but serve; and the Mean, to
live so as they might justly say they had nothing: The distemper then grew so
high, that even the Patients themselves practice upon each other, not by advice
of Physic, but by the rage of fury, entering into Civil War, blooding
themselves till they almost fainted: At last a Physician is thought on, a
Parliament is called, wherein diverse wholesome Medicines are provided against
diverse diseases raging and reigning at that time, the King and his Courtiers
having endeavored to enslave all, this Physician directs this Recipe of Cha.
libertatum, to restore all to their former liberties: Thus you have the
general disease, the cause, and cure, the particulars follow, viz. Churchmen
had formerly been oppressed by the Kings Officers by unjust exactions, the cure
is, Quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, cap. 1.

The Subject was oppressed by the Kings Officers and Ministers, under pretense
of taking Rationabile Relevium, which they hold every taking to be, were it
never so unreasonable, the cure is by putting it in certain, as it formerly had
been, cap. 2.

The Possessions of the Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons
of the Kings foundation, were by the Kings Officers much wasted, during the
Kings possessing them in vacancy, the cure is cap. 5.

The Subjects were oppressed by the Kings Officers, in seizing possessions of
great value for petty debts due to the King when they might have levied it
otherwise, without much damage t^ the Subject; or else in taking the Pledge
when the Principal was sufficient and this is cured, cap. 8.

The Subject was oppressed by grievous amerciaments, imposed by the Kings
Ministers, and others, this is cured, cap. 14.

In the Reign of King John, and his elder brother King Richard, diverse
oppressions, exactions, and injuries were incroached upon the Subject for
making Bulwarks, Fortresses, Bridges and Bancks contrary to I aw; which is
cured, cap. 15.

The Kings Officers and Ministers, Sheriff, Constable, Coroner, and other his
Bailifs, ignorant, unlearned men in the Laws of the Land, under pretense of
more speedy justice, though in truth for lucre of gain presumed to hold Plea
in matters of life, whereby often the innocent suffered, and the nocent escaped,
this is cured, cap. 17.

A debtor to the King dying, possessed of a great personal estate, his
Officers upon pretense seized all into their hands for a small debt, and
oftentimes only upon pretense of a debt, where in truth there was none due,
whereby the Widow and Orphans were deprived of means of living, and this
under pretense of diligent care to levy the Kings debts, and this is cured cap.
18.

Purveyance of Carts by the Kings Officers was a great grievance in taking,
without paying for the same, or in taking where they ought not to take, and
this under pretense of diligence in their Masters service, Non amo nimium
diligentes, and this is cured, cap. 21.

For the avoiding of the wasting of houses of persons attainted of Felony, etc.
which was due to the King, the Common Law gave him the profits of the Lands of
the person attainted for one year and a day, but his Officers being like
Harpies, having once fastened thereon, would not easily be taken off, under
pretense of profit to the King, though in truth to their own private, whereby
much damage grew to the Lords, of whom the Lands were holden, and who of right
ought to have the same, which is cured, cap. 22.

The unlimited and unbridled pleasure of the Kings Ministers was become the
Law, or at least was forced to be the Law, whereby the people must be governed,
how cruel, how tyrannical, every one may easily think, and yet upon a
pretense of doing service to their great Master, to make him a Monarch, to make
him seared, though not loved, then which a greater disservice cannot be to a
Prince, as the tempests of these times thereupon following manifestly prove,
and yet this grievous disease not thereby cured, it being too sharp, but a more
gentle Medicine is directed, cap. 29.

The Kings Agents evil entreating Merchant-strangers in amity, both by
exacting what they pleased for license to trade, and what customs and other
duties for their Master, as their covetous and boundless humor led them, yet
upon a pretense to ennich their Master, Trade, the life of a Kingdom, was
hereby much hindered and impaired, and this is cured, cap. 30.

The Kings Council and Ministers making all advantageous exposition for their
Master, as they pretended, though in all likelihood, the gain thereby accruing
came to their own purses, would needs hold the Law of the Kingdom to be, that
whosoever held of the King by Knights Service, in what manner soever, whether
as of Honor, Manor, or otherwise, yet it must be In capite, and thereby the
King to have his Prerogative for Wardship of all the Lands held of whomsoever.
And thus these Mountebanks misapply the wholesome Medicince of the Law, to the
destruction of the Patient, the people, mixing it with some ill ingredient of
their own, a usual trick and very frequent, it being their maine endeavor
under color of Law, to color their unjust oppressions; and this is only
cured by those wise and faithful Physicians, the Parliament, by rightly
tempering such mis-tempered Medicines, which is done by them in this particular
case, cap. 31.

Escuage, a duty due to the King and other Lords from their Tenants, the Kings
Ministers for that it was uncertain would thereof make their advantage, and
assesse it at what sum they pleased, and from their example it is likely
other Lords did the like, for Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis,
especially when it is for their profit; and incertainty in duties is a fit
opportunity, whereby cruel tyranny may oppress, if referred to the party to
whom it is due, and yet the poor knows not where, nor to whom to complain;
but for this particular malady, there is a proper Medicine, cap. 37. Referring
the assessing thereof as formerly had been used, which was by the Parliament,
the most equal and indifferent Arbiters in cases doubtful, and fittest to be
trusted; and the mischief of incertainty is so well foreseen by the Common
Laws of England, that it is always referred to those that by probability are
strangers, and indifferent as to Parliament Judges or Jurors.

The vigilant Physicians now assembled in consultation in Parliament using all
their industry they possibly can for procuring and continuing the welfare of
this Commonwealth direct the like general Recipe in the conclusion, c. 38. as
in the beginning, that if they had not directed for every particular a
convenient Medicine, yet this general might supply; so that now it might
probably be thought, 3. E. 3. c. 9. 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 4. 28. E. 3. c. 3.
37. E. 3. c. 18 42. E. 3. c. 3. 1 R. 3. c. 2.
that there would need no new advice or Medicines; but such and so many are the
redundant and malignant humors in this great body, that it presently grows
into new distempers, and must be new physicked, or it will perish, though for
the most part the ingredients hereafter used are but the same as in the
general or particular Recipes mentioned.

The Kings Court-Councell informed him that he might for his recreation and
better preservation of his health afforest any Subjects ground, and so dispose
of it for his pleasure, as he should think fit, upon pretense no doubt that his
life was so precious, and so to be regarded, that no possession the Subject had
should be so dear to him as that he should be unwilling to part with it for
the Kings preservation; fair shows, 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. c. 7. 7 R. 2. c. 4.
but foul substance even to the ruin of the people, as may appear by the
cure set down in Cha. de Foresta, and as it is well known in some parts of
this Kingdom, by woeful experience, even in these present times long after the
making of the said Charter, procured by the Court-Parafites chirping in the
late Kings ear the same or as bad notes as at the making of the said Charter.

The Common Law of England allowing the King this Prerogative, that he might
distraine the goods of his debtor, and make sale thereof toward his
satisfaction, which his Ministers abused, and thereby oppressed the Subject in
selling at low prises, or before the Debtor could have notice, and sometimes
when there was no debt due, but only pretended; all which are provided for by
a Statute of distresses of the Exchequer, 2. H. 4. c. 14. 3. E. 3. c. 3, 4. 20
H. 6. c. 8. 5. E. 3. c. 2. 23. H. 6. c. 1, 2. 10. E. 3. St. 2. c. 1. 4. 14. E.
3. c. 19 28. H. 6. St. 2. c. 2. 25. E. 3. St. 5. cap. 6. 21. 2. and 3. E. 6.
cap. 3. 28. E. 3. c. 12 2. and 3. Mar. ca. 6. 34. E. 3. c. 2, 3. 43. E. 3. c.
3. 7. R. 2. c. 8. 14. E. 3. c. 14
made 51. H. 3.

And lest the prime Medicines prescribed by Magna Charta should be forgotten,
neglected, or antiquated, the said Charter is newly confirmed 52. H. 3.
Marlebridge, cap. 5. and 30. times at the least since, so careful and
provident have these faithful Physicians been, and yet new diseases break
forth, as that the Kings Prerogative in purveyance for victuals how much abused
by his Ministers in oppression of the Subject, may appear by the many
Medicines provided for the cure thereof, Westminster. 1. cap. 32. and many other
cited in the margent, the Declaration of the Common Law being as it were new
tempering of old Medicines, thereby reviving the strength and virtue thereof,
which these Physicians are often enforced so to do as for ousting the long
delay procured by praying in aid of the King by the Stat. de Bigamis, cap. 1,
2, 3.

The Kings Courtiers and Servants under color of right, and preserving of it
to the King, by menaces and thre^ts prevailed with many Religious houses for
corodi^s, and other promotions, whereunto the King had no right, for redressing
whereof a Stat. is made, 1. E. 3. St. 2. cap. 10.

The Kings Officers, in oppression of the Subject, construe the Law of the Land
to be, that every alienation of any of the Kings Tenants in Capite, without
license, to be a forfeiture, the Law therein is truly expounded by 1. E. 3.
cap. 13. And where color of Law will not serve, they use force, and compel
diverse of the Kings Subjects to enter bond to come to the King with force and
Arms, whenever they should be sent for, upon pain of life and limb, and to
forfeit whatsoever they could forfeit, a fearful and dangerous tie, but
happily untied by a Stat. made, 1. E. 3. St. 2. cap. 15.

And the usefulness of these Physicians, and their often consultations, and
their frequent advices, apparently proved and approved by the happy experience
this great body the Commonwealth had formerly had to be exceeding necessary for
its preservation and happiness, it is is provided 4. E. 3. cap. 14. to be once
every year, 36. E. 3. c. 10
or oftener if need require.

Monopolies and restraint of Trade being beneficial to the Kings Courtiers,
though much prejudicial to the State and people, are no doubt upon fair,
though false glosses, set up and countenanced, which dangerous disease is
provided for by 9. E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 1.

The Kings Council and Courtiers, abusing for their own private ends, the
wholesome Medicine of the Common Laws of this Kingdom, to the great detriment
of the Subject, upon pretense that Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, and that all
Lands came from the King at the first, seize into the Kings hands any man's
Lands, thereby to enforce him to show his title, and if he make default, to
forfeit the same, which great mischief is provided for by 9. E. 3. St. 1. cap.
2. For that by tenure some Tenants of the King, by reason of their tenure are
bound to find Arms in the Kings service, his Council and Courtiers strained
this to be due from all, to the great damage of the people, which
misexposition is remedied 25. E. 3. Stat. 5. cap. 8.

The King by his Prerogative is to be first satisfied his debt before any
Subject, and till that were levied, the King might protect the debtor, which in
true intention was, with what speed the King might be first satisfied, then the
Subject might sue for his; but under color hereof the Courtiers had got this
trick, that if they did owe money to any other, they would also be debtors to
the King and thereupon get his protection, and delay the Subject of his due
debt till Doomesday, or at least till he should be without remedy, which great
mischief is provided for by 25. E. 3. St. 5. cap. 19. It were very probable
that the general and particular provisions afore-cited would be sufficient to
prevent any oppressing of the Subject, but as the Poet says, Queritur ut
crescunt tot magno volumina logis,
In promptu ratio est croscit in orb dolus.


New Ages produce new wirs, and they new inventions, and amongst the rest was
this, that the King should grant a Commission to certain persons to view and
search victuals, and correct where they found cause, upon a specious and fair
pretense forsooth, that thereby the Subject might be the hertor provided of
wholesome meat, and not to be poisoned or destroyed by miscarriage therein,
though in truth the thing intended was their own private gain, as expenience
presently showed; a grand way of oppressing under color of relieving; this
also is cured by 12. E. 4. cap. 8.

The Kings Officers and Ministers extending the Kings Prerogative beyond its
true bounds, especially where there was not particular bounds, as in case of
assignment of debts to his Majesty, they construed all assignments, whether by
Debtor or Accomptant, Bona fide, or feignedly, to be within the Kings
Prerogative, to the great damage of the people, in respect of the large
execution the King may take, which is remedied by 7. Jacobi, cap. 15.

But it seems our present age has been more straining of the Prerogative,
then of hundreds of years before, for notwithstanding the many and wholesome
Medicines formerly recited to have been provided, the Court-Mountebancks found
means to vex and oppress the Subjects, and one way was by prying into their
estates, and picking holes and quarrels with their titles, upon pretense no
question of much good service to his Majesty, though the true mark they shot at
was their own private profit; and this is particularly cured by 21. Jac. cap. 2.

Another late invention among the Courtiers, were the swarming Patents of
Monopolies, whereby they oppressed the rich, and fed upon the poor, and yet in
all these they have most glittering, though false colors, of good to the
Public, thereby endeavoring to deceive the people, but what their true aim
was, may appear by woeful experience in getting gain to themselves; and this
is remedied by 21. Jac. cap. 3.

But as if all the former Medicines had never been provided, or else the virtue
and operation of them so decayed by time, the Courtiers of the late King
raunged, roved, yea and raged in such, so many, and heinous grievances, as it
is not easily to be believed if late sufferings did not too too much attest the
same, some whereof are specified in the late Petition of Right 3. Carol. viz.
Loane-Money, New Oaths, Bonds for Appearance, Attendance, Imprisonment,
Confinement, unlawful charges laid and levied by Lord Lieutenants, Deputy
Lieutenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of peace, and others by
command or direction from his Majesty or his Privy Council, and many more
therein mentioned; all which by the Kings condescending to the said Petition is
remedied: And sure now the Head of this great Body is likely to be fully cured,
and that there should no distempers in future flow from thence, yet consider
how many have appeared since the beginning of this Parliament, 16. Carol. and
what cured, and what to cure, and it cannot pass without wonder, whence such
peccant humors should arise to produce such maladies, but the art of these
later times far pass the precedent, in that they cover all their proceedings
under color of Law and Justice, witness Ship-mony, Coat, and Conduct Money,
Fines, Imprisonments, and other grievous sufferings in the High Commission
Court, which were much to have been inhaunced and advanced by their late new
Canons, Oaths, Articles; in the Star Chamber by their excessive Fines,
Imprisonments, and cruel Macering of such as fell into their hands. And these
Gangrenes are also taken care of by the present Parliament: Out of all which
recited Acts of Parliament may be observed; first, that the Kings of England
had not a Negative Vote, for sure it is, if they had so had, they would have
made use of it, the same tending so much toward Monarchy, which all in some
sort labored for. Secondly, the many oppressions, dangers, yea ruins that had
befalne the people of England, if not remedied by their careful Physicians,
the Parliament. Thirdly, the dangerous consequent of the Negative Vote allowed
to either King or Lords, that then their oppressions, wrongs, and injuries
could not be prevented, so that Tyranny must needs follow with might and maine.

Behold then, O England, and consider thy Governors, the Laws of this Nation,
free from passion, ambition, and all other exorbitant affections, yet willing
to be reformed by your selves for your good, Cupiunt etenim leges ut jure
Regantur; And therefore I may safely conclude that Motto true in this Nation,
Legi servire libertas, for that the Laws by which they are governed, are of
their own framing, consent, and entertainment.

O fortunati nimium si sua bona norint.
Legis virtus est imperare, vetare, permittere, punire.
Pro Patria.
FINIS.

