THE WATCHER: OR, The Stone cut out of the mountains without hands, striking at
the Feet of the JMAGE, Whose head is gold and breast of silver, and thighs of
brass, and Legs of iron, and feet part iron and part clay, Dan. 2.31, 32, 33,
34, 35.

OR, A Discovery of the ground and end of all Forms, Professions, Sects and
opinions, and also how they now are made as friends, and join hand in hand
against the substance, the Life and Power of God, which is now made manifest in
his Sons and daughters (according to his promise) as has been plainly manifest
in several meetings betwixt the people called Quakers, and the people called
Baptists, which is here described.

And also a Description of the true Church, and the gathering thereof by the
Power and Spirit of our God, which is now made manefest in these later days,
which so gloriously does shine forth in the earth; so that all who have desires
to find the way of truth, need no longer walk in darkness, and seeking the
living amongst the dead where it is not to be found; for now light is come
into the world, and they that love and follow the light, shall not walk in
darkness, bat shall have the light of Life; but such as do evil hate the light,
and will not come unto the light, that the light may reprove them, and this is
the condemnation of the world, who love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil. Joh. 8.12. Joh 3.19.20,21.

Written by a friend to all tender hearted ones, who hunger and thirst after
God, who are groping and seeking in Forms for life, to the directing of their
minds, where and how to find the true Light which leads into the true life
and power of Godliness, the end of all Forms, where I rest with all who in
Spirit read me, who am known to them who are without, by the name, JAMES
PARNELL.

LONDON; Printed for Giles Caluert, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's.

TO THE READER.
THou that happens to be the Reader of this Book, know this, that my mind and
intent in the publishing thereof, was in relation to the simple hearted, who
hunger and thirst after Grace and Godliness, to the directing and turning their
minds from the darkness to the true Light of the Lord Jesus, which is not of
the world but comprehends the world, 2 Cor. 4.4.
and makes manfest the many ways of the world, and the Snares, Bates, Traps
and Nets that therein are laid, by him who is the God of the world, even the
Prince of Darkness, Ephesians. 2.2.
who rules in all the Children of disobedience; now whatsoever makes manifest
is Light, the which Light will discover unto them whose minds are turned to
it, the wiles and subtle ties of Satan, and so the simple will come to learn
wisdom, and thereby be preserved from the subtle devouring serpent, and
therein the creature will come to see wherein consists its safety and
preservation, and so Isreal's Tent comes to be found; for I in the Light
standing above the world, comprehending the many ways that are in the world,
and the destructions therein, with the many forms, judgments, and opinions,
one clashing against another, with their janglings and disputes, with their
earthly wisdom, which is at enmity with God, and about those things which they
are strangers to the life and power thereof, contending for that which fades
and vanishes away, pulling down one judgment, and setting up another, pulling
down one form, and setting up another; and thus are building Babell, 1 Cor.
1.^^
and so are confounded with this confusion by him who confounds the wisdom of
the wise, and brings to naught the counsel of the prudent, and so I seeing
many poor creatures in this distraction, tossed about with every wind of
doctrine, and sucking at the husk for life, and so gets into the comprehension,
a deal of light ayry notionall knowledge, which is all but as chafe, which the
wind will scatter in the day of the Lord, and so it will stand in no stead when
the Lord comes to plead with all flesh, for nothing will stand in the day of
trial, but what comes through death; thus I see many a poor creature lost and
tossed in this wide wilderness, even this dark world, being carried captive by
the prince of the Air, not knowing the true light to be its guide into the way
of truth, which is the way of life and peace: now in the light which was before
the world was, I do comprehend the world, and the ground and end of all Forms,
Sects, and Opinions, and so for some simple ones sakes, and the tender hearted,
have I here laid them open, and withal, directing the mind how and where to
find the true light by which these things are seen and read, and understood,
and as it is loved and followed, the mind will be brought into the life and
power, out of these fading empty shadows, unto the possession of the substance,
even the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, Mat. 29.39.
the end of all forms, shadows and imaginations; and thus does the stone which
the builders rejected, become the head of the Corner, and thus the Creature is
turned from the power of Satan unto God.

I. P.

THE WATCHER striking at the Feet of the Jmage. OR, A Discovery of the ground
and end of FORMS, SECTS and OPINIONS:
IN the days of old, the Holy Men of God, (who was endued with the Spirit of
God) did as they was acted and guided, moved and commanded by the Power and
Spirit of God which dwelt in them, and here was their Rule: and also the
Serpent as an Angel of Light, he acted and worked in his Instruments by the
power of Darkness in opposition to the Spirit of God, the enmity being placed
beiwixt the two seeds; and the more gloriously the true Light appeared in any
age, Satan also reformed himself and appeared accordingly, in the shape, and
form, and likeness thereof, as it is now to this day; but his was always but
the form and likeness of the thing but not the thing it self, his is the false
Light, the other the true Light, and so the true Light all along discovered him
and made him manifest to those in whom it ruled, but thus by his subtilty and
deceit, he has ever deceived the world and blinded the world, so that he might
keep his kingdom who is the God of the world; as for example, Moses a servant
and messenger of the most high God, to whom God had revealed and made known
himself, when he and Aaron was sent unto Pharaoh to require him to let Israel
go free, for a sign unto him they cast down their Rod, and it became a Serpent,
Exo. 10, 11, 12.
and the Magicians of Egypt they was brought, and by their sorceries and
enchantments they cast down their Rods, and they became Serpents, and thereby
Pharoahs heart was hardened, and thy would not obey nor believe, and thus the
devil imitated and opposed the truth, but Aarons Rods swallowed up their Rods,
so that it was manifest, that he that was with them was greater than he that
was in the world.

And also when Israel had sinned against God, and done that which is evil in
the sight of God, the Lord God sent forth his Prophets and Messengers to
declare the word of the Lord amongst them, against sin, and evil, Ier. 20.9.
pride, deceit and oppression, and all ungodlines, iniquities, disobedience,
and rebellion, and they had Visions and Revelations, and the word of God dwelt
in them, by which they was led, guided, and acted; and Satan he also wrought in
his Instruments, Ier. 23.
with a spirit of delusion, and he sent forth his Prophets with their visions
and lying divinations, and false dreams, Ier. 5.30, 31.
and they cried peace, where the true Prophets cried woe; and the people
hearkened unto them, and set them up, and the Prophets prohesied falsely, and the
Priests bore rule by their means, and the people loved to have it so; but what
will ye do in the end thereof says the Lord, by the mouth of his Prophet
Jeremiah, who declared against it freely, and said it was a horrible filthy
thing, and he was persecuted and the true Prophets who dwelt in the Light and
in the power of God; they saw them to be such as run, Ier. 23.21, 22, 32. ver.
30. Ier. 14.
and the Lord never sent them, and therefore they profited not the people at
all, and they stole the word from the r neighbor, and they spoke a divination
of their own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, and say the Lord said,
when he never spoke to them; and they were light and vain, and daubed the
people up with untempered mortar, and sewed pillows under their arm-holes,
Ezekiel. 22.28. Ezekiel. 13.18. Ier. 20.9. Jeremiah 23.
and healed the people slightly, crying peace, peace, where there was no peace,
but they turned them not from their evil ways, nor from their evil doings, and
the Lord was against them, and the true Prophets of God (who dwelt in the
Light) they saw them, and plainly and freely declared against them, then
whether they would hear or forbear, and told them they built up Sion with
blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity, and the heads judged for rewards, Mich. 3.
and the Priests preached for hire, and the Prophets divined for money, and yet
said the Prophet will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord amongst
us, as that none evil can come upon us? and they saw them to be such as seeked
for the fleeces, and regarded not the flock, Ezekiel. 34.
but fed with the fat, and clothed with the wool, and made a prey upon the
sheep, but the Prophets of the Lord did not spare them, but freely and
publicly declared against them, and they was persecuted, and imprisoned, and
destroyed, by those who upheld and sided with the false Prophets, Priests,
hirelings, and deceivers, and they had then a way of worship unto God, with
their new moons with their sabboths, with their calling of Assemblies, and
Prayers, and sacrifices, and Burnt-offerings, which was once prescribed by God
unto Israel, but when their hearts was gone from him, so that they walked not
uprightly before the Lord, then said he, who has required these things at your
hands to tread my Courts, Isa. 29.13.
bring no more vain oblations, incense is abomination unto me, the New Mons
and sabboths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity,
even the solemn meetings, your new mons, and your appointed Feasts my soul
hates, and when you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes, when you
make many Prayers, I will not hearken: your hands are full of blood, wash you,
make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow, Isa. 1. chap. and says
the Lord, is it such a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict his
soul, to hang down the head like a bulrush, and to spread sackcloath and ashes
under him; will thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? is it
not this the fast which I have chosen to break the bands of wickedness, to undo
the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that you break every
yoke? Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor
that are cast out, to thy house, when thou see the naked, that thou cover
him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Isa. 8.5, 6, 7. but
this they did not do, therefore said the Lord, these people draw near me with
their mouths, Isa. 13.26.
and honor me with their lips; but their hearts are far from me; and thus the
Devil deceived them, and blinded their eyes in that age, with a profession and
form of worship, but their hearts he kept to himself; and this the Prophets saw
in the light, and testified and declared against it, and left it behind them
upon record, and when the time came that Christ was born, the Pharisees, and
Scribes, and chief Priests had the Letter, the writings of Moses and the
Prophets, and they could tell by them where Christ should be born; and when
Herod had assembled them together, he demanded of them where Christ should be
born, they said in Bethlehem of Judah, Mat. 2.
for thus it is written by the Prophets, etc. so the Priests and Pharisees then
was the keepers of the Letter, and they had the types, and the shadows, and
figures of Christ the substance, and there they had a life, and thought in them
to find eternal life, but would not come unto Christ that they might have life,
but despised him, John 5.19.40.
and would not believe on him because he came not in the wisdom nor in the
pomp nor glory of the world but testified against it, and they was gotten up
into Moses chair, but not into Moses life, for they tythed Mint and Annis and
Commin, but omitted the weightier things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and
faith, which they ought to have done, and not to have left the other undone,
for that was a time when Tithes was due, Mat. 23.2. ver. 23.
for the Aaronicall and Leviticall Priesthood, to which, Tithes did belong, was
not yet changed until Christ was offered up, and they was fair sayers, who
said and did not; and the hypocrites, who was hopt above the Light, and so was
the blind leaders of the blind, with their fair sayings, and therefore said
Christ beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mat. 25.14. Mat. 16.6. Mat. 23.13.
and they turned people from the Light, and denied the Light, and so shut up
the Kingdom of Heaven against men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor
suffer others that would, but had gotten a wisdom and righteousness of their
own, which blinded their eyes, and covered their sins, so that they could not
see their sins, nor him that was the way, the truth, and the life, therefore
did he pronounce so many woes against them, and called them whited Walls, and
painted Sepulchers, who washed the outside, but was the generation of vipers
and serpents within: and thus Christ, who was the Light, searched them, and
judged them who appeared fair on the outside, but within full of uncleanness,
but they could not hide themselves from the Light, therefore they joined
against it, and the Saduces, and the Pharisees, and the chief Priests and
Scribes, and the Herodians, and Pilate, and Herod, and the rude multitude, all
joined together against the life; and they consulted against him, and took
counsel against him, how they might destroy him, Mat. 16.1.
and the Pharisees came to tempt him, and ensnare him with questions; that they
might get somewhat against him to bring him under their Law, but he foresaw
their deceitful hearts, their plots, and confounded their intentions, and
brought to naught their counsel; then they said, if we let this man alone, all
men will go after him, and so they sought false witnesses and took Counsel
against him, John 11.47.48 Mat. 26.59.
and Crucified him, and let Barrabus go free; and thus the devil blinded their
eyes (in that age) with a strickt profession, and their own righteousness and
wisdom, so that they could not see the Light and the Life, but persecuted it,
and seeked the living in the dead Letter, but if they had known him, they would
not have Crucified the Lord of Glory, yet they was wise in their own eyes, and
despised those that followed him, and said, none of the rulers believed on him,
Ioh. 7.48.49.
but an ignorant people that knew not the Law, that were accursed because they
was the Publicans and sinners, and they themselves was the greatest sinners,
but they healed themselves up with their own wisdom and righteousness, and
therefore said Christ, they that are whole need no Physician, but they that are
sick; therefore he said, publicans and harlots should enter the kingdom before
them, Mat. 9.11, 12. Mat. 21.31. Mat. 11.5.
but the blind, the deaf, the lame, the dumb, and the Leopardies came unto
him, and believed on him, and were healed, and the poor received the Gospel,
but the Priests, and professors, or the Pharisees, and Scribes, and Elders, and
Rulers, could not believe on him, that he was the Messiah, but looked for
another, and these was the most zealous in their profession, and builded the
Tombs of the prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the righteous, and said,
Mat. 23.29.30
if they had been in the day of their fathers, they would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets, and yet those was the chief
persecutors of Christ, the substance of those things which they upheld in the
Law and the Prophets, therefore they was witnesses against themselves, and
filled up the measure of their fathers wrath, and those professed Abraham, John
8.39. Ver. 44. Mat. 23.33. Mark 15.15.
and said Abraham was their father, and yet denied Christ, whom Abraham
foretold of, but Christ told them they were of their father the Devil, and his
works they did and would do, and thus he judged them for all their zeal and
profession, and said, how could they escape the damnation of hell: Then after
he was sacrificed up, he appeared unto his Apostles, and sent them to preach
the Gospel to every creature, and here they did not run because the Prophets
run, nor take up a command without them in the Prophets writings to do a thing,
because the Prophets was commanded to do it, but they was also acted and guided
by the same spirit and word of truth which dwelt in them, John 14.16, 17. John
16.7.8.
which Christ before he was offered up, had promised, that he would send the
comforter, even the Spirit of Truth, which the world could not receive, which
should lead them into all truth, and should reprove the world of sin, of
righteousness, and of Judgment, and then after they had received the
holy ghost, they went abroad preaching Christ, and showing thereby the
fulfilling the Law and the Prophets, which figured forth and prophesied of
Christ, Acts 2. Acts 4.
and this they declared in their Temples, and in their Synagogues, and they
haled them out of the Temple, and out of their synagogues, and brought them
before Governors, Rulers, and Magistrates, and the chief Priests, and their
kindred, and the chiefest professors (which was the Pharisees) was the head
acters therein, but nevertheless they went on boldly, being filled with the
power of the Holy Ghost, without the fear of man, obeying God rather than man,
so they was not subject to the authority of man in that respect, but they was
subject unto the Law of man so far as it was subject to the Law of God; and so
they went on preaching Christ, and many believed and were baptized, and
received the Holy Ghost and were converted, and it was so that the multitude
that believed was of one heart, and one mind, and they was so far of one being
exalted over another, or seeking themselves, that not any of them said, Acts.
4.32.
that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, and the works of God
went on in much power, the ministers being acted and guided by the Holy Ghost.
And also Stephen a man full of faith and the Holy Ghost, he declared against
the Temple, which God had once commanded to be built, and said, Solomon built
him an House, yet nevertheless, Acts 7.
God that made the world and all things, therein dwells, not in Temples made
with hands, as faith the Prophet, Heaven is my Throne, and Earth is my
Footstool, and where is the House that ye will build me? and where is the
place of my rest? has not mine hand made all things? and he judged them and
said, ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost, as did your Fathers so do ye, and they gnashed upon him
with their teeth, and fell upon him and stoned him, and when Saul was converted
and became Paul, Acts 26.17, 18.
his message was for to turn peoples minds from the Darkness to the Light, and
then (says Paul,) when it pleased God to reveal his Son in me that I might
preach him amongst the hearhen, imediately I conferred not with flesh and
blood, Gal. 1.15, 16. 2 Cor. 4.2. 2 Cor. 2.15. Acts. 1^.22 etc Acts. 17. chap.
and here was Paul's call to the ministry, and they was made manifest to every
man's conscience, and was a sweet savor unto God, both in them that believed,
and them that perished and Paul declared against the temple, and told them that
worshipped there they was too superstitious, and he went into their synagogues
on sabbath days and reasoned with them, and they persecuted him, and haled him
before rulers and there complained of him to be one that profaned the temple,
and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazareans, Acts 24. Acts 22.22. Ephesians. 5.8.
and a pestilent fellow and a raiser of sedition, and many cried out away with
such a fellovv, he is not worthy to live and thus they suffered by the zealous
professors in those days, but they whose minds was turned to the light, they
was translated out of darkness into the light, 1 Cor. 12, 13 1 John. 3.14. Col.
3.9, 10. Romans 6.6. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11
and became the children of light, and was baptized by one Spirit into one
body, and had passed from death unto life, and had put off the old man, and put
on the new, the old man being crucified with Christ, though some of them was
drunkards, some swearers, some proud, some covetous, Idolaters, Adulterers, yet
then they were cleansed, and washed, and sanctified, and justified, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, and here was the Church which
witnessed the Spiritual Baptism, into the Spiritual Body, of which Christ is
Head, and they being thereby set free from Sin, their Union and Communion was
here, and the Bread which the Saints brake was the Communion of the Body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.27. John 2.27. 1 Cor. 1.18.
and the Cup which they drank was the Communion of the Blood of Christ, and
they was in Christ new Creatures, all members of one Body, and needed not that
any man should teach them, because the anointing was in them, and to them the
Cross was the power of God unto salvation, though to the Greeks foolishness,
and to the Jews a stumbling block; and in this Cross Paul rejoiced, Gal. 6.14.
by which he was Crucified to the world and the world to him, and they was not
conformed unto the world, but transformed by the renewing of their minds, and
had one Lord, one Faith, Ephesians. 4.4, 5.6.
one Baptism, one way, one Teacher, one Life, and one Shepherd, and one
Priest over the household of God, and one God and Father of all, Phil. 3.20.
being united by one Spirit into the bond of peace, and their conversation was
in Heaven, and there was the Christians, and though there was a time that when
Christ was preached after the flesh, Phil. 1.16, 17, 18.
some preached Christ through envy and strife, and contention, to add
affliction to Paul's bonds, yet in all this he rejoiced that the name of Christ
was spread abroad, for there was many that believed not that that was the
Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, and was crucified, as Paul himself had not,
and as there is many such to this day, and so it rejoiced him that the name of
Christ was spread abroad, but after his name was spread abroad, and many
believed that that was the Christ, 2 Timothy 3.5.
then the Apostle declared against such who had the form, but denied the life
and power, and said, from such turn away, for as Iannes and Iambres withstood
Moses, so do they withstand the truth, being men of corrupt minds, and
reprobates concerning the faith, and said the Apostle, we preach Christ
crucified unto the Jews a stumbling block, 1 Cor. 1.23.24. 2 Cor. 5.16.
and the Greeks foolishness, but unto them which are called both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, and said the Apostle,
hence know we no man after the flesh; and though we have known Christ after the
flesh, hence know we him no more but he that is in Christ is a new creature,
old things are passed away, and all things become new, and they that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and Lusts, Gal. 4.24. Col.
26, 27. 2 Cor. 13.5. 1 John 5.10. John 5 25. 1 John chap. 3.5. 2 Pet. 1.4. 1
John 4.11 chap. 5.19.
and the Apostle preached Christ within the hope of glory, the Ministry which
had been hid from ages and generations, and they that could not witness Christ
in them, was reprobates, and here it was not sufficient for them to say they
believed Christ dyed for them, but he that believes has the witness within
himself, and he that believes is passed from death unto life, and he that
believes is born of God, and he that is born of God does not commit sin, and
those was they who was made partakers of Christ's divine nature, therefore says
John, as he is, so are we in this present world, and we are of God, and the
whole world lies in wickedness, and they that are of God hears us, and they
that are not with us are against us; and then the Apostle Paul he spoke of
false Apostles that was gotten transforming themselves as the Apostles of
Christ, 2 Cor. 11.13, 4.15.
and no marvel says he, for Satan himself is transformed as an Angel of light,
therefore it is no great thing also if his Ministers be transformed as the
Ministers of Christ, whose end shall be according to their works: and the
Apostle Peter he foretold of such who through covetousness with feigned words
should make merchandise of the people; and Jude he spoke of such who go on in
the way of Cain, 2 Pet. 2, 8. Jude 11. 1 John 2.10, 1^
and after the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards, and says John it is the
last time, and as ye have heard that Antichrists shall come, even now are there
many Antichrists whereby we know that it is the last time, they went from us,
but they were not of us: Now the false Apostles was such, as under a pretense
or profession of true Apostles deceived the ignorant, and brought in heresies,
and so Antichrist is one (that under the profession of Christ) opposes Christ,
and draws from him in the life, though under a profession of his name and of
faith in him; and thus Antichrist got up, even that man of sin, 2 These. 3, 4.
that is exalted in man above all that is called God, sitting in the Temple of
God as God, and says he is God, and thus he decived them in that age as an
Angel of Light in a form and likeness of Christ, but a false Christ, who
bewitched them from the truth with a form and profession; and thus Antichrist
has reigned by the power of Darkness, ever since the Apostles days, over the
world under a Gospel profession, yet I say not but that the Lord has had a
remnant in all ages to himself, who was zealous and faithful in what they
knew, but here has been a long time of cruel darkness and ignorance, and the
Lord has been a long time as a stranger in the earth, and they that were
accounted to believe on God or Christ, looked at him as a God a far off in the
heavens, without, far off, they know not where, yet they that said they
believed that that was the Christ that dyed at Jerusalem, and that he dyed for
their sins and rose again, and was sitting at the right hand of God, etc. as
that which they called their Creed, so then they was baptized with water and
called Christians, whenas before they were called Heathen, and did not believe
that that was the Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, but now called Christians
and believers, though they were nothing changed from the heathenish nature, and
this was at the first coming in of the profession of Christian faith and
Religion into England, and those had the writings of the Prophets and Apostles,
which is called Scripture, and so was the keepers of the letters, and that they
took to be their rule to walk by, as they do now, but knew not that which gave
it forth, to lead them unto the life, but had the Letter and the form, but
could not walk according to it, being led and guided by a contrary Principle,
to that which gave it forth, so they gave their own meanings and imaginations
upon it, so then all that were called Christ's, were of the Christian Church and
faith, and so were counted believers; then they sprinkled the children of those
believers, and by that were they entertained into their Church and faith, and
thus came up Infants Baptism, for which there is no Scripture nor example,
either from Christ or his Apostles, and yet they call this an ordinance of
Christ, and thus they begin to ad their own traditions and imaginations, and
all are by nature the children of wrath, and a littlewater on their faces does
not change them from that, Ephesians. 23.14.
but they grew up in all manner of unrighteousnes, as drunkenness, swearing,
lying, covetousness, adultery Idolatry, pride wantonness, envy murder, deceit,
fraud, and maliciousness, the which was cast out of the Apostles Church, and
they was washed from such things, and sanctified and regenerate into the
New Covenant, and reckoned such to be without, as now Englands Church is upheld
by: then they had their two Sacraments (as they call them) for which word they
have no Scripture, and Infants baptism is one, and that which they call the
Supper of the Lord, is another; and they had the carnal bread and wine, as the
Priests and people has now, and they give it to natural carnal men and
women, and the Apostle says, he that eats and drinks this unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, not discerning the Lords body, And the natural man
receives not the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned: 1 Cor.
2.14. 1 Cor. 10.16.
and the bread which the Saints breaks is the Communion of the Body of Christ,
and the cup which the Saints drinks, is the Communion of the Blood of Christ;
and here is the Communion of the Saints, and the Supper of the Lord to which,
he that has not on a wedding Garment is not admitted; but Englands Priests
knows not what a wedding garment is, and thus they planted their church in
England, and other places, and then Bishops was set up, and Archbishops; for
which name there is no Scripture, and Deans and Priests, and Deacons, and
Popes, and one ruled over another, and the Popes bore rule like Kings, but they
found never a Pope in the Scripture, and the Bishops they bore rule by their
means, and the Priests preached for hire, and the people loved to have it so,
and thus Antichrist set up his Kingdom, under a profession of the Gospel, and
then tithes came up for to maintain the Priests, contrary to any rule in the
Gospel, and then Universities was set up, for to make ministers or priests (as
they call them) for the which they have no rule in the Scripture; and thus they
was set up by the will and tradition of man, as they are still upheld, as the
false Prophets always was, and then they had their long robes like the
Pharisees, but not like the Apostles, for from them they have no such example,
then they set up these Idols Temples, which the blind and ignorant now call
Churches, or the houses of God, for the which they have no example from the
Gospel ministers, for God never commanded these to be built, and though
Solomon built him one Temple, yet nevertheless when the substance came, Matthew
24.
he prophesied of its downfall and destruction; and Stephen witnessed against
it, and was stoned to death by those that upheld it; and Paul witnessed against
it, and was persecuted by those that upheld it; as many of the servants and
messengers of God are now persecuted in these Idols Temples, and haled out and
abused, and stoned and imprisoned by those that uphold them now, though these
was never ordained by God, and then they got up into their Pulpets, the
chiefest places in the Synagogues (as they are now) and called of men Master,
and Doctor, and had the uppermost Rooms at feasts, and greetings in the markets
(as it is now,) and then they stole the Apostles words, as the false prophets
stole the word from their neighbor, so did [and doth] those; and put them into
Chapter and verse, an^ took a verse, and studied from it a divination of their
own brain, and added to it, but not from the mouth of the Lord, and so does the
Priests now; but they run like the false Prophets, and the Lord never sent
them, therefore they profit not the people at all, and then with feigned or
studied words, through covetousness they made merchandise of the people, as
they do now, and so made a prey upon the sheep as they do now, and began to
seek about for great livings, and fat benefices, and left a lesser and ran to a
bigger, so there was their beloved which they seeked for, as the false
Prophets, which seeked for the fleece and regarded not the flock, but fed with
the fat and clothed with the wool, and made a prey upon the sheep (as they do
now) and cried peace to those that put into their mouths, and called them
beloved brethren, and Christians, but they that did not put into their mouths,
they prepared war against them, and brought a Law upon them, and haled them
before Courts and Benches, as they do now, and thus they sought for their gain
from their quarter, and ruled them with rigor, so that until within these late
years, the Priests reigned like Lords over the people, contrary to the practice
of the ministers of the Gospel, who made themselves servants to all, 1 Cor.
9.19.
and though they did ordain Bishops, they did not ordain that they should live
of others Estates, or takes the Tenthes of the increase of others labors, and
live like Lords over the people, but said, a Bishop must be blameless, the
Husband of one Wife, vigilent, sober, and of good behavior, given to
hospitality, apt to Teach, not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy
Lucre, but patient, not a Brawler, not Covetous, 1 Timothy 3.
one that rules well his own House, not a novis, least being lifted up with
pride, he fall into the Condemnation of the Devil: now try your Priests and
Teachers by this rule, but they stood not to this who was ordained by the Pope,
or by the will of man, but was lifted up with pride and covetousness, and greedy
of filthy Lucre, as they are now, and so came into the condemnation of the
Devil, as they do now, and thus your priests old father planted their Church
and so set every thing in form and tradition, according to their own
imaginations, and here is the ground and foundation of the faith and Church of
England so called; and here is the old Fathers, and the old Authors that your
Priests have so much talked of, and prated of their ancient Fathers, even the
Popes and the Bishops: and though now in words they deny the Pope, and the
Papists, and the Bishops and differ something from the Pope in judgment, yet
are in the same forms Customs, and Traditions, and are upheld by the same Laws
as they was, when they was in the Popes and Bishops Loins, and thus Antichrist
has long deceived the Nations, and ruled by the power of darkness, under a
notion or profession of the Gospel and faith of Christ, and one generation
has gone, and another come, and have not known the Lord that bought them, but
by the hearing of the ear, and as those that saw him knew him in whom he dwelt,
bore testimony and declared of him, and thus the Priests could tell the people
from the Records of the holy men of God, what God is, and what Christ is, and
what faith is, and how Christ dyed for their sins and rose again, and that
Christ is a Savior and a Redeemer, and what the Apostles spoke and writ unto
the Church freely, they get and speak unto the world for gain and lucre, and
so casts the childrens bread unto dogs, and so seeds and puffs up the dark
minds of men with ayry knowledge, what they have gotten into their brains from
other men's words, and their own imaginations, and so made and makes the people
believe, that they are the means ordained by God; now many may see by this what
liars they are, and how they came up and was ordained, and whose rule,
practice, or example they follow in this they do, and they will be found the
Ministers of Antichrist, Look into their own Records which they call the Book
of Martyrs.
and such as have long shut up, and do shut up the Kingdom of heaven against
men, and would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others that would, but
so long as they had power would bind all unto themselves, and those that had
any appearance of Light, so that they came to see their deceit and separate
from them, they would scarce suffer them to live amongst them, but praised be
the Almighty who has so weakened their hands and shattered their foundation,
and caused his light so to shine out of Darkness, to cause them to be so
manifest, so that all people who love Light better than Darkness, may now see
how ignorantly and blindly you have bin led, as strangers from the father of
light, after the vain traditions, customs, forms, ordinances, and imaginations
of man, with a vain profession and feigned faith, which you have gotten into
the notion, but still in you sins and iniquities alive in the first nature,
under deaths dominion, still strangers from the God of life, and from Christ
the Savior and Redeemer of his people from their sins, and thus you lie under
the power of Darkness and delusion of Antichrist, Hos. 4.9. Isa. 9.10.
both Priest and people, for like people like Priest, and so says the Prophet,
and your Leaders cause you to err by their lies and by their lightness, and
though you be full of teachers yet you are lost for want of true knowledge, and
are still led captive in your sins and iniquities, after these who have gotten
the form, but deny the life and power, ever learning and never comes to the
knowledge of the truth in your selves, only differing from the heathen in name
and profession, judgment, or opinion, but still alive in the same nature, in
the fall under the Curse, the children of disobedience, in whom does rule the
Prince of Darkness, and you must have a Law without to keep you in awe and
fear of the same, as they have whom you account heathen, but the Righteous
needs no Law, for because of transgression the Law was added, and you are
fighting killing, and devouring one another, as they do whom you account
heathen, and you are Drunkards, and Swearers, and Liars, as they are, and
Scoffers, Gal. 3.19.
and scornrs and Revilers, and Back-biters, and Whoremongers, and Adulterers,
and proud, and covetous Idolaters, and high minded oppressors, as they are,
both Priest and people, and you are Idolaters, as they are, eating, and
drinking, and rising up to play, and you are envious, and malicious, suing, and
rending, and tearing one another at the Law, both Priest and people, pulling
down others to set up your selves, and you are dissembling, and cozening, and
cheating, and defrauding one another of the earth, which is none of your own;
and you are persecutots, and stoners, and strikers of the innocent children,
and servants, and messengers of God, and what sin is there amongst those whom
you account heathen, that is not amongst you, and does abound, yea, those whom
you account heathen may condemn you inmuch of their practice; Oh! be ashamed
and blush you Priests and teachers of England, to see your Ministry and the
fruits of your Ministry so laid open before you, and thus you are these who
come near the Lord with your lips and mouths, but your hearts are far from
him in the earth or else you would walk more uprightly; Math. 15.9.
but says the Lord in vain do you worship me, teaching (for Doctrine) the
Commandments of men, but I know some Pharisees and Priests will be ready to
say, we are no drunkards nor swearers nor such like, but I say unto you, you
are hypocrites, and your hearts are full of deceit, envy, wrath, and
bitterness, covetousness, pride, and earthly mindedness, and self love, and
selfe-wisdome, and persecutors, and the greatest oppressors of the truth, and
Publicans, and Harlots shall enter the kingdom before you: Jesus Christ the
Light marked out your forefathers, and found them to be such, though they was
more strickt and zealous than this generation: and by the same Light you are
found in their steps, and those things both Christ and his Apostles judged to
be without, and condemned them out of the new Covenant, for there no
unrighteous person can dwell, and there all wars are ended, and the swords beat
into pruning hooks, and guns into plowshares, and there is no oppression, nor
selfe-exalting, Math. 20, 21. Isa. 54.13, 14. Romans 8.1.
but he that would be the greatest must be the least, and in righteousness are
they established, and they are far from oppression, and the Lord alone is their
teacher, and there is no need of an outward Law, for to them there is no
condemnation who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit, and there is no
respect of persons, but all members of one body, of which Christ is head,
serving one another in love, and here is the new Covenant, and the Children of
the new Covenant who are washed and made clean by the blood of the new
Covenant, but you are Aliens and strangers from this Covenant, who are in your
notions and professions; therefore all you ignorant people who are led by these
deceitful Priests and Pharisees, and disdain to be wiser than your
forefathers, now see who is your forefathers, and the original of your
Priests, and who is your example, for you are out of the life and practice of
the Apostles and the Children of Light, and by their life are judged and
condemned, for they was mortified to that life which you live in; neither did
the Ministers of the Gospel Baptize Infants with water; neither did they teach
for hire, or stand up in the chiefest place in the Assembly; neither was they
called of men Master; neither had they the long Gowns; neither did they respect
any place more than another to teach or preach in, except for convenience; Acts
20.17.18 20.
for they teached in dwelling houses, and by the River sides, or in any open
place; neither did they give to the world David's Conditions to be sung in a
Meeter; neither did they give to natural men and women, bread and wine, which
you call a SACRAMENT; neither did they use to Church women, as you call it, and
take money for it; neither did they take a Text of other men's words, 2 Pet 1.21.
and speak from it a divination of their own brain; neither did they study what
or how to preach, but spoke as they was moved by the holy Ghost; neither did
they teach people the Letter was the Word, John 1.
or, that the Letter was the light, but they bore witness of God to be the
Word, and Christ to be the light; neither did they tearh people that they could
never be free from sin while they were upon the earth; but they preached Jesus
Christ the Lamb of God, who came to take away the sins of the world, and to
redeem his people from their sin, and to set them in the glorious liberty of
the Sons of God, that he might redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having
spot or wrincle, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
or any such thing, neither did they teach people that a house of lime and
stone was the Church, or the house of God; neither was they set up or upheld by
a Law of man, or came by the will of man, or stood in the will of man, Gal. 1.
but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, and from him they received their
Message and Command; neither was they brought up in humane learning, at an
University (as it is called) to learn Arts and Sciences and take degrees, from
Sir to Batcheller, and from Batcheller to Master of Arts, from Master to
Batcheller of Divinity, from Batcheller of Divinity, to Doctor of Divinity, and
had so many several Gowns, but the Pharisees loved these things, but the
Ministers of Christ was not such, but most of them was ignorant, and unlearned
in that wisdom and learning, Mat. 13.11.
but unto them it was given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, but it was
hid from the world, and the wise ones thereof; and now the wise ones of the
world say, that is the means ordained of God, to come to the knowledge of the
truth, and that is the original, to wit, humane learning, and deny all
revelation or immediate inspiration, and say it is ceased, for all which they
have no Scripture proof, for the Apostles never taught this Doctrine, nor
prescribed this way, therefore your teachers are such as bring another
Doctrine, and climb up another way, who are not to be received but shut out
for thieves, and robbers, who shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men, John
10.1.
and will neither enter in themselves nor suffer others that would, and the
Ministers of the Gospel never preached up Hebrew and Greek to be the original,
but they preached the word to be the original, neither took tithes, John 11.
nor ever had a set maintenance, or so much a year, namely, forty, fifty, or
sixty, or a hundred, or two hundred pounds a year, more or less, to abide in
one place, neither sued any at the Law for any such thing, but all their care
was to make the Gospel free and without charge, 1 Cor. 9.1^.
neither did they take of those that did not own them, as denied them, but
shaked off the dust of their feet, and so left them, neither had they an
hourglass to limit themselves by, or had a Clark to say Amen; but your Priests
will tell you now the Gospel is published, and the Churches are gathered and
planted: Oh! with shame might they speak it, what Churches have they gathered,
here I have before laid down their Church the ground thereof, the gathering
thereof, and the planting thereof, and what they are, and also the gathering of
the Apostles Church, and the planting thereof, so that here you may see the
difference betwixt the one and the other, the one a form and tradition and
profession, the other the life, and power, and substance, and here also you may
see what Englands Church, which Englands Priests have planted, now differs from
the heathen, and now set Drunkards aside, set swearers aside, set liars aside,
set proud ones aside, set covetous ones aside, set raylers aside, set murderers
aside, and whoremongers aside, set wild ones, profane ones, and wanton ones
aside, set quarrellers, and fighters aside, and hypocrites, dissemblers, and
persecutors aside, and back-biters, extortioners, and lustful ones, and such
like aside, and then see where Englands Church is, which your Priests have made
you believe they have planted, and let them eat no where but of their own
vinyard, and it will make them go about to plant a better vineyard, or else to
cast off their long Gowns, and fall to dig with a spade, for some of them have
sometimes brought that place of Scripture to uphold their 40, or 50. or 100. or
200. l. by the year, where the Apostle says, who planted a vinyard and eats
not of the fruit thereof? 1 Cor. 19.7.
now according to this the vinyard must be planted first, before they can eat
of the fruit thereof, and set those aside that I mentioned as aforesaid, for
the Apostles cast out suchweeds and wild plants out of their vinyard, and then
see where their vinyard is, which they have plaeted, and let them only eat of
the fruit thereof, and not rob others vinyards, and this is but equity
according to Scriptures example, but they are such greedy Dogs as the Prophet
Isajah declared Isa. 56.
against in his time, and such ravening wolves and foxes, as they live all upon
the spoil, and the fruits of others labors, and those that hunts them out of
their Vinyards, and Barns, and Flocks, and Herds; then they have a Law, even
to devour them and their whole estates, and this is far from Gospel Ministers,
nay, Jesus Christ the Light saw their forefathers and marked them out to be
the ravening wolves, Mat. 7.15, 16.
in sheeps clothing, as these does now appear to any, but those that love to
have it so, for so long as you put into their mouths, they cry peace, peace,
and speak you fare, and calls you christians and beloved; but put not into
their mouths, then they even prepare war, then they have a Law for you to take
treble damage from you, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and so fulfils the Apostles words: Oh what a horrible filthy thing is here
committed in the land! are not they plain ravening wolves, that would devour
hoth body and soul? Now you people of England, consider where you are, and whom
you follow, and whither you are going, and see now who is your forefathers,
and see now how you have walked by tradition and form, and have been blinded by
a vain profession and outside-worship and so have taken Antichrist for Christ,
and the Ministers of Antichrist for the Ministers of Christ, and have put
Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness, and your fear toward God has
been taught by the precepts of men, Isa. 29.13.
and they have taught for Doctrine the traditions of men, as I have before
proved, how many things they have led you in by tradition, without any
Scripture proofs, though to you they have been Oracles of God, but now they
are searched, by the light, they are made manifest to be vain heathennish
traditions, and thus the blind have led the blind along, and many of them into
the ditch; but yet I say not but the Lord has had his people in all ages,
those who was zealous, and faithful, and true in what they knew, but I know
the Priests have been long utter enemies to God and his truth, and the tares
have long covered the wheat, and in the time of ignorance God winked, but now
the Light shines out of Darkness, and now is the separation, and gathering the
sheep from the goats, the wheat from the tares, and to convince the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment, because the Prince of the Air is
judged, and now the Lord does require all every whereto repent, and they that
love the light will bring their deeds to the light, that the light may prove
them whether they be wrought in God, and it is not to say you will follow your
forefathers, and go on the old way, for such are they that hate the light and
despise it, and love darkness rather than light, because their deeds are evil,
and so having drunk old wine does not straightway desire new, for they say the
old is better; and those are they that cry up the old way, and cry away with
new ways and new Lights, and this is the condemnation of the world, John 3.19
20.
light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than light because
their deeds are evil, Light is now to them who have always been in darkness,
and truth is new to them who have always lived in deceit, but the light is the
same, as ever it was, for it is unchangeable, and the truth is the same.

So people take heed of obstinancy and wilful blindness, and love not to be
deceived, for now the light plainly and clearly shines, and here your old way
is plainly laid open, what it is, and from whence it is, and also your Priests,
and though they be more refined within this late years than they was before it
is because the Light is more broken forth within this late years, so that many
is come to see their deceit, and declare against them, and now they are but the
more subtiler and closer deceivers, Satan transformed into anothe shape more
like the light, but still they have no parted with their great benefices, add
Augmentations, or tithes, nor the chiefest place of the Assembly, nor their
long gowns, though they are almost ashamed of their color, nor to be called of
men Master, nor from seeking their gain from their quarter, nor from making a
trade of other men's words, nor from their lying divinations, and saying the
Lord says, when he never spoke to them, nor from stealing the word into their
mouth, and saying, hear the word of the Lord, when they never heard his voice,
neither turns the wicked ones from their wickedness, nor the proud ones from
their pride, nor the ungodly from their ungodliness, nor the profane from
their profaneness, but are still profane themselves, and still proud and
covetous, and still shelter themselves under the powers of the earth, as their
forefathers the false Prophets always did, and still runs when the Lord never
sends them, but ordained and set up, and upheld by the will of man, therefore
they profit not the people at all, but only has gotten a higher notion to feed
the notionists withal, and so makes more Pharisees, hypocrites, and whited
walls, and they are more whited over themselves to deceive the world, but the
pure light is so broken forth that they cannot hide themselves, and many sees
the deceit of the Priests, and their folly is a manifesting even to all, so
that none need to be deceived by them but the wilful, obstinate, and blind, who
love to have it so, who love darkness rather than light, which is their
condemnation, the light which reproves them for their evil deeds, and
therefore they hate it, for every one that does evil hates the light, and this
is his condemnation, and no ignorance here is to be pleaded, and these are they
that uphold the Priests and the Pharisees, but all who have desires to see, may
see; and now here is the Priests or the ministers (so called) of England laid
open, with the church of England, with their form, profession, and outside
worship, with their ground, and original, and sandy foundation, and to be
within, differing from the Heathen but in name, and form, and profession,
therefore down it must, though the powers of the earth has long upheld them,
more than any other sect, so that they have continued so long, as they do not a
little boast of, and thereby say they are of God, but let the Magistrate look
to his office, and let the minister alone with his office, and then you shall
see the professed ministers of England, to be the weakest of all sects and
forms, but Antichrist has had his limited time to reign over the earth, but
now the King of righteousness is risen with a sword in his hand, and by his
mighty arm he will overturn, overturn all until it come into his hand, Psalm.
149.8.
whose own it is, and he will bind the Kings in chains, and the Nobles in
fetters of iron, and he will brake the powers of the earth assunder, and all who
oppose him, Rev. 19.20.
and the Beast and false Prophet shall be taken, and all that receive his
mark, and worship his image, into the Lake shall go small and great, and there
to lie forevermore; Mat. 31.42.44
and this is the stone which the builders have rejected, which now is become
the head of the corner, and whomsoever falls upon it shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it falls, it will grind them to powder, and this is the Stone cut out
of the mountain without hands, which strikes at the feet of the Image, and here
is a blow to the foundation of the priests and church of England.

Therefore now all people who are captivated under the Priests, turn your
minds within to the Light of the Lord Jesus, which reproves you in secret when
you tell a lie, or use any deceit, which shows you your evil deeds, and that
your hearts are not right toward God for all your duties and shorship and
profession, and that which calls for uprightness of heart and an holy life, and
a change, and reformation, and a newness of life, hearken unto this, it is the
free grace of God unto your souls, and teaches freely, and by this you will
come to profit, for it teaches godliness, and godliness is great gain, so that
you will not need to spend your moneys for that which is not bread, 1 Timothy 6 6.
Isa. 59.1, 2.
nor your labor for that which profits not, nor to be led captive by your
blind guides, ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth, but
still in blindness and darkness, for you have a teacher within which is a more
sure word of prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19.
to the which you do well to take heed unto, as to a Light shining in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts; this is the
measure of the grace of God, even the free gift of God, which God has given
you to profit withal, which will accuse you or excuse you before the throne of
God, to which I now leave you, having discharged my conscience concerning you,
and so I proceed to the rest of forms.

Now within these late years the Light of Christ beginning to stir in peoples
hearts, so that many come to see themselves in much darkness and ignorance of
these things which they read of in the Scripture, and also the corruption of
the Priests and Teachers, and what Reprobates they were concerning the faith,
and that they profited not the people at all, but they had heard them so long,
and still blind and ignorant, so that many come to see their folly, yet their
minds not being directed to the light, which showed them this, and should have
led them out of this condition, upon which they should have waited for
direction to have found the way of truth, but they run without to the Letter in
their own wills and wisdom, and so would find out a way by their own wisdom
and imagination, and so went out to search the Scripture, but with a wrong eye,
giving their own meanings and interpretations upon the Scripture, and one cries
this is my opinion, and another cries this is my opinion, and another cries
this is my judgment, and thus they are confounded and divided into their
several judgments and opinions, yet all still in one life and one Nature, but
only confounded and divided in their judgments of what the Prophets meant, and
Christ meant, and what the Apostles meant, but it is as a Book sealed, both to
the learned and unlearned, and none is found worthy but the Lamb to open the
seals, Isa. 29.11.
who is the light wherein lies the Ministry; so this is the cause why they
whose minds are from the light, are so divided and scattered in their
judgments and opinions, and one sets up a form in his imagination, and another
sets up a Form in his immagination, and one runs abroad into the world with
his wisdom, and he will go preach up his form and judgment to be the truth, and
another he will cry down that form for delusion, anp preach up his form for a
truth, and so many deceivers and false Spirits are entered into the world, and
one cries, lo here is Christ if you can believe and be baptized you shall be
saved; so they that can say that is the way, and that they believe Christ dyed
for them, then they must be dipped in the water, and that they call baptising
of them, and then they are of their Church, and then they call themselves
Saints, though they are still in the old nature, and so in the fall, and in
their sins, and corruptions, and it is not the washing away the filth of the
flesh that does change them; but because they are come out from the Priests,
and turned into another judgment and profession, they think themselves Saints,
Acts 19.6.
and they read the Scripture of laying on the Apostles hands, and then the
disciples received the Holy Ghost; and so those formalists and selfe-actors
lays on their hands, but there wants the Holy Ghost, and thus they act, and
form and imitate, and make the form or likeness of a Church; and they read of
washing the feet in the figure, and so they dote upon the Letter, John 13, 5. 1
Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and wash one another feet; and they read of delivering up to Satan, one for
fornication; for the destruction of the flesh in the name and power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, for in the spirit Paul discerned it, for says he, though absent
in body, yet present in spirit, I have judged already as though I were present,
concerning him that has done this deed; and so those formalists and imitators,
if any differ from them in judgment, they will also deliver him up to Satan as
they imagine, taking the Apostles words, though they cannot tax him for any
thing; but his judgment differing from them, but they want the power; and here
they are the Magicians, like Iannes and Iambres, opposing the truth, and those
are they that are called Baptists; and another form, they are more spiritual
in their judgment, and they hold a spiritual baptism, and not a water
baptism, and as many as hold with them, are of their Church and faith, and
thus they are divided into several forms and Churches, and so have several
names, and there are several judgments of one thing, under one name, and here
is the confusion of Babylon, with their several sects, judgments, and
opinions, and every one professing the name of the Lord, and stealing the words
of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and saying the Lord says, when he
never spoke to them, and here the difference from another, only in profession,
judgment or opinion, but still in Babylon, and Babylons fashions, customs and
traditions, and fellowship, manners, and breeding, which is all heathenish, and
at enmity with God, being in the fall, and thus they stand in the first nature,
in pride, in covetousness, anger, wrath, malice, fleshliness and lustfulness,
and idle words, vain talking, foolish jesting, and evil communication; and to
be short, still alive in the worlds nature, strangers to the holy God, and so
under deaths dominion, and here I comprehend all forms, sects, judgments, and
opinions, by the light which slayes Death, and takes away its Dominion unto its
self, to whom it belongs, and does see them and judge them to be out of the
light, in Darkness and so in confusion, one clashing against another, with
their judgments and opinions, and here is the disputes of this world, and the
one cries, Lo, here is Christ in this form, and another cries, so here is
Christ in this form, and none else, when as Christ is within his Saints, and
theirs is a false Christ which they have set up in their imaginations, and here
is the false Prophets and false Christ's that are gone out into the world, who
have deceived many,

And hereis the ground of forms, a setting up a likeness of a thing, a figure
or image of a thing, Reve. 13.
but not the thing it self; and here is the beast and the image of the beast,
which all the world worships, and wonders after; even Satan as an Angel of
light, in his several shapes, forms, and likenesses to deceive the simple, and
here is the form without the life and power, and here is the building upon a
sandy foundation, which all must come down, Luk 6.49. Mat. 19.20.
who here the words, and talk of the words, and are sayers of the words; and
hear is him that says he has kept the commandments and Ordinances, and yet
his heart from God after other lovers, who is searched and found out by Christ
the Light, and here is the Spiritual Babel with its foundation, and Babels
building, and Babels builders, and here is the Image whose head is gold, whose
breast is silver and thighs of brass, Dan. 2.
and legs of iron, and feet part iron and part clay, but now is he come and
made manifest, who strikes at feet of Image, who is called the stone cut out of
mountain without hands, even Jesus Christ the son of God; now after all this
profession of his name and of faith in him, but now he finds none in the earth
who has revealed himself in the poor despised ones of the world, and those
which have been counted the blind and ignorant, and as you have read the poor
receive the Gospel, the world was made by him, but the world knew him not, he
came unto his own and his own received him not, John 1. Acts 2.16, 17, 18, 19.
but as many as receives him, to them he gives power to become the Sons of God,
to whom that promise is fulfilled which was promised in the days of old, by
the father, that in the last days he would pour forth his Spirit upon all
flesh, and his sons and daughters should prophecy, and the young men see
visions, and if you will receive it, this is the Elias which was for to come in
the Spirit as he came in the flesh, even the life and power of what has been
so long professed, which the Lord has now manifested in his servants and
handmaidens, whom he has now sent forth abroad, Mat. 22.2, 3.
freely to call into the Supper of the Lord, even the marriage of the Lamb, and
to preach his name no more after the flesh but after the Spirit, and to preach
him within the hope of glory, the Ministry which has been hid from ages and
generations, and they that will be his disciples must deny themselves and take
up his Cross and follow him, through evil report, and good report, through
persecution and through death, and who are faithful until death must receive a
Crown of life, and reign with him for evermore in his Kingdom, of which there
is no end neither beginning, over which he is made heir and King, blessed be
Jehovah, sing Haelalujah to his name all ye that know him.

And now that his name is spreading abroad, and his message declaring by the
mouth of his faithful messengers; those who have long talked of his name, and
so long professed his name knows him not, neither believes on him, but are
found hypocrites, and dissemblers, and blind leaders of the blind; whited
walls, and painted Sepulchers, but within full of uncleanness, hypocrisy, and
deceit, even the generation of vipers and Serpents, and those will not receive
the message, but makes light of it, and says, they believe on a Christ at
Jerusalem, and now in the heavens far off they know not where, and they cry, he
has done all for us, and has satisfied for our sins, and they shall not be
imputed to us say they; and they cry out this is a new Light, and a strange
Light, and we know not whence it is, but they say they will keep to the old
Rule, the Scriptures (which they call the word of God, and the old way) though
they be mere strangers to the life of the Scriptures; but it is that the
Scripture might be fulfilled upon them, as Christ says, for judgment am I come
into the world that they which see not might see, John 9.39.
and that they which see might be made blind, as their forefathers professed
Abraham and Moses, and said, we know that God spoke unto Moses, but as for this
fellow, we know not whence he is, John 9.29. and they said, God was their
Father, but Jesus Christ answered them and said, John 8.
If ye were Abraham's children ye would do the works of Abraham, and he also
said, If God were your Father then would you love me, for I proceeded forth and
came from him, but says he, ye are of your Father the Devil, and his works
you do and will do; and thus are the Pharisaicall professors of these times,
marked out to be in the steps of their forefathers, for this is the same
Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, but they are blind and cannot see, neither
(indeed) do believe the Scripture, nor walk according to it, but are in the old
and broad way of the world, wherein their forefathers walked, and led many to
destruction, but if these did believe the Scripture, they would believe on this
light which is come into the world, which the Scripture bares testimony of,
even the Spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, and some of them scoff
and scorn, and revile, reproach and slander, and rail at the messengers of
Truth, and some strike them, and stone them, and buffer them, and stock them,
and whip them, and imprison them, and despitefully use them, yet they are made
able through the power of him that has sent them, for to go on in boldness,
Mat. 22.4, 5, 6.
but those persecutors are not found worthy, Therefore the Lord will send forth
his Armies and destroy these murderers and burn up their City: and these are
they that have professed to be his near kindred, friends, and acquaintance, but
now are found strangers who prophesied in his name, and in his name done many
wondrous works, and yet they must depart for works of iniquity, he knows them
not; now read your selves you wicked ones, you murderers, you rude multitude,
you Priests, you Pharisees and professors, you formalists, selfe-actors, and
im^tators, for now all join hand in hand, and Gog, and Magog joins in Battle
against the Lamb, and Pilate and Herod is made friends, and you chief Priests
and Pharisees who are the professors of these times, and you Rulers, and you
rude and brutish ones, and you formalists and sectaries now at the coming of
Christ in the Spirit, even the substance of what you have long talked of, all
joined together in one, who formerly have been at great division and wars among
your selves, but now you are made friends, and muster up all your strength
against the substance, even Jesus Christ, whom you (as your forefathers did)
call a blasphemer, a seducer, a deceiver, and a devil; and now the rude
multitude they stand up for their Priests, and they fall upon the messengers of
Christ when they come into their Synagogues, and they hale them out of their
Synagogues, and strike them, and buffet them, and despitefully use them, and
stone them, as their fore-father ever did, and the Priests they seek to Rulers
and Magistrates, and hales them before them, and they persecute them and
imprison them, as their forefathers ever did, and the pharisees and ancient
hypocritical rotten professors, they side with the Priests, and goes about
railing, and evil speaking of the truth, learning and insensing peoples minds
against it, with their lies and slanders and reproaches to present it odious to
all people, and also fauning, and crouching, and seeking to Magistrates, to act
in their wills and persecute, as their forefathers always did against the same
seed, and likewise the formalists and sectaries do the same, and thus they that
were after the flesh always persecuted them that were after the spirit, Gal.
4.29.
and yet these are ready to cry out what hard hearted Jews was those that
crucified Christ, and persecuted his Apostles, and if they had been in those
days they would not have been partakers with them in the blood of Christ and
his Apostles, whenas they are now found the same generation of persecutors,
persecuting the righteous seed, and so they fill up the measure of their fathers
wrath, that upon them might come all the righteous bloodshed from righteous
Abel until now.

And now the Priests and the Baptists can agree, and they join together, and
the Priests calls them honest men, and the Baptists calls them Gentlemen of
Divinity, and the Baptists and Independents, they join together, and the
Independants, and the Presbiterians, they join togegether all against the life
and power, which the Lord has now manifested in his Sons and Daughters, and
has sent them to declare and lay open their hypocrisy and deceit, which they
have long covered with a Gospell-like profession, but now all their coverings
are found too narrow before the Light which is come now into the world, to
convince and reprove them of their sin, of their righteousness, and of their
judgment; and therefore now they have enough to do to join together with all
their strength and wisdom, to put out this light, and so they endeavor to sew
their tares in peoples hearts, and all the ways they can invent to destroy the
work which now is begun, and as Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do they
withstand the truth, according to the prophecy of the Apostle, being men of
corrupt minds, and reprobates concerning the says, which I have much
experience in several meetings which I have had with the teachers of the
baptized people, which shall follow in order afterward.

But the more they strive in their wills and wisdoms, the more does the work
of the Lord prosper and go on, and flourish by his mighty power, and
outstretched arm, and their shame, and folly, and downfall the more appear,
and when they have done all they can, they shall be glad to lay down their
grounds, and bow unto this truth which they now so oppose, and every tongue
shall confess it though to their condemnation, who do now oppose and gainsay
it, woe unto such, they shall perish in the gainsaying of Core, And the time
shall come, Luke 13.25.
that when the master of the house shall have shut the door, they shall knock
and shall strive to enter and shall not be able, all who now oppose and reject
the Counsel of the Lord and will not hearken now they are called.

And thus the LORD will exhalt his SON in his SAINTS, when his ENEMIES shall
be his Foot stole, and be made to bow before him.

And thus does all Sects, Judgments, and Opinions, join in one against the
Life and Substance, they being all sprung from one Root, so make up all one
Image, whose head is Gold, Breast of silver, whose Thighs is Brass, and Legs
of Iron, and feet part of Iron and part of Clay; and the Stone cut out of the
Mountain without hands, which strikes at the feet of the Image.

Now the head of the Image which is of gold, and those that have had a light
shining into them, and have had a sight of many things, and have seen the
emptiness of many forms, and have gotten the thing in their comprehension, and
have a notion above others, of much of that which is now witnessed and possessed
in life by the faithful, and there have been exalted and gotten up a life
therein, and a false rest, but have lost the light which once shined into them,
by catching the thing in their Comprehension, and so got it in the notion, but
did not obey nor suffer the death of the Cross, and the breast of the Image
which is of Silver, and the thighs of brass, are the rest of the sects, and
opinions, and forms, and likenesses; which are more glorious one than another,
for as I said before; Satan can imitate every appearance of the true Light, in
his forms, shapes, and likenesses, and the more glorious the light appears in
any creature, so does he refine himself, and appear more glorious to deceive
the simple; so that many (by the light of God stirring in them) have come to
see the deceit and emptiness in one form, and how they have been deceived
therein, then presently the deceit appears in another more glorious shape or
form, and calls that the truth, and the creature still looking without from the
Light, within it is ensnared there, again still painted with the Scripture
words, and then the creature thinks its a Saint in that form, whenas its but a
painted Sepulcher, still in the old nature; and under the power of the same
deceit, but the Cross tryes all, for there all forms and professions misses and
comes short, so that many a creature has passed through many forms, and has
thought it self a Saint in every form, but coming, yea, but to see the Cross
which they are to take up before they can be the Disciples of Christ, and there
have stumbled and cried out, it is hard and straight, and goes away sorrowful,
I know this is witnessed and answered in many consciences, for here every man's
faith and works comes to the trial, and so to some the preaching of the Cross
is foolishness, and to some a stumbling block, but unto them that believe and
take it up, it is witnessed the power of God unto salvation, and such rejoices
in it with Paul, who are crucified to the world and the world to them, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, but it would be an easy thing to the
flesh if that was all, 1 Cor. 10.11.
to turn out of one profession into another, and out of one form and judgment
into another, but the way to life is through death.

And the Legs of the Image, which is of Iron, is the Beast, or the power of the
Beast, upon which these stand, where lies their strength; and the feet of the
Image, which is part of Iron and part of Clay, are the Priests and Pharisees,
joined to the powers of the earth, which upholds them, for but for that, as I
said before, they are the weakest of all forms, and so they are the part of
clay, and the power that upholds them, is that part of Iron which is the
strongest of the mettalls; and the watcher, or the stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, which strikes at the feet of the Image, is the King of
righteousness, Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, etc. Rev. 17.12, 13, 14.
even he that rides upon the white horse, out of whose mouth goes a sharp
sword, whose name is called the word of God, who comes to strike at the powers
of the earth, even the Kings of the earth, who have given their power unto the
Beast, and join in war against the Lamb, but the Lamb shall overcome, and he
will overturn all until it come into his hand whose own it is, Rev. 19.20.
Rev. 21.1.
and the Beast and the false Prophet that has thus deceived the nations, and
all that receive the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, shall be taken
and cast into the lake that burns for ever, which was of old prepared for
them, and he will create new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, where there shall not be war any more, but he shall reign in
peace with his Saints for evermore. Oh blessed are all they that fight in this
Banner, and here lay down their lives, they shall take them up again with an
everlasting Crown, and reign for evermore, singing Halelujah to their king, to
whom be all praise, honor, power, dominion, and thanks for evermore, Amen: And
thus shall this great Image be broken to pieces, by the Stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, which will become a heavy mountain, even a burdensome
stone to all nations, but upon this Mountain shall the true Church stand, as a
City set on a Hill, Mat. 5.14.
that cannot be hid: and thus I have laid down the ground and end of all sects,
forms and professions, with a blow to this great Image, with a weapon which is
not carnal but spiritual, he that can receive it let him.

And now concerning the CHURCH which is now gathering and redeeming, not by the
will of man, nor by the wisdom of many, but by the will and power, and spirit of
God, which according unto his promise he has poured down upon his Sons and
Daughters now in these latter days, by which we are carried abroad in the
power of the Almighty, now to declare abroad his powerful Truth, which the
Lord has decreed shall prevail upon the hearts of the people, which is glad
tidings of great joy, unto them that receive it, but unto the stubborn and
stiff-necked and rebellious, tidings of woe and misery, and though the
messengers of the Gospel are by some rejected, reviled, reproached, scoffed,
and scorned, stocked, stoned, and imprisoned, and despitefully used, slandered,
and abused, yet nevertheless, blessed be the name of the Lord, there are some
found worthy and do receive with much joy the messengers of the Gospel, Romans
10.15.
so that they know how beautiful are the feet of those that bring glad
tidings, to the reviving the just witness for God, and raising up to life the
dead, and so the living comes to know and praise the Lord, and so the just
comes to reign, and the wicked comes to be judged, and the mind comes to be
turned from the darkness to the light, to which we do preach in every creature,
and to the same are made manifest, and known to them who do like to retain it
in their minds, and from whence we come, and the testimony which we do
declare; but they that do not receive it, to them we are not known, and
therefore are by them esteemed as deceivers, and deluders, vagabonds, and
wanderers, and the like; yet at all this we do not wonder, for we read the
servant is not greater than his lord, for if they have called the Master of the
House Beelzebub, how much more those of his household, and if they had known
him, Mat. 10.24, 25
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory, yet nevertheless we have a
witness in every Conscience, both in them that believe, and in them that
perish, unto which we do clear our consciences, and leave all without excuse by
the same, which will answer for us in the mighty day, though to the condemnation
of those that hate it, wherein we have our great joy above all our sufferings,
but as many as receives this, to them he gives Power to bccome the Sons of God,
and those are they who are led and guided by the one spirit of Truth, which the
world cannot receive, even the Comforter, of whom you have heard should come,
by which they are separated out of the world, and redeemed out of the rudiments
and polutions thereof, their fashions, their customs, their words, their ways,
their manners, their breeding, their fellowip, love and friendship, their honor
and glory, and their worship, and so are become strangers to the world, and so
are hated of the world, because they are not of the world, and the enmity
stands betwixt the two seeds; but while they was of the world the world loved
them, but now they are gathered out of the world, and separated from the world,
and testifies against the world both in words and actions, therefore the enmity
is raised in the world against the righteous seed, and those are they upon whom
the ends of the world are come, to whom it is given to know the mysteries of
the Kingdom, though to the world in Parables; and those are they that are come
with a mighty arm and power, to turn the world upside down, whom the Lord has
gathered, and is a gathering out of the world by his own Spirit of Truth and
Love, to walk in the way of Truth, even the way of Holiness, where the Ransomed
of the Lord do walk, and serve and worship him in spirit and in truth, and
such is the Father seeking to worship him, John 4.23, 24
in whom he is, in doing his own ork, even to destroy the old Creation, and
create new Heavens and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, and those are
they that are the new creatures in whom this new work is witnessed, in whom the
Father has manifested his Son, that in the likeness of sinful flesh he might
condemn sin in the flesh, and to bind the strong man, and cast him out of his
house, and spoil his goods, and so to destroy the works of the Devil, and to
cut down the Man of Sin, even that son of perdition who is exalted above all
that is called GOD, sitting in the Temple of God as God, and says he is God;
this is he by whom the world is deceived, who is the God of the world, even the
Prince of Darkness, who rules in all the Children of Disobedience, and so said
John in the light, the whole world lies in wickedness, and unto this does
Christ come with a sword for to make war with him, and to take and bind him,
and cast him into utter darkness, and so to take his Kingdom from him, and to
rule himself in righteousness.

And this is the King of the SAINTS, who is now come to redeem unto himself a
pure people, and to wash them and cleanse them from their sins by his BLOOD,
and so to wash away all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, and this is the
Baptism by which they are received into his Church and Faith, and here is the
effect of his BLOOD wrought in MAN; and thus he does and will manifest his
mighty power, to purify, and cleanse, and make Man a fit Temple for himself to
dwell in, and thus is GOD with us, manifested in Flesh, and thus are the Saints
Bodies made the TEMPLES of the HOLY GHOST, and thus is the word of Life and
Reconciliation witnessed, to the raising up the Soul to Life, and reconciling
the Soul to GOD, and those are they that are begotten and born again of the
Immortal Word which dwells and abides for ever, and here is the Household of
God, the Household of Faith, and the Household of Love, 1 John 1.1.
who speak the things which they have heard and seen, and tasted of the good
Word of Life, which was in the beginning, and those are the children of Light
who are gathered out of the dark Forms, Judgments, and Opinions, into the life
and power of godliness, to walk in the Light of Life, wherein they are gathered
and united by the one Spirit of Love and Life, into one body, of which Christ
is head: and here is the true Church which the Lord is a gathering, and
washing, and cleansing, and purifying by his Spirit, that he may redeem unto
himself a pure Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such thing, whose
insides are washed and made clean through the Word, John 15.
by which they are reconciled into the love and union which springs from the
Life of God, and here is the Vine and the Branches, and here is the communion
of the Church, all feeding upon one Bread, all drinking upon one cup, this is
Christ the Life of the Saints, and as many as are baptized into this Church,
partake of this communion, and those are they which have denied themselves, and
have borne the Cross of Christ, by which they are crucified to the world, and
the world to them, who are gathered into one Covenant of Life, where all are
Fellow Servants, under one MASTER, who serve one another in love and meekness:
and here is the true Humility in the HEART wrought, and here is the true
washing of feet without Hypocrisy, which some are imitating without for LIFE,
but falls short, for the heart the Lord requires.

And thus is the Church of Christ gathered by one spirit, and by the same
circumcised and baptized into one Light, and Life, and Power, where all dwell
as MEMBERS of one BODY, of which CHRIST is the HEAD. And here is the blessed
Union and Communion in one, and here God is worshipped in Spirit and in Truth,
and as CHRIST is spiritual, so is his Body, and so is his Ordinances; and here
are the true Christians, not those that only have the Notion of those things,
but they that witness, and possess this in Life, and they that believe has the
witness within themselves, and they that believe, have passed from death unto
life, and the life which they now live in is by faith in the Son of God, which
faith is without respect of persons, who are the new creatures, who are in
Christ Jesus, to whom there is no condemnation, who walk not after the FLESH,
but after the SPIRIT, Gal. 5.23.
for against such there is no LAW, for they are translated out of that NATURE
for which the LAW was added, and are set free by the Law of the Spirit of Life,
and are made partakers of the Divine nature of Christ, Romans 8.2. 1 John 4.17.
by which they are made Christians, and therefore says John, as he is so are
we in this prasent world, and such now witnesses the effect of the blood of
Christ wrought within them, and the end of his coming, and the benefit of his
Death, who are dead with him, and risen through the death of the Cross, and
these are they that have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the
knowledge of the Son of God within them, Christ within the hope of Glory, or
else no hope of Glory, for they that cannot witness him so, 2 Cor. 13.5. John
17.23.
are in the Reprobation, so says the Apostle, and here is the Son in the
Saints, and the Father in the Son, and thus are all made perfect in one, and
here is the true Church, where there is but one Teacher, one Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one Light, one Life, and one way, one Shepherd and one Sheepfold,
and one Priest over the household of God, and one hope, and one language, one
family, and one God and father of all; and they that cannot witness this, are
Strangers to Christ, and Strangers to his Cross, and Strangers to the
Commonwealth of Israel.

And this is the work which the Lord now has begun, and is carrying on by a
strong arm and mighty power, to redeem unto himself a pure Church, and blessed
are they that hearken unto his voice; Here all you Formalists, Imitators, and
selfe-acters are shut out; here all you proud ones are shut out; here all you
lustful ones, fleshly ones, and carnal ones are shut out, and all you that are
conformed like unto the world in their fashions, in their customs, in their
words, in their ways, in their worships and traditions, in their love and in
their fellowship, who are seeking the glory, and honor, and riches of this
world, you are the children of this World, under the Dominion of the GOD of the
WORLD, whose Kingdom is of this World: Here all you are shut out, who live at
ease in your pleasures, and live want only upon the earth in the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eye, James 5.5.6.
and the pride of life; you are the Children of Babylon, you kill the just, and
he lies slain in the streets, but here you all are shut out of the new Covenant
of Life in the dark world, under deaths dominion, of what profession and
judgment soever, Alians and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, for they that
are not with us, are against us, and our union and society is in the light of
life, Mat. 12.30.
but you must all suffer the death of the Cross to the life, which you now live
in, before you can witness this Redemption; for those that live with Christ are
crucified with him, therefore so it is, they that will take up life, must first
lay down life, for the way to life is through death; therefore you must be
stripped of all your old covers naked and bare, that your deceit and shame may
appear, which you have so long covered with your own righteousness, but now you
must suffer the shame of the Cross, if you would have part in Christ, and all
your old wisdom, knowledge, and notions, which you have gotten into your
comprehensions, by your conceivings of the Scripture Letter, wherein has bin
your life and pride, and exaltation, must all come to the death of the Cross,
that no flesh should glory in his presence; but I say unto all you Professors,
Formalists, Notionists and Disputers, and Wise ones of this World, if you will
not take up and embrace this Cross, Publicans and Harlots shall enter the
Kingdom before you; therefore, not many mighty, nor many noble, nor many wise
after the flesh are called, but he has chosen the foolish things of this world
to confound the wise, 1 Cor. 25.26. to the end.
and the weak to confound those that are mighty, that no FLESH should glory in
his PRESENCE, but CHRIST is made over unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, that they which glory might glory in the Lord,
and this I witness in my measure the things which I have seen, and heard, and
felt, and tasted of, the good Word of Life, which was in the beginning, the
same do I declare, and am known and read by the children of Light. And now I
shall proceed to several passages that I have had with the people called
Baptists, in seveverall meetings, that their deceit and delusion may be laid
open to the simple hearted.

Upon the thirtieth day of the first Month called March, in the year 1655. I
was atone Ashens house in Fenstanten, in Huntingtonshire, where I was freely
declaring the Truth of God to the people that came there together that day, as
I was taught and moved by the Spirit of Truth, by which the holy men of God
spoke forth the Scripture as they was moved and there came several of the
people called Baptists into the Room amongst us, amongst whom was one of their
Teachers, called Richard Elligood, who after a while stood up in his will and
wisdom to accuse me, and said that I said that God did not respect any forms,
and yet, says he, you use the form, and so use that which God has no respect
to; but his first words was, Sir (if you please) I will speak something to what
you have said; to which I made answer, here needs no complements, and then he
runs on as aforesaid, to which accusation I replied was false, and bid him
prove what form I used, and he said the Letter, and I replied, he that takes
the Letter to talk of without the life and power, such sets up a Form and makes
a Form; but this would not satisfy his filthy wisdom, which darkened his
understanding, but because I spoke words which are mentioned in the Scripture,
by the same spirit that spoke forth the Scripture, by which I challenge the
Scripture, from him and all such who have gotten it to talk of, but denies the
life, and are strangers to the life and power, therefore with his contrary
spirit tasked me with a Form, which by his logic and deceitful art would have
proved, but could not, but his deceit was laid open to the people, and many
declared against him, for a form is this, as I said before, the likeness of a
thing, but not the thing it self, as they have the likeness of a Church, which
they have imagined from the Letter, with their Elders, Pastors, and Teachers,
but not the Church it self, and so they imitate the Scriptures, but live not
in the life of them that spoke forth the Scriptures, neither are acted or
guided by the same spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, and so wants the life
and power, and those are the formalists that makes forms and likenesses, to
deceive the simple, as the devil has the form of an Angel of Light, but not
the life and power, who appears to rule in those formalists and selfe-actors,
but the day does make him manifest, and therefore he rages: and then this
Elligood denied that I had the same spirit that gave forth the Scripture; and
he said the Spirit might be tried by the Letter, for he said, many false
Spirits are entered into the world, and I asked him by what did the Apostle know
that false spirits were gone out into the world; and he replied and said, by the
Spirit of God; then I replied and said, if by the Spirit of God the Apostle
knew that there was many false spirits gone out into the world, then by the
Spirit of God he tried false Spirits, and knew false spirits from the true; and
here his deceit was laid open to the people, and he judged out of his own mouth
to be a liar, and to be guided by a false spirit, who would try the living by
the dead; and again he said, that one Spirit could not try another, for by that
judgments the evil Spirits might try the good Spirits; to which I replied, by
the Spirit of God all other spirits are tried, and also that by the Light
darkness is discovered, but Darkness cannot comprehend the Light, neither
discover the Light; and here again his blindness and ignorance, and deceit, was
much discovered to the people, although he fed himself and would have shufled
it off by his consequences and filthy logic, but it the more laid open his
deceit, and presently the said Elligood was found with another lie in his
mouth, for he said that I said the thing should be proved by every man's spirit,
which was a very lie, for I said that the baptism of the spirit was the
substance of the outward baptism, the which he denied and bid me prove it, and
I said I spoke to the witness in every man's conscience, which his dark mind
could not comprehend, but with his dark mind wrested my words, and therefore
said that I said it was witnessed by every man's spirit, but his spirit was a
lying-spirit, there tried and made manifest to the people, and his blasphemy
against the Spirit of God, Isa. 5.20.
in calling truth error, and error truth, and putting Darkness for Light, and
Light for Darkness, because the God of the world has blinded his eye, and many
witnessed against him, for his filthy Spirit was odious to many of the hearers;
then afterward he again said, that I was a deceiver, and his proof was that I
was not obedient to the command of Christ to be baptized, and I told him I was
baptized, but he said with water, and he said that were a command of Christ to
be baptized with water, and I bid him show me that Scripture, but he could not,
Acts 10.47, 48
but brought a Scripture in the Acts, where the Apostle commanded some to be
baptized; and this by his filthy logic and consequences he would have made a
command of Christ, but he could not decevie the Light which did him try and
make him manifest to the shame of his profession, but he could not bring one
Scripture to prove it to be a command of Christ to baptize with water, and then
he shuffled to that Scripture where the Apostle said, Be ye followers of us,
even as we are followers of Christ, and then he said Christ was baptized, but
he confessed it was to fulfill all righteousness, and I said, he was also
circumcised, and he said that was not for example, then not the Baptism, for
both was to fulfill all righteousness, to which end, he the substance came; but
Christ himself baptized not with water, neither do they read that the Apostles
was baptized with water; then who is their example? and how do they follow the
Apostles in that, seeing they are baptized, and the Apostles was not; then he
fled from that, being there routed, and said they might be Disciples before
they could take up the cross of Christ, and I replied, with Christ's words, that
they might take up his cross before they could be his Disciples, which he
denied, and said, that wicked men upon that account might take up the cross of
Christ, and that Christ required wicked men to take up his Cross, and I said,
it was so, he did them require so to do, for by taking up his cross they come
to deny their wickedness, for they that bear his cross live not in wickedness;
but this Elligood said, that wicked men could not take up his cross, for he
said reproaches and outward sufferings was the cross of Christ (for his names
sake,) but this was not the cross by which PAVL was crucified to the world, and
the world to him; and says PAVL, (where he was speaking concerning wickedness
and unrighteous ones, to the Corinthians,) Such were some of you, but you are
now cleansed, etc. 1 Cor. 6.9.10, 11.
And here wicked ones and unrighteous ones took up his CROSS, which to them
was the Power of GOD unto Salvation, though to the GREEKS foolishness, and to
the JEWS a stumbling Block; amongst whom this ELLIGOOD is found, who is a
Stranger to the CROSS of CHRIST, who says, Reproaches and outward sufferings
is the CROSS of CHRIST, when as the CROSS of CHRIST makes Disciples, and they
must be Disciples before they can suffer Reproaches or Persecution for the
Name of CHRIST, and must depart from iniquity before they be a Prey to the
World for CHRIST'S sake, for the World loves its own, and they that take up the
CROSS do depart from iniquity, which is before Reproaches or Persecution is
suffered for the Name of CHRIST: And here ELLIGOOD is found the Liar, who said,
Wicked men was not called to take up the Cross of CHRIST, when as all are
wicked before they take up this Cross; and here ELLIGOOD is found to be no
Disciple of CHRIST, who is such a Stranger to the Cross of CHRIST, who is a
Liar, and so are not the Disciples of CHRIST, for the Liar is of the DEVIL,
and therefore is ELLIGOOD.

Then I knowing him to be one of the Baptists Teacher, I took out some queries,
which (not long before) I had sent them, but no answer to them had I received,
and I would have read them openly that the people might have heard, and also he
that was one of their Teachers; but as I was reading, he not having power over
his own will could not bridle his tongue but disorderly run into many words, so
that the people could not understand, and I spoke to him for it, and he said he
had not time to stay, and further said that he was not of the society of these
Baptists at Fenstanton, and yet he came with them, and from them, and then I
replied that he owned them to be the Church of God, and this he did, and then
if he was not of their society, he was shut out of the Church; and then he
would have shufled off with his consequences, and said he dwelt far off, and
then I replied with the Apostles words, though absent in body yet present in
spirit, and the multitude that believed was of one heart and mind, and here was
the Society of the Saints, Acts 4.32.
and he being out of this society is shut out of the Church, and then he would
have made it have stood by his logic, which only is to make a false thing seem
true, but it the more laid open his deceitful heart, and shame to the hearers,
who severally witnessed against him, to speak nothing but deceit, and then
says he you call the Apostles words deceit, because he had often stolen the
Apostles words to make his deceit seem truth, by covering it with the Apostles
words, and this is a more subtle deceit, and then in his will he called me
deceiver, the which he was to prove, and all the people was silent, and there
he uttered several lies, and laid open himself to be the deceiver, as I had
told him, in going about to prove me a deceiver, he would the more lay open his
own deceit, and prove himself to be the deceiver, and the people did plainly
see it so, and witnessed with me against him, for he did so utter forth his
folly and deceit, that he made himself odious to many that was there; and at
last he shufled away, under pretense he had far to go, but the judgments of God
he cannot escape, for his damnation slumbreth not who is an opposer of the
truth of God,

Then there was one Phillips, an old man of the Baptized Party, in another
Room, who in scorn and wrath stood up and said they knew the first Principle
of Religion before I was born, because one of my Quaeries to them was, what is
the first Principle of Religion? so I replied to the old man if they knew it,
they should have answered, and then presently as he was running on in many
words, he swore as he lived and breathed, and Christ says, Swear not at all,
and here he was found not come to the first Principle of Religion, Mat. 5.34.
but out of the Doctrine of Chirst, and so has not God, so I told him of his
swearing, and he would have shufled it off, but he could not, 2 Iobn 9.
and I told him, He that seems to be Religious and brideleth not his tongue his
Religion is vain, and therefore he might own his Religoin to be vain, who could
not bridle his tongue, and then in his will he shufled off and said he would not
confess his sin to me, Iam. 1.26.
for I could not forgive sin, in scorn he spoke, then I said woe unto him that
hides his sin and covers his iniquity, but he shufled away in much confusion of
face, as they will all appear, as by the Light they come to be searched and
tried, their coverings will be found too narrow, and their nakedness will appear
to their great shame, and confusion of face, and they will be made to bow to
the truth, and lay down their Crowns at the feet of Jesus, for he is risen and
reigns in his Saints, to whom the Nations must bow, and every tongue confess to
their condemnation who do oppose him, but here now by the single eye, you may
see the emptiness of these forms, and what a blind hypocrisy this is of them,
to wash the outside, but leaves the inside full of uncleanness, and so the
inside defiles the outside.

A Copy of the Queries which was sent to the Baptized people in Fenstanton,
with some more added, for them, or any whom they do concern to answer.
Several queries to you which be called Baptists, by your Teachers to be
answered.
Querie 1.

What is the first Principle of Religion, and whether to it you be come, yea
or nay?

2. What is the bridle of the tongue, and whether to it you be come, yea or
nay?

3. What is the Church in God, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

4. What is the order in the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay?

5. What is the Baptism into the Church, and whether to it you be come, yea
or nay?

6. Whether you will own the Baptism of the Spirit, or the Baptism of water,
and which you will deny, seeing the Scripture says, The Baptism is but one?
Ephesians. 4, 5.

7. And where Christ ever commanded water Baptism.

8. Why did the Apostles Baptize with water, and why do you baptize with
water, and where, and when, and by what were you commanded, and where was any
of the twelve Apostles baptized with water?

9. And whether you do it because the Apostles did it, yea or nay?

10. What is the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, and whether to it you be
come, yea or nay?

11. Whether your Faith purify your Hearts, yea or nay?

12. And whether you commit sin, yea or nay?

13. How would you know there is a Christ but by the Scripture, and how do you
witness the Scripture is truth?

14. And what is the ground of your faith?

15. What is the redemption, and whether to it you be come, yea or nay.

16. VVat is the Communion of the Saints, and wherein it stands, and whether to
it you be come, yea or nay?

17. And whether you that breaks bread do discern the Lords body, yea or nay?

18. What was their rule and guide that spoke forth the Scripture.

19. Whether you have the same infallible Spirit that gave forth the Scripture?

20. Whether is the Scripture your rule and guide, or the spirit that gave it
forth.

21. Whether they that are guided by the Spirit that gave it forth live not in
the life thereof, yea or nay?

22. Whether the life of the Scripture be perfect, yea or nay?

23. And whether you are or think to be made perfect while you are upon the
earth, yea or nay? Or where do you think to be made perfect, if not upon the
earth?

24. And what is the life and power of godliness, and whether in it you dwell
who have a form, yea or nay?

25. Whether you be washed and cleansed by the blood of the Lord Jesus and the
spirit of our God, as the true Church was, yea or nay?

26. Whether you have put off the old man and put on the new, as the true
Church did, yea or nay? and what is the new man?

27. And whether you have put off the image of the earthly, and put on the
image of the heavenly, and how are they known the one from the other?

28. Whether you be not conformed like unto the world, so long as you follow
their customs and fashions?

29. Whether you be come that you need no man to teach you, as the true Church
was, yea or nay?

30. What is the cross whereby Paul was crucified, and whether to it you be
come yea or nay?

31. What is the watcher that strikes at the feet of the Image, and whether to
it you be come, yea or nay?

32. What is the word, and what is the death that has passed over all men,
even over those that had not sinned, after the similitude of Adams
transgression, and whether this death you ever passed?

33. Whether you have passed from death to life, yea or nay.

34. Where, and when, and how received you the command and power to deliver any
soul up to Satan, and where is that Satan you deliver it up to?

35. What is the tree of life, and what is the tree of Knowledge, and whether
upon it you do not feed, and what is the flaming sword that is set to keep
from the tree of life, and whether it you ever passed, yea or nay?

36. What is the beast which all the world wonders after and worships, and what
is the worship of the beast, and whether any worships the only true God but the
true church, and what is the worship in this church?

37. What are you Ministers of, and what do you minister unto, and what is the
end of your ministry?

38. And by what do you try the Spirits, and by what did the Prophets and
Apostles try the spirits, and whether yours is the same tryer of Spirits as
theirs was, yea or nay.

39. What is the faith of the Saint, and what is the faith of the hypocrite,
and how are they known the one from the other?

40. How and by what was you called to the ministry which you profess?

41. What is the Gospel which you profess, and what is the light of the Gospel
which the infidel cannot see, and what is an infidel, and what is the eye which
the God of the world blindes in the infidel.

42. What is the state and condition of the Jew inwardly, whose praise is not
of man but of God, and wherein does he differ from the Jew outwardly?

43. What is the new Csvenant, and where any in the New Covenant paid Tithes,
and why do you cry against the Priests, and their Tithes, and their worship,
and yet upholds them by paying them Tithes, and helping to maintain their
places of worship, and whether this be not Babel, yea or nay?

These things I do not ask because I know them not, but that the Truth may be
made manifest, and the deceit laid open, therefore answer by plain Scripture,
or else all you formalists, imitators, and selfe-actors, bow unto the truth,
and be silent, and let your mouths be stopped, and thereby confess and yield
your selves in an error, and to have gotten the form without the life and
power, that the simple may no longer be deceived by you taking the shadow for
the substance.

Read this openly in your Church, that all may hear and answer for themselves,
from him who by one of you was called a deceiver yet true, who according to the
world am called,

James Parnel;

A Copy of most of these Quaeries was sent to the chief Teacher of the
baptized people in Fenstanten, and after a certain time, these words they sent
me back again, as follows.

A few words to him that says that according to the world he is called JAMES
PARNELL.
We have received your Paper, and according to your desire read it in the
Congregation, unto which you desire our answer by plain Scripture; to which we
reply, that when you make good your affirmation that you are no deceiver, but
true by plain Scripture, then shall we return you a further answer to your
queries:

From them who desire to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, John Den, Edmund Male.


Then after I had received this Libel, I returned them this answer at the
bottom of their own paper.

An. This is plain Scripture, though as a deceiver, yet true, and if my life
and conversation does not prove the same, and make good my affirmation, then in
your answer to my queries you might have taxed me, and proved to the contrary;
but this of you is but a plain shufle to blind the world, and shun the shame,
and still to blind the people who are enslaved under your deceit, but this will
the more manifest your ignoranre; then not long after they returned me this
answer as follows.

It is not plain Scripture, though as a deceiver yet true, as deceivers and yet
true, is plain Scripture, the greatest deceiver in the world might as well
brought it to prove himself no deceiver, but true as well as you, for your
conversation we know it not, we have not to say to that, but this we know, that
wolves may come in sheeps clothing, and this does appear in you, in drawing
people from the truth, as namely, from Water-baptisme which is a command of the
Lord unto believers; as for your saying we might have taxed you in our answer
to your queries, we think you might plainly see your folly in this, you
affirmed nothing in them as your judgment, how should we then tax you and prove
the contrary? and again, we made no promise to answer, and therefore you might
have spared your daring and false words, to say the people are enslaved under
our deceit, and therefore until you have made good what you have taken in hand
by plain Scripture by the fruit of your lips, by bringing the Doctrine of
Christ, and owning his Commandments, we say until then, we are exhorted to let
you alone, let them alone, they be blind leaders of the blind, you having been
so plainly manifest unto us.

Rep. Here all people who with a single eye reads, may see the deceit of this
people, for I spoke but of one, and therefore in that respect it is plain
Scripture, though as v deceiver yet true, but these are they, who if they
could, would make a make a man an offender for a word, Isa. 29.21.
my conversation they cannot touch, and yet are not ashamed to say, the
greatest deceiver might as well have brought this Scripture as I, and this is
the blindness of their minds; and also say (because I deny water-baptisme to
be an Ordinance or a Command of Christ) that I am a woolf in sheeps clothing,
which they do affirm to be a command, but cannot prove it, and so are such as
use their tongues, and say the Lord says, when he never spoke to them, but
surely a woolf in sheeps clothing is to be known by the life and practice, but
in this they are blind and cannot discern, and so themselves are the blind
leaders of the blind, but I shall not let you alone but make you manifest unto
the world, neither did Christ let them alone but pronounced woes, and declared
against them; and here I am sure you might see your folly, who say I have been
so manifest unto you, and said, you know not my conversation, what a confusion
is this, but it is your mothers language and also in expecting me to affirm my
judgment upon my own queries, then what need I send them to you to answe if I
answer them my self; and here I am sure you might see your own folly, for it is
here plainly plainly laid open, so that all who are led by you, are plainly
seen to be enslaved under your deceit, and these words shall stand for truth
against you, which you call false, who are the blind, and so put evil for
good, and good for evil: and the Doctrine of Christ I have brought, and his
commandments I do own, from and against you, who are the busybodies and
selfe-actors, who have naught to do with him nor his commands, therefore
silence deceivers, for here I have made good what I have taken in hand, which
witnessed shall be in your condemnation.

The occation of another meeting betwixt the people called Baptists and the
people called Quakers.
Several times when I have come to the Town of Cambridge, I have heard a
rumor of a boasting and daring, that sprung from the people called Baptists,
behind my back concerning a dispute with me, yet I had received nothing from
them, neither by word nor writing, to be certain of their minds, therefore I
being in the Town sent them word that I heard a voice of such a thing, but knew
not the certainty, therefore to let me know their minds in writing, if they
intended such a thing; so then one Hindes a Tanner in Cambridge, sent me this
Note as follows, which Joseph Doughty had sent unto him.

The Note.
Brother Hind, as touching a Discourse with James Parnel, I shall be willing to
do God and men service in it, to my power given to me.

Frst, Provided that it be somewhat public; the questions in controversy may
be stated in writing.

2. That the questions may be such as may be resolved and answered according to
Scripture.

3. That the questions agreed upon, may be delivered into the disputants hands,
three days before the day of dispute.

4 That to avoid confusion in multitude of words, a short form of Argument
shall be used on both parts.

5. That some shall be chosen on both sides, to see order on both sides
observed in discourse, and competent Judges also appointed.

6. That censorious rash terms of judging, shall not be used.

7. That the disputants shall declare before the people their intent in dispute,
April this 17. 1655.

Joseph Doughty.

My reply to this was as follows, as not being willing to come under their
snares.
Rep. This is not to me, but betwixt Brother and Brother, so if you two
Brothers are agreed concerning this your intent toward me, let me know your
mind in writing now while I am in the Town, for while I was abroad there was a
voice of such a thing as from you, but to me you did not declare your minds,
neither in word nor writing, therefore now I am in the Town, let me know your
minds in writing, that there may be no boasting nor daring in secret, for
truth is bold and seeks no covers, this from me to you I send, and do require
your answer, who am called,

I. P.

This was writ on the backside of their note and sent back to Hindes, who
forthwith flew into a great rage against the messenger in the street, and said
that I lied in saying that the note was not to me, which any one who can read,
may plainly see it so, and him to be the Liar for the Lake, and his seeming
Religion to be vain, who is still in old Cain's nature, in wrath and
bitterness, without a bridle to the tongue. Then the next morning I received
this from them as follows.

James Parnel, this is to thee, my intent toward thee is this, If thou art
minded to dispute with me, appoint time and place public, and if the Lord
will, I will dispute with thee, and so on with his proviso's as aforesaid.

Then my Reply was as follows.
To thee Joseph Doughty, I do reply, That thou must understand the occasion of
this Dispute to be sprung from thee or thy party, as I did declare on the
backside of thy other paper, so if thou, or any of you, that made your boasts
or darings behind my back, or have any thing against me or the truth, which I
bear testimony unto, or the way which I walk in, I am ready now at all times
through the power of God, to stand up for, and defend the same, against thee or
any other, who shall object against, oppose, or gainsay it, be it in the
Towns-hall, or as public as you will, and what I have at any time declared
against you people, or your profession, I shall be ready to maintain, and
justify, by such weapons as I have, which are not carnal, but spiritual, and
here is time and place from me declared; but to the end of all Disputes and
Arguments I am come, for before they was I am, and in the Light do them
comprehend, and judge to be out of the Light in Babylon, and the Disputer and
Arguer of this World: but still I say against such I stand a Witness for the
truth which I have received of God, and by his power am carried abroad, to
declare and preach abroad, to the directing and turning people minds to the
true Light of the Lord Jesus, and there to come into the love and unity, where
lives the Children of Light, the end of all Disputes and Arguments, and this I
am ready to defend and seal with my blood; but I say my weapons are not carnal,
but spiritual, and as for these provisoes of thine, they are rather for me to
lay upon thee, according to equity, for I am the defender, but these things of
thee I do not require, neither three days before hand, but am ready at any
time to stand to what I, have here declared, and as for confusion in multitude
of words, which is thy fourth Proviso,

Reply. Look thou to that on thy part, and if thou can tax me thou may.

And as for order in the discourse, for which thou would have some chosen,
which is thy fifth proviso.

Reply. Look thou to that on thy part; for my God is a God of Order, and if
thou can tax me thou may, and let that stand against me; but if there be
men of power, to keep the people of the world in order I am not against it.

And as for competent Judges which thou would have appointed:

Reply. Is the Scripture thy rule, and not thy judge, but thou must flee from
that to the judgment of man, which is changeable, or else how comes Disputes
and controversies? but to that judgment I shall not stand, the spiritual man
shall be the competent judge, and the Scripture shall witness.

And as for censorious rash terms of judging, which is thy sixth Proviso.

Reply. Look thou to that on thy part, and if my judgment thou can find
contrary to Scripture, thou may by Scrpture disprove it; but what is that,
that would not be judged?

And as for declaring before the people the intent and purpose in disputing,
which is thy seventh proviso.

Reply. If thou who art the Disputant amengst the people, have any thing to say
unto the People, thou may declare thy mind according to the freedom of thy
mind, I shall not bind thee, neither shall I by thee be bound, but as the Lord
puts into my mouth, I shall declare unto the people, what is my mind and
intent, as his spirit guides me; so that for that I take no thought.

So here I have declared my mind in Reply unto thy writing, where thou may^st
understand my mind, if thou have an ear to hear, and an understanding open,
and if this do not satisfy thee, and the rest of you, yet nevertheless cease
your boasting and daring behind the back for the time to come; and let this
witness for me to any honest heart, whether it be not fair and equal, and so I
rest in the unchangeable,

I. P.

So it seems this pleased them, and so it was concluded to be of the twentieth
day, called Friday, of the second month, called April, so when the hour came
which was appointed, we was disappointed of the meeting place which the
Baptists had provided; for they sent me word they had provided a place, but
when we came to meet it could not be had, and so we was disappointed; then we
was in this Hind's house, and the woman of the house much fumed and raged at us
all the while we was in the house, which manifested what spirit she was of, and
that water had availed her nothing, for she was nothing departed from the old
nature: so then they would have had us to have met in the yard, but there could
be no order for multitude of rude people, and brutish Scholars, which was as
untamed bruit beasts, 1 Cor. 15.32.
like the beasts at Ephesus, which Paul fought with after the manner of men; so
I passed to a friends house hard by, and there continued declaring the truth,
as I was moved to the people, and there the idle drones followed, even Babylons
Children, with their turbulent vain contending spirits, opposing and gainsaying
the truth, like Iannes and Iambres, their forefathers, who must perish in the
gainsaying of Core: so then word came that the Baptists was in the Shire-house
in the Castleyard and had sent for me, and so I went up thither, and when I
came there the Jailer discharged me for staying there, and said I caused
tumults, though I had not spoken any thing to the people whereby to cause a
tumult; but the generation of this world was always tumultuous, both about
Christ and his Apostles, though they were known to be innocent and harmless,
offering violence to none, yet it was so with them then, and it is so now with
the same seed, where it is born up to rule, because it is not of the world, but
hated of the world, for the enmity lodges in the world, the world is the sea,
with its tumultuous gathering together of the raging roaring waves, castnig up
mire and dirt, foaming out its own shame: and though an innocent person travel
here, he must such distractions expect, and tumults of raging waves about him,
casting up such as they have; but he that made the bounds of the sea, can and
does deliver his out of the compass of its bounds, and then it cannot pass its
bounds, for its bounds it keeps; here is a parable hid from the wisdom of the
world, but the same which gave it forth, the same will open it to the unlearned.

Then after the Jailer had spoke to me, they made some way for me to come up to
the Baptists, who was there sitting upon the bench like Judges; this Doughty
and one Rix a brewer, an old Pharisee in Cambridge, the one a baptist, and the
other of the Independent sect so called, but two great enemies one again
another, in opposition against each sect, yet these two was joined together as
friends against me, and thus sat Pilate and Herod together like judges against
the innocent, so when I was gotten amongst the people, I would not meddle until
the Jailer had given freedom for me to stay there, as he had before discharged
me; so after a while he gave leave, so that we would be short, then this
Doughty the baptist, so called, stood up and put off his hat to the people,
after the manner of the heathen with a complement, pleading of the shortness of
the time, and so begun with a question, so I said his question might stand, and
as he had liberty to speak to the people, so would I, and then he would have
hindered me, contrary to what was before agreed upon betwixt us by the passages
aforesaid, so I got liberty to speak something to the people, and declared what
I was made a minister of, according to the will of God, and then I took out a
paper and read unto the people the occasion of my coming thither to meet the
baptists that day, and by the conclusions therein I was to have liberty to
speak my mind as well as he, and he was to accuse me before the people, or the
truth which I bore testimony unto, but he broke his first agreement and flew to
question, so then to satisfy the simple hearted, I gave this answer to the
understanding of the simple.

First, the Baptists question.

Qu. The writings of the Prophets and Apostles which are called Scripture,
whether are they the words and sayings of the most high God, yea, or nay.

Answ. The Word of God, which is God, which dwelt in the Prophets, and
Apostles, from it they spoke forth the things which is recorded in Scripture,
but this would not satisfy the Baptists, but cried out no answer, and Doughty
stood up, and put off his hat, and beckoned to the young Priests and Scholars,
and said, Judge ye Gentlemen of Divinity, and there was one Anger, a drunken
Priest, sided with the Baptists; now let all see how contrary to their own
principles they acted; but some of the Scholars had so much understanding as
to receive it for an answer, but the drunkards sided with the Baptists, and the
ruder sort, who could not understand, though there was many simple hearts that
with this answer was satisfied, but the wise must be catched in their own
craftiness, and several times I repeated this answer over to the people, but
the Baptist and his party could not receive it, because it was in the gross to
their wisdom; but there was that which I spoke to, which could and did receive
it; then Joseph Doughty the Baptist, and Henry Rix the old Pharisee, joined
together, and with one consent said I durst not answer it; and thus the unclean
spirits joined together, and made lies their refuge; and after that I was
repeating my answer over to the people, Doughty stood up, and said, I spoke I
knew not what, and then I taxed him with a lie, and then he said it was not to
his question, but I bid him prove that I spoke I knew not what, but he could
not, but shuffled off, and said I would fly from his question, and there he
stood; then the Jailer called to depart, and Doughty stood up and spoke to the
Jailer, not to suffer me to stay after him, least I should seduce the people;
there I stood up, and challenged him to prove me a seducer to the people, but
he had noting to say for that, but manifested himself to be a seducer, and a
slanderer, and a reproacher of the truth of God, and so must take part with his
forefathers of the wrath of God; then I openly spoke to the people, that if
any there could tax me, or lay any thing to my charge, I was there to answer,
but none did or could there accuse me: so then I passed into the Castle-yard,
then the wild brutish Scholars who had plotted together (as I was after
informed) to abuse me, and they flocked together about me like the wild beasts
of the Forest, and there I was tossed as amongst the raging waves of the Sea,
to and fro, and at last was hurried into a house, where I got shut of those
Caterpillars, which the Nation swarms with, but the baptized party passed away
without disturbance, so it appears the world loves its own.

Oh Cambridge! is this the fruits of thy Ministry, which thou have so long
professed, which has been so long preached in thee? is this thy Divinity, and
is these thy preachers of Divinity? nay, they are now found out (by the light
of God) to be the Diviners and Sorcerers, Witches and Magicians, that are only
opposers and gainsayers of the truth, who must perish in the gainsaying of
Core, they are known by their fruits, and the fruits of their Ministry, and thy
Wel-head of Divinity is now found the Wellhead of Sorcery, witchcraft and
spiritual whoredom, Iam. 3.11.
and all abomination, and uncleanness, the day does declare it, and one
Fountain cannot bring forth both bitter water and fresh. Oh! Antichrist has
reigned long over poor inslaved captivated souls; but now Isreal's Redeemer has
appeared, and the Son of Righteousness is risen with healing in his wings, and
Antichrists Kingdom is come, and coming to an end, Mal. 4.2.
and Christ himself will reign, and rule in truth and in righteousness in his
ransomed ones, and this is the mighty King, and Redeemer of Israel out of
captivity, into a Land of peace, and love and unity, where the ransomed ones do
dwell with their Captain and their King, who does deliver his own Lambs out of
the mouths of raging wolfs and dogs; Praises, Praises everlasting, eternal,
Mat. 01.16.
to the everlasting God of Life for ever: and thus we are sent as sheep amongst
wolves, but in the power of the Almighty we are sent forth, and the arm of the
Almighty is with us, and does deliver us from being a prey to the Lions whelps
which would us devour, and blessed are all they that receive our testimony, it
is Peace and salvation to their souls: Now where is the Wise? 1 Cor. 1.
where is the Scribe? where is the Disputer of this world? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this world, and has chosen the foolish things to
confound the wise, and the weak to confound those that are mighty, that no
Flesh should glory in his presence? Unto this Doughty I sent several of these
queries which are before mentioned, but I received no answer.

Another Meeting betwixt the people called Baptists, and the people called
QVAKERS.
Upon the fourth day of the third month called May, we was several of the
Lords people, met together in a friends Orchard at Litleport in the Isle of
Elie, and there came in three of the Tachers of the baptized people, the chief
of them was one John Ray of Wickombruck in Suffolk, and he came (as he said)
with a message, and that was to excommunicate two persons that was there,
namely, Samuel Cater, and Ezekiel Cater (who had formerly been Elders amongst
them) out of their society, whenas they was come out of their society before,
and owned the substance, and denied their form and shadow, without their
casting out; but thou Ray to uphold thy form, did there disorderly run into
words in thy own will, and then went away, and would not stay to prove what thou
had done, but said, thou was to be at the Steeplehouse shortly: so as I was
moved, I spoke unto the people there present, and after a while when I had
spoken what was given me of the Lord to speak, I passed into the town, and
there I hearing how the Baptist was railing on the truth in the Steeplehouse, I
passed to the Steeplehouse with some friends that had formerly society been of
their society, and when I came there, I found thee John Ray set up in the seat
of the Pharisee, the chiefest place in the ASSEMBLY, speaking a Divination of
thy own brain, and not from the mouth of the Lord, as thou confessed openly
amongst the people, that none in these days had any open vision, or heard God
speak immediately, and here thou wast an open liar amongst the people, but here
thou barred thy self from the same Spirit that spoke in the Prophets and
Apostles, and therefore art a deceiver, for he that has not the Spirit of
Christ is none of his, and so thou measured others by thy self, but I and
hundreds more of the Children of light, Romans 8.9.
do witness thee to be a liar and deceiver in these days, who comes not in the
name of the Lord, but in thy own name, therefore the world receives thee, but
here out of thy own mouth thou art judged and condemned out of the new
Covenant, for there God himself is teacher, and thou that never heard him speak
immediately, John 6.45.
and yet comes to preach his word, thou art a stranger unto God, and a blind
guide, a deceiver, and a false Prophet, who runs and the Lord never sent thee,
therefore thou profits not the people at all, but art a thief, and steals the
words of the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles, and adds a divination of thy
own Brain, and so feeds the people with notions, and ayry knowledge, Mat. 23.14.
and casting the Childrens bread unto dogs, but the greater is thy
condemnation, who for a pretense makes longs prayers, and wrests and perverts
the Scripture to thy own destruction, but think not that thou shall be heard
for thy much babbling, for the hand of the Lord is against thee.

And there in the seat of the Pharisee thou Ray had taken a text of the
Apostles words, and added thy own meanings, uses, applications, and
divinations, thou merchant of Babylon, and diviner, where have thou any such
example from the Prophets or Apostles, 2 Pet. 1.21. Acts 2.4. Acts 4.8.
they spoke from the mouth of the Lord, and as they was moved by the Holy
Ghost, and as the Spirit gave them utterance, and they spoke with power and
authority, and not as the Scribes, but thou do speak in the wisdom of the
World, like as the Scribes and Pharisees, and Priests, amongst whom I number
thee, and here thou art shut from the Apostles and their practice, with thy
carnal meanings, uses, applications, and divinations; and this was thy text
which thou had stolen out of the Apostles writings, which was writ unto the
church and thou applied them unto the world and said, Text. 2 Pet. 2.0, 21, 22.
For if after they have escaped the polutions of the world through the knowledge
of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and
overcome, the latter end is worse than the beginning, etc. and from this thou
raised thy Uses, Applications, and dark Meanings, whenas neither thou nor any
there which belonged to thee, or owned thee, that had ever escaped the
polutions of the world, or ever had come to the knowledge of Christ, but are
still in darkness and blindness, in their sins and corruptions, in covetousness
in pride, and wantonness, in lightness, in wrath, and in anger, and
maliciousness, in backbiting, in slandering, and false accusing, in railing
and cursed speaking, in lying, and blaspheming, only it may be have passed
through the water, 1 Pet. 3.21.
but it is not the washing away the filth of the flesh, but here both thou and
they are still, and these are the polutions of the world, but they that know and
witness Jesus Christ come in the flesh, witness the washing away those sins and
polutions; and thus thou wrests and perverts the Scripture to thy own
destruction, and then thou went on dreaming and flattering, and daubing up the
people with untempred mortar, saying the Lord says when he never spoke to
thee, and then thou run on railing behind the back of people that was not
there, as thou often said, thou spoke it of none there; and thus thou uttered
forth thy folly, and it is like thou might be-lie those whom thou spoke of, for
I heard the utter forth many open lies, and then thou run on to thy water
baptism, to maintain it an Ordinance of Christ, and thou brought this
Scripture in the six of Romans, which the Apostle spoke to the Church; Romans
6.3. 2 Cor. 5.17.
Know you not that so many of you as were baptized into Jesus Christ, was
baptized into his death; thou blind hypocrite, was this water baptism, they
that are in Christ are new Creatures, and so are not those who are baptized
with water, but they are in the same nature as they was before; and thou may
read in Corinthians the twelf, what baptism that was he spoke of there, for
says he, by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, etc. and they that
are thus baptized, are baptized into Christ, but as I said before, it is not
the washing away the filth of the flesh; and here is thy folly and ignorance
laid open, who art so blind as to bring this Scripture to prove water baptism
to be an ordinance of Christ, and again it says they was baptized into his
death, and in the same Chapter it says, they that are dead are freed from sin,
and this thou denied that any could be set free from sin so long as they are
upon the earth; and thus thou denies Jesus Christ and his ordinances, who came
to take away sin, and to cleanse his people from their sin, but praised be the
Lord we do witness a freedom from sin by Jesus Christ, who is the Lamb of God,
who came to take away the sin of the world; and to redem his peope from their
sin, and to redeem unto himself a pure Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or
any such thing, and says he if the Son have set you free, then are you free
indeed; and here is the liberty of the Sons of God, John. 8.36. 1 John 3.1.
and now are we the Sons of God, and now they that witness this and confess it,
such blind hypocrites as thou, calls them blasphemers, and so denies Jesus
Christ come in the flesh, and so are of Antichrist, and one while thou affirmed
in thy Pulpet that they that pressed and led people into holiness, was no
deceivers, but they that led them into sin and evil was deceivers, and then
afterward told the people they never could be free from sin, so long as they
are upon the earth; and thus thou would settle them upon the lees, and deny
Jesus Christ come in the flesh, who comes to cleanse from all sin, and thus art
thou judged out of thy own mouth for a deceiver.

And thou also brought this Scripture to maintain water baptism, where the
Apostle said, for as many of you as have been baptized unto Christ, Gal. 3.27.
have put on Christ, now let any whose understandings are enlightened by the
Light of Christ, read this Scripture and see if this mention water baptism,
and if any by water baptism do now put on Christ, and by the Light judge thee
to be a Liar and a deceiver, and a perverter of the Scripture to thy own
destruction, and all who believes thee except you repent, and then thou run on
to prove the Letter to be the word, by way of despising those that say that God
is the word, and that there is no written word, when the Letter says it self,
that the word is God; and then thou brought this Scripture to prove the Letter
to be the Word, in 1 Pet. 1.23. Being born again, not of corruptible seed, but
of incorruptible, by the word of God which lives and abides for ever; for all
flesh is grass, and the glory of man as the flower of grass, the grass
withers and the flower fades away, but the word of the Lord endures for
ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto you; here thou
dark sot, thy blindness and ignorance is more laid open; is the letter
immortal, or any written word immortal, or lives or abides for ever? or is
any born again but of God, and is not he that same immortal word which the
Scripture often bears testimony unto, and also in this place, John 15.3.
and Christ the Lamb of God is the everlasting Gospel, who preached the word,
and his Apostles was made clean through the word which he preached unto them,
but this was not the dead Letter, in the which thou would find life, John 5.39.
and so art seeking the living amongst the dead, like the blind Pharise, who
thought in the Scripture to find eternal life, but would not come unto Christ
that they might have life; and here thou art in their steps, though thou made
light of this Scripture, and said that some added ye to it, and said, ye
search the Scripture, for in them ye think to have eternal life, they are they
that testify of me, but ye will not come unto me that ye might have life, this
was spoken by Christ unto the Pharisees, who could not believe that he was the
Christ, but thought in the Scriptures to find eternal life, but would not come
unto Christ that they might have life, and therefore he bid them search the
Scripture, for there the Prophets had prophesied of him, and thereby they might
know that he was the Christ, if they had searched with the single eye,
therefore without ye, I say unto thee, search the Scriptures, for they are
they that bear testimony of Christ to be the word, and all that do search the
Scripture with a single eye will find Christ to be the word and will believe it,
John 1.24.
and not be so blind as to put the Letter for the Word, as thou do, who
brought another Scripture with thy dark mind, where the Apostle says, ye have
a more sure word of Prophecy the which ye do well to take heed unto, as to a
light shining in a dark place until the day dawn, and the day star arise in
your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Isa. 5.20.
Here thou still the more manifests thy blindness, who puts darkness for light,
and light for darkness, and so art under the woe from the Lord, who puts the
Letter for the light, how does the Letter shine, and what dark place does it
shine in as a Light? here the ignorant may see thy folly; and thus thou art a
Stranger to the Light of Christ, which dwelt in the Children of God, and the
word is nigh in the heart and in the mouth, Romans
to which thou show thy self a Stranger, who draws peoples minds from this
word in their hearts, to the Letter without, putting that for the word, and so
art a blind guide and a deceiver, who cries, Lo, here without in the Letter,
when the Apostle says, Go not forth, the Word is nigh in the heart: And thus
thou opposes the Apostle, and draws from his Doctrine, and brings another
Doctrine, and so art not to be received, 2 John 10.
but held as accursed, as thou art, by the children of Light, and sometimes
thou called the Letter the Word, and sometimes a Story, and here was thy
confusion; and then thou run on with thy fauning dissembling Speeches, making a
show oftentimes to the people of speaking more of a matter, but for wearing
their patience. Oh blush and be ashamed of thy Doctrine! now thou makes it
appear what filthy stuff it is, that art afraid it should weary peoples
patience to hear it, if it was of God it would not be wearisome to any thing of
God to hear it, but it was not of God, therefore I am sure it was wearisome and
burdensome to the Spirit of God: and here thou art shut out with thy frothy
Stuff and vain Complements, to be a deceiver: and then thou said, If you
please, I will speak more, and thus thou marks out thy self for a
Man-pleaser, and the Apostle said, If I yet pleased men, I should not be a
servant of Christ. Now read thy self where thou art, Gal. 1.10.
who art yet a man-pleaser, who comes with such enticing words of men's wisdom,
so that the Preaching of the CROSS to thee is foolishness, and the Prophets who
had the Spirit of the LORD, and the Word of the LORD, they spoke, whether they
would hear, or forbear, and here thou art shut out both from the Spirit of
GOD, and the Word of GOD, which is one, who art a Man-pleaser, and if not a
Servant of CHRIST, then a Servant of the DEVIL, and so I mark thee out, that
all may know thee, and no longer be deceived by thee with the shadow instead
of the substance, with thy enticing words of Men's wisdom; and thou told the
people thou spoke to the Reason of Man, when as all men in the fall their
Reason is corrupted, and the natural Man receives not the things of GOD, 1.
Cor. 2.14. Ier. 10.14.
for Man by nature is worse then a Beast, and there art thou, who art preaching
to the corrupt Reason of MAN in the FALL, to judge of thy corrupt stuff, for I
know there was none there that owned thee, but such like; but the Message of
PAVL was to turn Peoples minds from Darkness to Light, but thou strive to
draw Peoples minds from the Light within, Act. 26.18.
to the Dead LETTER without them, telling them, that was the LIGHT, and that
was the WORD, and so thou bewitched them with thy Lying Divinations, and bid
them search that, and read often that, and cleave unto that; but I say, they
that read that, and not by the light within them, read a parable, and it is
unto them as a book sealed, though they may by their carnal wisdom add their
own meanings, but that must be shut out of the Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.16.
for such are unlearned and unfruitful in the word, and so wrests the
Scripture to their own destruction, but by this know, that I go not about to
draw men from reading the Scripture; so that they read with this single eye,
the Light which gave it forth, so shall they that read understand, but to thee
this is a mystery, and therefore thou went about to deny Christ in man, and God
in man, by way of derision to those that witnessed forth Christ within, God
within, and thou says that he meant he was in them by his words, and thou
brought this Scripture, if you abide in me and my words abide in you, ye shall
ask what you will, and it shall be done unto you; in this place (thou Serpent)
he meant as he spoke, but Paul witnessed Christ within, and said, They that
could not witness Christ within was Reprobates, and so art thou, who denies
Christ come in the flesh, and Paul preached Christ within the hope of glory,
Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor. 13, 5. Col. 1.26, 27.
the ministry which had been hid, and so it seems is still from thee, therefore
to thee this preaching is foolishness, and as fancies, and whimsies, but unto
us that are saved, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God, by which thy
folly and thy ignorance of Christ is here made manifest, and that thou never
escaped the polutions of the world by the knowledge of Christ, who denies him,
as he is known to all who have escaped the polutions of the world by the
knowledge of him, and they that thus know him not, 2 Coo. 13.5.
are in the reprobation; and here art thou a Minister of Antichrist, who denies
Christ come in the flesh; and then thou went on with thy deluding spirit,
pressing the wicked to pray, yea there was many there present of the people of
the world besides thy own company, whom both thou and thy company counts as
heathen, yet thou pressed them much to pray, and to take unto them words and
pray, whenas the Scripture says, The prayers of the wicked are abominable; and
thus thou did that which was abominable in the sight of God, Pro. 15.8.
in praying thy self, and teaching the wicked to pray, and to steal other men's
words and pray, for neither you nor they have any words but what you steal out
of the Scripture, for thou have shut thy self from that by which the Apostles
preached, therefore thou thus runs into confusion, and thou told the people of
deceivers, and nominated them to be such as denied Baptism and Ordinances of
Christ, and the Scripture, and the Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal
judgment: so when thou had done thy divination and thy formal prayer, I stood
up and claimed the order of the true Church, that all might speak one by one,
and if any thing was revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his
peace, and then like Cain thy countenance fell, thou being struck with guilt in
thy conscience, 2 Cor. 14.30, 31
and fear surprised the heart of the hypocrite and thou was shufling away, but
I bid the stand, for, said I, thou art a deceiver, as I shall prove the one
before all the people, therefore stand to maintain what thou have said, but
said I unto the people, the Prophets and Apostles, and the holy men of God who
spoke forth the Scriptures, they spoke from the infallible spirit of God, as
they was acted, guided, and moved thereby, but all who comes with their words,
and pretending to preach and not from the same infallible Spirit, such are
deceivers, of which this man is one, who stands here in the seat of the
Pharisee, and he being smitten with guilt, fetled to be gone, and several would
have stopped him, but he said he would be gone, unlese they kept him in by
violence, and I said unto the people, know this, that these things wherewith he
marks out deceivers I own, so that I am none of those, for the Scripture I own,
and the true Baptism of Christ I own, and the Resurrection from the Dead I own,
and eternal judgment upon the wicked I own, so that I am none of those which he
marked out, but this man is a deceiver, and so I shall prove him if he will
stay, but thou Ray was ashamed of thy Ministry, and durst not stand to what
thou had said, but plainly like a hireling fled from thy stage, and left thy
Flock like a cowardly Serpent, I never knew Baptist so routed out of a Pulpet;
but the Independants joined with him, and the Priests rude multitude stood up
for him, and several would have been persecuting of me, but by the power of God
I was preserved and kept from the hands of such unreasonable men; but thus did
all Sects ever join against the one single Truth, but it is but that the
Scripture should be fulfilled, Isai. 3, 1, 2, 3.
that Gog and Magog should join in Battle against the Lamb, but the Lamb shall
overcome, and they shall lay down their Crowns before Him, and his Enemies
shall become his Footstool, and he will tread them in the wine press alone
without the City, therefore tremble all you Formalists, Imitators and
Selfe-actors, who have gotten a Form but deny the life and power, even Jesus
Christ whom you have crucified, which you shall be made to confess with weeping
tears, where your eyes behold him whom you have pierced.

So after I had passed out of the Steeple-house, when the Baptist was put to
the rout, I stood upon a Grave in the Grave-yard, and there I called to the
people, if any of them had any thing to object against me I was there to
maintain and stand up for the truth, to the which I had openly born testimony
in their Town but none would come to my face; and there was one Captain Cole
there present, who had been counted an Independent Teacher, until his flock
forsook him and owned the Truth, and he had railed against the Truth behind my
back, but he would not come then and speak to my face, and since he has
imprisoned one of his neighbors Son for obeying the command of God, and
coming to his House for a sign: so I spoke the Truth unto the people, and
proved this Ray openly to be a Deceiver among them, and judged him out of his
own mouth, and so cleared my conscience to the people, and so I came away with
my friends in Peace, having cleared and discharged my conscience unto them, by
which they are eternally left without excuse, whether they would hear or
forbear, their blood will be upon their own heads, and so I leave them.

Now upon the Day following it happened that a friend of mine did speak with
this Ray, who unto him did falsely affirm, that I said I was the head of the
true Church, when as I never spoke any such a thing, therefore I hearing of a
meeting of the Baptists that day, and that this Ray was there, I and several of
my friends went unto this meeting, and when I came at the house the door was
open, and I went in amongst them, and this Ray was speaking unto the people,
and when he saw me he stopped his speaking, and shut his book before I opened
my mouth to speak, and bid me be gone out of the house, and I said, is thy
spirit limited? is thy spirit bound? and he bid me begone, and said why did I
disturb them? and asked him, how did I disturb you was not I silent until thou
spoke to me? but guilt tormenting him within he could not forbear me, but
called for the man of the house to command me out several times, but he was not
amongst them as they said, so this Ray was much vexed and in much wrath, and
one of their Elders, named John Tabram of VVickin, stood up and pushed me with
his hand upon my breast several times in much wrath, to have me out of the
house, and I did not resist him, and he said if I would not go out they would
send for the officers; now let all people see what weapons they make use of,
when one comes soberly and civilly without any violence amongst them, and
presently to be in such disorder, and confusion, and rage, as they was, and
threatening to send for the officers, whenas there was no violence offered by
us, but here you might see what these people would do if they had a law to
guard them as the Priests has: then there was one man that had been hearing of
them, and he spoke and said to this Ray, you say they are deceivers, and they
say you are deceivers, now I would have you dispute it, that those that are
ignorant might know which are the deceivers; but Ray slighted him, and said,
who are you? I know you not, and would by no means have his deeds brought to
the light to be tried, but gets amongst the blind where he cannot be seen, so
then they brought the woman of the house to me, and she bid me go out of her
house, which I did not resist, and so I called to Ray and told him he was
ashamed of his doctrine, and so I shoke off the dust of my feet for a witness
against them, and so left them, and then they shut their door, but poor people
I do pity you, to see how ignorantly and blindly you are led by the
deceitfulness of Satan, to think that you are the Church of Christ, and none
else, whenas your teachers dare not stand to maintain their doctrine, but flies
away when they should come to the proof, and calls for Officers when one comes
in amongst you without any carnal weapon; is this the doctrine of Christ which
you talk so much of, or of Antichrist? surely if I had been a deceiver and he a
minister of Christ, then I could not have stopped his mouth, but he would have
stopped mine, for the ministers of Christ are able to stop the mouths of
gainsayers, but his mouth was stopped, yea, when he was busy at that he calls
preaching too, but my mouth he could not stop, and he was found the deceiver,
whom truth put to silence, who was ashamed of his doctrine.

Oh people take heed how you reject so great Salvation, for this is the day of
your visitation, now you are warned by one, who amongst you is counted a
deceiver, yet true, witnessed in all your consciences, by that which will
either accuse you, or excuse you before the the throne of God, who am known to
all the children of Light.

The Excommunicaiion of Ezekiel Cater, and Samuel Cater out of the Bapists
society, by John Ray, with their Answer thereunto.
We two, namely, Ezekiel Cater, and Samuel Cater, being met together amongst
our friends, upon the 4 day of 3 month, waiting upon the Lord, there came three
of the teachers of the baptized people, amongst whom was one John Ray a chief
Teacher, who came and said he had a message to deliver, but his message was
denied, but he said he would speak, and so disorderly ran into many words to
this effect,

There being a general meeting at Cambridge this week, Excom John Ray.
where the Church of Christ was met together, and there it was agreed upon by
the Elders, that Samuel Cater, and Ezekiel Cater, who were formerly Elders of
the church of Christ in this town, namely, Littleport, and being they have
departed from the sweet fellowship of the Church of Christ, etc. and after so
many admonitions, would not be reconciled, should be delivered unto Satan, I
was there appointed to be the messenger, and so he run on with his
excommunication, according to their form, with their stolen words.

Reply. Now for the truths sake, for which thou John Ray have cast us out of
your society, we shall hereby clear our selves from what is or may be cast
upon us in this matter, by thee John Ray, and the rest of thy society, whom we
know to be most bitter slanderers of the truth.

This we deny that ever we was Elders in the church of Christ, you made us
Elders in your church, who call your selves jews, and are not, but the
Synagogue of Satan, out of which you have cast us, but not before we forsaked
you, we by the light of Jesus Christ, through the love of God, seeing both you
and we, setting our selves of acting and imitating the Apostles in our wills,
with a blind zeal for life, but strangers to the life and power; neither could
witness the same infallible spirit as they had, as you know we all confessed,
and therefore we had nothing but what we got into our brains of their words,
and so got a notion, with adding to our own imaginations of them, and wresting
the same with our fallible spirits, for we durst not say it was infallible, as
you also confessed your selves, then it must needs be fallible, for there are
but two kinds of SPIRITS, and if not the INFALLIBLE, then the fallible; and
though we did the very same things and spoke the same words and not from the
same Spirit, it was all false and as nothing, as they that swore God lived
swore falsely, for they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none of his, and
his spirit is infallible in the least measure, and thus you are shut out in all
that you can do of your selves, with your formed Ordinances, and this we know,
we was also strangers to the Cross of Christ, and the Light and Life and Power
of Christ, which the Apostles lived in, and also the one Baptism of Christ
without which none can be his Disciples, so we was only jews outwardly, washing
the outside, but within as foul as ever, as you also are, yet we say not but we
had a zeal in the same, though not according to knowledge, but now the true
Light is sprung in, through the mighty love of God toward us, so that we see
the weakness of our own actings and formings in our own wills for life, and now
are made willing through the power of God, to lay down our crowns at the feet
of Jesus, and to wait in what he has given us of his Light, and we have tasted
of his powerful Word through his gracious love toward us, and now we have a
witness within our selves, whenas before we knew it not, but murdered it as
you also do and for this you have cast us out of your society, but not for
fornication, as he was in that place of Scripture which you imitate, 1 Cor. 5.
nor for making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, for we witness an
increase of both, but the discerning and power is wanting in you, and so you do
you know not what, but know this, we are not fallen to a looser life, but to a
more stricter severe life, for to serve the Lord Jesus Christ, but remember
this, that if they that believed your form to be the truth could but patter
over a few words of faith, and call it theirs, and then according to your form
they was put into the Water, and taken out again, and then received into your
Church and communion, though no change of life or nature, and this must needs
be the Synagogue of Satan, and this I Samuel Cater can vvitness, for so have I
baptized, and at you I learned, and you allowed of it, but now my eye is
opened, I do see it and do testify against it, that all I did so by I deceived
them, though then I confess it was ignorance, and so was yours, but now you
might see if you would, therefore it shall no more be called ignorance, but
willful blindness, but I know you will allege you teach Godliness and
holiness; but I answer, you run and the Lord never sent you, as we also did,
therefore you profit not the people at all, and if you had not the Words of
Godliness and the form, 2 Cor. 11.14, 15
then the Ministers of Antichrist would not be like the Ministers of Christ
but you are, but I say your lives comes short of what you profess, for in them
there is no change, but they that are Earthly Minded, and Covetous, are so
still, and your lives are in pride, ambition, and arrogance, puffed up with
your vain knowledge, and with respect of persons, and so are out of the faith
of Christ and in wrath and anger, and envy, and bitterness, and in lying, and
slandering, and backbiting, and lust, and fleshliness, we formerly being in the
same Society do witness it now our eyes are open, out of which society you have
cast us, and praised be the Lord that we have escaped the snares of darkness,
by the bright shining of his light into our dark hearts, to the which light do
we speak in you all, by it to read your selves, and judge your selves, for by
it are you seen and judged to be in darkness and in confusion, out of the faith
and society of the Saints, but these things do we not speak out of envy or
Revenge, but for the clearing of the Truth and our consciences from your
slanderous tongues, and to lay oped your deceit and way of delusion to the
simple, that they may escape the delusion which we was ensnared in, and that
so you may proceed no further with it, that your folly might be manifested to
all men, as theirs was who withstood Moses.

E.C. S.C.

A Copy of the most of the Queries aforesaid was given to this Ray, but no
Answer did he return.

NOw a word to all you who are still in your own formings, selfe-actings, Romans
8.7.
and imitatings, you are acting in that nature which is at enmity with God,
which is not subject to the Law of God, neither can; so all your formings and
actings is in vain, for it is not from life, but from death, for life; but life
comes from death, for in the destruction of death is life obtained, therefore
to the light of the Lord Jesus in all your consciences take heed, which is the
witness for God, to which I speak in you all, which witnesses for God against
the secrets of your hearts, which reproves you in secret for your secret
actions, and deeds of darkness, and it will search you through, and let you see
what you can witness of the work of God in you hearts, for all this your long
and great profession, and esteeming your selves of the Church and faith of
Christ, and Saints in Christ, so if you can witness yet the earth quakes, and
that the earth is yet removed out of its place, and mountains removed by the
eye of faith, and if the vail of darkness be yet rent. Is not the first man yet
standing, and the first Image, and the Serpent head? for while you are
strangers to the light, and your minds are from the light, you are wandered and
strayed in the paths of darkness, and so are the children of darkness, in whom
the Prince of darkness rules, even the Serpent who is head in man, but the
promise is, Genesis 3.15.
the seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head; but you are acting in
your own wills and wisdom, the Serpent is your head, and you are not yet come
to witness the first promise fulfilled, but are still in the fall, under the
power of Darkness, in the disobedience, and strangers unto the Cross, and so
have no part in Christ in that nature, for none comes to have a right in Christ
but through the Cross, for as many as are baptized into Christ, are baptized
into his death, and they that are dead with him do live with him, and they that
are dead are freed from sin, and they that are in Christ are new creatures; old
things are passed away, and all things become new, but they that are not in
Christ are still in old Adam, and so in the fall under the curse, and under
deaths dominion, drove out from the presence of God into the earth, and death
reigns over all, from Adam until Moses, Romans 5.14.
of what profession soever; therefore now read your selves by the light which
comes from Jesus Christ, and shines into your dark hearts, and searches the
heart and tries the reins, and makes manifest the secrets, to which light I
am made manifest, and by it witnessed in you all, and unto it I do direct your
minds, for the turning of your minds from the darkness to the light; all you
that have a desire to find the way of truth, in what form soever that thereby
you may come to see how you have been wandered and scattered in the many ways
of darkness, in the land of darkness, in this cloudy and dark day, as sheep
without a shepherd, being carried about after the voice of strangers, from the
shepherd of your souls, therefore hearken no more without to those that cry,
lo here, or lo there is Christ, and so draws your minds without to seek for a
Christ without, and a redemption, and a sanctification without, and a
righteousness without, and a God withou; but turn your minds within, for it is
to be found within if ever you find; for there is no way to come unto the true
knowledge of the truth, or of God, or of Christ but by that of God within, for
what is to be known of God is manifest within, and the same which descended,
the same does ascend, and so the way to God is to be found within, by the light
which manifests death and slayes death, do not you read the parable of the
woman that had lost the piece of silver, and could not find it until she had
turned into the house and lighted the candle and swept the house, and then she
found that which she had lost, and rejoiced with her neighbors; Luke 15.8.9.
Pro. 20.27. John 1.4.
now the Spirit of man is the candle of the Lord, and his life was the light of
men, so turn in your minds to the light of the Lord Jesus, which if you love it
to bring your deeds to it, will let you see the deeds of darkness, and the
paths of death, and it will also search your hearts, and make manifest your
inward parts, and let you see what you have lost, and as you love this light,
and likes to retain it in your minds, and by it to be guided, it will lead you
out of all the crooked and froward ways of darkness into the light of life,
and so to come to find and know the voice of the true shepherd, who is come to
seek out and gather all his scattered sheep out from amongst the mountains and
valleys, and the many ways and crooked paths wherein they have been scattered
and strayed in the land of Darkness, Ier. 23.3.
and to gather them together into one flock, into one way, into one sheepfold,
and he alone will be their shepherd, and this you shall come to witness; as you
love this light and follow it, it will lead you out of your many Forms, and many
ways, into one way, out of your own wisdom and imaginations wherein you have
been building Babel, and this will strip you of all your own righteousness
wherewith you have covered over your deceitful hearts, and it will lay your
deceits before you, and bring you to judgment, and if you love this light and
follow it, and be willing to wait upon it, out of your own wills, and wisdom,
and imaginations, and carnal thoughts, reasonings, and consultations, and
selfe-acting, John 1^
and imatating it will lead you to know the voice of the true shepherd within
you from the voice of the stranger, and so to know the precious from the
precious from the vile, he who says, I am the light, he says, I am the good
shepherd who will bring you to know the way and the door into the sheepfold, if
you do not run out in your own wills, and seek to climb up another way, for the
way is but one, and he that says I am the light, says I am the way, and I am
the door into the sheepfold: so if you turn from the Light and stumble at the
light, you stumble at all and so fall, but if you love the light, and be
willing to follow the light, it will lead you through all, and to deny your
selves and to take up his Cross unto thy self, and to pass through good report,
and evil report, through persecution and through death, 2 Cor. ^.8.
and the way will not be grievous but joyous, and so you will come into the way,
and in at the door unto the sheepfold, and so into the fellowship, and into the
life, and into the power, and into the faith of the Saints, where all live in
union in one, united by one into one body, the end of all jarring and jangling
divisions and disputes, therefore said the Apostle, where is the wise, where is
the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world, 1 Cor. 1.
therefore I do you call to come out from amongst them, and be ye separate, and
touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you says the Lord, and I will be
unto you a father, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters; now you are called,
and this is the day of your visitation for now light is come into the world,
and if you like to retain it in your minds happy are you, 2 Cor. 6.17 18.
but if not, by it you are left without excuse, and it will judge you at the
last day, for he that loves the light shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life* but he that does evil hates the light which is his
condemnation; John. 8.12.
now the way is plain to all simple ones, who have a desire to find it declared
by a friend and witness to the eternal Truth: who am called,

I. P.

FINIS.

