A LETTER WRITTEN FROM Sir WILLIAM PARSONS, One of the Lord Justices of
IRELAND, TO Sir ROBERT PIE, A worthy Knight of the Honorable House of Commons:
Published by his consent, and other Members of the said Commons House.

This Letter was received by Sir Robert Pie, the 9. of April.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET. 1642.

A LETTER WRITTEN from Sir VVIL: PARSONS, One of the Lo: Justices in Ireland,
to Sir HENRY PIE, a worthy Knight of the Honorable House of Commons.
Honored Sir,
IN some late Letters I troubled you with some of the frowning occurrents of
this place; wherein I have had a heavy share, as well of the sufferings in the
ill, as in my labors to fore-lay and prevent the worst: Which labor, I must
say, God has wonderfully blessed; In so much as now I dare avow, if England for
their own good much more then ours, will set in roundly to enable us under a
good Governor, (if God have so ordained us one) we will make the mischiefs we
have suffered, the greatest addition to the glory, security, and happiness of
England, that ever they had by any particular action: For besides that, we will
for ever free them from the dishonours and damages both in men and treasure
which they have from Age to Age endured from, and by occasion of this disloyal
and malignant people, the entire benefit of this unnatural and high rebellion,
shall in a manner redound to themselves, by settling here very great multitudes
of the English, which this Island can well receive, and give them happy and
plentiful being, if God guide the conduct and conclusion of this War aright.
I entreat you Sir consider, if the Irish had gained the Castle and City of
Dublin, (which nothing could have hindered but the blessed sudden discovery) and
therein all the Kings Arms and Munition, and therewithal the Port-townes and
Shipping of Ireland, and out of that strength had sent 30000. men into England,
as they intended; whether their ravenage (wherein they excel all men) would
not have been more loss to England, before they could have found competent
resistance, then all the money comes to, which they are now to send us, to
reduce Ireland, and make it theirs, in a more firm way then ever it was since
the Conquest. If you be sparing to us this Summer, you hurt your selves and the
cause; And therefore to our speedy and round supplies, I pray you put your
helping hand in this act of reducement, which must at last have been done with
infinite more difficulty and charge, after the above mentioned horrible loss.

I doubt not but by late Letters you have heard that we have beaten the Enemy
from Tredagh: Now I must tell you, that a party of that late besieged
garrison, with the help of five hundred men sent from hence, have marched and
taken the Port-towne of Dondalke, sixteen miles North-wards from Tredagh, and
there beaten out a thousand Rebels, and taken the little Ordnance they had. We
want men and money extremely; when they come, I undertake we shall not
mis-apply them. It is mavelous to see how spiritfull our few soldiers that
have health are, while we are not able to put shoes on their feet, clothes on
their backs, or meat in their bellies, save herrings, and some salt beef:
Neither have we any money at all, which is the life of War. Out of all which
defects, our soldiers do so die daily before our faces, besides what are
slain, as without speedy supplies, we shall not only be frustrated in our
promising beginnings, but speedily sink into a desperate danger of utter loss.

I find by your late Letter to the Duchess, that you hear there, that the
Earl of Antrim is in rebellion; I assure you Sir, it is not so, neither I hope
will be; though truly through these tumults, cutting between him and his late
means here, he is now in great and pinching want; And, which grieves me more,
the Duchess suffers very lamentably in it: For my part I have helped her what
I could, but being deprived wholly of my poor estate by this rebellion, I am
able to do no more: Hereof I desire you and her friends there to be sensible,
and take it for a truth from

1. APR. 1642. Your assured friend and servant, VVm PARSONS.

FINIS.

