THE SUBSTANCE OF Mr. PYMMS SPEECH.

TO THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT.

November. 9. 1641.

LONDON, Imprinted for Richard Lownes.

MDCXLI.

Mr. PYMM'S SPEECH TO THE LORDS in PARLIAMENT.
That which I am to speak is concerning the ill Counsels; to this, I shall
lay down these Steps.

THat the danger that comes to a State by ill Counsels; That they are the
Politic Bodies with the Natural; the Natural Body is endangered diverse
ways; either by outward violence, and that may be foreseen and prevented; or
by less appearing Maladies which grows upon the Body by the distemper of the
Air, immoderate Exercise, Diet, etc. And when the causes of the Disease are
clear, the Remedy is easily applied: But Diseases which proceed fom the
Inward Parts; as the Liver, the Heart, or the Brain, it is a hard thing to
apply Cure to such diseases: Ill Counsels they are of that nature, etc. For
the Mischiefs that come by evil Counsels corrupts the Vital PARTS, and
overthrowes the Administration of Public Government, etc.

The second Step, That there have been lately and still are ill Counsels
here in this Kingdom and about the King. That there has been lately, you
will not doubt, when the maine Course of Government has been so employed, as
Popery thereby has been so maintained, the Laws subverted, and no
distinction between Justice and injustice, and that there is still reason to
doubt is apparent by courses taken to advance mischievous Designs: but that
His Majesty's wisdom and Goodness kept them from the Heart, though they were
not kept out of the Court; so the principal and most mischievous Designs have
been practiced by such as have near Access unto His Majesty.

The Third step, that the ill Counsels of this time are in their own natures
more mischievous* and more dangerous then the ill Counsels of former times,
former Counsels have been to please the King, and Prince, to raise up
Prerogative; if it had gone no further, it had brought many miseries, but not
to ruin and destruction: But the ill Counsels of this time were to alter
Religion and Law, therefore more mischievous in their own nature then the ill
Counsels of former times.

Fourth step, That these ill Counsels have proceeded from a spirit and
inclination to Popery, and have had a dependencie on Popery. The Religion of
the Papists is a Religion incomputable to any other Religion, destructive to
all others, and does not endure any thing that does oppose it; whosoever does
withstand their Religion, if they have power, they bring them to ruin. There
are other Religions but not so destructive as Popery is, for the principles of
Popery are destructive to all States, and persons that oppose it: with the
progress of this mischievous Council, they provide Counselors that may
execute their own designs, and to turn all Counsels to their own ends. And
you find that now in Ireland, That those designs that have been upon all ^he
three Kingdoms do end in a War, for (...) of Popery in Ireland.

Fifth step, That unless these ill Counsels be changed, as long as they
continue, it is impossible that any Assistance, Aid, or Advice that the
Parliament can take to Reform, will be effectual for the Public. Those that
are the instruments of State they put things into action, in good order, but if
acted by evil men, while these Counsels are on foot we can expect no good.

The Sixth step, That this is the most proper time to desire of his Majesty,
the alteration and change of evil Counselors, because the Commonwealth is
brought into distempers by them, and so exhausted, that we can endure no longer.

Next reason why we cannot admit of them, is, to show our love and fidelity to
the King in great contributions and adventures: when God does employ his
Servants, he does give some Promise to rowse up their Spirits. This is the
time wherein the Subjects are to save the Kingdom with the hazard of their
Lives, and Fortunes; and therefore expect from His Majesty in a more large, and
bountiful manner, then at other times. As we have weakness at home, so we
ought to discern the Actions abroad, where great provision is made, and a
carelessenesse and improvidence herein; when our neighbors are so provided,
and have such great Fleets at Sea, will open a way to sudden ruin and
destruction, before we can be prepared; and therefore now the fittest time to
move the King.

The last Step that this Alteration of Counsels, will bring great advantage
to the King in his own designs. In all our Actions our Prayers unto God should
be, that his Name should be glorified; so our Petitions to His Majesty, should
bring on our profit and advantage to him. 1. A discouragement to the Rebels, a
great part of their confidence is in the evil Councels at home, as by the
Examinations appears. 2. Advantage is great encouragement to the Kings good
Subjects at home (who hazard their lives, and give Aid and Contribution) to
have things governed for the public good. It will make men afraid to
prefer Servants to the King, that are ill Counsels, when they shall come to
the examination of a Trienniall Parliament; for many times Servants are
preferred to Princes for advantage of Foreign estates.

Next, this will put an Answer into the Kings mouth against all importunities,
that he is to prefer none but such as will be approved on by Parliament;
those that are Honorable, and most Ingenious are aptest to be troubled in this
kind, and not to deny: therefore the King may Answer he has promised his
Parliament not to admit of any but by advice in Parliament, this will answer
them all.

Next, advantage, it makes us fitter to enter into Union with Foreign
Nations, and Foreign States; and to be made partaker of the strength and
assistance of others: It will fortify us against the designs of Foreign
Princes. There has bin cunning Council at Rome, and in Spain to reduce us to
Popery; if good Counsels at home, we shall be the better prepared to preserve
Peace and Union, and better respect from abroad.

Lastly, it will make us fit for any noble design abroad.

FINIS.

