A TRUE COPY OF TWO SPEECHES, SPOKEN By Two ORPHANS, Educated in
CHRIST-HOSPITAL, On the 13th day of August, 1663.

BEING A day set apart to commemorate God's Mercies bestowed on their
fellow-Brethren, who were formerly Educated and brought up in the said HOSPITAL.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM GODBID, M.DC.LXIII.

The first SPEECH.
Reverend Brethren and quondam Fellow-Orphans;
THere is I confess a great disparity between you, that are our Seniours, and
us, who are as it were but of yesterday. You have formerly been planted in this
Soil, and now grown up to be tall Cedars, Stars of a higher magnitude than we,
whose splendour and luster do bespeak you to be conspicuous; yet we hope you
will give us leave to feed our Eyes in beholding so lovely a sight as appears
in this place this day, and to congratulate you in this days Solemnity.

I am desired in the Name of my Fellow-Orphans, who daily suck at the breasts
of Charity, to tell you how proud she is to see so numerous an Offspring, and
so loving a Fraternity to associate themselves within her Habitation. And why
should not we, who are her Foster-children, that have communem cutem with you,
though not communem vestem, count our selves honored, that we have such
Worthy, Grave and Venerable persons for our Elder Brethren? It makes our hearts
leap for joy within us, that after all our dismal Conflagrations and
State-convulsions, we may this day behold the faces of our Brethren, whom we
feared had been swallowed up in those bloody waves, which swelled lately beyond
their chanel. But blessed be our God, that secured you in this Ark, and
preserved you in this Zoar, till the floods of blood were abated, and the fire
of our contentions was quenched.

You are now exempted from your fears and dangers, and have the happiness this
day to meet together, and commemorate those great mercies and favors that God
in this place prepared for you. It is, and often has been, the practice of
great Persons, whom God has raised even from the dust, to frequent those
places where at first they had their beings. Agathocles, though advanced to a
Throne, yet could delight to see those Pots amongst which he once lay. And good
reason indeed have you to be clothed with the same humility, considering what
once you were, and to what Estate many of you are advanced at this present. To
your honor be it spoken, that you have set apart this day to publish and
proclaim God's mercy, who remembered you in your low estates; for his mercies
endure for ever; and also to take a fuller view of this place, where for some
years past, the bowels of most here present were refreshed, your naked backs
clothed, and all necessaries so provided for you, that you, as well as we,
forge^ now what want means: Olim haec meminisse juvabit.

Time was, when you traced these Galleries, and thought your selves happy that
a Table was here spread for you. Time was, when you were under this Oeconomie,
and counted it a favor that you could be admitted to sit under these Roofs:
and still to this day the memory of these mercies is not obliterated. You do
well therefore to prescribe an Annual Festival, that so this City and our
honorable Patrons and worthy Benefactors may see how thankful you are, and how
careful you will be to revive the thoughts and memory of their favor and
beneficence.

Your mouths, I see, are filled with holy Doxologies, while your hearts
ruminate on these mercies. Your Hallelujahs are not verbal, but cordial, while
you do not only recollect those pristine favors which God bestowed, but also
desire this day to praise him for your present condition. Your Arithmetic is
not able to recount that Series of Providence that at this day attends you; nor
can your Mathematical knowledge fathom the great Abyss of his divine love, nor
take the altitude or dimension of his bounty. Your lot, while you were here,
fell in a good place, and now also you have a goodly heritage.

Many of you may say with Jacob; With my staff came I ever this Jordan, and now
I am become two hands; I am raised from the dust, and enjoy peace and plenty.

Give me leave (dear Brethren) I beseech you, to affect the hearts of my
fellow-Orphans with this rare Spectacle of divine mercy, and vicissitude of
Divine Providence.

Draw near (my dear Hearts) and behold what a knot of Amity divine Love has
here tied; what an honorable Convention of Brethren is here assembled, to
bless the Lord this day for his past and present mercies conferred upon them.
These once were planted in this Garden, and now behold! being watered by the
influence of Heaven, to what a height they have aspired.

Here are some, whom God has honored to be Animarum Proci, and has invested
them with Ecclesiastical promotion. Here are others, whom God has qualified
and made useful for Political concernments. Some, whom God has made to be a
Sun, to give light to those that sit in darkness: and others, whom he has
placed-in Londons Hemisphere, like Stars, to be influential in their Orbs.
Surely the Poet was mistaken in his observation, when he did so boldly assert,

Non facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi. --
Be encouraged (my fellow-Orphans:) The same hand that raised up these our
worthy Brethren, can exalt us. Let us emulate their virtues, though not envy at
their prosperity. Blessed be our God that has raised up Nursing Fathers for Us
also, by whose care, and our wise circumspection, we also may sprout forth
through God's mercy in virtuous achievements.

Pardon me (dear Brethren) that I have so long stopped the sound of your
grateful acknowledgements of God's present favors to you. You are now going to
solace your selves in the enjoyment of Fraternal conference; and I know that
you will admit no ungrateful Guest this day into your Society. You are of
Philip's mind King of Macedon; to brand him on the forehead with these two
letters [I. H.] Ingratus Hospes, that shall be ^uilty of that Vice.

Your hearts, I see, are enlarged, nay ready to crack in sunder, till you have
vented your grateful acknowledgements and pious acclamations. Your fervent zeal
boils over, while your thoughts are enflamed with divine meditation on God's
grace and bounty.

Weighty Clouds, I see, must empty themselves by distillation, and pay their
tribute to the thirsty Earth. You do well this day, to display the banners of
God's mercy to all Spectators, and to set the Crown of all your enjoyments upon
his head.

Go on (dear Brethren) and let this present Festival be crowned with love and
harmony of affection, that you may be, as Pylades and Orestes, even one soul.

For ever may those sparks of Contention, that have set others into a flame of
passion, be quite amongst you extinguished; that so this place and this meeting
may justly challenge the name of Philadelphia, or a Society of loving Brethren.

Rejoice together; but, I beseech you, let this days Solemnity hereafter be
like a fruitful womb, to bring forth many blessings to this place, where once
you had your succor. You are those PTOOPLOYSIOI, whom the Almighty has
shielded with the Helmet of his Providence, and now expects that you should
reach out your hand for the defense of such as we, that are your younger
Brethren. Let it appear that Charity has such an Offspring, that are not only
like ^he Tribe of Gad for number, but also like the Trees of Lebanon for shade
and comfort to their fellow-Brethren.

In a word, let not your tongues only be tuning the praises of God, whilst your
hands are open and free for our Relief; but let your hearts also offer up the
sacrifice of Prayer, That God would bless our Gracious Sovereign, and our Noble
Queen, with all the Royal Family; That he would watch over this great City, and
cause that Peace and Plenty might unload themselves in her Lap; That he would
prosper this Foundation, and reward our Patrons and Benefactors, who so freely
have scattered the seeds of their Charity in these furrows.

And let all Loyal hearts and grateful Orphans stand up, and say, Amen, Amen.

John Parker, Orphan.

The second SPEECH.
Nay stay I beseech you (Brethren) a little, and let not the joy of this
Festival so transport you, as to forget to pay your tribute of Thankfulness
unto these worthy Persons, who have honored this Society this day with their
presence. RIght Worshipful,
I have heard that great Persons have those that are Masters of the Ceremonies,
to court their Guests with complemental salutations. Such I confess are wanting
to this our Festival. But yet rather then such worthy Persons shall go
unsaluted, I my self (though but a poor Complementer) in the name of this
Society, and at their command, will redouble our salutations, and bid you
welcome.

We would not be singular in our grateful Retributions; but yet we have cause
on this day to thank you especially (Our Worshipful Treasurer) that you have
showed your self such a pattern of Christian love and amity, to endeavor to
kindle the same sparks in the breasts of these our Brethren, by promoting and
encouraging them to this loving meeting.

Nor shall our thankful acknowledgments be this day confined within a narrow
compass.

We have cause indeed (Right Worshipful) highly to congratulate you, and pay
our filial all gratitude unto you, our Oeconomical Father, and Noble President,
whose Head, Heart and Hands are all employed in promoting our Welfare.

And though (Sir Thomas Viner) perhaps it may be counted a Tautologie to
reiterate our salutations; yet we had rather be so accused, than be silent in
our return of thanks this day for your pious bounty toward us poor Orphans,
and for that cost that you have expended to make this place so beautiful. You
have been the Repairer of our breaches, under whose Vine we poor Orphans have
for some time sat, and to this day do smell the fragrancy of your beneficence.
What Homer styled Agamemnon, (...); that appellation do you justly deserve. You
have been a bountiful Benefactor and loving Shepherd unto this little Flock,
when they were under your Conduct, and folded them within these green and
pleasant Pastures, which our Brethren see this day.

To your Honor be it spoken, that you have shown, your self so Noble a
President: and we hope many others will write after your Copy.

If works of Piety may commend a Patron, and liberal Charity and free Bounty
extol a Benefactor; Then yours (dear Sir) which you have conferred upon this
Hospital, and on this place, do bespeak you to be Noble and Generous.

Our Brethren here present, as well as we, may say, non, ut nunc, sic olim
erat. Our tattered Walls and smoky Roof are now so repaired by you, that, when
Spectators see them, they say, you have made this place fit for the reception
of the greatest Princes. And truly, that the worth and excellency of our
bountiful Benefactors might not be blurred nor expunged, you have ingraved
their Names in such legible Characters, that neither length of time nor envious
fate is able to obliterate.

By you it is, that not only the Royal bounty of King Edward, who was our
Founder, is commended to posterity; but his Person also as it were has
received a new Resurrection, being here attended with England's Peers, and
London's Representatives, consulting how to lay a plot and model of true Piety.
A lively and a costly draught indeed to represent London's well-disposed
Charity.

Here the wounds of the maimed are healed, and the impotent poor relieved:
There the sturdy Vagrant corrected, and his hands taught to labor. And here
also are the Thriftless Poor and Needy Orphans, whose Livery being almost
thredbare and worn out, is now recruited (Noble Sir) we see, out of your own
Wardrobe.

There both Moses and Aaron, the fit Representatives of Political and
Ecclesiastical order, are prefigured. And that we might not forget our
Christian duty, we have both Law and Gospel fairly transcribed in the Decalogue.

There sits Charity yielding her full breasts, an^ teaches her Offspring how
to live by faith i^ the want of Creature-enjoyments, and to ancho^ their hope
upon him who is the Rock of Ages.

Here our Windows, that were not only shattered, but naked, are now glazed and
adorn with the honorable Coats of Arms of our Noble Presidents.

In a word (Noble Sir) there is no cost spared, nor any thing indeed wanting to
make this Hall truly beautiful, but your Effigies, and the representation of
the Noble Lady Ramsie, to accompany that of Sir John Lemmonds, once (...)
worthy President and pious Benefactor to thi^ Hospital: all which, though we
would not Idolize, yet we would count them venerable.

Away, you foul-mouthed Atheists! No longe^ question the truth of Omnipotency,
nor gainsay his Providence. Behold even Us, who are here present this day, who
have been the Almighties care ever since we had our beings. We alone are able
to convince you that there is a God, who sits in Heaven, and steers all humane
actions and concernments.

Away, you Papists, who boast of your Religious houses, and think, that by your
pretended works of Piety, you shall ex condigno jump into Heaven per saltum.
Lo, here is a Model of well-disposed Charity, which the God of mercy approves
of, and which you are never able to parallel. But it is to you (Worthy Sir)
whose heart God has enlarged, that we owe the thanks of these glorious objects
which present themselves this day unto our view.

Go on, we beseech you, and by your example prompt others to works of true
Piety; that they also, as well as you, may help to repair and uphold our
Foundation-Walls, I mean our Cloisters, whose wide gaps thirst like the parched
earth to be filled with the distillation of their liberality.

The great God remunerate (Right Worshipful) your acts of Piety; and grant,
that you that have so freely cast your bread on these waters, may find it after
many days: in the mean time, we poor Orphans will rise up, and call you blessed.

Thomas Brice, Orphan.

FINIS.

