The COPY of a LETTER Written by Mr. Thomas Parker, Pastor of the Church of
Newbury in NEW ENGLAND, TO His Sister, Mrs Elizabeth Avery, Sometimes of
Newbury in the County of BERKS, Touching sundry OPINIONS BY HER Professed and
Maintained.

November. 22. 1649.
Imprimatur

JOHN DOWNAME.



London, Printed by John Field for Edmund Paxton, at Pauls-Chain, over against
the Castle Tavern, near the Doctors Commons. 1650.

The Epistle to the Reader.
BEsides this ensuing Letter, I have also received other Letters to my dear
Friend Mrs Avery (which for sundry Reasons are not Printed) from Mr. Cotton,
Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Noyes; all which bear the like aspect as this Letter does,
in opposition to her Opinions herein Refuted; That (if so be the will of God)
she may be reduced to her former Faith and Profession, from which she is so
strangely turned away. I forbear to acquaint the Reader with the transcendent
worth of the Reverend Author of this Letter; partly, because I know it will be
unacceptable to him, and unnecessary, in respect of them that have any
knowledge of him; and partly, because I am unwilling to follow the Devils
method in these days of Error, who by raising an admiration of men's persons in
the hearts of the simple, disposes them to a present compliance with their
pernicious Doctrines: Such flattery is below the gravity of a spirit
established in the Faith of Christ, whose Genius it is, not to glory in Man,
forasmuch as whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, all is yours, 1 Cor. 3.21,22.

Benjamin Woodbridge.

To my very loving Sister, Mrs Elizabeth Avery.
LOving Sister, for yet you are my Sister according to the flesh, and I am not
yet without hope, but that you are my Sister according to the Spirit; for it is
possible, that God may bring you back again from your Heretical Opinions. The
Lord of his mercy grant, That what I shall now write, may be acceptable unto
you, and may be effectually prevalent for your seasonable reduction, that you
may not dye away in this lamentable Belief. You will not come to Ordinances,
nor willingly join in private Prayer with your own Husband, but only to
condescend to his infirmities; for you say you are above Ordinances, above the
Word and Sacraments, yea above the Blood of Christ himself, living as a
glorified Saint, and taught immediately by the Spirit. Who would have thought
or dreamed, that such expressions should have ever come out of the mouth of
Sister Avery? What will you make your self to be? What, higher then Moses and
any of the Prophets, above the holy Apostles and Primitive Saints, which all
were under Ordinances? What, higher then Christ himself, who subjected himself
to Ordinances while he was upon the Earth? Acts 2.
Did not Christ, when he ascended up on high, institute Ordinances for this
end, that by them his Saints and Churches, and all of them without exception,
should be builded up until his second coming? Ephesians. 4.
Surely then, if you will not be at Ordinances, public and private, you
forsake the way of Christ, and withdraw your self from the way and means of
Edification by him, and Communion with him by the Spirit: And what manner of
Christian will you make your self to be? For all the Saints and Churches, from
the Apostles until this time, have constantly subjected themselves to the
Ordinances of Christ, as Histories do show, and the Prophesies in the
Revelation. What can you say, to prove that Christ will bring forth Christians
in this age, differing from all that went before? You go the very ready way to
exclude your self from the sheepfold, and from among the sheep of Christ, when
you do exclude your self from Ordinances, and from the common way and path of
all Saints; yea, and the glorious Church of New-Jerusalem, to be raised up in
the last time, is said to be builded upon the Foundation of the twelve
Apostles, namely, upon their Doctrine, and in way of the holy Ordinances
instituted by them. You cannot possibly say, That you are above the glorious
Church of New-Jerusalem; whose glory here, is the height of grace upon the
earth. But it is mavelous that you are not afraid to say, That you have more
of the Spirit then the Apostles: Be not offended that I tell you, This is a
horrible delusion of Satan, and Luciferian pride: Why do you not then dictate
Oracles immediately from Heaven? Why do you not infallibly Prophecy of the
Times? Why do you not work Miracles as they did? Did any of the holy Martyrs
ever say so, or think and do as you? The time was when you honored the memory
of them, and could humble your self to their imitation. But that is above the
rest, That you are above the Blood of Christ: Surely Satan, the cunning hunter
of souls, does labor to divide you from Christ, and from his Blood, that you
should have no share at all in him, when he moves you to conceive, and utter
such things: Saints are never above the Blood of Christ; they are kept and
maintained by his Blood, even in their glorified estate, as well as thereby
promoted thereunto: And if the Blood of Christ does not keep you here on earth,
and wash you daily, and further you on in the way of all Grace, and in
opposition to Sin and Satan, you shall certainly never enjoy his presence and
communion in the world to come. To put the Blood of Christ out of the honor of
employment, and not to depend upon it, is a fearful way to be utterly rejected:
Christ of his mercy preserve you, dear Sister. But I may say with Isaiah, Stand
and wonder, they are drunken, but not with wine; Is any such language to be
found in any corner of the Scripture? or did any of the Apostles ever say they
were above the Blood of Christ? would they not have defied such a speech?

But unto all this you add, That Christ has no humane body; and that he shall
not appear to the world any more in a visible manner; that his second coming is
his coming in his Saints, whereby they are taken up into the nature of God, and
are as truly Christ, as Christ himself, and partake in the fullness of the
Godhead no less then Christ; yea, that they are one with God, their very Being
is God: Dreadful to think upon, much more to speak, or write, or meditate upon;
Who has bewitched you, that you should fall into such Errors? Hardly any in
the world, which have known you in former time, would have thought or dreamed,
that you should ever have fallen so deeply from your Faith: If this be your New
Light, God preserve me, and all good people from it. But you will say, I am in
darkness, and you in light, and that I am no meet Judge; The time was you would
not so say: But if you question it now, how shall it be tried? Is not the
Scripture to be our Rule? To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to the word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. And
does not all Scripture plainly affirm, and the Churches, and Martyrs, and
Witnesses of Truth all along affirm, That Christ has a true humane body? He
could not properly arise nor ascend, but in his flesh; and is he not for ever
God revealed in the flesh? 1 Timothy 3.16. and after his Glorification, is he not
called 1 Timothy 2.5.
The man Christ Jesus? and the Rev. 13.5,6.
Tabernacle of God, by reason of the flesh, Rev. 13.5,6. and in whom the
Godhead is said to dwell bodily? for the same cause, Col. 1. is he not said to
have a life given him for ever and ever? Isa. 53.10. Psalm. 21.4. Rev. 1.18. And
if he had not carried his real body into Heaven, he would have left it in the
Grave behind, he would not have eaten and drunken in it, for to show the
reality of his body, and that he was no spirit, as the Disciples imagined; he
would not have offered his body to be handled, the print of the nails to be
felt, for the proof of the truth, and reality thereof: And that he shall
visibly appear again unto the world, it appears, Because the same body he
carried up, with the same he must return again to Judgment; Psa. 110.1. Acts 3.
and therefore it is said, Acts 17.31. He has appointed a day wherein he will
judge the world, by that MAN whom he has ordained. It is a sick and irksom
labor, to multiply places about a point so clear. But what Scripture or Reason
has showed you, That his second coming is his coming in his Saints, a mystical
coming: The plain words of Scripture are ever against you, neither can they be
applied otherwise, then by making them a nose of wax; This Jesus whom you have
seen going into heaven, shall so come as ye have seen, Acts 1. I saw a white
throne, and one sat thereon, Rev. 20.11. Behold, he comes with clouds, Rev.
1. Matthew. 24. and 25. If you turn these things into Allegories, nothing can be
certain. And, would not Christ and his Apostles have told us so in some place
or other, if this coming were only figurative? add, That if this be
figurative, other things annexed are also figurative, and nothing plain; and
this were to make a chaos and confusion of the Scriptures: It grieveth me to
spend time, when matters are so evident. Of like nature is that which you
grossly hold, that There is no Resurrection of the body; Read 1 Cor. 15. Dan.
12.2. Rev. 20.12,13,14. It irketh me to write in such cases.

Whereas you say, The Saints are Christ, one with God, their Being God; What
godly ear can hear such things, without defiance and abomination: If Saints are
so, if you are so, then are you without sin, as Christ, Omnipotent, Omniscient,
Infinite, to be worshipped and adored as God and Christ is. I will spit at
this, and say no more.

I understand also, that you can determine of the holy Scriptures, that much of
them is written with a humane spirit, can take or take not for Scripture, or
meaning of Scripture, only by the Rule of an apprehension and Revelation of
the Spirit, which you suppose your self to be guided by, and to have more of
then the Apostles had. The same Spirit which told you, that much of the
Scripture was written with a humane Spirit, may happily tell you at another time,
that all the Scripture is written with a humane Spirit, that there is no
certainty therein; yield to one, yield to all: But we know that the Prophets
and Apostles did all write, as guided by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 1. ult. 2
Pet. 3. Joh. 17. Rev. 21. He that receives you, receives me, John 13.

Now over and above all this, there are other horrid things in your Book, which
I have not seen, and Satan has been let loose to shut you up, and to imprison
you in your monstrous Heresies, by gates and bars, and to fetter and chain you
up, that all means might be frustrate, whereby we might have hope to bring you
forth: For if any thing from Scripture or Reason is brought against your
Opinions, which you cannot answer, you can shift it off with this, That you do
not so apprehend; thinking your apprehension to be infallible, and above Reason
or Scripture: How came you by such an apprehension? By what means came you to
know that it is infallibly directed, or may you not be praefident, in thinking
it to be so, when it is not? But surely, no Saint or Martyr since the Apostles,
ever challenged to themselves such an apprehension, for ought I find: And we
are all commanded to regulate our apprehensions by the Scripture, and not to
judge the Scriptures by ungrounded apprehensions: Thy word is a light unto my
paths, Psalm. 119. 2 Pet. 2. Mat. 4. for otherwise any Heretic may justify
himself by his apprehension, and there would be no way to confute Error. The
Apostles themselves, though infallibly directed, yet would subject their
Doctrine to the trial of the Scripture, as in the Bereans, and prove it unto
others by the Scripture, Romans 9. Gal. 4. Furthermore, in these days we cannot
tell, That our apprehensions are guided by the Spirit, but by the light of
Scripture: You will say, It is so with you, but how will you prove it to your
self or others? why may it not be the Spirit of Satan, which you think to be
the Spirit of God? I dare be bold to say, It is the Spirit of Satan, and not of
God, that so directs apprehensions, as not under the direction of the Word.

Dear Sister, with whom I have had sweet communion in the ways of God, let us
not now part at last, divided in Faith, Eternally divided: Were you not in the
Faith before you fell into these Opinions? and did you not then write unto me,
that you had full Assurance? Is all then lost, and nothing that was before,
that you have changed your Faith and your Religion? Is the Doctrine of your
Reverend Father, and of Dr. Twisse, and the Doctrine of the holy Martyrs, now
at last discovered to be Error, whom the Apocalypse does expressly style the
Witnesses of Truth? Whither will you run, dear Sister, from your Parents,
Friends, Church, Christ, God, and life Eternal? Have you no more strength, but
at the first assault to yield the Bucklers, and to give over your Faith, so
long professed, at the first push? If you had not Reason enough your self, yet
why did you not first enquire of those that might have helped you? I would
rather a hundred times you had perished by the Sword, then have thus fallen,
dishonored God and your Profession, and weakened the people of the Lord, and
shamed all your Friends, and laid up treasures of Correction for your
Posterity, and put your self in a suspicious way, at least, of losing the
heavenly Inheritance; Let me tell you plainly, I doubt there was some grievous
sin at bottom, as the Pride of Women, or Spiritual Pride, or something else,
that God has suffered you so horribly to fall away: Search your self, pray,
repent, humble your self, and turn betime. The instruments I know not who they
were; but I dare say, That in this particular they were messengers of Satan;
they might pretend to you singular Sanctity, and deceive you, by carrying
themselves as if they dropped down from Heaven, and came out of the bosom of
God: But all is not Gold that glistereth; both you and they, by reason of joys
and ravishments conceived in the Spirit, may think your selves to be in the
arms of God, and yet at last you may find your selves in the very arms of the
Devil, who knows how to transform himself into an Angel of light, being
cunning to deceive. I could give Examples to declare this; I should rather
rejoice to hear, that you were a mourner, poor in Spirit, and hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness, so should I know you to be in the very ready way
to the Kingdom of Glory, Matthew. 5. This is the state of Christians here on
earth, even those that have the most Assurance: The more Grace, the better they
think of others, the meaner of themselves; abasing themselves for the remnants
of sin they find behind, and mourning after more holiness in way of
mortificatio^. They which are not in an humbling way, are not in the way of
Heaven. O Sister! you seem to be lifted up, as if you were a goddess, and as if
all should bow unto you, as singularly beloved above others, yea as Christ
himself, and as one with God: What pride was ever to be matched with your
pride? What will be your end, if you humble not your self betime? Your state
requires sharp and hasty Remedies; bear with me therefore, that I sharpen my
style, to pull you out of the fire, wherein you are already flaming.

Your affectation and writing of Assurance did not formerly so well savor, and
your printing of a Book, beyond the custom of your Sex, does rankly smell; but
the exaltation of your self in the way of your Opinions, is above all: God will
never tolerate pride in his beloved ones be sure, and therefore I fear some
afterclaps. Hear me, dear Sister, renounce, cast off the Masters and Fomentors
of your Heresies, never receive their Letters any more, never answer them,
never admit them unto house, send unto them, That you will never have to do
with them any more: Think not that you are the better for your joys, or more
directed then others are; but only so far as you find your heart to be humbly
upon God in Christ, as the chiefest thing, in the way of his Truth, and in the
way of all his Commandments, according to the sincerity of Evangelical
endeavor. Your heart may be upon your own advancement above others, and not on
God, unless you look unto it. Your new Masters and Companions in Heresy, speak
fairly to you, and flatter you, and advance, and set you up on high, and this
is pleasing to the flesh; and when you are entangled in their Net, you are
unwilling to displease them, they are as close unto you as the Ivy to the wall,
and you cannot easily be separated. A man that flattereth his neighbor, lays
a snare for his feet, Prove. 29.5. O Sister, fly far from the house and corner
of these men and women, that lie in wait for your poor soul! Do you not plainly
see, that Satan is loosed in these times, and that there are many Heresies
scattered amongst Professors, which you your self do disallow? why do you not
suspect your self? I have endeavored, from the love of you, and from the desire
of the welfare of your soul, to put my one eye unto the work, and to write
these lines unto you; the Lord God only can give success: And I pray our Lord
Jesus Christ, That you may be turned, otherwise you seem to be in a suspicious
way, and in great danger to be a lost woman, a lost Sister, and lost eternally.
Here (as yet appears by his Letter) he had concluded; but upon second
thoughts proceeds.


I cannot tell how to make an end, it is a business of such importance that I
am about, and your Spiritual welfare is so much desired. I cannot yet but
comfortably hope, That God will bring you back again unto the Truth; I will
therefore answer some Objections to facilitate your return.

First, you may think, that It was not likely that God should cast you into
Error all this while, seeing you had immediately before so much communion with
him, and love unto him. But had not your Father and others as much love to God
as you, and as much experience of his goodness, whom he did never cast into
such Opinions? And if you had such experience of Gods goodness, and communion
with him in the time of your former Faith, why have you then revolted from that
Faith, which God by his Spirit has so much witnessed unto? But Sister, you are
a weak woman, and ignorant of the wiles of Satan, and may easily be lifted up;
so that although I do hope that you had some true communion with God, yet I do
believe that it was exceedingly mixed with Spiritual pride, for which God has
been angry with you, and has given you up to Heresies, as was said before.
Some Christians, by reason of their joys and raptures, have gotten lofty eyes,
and eyelids, highly lifted up above their brethren, censuring them, slighting,
contemning them in comparison of themselves, which it may be have more true and
real grace, in way of Humility and Mortification then they: They rejoice not
humbly, but in a proud singularity of communion and enlargements above others,
and seem to themselves as Angels, in comparison of others, great in their own
conceits, not mourners in the sense of their own filthiness and indigency, nor
thinking others better then themselves. This God hates and abhors in all
Christians, and will surely punish it; humble therefore your self for this sin,
and any other, and be sure that God in the way of returning will accept you.
And indeed my hope is, That God has suffered you to fall, that he might do you
infinite good thereby, and bring you nearer, and more purely to himself then
ever before, by purging your Spiritual pride, and making you the more humble
all your life after; which God grant, for his tender Mercies sake in Christ.

Secondly, It will be grievous to you to renounce that Society which has
furthered you in your new and horrid Opinions, crept in within you, and engaged
you, and as it were adored you. But dear Sister, have you so much respect to
your new upstart friends, and it may be with whose spirits you were never
thoroughly acquainted, as for their sakes to neglect your old and sure friends,
your Father, Mother, Husband, Brothers, Sister, Uncles, and all the rest? But
if they are in Error, as I have showed them to be, will you follow them to
Hell? I pray you harden your face against them as brass, and set your
countenance as iron; and be not so weak, and childish, and flexible, as to
yield to your own destruction: say as that worthy Convert did, unto his
following old society, when he turning, said, Ego non sum Ego, I am not the man
that I was.

Thirdly, this will be another block in the way, That your Opinions are in
print. But Sister, (alas, alas) by reason of your Book, you are (as I am
credibly informed) printed by Name in the Catalogue of the Heretics of this
time, as one of the infamous Apostates: Redeem your name and credit amongst
Saints, which now is lost, by protesting against that horrid Book, and by
humbling your self for an attempt above your gifts and Sex.

Fourthly, there is yet another block or hindrance to your return, which I
doubt will be stronger then any beforementioned, whereby Satan has you as it
were in chains of iron, and hops so to hold you, that you shall never be able
to get out: But yet the Lord Jesus Christ is able to break the fetters of iron,
and chains of brass; and therefore hoping in his Mercy, I will say something:
Satan will tell you, dear Sister, That Your Opinions are upon your Conscience,
and you have given way unto them upon Conscience, and you have had long, and
sweet, and heavenly raptures in the way of them, and have put off thereby all
your former doubts, and fears, and servility: Will you deny your Opinions so
long professed? will you go against your Conscience therein, at least with a
doubting Conscience? will you return to your former fears and slaveries, and
call again your state into question? Will you now become a creeper, who were in
way of your Opinions advanced unto Heaven? yea, Will you now become meaner and
lower then the meaner sort of Christians, by professing your self to have all
this while been miscarried and misguided by an evil Spirit? O Sister, you have
gone by fancy and not by Reason, by an ungrounded apprehension and not by
Scripture, by a Conscience without a Rule, made by Conceit, and not by the Word
of God; ground your conscience by the word, and harden your Spirit like steel,
to break that conscience that has been grounded upon vanity, upon conceit, and
fancy and imagination, upon which you did not ground your conscience before you
fell, neither your worthy Father, nor any of the holy Martyrs, which are surely
gone to Heaven, as the Apocalypse does testify. All Scriptures are evidently
against you, and the profession of all the Church before you: If Satan has
made his pills of death sweet unto you, and has covered them with delight, and
made you vainly to believe, That it is God and Christ that dwells in you,
working such heavenly refreshments, will you take them down unto your
destruction? The longer you have yielded, so much the more hasty be to break
off, lest you be confirmed in a pernicious way: Fear not to return to the
truth; it is better to go in way of truth with some doubts and fears, then in
way of Heresy to perish: And the more low and mean Christian you shall be in
your own eyes, the higher shall you be in the eyes of God, and of all good
Christians. Some haste too fast in putting off their fears; let God put them
off in way of truth and Scripture, or not at all: It is often best for
Christians to be under some fears, that they may be humble, that they may
fight, and overcome, and be crowned; that in way of Mortification, they may
make their Calling and Election sure; and if you shall return, all Saints will
meet you, and rejoice with you, yea the Angels will rejoice for you, and Christ
himself, For this my child was dead, but she is alive again; she was lost, but
she is found again.

Fifthly, Satan may say unto you, that If you shall renounce your Opinions, you
shall have no ground to stand upon, you shall justly question whether you had
ever Grace or no, you shall despair. But Sister, you had well-grounded
Assurance before you fell into these Errors; I am witness my self thereof, to
whom you writ to that effect. A Saint may fall, and grossly be deceived for a
time, only he shall return again; he may not be dead, but asleep only: So I
do persuade my self of you, though I have written somewhat roughly, to awaken
you the more. O that I might hear that you were returned; you have no cause to
despair, but only to be humbled: and this I hope is the only end of the
Divine permission. Return to your former Principles, dear Sister, with
confession and repentance, therein live and dye, and I doubt not but that you
shall live with Christ for ever; but if you never had grace, yet there is no
cause of despairing, forasmuch as grace is freely offered at all times to them
that do come in by Faith and true Repentance, through the blood of Christ;
only it must be such a Faith, and such a Repentance, whereby we cleave to God
in Christ, as the chiefest good, and in the way of sincere endeavor of all
Obedience, and of forsaking every opposite thing.

You cannot now but take so large a Letter, from a Brother, so defective and
weak in sight, and so much otherwise employed, to be an Argument of great
desire of the welfare of your soul, and of the importance and necessity of your
condition. The Lord God grant, for Christ's sake, that my labor may not be in
vain. Salute all my friends as named, my dear Brother your Husband; thanking
you for all kindenesses, I rest,

Newbury, Novem. 1648. Your loving Brother, THO: PARKER.

FINIS.

