THE TRVE COPY OF A LETTER: Written By Mr. Thomas Parker, a learned and godly
Minister, in New England, unto a Member of the Assembly of Divines now at
Westminster.

Declaring his judgment touching the Government practiced in the Churches of
NEW ENGLAND.

Imprimatur.

Ja. Cranford



feb: 19 LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold
at his shop, at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange.
1644. 1643

THE COPY OF A LETTER.
Loving Brother,
MY eyes do yet serve me, though with much difficulty; and therefore I will
spend some part of their last strength in writing a word or two unto you. I
desire to mourn with you, for the sore afflictions of the Church, and for those
in particular which you have suffered, and my poor Sister, and Mother, with
you. I hope the Lord does bear up your hearts by Faith and Patience, and that
you do rejoice under hope of the glory that shall follow He that shall come
will come, according to promise.

I presume you are in the number of those, which are gathered into a Synod now
at London; and therefore I write unto you as being there.

I suppose you are so prepared and qualifyed by these present afflictions,
beside all your learning and sufficiency of parts, that God will discover great
things by you.

I assure you we have great need of help in the way of discipline, and we
hope that we shall receive much light from you. My cousin Noise and my self,
have seen such confusion of necessity depending on the government which has
been practiced by us here, that we have been forced much to search into it
within these two or three years.

And although we hold a fundamental power of government in the people, in
respect of election of Ministers, and of some acts in cases extraordinary, as
in the want of Ministers; yet we judge, upon mature deliberation, that the
ordinary exercise of government must be so in the Presbyters, as not to depend
upon the express votes and suffrages of the people. There has been a Convent,
or meeting, of the Ministers of these parts, about this question, at Cambridge,
in the Bay; and there we have proposed our arguments, and answered theirs; and
they proposed theirs, and answered ours: and so the point is left to
consideration. Also concerning admission of Members, we hold, the rule must
be so large, that the weakest Christians may be received; and there was,
according to appearance, much conjunction in this particular: Pray for us, as
we do for you.

From Newbury in New England, December. 17. 1643. Your Brother, true and faithful
in the Lord, THOMAS PARKER.

FINIS.

