MASTER PIMMES SPEECH TO THE LORDS IN PARLIAMENT, Sitting in Westminster Hall,
the twelfth of April, 1641.

MASTER PIMMES Speech to the Lords in Parliament, sitting in Westminster Hall,
the twelfth of April. 1641.
My Lords,
THere has been much time spent to prove our Charge, and your Lordships have
heard my Lord of Straffords defense with as much patience. You have also heard
our Evidence summed up whereby we have proved that he has by traiterous words,
Counsels and actions, traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws
of England and Ireland, and in stead thereof, to introduce an arbitrary and
tyrannical government against Law. This (my Lords) is that poisonous Arrow
that has tainted his blood, this is that Cup of deadly wine that has
intoxicated him.

My Lords, It comes to my share to show you how mischievous an Act of Treason
it is by that Law that he has appealed unto, which is the supreme Law (to wit)
public good, for his Position was this, That Salus populi, is Suprema Lex. All
Laws are derived from this as its Fountain, and end here as its proper
Center. And those Actions that are opposite to this are against Law.

First, My Lords, It is such an offense as comprehends all offenses, such a
Treason as comprehends all treasons.

The earth (my Lords) is a Seminary of all flowers, so is this a Seminary of
all offenses.

My Lords, this Law puts a difference betwixt good and evil; take away the Law
(my Lords) and Nature becomes a Law to it self. As Pride will be a Law, Lust
will be a Law, Rapine a Law, Treason, a law, which Laws have ruled in Ireland
ever since my Lord came thither.

Take away the Kings protection from the people, and you take away the peoples
allegiance to the King. Prerogative is the bounds of liberty, and (my Lords)
they must not contest one against another.

My Lords, I beseech you consider, ye have all under this custody; and if you
take away this, you take away your goods, liberties and lives.

My Lords, he says, that Ireland was a conquered Nation, why? were not all
Nations conquered? England, Wales, etc.

The next is this, that it is an offense full of danger to the Kings person and
Crown, it nourishes dissension and tumults in a people. If you consider the
histories of the Nations under arbitrary government, you shall find them full
of cruelty and bloody Massacres; yea, if you please to peruse our English
histories, you shall find that when Arbitrary government was set up, how many
Kings fell by cruel and bloody hands, which is fearful to relate.

Thirdly, my Lords, It is dangerous to the King, First, in respect of his
honor, Secondly, in respect of his profit, and Thirdly, in respect of his
greatness: yet all these have been put on upon the face of this treason as so
many vizards, can it be (my Lords) for the Kings honor, to have his Ministers
to lay all the fault upon the King? To kill, to imprison, to use Rapine, to
levy war against his people, and to ruin the State, and then all these
dishonorable acts to be laid on the King? Is this for the Kings honor?

Secondly, it is contrary to his profit, for if there be not an affectionate
supply from the people to the King, he can never grow in his revenue.

Nay, this (my Lords) is the Kings most certain Revenue, that issues from the
affection of his people, for other Revenue, as Lands, or the like, are subject
to many Inconveniences, to many substractions and pensions, but this is free
and wholly to himself, these fourteen years past, since there has been an
unhappy cessation of Parliamentary proceedings, the King has had less
revenue, and it does him less good.

Nay, there has been more wanting to the King, than many years before.
Again, it is unprofitable, and that is worse, for the King lost by it, for it
has cost him these two years more than it cost Queen Elizabeth in all her
wars in Ireland and Spain, yea, (I fear) more than is to be repaired in an
age.

Thirdly, in point of greatness; the World is a society of Kingdoms, and it
is not enough for a King to be great at home, but to equal his fellow Princes
abroad: Nay to be above them in honor and Majesty, in Riches and glory.

But my Lords these Counsels of late that have bin given his Majesty, have
rendered him contemptible to his enemies, useless to his distressed friends,
and had they not been prevented, in time would have made him incapable of any
design at home or abroad.

A fourth Consideration is this, my Lords, it is destructive to wealth and
valor; it corrupts our peace: and in peace, makes us have the malignities of
war, and for wealth; who will venture his goods, life, his liberty in the
way of trading and Commerce, when he knows not upon the return of it, whether
it be his own or not.

Nay, my Lords, it imbaseth the spirits, and valor of a Nation, when they must
stand in fear of pilloring, scaffolding, and the like punishments, it makes
men to be of base spirits.

Now my Lords, to imbase the Kings Coin, if it be but six pence, or twelve
pence, it is treason by the Law, and a man must die for it: what is it then to
imbase our spirits, my Lords? truly it is a matter of great importance.

Fifthly it does disable the King, and makes him unfit to deal with foreign
enemies, for every one thinks to slip his neck out of the Collar, when he
shall be forced to it.

The sixth Consideration is, that it is against the Covenant betwixt the King
and his people.

Before my Lords I spoke of a Legal Oath, but now I speak of a personal, for
we swear our allegiance to him, and he the maintenance of our Laws to us: he
is our husband, and we his wife; he is our Father, and we his children: he is
to maintain our liberties, and we his Dignities, and our duties.

And my Lords, Justice Thorpe was condemned and executed, for breaking the
Kings Oath: My Lords, he broke not his own oath, nor did the King break his
oath, and yet for violating that oath, that the King had taken to his Subjects,
he suffered.

Ah what an unfortunate man then is the Prisoner at the Bar, that has in all
his Counsels, in all his words, in all his actions, broken the Kings Oath, and
as much as in him lay, violently persuaded the King to countenance him in all
his actions?

The seventh consideration is this my Lords, it is against the end of
government, for the end of government is to preserve men in their estates,
lives, and liberties, but an Arbitrary power destroys all this: the end of
government is to advance virtue and goodness, and to punish vice: but this
cherishes all disorder.

Now my Lords, I come to show the vanity of his excuses, that he has made for
himself.

The first is the liberty of giving Counsel, being a Counselor, true my
Lords, he has this liberty, but its bounded within its lists, and it must be
such a Counsel as must stand with the sacred Majesty, and the prosperity and
weal of his Subjects, for if Counsel be bad, it poisons the Consciences of
Princes, it infects their ears, for all Government proceeds from the Prince,
as from a Fountain; now if the fountain be poisoned, how can the streams be
free?

A second shift is, that he hopes your Lordships will be careful to secure
your posterity, and not to admit of this as Treason.

My Lords, I know your Lordships will be careful to secure your selves, but by
your virtues, not by your vices.

The third excuse is, the goodness of his intentions: truly, my Lords, good
and evil lie close together, not easily to be discerned, if they be natural
corruptions, but for Murders, Adultery, Rapines, and Treasons, these are so
monstrous, that they may easily be distinguished.

And I cannot be persuaded that ever he intended well, that acted so ill.

The fourth excuse is the Kings necessities.

My Lords this necessity came from his own counsels.

A fifth excuse is, that it was for the Kings honor, and the maintenance of
the Kings power.

My Lords, it has been declared unto you, that the Kings power does not
extend to any thing against Law, by which he has sworn to rule us, and to
maintain our Liberties and privileges for us, and this has been declared by
five Parliaments, and also will appear in the cafe of the Pitition of Right,
and in the case of Ship Money.

A sixth is, that he advised the King to do it with moderation and reparation.

My Lords this is a contradiction, for there can be no reparation for this.

The seventh excuse is, that no horrid facts did follow his Counsels: truly my
Lords we thank God, his facred Majesty, and his wise Counsel for that, or
else God knows what fearful things would have befallen us, nor are we free
from it as yet.

To conclude, now my Lords, give me leave to entreat you to consider the
Treasons ordinarily practiced, when the act is done, they cease as in killing
that noble King of France, and the several plots against Queen Elizabeth, but
this treason of my Lord of Straffords, is a standing treason, which when it had
been done, it had been permanent from generation to generation.

And now my Lords, these Laws that he would have overthrown, must now be his
Judges, and he is to be judged by Law, and that law will have mark enough of
it to describe it, for it is a Law against such as break the fundamental Law
of the Kingdom.

And my Lords give me leave to inform you that under favor this is not to
make a new way for blood, nor is the crime of Treason in my Lord of Strafford
the less, because none would venture upon such a horrid Treason, in two
hundred and forty years.

But my Lords, for the making of our Charge good by Law, as we have fully
proved it by Testimony, we must resort to Counsel with the house of Commons,
and trust to your Lordships Justice.

FINIS.

