Pyms Juncto.
TRuth I could chide you, Sirs, why how so late?
My watch speaks eight, and not one pin o'th State
As yet undone? can such remissenes fit
Your active spirits, or my hellish wit?
Each step the Sun amounts to heavens crown
(Whiles Pym comands) must see a kingdom down.
I Am sure you have spurs enough to make you run,
Guilt hopes, cracked fortunes, and the ils y've done.
Thus whylome seated was, great James his heir
Just as you see me now in the Kingdoms chair.
There the great Seal, there Richmond, Hartford sat,
There Marshal, Dorset, Bristols temperate pate,
But there sat Pembrock life of loyalty,
There Holland flower of fidelity.
We are no less then Charles in power and state,
You are our juncto now, as his of late.
Here sits Kimbolton, holy Say and Seal,
With Wharton, Warwick, Brooks inspired zeal:
Strood, Hampden, Hollis, Haslerig bold spirits,
Fynes, Martin, Ludlow, vain unmatched weights:
But there Church-elder White, religious Beard,
There sits abomination, statest Peard:
Charles bide at Oxford ^hy Crown that pretty thing
We must most humbly be at London King.
But what is the business of the House to day?
How speaks my notes? Commissions of Array.
The ninteen Propositions to be sc^n'd
A second time, Manchestets trained Band:
Letters from Tristram, Whitcum, and from Hull,
From Amsterdam, the Admiral, how full
Of high concernments are we? Sirs advise
How we most warily may play our prize:
I do conceive it must be our first play
(Be It right or wrong) by vote to damn the Array.
If ever that take footing, or advance,
Farewell Militia, and our Ordinance.
What will the appearance be do you think? yet stay
Who dares our leading votes, by votes gainsay?
Should any haughty spirits presume so far,
What serves the Tower for then? or what the bar?
But if we see the business will not bend
As may be most conducing to our end
By some fine way, it must be our next plot
To put it off, and a new time alot
And just jump for our turn: some letters shall
From Whitcombe, Hotham, and our Admiral,
(Though forged in truth) be interposed and read,
To spend the time, and maze the peoples head.
If the next day, we yet suspect to find
Such whose just consciences cannot be inclinde
To be made vassalls, to our desperate s^nse
It is easy to procure a conference
Which shall out spin the leisure of the morn,
Then weel resume the House, and so adjourne
Till five at night, the moderate (wearied thus)
Will quit their seats, and leave here none but us:
There Is president for that, this was the feat
That plucked the Bishops from the Barons seat.
This wrought good orders, many and many a vote,
This Art must my Disciples get by rote.
But if the Accommodation chance to spring
Into debate, your whole Artillery bring,
And lay that flat: that calmed, my Genious starts
With fear, to find in the House too loyal hearts:
Seem (though) we must teeth outward to comply
And humbly kiss the feet of Majesty:
Yet live we cannot, unles, obedience dead,
Nor stand else where, but on the Kingdoms head.
Calms proper are for guiltless sons of peace,
Our vessels bear best out in troubled seas.
Charles must not reign secure, whilst rules a Pym.
The Sun if rise wi^h us, must set with him:
You have our pleasure, which let be expressed
To Pemhrock, Stamford, Roberts, and the rest,
Bid Essex, Piercy, and the quandam groom
O'th stool a wait us in the painted room.
Some of you subtily may in Cottens walk,
Sit and allure affections by your talk;
'Twill be a work worthy your nimblest wit.
To gain the Devil and us a Proselite:
So, to your business, yet ere you be gone,
Take this advice, then blessings light upon
Your nimble pates, first be you sure you shroud
Your dark designs in a religious cloud.
Gods glory, Churches good, King head, suprem,
A preaching Ministry must be your theme;
Next structure of you Babell, to be built,
Must speciously be varnisht over and guilt,
With liberties and proper^y of lives
And fortune* against high stretched prerogatives,
And then a speech or two is fitly spent
For rights and privileges of Parliament.
These two well mixed you will need no other lures
To gain the people, and to make them yours:
If Charles displeased, with some witty tart
Message (and justly too) shall make you start,
Saying, you have put him to his guard, be sure
You then cry loud enough, and first cry whore
War raised against the Parliament, and great
Hindrance of the Irish aid, and strong abet
Unto the Rebels, then if any thing
You have may blast the honor of the King,
Be It nere so bad, no matter from what hand,
We Will vote it true, and then believe command.
But on your memories I Will impose no more,
You cannot miss the way when I Am before.
Rise Cincua, Scillae, Marius, Graccus ghosts,
And thou worst Cataline, with all thine hosts
Romes greatest earthquake, and this little trunk
Makes with your desperate spirits, deeply drunk
Up from your drowsy urnes, the ghosts of those
(My Ancestors) that Richard did depose.
Drop fresh into my breast, my soul inspire,
And strongly actuate me with your fire.
That these thus mixed with my malicious gall,
Mine may with theirs fully possess you all:
Go, and exceed the mischiefs as much more
As theirs did all ire attempts which were before
Act past example, that it may be known
You copied no example but your own:
And if in after times when silently
We sleep, another firebrand chance to be,
'Twill be chief crown, and glory unto him
To say he escaped his plots like you and Pym.
Finis.
Oxford, Printed for Will. Web. 1643.


