SVSANNA'S Apology against the ELDERS.

OR A Vindication of SUSANNA PARR; one of those two Women lately Excommunicated
by Mr LEWIS STVCLEY, and his Church in Exeter.

Composed and Published by her self, for the clearing of her own Innocence,
and the Satisfaction of all others, who desire to know the true Reason of their
so rigorous Proceedings against her.

Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation. Prove. 26.26. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea
the time comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God
service. Joh. 16.2. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp,
bearing his reproach, Heb. 13.13. Printed in the Year, 1659.

To the Impartial READER.
IT is a thorny path, and a myrie way that I am compelled to walk in; a way
wherein there is a danger of loosing more in all likelihood, rather then of
regaining what is already lost. A way, the walking wherein, all the comfort I
have, is the hope of getting out of it at last, and so it concerns me to hasten
as fast as I can. In it I meet with the Enemies Sword, covered over with zeal
for God and his glory, when as nothing of this has appeared in the least,
either in the work, or in the managing thereof: Satan is now transformed into
an Angel of light, But my hope is, that he will in the end appear to be no
other than he is, a prince of darkness, a black grisely Devil, Jealousy, and
censorious Slander, the discovery of which, is the work I am at present
engaged in, the design of this following Vindication: a work it is no less
difficult and dangerous, then troublesome, and unpleasing, in respect of my
self who write, the things whereof I write, and the persons against whom I
write.

Weakness is entailed upon my Sex in general, and for my self in particular,
I am a despised worm, a woman full of natural and sinful infirmities; the
chiefest of Sinners, and least* of Saints: should the Lord contend with me, I
must lay my hand upon my mouth, I must acknowledge him to be just and righteous
in suffering them to deal thus with me; neither should I put my self to the
trouble of a Vindication, but leave the clearing of my Innocence to that day
which he has appointed to judge the world in righteousness. I have cause to
remember, and be ashamed before the Lord, there being Iniquity even in my holy
things; yet as to them, my heart does not reproach me, but on the contrary, I
have great cause of rejoicing, in the uprightness of my heart, as to the
things of God, and in my abundant love and affections unto them, my heart was
enlarged in love toward them, and therefore my mouth was opened upon all
occasions for their good: though I was of a stamering Tongue, slow of speech,
and wanted eloquence, yet the desire I had of their perfection, made me forward
to speak to them in general, and in particular: the Lord knows I lie not, my
conscience also bearing me witness. I mourned with them that mourned, rejoiced
with them that rejoiced; when any were under temptations, or afflictions, I did
labor to sympathiz^ with them, as if they were mine own, and did engage for
them at the Throne of Grace as for my self. And as for that which I did oppose
among them, it was matter of mourning unto me, when I apprehended the glory of
Christ, and their particular interest, could not stand together, I then
withstood them, resolving not to spare any that stood in the way of Christ, and
the Gospels enlargement. It is my comfort that the Lord sees not as man sees,
man looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart: not
he that commends himself, but he whom the Lord commends is approved.
Though they have proceeded to Censure me, and have been full of Cursing and
bitterness, returning evil for good; yet I shall pray, Lord lay not this sin
to their charge: they know not what Spirit they are of.

Besides my personal weaknesses, the many Family-cares that lie upon me, must
needs unfit me for such a work, and very much disinable me to write even of
those things which were newly done, and fresh in my memory, much more to write
of these, which they charged me with, being some of them transacted Seven or
Eight years since: In the laying down of which, if my memory should fail me, I
need not tell thee (if thou know Mr. Stucley and his Congregation) what an
improvement they will make thereof, for the justifying of their late
unchristian Censure, of whom I have cause to complain, as the Church in the
words of Jeremiah, Lam. 3.53. they have cut off my life in the dungeon, and
cast a stone upon me, which they threaten to eternity. Surely they who have
been so wicked as to censure me without any ground, will not stick to take hold
of the least occasion for the maintaining of it, and though I have in part been
cleared by the Ministers of Exeter from their forged accusations, who received
me jointly into communion with them, yet my Adversaries being so crafty,
cruel, and powerful, it will be no hard matter for them to bear down all
their gainsayers; whosoever shall dare to contradict them, unless the Lord
himself take them in hand, and then though they are mightier then I, yet they
will find to their cost, that he is higher then they, to him I have committed
my way, in him is my trust, therefore my confidence is, that he will bring it
to pass, seeing my undertaking is not so much for my self, as for the Lord,
for his servants and for his people.

It cannot be (whatever Mr Stucley says to the contrary, p. 46. of his answer
to Mr Toby Allen.) but that a slur is cast (by their censuring me) on the
Ministers and people of God, in this City, it must needs reflect very much on
them, who have received such a daughter of Belial; such a liar, etc. (as he
tells the world confidently enough I am) into communion and fellowship with
them. I look on it as my duty, to keep the house of God pure, to the uttermost
of my power, which in this case I cannot do, without clearing my self from
those crimes laid to my charge. Had Mr Stucley dealt ingeniously with his
Readers, in discovering the right and true grounds of his Excommunication
(viz:) my hearing another Minister, whiles I was with them, and after my
leaving them, my refusing to return, unless I might have the liberty of
communion with other of Gods people in this City, then it would have been
apparent, that their censuring me was no other then the smiting of the
watchmen, for seeking after my beloved, and so have freed me from a great
deal of trouble: But seeing he has dealt so craftily as to omit them, and lay
other things to my charge in their place, it will be worth the while a little
to uncase him in his co^parisons, for the undeceiving of those, who (by his two
Books) may be persuaded to think that Mris Allen and my self are indeed
children of hell, and fitter for fellowship with damned spirits, then to be
associates of the Lords people; p. 11. True Acc: And that they on the other
side are a self denying people, trampling the world under their feet, keeping
judgment and doing righteousness at all times, having their hands filled with
both the Tables, and an equal respect to all Gods Commandments, page 13.

To this end I shall declare,

First, the ground of my joining with them; and here I cannot but take shame to
my self, for being so rash; as because of their specious pretenses, to forsake
the society of Gods people, and join with them, before I saw what work they
woul make.

Secondly, the manner of our joining together, and my coming in unto them.

Thirdly, some remarkable passages, I observed whiles I was with them, together
with my behavior in reproof, admonition, and admission of members.

Fourthly, declare the grounds of the difference between us, and of my leaving
them, and also how I left them.

Lastly, wipe off the reproaches they have cast upon me, since my leaving them.

All which I shall set upon in the strength of Christ, who is able to make the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty: And never had a poor creature greater cause to
fly for refuge to the hope set before me in the Gospel, to get within the
veil, and shroud my self under the wings of the Almighty, till these
calamities be overpast, then I have: my enemies are many, and I am single; they
wise, or rather crafty, I simple; they mighty, I weak; they have witnesses (as
Mr Stucley affirms) I none; and which is worst of all, by accusing me of
lying, by making me a notorious liar, they have endeavored to stop the ears
of the people, and take them off from believing, and giving credit to what I
write: so that if the Lord does not bring forth my righteousness as the light,
and my judgment as the noone day, I can look for none other then to become a
Prey (by my writing) unto those who wait for my halting, who have (as far as
I can perceive) taken up a resolution, (according to the Elders threatening) to
make my going away cost me dearer, then my coming among them, its true, I have
not yet resisted unto blood, yet I know not how soon I may, they have
endeavored to deprive me of my good name, which is of more worth then riches,
and the next in esteem to life it self. And what they will do next, had they
power in their hands, the Lord knows! it is to be feared that they who have
been so forward to Smite with the Tongue, will not be backward to strike with
the hand, when occasion shall serve: The Papists, when they had put a Cap upon
the head of John Husse, on which were painted several ugly devils, presently
after cast him into the fire: if that which was his lot, and the lot of other
servants of God, be mine, the will of the Lord be done: It is my resolution to
part with all, rather then return to such a backsliding, and self seeking
people: And therefore my request is unto you, the Ministers of Christ in this
Nation, that you would take my case into your serious consideration, and call
Mr Stucley to an account, for his disorderly smiting his fellow servants: That
you, who have so openly declared against Separation, and charged it as a duty
on strayers to return into the fold of Christ, would encourage others to
follow our example, by defending us against the assaults and endeavors of
those who have dealt so outragiously with us, upon no other account then our
leaving them, and returning unto you, as it will appear in the following
Narrative and Vindication, from which I shall no longer detain you, but
conclude and shut up all with this request, that you would in the examination
of what I have said, not look to words or expressions which may not be so
fitly placed, but to the things themselves, and the truth of them, which was
the chief aim (in writing) of her, who still professes herself to be an
engaged servant to Jesus Christ in Gospel bonds

SUSANNA PARR.

NARRATIVE.
We were told in the time of the Wars, that when the Lord did turn our
Captivity, there must be a thorough Reformation, every thing must be brought to
the pattern in the Mount; and by some, that rather no Reformation, then a
partial Reformation; and in special, the last war by many was styled a
Sacramental war.

Considerations of this nature made me willing to engage where was most purity
as to the Ordinances, and the great affection and good opinion I had of the
New England Churches, made me in liking with the Congregationall way: Besides
it is well known, Explicit Cov.
how much was spoken of a Church State, and the privileges thereof: A greater
effusion of the Spirit, more purity and holiness, more union and communion,
more liberty of Conscience, and freedom from that yoke of being servants unto
men, in this Church State, then could be found elsewhere: Many such
considerations made me engage in this way, which we did after this manner.

Mr Stucley being at Torrington, and coming often to this City, speaking very
much in commendation of Mr Bartlets Church at Brideford, and the order therein,
and also exhorting me, and others to meet together, telling us that we did not
live like Christians, because we had not communion one with another, and that
we must come together, so that we might be in a capacity of having the
ordinances; we thereupon met very often, the time was spent in praying, and
speaking one to another, what God had done for our souls: And to this we were
enjoined secrecy, the reason was given, because we might be put upon such
temptations (if it were known) as we could not resist. This practice we
continued once or twice a week for a long time, M. Stucley promising to be at
our meetings, which he accordingly performed sometimes. At length some of us
desired to have the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and because of that
confusion which was among us, in that we wanted abilities for the right
managing of our weekly Exercises, we desired likewise to have a Minister, M.
Hanmer was pitched upon by some, but opposed by others, in the end we agreed to
leave it to M. Barlet of Brideford, whether M. Hanmer, or M. Stucley was the
fittest for us, hereupon we sent messengers to M. Bartlet, who when they came
to his house found M. Stucley himself there, M. Bartlet told the messengers,
he conceived M. Stucley was fittest for the present: but however he would
acquaint M. Hanmer with the business, which he did, but M. Hanmer refused it.
After this M. Stucley came to continue in this City, yet not quitting
Torrington till the means was settled on him here. And now again some of us
(the greater number were very indifferent) renewed our former desires of having
the Sacrament, and sent about it to M. Bartlet, who said, we were not as yet in
a capacity to have that Ordinance, that it was necessary we should be first in
a Gospel order embodied: and said moreover, that then we should see much of
God, that the day of our embodying would be such a day as we had never seen. A
while after M. Bartlet came to the City with his Church officers, he himself
prayed and preached on Zech. 6.12. in the ^^^ning, afterward seven or eight
persons spoke out the experiences they had of the change of their condition,
with which I was much affected, and through M. Stucleys persuasion did the
like. Afterward there was a confession of faith read, being a Copy of that
which was composed by M. Hughes, which Copy we had not from the Author, but
from another, this confession of faith was subscribed by every one of us. And
then M. Bartlet made some proposals unto us by way of quaere, to this effect as
I remember.

1. Whether we would take Christ for our Judge, King, and Lawgiver.

2. Whether we would renounce all ways of false worship?

3. Whether we would worship God in all his Ordinances?

4. Whether we would give up our selves to the Lord, and one to another, and
would engage our selves in all duties of Christianity each unto other?

5. Whether we would hold communion with other Churches?

6. Whether we would relieve the Saints that were in Communion, according to
our ability?

7. Whether we would not rest in the light that we had received, but would
study to know the mind of God, and live up unto it?

This is the substance of our engagement, as I remember. At this time and
somewhile after, there was never a woman of the Church but my self, and yet at
every meeting about Church affairs Master Stucley would send for me, and when
I pleaded for my absence (at such times) from the meetings, that of the
Apostle, Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permitted
unto them to speak; he replied, he would do nothing without the consent of the
whole. And when I was present, he himself would constrain me to speak my
opinion of things proposed.

We were (as I said formerly) very desirous of the Sacrament, in order to
which, our first work was to get a Minister that might administer it.

Although Master Stucley was with us, yet the people of Torrington claimed an
engagement from him, that Town having been visited with the plague, and
deprived of their Mininisters maintenance. Master Stucley (who was their
Minister) for those reasons left them; but with a promise of returning so soon
as the Lord should remove his hand, and sufficient maintenance for a Minister
should be procured, both which being at this time effected, we could not choose
him to be an Officer, until he were by them freed from his engagement: in
order hereunto much means was used, Master Bartlet was employed to persuade
them unto it; but they with one consent refused it, saying, that seeing he had
promised to return, they expected that he should keep promise with them.

Hereupon we wrote for counsel to some of the Congregationall Churches in
London, Master Feake, and Master Harrison (in their answers to our Letters)
affirmed that Master Stucley was bound in conscience to go unto Torrington:
that it would be dishonorable to the Gospel to leave them, unless he could
get their consent for his dismission. At length Master Stucley himself
accompanied with two or three of the Church rode thither, where having made an
agreement with the people, those that rode with him were called in to consent
thereunto, which they accordingly did.

At their return Master Stucley required each one of us to consent likewise
unto the agreement they made at Torrington, without declaring what it was;
which being done by all the men, he desired the sisters (there being other
women now added to the Church) to do the like, which my self and some others
refused, resolving that we would not act by an implicit faith. Master Stucley
thereupon said, that what was done was a Church act, because they who went with
him consented thereunto (viz.) that we were engaged to get a Minister for the
people of Torrington. Accordingly there was one procured, who continued with
them for a time.

This Serpentine subtilty of his I took special notice of, and did for it
reprove him to his face: we were in the mean time (and so continued for some
years) in a bewildred condition, without either of the Sacraments, some not
having their children baptized in a long time, others did procure some
Congregationall Minister to do it. And as for the Lords Supper, they who would
partake of it; rode to other places in the Country: most of the people were
very indifferent whether we had the Ordinances or no, seeking themselves,
getting places and offices, designing how they might build their own houses:
and as for Master Stucley himself, he was so distracted with Lawsuits,
Entangled with the world and money engagements, as that he was seldom with us
at our fasts and times of prayer.

Hence I began to suspect, that they intended nothing but separation, and
setting up of themselves and their own interests and designs, which did
exceedingly trouble me.

Upon our private fast days, when we had done praying, it was our custom
(for the help of those that were to pray) to spend a little time in Conference,
and at such times did I take occasion to speak of the disorders among us, and
told the^ plainly, that I feared we did separate from others more godly then our
selves, as Cain, who went out from the presence of the Lord to build cities;
that there was little regard had to what we at first pretended, the setting up
of pure ordinances; I often told them that I never heard or read in Scripture,
or other history, that the Lord did make use of a people of such an earthly,
lukewarm, and indifferent spirit, in any public work of reformation; that
it was not a party, or confederacy that I looked after, but to have the Gospel
more discovered in greater light and beauty; and the ordinances to be enjoyed
in greater purity: the beauty of Gods ornament to be set in Majesty, and more
purity and self-denial to appear in us, who had separated from all mixtures.

Because I conceive that purity lay only in this way, therefore was I very
forward and zealous in it, hoping to leave posterity the ordinances pure, and
the name of God glorious in the brightness of the Gospel: for this cause did I
deal so plainly with them; with which plain and faithful dealing, they
pretended many times to be much affected, and thereupon would do something more
in order to Religion, then they had formerly.

Master Stucley (as I said before) being troubled about the things of this
world, left us to our selves very often in our meetings: so that it is not to
be wondered at, if in them there were much strange fire, both in prayer and
exposition of the Scriptures, they being mere Novices, and in the entrance of
Christianity, and many of them scarce well principled, I feared that the name
of God was often taken in vain in prayer, sure I am that much ignorance, pride,
and self confidence, and a Diotrephes spirit strongly working, appeared in
many of them.

N.E.
One of them affirmed, that there was no iniquity of the holy things etc. this
being delivered without any caution when the meeting was public, I told him
of it in private the same day.

Owen.
Another who had formerly been an Anabaptist, then a Seeker, next (as I was
informed) a Papist, or little better, very much addicted to the study of their
books, the most conviction that he had (as was reported) was by Jonas Ware,
since a Roman Catholic, who went to Rome, and then turning to prelacy, and
the book of Common Prayer, and afterward an Independent, the same person was
very forward at our meetings, and did often put forth himself in the duty of
prayer, which was a great trouble to me to hear how the name of God was taken
in vain by him, insomuch as that I earnestly desired Master Stucley to hinder
him from engaging in that duty, till he understood the nature of it better.

I acquainted him likewise of other disorders and miscarriages very frequent at
our meetings, declaring how much I was troubled at them; for redress of which,
I entreated him to be constantly with us. But he endeavored to quiet me with
this, that they were honest, though weak, and further persuaded me to be
constant at the meetings, to be faithful unto them, in minding them of what
was amiss. I told him it was more fit for me to be in private meditation, to
be gathering rather then scattering: but he replied, that the time was now not
to be Closet-Professors, but to say, come, let us go up to the house of the
Lord, to seek the Lord together, with our faces Zion-ward. And though I pleaded
my Sex, my natural and sinful infirmities, which made me unfit to speak unto
others, yet he pressed it on me as my duty. And when there was any Jarring
between them and my self, he desired me not to be troubled, though I met with
opposition, that one was of a Souldierly spirit, another of a dull Spirit, that
it was mere Envy, promising to speak with them about it himself. Yea when I
resolved to be silent at some meetings, Mr. Stucley himself would single me
out, and even constrain me to speak.

As concerning my Carriage at the Admission of members, I shall give a brief
account of it as follows.

They who desired admission into the Society, were sometimes desired in a
private meeting to speak what experience they had of the work of grace upon
their Souls: after which we were every one of us both men and women to declare
our thoughts of what was spoken; it being laid down as a ground, that we must
have an account of a change from a natural and legal estate, into an estate
of grace and believing, of those whom we admitted into communion with us. I
among the rest did according to my weak measure declare my self against that
which I thought would not stand for grace. I was so far from delighting in this
work, as that it was a trouble to me, an Employment from which I would
willingly have been freed: I conceived it more needful for my self to study
the worrd, and compare my own heart with the rule, then to be so taken up about
the condition of others. But this was our principle, we were to keep the house
of God pure, we were set as Porters at the door, it was our duty, we were not
to be wanting at such times, yea it was our liberty, that we, who were to have
communion with those who came to be admitted, should give in our assent, or
dissent in reference to their admission. I did therefore at such times declare
my thoughts asvvell as the rest, but left the determination to themselves, as
it appears in Ganicle, who was admitted, though I was at the first against
his admission. I mention him, because he was brought by Mr. Eveleigh, as an
Instance of my censoriousnesse. I was blamed for disliking him, whom they
said was one of the most eminent among them, and yet it was not long after,
before he discovered himself, by Renouncing the principles of Christianity,
and turning Quaker. He in speaking out his Experiences pretended unto much Joy
and ravishment of Spirit, but (the Lord knovves) when he spoke of such
enjoyments, he spoke as a stranger that never intermedled with this Joy, never
declaring any powerful effect thereof, but only that which was, only but a
Balaams vvish. I the rather instance in him, because he was the first that
kindled the fire of Contention, which then brake out in that manner, as it is
not quenched to this day; here began the Quarrel on their part. When I was
called by the Elder to give in my thoughts concerning a Person proposed, he
most disorderly intercepted me, for which there was not the least admonition
given him: but not long after his folly was made manifest, by his Casting off
the very form of godliness. This is one and the Chief one of those persons
whom I disliked, though approved of by the Church. If I be contentious for
opposing such a one, let me be contentious still; though none among them will
witness for me, yet he does, he stands to this day as a sad witness between
me and them, whether I were contentious in my oppositions, or they infallible
in their determinations. Besides, as for some who continue among them, if you
look for distinguishing Characters, they are scarcely visible, much less easy
to be discerned.

Thus I did from time to time, whilst we were without Officers and Ordinances,
partly through the great desire I had to promote the work of Reformation among
us, partly through Mr Stucley's instigation reprove them for their indifferency
of Spirit, stir them up to that which I conceived was their duty, for which I
alvvaies gave them my grounds and reasons. But after the officers were chosen,
I never meddled (to my remembrance) with Church affairs, nor spoke in the
meetings, after I heard by Mr. Stucley my speaking was disrelisht; unless a
Question was proposed, and I was desired to give my Answer unto it.

Not long after, the Officers were chosen, I being at Mr. Stucley's house,
desired him to resolve me concerning a true Church, he then confessed that the
Churches of New England did acknovvledge the Churches of old England, from
whence we had separated, to be true Churches: I told him thereupon that we
could not justify our Separation. At length we falling into discourse of
other things, he said my speaking was disrelisht by some; I ansvvered, that I
did not like it my self, and therefore would be from thenceforth silent,
though I looked on it as my duty formerly, he told me no, he would have me
speak, but it must be by a Brother; for a stander by may see more then he that
plays the game, promising likewise if I did speak by him, to deliver my words
in the same manner as I spoke them.

After this it pleased the Lord to exercise me with a smarting affliction, the
death of a dear child; the suddenness of the stroke, and some other
circumstances made it a very melting affliction. When my Bowels were yerning
toward my child, I called to remembrance the Lords tender bowels toward his
children, for whom he had given his only Son; when I considered the breach that
the Lord had made in my family, I beheld how terrible it was to make a breach
in his family. Then the work I was engaged in, this Sin of Separation,
appeared nakedly unto me to be no other then a wounding of Christ's body,
which is his Church, the Church which he has purchased with his own blood:
I then looked on Separation to be a dividing of Christ. Truly I beheld it with
terror, this sin of wounding of Christ it made a vvound in my soul, which
was kept open in a terrible manner, the Lord bringing to my remembrance his
Justice and severity, and wrath revealed from heaven on families and nations,
yea on his own people, ever since the beginning of the world: as also his
Judgments which are in the earth to this day, from Genesis to the Revelation
was brought to my remembrance, and kept hard upon me. Having these Impressions
on my Spirit, I was almost overwhelmed, and in mine own apprehension upon the
Borders of Hell, where the Lord made me to behold the Execution of his wrath
upon sinners: I could then have told what hell was, I felt the flashings of
helfire in my soul, the wrath of God that lay hard upon me, the effects
whereof were very terrible, insomuch as I was even swallowed up, only the
Lord was pleased to keep me following after him, resolving to lie at his feet,
though he should spurn me to hell. Having thus been under a sentence of death
with the very terrors of hell in my soul, providence so ordering it, I came
(by following the people) where Mr. FORD preached. I no sooner came into the
Congregation, but I was so exceedingly troubled, as that I vented my self in
Passionate tears; fearing lest I might be unfit to hear, but in prayer
recovered my self. His text was in John 16: last. Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world. He instanced in all the enemies of the new creature, the
World, the God of this world, Sin, Death, and Hell: the Lord setting it home
every sentence was to me as the rivetting of the nails, set on by the great
master of Assemblies, and in prayer afterward (the Lord so providing) those
very particulars which were the burden of my soul, were put up unto God. I
went out of the congregation with another frame of spirit then when I came in,
blessing the Lord for giving his Son Jesus Christ, who has loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God. But afterward I began to question whether I had not taken that,
which did not belong unto me, Christ then speaking comfort to his disciples in
reference to that hardship they were to meet with in the world; among the rest
of their sufferings this was one, that they should be put out of the
Synagogues, yea the time would come that whosoever killed them, would think he
did God good service, which things Christ told them that they might not be
offended: But yet the Sermon being in general of all the Enemies of the new
Creature, I could not put it off. Furthermore the appearance of God was so
remarkable in the change of my spirit, as that I could not but take it home,
that Sins of the right hand and left hand, and separation also, and death and
hell should be cast into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, that in
the mean time Christ has overcome the world, the Prince of this world is
judged, condemned already, only the execution is deferred till the time
appointed by the father. And as for sufferings, that we must look for them,
having such provision so remarkably laid in before, I cannot but take notice of
it at present. But then I could not conceive how it was likely for me to suffer
in that kind, there being then so much love pretended. But now the time is
come, and therefore I mention it: Christ says, these things have I spoken
unto you, that when the time shall come, you may remember that I told you of
them. Now I can make application of all the Sermon which is food for my faith
to live upon, although I suffer as an evil doer. I mention it with admiration,
that the Lord even then when he spoke peace unto me after my being convinced of
Separation, should lay also provision against Excommunication.

But now after my conviction of Separation, it troubled me very much, because I
knew not how to avoid it: my fear was lest I should be constrained to live in
it, had I presently come off, I should have made a breach there. They pretended
so much love unto me, as I knew not which way to break this bond, which the
Apostle calls the bond of perfectness; wherefore I resolved to wait upon the
Lord, for the opening a way unto me, which he did afterward in manner
following.

The Lord was making such abundant Provision for me in Mr. Ford's ministry, I
did constantly attend thereon, hearing him once a Lords day for the most part,
unless it were when we had the Sacrament of the Lords Supper administered among
us. This was my practice ever since he came to this City, of which Mr. Stucley
took no great notice before he was in office; but afterward both he and the
people were displeased with me for it, on which began the quarrel on my part
between us. Mr. Stoneham being a stranger was employed to take me off from this
practice, who at first pretended that it did very much trouble him, but since
he has told me that he wished that he had never been put upon it.

He sent a Messenger unto me to persuade me to leave Mr. Ford's ministry: I
then showed my grounds for that practice, what provision I found there, and how
the Lord had made that ministry effectual unto me, and withal that when I
came among them, I took up a resolution to attend upon that ministry.

The same day in a public meeting they accused me first of Contention, and
secondly for my hearing Mr. Ford, which (as the Elder said) the Church neither
could nor would bear, however they would not meddle with it for that time.

As to the Article of Contention I appealed to the Church, and charged them to
be faithful as they would answer it another day, in making it known whether
they had found me Contentious.

Upon which, I having withdrawn my self, they entered into a debate about it,
every one declaring their thoughts of me: the result of which debate was this.

That they neither could nor would charge me with contention for a world, but
did fear that through a mixture of Corruption it might tend to contention. This
business was ended three days after, they declaring that they were satisfied.

But as to the other Article the Elder told me the very next day, when I
pressed him to declare whether he knew of any thing against me, he told me
that there was nothing else in the world but my hearing Master Forde, and then
desired me to leave off that practice; which I did sometimes to content them,
but the little peace that I found in it, made me quickly to take it up again.

After this messengers were sent unto me several times from the Church, to
inform me how my practice was disliked by some, to whom I gave my reasons for
it as formerly, and told them farther, that I was engaged to study the mind of
Christ; and because of their dis-satisfaction, to seek the Lord in this thing,
I promised likewise to submit my self to the Officers, so as to be accountable
to them of my hearing Mr Forde. I informed them also, how the Lord had made use
of that Ministry for my good in these times of distraction, I gave the^ thanks
for the great love, and good will they seemed to bear toward me, but withal
desired the^ not to be offended if I made use of my Christian liberty till I
was better informed, and told them where the Carcass is, there will the Eagles
resort.

Master Stucley also sent me two long letters, wherein he endeavored to
persuade me to have dependence only on their ministry without hearing any other.

But when they saw that I could not be taken off from this practice, they began
to quarrel with me, telling me that I was contentious, that it was height of
spirit, and so by little and little estranged themselves. But the Word was a
light unto me, and so evident, as if it had been appointed on purpose for
direction, they themselves being judges, insomuch as some of them asked me
whether I did not use to visit Mr. Ford.

As for Mr. Stoneham he declared in his public ministry oftentimes, That it
was out of the way of order to hear any other minister, when our own officers
preached, that no blessing was to be expected in such a way, and if so be there
were any profit received, it was a delusion, a temptation, yea a judgment of
God upon such a soul; it was a going out of the bosom of Christ into the
bosom of strangers; Rebellion against Christ, and that such must be dealt with
as Traitors and Rebels.

At length a fast, a day of humiliation was appointed for the disorderly
walking of some, and that with obstinacy in the general.

Hereupon I went unto Mr. Stoneham to know for what end this fast was intended,
whether it was in reference to my self; if so, I should remove the occasion,
resolving with my self, if the liberty of hearing other ministers were denied
me, to leave them. But he and Mr. Stucley whom I found with him, in stead of
informing me fell into a dispute about true Churches, a subject that I was
unskilful in, and he by reason of his deafness unfit to treat of, and withal
let fall some strange Expressions concerning the people of God. I told him that
I did delight in the image of God where ever I found it, in those that were the
Excellent of the Earth, that did excel in virtue: he then endeavored to
persuade me that I was to have my affections tied up to those of their Society,
alleging that I might as well delight in another man that was not my husband,
because the Image of God shined more in him then in my husband. I being
troubled at this gross discourse told him that those relations were of a
different nature, and that I thought I did owe more duty where God in his
Providence had cast me, and where I had the opportunity and ability to perform
it, then I was engaged unto or could discharge unto others, where I had no such
opportunities: yet I did not look upon it as that which could cut off my
affections from the people of God, from those who had the Image of God renewed
in them. Something also was spoken of Church ordinances, Mr. Stucley said the
preaching of the word was not a Church ordinance, because that it might be
preached by one that was not a Church officer, and it might be used out of a
Church, even in a family. For my own part I knew not how to understand these
distinctions, but accounted them strange doctrines.

Mr. Stucley some days after in a letter taxed me for acknowledging an
assembly of people to be a Church meeting, and the wednesday meeting to be a
Church meeting which formerly I looked upon as Babylon. To which I returned
Answer by letter, that I accounted those from whom we did separate a true
Church, as he had told me the New England ministers did; that I looked upon the
wednesdaies meeting to be a Church meeting, the Ministers as ambassadors of
Christ, the preaching of the word a Church ordinance, that which Christ has
appointed for the gathering in, building up, and edifying of his body, which is
the Church, that I did put no difference between hearing there and among our
selves in point of efficacy, and that my separation from them was not in
doctrine and worship, but in discipline. Much I wrote likewise for the removing
of some prejudices, complaining how I was preached against, and prayed against;
informing him likewise that I was neither able to live in the fire of
contention, nor sit down under a ministry that I could not profit by, and
therefore should willingly withdraw from them, I also desired him that whilst
we contended for pure ordinances we should not suffer the Gospel to be
corrupted, and that I feared we did not walk up to our own principles, and I
likewise desired direction from him.

When the day appointed for the fast was come, I went to the meeting not
knowing for what it was intended, The practice of the hearing of other
ministers was then made to be as the Sin of Korah and Dathan And between the
several prayers Mr Stoneha^ propounded somewhat by way of question, how to
know an heriticke: one discovery was when persons went against their own
principles as those did, who although they have given up themselves on unto
another shall notwithstanding say they delight in the Image of God where ever
they find it, in the Excellent ones of the earth, which was contrary to their
principles and destructive to the very fundementalls of the Church.

This being contrary in my apprehension to that of the Apostle. 2 Col, where he
tells us. That he had great conflict. not for them only which he knew, But also
for as many (of the Saints) as had not seen his face in the flesh, And in
Chap: 1.4. where he commends them for their love to all the Saints, I did in
the conclusion tell some of the^ privately, There was that delivered which
could not be proved by the word.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper had been about this time omitted for near
half a year, sure I am it was very long, I enquired of some the reason
thereof, who told me because I could not sit down with Master Stoneham's
ministry, whereupon I went to Master Stoneham to know the reason why the
Sacrament was kept from us, at the first he gave me no answer, but when I was
earnest with him to give me satisfaction, he said, that he did not know what
use I would make of it: I then told him, he looked upon me as under a
temptation, when I was in an ordinance of Jesus Christ; but I had cause to
fear that he was under a temptation, in neglecting such an ordinance of Jesus
Christ, which he had a command often to make use of; and then entreated him
that if he thought me unworthy to partake of it, that I only might be kept
off, that the ordinance might not (upon that account) be laid aside: to this he
replied, that the prayers they had put up, would be answered, which was all the
satisfaction I could get from him at that time: A week after I pressed him
again for the Sacrament, he then told me, that if I would not sit down under
his ministry he would be no officer unto me, and for a close told me, there
was one who had somewhat against me: whereupon the same day I went to Master
Stucley to know what it was that some body had against me, what the evil was
they could charge me with, I told him that it was my desire and endeavor to
keep a good conscience void of offense both toward God and toward men: that
if there were any evil with which they could charge me, upon information what
it was, I would not continue in the practice thereof, and therefore desired him
to tell me what it was, that one had against me: to which Master Stoneham,
then being at Master Stucleys house, answered, that I must first resolve to sit
down under their ministry, and then they would confer about that: I replied
that I did not separate, but in distinguishing ordinances, unto which this
answer was returned, that there was as much reason for a woman to go after
another man because of fruitfulness, as to make use of another Ministry
because of more benefit. At which gross discovery of themselves I resolved
with my self to take my leave of them: Master Stucley at my going forth came
with me to the door, and then desired me to deny my selfe-holinesse for God,
and look for a reward in heaven: This was the last time that ever I was in his
house.

After this two or three times I went to Mr. Eveleigh the Elder, to know what
it was they had against me* but I could never speak with him, until I met him
at the meeting, where I desired to speak with him, and went to his house, and
desired him to inform me, what they had to Charge me with, who instead of
answering directly to my question said, there would be a Sacrament the next
Lords day, which (as I remember) was putt of, and that some body did desire me
to forbear, my Answer was, that I should not give offense to any, he then told
me what a do they had to please me, instancing in his wife, dead and buried
long before.

This being all I could learn of him, I went about to several persons (at
their houses) to know what it was that they had against me, but they told me
there was nothing but my goeing to hear others, then I asked whether the
Church had any thing against me, they did assure me the Church had nothing
against me, Having done this, I beheld the door standing so wide open, as
that I might fairly take my leave, which yet I did not, before I had for a
while seriously and sadly considered of these following particulars.

1. The strangeness of their opinions and practices in reference to the
ordinances of Jesus Christ: Preaching was affirmed to be no Church Ordinance,
as also Catechizing.

The ordinance of Fasting exceedingly perverted, in which they walked in the
ways of Ahab, and statutes of Omry, Making it like Ismaels weeping to fall on
poor souls, when they go to worship the Lord, like the tumultuous concourse
of people, Act. 19.32. by concealing the particular occasions and ends of their
fastings, fasting rather for strife and debate, then to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace with Gods people.

The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was for a long time detained, not only from
my self in particular without giving any reason, but from the whole
Congregation in general; new, and unheard of, and unscripturall qualifications
were required of those who would partake thereof: They must subscribe and
engage not to hear any, but their own Officers at such times as the Officers
did preach, and must believe that a greater blessing was to be expected on
their Ministry, then on the Ministry of others, when (as the Apostle says) He
that planteth, and he that waters are all one, 1 Cor. 3.7, 8. To come out
from among them upon this account I was very much encouraged by Master
Buroughs, who in his heart divisions, p. 174. says, If Governors enjoyne any
thing upon the Church, or any member thereof that is Sin, or if they shall
mingle Evil in the Public worship, so that there can be noe Joining with
their worship, but there must be Joining likewise with their Sin: In this case
they are the Schismatics, not those who withdraw from them.

Yea farther If they impose that, which is not necessary though in it self not
sinful, and will not bear with the weakness of such as think it Evil: If upon
that, they are forced to withdraw, in this the governors are the Schismatics;
the cause of the Rent is in them, they ought in such things to bear with the
weaknesses of their brethren, and not imperiously require of them those things
of which there is no necessity, if such things be Sin to their Brethrens
consciences, if they will stand upon it to enjoyne them, they lay a necessity
on them to withdraw. God will not lay the Indictment of Schism thus; such a
one departed from the Communion of such a church, because he would not do what
was lawful to be done, But thus, -- you imposed that upon your brother, which
there was no necessity of, and would not forbear him in what I would have you
to forbear him, but caused him by your imperiousness, and stiffness to depart
from communion with you. It Is true, God says, the things might have been done,
but it was not necessary, it was out of conscience to me that they forbore, the
weakness is theirs; but the Schism is yours.

2. From the ordinances I turned my thoughts unto the Churches, both that from
which I had separated, as also that whereof I was then a member, as to the
Churches of England, I considered that they were right in respect of Doctrine
and worship; and not only so, but that they were united likewise by an
implicit covenant, which upon enquiry that they of New England make to be the
same for substance with that which is explicit, contrary to what I believed at
the first (viz.) That an Explicit Covenant was necessary to the Constituting of
a visible Church, and therefore upon this account, there was no reason to
separate from them: I considered that the work of this generation was not the
Constituting, but the reforming of Churches, which I conceived separation did
hinder. It made my heart bleed within me to think that I should have a hand in
the hindering of Reformation, for which so much precious blood had been spilt
in the late War.

As to the Church whereof I was then a member, I feared what it would come to
in the end, there being in so short a time, such a visible difference between
our first Engagements, and the present state thereof. At the first, liberty of
conscience and freedom from the Intolerable yoke of being Servants unto men
was pretended; But now we were in greater bondage then ever, all liberty of
dissenting from them being denied. Our officers were swayed by such a
Prelaticall Spirit, as that every one must rest satisfied with their
determinations, otherwise it would be looked upon as a nonconformity,
contention, and the Lords Supper forthwith denied them.

At the first we were not to rest in the light we had already received, but
engaged to study the mind and will of God, and live up unto it, to have Christ
for our Judge, our Lawgiver and King; but now the voice of the Church (two or
three of them) carries all before it, he that did not hearken unto this, he
that was not obedient unto this, must be presently accounted contentious,
censorious, a Rebel against Jesus Christ, and dealt withal as such. When I
demanded, whether that which they said to be the voice of the Church, were the
voice of Christ?

Answer was returned, that the voice of the Church, was the voice of Christ.

If this be true, then we must believe as the Church believes, we must believe
that the Church cannot err, contrary to that in Rev. 3. where we read that the
Church of Laodicea said one thing, and Christ another, where every one is
commanded to hear what the spirit says unto the Churches.

And as for the people; the generality of them I plainly perceived that they
made it their business to study conformity, without the least heeding what
they had formerly engaged, or enquiring what, for the time to come this might
grow unto; Isacher-like they bowed their shoulders to bear, and became
Servants unto whatsoever tribute was imposed.

In the last place I took a brief view of their behavior abroad in the world
-- where they were striving who should be foremost in getting of offices and
places of profit; so employed they were in enriching themselves, and building
their own houses; as that they little minded the house of God. And as for Mr
Stucley, he was so entangled with the world as that it took up a great part of
his time every week, which should have been spent in the work of the ministry,
contrary to that of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.4. So troubled he was about many
things, as that he very much neglected that one thing needful, the feeding of
the flock, -- He seemed to me to be led captive by ambition and covetousness,
which made him more crafty and politic then could (in my Judgment) stand with
the Simplicity of the Gospel: So that I questioned whether or no, he had not
applied himself to the study of wisdom, only for her left hand blessings
of riches and honor.

I called to mind his subtilty in the manageing of many busienesses, his setting
Mr Stonham a work about that which he durst not appear in himself; but
especially his trecherousnesse and deceitful dealing in useing means for the
opening reading and Coppying of postletters; the letters of the chief
magestrate of this City, this I was informed of by one of their members, and
since has been confirmed by others; And his appointing a day of thanksgiving
for the Succesfulnesse of his designs furthered by such unlawful means;
whether this were not a bringing of Thanksgiving with leaven, I leave it to
others to Judge. I could not but withdraw from that thanksgiving: I considered
with my self, how unlike it was that he should be a faithful minister of
Christ, who dealt so unfaithfully with men, and therefore that it could not be
safe for me to continue any longer under his pastoral charge; especially
seeing I could not be faithful to them, because of their crafty seeking
advantages to ensnare: All the remedy I had left was to withdraw from them.

Thus being convinced of Separation and the evil thereof, and having pondred a
while of their Unchristian or rather Antichristian practices, I went on the 24
of March 1654. to Mr Eveleigh the Elder, whom I desired to acquaint the Church,
that I should continue no longer with them, for several reasons which I then
gave him; And that I would willingly (if they desired it) give them farther
Satisfaction; he replied that there was nothing but would be made up: I know
that very well, said I, but for several reasons I am resolved to withdraw from
your society.

About foureteen days after, (being sent for) I went to their meeting
according to my promise, supposing they would require an account of my leaving
of them; but Mr Stucley altogether waved that, and instead thereof having
questioned me a little concerning Mr Stoneham, demanded how long I had used to
hear Mr Ford; I answered a year at the least, the truth of which assertion
when he seemed to question, I added farther that my writing books would make it
appear that I had heard him much longer.

Then he asked me concerning Mris Eveleigh, whether I did not speak against her?

To this I returned Answer; (1) by asking him whether he did not say to Mr
Eveleigh in his own house within a few days after that she was admitted, that
I was so far from speaking against her, as that I had spoken for her, and
therefore would clear me.

To this he answered never a word, but was silent (1ly) by acknowledging that I
had Spoken against her, but not to have her kept off, as Mr Eveleigh had
charged me.

Why did you then Speak against her, said Mr Stucley?

I answered because she had gone contrary to the law of Charity, in that she
did partake of the ordinance of the lords Supper with the Presbyterians, which
we did not: If she looked on this as her duty, she could not but look on the
neglect thereof, as our Sin, and so she walked uncharitably: she being in
Society with us, and not admonishing us of our neglect, in suffering Sin upon
us.

To this Mr Stucley replied, what that law of Charity was (for his part) he
knew not, he knew noe such law, Mr Roles said It was a word hastily spoken, and
so it might be taken.

After this Mr. Stucley asked me, how I could go amon the Presbyterians.

To this I answered, that I looked on it as my duty to wait upon God amongst a
professing, reforming people.

And then he told me, how that in my letter unto him, I had acknowledged that
for a true Church, which I had formerly called Babylon.

To this I answered, that I had called to mind so much as I could against my
self, as to that particular of Babylon, and so far as I could remember any
such expressions, I did acknowledge my evil therein, for which I had cause to
be humbled: and withal that I did not separate as from Babylon; that I looked
upon them from whom we separated as true Churches in doctrine and worship,
that I did not separate from either of these, but only from their discipline:
that the chief ground of my separation was a Mistake, I supposing that a
Church rightly constituted must be joined together by an Explicit Covenant,
which I found to be otherwise now.

I was likewise questioned for opposing in a public meeting Mr. Stucley, as
to his being Pastor at that time, when they chose him to be the Pastor, and
that in such a Contentious manner, as to cause an hour and half debate in
the meeting. Mr. Whitehorne sent them a paper, wherein he proffered to affirm
with oath this charge.

Which being denied by me, because I knevv I was not present at the meeting at
that time; Mr. Role and Mr. Slade said they did believe that Mr. Whithorne was
mistaken (or to that effect) and Mr. Sprague expressly affirmed, that it was
otherwise then Mr. Whithorne had written, for (said he) we did agree to
conceal that meeting from her, lest she should oppose him.

I asked Mr. Roles and Mr. Slade where ever they knew me oppose Mr. Stucley in
a public meeting? They said no, they never knew it.

Thus after they had spent some time in such Cavills, Mr. Stucley said to me,
you are accused of a slip of your Tongue, of an Untruth.

To which I replied, that this was a new thing, and desired to know what ground
he had for it.

He answered here is Testimony, here are they who will witness.

I told him my witness might be taken as soon as theirs, and had been formerly
before theirs.

Mr. Rols then turning himself toward Mr. Stucley, said, that he believed
there was never an untruth spoken, and it being things long before, and that
every one spoke as they remembered: and farther said, that he wondered he made so
much ado about nothing.

To which Mr. Stucley replied, here is a negative and an affirmative, and
therefore a lie; although he never examined where the lie was.

At the conclusion I told them that I should come no more among them.

This is the Substance of what I can remember concerning this days discourse,
it being more then three years since. Whereby it appears that I have just
cause to charge the lie on themselves.

A few days after they sent for me again, but I told the messenger, seeing
they had so grossly abused me, as to charge a lie upon me, I would come no
more among them: that they were a people not to be trusted, and that I would be
drawn in sunder by wild horses rather then go unto them.

However the same day I sent unto Mr. Slade, one of the Officers, to know what
they would have of me, who told me that they were very much troubled at my
leaving them, and that they would look on my Return as a Resurrection mercy.

I desired him to return this as my answer unto them, viz. Let them study the
Word, and convince me from the Word what is my duty in such a Case, and I
would gladly receive it, and willingly submit to it, so unwilling was I to
offend them, yet to come any more among them I durst not, because of their
former Carriage, neither was it (as I conceived) safe for me to adventure
singly and without witness among them, who were my accusers, witnesses, and
judges. Since that day of the meeting abovesaid I never spoke with Mr. Stucley,
though I desired it several times.

Some days after Mr. Eveleigh and Mr. Slade Officers, and a member with them
came unto me, and (as they said) expected Mr. Stucley's comeing likewise, but
he came not.

I then complained of their Carriage toward me, telling them how much I was
troubled at it, and desired them also to show me from the word what they could
expect, and then I should submit.

One of them replied you must return, and do otherwise, I answered, that I had
too much to do with Separation already, and therefore should not return; then
said one of them, then they will never be satisfied.

As for Mr. Eveleigh he told me, that my going away should cost me dearer then
my coming in; and that they would proceed according to the order of the
Churches: this was heard by another.

I ansvvered, whatever I suffered by them, could not be so much as had
suffered for them.

After this others came to me, I told them I did expect to speak with Mr.
Stucley, that I might know what he had against me, and that I was ready to
submit to the word, that they should convince me thereby how I ought to be
affected.

Mris Roles also came unto me in way of a visit, who desired me to consider
what a dishonor it would be unto the Church, if I left them: and as for
what you have at any time spoke unto them (said she) I believe it was in the
uprightness of your heart, and so does my husband.

I told her that I did not justify my self in every particular as to the
manner of it, said she, you spoil all in saying you will leave them, and if
you do so, what will they say of my Cozen Stucley? and what will they say of
us? consider, we are rising, and more will come into us continually.

And after this Mris. Stoneham came unto me, asking with tears in her eyes,
whether I would not return, and whether she was the cause of my going away.

I demanded of her whether Mr. Stoneham knew of her coming? She answered, that
she did not see him at her coming away. I then told her that it was reported by
some of them, that they could not partake with me in ordinances now:

For my part (said she) I was never of that mind, neither do I know any who
are, but on the contrary we are all much troubled that you will leave us.

About two months after, Ezekiel Pace was sent from Mr. Eveleigh, to tell me
that I was suspended by the Church.

I told him that I had left their Society, and that I had no communion with
them.

He answered, they conceived that they could not otherwise discharge their
duty unto me, and as for what they had done, it was in order to my return.

I replied that my purpose was never to return unto them.

After I had made my Address to the Ministers of the City, desiring to be
admitted into fellowship and communion with them in ordinances. Mr. Stucley
understanding thereof sent Mr. Eveleigh unto Mr. John Bartlet Minister, to give
him notice that they had several things against me: upon which it was by Mr.
Bartlet desired that they would produce their charge, which they promised to
do, although it was long first, yet at length (after often desiring of it) a
meeting was appointed at Mr. Fords house the Minister: Between Mr. Ford and Mr.
Bartlet on the one side, and Mr. Stucley and Mr. Eveleigh on the other. At
which meeting I was present, there they did declare what they had against me,
concerning Mris Eveleigh and Babylon, where they charged me with an untruth.
And the result of this conference was this, the Articles wherewith they charged
me, being after serious Examination by all the ministers of the City found
partly doubtful and proofelesse, and partly frivolous, I was shortly after
(according as I desired) received into Communion with them; and so continued
near three years, till Mr. Stucley's Cursing began to make a noise in the
world, which was near three years after I deserted them.

Near three years after my leaving of them, Mr. Eveleigh acquainted me with a
fast in order to their Excommunication. I then desired that the business might
be brought to a new trial before the ministers, whom they had acquainted with
it formerly, and with whom I was in Communion, without whose advice I would do
nothing.

But this was not hearkened unto, they being (it seems) resolved on their work
of Excommunication, how causeless and unjust soever.

Let that letter that Mris. Allen and my self jointly subscribed and sent to
Mr. Stucley to be communicated to the Church, stand as a witness between us
and them, to testify to all the world how unjustly they charge us with
Contumacy and refusing of Admonition, whereby it evidently appears that we
honored them so far as to receive their Summons, and to return them our
Answer, wherein we did

1 Desire a fair trial betvveen them and us before understanding and
impartial mrn.

2 We did profess our desire to submit to the law and will of Christ, when
we should see reason from Scripture to Convince.

3 We did in the general profess our Repentance for those Evils that we
knevv our selves guilty of.

Thus far we condescended to them. And let the impartial Reader judge what
they could expect more from us, who had upon Conscientious principles
withdrawn from communion with them, as Master Allen has already declared of
his wife; and my self having deserted them near three years before (being
convinced of the groundlesnesse of separation for several particulars I
declared to the Elder; and the cause of my withdrawing being not removed; but
more offense being still given by them, how could I acknowledge them so as to
put my self upon their trial. Besides how could we with safety put our
selves on their trial, who were enraged with us since we left them; which they
discovered by their Calumniating and defaming of us.

Besides we having been in fellowship with the Lords people in other
congregations; my self several years, and Mris. Allen for some time, we
being so aspersed by them as we were, how could we clear our selves, so as to
satisfy them that we were in Communion with (without a trial) so as that they
might not suffer by us; for what we were aspersed with, did in some manner
reflect upon them, who had received us into fellowship with them.

And whereas Mr. Stucley in his book Entitled (Manifest Truth) page 22.
pretends that it robbes particular Churches of that power and authority which
Christ has entrusted them with, of Trying and censuring their own delinquent
members etc.

Resol. This is nothing to the purpose, we were not their members, but real
members of some other congregations. If they have power to censure their own
delinquent members, we do not hinder them from exercising their power. But
have they therefore power to Censure the members of other Churches? we had
withdrawn from Communion with them, and they having not satisfied us so as to
remove the occasion of our leaving them.

May he not therefore reflect upon himself, who has contrary to his own
professed principles robbed the Church of their power, and of their members in
Censuring of us, without the Approbation of those ministers and congregations
to which we stood reiared? May we not therefore ask him, who gave you this
Authority of lording it over Churches and their members without their Counsel
or consent? Is not this practice of his too much like those that the Apostle
foretells of Acts 20.24. For I know this that after my departure shall grievous
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock, and our Savior tells us
there are wolves in sheeps-cloathing, ye shall know them by their fruits,
Matthew, 7.15, 16. Besides, let it be considered, in denying of us this liberty
to have a fair Trial, has he not hereby denied Communion of Churches, he
being since desired several times by several ministers of the City, that the
business might be brought to a Trial, they judging it unreasonable that we
should be excommunicated by them, until the cause be clearly proved, and we be
permitted to Answer for our selves. But this he has evaded for several
months, and in stead thereof takes liberty to preach and print what he pleases
of us, that so he may render our names and persons odious to them that know us
not.

And for farther Answer to him in that he pretends that it robs the Church of
the power that Christ has given etc. It being a point of controversy I shall
leave it to the learned. Let him consult the Judgments of those that are for
the Congregationall way.

The Apologeticall Narration presented to the house of Parliament, and
subscribed by T.G. P. N. S.S. I.B. W.B. in answer to this objection, viz. That
in such a congregationall government, thus entire within it self, there is not
allowed sufficient Remedy for miscarriages or wrongful sentences, or persons
injured thereby, no Room for complaints, no powerful or effectual means to
reduce a Church or Churches that fall into heresy, or schism; but every one
is left, and may take liberty, without control to do what is good in their
own eyes.

Page 14. We could not but judge it a safe, and an allowed way to retain th
Government of our several Congregations for matter of discipline within
themselves, etc. yet not claiming to our selves an independent power in every
Congregation, to give account, or be subject to none others, but only a full
and entire power complete within our selves, until we should be challenged to
err grossly: such as Corporations enjoy, who have the power and privilege to
pass sentence for life and death within themselves, and yet are accountable to
the State they live in.

Page 16. An instance they give of their own practice in a business of this
nature of Excommunication, wherewith some Churches were offended.

In this Case our Churches did mutually and universally acknowledge and submit
to this as a Sacred and undoubted Principle and supreme Law to be observed
among all Churches. That as by virtue of that Apostolical Command, Churches as
well as particular men are bound to give no offense, neither to Jew or Gentile,
nor the Churches of God they live amongst: so that in all cases of such
offenses or difference, by the obligation of the common law of Communion of
Churches, and for the vindication of the glory of Christ, which in common they
hold forth, the Church or Churches challenged to offend or differ are to submit
themselves, upon the challenge of the offense or complaint of the person
wronged, to the most full and open trial and examination by other neighbor
churches offended thereat, of what ever has given the offense. And farther
that by virtue of the same and like law of not partaking of other men's sins,
the Churches offended may and ought (upon the Impenitency of those Churches
persisting in their error and miscarriage) to pronounce that heavy sentence
against them of withdrawing and renouncing all Christian Communion with them,
until they do repent. And farther, to declare and protest this, with the
causes thereof to all other Churches of Christ that they might do the like.

Page 21. It was openly and publicly professed in a speech, that was the
Preface to that discussion, to this effect. That it was the most abhorred
Maxim that any Religion has ever made Profession of, and therefore of all
other the most contradictory and dishonorable unto that of Christianity, That
a single and particular Society within themselves should farther arrogate unto
themselves an Exemption from giveing account, or being Censureable by any
other, either Christian magistrate above them; or neighbor Churches about
them. So far (say they) were our Judgments, from that Independent liberty,
that is imputed to us.

So Mr Borroughs, heart division p. 43. where he says, Those in the
Congregationall way acknowledge that they are bound in conscience, to give
account of their ways to the Churches about them, or to any other who shall
require it, this, not in an Arbitrary way, but as a duty they owe to God and
man.

Reader, here you see how wide and dissonant, the judgments of those (more)
learned of the Congregationall way are from the practice and proceedings of Mr
Stucley and his Church: Those of that way acknowledging, but he denying,
submission to any examination, or trial by neighbor Churches, and he and his
Church claiming an Independent power, or liberty to give no account, or be
subject to no others, though accused and challenged for erring grossly in point
of their Arbitrary unjust proceedings against us, which is plainly manifested
in Master Allen's book called (Truths manifest revived) and will farther
appear in my ensuing Vindication, to which I hasten; This being (to my best
remembrance) a true Relation of what passed between us, until the
Excommunication.

THE VINDICATION.
BY that which has been said in my Narrative, it is manifest that I was never
questioned, much less admonished for lying, until my coming off from them,
that they never accounted me (whiles I was with them) such a vile person as now
by their slanderous pamphlets they endeavor to make the world believe me to
be: and here I cannot but wonder at Mr Mall, that he, being a stranger to me,
and altogether ignorant of my manner of life and conversation, should yet be so
rash and inconsiderate, as merely upon reports to defame me in Print, for which
he is bound in conscience as he is a Minister (if he be one) a Christian, yea,
as he is a man, to give the Church of God, me, and the world, satisfaction.

The Notes, (says he in his Epistle to the Reader) of Mr Stucleys Sermon, I am
glad I took in short hand from his mouth, or otherwise thou might never have
seen a true Copy of them.

Surely, if the Copy do agree with the Original, (which some question) I shall
be so bold to affirm of both that they exceedingly disagree with the Truth, in
laying those Crimes to my charge which they are never able to prove, as will
sufficiently (I believe) appear in these my following Answers to their
Several Articles.

I shall begin with that of lying, it being that which my accuser begins and
almost ends with, which he in many places of his book mentions with a great
deal of pretended zeal and indignation, which he endeavors to equal with
the sin of Incest, which he says is a fault detestable to the very heathens.
Some of them, this is the Crime which he and his party especially charge me
with both in City and Country, crying out every where, I am a liar, yea an
egregious one, and therefore justly Excommunicated, This is in fine, the
Article on which the whole charge depends.

Before I come to the Charge it self in particular, I shall crave leave to
speak something in the general concerning the apprehension I have of this
Sin, as also somewhat concerning Master Stucleys practice in reference unto it,
whereby it will be evident, both how improbable it is that I should be such an
Egregious liar, as he has made me in his book, and also how unlikely it is,
that he should be so zealously affected against lying as he therein pretends.

For the first of these. Lying is that Sin, which my Parents from time to time,
so represented unto me in the several aggravations and deformities thereof, as
that I always (since I came to years of discretion) abhorred, and detested
it, both in my self and others.

I account a liar unfit not only for Christian Communion, but also civil
Commerce.

From the word, and my own sadd experience I find it to be an hereditary evil
in all the sons and daughters of Adam: That the heart is deceitful and
desperately wicked above all things, who can know it? That there is a way of
lying in the best of men by nature, in this sense, let God be true, and every
man a liar; The guile, deceit, falsehood, and hypocrisy which is in the heart,
is that which is a chief part and member of the body of death, and that which
makes it out of measure, sinful, and an intolerable burden to be borne.

As to the practice of this sin, I do believe that it is not consistent with
the work of grace, That he which lives in the practice thereof, is not a
member of Christ but a limb of the devil, it is so contrary to the God of
truth, so contrary unto Christ, who is the Truth, and so contrary unto the
Spirit of Truth, and so contrary unto the work of Regeneration, as I cannot
believe that such a soul as lives in the practice thereof, or has slight
thoughts of it, was ever begotten again by the word of Truth; neither is it (I
conceive) possible for such a one to enjoy comfortable communion with God.

I look on it as a distinguishing Character, whereby the Children of God are
known from the children of the devil, The Remnant of Israel shall not do
iniquity, nor speak lies, neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their
mouths. Liars are excluded from the New Jerusalem, that comes down from God
out of heaven, whosoever loves and makes a lie is in the number of those who
are without: The hundred forty and four thousand that stand with the Lamb on
Mount Sion, having his fathers name written on their foreheads, which follow
the lamb wheresoever he goes, which were redeemed from among men, being the
first fruits unto God and to the lamb, in their mouth was found no Guile.

I hope through grace in some measure I can say, That I have seen such a
desirable beauty in Truth, as with David to hate and abhor lying, and
whatsoever is contrary unto truth, guile, deceit, hypocrisy, falsehood, a false
heart, false ways, false doctrines, though under never so fair pretenses,
when once they are thoroughly discovered.

And as to my practice, as I desire to lay aside every weight that presses
down, and the Sin that does so easily beset me, So is it my endeavor in all my
approaches unto the Throne of Grace, the word and ordinances, to obtain
strength for the purging out more and more of the Guile, hypocrisy, falsehood,
and deceit that is in my heart, and is still discovering it self before the
Lord, and ready to break out on all occasions, which does continually
administer matter of lamentation unto me.

And because I find by sad experience that this body of death does not lie
idle, but is still bringing forth fruit unto death; and being not willing to
rest in my own Testimony, considering often that of Solomon, he that trusts
his own heart is a fool: and fearing also lest through corruption I might
forget the miscarriages laid to my charge (some years being expired ere ever I
was questioned for them) or put them off, I did earnestly desire again and
again to speak with Mr. Stucley himself, that I might know his grounds in
charging me with lying, but all to no purpose; he could not be spoken with.

And so also since the Excommunication did I write unto him to know the
particulars whereof I am accused in reference to lying, that so I might
accordingly either justify or condemn my self. But he in stead of satisfying
my just and reasonable demand, most imperiously and prelatically sends me a
letter full of bitter Calumniations, accusing me to be a Contentious, dividing,
and lying Spirit, without so much as naming any particulars.

As to the Second, I might refer the Reader for proof hereof to his practice.
It will be found upon trial that he is not of David's mind in Psalm. 101.7. to
Banish from his house and sight, every one that works deceit and tells
lies; and though he pretend to banish me (upon that account) from his society
and fellowship, yet he never questioned me for lying, until I departed from
him, until I sent him word that I would come no more among them.

When he and Master Eveleigh accused me to Master Forde, and Master Bartlet of
lying, Master Forde asked him whether he had ever admonished me for those
things whereof he accused me, To which he answered that he had not been
faithful unto me, and that I had told him of it my self, And Master Eveleigh
added, That they had much a do to please me.

Had I continued with them I should, without doubt, notwithstanding all those
lies I am now accused of; have been as favorably dealt with, as two other of
their members, who were notoriously guilty of lyeing.

As to the first of them, it was briefly thus; we having been enjoined
Secrecy by Mr Stucley, there was notwithstanding somewhat of our private
Conferences divulged and made known.

Hereupon the next meeting every one was examined, and charged in a solemn
manner to declare whether they knew who it was that had revealed it: To which a
negative answer was returned by every one, and when I desired Master Stucley to
search after it more narrowly, and press it more closely upon them, that the
Liar might be found out, he put me off with this, that it had been so in
another Church, and though he knew who it was afterward (as I am informed) yet
the party was never admonished at any of our meetings.

Here was (to be sure) a negative and an affirmative, a breach of promise, and
then a denying of that which was fresh in memory and (which is more) the words
spoken in prvitae between our selves were mis-reported, and yet Mr Stucley
could quietly pass it over.

The other is John Whitehorne, who offered to affirm with oath, that which was
by two or three of the members presently contradicted; and yet Mr Stucley has
been so far from admonishing him for it, as that I hear he is now become an
Elder.

By all which it is more then probable, that there is little of truth to be
expected in his lying charge, which he expresses in these words.

Charge. As for Mris Parr she is accused among other things for lying more than
three times sufficiently proved, in page 18. of his book published by Mr Mall.
But when she was under Church admonition concerning several things, she was
found tripping very much in reference to her Tongue, and lying egregiously, so
that the whole Church could bear witness against her.

Resol: If this Charge be thoroughly sifted, it will be found faulty more ways
then one, and so egregiously tripping, and halting, as that every unbyassed
Reader may witness against it. For,

1. It runs altogether in the general, in affirming me to be under Church
admonition, for several things, without naming any one: And then in accuseing
me only of lying in general, without instancing in so much as one particular,
whereby others are possessed with a prejudice against me, and my self
disenabled to allege any thing in mine own defense, not knowing how the
particulars will be framed.

2. Secondly, it confidently asserts me guilty of lying more then three times
sufficiently proved, and that so egregiously, as all the Church could witness
against me; when as one of their principal members declared (at that time
when I was accused of Tripping) in their meeting that he thought there was
never an untruth spoken, but that every one spoke as they remembered.

3. Thirdly and lastly, it says, I was under Church admonition for several
things.

What he means by Church admonition I scarce understand; if by Church
admonition he means that discourse which we had together at the very time
(being ten days after I left them, when as he says, I was found tripping) I
say it was no admonition (as I conceived) but only an examination, as appears
in my Narrative. If he would insinuate thereby that I was under Church
admonition before that time. Then I say it could be but for one thing only
which is omitted; neither is there any mention made of it throughout the whole
book; And that was my hearing Mr Forde.

Its true Mr Stucley told me, my speaking was disrelished, whereupon I left
that practice near two years before I left them; Its true likewise that the
Elder accused me of contention, upon which I made my appeal unto the Church,
who with one consent acquitted me of that charge,

The Elder also accused me of censoriousnes for opposing (Ganicle) who not
long after turned Quaker, and thereby cleared me of that imputation; so that I
could not be at this time, when as they say I lied so egregiously, under church
admonition for either of these,

And as for any other things I cannot remember any that they did ever manifest
the least dislike of, unless my practice of hearing Mr Forde, (which is the
thing (not things) for which I was under Church admonition) the thing which
has occasioned all this trouble; and for which, (as Mr Stucley in a letter
formerly threatened) they have proceeded to censure me, though it be daubed
over with lying and other forged crimes.

This practice of hearing Mr Forde was permitted me, or at the least winked at
by them, so long as I had a friend that might pleasure them in the City and in
the Parliament --. Mr Stucley presently upon his being an Officer, told me
that he did expect I should hear him, and no other, to which I presently
replied, that it would be hard for me to leave that Ministry which the Lord
had made so profitable unto me, and withal gave him my grounds for that
practice. At length at the close of our discourse, he said, we should not
disagree about it, and yet afterward Master Stoneham was put upon it to preach
and pray against me for this practice.

To take me off from this practice also was Mr Sprague sent unto me, by Mr
Stoneham: the very same day at the meeting the Elder told me, they had two
things against me, one was Contention, the other my hearing Mr Forde, which the
Church neither could nor would bear: the Elder the next day after the business
of contention was ended, told me that he had nothing against me but my
hearing Mr Forde.

Mr Slade also, and Mr Rolls came to me as messengers from the Church (as they
said) to admonish me in particular of hearing Mr Forde: Mr Stucley himself
wrote me two long letters, about this very thing, and in one of them threatened
to censure me for it: they kept a fast for this very particular the 24. of
February 1654.

They omitted the administration of the Lords Supper for this reason (as Mr
Raddon told me) yea Mr Stoneham said, that if I would not sit down under his
Ministry, he would be no Officer unto me.

When I was desired afterward to forbear coming to the Sacrament, without
giving any other reason then this; That some body did desire me to forbear
(who this somebody was I could never learn) I went forthwith to several
members, to know what they had against me, who answered, they had nothing, but
my going to hear others, which practice (they said) was destructive to the
Church. By all which it is manifest that this was the only thing they had
against me, until I had left them, and yet this is omitted, and other things
are pretended. Let all the world judge whether this be not Serpentine subtilty:
As to this charge of (lying) I shall desire the Reader to consider farther
these three or four particulars.

1. The time when they found me Tripping, (as he says) it was after I had left
them. Before I had sent them word that I was resolved to withdraw from their
Society I was never questioned for a lie: what does this imply, but that they
resolved my going off should cost me dearer then my coming in among them,
according to the Elder Mr Eveleighs threatening.

Again, it was at that time when I went to the^ in love, in the simplicity of
my heart, to give them satisfaction why I left them, as I did at the first why
I associated my self with them; thinking as little to be charged with lying,
as with theft, murder, or other sins not to be named among Christians. And here
I cannot but commend Mris Allen her discretion, in refusing to adventure her
self singly among them, which had she done, they would have made her as great a
liar, as my self, thereby Mr Stucley would have been freed from the trouble of
framing two indifferent bills of indictment against us.

2. Secondly, the matters about which they examined me at that time were such
as had been done and past long before, some years: so that if through
weakness of memory, my tongue had tripped, how will it follow hence that I
lied so egregiously as to deserve Excommunication? How could they be sure that
I made a lie, though I had spoken an untruth, unless they knew certainly, that
I spoke against my knowledge?

3. Thirdly, I did in my answers to their frivolous and cavilling questions
insert by way of caution (viz.) as I remember: according to my best
remembrance, etc. which might have satisfied them, as it did Mr Rolls at that
time, had they not been fully bent to slander me for leaving them.

4. Fowerthly, I was only accused, not convicted, of lying: Mr Stucley said,
here are they who will witness, but yet they did not witness any particular,
that I absolutely denied, except John Whitehorne, whose testimony (though he
offered to confirm it with oath) was presently contradicted by another of
their members. Why did not Mr Stucley according to the manner even of
heathenish Romans, Act. 25.16. (who in this show the work of the Law written
in their hearts) require as an Officer, every one to speak out what they had
to say against me? was it for fear lest they should be found Tripping as John
Whitehorne was? I appeal to all impartial Readers, whether it be not a most
unrighteous judgment thus to condemn me without being convicted, yea when I
was cleared by Mr Rolls.

And farther let it be considered that I was so far acquitted by the
Ministers of this City, as that they gave me the right hand of fellowship,
notwithstanding their impeachments, which I believe they are ready to witness
unto the Church, of God when it shall be required of them. This may suffice to
be spoken in reference to the charge of lying in the general.

I shall in the next place proceed to Answer the Particulars of this lying
Charge, as I find them laid down by Mr. Stucley in another Pamphlet of his,
Entitled Manifest Truth. Being an Angry Answer to Mr. Toby Allein, in in which
he has unbosomed and discovered himself more fully then in Mr. Mall's Book.
In page 41. and so onwards, he reduces the grounds of my Suspension to three
heads, Contentiousnesse, Censoriousnesse, and Lying, each of which he
instanceth in several particulars. The last of these I shall begin with, and
answer in the first place, which I shall do, having briefly considered what he
says concerning the grounds of my Suspension.

As to that suspension that Ezekiel Pace gave me notice of, I say that it was
near two months after I had left them, after I was withdrawn from their
communion; which suspension (as the messenger said) was in order to my return.
By which I gather that the chief ground thereof was my going away: and that it
is so, as also their Excommunication, almost three years after, will be
manifested fully by my following answer; wherein I shall show that they had no
ground at all to suspend or excommunicate me for any of those three particulars
mentioned by Mr. Stucley.

And first of lying, which in page 44, 45. he endeavors to prove in six
particulars.

Instance 1. She affirmed, that she always acknowledged Presbyterian Churches
to be true Churches in respect of Doctrine and worship, and that it was hard
for her to separate from the Presbyterians in distinguishing ordinances;
whereas she excepted against Mr. Toby Allein, for having his child Baptized by
Mr. Ford, and opposed his admission on that ground: there were 4 witnesses to
this.

Resolut. This instance has more of Craft (if I understand it) then either
truth or reason, and may very well (I think) answer it self. I am here brought
in opposing Mr. Allens suspension, and in other pages of his book he says Mr.
Allen consented to my suspension.

As Mr. Allen denies the one, so do I the other. But suppose I should have done
it, they all know it was my judgment and my practice at that time: where is the
lie?

I told them it was very hard for me to separate in distinguishing Ordinances.
And they may remember the same time I told them also what was my ground why I
did separate: what can be gathered hence, but that I did that which was very
hard for me to do, separate in distinguishing Ordinances, and dislike Mr.
Allen, because he was not of the same mind?

But I am very much dissatisfied and offended with this charge, because it does
differ from the charge which I was charged with by them, which was this, namely
for speaking against Mr Allen, because he did partake of the ordinance of the
Lords supper with the Presbyterians.

And this I denied; my reason was, because I had never heard at that time, that
Mr. Allen did partake with the Presbyterians in that ordinance; its now Seven
years since.

Instance 2. She affirmed that she never opposed Mris Dorothy Eveleighs
admission, but was for it, whereas the generality of the then members of the
Church witnessed, that a long time she openly contended against it to the
grief of the Church.

Resolut. 1. I have marveild many times why they should question me about
opposing of her, who was long before in her grave, and with whom I had loving
and Christian converse to her dying day.

2ly, That I affirmed that I never spoke against her is false, neither could I
get any advantage by it, seeing others of the Church did the like, in whom it
was not looked upon as an evil. I might say more, but that I am unwilling to
rake in the ashes of the dead.

3ly, I gave Mr. Stucley a Reason why I spoke against her at the first, (which
he himself mentions page 43. in the 4th. particular of Contention) not to have
her kept off, but that she might acknowledge her sin in breaking the law of
Charity etc.

4ly, That I did speak for her admission, Mr. Stucley himsele witnessed it to
Mr. Eveleigh in his own house, and also another of their members E.B. has (as
she told me) declared unto them that it was I who prevailed with her to consent
unto the admission of Mris Dorothie Eveleigh.

Instance 3. She denied that she ever called the Presbyterian Churches by the
name of Babylon, whereas most of the Church witnessed that she had often so
called them.

Resol. What I answered Mr. Stucley when he did in a manner reprove me for
acknowledging that to be a true Church, which formerly I had called Babylon,
appears in the Narrative. To which I shall farther add

1 Suppose it were true, that I had in the heat of Contention at our first
separation vented some rash and inconsiderate expressions in reference to the
Presbyterian Churches, or the Presbyterians themselves, yet it ill becomes Mr.
Stucley and the rest to be my accusers, who continue in the same practice; in
judging me for this, they do but condemn themselves, according to that of the
Apostle Romans 2.1. Why do they censure me now for this, seeing I am not guilty
of it at present? why did not they admonish me for it formerly, when I was with
them?

2 Would they even now be so faithful unto me, as to name any particular time,
place, or other circumstance that might bring such expressions to my
remembrance, they should find me as ready to condemn my self, as they are to
accuse me, if done in an orderly manner.

(3ly) It may be that which occasioned this report, was my mentioning of
Babylons brats, at the time when I spoke my Experiences.

I did then declare how hard it was for me to Separate from those who were
godly, and whose ministry had bin so profitable unto me: But when I considered
the command of god, Touch noe unclean thing, and I will receive you. etc. I
conceived it did sufficiently warrant our Seperating from them: And farther I
declared that there were many little ones, Babylonish Brats, which must be dashed
against the stones, which (I then told them) I did understand of things, not
persons. But they, many of them, being newly crept into a form of godliness,
were so ignorant of that distinction, as what I spoke of things, they
interpreted of persons; which was so far from my thoughts, as that when I
began to read the Book Entitled, (one blow more to Babylon.) I laid it
aside, as not being able to Close with the Author thereof, because of his many
Reflections therein, though (as they all know) I had a high esteem of him, and
did not use to slight him.

(4ly) When I did at any time afterward name Babylon, I never meant it but of
Babylon in the Mystery, consisting either in the joining of men's Inventions
with Christ's institutions; or in pressing of things indifferent upon the
conscience, as necessary; or in the setting up of mixtures in the Ordinances of
Christ, So far as I apprehended any of these, I did declare against them: And
for these very things do I now declare against that Congregation from which I
have departed, which I little thought at first would have bin found amongst
them.

Jnstance. 4. She denied that ever she endeavored to have Mr Stoneham pastor,
and under her own hand were these words, J never labored to bring him to that
office; whereas the contrary was witnessed by three persons.

Resolut. What I affirmed in my letter I believed to be truth, neither have I
reason to think the contrary: if it were as Mr Stucley says, More then three
would have been able to witness it: it is true, he being an ancient non
conformist, and very sensible of the evils under which the Church of God did
formerly groan, I had a good esteem of him; but that I labored to have him
Pastor, will never (I believe) be clearly proved, yea two or three of the
chiefest of them, did witness in the meeting, that they never heard me speak
for him.

Jnstance 5. She affirmed that she never profitted by Mr Stonehams preachings,
and never approved his Ministry, the contrary hereunto was witnessed by three
persons.

Resol. What I affirmed concerning Mr Stoneham was in a letter in these words,
(viz.) As for M. Stonehams preachings, J have had little benefit by it, but J
have imputed it to my own dullness in hearing, and did hope that when J was
better acquainted with his method in teaching J should profit more by it: they
that witness other then this witness a lie.

Jnstance 6. She denies in a letter, That she suspected those that had
Kindred and Relations among the Presbyterians, whereas many witnessed the
contrary.

Resol. 1. If the contrary were true, then I must have suspected my self
having Kindred and acquaintance that were Presbyterians, with who^ I had
daily society, and intimate communion, and whom I did highly honor, for the
image of God shining in them; though our judgments differed.

2ly. Let them show me the persons whom I suspected, and I will show other
grounds of my suspicion.

3ly. They themselves questioned me for my affections to those of different
judgments, even Presbyterians, and therefore I cannot but vvonder, that they
should dare to charge me with this.

This may (I hope) suffice with all judicious and impartial Readers, for the
vviping off that filth, which they flung after me at my leaving them, in
reference to lying, one of those three generals to which he reduced the
ground of my Suspension; the other two are contentiousnesse, and
censoriousnesse, so he is pleased to miscall, Love and Faithfulness.

Contention. The first of these (Contention) he says, page 41. in his Answer
to Mr Toby Allen, was proved by many vvitnesses in six particulars.

Ans. As to this I answer, that I was cleared by the whole Church of this
Impeachment, (as in my narrative) which all of them can witness if they
will; since that time none of them ever undertook to prove it to my face.

I was so far from delighting in Contention, as that I complained of it to Mr.
Stucley several times, and also in a letter I told him plainly, that I was not
able to live in the fire of Contention, nor sit down under a ministry that I
could not profit by, and therefore I should willingly withdraw from them; which
I did accordingly for this and other reasons, and therefore he has little
reason to accuse me of Contention. But he says it was proved in these
particulars.

Instance 1. In very many, if not in most of those debates which have been in
the Church since our first coming together, she has been usually silent,
until the Church have been ready to come to some determination, or had
determined, and then she would object against what she perceived was the
Judgment of the Church, and pursued it with much violence. This the generality
of the then Church witnessed.

Sol. 1. Was I silent till the last? why may not Elihu's Apology be mine? Job.
32.4, 5, 10, 11, 12.

2 My Assent was required to their determinations, and therefore it was very
fit I should know what ground there was for them; especially considering that
the then Church Members, the generality of them were novices in Christianity,
and very weak in the first principles; so unacquainted with the Rule, as that
they knew not how to behave themselves in the Church of God, knew not how to
direct either themselves or others, in matters of faith or order, without
instructions from abroad; yea we were then in a bevvildred condition, without
officers and some of the ordinances, and professed our selves to be a people
that had lost our way, and that were seekers of the way to Syon.

3 As for my pursuing it with much violence, I know not what he means,
unless it be that I refused to be satisfied with their determinations, when
they gave me no sufficient ground for them.

Instance 2. Secondly, when it was moved in the Church to this effect, That
it was very necessary to have respect in our admission of Church members to
union in Judgment, (at least in all the ordinances of Christ) that peace and
love in the Church might be preserved; she did eagerly contend against this
motion, and occasioned long and sad disputes betvveen the Church and her self,
especially concerning singing of Psalms, the practice of which she absolutely
denied, and declared That praises and thanksgivings unto God in prayer were
only that singing which the Scripture requires. This also the generality of
the then Church members did witness.

Sol. 1. Mr. Stucley was not present at this meeting.

2. Those who made this motion were some of them very vveak and erroneous in
their Judgment.

3. When this motion was made, we were without some of the ordinances, and so
continued for some years after this, And they who made this motion were of a
very indifferent Spirit, as to the procureing them, until they had settled
themselves in public offices. This was such a burden unto me, as that I was
very much dissatisfied; when as they (who needed some to inform their
Judgments) who made so little Reckoning of the ordinances, should yet be so
forward after union in Judgment: I conceived the work we had to do, was to
free our selves from that Confusion in which we were, by getting officers and
ordinances.

4. As to Singing of Psalms, It Is true, I did at that time question it, which
does administer matter of daily humiliation unto me, to consider and remember
the darkness of my mind, that has and continually does, cause me to wander
from the way of the lord to the right hand and to the left; But yet Mr Stucley
has little Reason to Charge me with it, for,

1. He was the first that unsettled me as to this practice, by Speaking against
it himself, and

2. Some of his members have spoken more slightingly of this ordinance then
ever I did, in affirming that one who was possessed of the devil would singe
Psalms, that they who sunge Psalms, sunge lies etc.

3. The generality of the People that were for separation every where Scrupled
Singing, as to the matter, manner, place or time: So that it was a vain thing
at such a time to Expect union as to this ordinance, much more to press it so
eagerly, as to make it a necessary qualification of Church member ship, when as
the Apostle says, Him that is weak in the faith receive you, but not to
doubtful disputations: whereupon I did oppose, not union, so much as the pride
and irregularity of three members,

Mr Owen, and John Whitehorne (then servant to Mr Main) who took upon them to
deny Admission unto two persons who proposed themselves, because they differed
in judgment about the Circumstance of this ordinance, and that before it was
debated by the Church (consisting at that time only of eight or nine persons)
when as admitting or refusing of persons was then accounted a Church act, that
which was to be debated by the whole. These persons did affectionately declare,
that they were in the dark about the manner of singing, not knowing whether it
were a praising of God in a musical tune, or praising of him in prayer: one of
them being asked, whether she looked on singing of Psalms as an ordinance of
God, she answered, that she looked on praising of God, as an ordinance of God,
and as for singing, as now used, she could not say but it might be an ordinance
of God, however it was doubtful to her: This person was afterward received
into the Church, and has attested this under her own hand; so that its
evident, these words were spoken by others, and if I did afterward speak
them, it was on the behalf of those persons whose judgment I spoke, more then
mine own. And farther, the desire I had to be informed concerning it, put me
upon objecting many things against it, especially when Mr Stucley was
present: for this cause also was I very earnest with them to procure an able
Minister, as all the then Church can witness.

Instance 3. Thirdly, she has opposed several persons in their Admission,
who have been known to be of approved godliness and integrity; and those
who have been most liable to Exception, she has most contended for, insomuch
that the Church, having respited the admission of a person concerning whose
conversation they were not sufficiently satisfied; she did openly declare
against it, in these words, That it was an unrighteous sentence: this
particular was witnessed by four persons.

Resol. As to the former part of the Accusation, my opposing persons (reputed
godly) in their admissions, I answer,

1. They themselves have done the same, as appears in my answer to the
Accusation immediately preceding this: They denied admission to two persons,
esteemed godly, because they scrupled Singing, and for their unwillingnesse to
speak their Experiences in a public meeting.

2. I never opposed any for their godliness, and as for any who were esteemed
godly, I never opposed them alone, without other members, why am I therefore
more Contentious then they?

3. They were not all godly whom I opposed, as is evident in Ganicle, who
after his Admission (which I withstood) turned Quaker.

As to the second part of the Accusation, my contending for those who were
most liable to exception, I answer. The persons I contended for are now many
of the^ Church Members, and such (I conceive) as Mr Stucley, and the rest, do
not now look upon as liable to exception.

As for the person concerning whom I used those words, that it was an
unrighteous sentence, it was A. P. one generally accounted godly, yea Mr
Stucley himself has given this Testimony of her often, that she would oppose
Sin where ever she found it, that she would not fear to Reprove it, where
ever she came, she being in fellowship with us from the first beginning, did
at length propose her self to be admitted a Churchmember, but this was
denied her, because of her unwillingnesse to declare her Experiences in a
public meeting, this was the only reason (that ever I heard) why she was
then kept off.

Afterward, when the Admission of members began to be in private, she
proposed her self again, but was refused the second time, because that some
had a prejudice against her, for which (as I conceived) they had little
reason, the things whereof she was accused were trivial, neither were they
sufficiently proved, yea Mr Stucley himself cleared her, as to some one of the
particulars: and although she was in society with us for some years, yet she
was not permitted to speak for her self: Her companion also, a Churchmember,
who lived continually with her by reason of her many weaknesses, was ready to
answer for her, but it would not be permitted.

After this meeting was dismissed, I desired M. Stucley that I might not be
present at such debates, for I looked on this as an unrighteous judgment, of
which he seemed then to take no great notice: if he were offended at that
expression, why did he not presently examine what ground I had for it? why
did he not convince me of the Equity of their proceedings? which until it be
done, I cannot but look on it to this day as an unrighteous sentence, such a
sentence as they have cause to be humbled for. It is not unknown to those,
who were acquainted with her, how that she was a person that had been
under great Terrors of mind, and affliction of spirit, even from her youth,
that she vvalked very sadly continually, partly by reason of the weakness of
her body, and partly by reason of those temptations, with which her whole
life was accompanied. so that it is not to be wondered at, if she were troubled
at her being twice refused admission, by those whom she did so highly honor;
and that she was so exceedingly troubled at it, appears by what she said to
me two days before her death, which was within fevv days after they had
denied to admit her, she then told me that their cruel dealing was the cause
of her sickness, and would be the cause of her death. And when she was told
that death could not come till his commission was sealed by him who had the
keys of hell and death; she ansvvered, she knevv that very well, but yet
they were the instruments which had effected it: she desired me likewise to
tell them of their pride and cruelty, and to beware of them; she likewise
grieved very much that Mr Stucley came not unto her when she sent for him in
her sickness: however she testified her love unto the Church and him, by
leaving them both Legacies: the morning after she dyed Mr R. (as I heard) came
to the house, and did with tears in his eyes, tell her companion to this
effect, that he and his wife had blessed God solemnly for that they had no hand
in this censure. Mr Stucley himself honored her so far after she was dead,
as to preach her funeral Sermon: by all which it appears how little reason
he has to charge me with being dissatisfied with their censuring her, and
calling it an unrighteous sentence, when as others besides my self did not
look on it as righteous.

Instance 4. She opposed the Admission of D. E. for her Joining with the
Presbyterians in the ordinance of the lords Supper, and insisted upon it with
much Earnestnes, she then declareing that she could not be satisfied
otherwise, then by her acknowledging it to be her Sin in breaking the law of
Charity: This was witnessed by Seven persons.

Solution. This cannot prove me Contentious, any more then the generality of
them, who have acknowledged that they did speak against her; and some of them
told me, that whereas I had one thing against her, they had twenty: yea Mr.
Stucley himself was so dissatisfied with her, as that he took advice with
another minister about her; but I remember the law of Charity to the dead, and
therefore forbear to add any more, but refer the Reader to my Narrative, where
she is brought in as a witness against me for lying, as she is here to prove
me contentious. Surely if Mr. Eveleigh did ever love her whiles she lived, the
best testimony he can give of it will be by letting her alone, to rest quietly
in her grave, and not urge me any more to publish that, which the law of
Charity requires to be concealed.

Instance 5. She caused a great deal of disturbance amongst us after the
Officers were chosen, in pressing with much earnestness that Mr. Stoneham
might be chosen Pastor: this was witnessed by three persons.

Resol. I know not what he means by disturbance, nor who was disturbed,
neither have I any ground to believe that I caused the least disturbance to
any, as to this particular. If I had caused such a great deal of disturbance
amongst them, it might have been witnessed by more than three witnesses. And as
for Mr. Stoneham I wonder they should allege him as an Instance of my
Contentiousnesse now he is absent, who when he was present in the name of the
Church pronounced me innocent, as to this very impeachment, after he was
Officer.

Inst. 6. She did a long time contend for women's speaking in the Church; and
being admoshed for practicing accordingly, she did openly profess that she
would not be present at Church meetings when matters were debated, unless she
might have that liberty, and being denied, she ever since contemptuously
neglected Church meetings, and slighted the officers of the Church.

In page 20 of Mr. Mall's book, he lays down the charge in these words. She
took liberty of speaking in the Church for some time, and being reproved by me
for it, from time to time there was a visible decay of affection to me etc.

Solut. That it is false, as to the whole charge taken together, appears, in
that there are none (as in the former particulars) mentioned who did witness
it, neither will he ever find any (unless they be desperately hardened) that
dare affirm it, which I shall make evident in my Answers to the several
particulars thereof.

As to the first particular (viz.) she took the the liberty of speaking, and
she did a long time contend for women's speaking etc.

To this I answer,

1 As for women's speaking it was usually practiced amongst us by the rest of my
Sex. And it is well known that the power was pretended at first to be in the
body of the people, in the multitude, so that every one had the liberty of
assenting or dissenting, of arguing and debating any matter proposed, whether
men or women. If women were denied the liberty of speaking, how could they
declare their Experiences: yea A. P. was kept off for refusing this.

2. It is false that I took the liberty of speaking, it was not only given me,
but the liberty of being silent was denied me, and that by Mr. Stucley
himself, who would send for me at the meetings, even then when there was never
a woman of the Church but my self: and afterward many times he would single
me out in the meetings, and urge me very earnestly to declare my Judgment in
reference to what had been proposed.

3. As to my contending for women's speaking, by my former Answers it appears,
that Mr Stucley has little reason to charge me with it, unless he expected
that I should be as fickle as himself, in taking up, and laying down opinions
and practices, as they suited with, or thwarted his humor and interest.

As to the second particular, whereas he says he admonished and reproved me
for it from time to time, I answer,

That all the Admonition and Reproof I had from him, was that mentioned in my
Narrative, viz: that my speaking was disrelishd by some, whereupon I resolved
Silence for the future, although I had looked on the Contrary as my duty
formerly; which resolution I accordingly kept always after the Officers were
chosen, unless it were when I was required to give in my thoughts concerning a
person, proposed or asked a question; yea Mr. Stucley witnesses for me in the
charge it self, where he says, it was a long time that I contended for women's
speaking, and in Mr Mall's book for some time etc. By which it is evident that
I did not continue in the practice thereof to the last: how can then my
speaking be brought as an Instance to prove me contentious (one ground of their
Suspension) near three years after I had left of this practice.

As for what he says followed on his Reproving and admonishing me, viz. 1 A
decay of Affection to him.

I answer, if there were such a visible decay of affection, he mistook the
cause of it. It was not his reproving of me, no, the reproof was so mild and
gentle, and at such a distance, as that I had little reason to be angry with him
for it. But it was his selfe-seeking, and minding his own things more then the
things of Christ etc. against which I did declare my dislike both before and
after this reproof and admonition.

As to what he says, that after their denying me the liberty of speaking, I
contemptuously neglected Church meetings, and slighted the officers.

I answer that it is a gross lie, a lie so egregious, as that the whole church
can witness (if they please) against it.

For I was after this constantly at church meetings, the liberty of speaking by
a Brother being allowed me; yea I declared that I was very much dissatisfied,
because the meetings (after the Officers were chosen) for conferring one with
another, were not continued as formerly, I never absented my self, but upon
some necessary hindrance, which was not often.

As for slighting of the Officers --

I answer, that I gave them so much honor as was due unto them according to my
power; if they had not so much as they desired, let them consider whether they
did not desire more then they deserved. They that rule well, are worthy of
double honor.

3d Charge. The Censoriousness of her Spirit was evide^ced in her uncharitable
language concerning the Presbyterians, and us also: reporting one to be fallen
from the faith, another to have nothing of God in her; charging Mr. Stoneham to
have walked contrary to the Apostles counsel, 2 Cor. 4.2. And to have such
expressions in preaching and prayer, as were but as chafe to the wheat. And
imputing the afflictions of some of the church to their unworthy receiving of
the Lords body. These were proved by many witnesses, and her own letters.

Ans. As to the first Article, which concerns the Presbyterians, I answer, I
must acknovvledge and confess, that difference in judgment did likewise cause
some breach in affection, that I was too much svvayed with a spirit of
separation, which made me prone to censure those who differed from me in
judgment more then was fit, which I have cause to bewail and lament. But
yet I cannot but vvonder that Mr Stucley should be so far blinded with
passion, as to censure me for this, when it is well known that neither
himself, nor any of his Congregation, are in a capacity to fling so much as
one stone at me upon this account. It is now the fifth time he has mentioned
the Presbyterians in his threefold Accusation; for what reason, though he
himself knows best, yet others cannot be ignorant of, and as for the hope he
puts in this, I believe it will prove but a Spiders web. I shall only add
this, That if my Tongue were against the Presbyterians, so would my hand
likewise, had I harkened to Mr Stucley.

As to my uncharitable language concerning themselves, he does instance in
several particulars, which I shall answer in that order he lays them down,
having desired him in the general to consider those reproachful, bitter,
unchristian Raylings against Mris Allen and my self, wherewith both his
Pamphlets are full, and see whether they do not far exceed all the hard
speeches I have given of them.

As for the particulars they are (viz.) 1. My reporting one to be fallen from
the faith.

Resol. I do not remember that ever I used such an expression in reference to
any of them, as (fallen from the faith.) There was (its true) one, concerning
whom, when they were about to choose him to be an Officer, I said, that I did
fear he was not sound in the faith, for which I had good ground, neither did I
hereby intend to reproach that person, but to prevent the evil that might
follow, in case one not sound in the faith were chosen an Officer.

2ly. That another had nothing of God in her.

Resol. I never heard the least hint from them of any such expression, neither
do I remember that I ever used it concerning any among them. If it be that
person which I admonished, that is meant by Mr Stucley, as I have some ground
to conjecture, for I cannot conceive who it should be else. Then I say that it
is a gross mistake, if no worse, to affirm that I reported, that she had
nothing of God in her.

She was a person that pretended to a great deal of Assurance, whereupon I
was willing to have some conference with her, to know if she had any ground
for such an assurance. To this I was the more willing, because a member of the
Church did somewhat question it, who desired me to try whether it were so or
no, which I did: in my discourse I told her, that they who had this assurance
knew how they came by it, that where there is assurance, there is likewise
adherence, a closing with the promises, the workings whereof will be evident to
that soul which has attained it, that therefore she should do well to look to
the ground of her confidence, and be sure that she had Scripture for it. What
her answers were I shall not here mention; but it seems she did not like this
my plain and faithful dealing with her, as appears by her complaining of it
to some, who hereupon have now accused me for being so censorious as to
affirm that she had nothing of God in her, which is false; yea, I was so
unwilling to dishearten her, as that I told her, that grace was in the hidden
man of the heart, and not discernable many times where it is, though assurance
has alvvayes its evidence. Had I known that they had been offended with me
for this, I should have given them a full Account of what passed betvveen us,
whereby they would have known the truth of what was reported concerning
her: this had been far better then to accuse me for it so many years after.

3. As to that of Mr. Stoneham etc.

Resol. I must confess that when Mr Stoneham refused to declare the End of
that fast mentioned in my Narrative, I did look upon it as walking in
Craftiness, contrary to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.2.

And as to his Expressions in preaching etc. I conceived Mr. Stucley the
fittest to admonish him of his weakness; and therefore in a letter, I wrote
unto him these following words. "I shall entreat you to speak to Mr. Stoneham
of those Expressions he does often use to express spiritual things by; the
word (I conceive) is fittest to express spiritual mysteries and duties: I am
sure that is the sword of the Spirit, and that is able to make the man of God
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. The more wise the preacher was,
the more he sought to teach the people wisdom, and to find out acceptable
words, words of wisdom, that are as nails and goads fastened by the master of
the Assembly: I must confess I cannot close with his Expressions which are
usual and ordinary both in prayer and preaching, which is as the Chafe to the
wheat; and what is the chafte to the wheat? I should speak to him my self,
but I fear he will not hear it from me.

The ground on which I went, was that of the Apostle: say to Archippus, take
heed to thy ministry that thou fulfill it. Would it have been an ingenuous
return of Archippus to censure, suspend, or excommunicate a person for giving
him such an admonition? let Mr. Stucley judge.

Lastly, concerning my imputing the affliction of some of the church to their
unworthy receiving etc.

Resol. For answer hereunto, I shall here set down what I wrote in the same
letter concerning it, viz.

"It is and has been a great trouble to me, that there is no means of
instructing by Catechizing, which is like, in my apprehension, to put a stop in
the way of the Gospel. And I conceive the ordinance of the Lords supper cannot
be kept pure, without instructing those that are of the Church, younger ones
especially, in the mystery of discerning the Lords body: for this many are
weak and sick, the Apostle lays it down as a Cause of that sickness and
death that was amongst them. For my part it is my fear that the Lord has a
controversy with us for not discerning the Lords body, and not judging our
selves. Surely the Lords hand that is upon us, and those afflictions that have
been upon me, has put me upon serious enquiry after the Lord in his word; and
I am afraid we do not walk up to our own principles, and keep the ordinances
pure.

Behold Mr. Stucley's discretion and ingenuity in censuring me for censuring my
self, which I did in that letter as well as others. I did impute the
afflictions on my self and them, either to the omitting of the administration
of the Lords supper for a long time, without giving any reason; or to our not
discerning the Lords body, which I was persuaded that many amongst us by reason
of their ignorance could not do, I did verily think that the Lord was angry
with us for this. I was so sensible of Gods afflicting hand, as that I could
not but discover my fear unto Mr. Stucley, that he might set upon reforming
what was amiss, for I thought I had herein to do with Christians, and not with
Scorners: it was the least of my thoughts, that ever I should be censured for
it.

Having finished his threefold charge, he proceeds to add somewhat concerning
my contumacious refusal of admonition in page 45. of his Answer to Mr. Toby
Allen, in these words: I might tell thee I have several times endeavored to
convince her of her sin, yet I do not remember that ever she acknowledged her
self guilty, and that several persons that were sent to her (or that went
voluntarily) about the work of admonition, came away from her with a burdned
spirit. But I shall refer thee to 20 and 21 page: of my Sermon in the true
Account etc.

Here he tells the world that I refused admonition, first from himself,
secondly from others, and then refers the Reader for farther Satisfaction to
the true Account, etc.

1 As to his admonition he says, I might tell thee I have several times etc.

Resol, You cannot tell this without telling a lie, for I was never admonished
by you for any sin that I continued in after admonition, either before my
leaveing you or since.

Not before. This you acknowledged to me when I asked, whether you had ever
admonished me, you told me you had not: this you confessed to Mr. Ford and Mr.
Bartlett.

Not since. For I could never speak with you, after you had accused me of lying.

Its true you admonished me for hearing another minister; but that this is a
sin, you dare not (it seems) affirm or maintain: for it is not so much as
named among those Crimes laid to my charge either in the true account, or in
your Answer to Mr. Toby Allen. And therefore what reason is there that I should
acknowledge my self guilty?

2 As to the Second (viz.) that several persons that were sent unto her etc.
came away with burdened Spirits.

Resol. The errand they came about was not to admonish me for lying etc. But
partly to take me off from hearing other ministers, and since I left them to
persuade me back again: it was my not consenting unto them in this, that made
them go away with a burdened spirit, and not because of my proud and lofty
Carriage (as he says page 20 True Acc:) for I always treated with them
Civilly, returning them thanks several times for their (pretended love) to me;
I never baulkt discourse with them. And always at their departing, said, let
me be convinced from the word what my duty is, and I shall submit.

I desired the Elder before the fast in order to their Excommunication, and
since that fast others also, that they would bring the business to a new
Trial before the ministers, whom they themselves had acquainted with it
formerly, and with whom I was then in Communion: had the Incestuous person done
so, I am persuaded he would never have been delivered to Satan.

The letter likewise sent Mr. Stucley by Mris. Allen and my self makes it
evident, that neither of us contemptuously refused admonition according to the
rule of Christ.

3 As for his referring the reader to page 20. 21. of the true Account, as if
there were other Crimes mentioned there, for brevities sake he omitted here, I
say.

That in page 20 of the True (which yet some think to be a very defective)
Account, there is only one Crime mentioned, which he has not accused me of
here in this other Book, and that is my unfaithfulness in not reproving
privately.

Charge. I am confident (says he) that there is scarce one Brother or Sister
that can bear witness of her faithfulness in Reproving privately, though she
so much Blazoned abroad supposed or real infirmities, etc.

Resol. 1, I am Confident that some can (if they will not hold the truth in
unrighteousness) bear witness of my faithfulness in reproving them
privately, I reproved Mr. Raddon and his wife, Mr Eveleighs maid, yea Mr.
Eveleigh himself, both privately, and publicly when his offense was public,
according to that of the Apost. 1 Timothy 5.20. And if none of these will
witness, yet Mr Stucley himself can, if he call himself to mind, he can bear
me witness, that I reproved him for his indifferency of Spirit in the work of
God, for his preaching funeral Sermons, for his Serpentine subtilty in his
Entrance on his Office, and in reference to his Carriage in Mr. Madder's
business, yea he has witnessed that I reproved him for the unrighteous
sentence in reference to A. P.

2 As for Blazoning abroad their supposed or real infirmities, I know not what
he means, or of what thing he speaks it, whether whiles I was with them, or
since I left them.

If he mean thereby that when I was among them, I did discover the nakedness
of a Brother or Sister to others who were not in Communion with us, I say it is
false, and dare him to instance so much as in one particular.

If by abroad, he mean others of the Society, I acknowledge it. But then it
was to such as by reason of their intimacy and familiarity with the offenders
might in all probability prevail, more with them then I could. And for this
very reason did I several times address my self to Mr. Stucley, which he
acknowledges a little before this charge, though, through Envy, he call it an
Impeachment and accuse me for it, though I had the house of Cloe for my Example.

Lastly, If (By abroad) he mean that I have divulged their miscarriages to
others since I left them, To this I answer.

That even since my leaveing them, It was my desire to continue a good opinion
of many among them: So unwilling was I to make known that which might blemish
any of them, As that I suffered in mine own name, by concealing their
miscarriages, until such time as it was noised abroad, that I had not left
them, but that they had cast me out as a liar, a contentious and a troublesome
person, whom they could no longer Suffer, nor have communion with: Then indeed
I did begin to pull off their masking robes and vizards, as Mr Stucley
expresses it in the true Account, that so it might appear to the world, how
unlikely it was, that such (as many of them were) should cast off any upon the
Account of lying. Again,

Charge. In page 21. He brings in a passionate expression of mine in these
words, And being farther pressed to hear the Church, she refused, and (if my
memory fail not) she said, She would be drawn asunder by wild horses rather
then come among us.

Resol. I confess the expression, whether there were not cause for it, let
others judge, they having dealt so basely with me as to accuse me of lying,
when I went unto them a little before to give them a reason why I left them. A
burnd child (we say) dreads the fire: I had been burnd once by adventuring
singly among them, therefore I durst not do it again the second time. So that
Mr Stucley needed not here to insert this parenthesis (if my memory fail me
not) it would have done better in all the other Articles of his accusation, in
which, if his memory did not fail him, he will never be able to free himself
from that, for which he pretends he has Excommunicated me.

But that I did not refuse to hear the Church, the several answers I gave to
the messengers sent me can witness. Besides, when M. Eveleigh came to acquaint
me with the Fast, in order to Excommunication. I desired that the business my
might be referred to Mr Forde, and Mr Bartlet, who had formerly heard it: and
after the Fast I told two other of their members, that they should bring it to
a new trial before the Ministers of Exeter with whom I was in Communion,
promising to stand to their determination.

The letter likewise Mris Allen and my self sent the Church, does witness
sufficiently, that neither of us refused to hear the Church.

Unto this Charge he adds that of separation.

Charge. And though she had lifted up her right hand to heaven to walk in
fellowship with us, yet has she separated from us, and to this day sought not
reconciliation, neither has she expressed Repentance for her Sin, etc.

Resol. This is likewise confessed and acknowledged that I Separated from them,
The grounds of my Separation are laid down in my narrative. To which I shall
farther add.

1. That there was a clause in our first Engagement binding every one of us not
to rest in the light then received, but to Study to know the mind of God,
and live up to it, and so accordingly having Studied the mind of God,
concerning our separation from other Churches of Christ, I found it to be
Sinful, and therefore durst no longer to continue therein.

2. If I engaged so to walk in fellowship with you as to deny it to others of
Gods people, of which there are many (I hope) in this City, I am Sorry for it,
and to show my Repentance I have reformed, by leaveing your Society. in which I
could not continue without the guilt of Sin, If a man should promise, yea
Swear to that, which is Sin he had better to break then to keep his oath.

yea we were likewise engaged to hold communion with other Churches of Christ;
But this is now denied, unless it be with those that are Congregationall.

As for what he adds concerning my not expressing repentance for my sin: etc.

Resol. I shall answer with Job: c. 27. God forbid that I should justify you
(by confessing that which I am not guilty of) till I die, I will not remove my
integrity from me. My righteousness (as to your impeachment) I hold fast, and
will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me (for basely submitting to
any thing against my conscience) so long as I live.

In page 23. He speaks of my undervaluing, Excommunication and slighting it, in
these words (viz.)

The other (meaning me) as little valued this Institution of Christ for (as I
am informed) she said, Excommunication was but as the breaking of a horse over
the hedge, etc.

Resol. I have been heretofore, and am at present so far from slighting
excommunication rightly administered, as that it makes me tremble to behold my
self accused thereof, as if I slighted the ordinance it self: I look on it as
an ordinance of Jesus Christ, as that Sword which he has given his Church for
the cutting off contagious members, as that, which he has appointed and
ordained to as high an end (for ought I know) as any other ordinance, (viz) the
destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus.

And as for the slighting expression concerning this ordinance, with which he
charge me.

I say it is a notorious slander, as he has laid it down, the truth is, that
to some, who spoke about excommunication I told them how it had been formerly
abused in this nation by many who (as it was reported) would excommunicate for
such a Trespass, as a horse to break over a hedge; and farther added, that I
valued an unjust excommunication no more then I did that: and because I look on
Mr Stucleys late excommunication as such, therefore do I set light by it: as
Luther did by the Popes bull, for which he was never charged by any Protestant:
in doing of which I am no more to be condemned for slighting this ordinance in
general then he. It will be found upon trial that Mr Stucley has a far
lower esteem of this ordinance, then my self, otherwise he would never have
so abused it as he has, for the promoting his own interest and carnal
designs, which is the ready way to make it contemptible, in the Judgment and
opinion of those who are not well acquainted with it.

Thus I have done with the true account, and now return to what he says
farther concerning me in his answer to Mr Toby Allen: page 45. Her Crimes and
contumacy being very great: the Church thought themselves obliged to suspend
her from Communion before ever she joined in the Sacrament with any other.

Resol. That this Suspension was for no other crimes or contumacy, then my
leaving them, and my refuseing to return unto them: And therefore it was not
thought sufficient to debar me from communion with others of Gods people in
this City, by those who heard the whole business, and thoroughly examined the
Circumstances thereof.

Char. In the next place he charge Mr Allen with a lie, for affirming. That
the Quarrel between the Church and me began, because I had a mind to hear
some other ministers which (he says) is abominably false, and farther, that
this was no particular for which I was ever admonished by the Church in page
45.46. And again, he says, That the Quarrel began in my contentious Spirit
and sowing Divisions, and was increased by lying.

Res. 1 That I was admonished, for hearing other ministers, by the Church it is
manifest by what is already set down.

2 That the quarrel did not begin in my contentious Spirit, and sowing
divisions; nor was increased by lying: it is also apparent, as for lying, I was
never charged with it till I left them: and as for contention, etc. I never
meddled with Church affairs after the officers were chosen; unless it were
once in reference to a person proposed, when Ganicle interrupted me.

The Qurarell Brake out at a Tuesdayes meeting, Mr. Stucley was absent from
that meeting and so knows nothing of it but by the report of others, it so
much concerning me, I have reason to know it better then others: The account
whereof according to my best Remembrance is this.

On the day before, being monday after dynner Mr. Stonham and his wife came to
visit me, Before I could come to them, my husband, in discoursing with them
said, that I had heard Mr. Ford the day before, when I came into the Room, Mr
Stonham looked on me with an Angry countenance and would scarce Speak,
whereupon I asked his wife what did aile him, who ansvvered that he was not
well pleased with me for my goeing away to hear, she told me likewise that
he did not like Mr Eveleighs maid, and farther added, that she heard that I
had somewhat against her, she is (said I) a stranger unto me, and therefore it
is my desire that she may be kept off one week longer until I have informed my
self concerning her, Then (said she) do you be present at the meeting to speak
to have her kept off, this she desired with much earnestness.

On the Tuesdaie following after dinner Mr Spraigue the younger came to me from
Mr Stoneham (as he said) who had been with him the day before, and desired him
to take me off from hearing Mr Ford. To this end (among other things) he told
me, that those sheep, which had been used to mean feeding, were not fit for
fat pasture, it was the way to bring them to the scab: he likewise spoke
something about Mr Eveleighs maid, and earnestly desired me to be at the
meeting. I told him that I then lay under some trouble of spirit, and so could
not be fit for such an Employment, however upon his earnest entreaty, I fitted
my self to go.

When I was come, they began (contrary to their usual practice) to talk of
the maid, before ever the Lord had been sought unto in prayer: Mr Owen, sitting
at the table near me, I willed him to acquaint them, that it was my desire she
might be kept off a week longer (as I remember) until I had informed my self
concerning her.

Mr Eveleigh, presently replied, that he would give Testimony for her: I told
him that a master or superior was not so fit to give Testimony for a servant or
inferior, and withal instanced in Gehazi, who carried himself fairly in his
masters presence.

After this one Ambrose a shoemaker was proposed, who (it seems) wrought with
Ganicle, concerning whom Mr Eveleigh asked me whether I had any thing against
him? I answered that I had nothing, and also that though he were a stranger
unto me, yet I had heard a good report of him: upon which Ganicle said that I
would take his Testimony for his man, and not Mr Eveleighs for his maid, yea
(said Mr Eveleigh) that is the very thing, because it is my Testimony,
therefore she will not take it, adding farther that it was scandalous, and that
I was offensive or contentious, and had hindered their proceedings for many
years, insomuch as he could not partake with me in the Ordinances, until he
was satisfied.

I replied, that this would not be borne, and that if my carriage had bin so
offensive, I should have heard of it, in some other place and in some other
manner: and then I presently appealed to all the Congregation desiring them to
be faithful unto me, as they would Answer it another day, by declaring wherein
my carriage had been offensive, and what evils they had seen in me: And when I
perceived they were unwilling to meddle in it, I told them plainly, that I
would come no more among them, unless they would satisfy me herein.

At length Mr Stoneham began his prayer after this manner: Lord, we have waited
for a prayer, and now thou have given us in a prayer, it may be, the return of
many prayers, and then bewailed that the serpent was gotten into the garden:
After the prayer, Mr. Eveleigh and my self were to withdraw; but Mr Eveleigh
(before he went out) told them, he left it to the Church to determine, whether
I were not contentious. Two things (said he) I have against her, Contention,
and her going away to hear Mr Ford, which the Church neither can, nor will
bear. And he farther charged John Whitehorne (the chiefest then in this
business) that he should insist upon Contention, and if he wanted an Instance,
that he should name Agnes Pullen.

When we were withdrawn, the generality of them said, they did believe I was a
good woman etc. But then they were asked again, whether through a mixture of
Corruption it might not tend to Contention? to which this reply was made, That
they did not know but it might. Mr. Stoneham told me, that they would not for a
world charge me with contention, but did fear lest through a mixture of
Corruption, it might tend thereunto.

Many of them were offended with the Elders dealing so disorderly with me, but
knew not how to help it, and desired me to take no notice of it.

By all which it appears

1 That they were very much displeased with me for hearing others besides our
own Officers, though they were unwilling to quarrel with me openly about it.
Mr. Eveleigh (it is true) accused me thereof at this meeting, but (as I am
informed) some of them did very much dislike his mentioning of that particular;
and refused to meddle with it, because they thought it fitter to be concealed,
then that it should be publicly taken notice of.

2 That it is very probable they had a resolution (some of them) to quarrel
with me about Mr. Eveleigh's maid, in case I could not be prevailed with to
leave off hearing of other ministers, why else should they be so earnest with
me (after I had given a sufficient Excuse for my absence) to be present at the
meeting? why else should Mr. Stoneham use such expressions in his prayer.

3 That although Mr Eveleigh at this time (when the Quarrel brake out) accused
me of Contention; yet that the Quarrel did not begin in my contentious spirit,
and sowing divisions, is apparent. 1 Because I did no more then Mr. Stoneham
approved of, and Mris. Stoneham desired me to do; so that I could be no more
contentious in opposing Mr. Eveleighs maid, then they. 2. This business was
ended in three days; they had nothing after this against me, but my hearing
other ministers, as Mr. Eveleigh himself told me.

4 And therefore notwithstanding the quarrel brake out at the time, when I
opposed Mr. Eveleigh's maid, yet it is very apparent that it began, was
continued, carried on, and increased even to a breach, only for my hearing of
another minister: for as to the charge of lying I never heard of it till my
coming off, as I have already declared.

In the next place he takes shame to himself, that he did not sooner excite
the church to their duty, as to the last Remedy for the healing of this woman,
etc.

Resol. I believe in the end he will see more cause to take shame to unto
himself, in that he has so rashly excited them to this censure, before he
ever discharged the duty of admonition.

Let him consider whether he has not run before the Lord sent him, let him
produce his warrant to Excommunicate, before ever he proved the Crime, or
admonished me of the Evils, for which he says I am Excommunicated.

He adds, that there are some full of evil surmises about this matter, as if
the Church would never have proceeded against her, but upon a design to hinder
others from deserting us.

Resol. It is no surmise, for

1 One of their own Officers (Mr. Slade by name) talking with an Alderman of
this City about this Excommunication, told him that if they had proceeded
against me sooner, Mris. Allen would not have left them.

2 Mr. Stucley does not in plain terms deny it. And though that which follows
concerning the unquietness of his spirit about my not Repenting may imply a
denial, yet

3 It is that which he has in a manner acknowledged in page 10. of the True
Account, in these words, If we had discharged our duty sooner on the liar, we
might have prevented the others fall, her disobedience and perverseness of
spirit.

As for that he professes, he had no quiet in his Spirit, that a Person should
lie so long suspended, and give no Evidence of Repentance, but the Contrary
etc.

Resol: The Suspension was two months after I had left them; the messenger
that was sent to give me notice thereof said it was in order to my Return, a
Return to them, this is the Repentance they expected, and I resolved against,
unless (as I told the Elder) I might have communion with them, and not to
separate from others that were godly.

But what quiet can Mr Stucley have now, that he has passed a Sentence of
Excommunication without admonition, seeing I so earnestly desired it? vwhat
comfort can he have in passing this Censure three years wanting a few days
after I had left them? when as in all probability by reason of forgetfulness,
there could not be a charging of sin, so as to convince and work a kindly
Repentance.

If his conscience had troubled him, because of my lying in Sin, without
evidencing Repentance, then his conscience is either blind or baffled; else why
had not his conscience checked him, when he discovered no zeal against lying,
when he was so often pressed unto it by me? why had not his conscience troubled
him, when there was a lie affirmed with so much Confidence by John Whitehorne,
when he offered to depose it upon Oath, and yet there was clear Testimony
brought by some of their members to prove it to be a lie? this person is under
his charge, yet here his conscience has not disquieted him.

And for what he adds, That to quiet his conscience he took advice with
several Ministers, and so concluded the matter by them and his own Conscience.

Resol. 1. Why did he go so far away? had he desired to have the truth
brought to light, then why should he refuse to advise with those Ministers that
he himself acquainted with the business; and when I so often desired them to
bring it to a new trial before them, with a promise to submit unto their
determinations, without expecting any favor from them.

2. How could those Ministers (whoever they be) persuade him to such a censure,
without advising him to bring the business to a Trial, without hearing both
parties speak? will not Festus rise up in judgment against them? Did these
Ministers in their advice duly weigh the weight of this Ordinance, and the
pretiousnesse of souls for which Christ did Sweat, Bleed and died, for which
he ever lives to make intercession? Durst they upon the Report of one party
without Examination, give such advice in a corner? the Lord lay not this sin to
their charge: It Is not the first time that Satan has made use of such
instruments, Christ saw him in a Peter etc. I confess it would have been more
easily borne, if they had been such as have not known the Father, nor the Lord
Jesus, that had given this wicked advice; but that it should come from them,
who have (or at least pretend to) more acquaintance with Christ then others,
this is as the Vinegar and the Gall.

Charg. p. 47. In the last place he gives the world a Catalogue of lying
defamations, spoken by me since my Suspension.

Resol. As for those lying defamations, I answer briefly: That many of those
Reports are no lying Defamations, but manifest truths, as I have made it
already to appear in my Narrative and Vindication; and make no question but
shall be able to do the like of the rest, if called unto it, even as many of
them as he shall prove to proceed from me, far better then Mr Stucley will
be able to make good (in a regular and orderly proceeding) those slanderous
reports concerning me, with which he has filled the world, notvvithstanding
he boasts so much of witnesses, at the end almost of every Charge.

And now I suppose the Reader is sufficiently tired with perusing an
unpleasing and broken History, I shall therefore now hasten to an End.

If the Gospel be the great Salvation that is delivered by Christ himself,
and the Revelation of it completed, and it be once delivered to the Saints,
and no other Revelation to be expected till Christ come, and this Salvation
being so glorious, as that the Angels desire to look into it, and there being
such a Curse by Christ pronounced on such as shall add to it, or take from it,
then let it serve as an Apology for me in my learning of them. This was that
which I did desire and aim at, that I might be instructed in the mystery of
this great Salvation, God manifest in the flesh etc. It Is that was in my eye,
and that I still follow after (although I have not yet attained) to comprehend
with all Saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge; yet through grace this was,
and is that one thing, that I may know Christ and him crucified, and that I may
with the Apostle Phil. 3.12, 13, 14. know him, and the power of his
Resurrection, and the fellowship of his Sufferings, so as to be made
conformable to his death, that I may know this great mystery which has been
hid from other ages, but is now revealed unto us by the holy Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.1. Know him so, as to bear about in my body the
dying of the Lord Jesus; that the life of Jesus may be made manifest in this
mortal flesh, that the old man may be Crucified with him, that the body of Sin
might be destroyed, that I might not serve sin; This was that which to the
glory of free grace I can say in some measure (if my heart do not deceive me)
was my desire in Joining with them, and in my withdrawing from them, I finding
not a Sufficiency in their Ministry for edification and building up; and being
disapointed of my expectation in the ministry, and continuing my practice of
hearing Mr Ford, sometimes once a Lords day merely out of necessity, and
observing what they did after they were in office and settled themselves, in
stead of discovering their love and faithfulness to the peoples souls in
their diligent circumspection and watchfulness over them, and discovering to
them the hidden mysteries of the Gospel, they were very remiss, the work
they were employed in was to exalt themselves, and bring the people into
Subjection unto them, silenceing some, and censuring others without allowing
them any liberty to clear themselves, such as they supposed stood in their way,
and when this was effected, then they proceeded farther to take them off from
hearing any other minister, making that practice of hearing another minister,
when themselves preached, to be a going out of the Bosom of Christ into the
Bosom of Strangers; and such persons were Traitors and Rebels to Jesus
Christ, and should be so dealt withal; and what benefit was received by
another minister to be a delulusion and a Temptation, and a Judgment of God
upon the soul. And engaging the people at their admission, to believe it as an
Article of their faith, that a greater blessing was to be expected on their
ministry, then on any others, as if they preached another Jesus, or another
Spirit, or another Gospel: when the Apostle says, he that planteth and he
that waters are one, 1 Cor. 3. Was there not a cause to suspect what they
intended, but the liberty of dissenting was denied, and they proceeded to lay
aside their meetings for to confer together, and to consider one another, and
the ordinance of the Supper, that was laid aside a long time, fasting was
perverted to carry on their own designs, and to keep the people ignorant of
the occasion and ground of their fast.

I being troubled at this, and resolved not to be Silent to see what was done
by them, but rather to suffer, did discover my dislike of these practices, and
blamed them to their faces for walking in craftiness, contrary to the Apostle,
2 Cor. 4.2. and perverting and laying aside of the ordinances, then instead of
giving me any satisfaction (as I expected) did they craftily conspire to
entangle me, to fall to dispute about true Churches. And to seek occasion
against me, to defame me, and as if there had not been sufficient above ground,
rakt up the dead out of her grave, and made matter to frame an accusation
against me, for doing that which themselves the generality of them did the
same, as some of them have since acknowledged, and in what they accused me Mr
Stuckley himself cleared me, and here is the ground of all their charge of
scandal, which how cruel, and unjust, and unreasonable it is, I leave to the
impartial reader to Judge.

Thus seeing Gospel privileges, purity of ordinances, and liberty of
conscience lay a bleeding, and they walking contrary to their principles, and
often engagements, and having no way to free my self from partaking with them
in their evils, not only the liberty of speaking but of dissenting being
denied, unless it were purchased upon such terms as their ensnaring of me, and
of looseing peace and a good name, I not daring to make it known to other
members, lest I should be accounted contentious, having had experience of the
people formerly, and seeing the officers to be masters of the ordinance,
instead of dispensors, and to lord it over Gods heritage, as if they had
dominion over our faith: after often seeking of the Lord and enquiry in his
word according to that light I had received, after I had declared my resolution
and my grounds to the elder, I withdrew, according to the Apostles rule, 1
These: Hoping that by my withdrawing they might be more convinced, and that in
time the Lord would make them sensible of their usurpations, when they saw what
effects were produced, and so might put a stop for time to come to such
proceedings: and though I could expect little favor from them, unless the
Lord did convince them, and so humble their Spirits, yet having the Testimony
of mine own conscience, that I could say in in some measure with the Apostle,
herein did I exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense
toward God and toward man: and I considered that I should hereby keep and
preserve mine own peace, in having no hand in exalting of men and so opening a
way to bring in men's inventions, and to worship God according to the precepts
of men.

And Mr Stucley himself in his Sermon on that black and dark day has
acknowledged (as the Copy taken from his own mouth will testify) that I
separated from them on pretense of conscience, he might have left out the words
(on pretense) unless he take upon him to Judge the heart and conscience,
although Mr Mall in his printed True account (as he calls it) has not afforded
me so much charity as to put in that particular.

And Mr Stucley himself afterward page 23. says that I went away to avoid
the censure; here he contradicts himself more ways then one, for 1. If I went
away to avoid the censure, then I could not separate on pretense of conscience,
but if this be denied (as the leaving it out of his printed Sermon may infer
so much) 2. If I went away to avoid the censure, then he must be forced to deny
that I am excommunicated justly for lying, for how could I go away to avoid
the censure for lying, before ever I knew I should be charged with lying, for I
was never charged by him with lying until such time as I had really withdrawn
and separated from them.

The like Mr Allen has already declared of his wife, page 24. of his Truths
manifest, that the pretended crime or cause of excommunicating her, was in time
long after she left them.

Therefore (Reader) take notice of his gross contradiction of himself in what
he affirms.

And whereas he pretends that he had no quiet in his spirit that a person
should lie so long suspended and give no evidence of Repentance, and in his
prayer, that they have not past their censure in a revengefull way, and that
they could not answer the neglect of their censure one day longer.

If it be so, why must he take liberty to himself to defame me in my name, if
it were the sin only he aymd at? and why did he use such Epithites, as,
disconte^ted liar, notorious liar, egregious liar, Bryer in our sides,
companion for damned spirits, when as his conscience must needs tell him, that
he never accused me of one lie all those years that I was in fellowship with
them: And if he found me guilty of a lie, let him produce what lie it was, I
never heard of any yet, whiles I was with them, and when since I left them, he
carged me at first, it was then with an untruth.

And although I desired in our letter sent them to have the cause heard by
understanding and impartial men and promised to Submit, yet he slighted that,
and has taken liberty in pulpit and in print to render our names and our
persons odious to all the world, as if the sword of excommunication had not
been sharp enough, unless it were sharpened by him at the Philistines forge, and
in the mean time takes liberty to himself to practice that for which he
pretends he has censured me as for lying, I could instance in several of
their charges that they are no other but lies.

Not to mention the several reports that have been spread concerning me, as
not worth the taking notice of, which have one contradicted the other, and not
two of the Reporters found in one tale, as has been taken notice of (as I am
informed) by a person of credit, this is not worth the taking notice of.

But that false report that has been raised by them and spread in city and
country on Mr Ford the minister, that he should slight lying, and that say
lying was the property of a woman.

Whereas the truth is, that when Mr Ford and Mr Bartlet Ministers, and Mr
Stucley and Mr Eveleigh were met at Mr Fords house, Mr Stucley and Mr Eveleigh
accused me of Scandal, and brought in a charge of lying against me, instancing
in Mris Eveleigh and my speaking against the Presbyterians (which I have
already answered) Mr Ford still called for more, more charge: then to make up
their accusation, they said that I was fickle, Mr Ford answered them, that is
as much as to say, she is a woman, this I know to be the truth; and yet the
report is spread by them in City and Country, that he said that lying was the
property of a woman: and herein have they discovered their falsehood and rage
against such an Eminent labourer in Christ's Vineyard, who has given abundant
Testimony that he seeks not himself but the things of Christ.

And as for Contention, how has Mr Stucley discovered himself guilty to all
the world, Doeg like, falling on Magistrates and Ministers whom he supposes
stands in his way, as his Sermon and printed books do witness.

Give me leave to take notice of it, as David, when he heard how Saul had cut
off the Lords Priests (says he) I have occasioned the death of all these.

And for Censoriousnesse, how does it appear? not by secret search, but upon
their several Accusations, wherein the greatest ground of their proceedings
against me, has been a censuring of the ends of my words and actions, which is
Gods prerogative alone, who searches the heart, and tries the reins.

Let the Impartial Reader judge whether they sought the glory of Christ, and
to convince me of this sin, when it is that which was and yet is usually
practiced by themselves. Witness their usual calling Mr Fords preaching
Railing and nonsense; and some of them would have the Pulpit shut against Mr
Ford, and Would have had the notes of his Sermons to pick occasion against him,
and persuaded me not to hear him; and I was questioned many times for hearing
of him, not only the Lords days, but on Lecture days also.

I cannot but take notice of Mr Mall in his reasons pressing them to renew
their Covenant.

He says, such poor wretches are given up to Judicial hardness, so that they
are sorry for nothing so much, as that they with such a Church entered into
Covenant with God; and again, such wrethes they have renewed their Covenant
with hell and Satan.

For answer, what Covenant I have ented into with God, whether with them or any
other, I desire still to own and acknowledge, that I am engaged unto to
perform, and am resolved in the strength of Christ never to retract. And if in
any particular I have denied my Covenant with God, it lies upon them to
convince me of it. It is not enough for them to charge Covenant breaking, and
perjury, and Schism: it lies upon them to prove their charge, otherwise I am
not engaged to an Implicit faith to believe them.

I think our letter (we sent to them) will testify, that we did not retract
our Covenant with God, when we did profess our submission to the law and will
of Christ, wherein I think we did own our Covenant with God more than they did,
who by their Explicit Covenant engaged themselves to an Implicit faith, in
subjection to Mr Stucley's ministerial guidance and teaching, without any
restriction or limitation. And yet how does he boast page 13. as if they were a
company of believers that will part from life rather then from a little
command, and their hands are filled with both Tables: is not this practice of
theirs a contradiction to this profession, and yet page 29. exhorting them to
keep to the Church of Christ, he tells them he cannot but approve of their
purpose to subscribe a covenant, that will be a fence against a lawless Spirit.

Moses who was a servant in the house of God, and God testifies of him that he
was faithful in all the house of God; see Deuteronomy. 33.4. Moses commanded us a
law, even the Inheritance of the congregation of Jacob.

Is not this fence against lawless Spirits, that God has prescribed his
Church sufficient? but that Mr Stucley must engage the people to himself, as
if his design were to seek himself, and to espouse a people to himself, and
not to Christ.

It was the commendation that the Apostle gives of his hearers, that they
received the word with all readiness of mind, and earched the Scriptures
daily, whether those things be so or no: but here they Engage to absolute
subjection to Mr Stucleys Ministry without any Caution, I the rather take
notice of it, because they may consider, that whiles they are Censuring us,
they forget themselves, and their Engagements to Christ, and to his Laws; that
whereas they have professed the taking Christ for their King and Lawgiver, now
they set up men in the room of Christ, without any mention of the Law and
Septer of Christ: And yet he pretends that his book (called Manifest truth) is
set forth by him to prevent the Gospells suffering, although he ha h had a
Bratherly admonition given him by the unknown author, Diotrephes detected and
Archippus admonished, yet he never takes notice of this particular, to give any
Satisfaction unto it, or to remove the offense taken by it.

And now for a close of all I shall desire Mr Stucley to retire himself a
little from the world and those multitudes of designs he is at present so
much entangled with; having done this, seriously and sadly consider a while of
that great day of accounts, wherein the hidden works of darkness shall be
fully discovered by him whose eyes are as a flame of fire: if he does think in
good earnest that there is such a day coming wherein he must by accountable for
all his actions: let him I say, consider what account he can give to Christ of
his late proceedings against Mris Allen and my self; will it (thinks he) be
enough to say, that his credit and esteem in the world could not be upheld
without it? that the Interest of that party with whom he sided consisted
therein? that he had Majors, Colonels, Knights, Ladies, to stand by him; if he
account these vain and foolish pleas, now, why should he? how dared he act
upon such grounds now? His only way therefore will be to repent of this his
wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thoughts of his heart may be forgiven
him; which will be more to his honor, then by Printing any more angry books
against two weak women (who are not able to speak for themselves in Print
(neither is it required) so well as men, especially Scholars) to withold the
truth in unrighteousness, to oppress the Innocent, and to cover his own Sin,
which whosoever does, shall not prosper, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

FINIS.

