GOLIAHS HEAD Cut off with his own Sword; In a Combat betwixt little David, The
young Stripling, who stands in the power and strength of his God, and great
Goliath the proud Boaster, who stands in his own strength, glorifying in the arm
of flesh, and contemning and despising little David, because of his youth.

In a Reply to a Book, set forth by an un-named Author, under pretense of an
Answer to thirty six Queries, propounded by James Parnell, whom he in scorn
calls, the young Quaker. And also an Answer to several Counter-Queries,
propounded by the same unnamed Author, whom I understand to be one Thomas
Draton, A Teacher of the World, at Abbey Rippon, in Huntingtonshire, wherein
his folly and ignorance, is much laid open, and the pride and deceit of his
spirit much manifested; And also he that takes his part, who writes himself W.
P. who knows not the power of God, and therefore glories in the Length of
time, and the multitude of years. But Solomon, who was a wiser man then great
Goliath, said, that the honorable age is not that which is of long time,
neither that which is measured by the Number of years; but wisdom is the gray
hair: and an undefiled life is old Age. And therefore let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, for it is vanity.

Given forth from the spirit of the Lord in the behalf of Israel against the
Armies of the Aliens, who muster up themselves against the Lord, and his
Authority: by a friend to the Commonwealth of Israel, who is known to the
World, by the name James Parnel.

Who is a sufferer in outward bonds, for the testimony of the everlasting
truth, in Colchester Castle. 1655.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's, 1655.

The Title of the aforesaid Book.
An Answer according to truth, that trembles not, nor quakes, nor quaileth;
given to thirty six Queries, propounded by James Parnell (commonly called the
young Quaker) to an ancient Country Minister: with some Counter-Queries by the
said Minister, unto the said young Quack and his fellows.
HEre thou may be ashamed to style thy self an ancient Minister, Reply. Heb.
12.21. Jer. 23.9. Job 4.14 Ezekiel. 12.10.
who manifests such an Ishmaels spirit, who with reproachful words, makes a
scoff at the power of truth, which the Ministers of God in all ages witnessed,
which made them to quake and tremble: And though the truth neither quake, nor
quaileth, yet all that owned the truth, owned and witnessed quaking and
trembling: which truth thou manifests thy self but a professor of, and a
stranger to the power, and a despiser thereof: and therefore out from among the
Ministers of Christ thou art raised, Eccles. 12.3.
And thy Answer is not according to truth, but a Lie, as shall further be made
to appear hereafter, by him whom thou calls the young Quack, and it seems fear
surpriseth the heart of the Hypocrite, P: F. 22.14, 15. Priest.
so that thou art ashamed to own thy work with thy name;

And whereas thou say, Courteous Reader, we are forced, notwithstanding so
many Pa^phlets extant against the people called Quakers, to give answer to
thirty six Queries of James Parnells, the young Quaker. Although thou have
boasted thy self an ancient Minister, Rep.
and contemns me as a young Boy, yet here it appears, that thou art glad of
others to help thee to answer my Queries, as these words before mentioned does
testify. And yet it is but a Pamphlet, as thou and thy helpers do confess,
that those many are, that are extant against the people called Quakers. And
then thou run on in way of reproach, and scorn against me, because of my youth;
but the wisdom of Solomon answers you, That a poor and wise Child, is better
then an old foolish King, who will no more be admonished; Eccles. 4.13.
And therefore, when you think of your age, consider also your folly, and let
that stop your mouths, from professing your selves Ancients, who manifests
such a Light scornful spirit, and hates to be reformed.

And whereas thou say thou doubtest not, Priest.
but his Queries are the dictates of others, deceiving, and being deceived,
which they yet put under the Boys name, for the Credit of their cause.

Here also without doubt, Rep.
thy unbelieving heart is manifested, who without ground, measurest others,
according to thine own heart, who because thou make use of the dictates of
others, as here does plainly appear: therefore censurest others, which does not
add credit to thy cause, because thou boasts of thy age.

But according as thou believes, Priest.
so be it to thee: yet nevertheless, thou shall find that the truth I shall
maintain against thee, who with thy unbelieving heart, art deceiving and being
deceived, and then thou runs on in the pride of thy spirit, accusing of me, to
be ignorant of the truth of God, because as thou say, Priest.
of the false wording of my Queries.

But with shame might thou speak it; Rep.
for openly have thou manifested to the understanding Reader, thy self to be a
mere stranger, both to God and his truth also, who would limit the truth of
God, to a humane art, which many of the Children of God had not; Act. 4.13.
and therefore the power of God was the more manifested. And when Peter and
John was brought before the learned men, to wit, (the chief Priests and the
Rulers) and they wondered at them, because they perceived they was unlearned
men; and thus with thy wisdom, and thy great learning, thou art shut out of the
truth in the natural; but by this I do not own thy accusation to be truth
against me; for I have a Copy of the Queries of my own hand writing, which was
the original of those that was sent to thee, which will bear testimony against
thee, to be a false accuser, and how thou thy self have wronged them, and
misworded them, because they was in the cross unto thy wisdom. And to maintain
this, thou bring a story in Erasmus: nevertheless, the story which thou
bring, does not at all touch me, but may fitly be returned into thy new
bosom, where it shall lie* Then thou and thy Agent beseeches the Reader, to
read without partiality; which if he do, he will judge no otherwise of you,
then as I have declared, but will see how you have uttered forth your folly,
and foamed out your shame, in going about to contradict the truth. And at the
end of this your Epistle to the Reader, I find W. P. which I judge to be one
of thy Agents, to this your shameful work, to which thou dare not own thy
name.

My first Querie.
Where, 1 Qu: P: An.
and how, and by, what wast thou called to the Ministry which thou professest?
And in thy answer to this Querie, thou go about to plead many excuses,
whereby to fly the answering of my Queries, saying it is easier for him that is
yet in darkness to propound doubts and Queries, then for some of the Children
of light to answer them, on a sudaine, which to prove thou quotes Daniel: and
that our savior (thou say) himself refused to answer the Pharisees
interogatories till they had first answered his, Math. 21.23, 24.: And, allbeit
thou say thou might put me off with Solomon's words Pro. 26.4. Answer not a
fool according to his folly, least thou also be like unto him,

I did not propound the Queries unto thee, as any doubts of mine, Rep:
but that thou in thy Answer thereunto might either prove thy practice, by the
Scriptures unto them that are in doubt thereof, or unto them manifest thy self
to be a deceiver: which last thou have plainly done to the least Child of
light, and therefore it does not follow that I am in darkness, or that thou
art a Child of light. Neither did thou suddenly answer the Queries, though
they concerned thy own condition, and therefore this place in Daniel, does not
at all stand for thee, for it was for Daniel to tell and interpret
Nebuchadnezers dream, which was a hard thing for any to tell unless it was
immediately revealed to them by Gods spirit, as it was to Daniel; but all the
Magitians and learned men, could not find it out by their arts, but most of
these Queries unto thee was concerning thy present condition and practice, and
herein thou manifests thy self to be in darkness, who thus wrests the
Scripture out of its place, Dan. 10.11.
for thy own ends: and also Daniel was a man that feared the Lord, and trembled
at his power, which now thou denies and scoffs at, and yet art not ashamed, to
take Daniels words for a refuge against the light: And as for that Scripture in
Mat. 21.23, 24. it shall be returned into thine own bosom, for it is thee, and
such as thee who are set up by the will of man, and authorized by the authority
of man, who join with the Pharisees, and Scribes of these times, and combine
together with the earthly powers to call us to Question, by what authority we
go abroad preaching the truth from place to place, and crying against
deceivers, and where we had our commission, because we receive it not from man
as you do, but do witness the same power and authority as the Ministers of
God did in all ages, and the same commission: for they received not their
commission froo^ man, but was immediately called and immediately fitted, and
sent forth into the work of the Ministry freely to give as freely they had
received, and was persecuted by them that was set up by the will of man; which
also we do witness, and therefore the Scripture aforementioned, belongs unto
thy generation who was ever persecuters, and if by propounding Queries thou
judge me to be in darkness, then much more thou judge and condemns thy
self: for, for my 36. Queries thou have propounded me 100; and here also thou
accounts me a fool, as by the Scripture which thou quotes in Pro. 26.4. and
therein manifests thy self so much the greater fool, in propounding so many
Queries to me, whom thou accounts a fool: and thus the pride of thy heart has
deceived thee.

And whereas thou say thou wast inwardly called to the Ministry, by the
motion and gifts of Gods Spirit, P. An:
long before I was borne, which thou say has been Gods ordinary way, which
to prove, thou quotes Job. 32.8.2. Chron. 20.14. Amos 5.7.15. Much. 3.8.

Though it has been, and is Gods ordinary way by his own power and Spirit,
Rep:
to call and fit his own Ministers, for his own work, as those Scriptures
aforementioned does prove, which we also do witness and do come no other way,
yet these Scriptures do not at all prove where and how and by what, thou wast
called and Iahaziell, and Amos, and Micha, which those Scriptures aforesaid
bears Testimony of, to be thus called, was men that spoake the word of the
Lord freely, against sin and transgression, and false-Prophets and hirelings,
and their lives, sealed their Testam any: and these Scriptures also bears
Testimony, how and where they was called, from their outward callings to speak
the word of the Lord, and so from those Scriptures thou art shut and have
naught to do to take them into thy mouth forthey do not prove that thou wast
thus called from thy labor, for thou wast brought up all thy days in
idleness, and at an University (as you call it) to learn Arts and Sciences
without which those was called and fitted; and for any other Call than as the
common national Ministers are called (who deny both immediate Revelation, and
Inspiration) thou have brought no proof that will stand for thee, but only
thy own bare words, wherein thy life and practice will condemn thee, for it is
one with the National priests and thou art maintained and upheld by the same
power as the national Teachers are, neither do go from place to place,
reproving sin in the Gate as Amos and Micha did, who was thus called, neither
do speak freely as they did, and therefore art a false Prophet, who says
the Lord says, when he never spoke to thee, but run, and the Lord never sent
thee; and therefore thou profits not the people at all, as is manifest by the
fruits of thy Ministry, and thus thou wast a deceiver before I was borne, and
the Lord has Raised me up to tell thee of it.

Whether is thy Call and means which thou professes mediate or immediate.

And in thy Answer thou say, it was both: for say thou besides the
immediate aforesaid, thou wast ordained a Minister by the Superiors, and
Governors of the Church, as the Elders and Pastors of the Churches were
formerly by Paul and Barnabas, Act. 14.23. but thou say thou doubtest whether
James Parnell well was called either way to be teacher; if so let him prove it
by an infallible Testimony.

Those that have an inward call to the Ministry do not stay for an outward call
by man, Rep.
but go forth in bedience to the word of the Lord: whosoever was called to the
Ministry of the Gospel, it was immediately, and not mediately; but thine
mediately by the will of man, and not immediately as before is proved, and also
out of thy own mouth is made manifest. For thou say thou doubtest whether I
was called either way, but if thou was called and guided by the Spirit of the
Lord, thou would know, without doubts, whether I was so called yea or nay:
for the true Ministers was Epistles writ in one another hearts, and they also
know the false Prophets, and the false Apostles, and the false Ministers, and
declared against them as I do against thee, and without doubt I do know thee
to be a deceiver, 2 Cor. 3.2.2 Cor. 11.13.14. 15
02 by an infallible Testimony, and those that thou speak of, in Act. 14.23.
whom Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, they did not ordain them Ministers of
the Gospel, neither sent them abroad to preach the Gospel, 0 neither allowed
them 100 or 200 pounds by the year, as thou have; but they chose out those
that were strong in the faith and set them to watch over the weak; but those
Churches, was gathered by the power and Spirit of God and was turned from
darkness to light, and was washed, cleansed, and sanctified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God; but out of your Church, cast
Drunkerds, and Swearers, and Liers, and Proud, and Covetous ones, and
adulterous, and Idolaters, and Quarrellers, and Fighters, and Scoffers, 1 Cor.
6.11.
and Scorners, and Backbiters, and Envious ones, and Profane and wanton ones,
and the like, who are neither washed nor sanctified; and then see where will be
the Church of England, and the Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, Rv. 3.
and all; then you that profess your selves to be the Church of Christ, will be
found the synagogue of Satan, whose Minister thou art: and also Paul and
Barnabas who ordained them Elders, was men endued with the holy Spirit of the
Lord, and was immediately called and chosen to the Ministry, and had a Spirit
of discerning to know who was fitted, for the Elder-ship; and all this was done
without an University or serving seven years to learn Arts and Sciences, or
taking Degrees, without which, you can do nothing: and also those Superiors and
Governors, that ordain you teachers and governors, have nothing but what
they have gotten by art and study, and reading of others experiences; but are
ignorant of the power of God, neither knows whether there be any Holy Ghost,
yea, or nay, but by the hearing of the ear: but scofs and scorns, and and
persecutes those that now do witness these things; and they themselves was
also first ordained by the will of man, and thus thou have but so much the more
manifested thy self to the world, in going about to prove thy self a called
Minister by the Scripture, which does altogether witness against thee. And
whereas thou would have me to prove my Call by an infallible Testimony, I
tell thee without an infallible Testimony I do not go, neither without an
infallible Testamony do I desire to be received or owned, and to this the
infallible Spirit of truth bears Testimony in all the Children of truth, and
thou that have not an infallible Testimony either with me or against me, art
still in darkness and knows not the truth then far unfit to be a teacher to
others.

Whether thou art guided by the same infallible Spirit that gave forth the
Scripture. 3 Query


And in thy answer thou say, P. Ans.
that we our selves teach that all men are taught and guided by that Spirit at
times: and secondly thou say, thou praises God for it, thou art guided and
assisted by that Spirit which is always infallible: and thirdly thou say
thou doubt whether any of those that are called Quakers are always guided by
that Spirit.

Here all that are guided by any measure of that Spirit may easily see thy lies
and confusion, for thy first is a lie, Rep.
that any of us do teach: that all men are taught and guided by that Spirit at
times: for I deny that thou art, who art now taken with a lie in thy mouth,
which all that understands our doctrine will witness against, and secondly
that thou art guided by an infallible Spirit, is a lie against the Holy Ghost,
for no lie comes from that Spirit. And again thou belies the Spirit of truth
to say thou art guided by it, and yet cannot give an infallible Testimony,
whether those thou calls Quakers are guided by an infallible Spirit, yea or
nay, but art in thy doubts; Joh. 8.44.
but that Spirit is without doubts which now judges thee to be a lier, and thy
God thou praises to be the Devil, the Father of lies, who must both be
tormented together.

Whether they that are guided by that Spirit need study how or what to say. 4
Qu.


And in thy answer thou say, P. An:
Timothy had that Spirit in a greater measure then James Parnell; yet Paul
says thus unto him as in 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. And thou say, if the
Apostles had been put to it to preach upon a short Text or Theme,
Methodically, as by long practice in the Church is expected from you, they must
often times have studied for it, as thou conceivest; though if you were left at
large, to speak as the Spirit of God mo es you, and gives matter in, thou
hopes some of you by Gods assistance, should speak as togood or better purpose
then any whonow pretend to the spiritsactings.

Here thou have sufficiently manifested thy spirit, Rep:
and thy ignorance of the spirit of God, to any who understands the things of
the spirit of God: and all these Scriptures which thou have brought concerning
Timothy, does not at all prove, that he that is guided by the spirit of God,
need study how or what to preach. But Paul exhorted Timothy to the gift that
was in him, which was given him by, or for prophecy; for in so doing, he
should save himself, and those that heard him, which you never do, by the fruit
of your study, but rather destroys them; witness the fruits of your Ministry,
this many years in this Nation, who have wrought no better Reformation amongst
your hearers; and also this Scripture does not at all prove, that Paul bid
Timothy study old Authors, and heathenish Commentators, as you do: neither to
study Arts and Sciences, as you do, who with your Philosophy, Col. 2.8.
and vain deceit, do spoil the people; for thou have manifested thy self to
be altogether ignorant of the spirit of God, who by thy own conceivings,
judge the spirit of God to be unsufficient to instruct and teach the Apostles
what to speak at all times, without study: when as Christ himself exhorts
them, to take no thought what to speak; for it should be given them in the very
same hour; Mat. 10.19, 20.
for says he, It is not you that speaks, but the spirit of your Father that
speaks in you, (which spirit speaks not without method) which spirit you
Teachers of the Church of England, are great strangers to, who think that the
spirit of God can be limited to a Text, or a Theme; as thou confessest you are;
but thou lier, where is now thy infallible spirit, who thus speak thy own
conceivings, and therefore be ashamed hence forward, to pretend to an infa
lible spirit, who have here so openly manifesied thy ignorance of it, and its
movings, so that if thou wast left at large to speak from that spirit in thee,
and was shut out of thy Liberary and from any Text or Writing, Isay 56.10.
thou would plainly manifest thy self, to be one of the dumb Dogs that could
not bark, which I saiah from the spirit of the Lord declared against, without
study: for I do believe, that if thou and the rest of the national Teachers,
whom thou confessest, are tied to a text or Theme, could tell how to pleafe the
people, and get gain without studying or speaking from a Text, you would for
the credit of your cause, (as thou say): for I know nothing that ties you to
it, but your own covetous ends, to make a gain of these Scriptures, and to
deceive the ignorant with feigned words, 2 Pet. 2.3.
whom Peter without study foretold of; and therefore thou Hypocrite, pretend no
more to an infallible spirit, but with the rest of thy Brethren, confess thou
art void of it, as many of them have done; for in such pretenses thou art but
the greater deceiver, and thy folly does the more appear.

Whether is it as lawful now for Tradesmen, 5. Query.
Shepherds, or Plowmen, to preach if they be led by the spirit of God, as
those that spoke forth the Scripture.

And in thy answer thou say, P. Answ.
if this was wholly granted, James Parnell cannot claim any interest therein,
as thou conceivest; for, thou say, he is neither Tradesman, Plowman, or
Shepherd, nor will take any course to maintain himself by his labor, for he
has been tried.

But herein James Parnell can plainly tell thee, Reply.
thou art a Liar; for he followed a Trade with his Father, until the Lord by
his spirit called him from it, into his own work, and so I obeyed the word of
the Lord, and left my Father with his Trade, Mat. 4.21. Mat. 10.37, 38.
as James and John did their Father in the Ship; for he that will not forsake
Father and Mother, Lands and Livings, Wife and Children, and all for Christ's
sake, is not worthy of him; in which work, neither thou nor any other can tax
me for idleness; but I believe my labor and diligence in the same is more
offensive to you deceivers, then if I had been Idle. But he that would call me
from this work that I am set about, into the work of man, I should answer him,
God must be served before man; for if it had not been the will of God, to call
me forth into his work, I should stall have served my earthly Father, sooner
then any other man, notwithstanding the evil thoughts and conceivings of such
like as thee, who art given up to believe lies, and tell lies; but where is now
thy infallible spirit, who speak by thy own conceivings, and thus the
thoughts of thy heart deceives thee; and as for my maintenance, I need not a
Law, to compel it as thou do, neither am chargeable to the World, as thou
art, who by a Law of man, take nigh 300. l by the year of them: therefore in
this thou might have laid thy hand upon thy mouth, for thou and hundreds more
of thy Brethren, never followed any honest Calling, whereby to get an honest
livelihood, without being chargeable to the World, but was from your youths
brought up at Babylons Schools, learning her wich-craft and sorcery, thereby to
deceive the Nations, and through covetousness with feigned words, make
merchandise of them, which you nowspare not.

And secondly thou grants, P. Answ.
that if men be made of God spiritual, whether Shepherds or Plowmen first,
they may teach; But thirdly, thou say, every man that has the spirit in some
measure, does not attain to that height, growth, and degree, that they did, who
gave forth the Scriptures, and therefore may not as lawfully, nor as infallibly
teach as they did; and thou say, nor can thou discern clearly, that the best
amongst them called Quakers, have yet reached that degree or dispensation of
the spirit; and after much dissembling speeches, thou manifests thy light and
frothy spirit, still despising me, because of my youth, but thy words are not
worth mentioning.

And thu swhen thou opens thy mouth, Reply.
concerning the Spirit, thou manifests thy folly, and ignorance of the spirit,
so that a Babe may comprehend thee, and tell thee of thy folly, and when thou
think of thy beard or age, (as thou say) confusion of face may cover thee;
for though every one, that has the spirit in some measure, does not attain to
that height, grouth and degree, that they did who gave forth the Scripture: yet
it does not follow, that none does attain to that grouth, height, and degree;
and they that have attained to the same spirit in a measure, and by the same
spirit are moved and called forth, may as lawfully, and as infallibly teach as
they did, (in their measures) for the same spirit is infallible in the least
measure, and its call is lawful; and thus thou show, thou was never called,
nor led by it, who art so ignorant of it; and as here also does further appear,
in that thou confessest, thou discernest not the people called Quakers; and
therefore art blind, and from thee the secrets of God are hid; and it does not
follow, that they are ever the less spiritual, but rather more, (because thou
can not discern them) who pretends thy self a spiritual man; and thus they
are attained to that degree, they can discern thee to be a blind guide, and
deceiver of the World; and therefore is thy spirit the more against them, for
all thy flattering and dissembling speeches from thy hypocritical heart, who
bends thy Tongue like a Bow against them, uttering forth lies in hypocrisy,
and with thy sconrful spirit, reproachest me with lies; but it was thy
Generation that quaked for fear of the downfall of their Kingdom; and therefore
persecuted me, and imprisoned me: yet their fear did not overtake me; for I was
made as willing to suffer, as they was to inflict, as knowing it was for his
cause, who will make you all to quake and tremble, who lift up your heels
against him; and as thou compares Cambridg to Jericho, so the curse of Jericho
shall come upon it, for its whordom and sorceries, and stifneckedness against
the Lord and his anointed; and though thou thus scornest me, and despisest me,
because of my youth, yet it is because thou know not the Scripture, nor the
power of God.

Whether any are the Ministers or Messengers of Christ, but those that are
guided by his spirit, Query 6.
and abide in his Doctrine, as the holy men of God was in Scripture, and
whether the wind does not now blow where it lists.

And in thy answer to the first part, P. Ans.
thou grants, that none are the true Ministers, and Messengers of Christ, but
those that are in some measure guided by his spirit, and abide in his Doctrine.
But secondly, thou say, men may think, that they have that spirit, and yet be
led by the lying spirit, as Zedekiah who smote Michajah, was, 1 King. 22.24.

Herein thou markest out thy self for a deceiver, who pretends to the spirit,
Reply.
and it is the lying spirit, as is before proved, and so art shut out from the
Ministers and Messengers of Christ, who art not guided by his spirit, and
therefore abides not in his Doctrine, as is before proved by thy ignorance of
the true spirit: and therefore thou, and such false Prophets as thou, thus
smites at, and persecutes us that are called Quakers, because the Lord is
pleased to bestow his spirit upon us, whereby we are able to declare your
deceit, and manifest your lying spirits, who have professed your selves, the
Ministers of Christ, yet strangers to his spirit, and opposers of his truth,
like Jannes and Jambres, who are men of corrupt minds, and Reprobates
concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3.8.

And to the second part of the Query thou say, P. Ans:
that the wind does blow where it lists, if it be not stopped; yet are there
many false winds, which blow likewise from a deceiptful spirit, which to
prove, thou quotest Ephesians. 4.14. that we henceforth be no more Children, tossed
to and fro with every wind of Doctrine; and say, Mind this James.

This I do mind, and still sees how thou markest out thy self with thy
deceiptfull spirit; Rep.
for if the wind do blow where it lists, which thou acknowledgest: then
what is that in you professed Ministers, which goes about to stop it with
gainsaying and persecution, and would limit the spirit of God unto a Text or
Theme, from which you with your deceitful spirits do raise, uses points,
trials and motives, etc. whereby many poor Creatures are tossed to and fro,
and carried about with your airy spirits, with the slight and cunning
craftiness of your brains, whereby you study to deceive, as thou may read in
the latter end of the verse, which thou have quoted, Ephesians. 4.14. which here
shall stand against thee, and so, many are the Children which are tossed to and
fro by you, although they have both beards and age, (as thou say) yea some
are 30. some 40, some 50, some 60, yea 80. and never yet come to the knowledge
of the truth: and thus with feigned words, through covetousness, you make
Merchandise of the people, beguiling unstable souls; but think not, that all
you false Prophets, with the beast that upholds you, can stop or quench this
spirit, which now blows where it lists; for with all the slight and
craftiness that you can use, you shall be made to fall before it, and the
fruits of your labors shall be given you.

Whether thou will own immediate Revelation now, Query 7.
yea or nay?

And in thy Answer, thou say, P. Ans.
the Apostle teaches you to pray, for the spirit of wisdom and Revelation in
the acknowledgement of God: which to prove, thou quotes Ephesians. 1.17. but say,
there are many false lights and delusions of Satan, who too often transforms
himself as an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11.14. which thou say, are entertained
by unwary men, for the Illuminations and Revelations of Gods spirit, as appears
in Zedekiah aforesaid; which to prove, thou quotes, Ezekiel. 13.6. 2 These. 2.11.

Here again, thou have marked out thy self, Reply.
and also belies the Apostle; for that Scripture in Ephesians. 1.17. only makes
mention how the Apostle prayed, for the Ephesians that believed* but it does
not at all prove, that the Apostle taught you that are of the world to pray;
for the prayers of the wicked are abominable, Prove. 15, 8.
and the Apostle would not teach such to pray; and though in thy Answer, the
substance of my Query is confessed, yet it does not serve to prove that thou
do witness it in thy self, or own it, where it is possessed; who would bar
it from youth, and limit it to time and age, and so shows thy ignorance of it,
and that by the false lights and delusions of Satan thou art deceived, who in
thee rules as an Angel of Light: and so thou art one of those unwary men who
takes a lying spirit for an infallible spirit, as is both here and often before
proved, who art found in Zedekiahs steps, and so art one of those false
Prophets, which the Prophet speaks of, who says, the Lord says, when he never
spoke to thee, as is before proved; and how long have you professed Ministers
of this Nation, fed the people with expectations, and hopes that you would
confirm what you have spoken unto them, which is not yet come to pass, neither
likely; and thus you have deceived them by your lying divinations, for your
dishonest gain; and therefore for this cause God has given you up to strong
delusions, that you should believe a lie, that you all might be damned who
believe not the truth now it is come unto you; but still take pleasure in
unrighteousness, as in those Scriptures aforesaid, which thou have quoted
against thy self, and so they shall stand.

What is the Gospel which thou art a Minister of, Qu: 8.
and whether thy Gospel be free and without charge?

And in thy Answer thou say to the first part, P. Ans.
that the Gospel which thou preachest, is the same which Christ and his
Apostles taught, which thou say is summarily contained in these four verses,
Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. wherein the Apostle speaks of the grace of God to be
their Teacher, to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
justly, and godlily in this present World etc. And to the second part, thou
say the Apostles Gospel was not every way without charge; which to prove,
thou quotes 2 Cor. 11.8. and again thou say, Nor has Christ, or any of his
Apostles, imposed it upon you, that the Gospel should be altogether without
charge, unto them which have it taught: which to prove, thou quotes Romans 15.27.
And again thou say, nor is James Parnells Gospel, be it right or wrong,
without charge: If he do not take more then it is worth, if duly examined, it
is well.

Thy Spirit is much against James Parnell, Rep.
as Zedekia's was against Michajah, yet here he can prove thee to be a lier,
and not only against him but of his Lord also: and therefore if thou beliest
the Lord, how much more the servant? Joh. 1.29.
for Christ Jesus the Lamb of God was the Gospel which the Apostles preached,
which was free and not chargeable to any, though he was and is a burdensome
stone, to them that believe not in him; yet not chargeable. And therefore thou
blasphemer, how dare thou to open thy mouth thus against the Lord and his
anointed, who art still in thy ungodliness and worldly lusts, who art
pleading for the earth and art a stranger to the free grace of God, and
therefore these verses which thou have set down, shall stand to witness
against thee, which thou say contains the Gospel which thou preachest, but
the Apostles Gospel could not be contained in Paper and Ink, for the heavens
could not contain him, for he ascended far above all Heavens that he might
fill all things: and also of thy Gospel thou make a trade and a gain, Ephesians.
4.10
being many years at an University as thou calest it to learn to preach it:
all which the Apostles did not, and so thou bring another Gospel, and so art
not to be received but held as accursed, as thou art, who art not ashamed to
presume to say, thy Gospel is the same with the Apostle's, and thou do here
yield thy Gospel to be chargeable, but this Scripture in 2 Cor. 11.8. does not
at all prove the Apostles to be chargeable, Gal. 1.8.9.
who says he took wages of other Churches to do them service, for it was but
for his necessities, and it was freely communicated to him and therefore no
charge; but now you professed Ministers instead of robbing other Churches you
rob and oppress the world, ruling over them by a law with force and cruelty,
for the which you have no Scripture rule, Ezekiel. 34.4.
but amongst the false shepherds. But whom do you spare, whether you do them
service or nay, if you can but get it either by fair means or foul? and
therefore in this thou before many other might well have laid thy hand upon thy
mouth. For whereas the Apostle there took some necessaries which was freely
communicated to him by the Churches, thou takes nigh three hundred pounds by
the year of the world, by a law of man, and none will spare who comes within
thy bounds, whether thou do them service or nay, and that Christ or any of
his Apostles has not imposed it upon you that the Gospel should be altogether
without charge, J. (...). 14.^4
it is true, for they never entrusted you with it, though for sucre sake ye
have run, though he never sent you, and speak a divination of your brain, but
not from his mouth, and so profit not the people at all, but like ravening
Wolves makes a prey upon them; but your end shall be according to your works,
but they that are entrusted with the Ministry of the Gospel, Mat. 10.8. 1 Cor.
9.16, 17, 18.
have this charge imposed upon them, As they have received freely, freely to
give: the Apostle Paul also showed the same example, whose care was to make the
Gospel free and without charge, and said woe unto him, if he preached not the
Gospel, and therefore because he would not make the Gospel chargeable, he took
necessaries of some, and spared others, and this was wisdom (which you
Earthwormes are void of) and thus he that is taught in the word may communicate
to him that teaches in all good things and yet without charge, he that can
receive it, let him; the workman is worthy of his meat: and in that thou
taxest James Parnell, Mat. 10.10.
he has not been chargeable to thee nor to thy generation, neither does any
of him complain, although thou judge him according to thy own corrupt heart,
yet the answer of the just witness in my conscience shall be for me, before
the righteous Judge of all hearts, when you Hirelings and false Prophets, shall
wish the Mountains to cover you, and the Rocks to fall upon you, and hide you
from his presence who will give you your reward in the lake that burns, with
the beast that now upholdes you in this your wickedness.

Whether thou do hold up the first Priesthood that took Tithes, 9. Query,
or the second* Priesthood that took no Tithes and which thou do deny,
seeing thou take Tithes?

And in thy Answer thou sai'st, P. An.
Melchizedeck whose Preist-hood was the first Priesthood took Tithes and the
Leviticall Priesthood, which was the second and not the first took Tithes
also, so that thou faist there is no Priesthood mentioned in the Scripture
that took no Tithes: then thou Queries how thou or any other does deny either
of those Preist-hoods by taking Tithes which to prove thou quotes, Genesis 14.20.
Heb. 7.2, 3, 4.5. etc.

Here, thou Serpent! although thou thus twines about to cover and shelter thy
deceit, Rep.
under others wings it will not at all serve to prove, that thereby thou do
not deny Jesus Christ come in the flesh, who is the everlasting high Priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedeck which is the unchangeable Priesthood, the
end of the changeable, which took Tithes, and so, the end of Tithes, as is
proved by that Scripture which thou have quoted, Heb. 7. and chap. 8.1. wherein
the Apostle speaks how Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck of the spoils which
he* got in the war which was a free gift without either law or compulsion;
neither did stand for a law or rule to the generations following until the law
was given to Israel after the flesh, and the changeable Priestood established:
which I say was the first Priesthood, to which Tithes was due, for it was so
the command of God, that the Tithes should be paid unto the changeable
Priesthood, and they was to have a storehouse, wherein the Tithes was to be
put. And the Widows and the Fatherless and the strangers was to come and be
filled within their gates that there should not be a beggar in Israel; Deuteronomy.
14.28, 29.
which statute is now rejected by you who now so gape for Tithes: for ye
instead of doing this, do grind the faces of the poor, and oppress the
Widows, the Fatherless, and the Strangers if they do come within your
bounds, and, so makes beggars rather then otherwise, Isa. 3.15.
so that if you profess Tithes by this law, it will witness against you, and
also in so doing you deny Christ Jesus come in the flesh, who when he was
offered up, was the everlasting offering, and the everlasting high Priest over
the household of God, and so the fulfilling and the end of the changeable who
took Tithes by a command. And so, says the Apostle, the Priesthood being
changed there must of necessity be a change of the law, and so the command was
disanulled and Tithes ended: for says the Apostle in Heb. 8.1. Now of the
things that we have been speaking, Heb. 7.12. Here thy 66 Qu. is Ans.
this is the sum, we have such an high Priest, that is set on the right hand
of the throne, etc. Now Tithes was one thing, and the Priesthood was another
thing and the law (by which they both was upheld) was another thing, of which
the Apostle had been speaking of which he says this is the sum, Christ
Jesus the high Priest that is set on the right hand of the Throne, and so the
fulfilling and the end of these things before mentioned, of which Tithes is
one: so by this new Covenant he has made the first old; Heb. 8.13.
now that which decays or waxes old is ready to vanish away. Now mark then,
which Priesthood the Apostle here accounts first, because thou accusest me,
that I know not which was the first and which was the last, but by this it is
proved that you that now so gapes for Tithes under the profession of the
Gospel, are razed out from Melchizedeck, who once took Tithes, only of the
spoil which was taken in the war, which was a free gift unto him, (which now
you have not) and also are rased from the changeable Priesthood which was the
first to which Tithes was due, by a command for its time; and also do deny
Christ come in the flesh who is the end and fulfilling of those things, which
without command, for lucre sake, you now uphold, and cry up; and so are found
only the Ministers of Antichrist, who oppose the true Christ, (where he is
witnessed and held forth) yet under a profession of his name: therefore he will
profess unto you workers of iniquity, that he knows you not, when you knock
and are not able to enter.

Where is thy Rule in the Scripture, Query 8.
from the Ministers of the Gospel to take Tithes?

And in thy Answer, P. Ans.
Thou much endeavors to shelter and cover thy self by the Scripture, but it
will not hide thee, nor stand for thee; to prove that the Ministers of the
Gospel ever took Tithes, or that unto them Tithes belonged, as any who reads
thy Answer with understanding, may see and also see thy shuffings, who runs
into the old Covenant to maintain Tithes due to the Ministers of the new
Covenant, which is the end of the old, as in my last Reply is plainly proved;
and thou out of both to be shut* and therefore thou say, it is sufficient for
thee, and other Ministers of the Gospel, that there is no Commandment in the
Gospel against the taking of Tithes, which thou say, we must produce ere we
can make the thing unlawful.

Now all people may consider, how they have been blinded and deceived by you
professed Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, who upon such slender grounds
as these, have and do take the tenth of the increase of the fruits of the
peoples labors, who many of them, themselves do rent and hire what they have,
whereby you have and do live at ease, in pride, idleness, and fullness, sporting
in the day time, and living in the pleasures, and wantonness upon the earth,
contrary to any Rule or Example in the Scripture, from the Ministers of the
Gospel; and therefore this your ground and foundation which thou have here laid
besides the Scripture, to uphold Tithes contrary to the Scripture, will not
stand, and therefore your building must fall; for although there were no
Command in the Gospel against the taking of Tithes: yet it does not prove, that
the Ministers of the Gospel are to take Tithes, being it was never allotted
them; but that by the Gospel, Tithes are disannulled, and the Priesthood
changed, and the Law by which they both was established; is fulfilled and done
away, is clear by the Scripture; and therefore unlawful now for any to practice
without a Command from God, as before is proved in my last Reply, and thou to
be a lier, who says, I could not prove it by clear Scripture, that Christ or
his Apostles has taken away that maintenance; and therefore that Scripture
which thou have quoted in Mat. 23.23. shall stand and witness against thee; for
when Christ spoke, that was before he was offered up, and then the Law of
Tithes was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not disanulled; and therefore
strictly to be observed, until Christ the everlasting sacrifice was offered
up; and then the Apostles said, the Priesthood being changed, there must of
necessity be a change of the Law, and so Tithes ended, as before is proved; and
therefore not for the Ministers of the Gospel, to take them as theit
maintenance; and that Scripture which thou have quoted in 1 Cor. 9. shall stand
and witness against thee; for the whole Chapter does not at all prove Tithes
due to the Ministers of the Gospel, as any who reads the Chapter with honesty
will witness; for it does not at all mention Tithes, but only speaks of the
Apostles power, that as they had planted Vineyards, so they might eat of the
fruit thereof; and as they preached the Gospel, so they might live of the
Gospel; and this the Apostle writ to those whom he said was the Seals of his
Ministry; but where is the Seals of your Ministry? 1 John 5.19.
are they not the world who lie in wickedness? where is the Vineyard that ye
have been planting this many years? is it not still full of Briers and Thorns,
and weeds, and wild Plants, which bring forth no fruit, but cumber the ground:
but keep in your own Vineyards, and rob not others, and then you will not be
such Thieves as you are, but it will make you plant better, or else to fall to
some other Trade; and the Apostles power was not of man, nor by man, being he
was not set up by man; but yours is of man, and by a Law of man, by whom you
are set up, and by whom you stand, as here in thy answer thou have confessed;
and yet the Apostle refused to use this power, and yet said, necessity was laid
upon him to preach the Gospel; but what power do you refuse, be it right or
wrong? and if that earthly power should be taken from you, which you have, what
would become of your Gospel? nay some of you have said, that Down with the
maintenance, and down with the Ministry; and therefore for ever stop thy mouth,
from taking the Apostles words, for a Cloak for thy covetousness, who himself
cast out such from the Ministry, 1 Timothy 3. and therefore thou knew, that none
of these Scriptures would serve for thy ends; and therefore thou would shelter
thy self under the powers of the earth, by whom thou art set up, whom thou
say, did give to the Ministers of the Gospel in this Nation, and else where,
and to their successor for ever, the tenth of all their grounds, and caused
them to be settled by a Law. And thou ask, If this was not a lawful and pious
gift, and suitable to what was paid in the old Testament.

This I do deny to be lawful, but altogether unlawful; Reply. Thy 6th Query is
answered in this Reply. 2 Pet. 3.16.
for that has made so many pretended Ministers as there are, who for
greediness of the gain and pleasure, have pretended to the things which you
never had in you, neither know any thing of them, but by others Declarations,
which for your own ends, you have wrested to your own destruction and others,
and so through your Philosophy and vain deceit, have spoiled the people, and
by feigned words through covetousness, have made Merchandise of them, and so
have deluded and led in blindness the people this many years, only for your
own carnal ends; and that this is suitable to what was paid in the old
Testament, I also do deny (and if it was, what is that to you? that which was
given in the old Testament is disannulled by the new, and therefore no rule for
you) and also that was given by the Lord to the Levites, who had no other
Inheritance in the Land, and the Lord gave that which was his own, and he gave
a strict Command, that it should be paid, which stood in force so long as the
Priesthood endured, as is proved by the Scriptures, which thou thy self have
quoted which shall here stand against thy self, Levit. 27.30, 31, 32. and
Numb. 18.24. but the Lord did not give it since to the professed Ministers of
England; but thou say, man gave it, and therefore gave that which was none of
their own; for it is unjust for any Prince or Ruler, to give away the labor or
Inheritance of his Subjects unto them that never labored for it, and unto
these who under pretense of the Gospel do delude, and beguile the souls of his
Subjects, for their dishonest gain, as you professed Ministers of England do;
and therefore they whose eyes are opened, Mich. 2.5.
do see you, and therefore accounts it a sin unto God, to uphold you, or put
into your mouths, whom the Lord is against; and therefore you even prepare
War against them, and it is neither pious nor lawful, for any Prince or
Governor, to force any of his Subjects by a Law, contrary to their
Consciences; and also the Inheritance of the Levites, was stated by a Law of
God, and yours by a Law of Man, and they was ordained, and set up by God, but
you by man, by whom you are upheld and maintained contrary to Scripture: so
they come by the will of God, and you by the will of man; and they was
maintained by the will of God, and you by the will of man, and they were of God
(as all his true Ministers are now,) and you are of man, (as all the false
Prophets, and false Ministers ever was,) so that there is much difference
betwixt you and them, and betwixt the Interest, that they had in Tithes, and
the interest that you now claim: so that they that robbed them, robbed God, as
in the Scripture which thou have quoted, Mal. 3.8. which shall stand against
thee; and if the ground of your interest was well searched, it would be found
that you have it from the Pope and his upholders, whose supremacy your selves
deny in words to blind the World; but in practice you own it, and claim it:
and again, if this which thou speaks of, was given to the Ministers of the
Gospel, then you that are hirelings, and the Ministers of Antichrist have no
right nor title in it; and the Ministers of the Gospel, they also do deny it,
whose care is to make the Gospel free and without charge; and therefore cannot
oppress any, neither will their Consciences serve them to take the increase of
others labors, by Law or compulsion, and therefore it is most just, that the
Labourer should in peace, enjoy the fruits of his labors, and such idle drones
as you (who neither labor for God, nor for the good of man, but are the
destroyers both of body and soul) should not eat according to the Apostles
Rule, in 2 These. 3.10. and thus unto it you have no legal nor civil claim, (as
thou calls it,) but your Birthright is as a mess of Pottage: neither is your
Claim and Title, as lawful as a Sons is to the Inheritance of his Father (as
thou say;) but you climb up another way and so are Thieves and Robbers, John
10.1.

Whether ever the Ministers of Christ had or stood in need of an outward Law,
Qu: 11.
to compel people to maintain them, as thou, and such as thou now has and does.

And in thy Answer thou confessest, P. Answ.
that those that are righteous or truly spiritual, needs no such compulsive
Law to force them; for they are a Law unto themselves; but thou say, that the
greatest part of the professors in the visible Church, always were, and yet
are earthly-minded, and neither do nor can, rightly value spiritual and
heavenly things.

But in all thy pretended Answer, thou do not at all, resolve the substance
of my Query, but rather in thy silence in it, do yield thy self out of the
practice of the Apostles, and by thy own confession it is manifest, that
neither you professed Ministers, nor your Auditors are righteous, nor truly
spiritual, for you stand in need of a compulsive Law, to force people to
maintain you, and the people stands in need of a compulsive Law to force them
to maintain you, which thou confessest the righteous need not; but though you
have a compulsive Law, the righteous will not maintain you: and thus out of thy
own mouth thou art judged, and the rest of thy Brethren to be the false
Prophets, who profit not the people at all; and again, thy own confession
proves it, that the greatest part of your Church is earthly minded, and no
wonder while the Teachers themselves are so; and thus your Church is the
Synagogue of Satan, which is built up of such professors; and therefore blush
and be ashamed of your Ministry. Oh what have you been doing this many years!
who have wrought no better Reformation: and herein you show your Ministry to be
earthly, who have no better seals then earthly minded professors, who stand in
need of a Law to compel them to maintain you; and this is as true a saying, as
any thou have in thy Book that the greatest part of the professors in your
Church are earthly minded; but, in that thou accusest the Church in the
Apostles days to be the same, thou art a liar and a false accuser, neither
can bring any proof in the Scripture, to maintain what thou say, but it
will witness against thee; Act. 4.33, 34, 35. Act. 5.1.8.
for the multitude that believed, were of one heart, and one soul, so that they
sold their possessions, and laid it at the Apostles feet; and it was
distributed to every one, according as they had need: the Ministry took such
place in them. And whereas there was two found that was earthly minded, yet
there needed not a Law of man to compel them; and the Law of man also was
against the Apostles, as it is against these now that walk in the same steps,
yet they do not need a Law of man to force a maintenance for them, from worldly
or earthly minded professors, as the false Prophets and deceivers always did,
who was always sheltered and upheld by the will of man, because they could
wink at their iniquity, and cry peace to them as thou here do, because they
put into thy mouth: therefore thou flatters them, and daubs them up, but it is
with untempered mortar. But the Commission which Christ gave to his Ministers,
was, Ezekiel. 22 22.28. Mat. 6.25. Mat. 12 11, 12, 13, 14.
Take no thought, but into whatsoever City or place they entered, they was to
enquire who was worthy; and if they was not willingly received, they was to
shake off the dust of their feet, and so leave them; but is it not well known,
that all your care is to take thought, where to get a fat living, instead of
inquiring who is worthy; and there if you have but Authority from man, you will
have it, whether they receive you, yea or nay: so with shame might thou
bring any example from the Apostles, or the Church in their days, who were men
that coveted no man's Silver nor Gold nor apparel but had forsaked all for the
Gospels sake, and many of the Church suffered the spoiling of their goods
willingly by your Forefathers the chief Priests and Scribes and Pharisees, who
was their persecutors, as you are now of them who the Gospel do own, Act.
20.33. Heb. 10.34.
(and your professors also) who as thou say does not rightly value spiritual
things, such as are holden forth by the true Ministers and Messengers of God,
(neither can) because, by such blind guides as thou art, they are kept in
blindness, and darkness, least their eyes should be opened and they come to
see you, and decline from you, who was never tied to you by any command of God,
and therefore you are glad to make use of a law of man, contrary to the
practice of Christ and his Apostles: and as for the express provision, which
the Lord made for his Ministers and Messengers in the new Testament, I reply,
When Christ gave them their Commission, he said also in whatsoever house they
entered they was to eat such as was set before them, for says he the workman
is worthy of his meat: and this is all the express provision that thou can
find allotted to them in the new Testament, and this was without any law of man
too; for there was no need of any, for if they did not willingly receive them,
they was not to eat with them, but to shake of the dust of their feet against
them, and that was all the law they was to take against such which was earthly
minded, and regardlesse of them: but this will not serve you because your
selves are earthly minded, and therefore will have it of every one, whether
they receive you yea or nay, or else you have a law of man to take treble
damage; and instead of eating such as they will set before you, you will have
the tenth part of what they have by compulsion, you are such greedy devouring
Woolvs: and what was before allotted to the Priests in the old Testament, is
before sufficiently proved to be nothing concerning you, who profess your
selves Ministers of the New Testament, and as for those Scriptures which thou
quotes in 2 Chronicles. 31.5, 6. etc: are also as nothing to my Query, but are
before answered in my last reply, but yet these shall stand to witness against
thee to be a liar: for let any who reads these verses, see if there the
Isralites did show any earthly mindedness, or stood in need of a law to compel
them, after they knew the Kings mind, (as thou accusest them) and thus thou
can find nothing either in the Old or New Testament that will cover thy
deceit but altogether witness against thee, and therefore again thou flees
into thy old shelter which is the will of man, by which thou art set up and
upheld, therefore a false Prophet, and a deceiver, who abides not in the
doctrine of Christ, and it is no Pious nor Just act for them as I said before,
to take away the fruits of their subjects labors by a compulsive law to give
unto such Earth-wormes as thee, who cares not how you get it so you get it, as
thy own mouth confessest, for thou say it is a competent though not a
liberal maintenance; and yet thou can take it and plead for it too, yea and
of worldly minded people, which is altogether contrary to the Apostles
practice, and so thou fullfills the words which before I have spoken of thee,
and whosoever denies you of Tithes do not unjustly detain them, (as thou say
they do) being you have no right to them by any law or command from God, or
example in the Scripture, as before is proved, but only claims a Title by the
unjust supremacy of the Pope, by which your Forefathers, the persecuting
Bishops was upheld, and therefore we called Quakers do teach people them you to
deny, which is not contrary to the practice of Christ or his Apostles (as thou
accusest us) for says Christ, Beware of false-Prophets that appear in sheeps
clothing, Mat. 7.15.16.
but inwardly ravening Woolves; by their fruits they are known, and by which
sufficiently you are here marked our, and the Apostles bids from such turn
away as in 2 Timothy 3.5. and again the Apostle John forbids to receive such as
abides not in the doctrine of Christ, or to bid them God speed 2 John 9.10. and
here both Christ and his Apostles sufficiently taught people to deny you, and
here thou art proved a lier who thus falsely accusest us called Quakers, in
this to act contrary to the practice of Christ or his Apostles, and so here
thou and the rest of the professed Ministers of this Nation, are sufficiently
manifest what you are; so that all men may see your folly and deceit, but
those who are blind, and love to have it so, and so the Scripture is fulfilled
upon you, Jer. 5.30.31.

Whether ever the Ministers of the Gospel took any necessaries of the world,
12 Que.
as thou and such as thou does all your Tithes and maintenance yea or nay?

And in thy Answer thou say, yea they have, P. Ans.
which to prove thou quotes, Ast. 28.1.9. where thou say Paul took
necessaries of the Barbarians, yet this not serving thy turn, thou runs to old
Histories which thou calls Ecclesiastical records, and says they for 1500
years do testify the same, but yet doubting of this, thou say as thou said
before, it suffices you that there is no law nor command of God, to the
contrary; nor are examples thou say needful for every thing; as to prove
that Christ called any shooemaker or cobbler to be a Prophet.

Reply.
But here again thou have marked out thy self to be a false Prophet, who runs,
and the Lord never sent thee, and therefore thou teach for Doctrine the
traditions of men; for the which thou have no Scripture and therefore runs to
old stories, to which I am not to give any credit, be they never so old, being
they are not according to Scripture, (and therefore not Ecclesiastical) for
the oldnesse of the thing does not make it truth; though you have long thereby
deceived the ignorant. And as for that Scripture which thou quotest in Acts
28.1.9. then Paul was a Prisoner, and he and the Soldiers that kept him and
the rest of the people, was driven there by storm upon the Sea, so that in that
cause the Barbarians took pity of them, and received them; but there was many
besides Paul, and the Centurion, to whom Paul was committed, was to take care
of him, and also that which the Barbarians did was freely, and that which
nature bound them to, being they was in that strait; which was done to many
besides Paul, who were heathen, so that this does not at all stand for thee,
who art in thy own Country, and yet takes all thy Tithes and maintenance of the
World by compulsion: neither will this excuse serve to shelter you Hirelings
and deceivers, to say that there is no Law nor Command of God to the contrary;
for it is false; for Christ commands his Ministers expressly, freely to give, as
freely they had received; and also charged them where they was not freely
received, Levit. 25.14. Mich. 1.2.
to depart thence, shaking off the dust of their feet, as before is proved, and
also oppression is the Law of God against, and to take the tenth, or increase
of the fruits of the peoples labors, is a sore and great oppression which the
Land groans under, and therefore a sin, and yet the gift does so blind your
eyes, that you cannot see all this, but thinks, because there is no Scripture
for you, therefore none against you: and though there needs no example to prove
any Shoemaker or Cobbler to be a Prophet (as thou confessest) though in scorn,)
for it is a thing that none does, who understands the Scripture, being there is
sufficient proof, that he called other Tradesmen; yet there is a need, that you
might find so much as a Scripture proof, or example, for your Tithes and
maintenance, (who profess it to be your rule) being it is a great oppression of
the Land; and yet say thou, it does suffice you, that there is no Law or
Command to the contrary: therefore this shows your avaricious minds, who are
so willing to be blind in this things; but it will not, neither does so easily
suffice those that are oppressed by you, though you regard it not, according to
the Prophet Ezekiels words, you seek for the fleece, and regard not the flock,
but make a prey upon the sheep: and so with this stop thy mouth, and own thy
self amongst the false Shepherds and Hirelings, Ezekiel. 34. John 10.

Whether ever they had a set maintenance, Que: 13.
or so much a year for preaching, as 40.60.100. or 200 l. as thou, and such as
thou has.

And in thy Answer, P. Ans. i
thou can not bring one Scripture for thy Rule, to prove this your common
practice, but flees to the Records, that thou say are to be found in several
parts of Christendom, (as thou calls it) where I do not intend to seek for
them, to see whether these things be true or no, which thou speak of them;
but as I said before, will conclude them to be false in this thing, being the
Scripture is altogether against it, so that thou can not find one Scripture
to justify it; but say, if we say Where do you read of this in the
Scripture; thou answers as far off again to the same purpose still, without any
Scripture proof, and therefore I shall leave it for any understanding Reader of
thy Book to judge, and see how weak you are, if you had not a Law of man to
uphold you, who have not one Scripture that will strengthen the foundation of
your Ministry, which is your maintenance: then how have you deluded the people
to make them believe, that the Scripture is your Rule, when it is altogether
against you, let the honest hearted judge.

And whether such be not the hirelings which cares not for the sheep yea or
nay; Que. 14.
And whether such be not the greedy Dogs which the Prophet Isay freely
declared against Isay 56.11. and makes a prey upon the sheep, which Ezekiel
declared against, Ezekiel 34. and are the ravening Wolves which Jesus Christ
declared against, Mat. 7.15. and are such as through covetuousness, makes
Merchandise of the people, which Peter a Minister of Christ declared against, 2
Pet. 2.3. and such as go after the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards,
which Jude a Servant of Jesus Christ, cried woe against, Jude 11.

And in thy Answer, P. Ans.
after many excuses thou plainly confessest, thou can not justify all of
your Calling, and therefore thou will answer for thy self; and first thou
say, thou art none of these Hirelings; for he is not an Hireling which takes
the wages allotted to him for his work; for then thou do accuse Kings and
Governors to be Hirelings, who takes Tribute and Custom, yea and the Apostles
and Christ himself, which to prove, thou quotes 2 Cor. 7.8, and Luke 8.23. but
thou confessest, that he is one, that sets his heart upon the wages only, and
delights not in the work, but is weary of the same, and longs for the shadow or
rest, which to prove, thou quotest Job 7.1.2, 3.

Reply.
Here, thou impudent liar, for all thy shuffelings and thy coverings, thou can
not hide thy self, but out of thy own mouth shall be judged, though thou here
plainly denies thy Brethren, and thinks it enough to answer for thy self, thy
cause is so bad; for thy wages is not allotted by God, neither have thou any
Scripture Rule to prove them, (as is before proved) and therefore it follows,
that thy heart is set upon thy hire; for which sake thou undertakes that work
which thou professest, and it is for thy hires sake, that thou art not weary of
thy work, or else thou would not own that which is so contrary to the
Scripture: so that thou can not bring one Scripture proof for this thy
practice: and, that it is thy hire that thou delights in, is sufficiently
apparent, by thy thus gaping for it, and seeking to defend it, though
altogether contrary to Scripture: And as for the work thou and thy Brethren
professes, you are as idle in it as you can, so that you can but hold up the
Worlds custom, and blind the people that still you may rule over them by your
means, and thus it may plainly be seen, wherein is your delight, and so out
of thy own mouth judge thee to be neither conscionable nor faithful, who art
not ashamed thus to seek to justify thy self in thy deceit, when as thy own
mouth confesses that it is not a liberal maintenance, and that thou can
take it and plead for it: and therefore this Scripture which thou quotest, in
Job. 7.2. shall stand and witness against thee, who as a hireling agrees with
the people for so much a year, and as a hireling looks for thy wages at the
years end, but of thy work there is no profit to any, and so with the shadow
thou deceivest them for gain which does so blind thy eye, that thou think
all are like thee, though they take that which is freely administered to them
for their temporal necessities; which is not agreeing with the people, for so
much a year, and to take it by a law whether they will agree with you yea or
nay; which weapons Christ or his Ministers never made use of, and therefore
thou lier how dare thou to accuse Christ or his Apostles to take wages for
their work? did Christ heal the sick or the diseased, and the lame, and the
blind, or teach the people, for money or wages? oh thou blasphemer for ever stop
thy mouth from nameing his holy name who does so slander him: well may thou
accuse and slander his Servants and Messengers, which so impudently do it to
him, who is our Lord and Master: but as for paying tribute, 3.
to Kings and Goverours in their places it is allowed of by Scripture, which
thine is not, and they are set about temporal affairs and are the ordinance
of God for that purpose, for to Govern and Protect the people in bodily peace
and quietness, which if they neglect, will be laid to their charge: but thou
and thy brethren pretend to spiritual affairs, and therefore are to have your
rule and example from Christ and his Ministers who was set about spiritual
affairs, the which thou can not but would creep into any hole, to hide thy
self and thy brethren from the light, but by it are you found out, and seen,
to be the deceivers who out of the doctrine of Christ are found, and therefore
not to be owned nor received.

And secondly thou say, thou art no such greedy Dog, P. Ans.
whatsoever foul-mouthed Curs do bark to the contrary; for thou say, thou
contents thy self with thy legal sallary, which yet thou say is not
contrary to evangelicall, (wherein thou have already been proved a Lier
sufficiently.)

Here thy foul mouth thou have opened wide, who accounts the Prophet Isaiah,
Reply.
a foul mouthed Cur, who this Language first did speak unto the false Prophets,
in whose steps thou art found, and therefore unto thee the same Language
belongs, who seeks for thy gain from thy Quarters as they did; and what have
thou else manifested but greediness of gain all along, Isay. 56.
who rather then thou would yield thy error in it (though thou could not
produce one Scripture that would stand for it:) yet thou runnest to old
Histories and Records, thereby to maintain it, contrary to Scripture: therefore
with shame and confusion of face might thou say, thou contents thy self with
thy legal sallary, who have nigh 300 l. by the year, and yet thou would
have more, if thou could get it, thou art so greedy, as may be well
understood by thy saying: that in former time, that the Bishops and Pastors had
not only a settled maintenance of that value, but of a great deal more, which is
an unheard off thing in all the Scripture, and therefore thy own mouth confessed,
what greedy Dogs you Priest have bin since your beginning, and yet with the
deceit of thy heart thou would still cover; but the day does make you
manifest, to be such who run, and the Lord never sent you; and therefore you
profit not the people at all: Therefore what is thy teaching and warning of the
people which thou here boasts of, and therefore art found one of the Dreamers,
and studiers, and mutterers, who speaks a Divination of thy own brain, and not
from the mouth of the Lord, and so feeds the people with wind, and air:
therefore silence thou deceiver, for going about to excuse thy self from these
things, as if thou wast more holy then thy Brethren; for in so doing, thy lying
and hypocrisy does but the more appear; and therefore this shall serve to
prove thee a liar in all the rest of thy excuses, and it is not uncharitable,
nor censorious to tell thee so, though thou so accusest me; but a lie in thy
mouth is no wonder.

Whether ever thou labored with thy hands, to make the Gospel free, and
without charge, Qu. 15.
as Paul a Minister of the Gospel did.

And in thy answer thou do not at all resolve my Querie; but shufflest to and
fro to hide thy self, P. Ans.
and excuse thy self by pleading Paul's power, in 1 Cor. 9.6. and say that
Christ your Master did not injoyne you so to do, which to prove thou quotes
Luke 10.7. and Deuteronomy. 25.4. and also pleades that in 2 Timothy 2.4. and also
pleades a liberty by the Counsels and Synods in the Church in former ages, etc.

Yet all this does not prove, that ever thou labored with thy hands to make
the Gospel free and without charge, Reply
which any who reads these Scriptures may see and by thy silence in the same
judge thee guilty and to be out of the Apostles practice: and therefore these
Scriptures will witness against thee, (which thou have quoted) for thou art
not as Paul and Barnabas was, neither wast called to the Ministry as they was,
neither preachest freely as they did, neither labourest with thy hands as Paul
did, but only make a trade and a gain of the Apostles words for thy own
ends: and therefore what have thou to do, to mention Christ or his Ministers
who art so plainly found out of their practice, or to call Christ thy Master
who art thy self called Master and so robs him of his honor, and art not in
his Doctrine, (who says, be not ye called Masters) and so art none of his, and
therefore have nothing to do with that liberty which he has given to his
faithful laborers whom he himself has called into his Vineyard: and as for
that Scripture in Luke 10.7, it is not against labor, but for labor before
thou can have thy hire, but thou would have it and be maintained in
Idleness by others labors as the Clergy men (as thou call them) in England
are, who are no Ministers of Christ who are called of men Master, and so are
out of his doctrine in the steps of the Pharisees whom the woe is unto, and
therefore in this these, Councels and Synods (as thou call'st them) in your
Church in former ages have acted contrary to Scripture, in ordaineing that you
should not work, and labor with your hands for your selves and your families,
but that you should live in Pride and Idleness, by the sweat of others
brows, to be maintained as you are: which ordinance is not of God but of man
by which you stand, and how have thou before falsely accused me for not working,
though I am not chargeable to the world, and now thou art striveing by
Scripture wresting and false applying and all the ways thou can, for to
excuse thy self from laboring with thy hands, as the Apostle did, though
thou and thy family are altogether chargeable to the world. All which
Scriptures shall stand against thee, for they all maintain working before the
benefit of the work come to them, be it spiritual or temporal, for the Ox
treades not out the come without labor: but what corn have you Clergy men
trodden forth? and what spiritual things have you sown? and what Gospel you
have preached, this many years in England? does not the fruits of your
Ministry condemn you, and witness against you, to be such as run, and the
Lord never sent you, and so the curse follows you and is upon your Ministry,
and therefore profits not the people at all, but as drones lives upon the
painful labor of others, yea though you do not labor with your hands yet
who more intangles themselves in the affairs of this world, then you that
calls your selves Clergy men both by law and cunning craft and deceit, and
bargaining and oppressing thereby, to make your selves rich with the things of
this life, yea what thing is there in this Nation to get riches by, (though
never so unbeseeming spiritual men) but you have a hand in it, and therefore
none of those spiritual Soldiers which Paul speaks of, in 2 Timothy 2.4.
therefore silence thou deceiver for meddling with the Scripture, with thy
Babylonious language (as prohibit, Mechanic, Synod, and Clergy) which are the
words of man's wisdom, and contrary to the plain language of the Scripture, out
of which thou art shut, in Babylon where thou wast bred, with thy Clergy as
thou call them.

Whether thou do not walk in the steps of the Scribes and Pharisees who art
called of men Master or Doctor, and have the chiefest seat in the Synagogues,
Que. 16.
and uppermost rooms at feasts and greetings in the markets contrary to the
practice of the Apostles, and so art under the woe which Christ pronounced
against such, yea or nay?

And here thou would shuffle off with Questioning instead of Answering, and
say, P. Ans.
what if Christ gave the name of Master to Nicodemus, John. 3.10 and Luke the
name of Doctor to Gamaliel in Act, 5.3.4. and thou say, Is it then the giving
or taking of these names, which Christ forbids or the arrogant using of
them, out of an high or proud Spirit that desires to be Idolized? and thou
confessest the word Rabby signifies Doctor or Master, which names thou say
was familiarly given both in the Old and New Testament, which to prove thou
quotes, Eccles. 12.11. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Cor. 12.28.

Reply. The 89 and 90, Que: are answered in this Reply; and thy 92 Query also.
Here thy blindness does appear, and thou will need no other proof against
thee but thy own words, though here thou would go about to slander Christ,
and his Apostles, whom thou art not worthy to name, neither do thou thereby
answer my Query, but would justify that which Christ cried woe against, and
therefore a Minister of Antichrist art found to which the woe belonges for that
Scripture in John 3.10. does not prove that Christ called Nicodemus Master, as
thou would feign slander him, neither does that, Act. 5.34. prove, that Luke
gave Gamaliel the name of Doctor, but in way of declaration what he was
accounted amongst the Jews, as any that reads with understanding may see: yea
thou thy self can not deny it, but that thou would be glad of any thing
to shelter thy deceit; but Christ expressly forbids his to be be called Master,
and therefore it is concluded that you take these names unto your selves, from
an arrogance and pride of Spirit that you might be Idolized as is well known,
how you swell and are puffed up in wrath and rage, if you be not so called by
those you account your inferiors; or else you would not own it, being Christ
has so expressly forbidden it, to his Ministers; and you professing your selves
to be his Ministers; and the word Minister signifies servant; and Paul, who was
his Minister said he made himself servant to all, but you would be Masters
over all, 1 Cor 9.19.
bearing rule by your means though hired as Servants, yet more unreasonable
and unjust, for you will have it of them you do no work for: and also
whatsoever thou say Doctor or Master signifies, Christ has forbidden it, and
therefore in useing of it thou art out of the doctrine of Christ, and the woe
is unto thee, and the more for wresting the Scripture to maintain it, and
uphold it which Christ has cried down, and it is well known to them that are
not wilfully blind, that Master or Doctor are names that are given and taken,
amongst you Clergymen (as you call your selves (as Titles of honor; witness
your degrees in your Nurseries of deceit, (which you call Universities) as
first Bachellor, then from Bachellor to Master of Arts, and from that to
Bachellor of Divinity and from that to Doctor of Divinity; which highest Title
is given to thee, and therefore it is no wonder that thou so pleads for it, but
the least Child of light, will judge these traditions to be upheld by the
Pride; and arrogance of the flesh that would be Idolized, but the old man must
needs plead for his life: neither does these Scriptures in, Ephesians. 4.11. and 1
Cor. 12.38. at all advantage thee, for neither Doctor nor Master is mentioned
in these Scriptures, and thus thou art ignorant of the letter, then far unfit
to be a teacher of others which thou do assume to thy self by the name of
Doctor, according to thy own meaning.

And as for the chief seats in the synagogues and uppermost rooms at feasts,
P. Ans.
some thou say that are worthy, were allowed them by Christ himself which to
prove thou quotes, Lnk. 14.7.8. etc. Mark. 5.22. And by Luke, Ast. 13.15. and
Chap. 18.8.17. and as for salutations they are allowed thou say, as well in
the market places as any where else.

This is the truest word that thou have yet spoken in one respect, though from
a false Spirit: Reply.
for your heathenish customs and salutations, are allowed-of no where, by the
Scripture, neither have thou brought any proof to the contrary, and it is also
easily discerned, you rather choose them in the markets, or in Pudlique to be
seen of men, that you might be accounted Courteous, and looked upon for your
breeding, witness your congying and bowing, with your hats off in admiration,
and Idolizing of one another persons, wherein you exalt your selves above the
Angel, who would not suffer John to bow unto him, Rev. 22.8.9.
but said, he was his fellow servant: therefore let this judge you and condemn
you in these practices, which by you are used from an ambitions and an in
ordinate desire of them, and therefore are the most unworthy as thou confessest
the Scribes and Pharisees were, and therefore art out of thy own mouth judged, 1
John 5.19.
although thou wold'st cast it upon the Quakers as thou call them, but we
can justly clear our selves and cast it into thy own bosom for we use no such
heathenish customs, yet we can justly say with John, we are of God, and the
whole world lies in wickedness, which thou accounts an exhalting of our
selves, and in that thou belyest Christ and the Scriptures in saying he allowed
these things to any (which he cried down) thy impudency does the more appear
that thou would not stick to belly us, whom thou call Quakers, for none of
these Scriptures which thou quotes, to uphold the chiefest seats in the
Synagogue and uppermost rooms at feasts, does at all concern the matter, but
only Luke 14.7. etc. which Christ spoke as a parable to the Pharisees, who
loved the uppermost rooms at feasts; which also may fitly be applied to you
now who take the uppermost reome, How thy 9th Query is answered. Mat. 20.25,
26, 27. Jam. 12. John 13. John 5.44.
and thinks scorn to take the lowest, which may easily be discerned by you,
with an impartial eye, or else you would not own these things, which Christ
declared against, to his Ministers, and also taught them that he that would be
the greatest, should be the least, and the Apostle forbids all respect of
persons, and Christ showed an example of humility to his Ministers, when he
washed their feet, and condemned the Pharisees who received honor one of
another, which thou art here pleading for: then if thou be not in their
steps, let the understanding judge.

What is the Church and whether it be not a delusion to the people, Que. 17.
and a dishonor to Christ to call a house of lime and stone, a Church?

And in thy Answer, P. Ans.
thou pleadest it a custom in most ages, and by a Trope of figure; but thou
confessest the word Church is first and properly a congregation of Saints, or
of such as profess so to be, as in 1 Cor. 1.2. and in the second place thou
say, this word is used for a place where such a Congregation use to assemble;
which to prove thou quotes; Cor. 11.22. and ver. 18. and Chap. 14.5.23.
compared with ver. 19.28. neither is this any delusion to the people thou
say, nor more dishonor to God, then to use this phrase, the house of God;
which to prove thou quotes, Isa. 60.7. and Ephesians. 42.4. therefore here we seek a
knot in a bulrush, thou say.

And thus thou blasphemer values thy blasphemy covering it with lies, Reply.
that thou might still keep the people in blindness who makes such a small
light matter of it, to put a house of lime and stone for the body of Christ
which is the Church, and thus you have long fed the people in blindness with
your vain customs and traditions, and they put you out of your customs, Col.
1.24.
and you are vexed and troubled, as the heathen was at Paul and Silas, and said
they came to turn the world upside down: and then, to cover your blasphemy
and lies, Act. 17.6.
you have Tropes and figures, which is the wisdom of man to cover lies; and
thus you learned ones make use of your learning to make lies in hypocrisy
contrary to the Scripture, for the Types and Figures in the Scripture figured
forth something to come, but your steeple houses are no figures of Christ, nor
his body (which is the Church) and when the substance is come, of what use is
the figure? for the Temple which God commanded Solomon to build him, which was
called the house of God, (where them that feared the Lord worshipped him) was a
figure of Christ, but when Christ the substance came he Prophesied of its
destruction, Math. 24. and Steven after him declared against it, and by them
that upheld, it was stoned to death, Act. 7.47.48.49. etc: and Paul declared
against it and by them that upheld it, was persecuted, Acts 17.24.25. Acts
19.26.27. as we are by you now, that uphold your Idols Temples, that figure
forth nothing but the Imaginations of man, neither was ever commanded by God to
be built, as Solomon's Temple was, which for its time was called the house of
God; but the Prophet Isay saw the end of it, when he spoke that in Isay 66.1,
2. But that you should call your popish houses, the house of God, which was
built by the Papists, and such like, without any Command of God, thou have no
Scripture proof to maintain it: neither are those fit examples to bring to
prove it, as the Scholars and the School, and the Jews and their Synagogues:
what does this at all prove, that you should call your Idols Temples as the
body of Christ, which was made of living stones, elect and precious; for the
Scripture all along witnesses, that the Church is the body of Christ, which is
the Saints, as this Scripture does witness, which thou have quoted in 1 Cor.
1.2. but it does not at all prove thy lie, that the Church is a Congregation of
such as profess to be Saints; for it is more then a profession, though with a
profession you have long deluded the people: yet many there are that profess
Christ in words, but in life deny him, who are no Saints, nor the Church of
Christ, Tit. 1.16
though thou art blind, and sees no difference: yet according to thy own
meaning, you do not call your Assemblies, and the place where your Assemblies
meets, all one; for you call your meeting places Churches, and the people a
Congregation; and so here out of thy own mouth thou art judged, yet it would be
as much blasphemy, to call your people a Church, as the place where they meet,
a Church; for it is well known, that all manner of unrighteous persons meets
there, as thou confessest the greatest part of the professors are earthly
minded, as in thy answer to my 11th Query; and I am sure the chiefest of them
are blind, and led by Customs and Traditions, as thou here makes it appear, who
thy self have been a Teacher so long, and now goes about to justify it
lawful, to call a house of lime and stone, a Church, which thou go about to
prove, by wresting the Scripture; but let any with a single eye, read these
Scriptures, which thou have quoted in thy Answer, concerning the Church, 1 Cor.
16.19. Col. 4.15 Act. 20.16.
and see if they do at all mention any house to be a Church; but only the
Saints whose bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; for they commonly met in
dwelling houses; but you call none Churches, but your Steeple Houses, which
has been your Custom long; and it is well known, how the ignorant people that
go to them, have long idolized them as the houses of God, and looked upon them
to be far more holy then any other place, and have envied and hated, and even
murdered those in their hearts, that should say to the contrary, and you
Priests have been their great Agents in it, though you have known in your
Consciences to the contrary: yet you know, that where the people are the most
blind, you are the more idolized and set up; and it is your greatest grief,
where the light appears, as is openly manifest by the chief Priests, who now
rage and rail against the light, where it appears, and persecutes them that
holds it forth, that you might, if it were possible, put it out, and still
uphold your Fathers Kingdom, which is in darkness, and then you think you are
safe, and all will be yours; but your Calamity will come on a sudden, and your
downfall is nigh at hand, 1 These. 5.2.3.

Whether thou, and such as thou, be not the Creepers into houses, Que. 18.
who would confine all to your Steeple Houses, yea or nay.

And in thy Answer thou grants, that Paul speaks of seducers, that creep into
houses, etc. as in 2 Timothy 3.6.7. but whether this best suits with your manner
of teaching, or ours, thou say, judge ye; for thou say, you do not creep
into the Churches, who have the doors set wide open, and have your
Congregations or Assemblies publicly called together by a Bell, and then thou
vents forth a deal of frothy stuff, and say, why must your Houses of Lime
and stone be called Steeple Houses, more then the Glaziers Hall, or the Bull
and Mouth near Aldersgate, be called a Glasse-house, a Chimney-house, or a
Storehouse, or a Stable-house; but thou ask, where did Christ or his
Apostles reproach the Synagogues with reproachful names, as we do your Churches.

Here thy malicious and scornful spirit is much more made manifest, Reply.
together with thy folly and ignorance, so that I am able to judge thee, and
the rest of the Parish Preachers, to be those creepers into houses, that Paul
there speaks of, 2 Timothy 3.6.7. who have led silly women and people captive
these many years, full of sin, and led away with diverse lusts, who some have
learned 40. years, some 50. some 60. yea some 80. and yet strangers to the
truth, yea as blind and carnal as ever they was, so that they take a House of
Lime and stone for a Church and a House of God, as you have taught: and ask
them why they call it so, and they will answer, it was called so before they
was born, and will be after they were dead: then judge ye, whether these
Creatures be not blind and carnal, and led by your own Customs and traditions,
and you are their Teachers, who would bear rule in your Steeple Houses, so that
none shall speak but your selves: if they do, you have a Law to lay upon them,
contrary to the order of the true Church, as in 1 Cor. 14.30, 31, 32. That all
might speak one by one; and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let
the first hold his peace; but this is called disorder amongst you, that call
your selves Saints, and are not, but the Synagogue of Satan; and by thy own
Confession are led together by a Bell; for which you have no Rule in the
Scripture, and so you lead them by Custom and Tradition; and also thy own words
here proves what I said in my last Reply, that you do not call your Assemblies,
and the place where your Assemblies meets both by one; for here thou call
the place a Church, and the people the Congregation, as I said before; and thou
blind guide, where do thou read in the Scripture of Church-doores be ashamed
and blush, thus to presume in thy blasphemy; and therefore how soever thou have
taken these houses to be, wherein deceivers creeps, as before is proved, and
have taught the people so, to put them out of jealousy of you to be the
deceivers, does not at all excuse you from it; for the Apostle himself taught
in private houses and Chambers, and private places; Act. 20.20.
and therefore by that account, thou would tax the Apostle to be a deceiver, if
he was here, as thou do James Parnel, and those whom thou scornfully calls
his gang: but where do thou find such a word in the Scripture, which
proceeds out of thy malicious and evil heart; but thy reproaches unto us are
riches, (and thy shame.) And the Reason why those Houses near Aldersgate (which
thou so spits thy venom at, because the people of God have used to meet there,)
may not be called (as thou in contempt do term them) as well as your
Stone-houses be called, Steeple Houses, is, because they have names fitting for
them already, for to distinguish them from other places; and so also the word
Steeple-house, is the fittest name to distinguish your meeting places from
others, and also to take from them that holy name, which only belongs to the
body of Christ, and also to wear out that Idolatry of the peoples minds, which
they through long Custom have born to those Idolatrous places: neither do we
any more reproach them in so saying, then Christ and his Apostles did, in
calling the Jews meeting places, Synagogues, though thou highly dishonourest
Christ in calling them Churches, which signifies his body: Have you no other
names to bestow upon your stone houses, and high places; but most
blasphemously to call them by the name of God's, and holy men, whom you are not
worthy to name, as you call your Colleges, (which are Synagogues of Satan, and
Cages of unclean Birds,) by the name of Immanuel, and by the name of Christ and
Trinity, and the like: if you had called them by the name of Glaziers Hall, or
Bull and Mouth, or Synagogue, and the like: we should not gainsay it, and
therefore in this, the Jews will condemn you, who did not presume to call their
meeting places, by such holy names, as you presumptuously do, which is, and
has been a great provocation of the people to Idolatry, to idolize the places,
because of their names which was given to them by the Papists, who ignorantly
worship names, and you cast out the Papists for Idolatry, and yet upholds their
Idols: therefore woe unto you blind guides, and deluders of the people, your
wickedness is had in remembrance before the Lord.

Whether it was the practice of the Apostles, to take a Text of the Prophets
words, Que. 19.
and from thence to raise uses, points, Traills and motives, as thou and such
as thou do, who makes a Trade of their words.

And in thy Answer, P. Ans.
thou say, that it has been the practice of the Church and her Teachers this
many hundred years; (for the which thou have no Scripture proof) and thirdly,
thou say, that none will deny, that this is an useful and profitable way of
teaching, (which is an abominable lie, which I, and hundreds more can testify
against) And fourthly thou say, it may be proved out of the Scriptures, that
all this has been done by Christ and his Apostles, (which is another lie; and
those are the Scriptures upon which thou would ground thy lies, in which they
will witness against thee, as Luke 4.18. and Mat. 22.31. Act. 8.35. and for to
maintain thy uses, points, Trialls and motives, thou quotes Romans 15.4.2 Tim.
3.16.17. John 8.31. and 13.35. and Matthew. 25.34.

Oh thou lier, Reply.
thy lies will not cover thee, nor the Scripture stand for thee, who art found
out of the life and practice of them that gave them forth, who art one of the
lying false Teachers, who have deluded the people this many hundred years, Col.
2.8.
which deluded ones are your Church, amongst whom you have used your
Philosophy, and vain deceit, by which you have long spoiled them, so that the
greatest part of the professors therein are earthly minded, by thy own
confession; and I am sure that another part are Drunkards, and swearers, and
Adulterers, and scoffers, and scorners, and proud and envious ones, and the
like; and now where is the fruits and profitableness of your teaching?
therefore for shame stop thy mouth for boasting of your Church, and her
teachers, and saying, None will deny the profitableness of your teaching; for,
like people, like Priest, Hos. 4.9. 2 Timothy 4.3.
as the Prophet said; and you are the heaps of teachers, that deceive the
world, and draw itching ears after you, (who cannot endure sound Doctrine)
with your fained entising words of men's wisdom; but the Teacher of the true
Church is but one, which is its head, even Christ, who speaks with Power and
Authority, (and not as you Scribes) whose teaching is a profitable teaching, as
is much witnessed in these latter days, Mat. 7.29.
to your great shame and grief, who have been the professed Teachers of the
Church of England, this many years: neither does any of these Scritpures prove,
that ever Christ or his Apostles took a Text of Scripture; and by humane art
and study, did raise Uses, Points, Trialls and Motives, as you do, which is a
commendable teaching, 1 Cor. 1.18. 1 Cor. 2.4
by the wise ones of the world, who know not the wisdom of God; but to them the
preaching of the Cross is foolishness, as was accounted amongst the Greeks,
because the Apostle came not with entising words of men's wisdom, (as you do to
please men) but in plainness of speech, spoke the word of the Lord faithfully,
and also said, If he yet sought to please men, he should not be the Servant of
Christ; Gal. 1.10.
but this is all your care, whose trust is in man and not in Christ: and in all
those Scriptures, when Christ or his Apostles spoke of a Text of Scripture, out
of the old Testament, it was to show the fulfilling thereof, or to witness to
what they had said; but you will take these Scriptures, for to give your
carnal meanings, and interpretations of them, and so from them speak a
divination of your own brain, for gain and lucre; and this is the use you make
of these points, as thou calls them, which the Scriptures before mentioned
will not at all maintain, and yet thou can impudently quote this Scripture in
Mat. 6.25.34. which forbids taking thought what to eat, what to drink, and
wherewithal to be clothed, when it is so publicly known, that it is your
greatest care, and that which thou have been here much laboring to maintain
all along, to prove it lawful, for thee to take nigh 200. or 300. pounds by the
year, of the world: yea and for a Law to compel them, if they refuse to give
it; and yet thou art not ashamed to say, that thou do not go in the way of
Balaam, for gifts and rewards; and the chiefest Scripture which thou have here
quoted, will witness against thee, as 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. which says, the
Scripture was given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, and instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfected, thoroughly furnished unto every good work; but thou hates to
be reproved, and calls them foul-mouthed currs, and the like, that do reprove
thee, and thou teach for Doctrine, the traditions of men, as to call a house
of Lime and Stone, a Church and the like, as is before proved.

And how have you by all your Doctrines, reproof, correction, and instruction,
this many years perfected any, when as the professors therein are earthly
minded (as thou say; P. Ans.
) and you that are therefore Teachers the most of all, and most of you denies
perfection in this life; and though thou with thy tongue profess it; yet in
life denies it, which is worst of all, and so I take thee: and though thou have
been so pleading for thy way, yet thou say, you would change it for a better,
if any can show it you, and make your hearers believe, that it would be more
advantages for them, but thou say this trade of interpreting the Scripture is
an old and a good trade, which to prove thou quotes Job. 33.23: Psalm. 10.2, 3.
Pro. 1.6. Act. 8.3.

Here thou blind guide, Reply,
thy nakedness is open to the world, and thy hearers may consider it who have
looked upon thee as their Teacher this many years, and yet thou thy self
still to learn which is the best way, when as there is but one true way, then
thou who art ignorant of this true way, must needs be in a false way: then how
have thou deluded thy hearets this many years, Jer. 32.39.
and also belyed thy self in thy Book? And if the Teacher be ever learning,
then what must the herers of such a one be, let the wise-hearted judge; and I
believe and know, that your hearers would soon believe the same, if the
Preachers of truth might have liberty to speak, when they come amongst you:
but if any come in that intent, you are ready to set your people upon them to
hale them out with force, and also you have a law to cast them into Prison, as
many of us do witness at this day: and therefore thou liar, the convincing of
your hearers of a better way, is not your greatest care, but rather your
greatest fear, least any should be drawn from you, and so your trade come to
fail (as thou call it): but this I know is your greatest care, that any
body would show you, a better way to get money by, and also persuade your
hearers into it, (or else thou thinks, you are never the better) and then you
would leave interpreting the Scripture, which now thou calls a good trade, but
thou Merchant of Babylon, where does any of these Scriptures which thou have
quoted, prove or term interpreting the Scripture, a trade? though you
Merchants of Babylon, make a trade of it, to get lucre by, and so call it a
trade, who think gain is godliness: but well may others accuse you, for making
a trade and a gain of the Scriptures, while you your selves confess it, and
thus thou wrests the Scripture, for thine own ends and paints thy work with
Scripture, for to make the ignorant believe it is grounded upon Scripture: oh
be ashamed to take it into thy mouth, to make a trade of it, which was freely
spoken forth by the holy men of God as they was moved by the Holy Ghost, and
thou makes the people believe, it is of some private interpretation, and so
thou makes Merchandise of the people, and so out of thy own mouth art judged to
be a lier, who before denied it.

Whether thou do speak as thou art moved by the Holy Ghost, Que. 20,
as they did, who spoke forth the Scripture?

And in thy Answer thou sai'st that thou have answered to this already, P. Ans
that thou usually do speak at the motion or assistance of the Holy Ghost,
thou praises God for it.

But thou hypocrite I have also in this already proved thee a lier, Reply. 2
Cor. 4.4
and thy God to be the Father of lies, who is the God of the blind world, in
which thou art a blind guide, and an enemy to the Holy Ghost, where he is
witnessed to rule, and this James Parnel and those thou calls his fellows, can
discern in thee though thou art blind and cannot them see.

What Scripture have thou for sprinkling Infants with water on their faces?
Que. 21
and whether all are Christians and in the faith of Christ, that are so done
by, or what does it profit?

And in thy answer, P. Ans.
the deceit of thy heart thou utters, so that the simple may easily discern
the folly, and also see how thou and the rest of thy brethren, have deluded
and bewitched the Nation, for thou say thou holds not the Baptism of
infants absolutely necessary but lawful only, and to prove the lawfulness of
it thou say, it is sufficient, that thou have no command in the Scripture
against the sprinkling of infants in the face with baptismal water, but thou
say thou have the commandment of Governors, and thou art commanded to be
subject to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Here the people now may see how they have been long deluded, for thy own mouth
utters it, Reply.
for whenas many of the people of this Nation who follow you blind guides, have
persuaded themselves through your evil incensing, and leavening of their minds
to this day, this to be absolutely necessary to salvation, and that their
Children could not be saved, if they died without it: and now thou comes to the
Trial, to prove it, thou confessest it is not necessary, but lawful only,
and that is because there is no command of God against it, thou say: neither
a command for it, but by man; and thus you have long deluded the nations, with
your own Inventions, for the which you have no Scripture, then how is it your
rule? here you run besides your rule, teaching for doctrine the commandments
and traditions of men, which the Scripture is against, and therefore against
infants baptism, Math. 15.9. Col. 2.22.23. which by thy own confession is but
an ordinance of man, Here thy 53. Que. is answered.
but God is to be obeyed rather then man, and you do it not for the Lords sake,
but for to please man: for the Lord does not require it at your hands, and now
all the ignorant people who have been in this bewitched by you, may see your
blindness who have long made them believe that it was an ordinance of Christ,
that their Children should be sprinkled (and one of the points of salvation)
(as you call them) and now nothing but an ordinance of man, which will not
stand for thee neither; for in that thou lie also, to say it is the
commandments of thy governors, for in that they leave every one to the
liberty of their consciences, and all laws and ordinances before time to the
contrary are made by this null and void: and now, does the Holy Ghost teach thee
to lie? oh thou lier and blasphemer of the Holy Ghost, who said that usually
thou speak by the motion of the Holy Ghost, and now art taken in a lie: oh
Satan is high in thee, and thy wickedness is great, and which do thou call
thy baptismall water, this also is the deceit of thy heart, and that which is
not of says is sin, Romans 14.2*
therefore infants baptism: for you say your faith is grounded upon Scripture,
then where is your Scripture for infants baptism, and thus out of the doctrine
of Christ you are found, acting and doing your own works, and therefore the
rest of thy pretended answer I shall leave to the impartial reader to judge
of; wherein thou have much manifested thy ignorance and bindnesse, and in vain
have thou quoted any Scripture: for if any of it would stand for infants
baptism, then it would be necessary, which thou confessest it is not, and
therefore thou Serpent why wrestest thou the Scripture, thus to uphold that
which is not necessary, and where as thou speak of the promises made in the
seed (but that seed is not the seed of the Serpent, which rules in all you
Children of disobedience, therefore) what have thou to do with the promises,
and where do thou prove that infants baptism is the seal of the covenant or
the badge of the Kingdom, as thou termest it: but thou liar, read what the seal
is, in Ephesians. 1.13. and with that stop thy mouth. And whereas thou speak of
Christ's calling little Children, Here thy 54, and 55. Qu. is Ans. John. 4.2
Ephesians. 2.3. John. 3.3
what of that? Christ baptized none; therefore silence babbler: And how are your
Children sanctified from the womb, (as thou say John was) when as all are
by Nature the Children of wrath, and except they be borne again, they cannot
enter, and therefore thou manifests, that your Church is made up of
unregenerate persons, into which thou say they are admitted by water, and 20
or 30 years after they are thus baptized, you preach repentance to them, and
this is the cause why the professors therein are earthly minded, as thou
complainest, and therefore no Christian parents but blind carnal creatures,
who thinks it profits their Children to be admitted into such a Church: and as
the Children grow up, they show what seal you have given them, which is more
like the mark of the beast then the seal of the covenant, and therefore your
prayers which thou talkest of, are an abomination and avails not, and thus
have thou foamed out thy shame and folly, to the sight of all but those who are
blind and love to have it so, for here is one of the maine points of your
religion proved a mere delusion.

Qu. 22. P. Ans.
What is the estate and condition of a Christian?

And in thy Answer, thou have stolen the Apostles words, which he speaks
concerning this matter, and says, There are three ages, steps, and degrees of
Christianity; And the first Age, step, and Degree thou confessest is in Christ,
and begotten of the Father in the hatred of sin, and love of righteousness, and
by him brought to the knowledge of Redemption, from all iniquity, and
Renovation in all righteousness.

Here thou have destroyed the whole faith of your visible Church; for they
generally believe, Reply.
that they shall never be wholly set free from all iniquity, nor be perfect in
righteousness, while they are upon the earth; and if this be the lowest estate
of Christianity, to be in Christ, and redeemed from all iniquity, and begotten
by the Father, and renewed in all righteousness, (which is perfection in
righteousness) then by thy own confession none of them are Christians, neither
thou who art a teacher of them; for thou have been openly found in sin and
iniquity, as in lying, covetousness, lightness, scornfulness, oppression, and
deceit, as before is proved; and now thou art again found a lier, in saying,
that we know not the first estate of a Christian from the last; but we are able
to discern thee, yet uncome to the first, and therefore far off the last,
although in years an old man: yet a Child can tell thee thy confusion,
therefore stop thy mouth thou deceiver, and sit thee down and consider, how
thou and thy Brethren have for this many years deceived this Nation, and labor
thy self, and repent in dust and ashes, least the Lord in thy destruction make
thee an example to all thy Brethren-deceivers.

What does the faith which thou professes, Qu. 23.
differ from the faith of the Hypocrite, and what is the faith of the Hypocrite?

And in thy Answer thou say, P. Ans.
thy faith is A trust in the Lord Jesus, to be helped up again from the fall,
or to be saved from the hand of thine enemies, or of all that hate thee, and so
to be renewed; through him, to be enabled to serve him, cheerfully and without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of thy life; and
thou say, this faith brings forth obedience, and purifies the heart, and
makes you conformable to Jesus, so that thou hopes for no benefit by his death,
unless thou die with him, to all known sins: but the faith of the Hypocrite,
seeks all ways something by or through Christ, than what it should seek, (to
wit) the putting off the old man, and the putting on the new, which is created
after God in righteousness, and true holiness; and herein thou say, does thy
Faith differ from the Faith of the Hypocrite, and perhaps from James Parnell.

Yea it does, Reply.
for my faith is, that there is no putting off the old man, and putting on the
new, but by and through Christ, John 15.5.
which is no more then what I should believe: and thy faith which is contrary,
is the faith of the Hypocrite, which will perish; yea and out of thy own mouth
I shall prove it; for by thy own confession, thou art still in the fall, in
saying, that thou trustest in the Lord Jesus, to be helped up out of the fall
again: hereby it is concluded, that thou art still in the fall; for if thou
wast helped already out of the fall, then thou would have the end of thy
hope; but its like this faith, thou have professed this many years, and have
been a Teacher so long, and yet it has not brought thee out of the fall; and
therefore it is but a borrowed faith, and most of those expressions thou have
stolen out of Luke 1.71.72, 73, 74, 75. which has not purified thy heart from
lies and deceit: neither art thou in obedience, or conformable to Jesus
Christ, who abides not in his doctrine, but teach for doctrine the
traditions of men neither art thou dead with him unto all known sins, for this
is one to depart from his doctrine, and such has not God: and this is proved
against thee in many things, as in taking thy Tithes and maintenance, of the
peoples labors, which many of them its like do want it themselves, which is a
great sin and oppression: and secondly in sprinkling infants which is a great
delusion to the people; and many other things which is before proved against
thee, which that in thy conscience cannot but testify against. And to prove
another word, which thou call the ingiven and Inspoken word thou quotest,
Jer, 2.1. and 4.11, 13. and to prove another word which thou call the out
spoken word thou quotes, Psalm. 68.11. and to prove another word, which thou
call the written word of the Lord thou quotest 2 Timothy 3.16,

Here thy ignorance of God is not hid, Reply.
who by thy wit and deceiptfull wisdom would make four of one: but all these
Scriptures which thou have quoted does not prove any other then one, Jer. 23.29.
which word was in the beginning by which all things was made, which thou
confessest to be eternal powerful and living, and that word which came unto
the Prophets was as a fire and a hammer to beat the Rocks in pieces, Heb. 4.12.
then was it not powerful and living, and one and the same with that the
Apostle speaks of which is quick and powerful, John. 1.1 1.
and sharper then a two edged sword, and this is the same word of life which
the Apostles spoke from and published which was from the beginning, 1 Pet. 1.23.
and this was the same word which was published, which David there speaks of;
and by this word was the Prophets all begotten and borne again, and this word
is invisible, hid from the carnal eye, as thou thy self confessest though in
confusion, but that Scripture which thou quotest in the 2 Timothy 3.16. to prove a
written word, does not mention any such thing; but if thou meanest that the
Scriptures is that written word, I answer there are many words in the
Scripture; but the word is but one, of which the Scriptures bears Testimony.
And thus thy ignorance is manifested, and returned into thy own bosom,

What is the end of Christ's coming and what is the redemption?

And in thy Answer thou go about to prove that many-fould which is but one,
P. Ans.
and so runs into thy sundry divisions in thy imaginations: and though thou
accusest James Parnel, that he knows it not, yet he is able to discern thy
confusion, for in one place, thou say there is a redemption from all sin,
and another redemption from all evil, and this thou calls twofold; and thou
say there is a redemption from the curse of the law, and another redemption
from the guilt of sin, which also thou call twofold.

How many redemptions would thou here make, of one, Reply,
thou blind guide? Can any be redeemed from all sin? and not from all evil,
and from the curse of the law, and not from the guilt of sin? and is not all
this one, and by one, and fulfilled in one? But it may easily be concluded that
thou can witness none of this; for so long as thou art in the fall, thou art
under the curse of the law, and the guilt of sin, as before out of thy own
mouth is proved; and they that can witness this redemption, are Christians
indeed, and cleasned from earthly mindedness: all which thou nor thy Church is
not, as before out of thy own mouth is proved, but are still in your iniquity
upholding the works of the Devil, and are not saved from your enemies that are
of your own house; neither is the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in you,
neither is your souls delivered out of the house of bondage, neither is Jesus
your high Priest, who set up your selves to be Priests in his stead, holding up
the changeable Priesthood which took Tithes, and so denies Christ come in the
flesh and therefore shall be judged by him, whom thou confessest is the judge of
the world, all which thou say is the end of Christ's coming.

Whether thou will own that Christ has enlightened every one that comes into
the world, Que. 30.
and whether they that know that light need any man to teach them, and whether
thou leadest up any under thy Ministry, that they need not thee to teach them.

And in thy answer thou confessest that Christ does enlighten every one that
comes into the world, P. Ans.
because the Apostle affirms it, Joh. 1.9. And secondly thou confessest, that
they which have attained to the true knowledge of this light, need not that any
man should teach them for they are sufficiently taught of God, thou say Jer.
31.34. But thou say thou deniest that we are so taught, or in such a
measure; but thou say till that full light shine in you, you may have other
helps and teachers which to prove, thou quotest, 2 Pet. 1.19.20. etc.

But thou deceiver! thou run, and the Lord never sent thee, who has been a
teacher of the people, and a professor of the light so many years, and have
not yet brought any of thy hearers to the knowledge of the light; yea thou
numberest thy self, amongst them whom this full light does not yet shine, but
stands in need of other helps, and teachers: then, thou hypocrite and
dissembler, how should thou teach thy hearers the full knowledge of the
light, (as thou say they will witness for thee) when as thou thy self
stands in need to be taught it, by thy own confession? Therefore it may well be
resolved, that thou know not that Christ has enlightened every one that
comes into the world neither would confess it, but that the Apostle
affirms it, in that Scripture which thou quotest in John 1.9. yea that
Scripture which thou quotestin, Jer. 31.34. does witness against thee, and thy
hearers to be yet strangers to the promises: therefore thou hypocrite how have
thou belyed thy own conscience, in saying that thou would bring them to the
knowledge of the light, that they should not need thee or any man to teach
them, when as that is it, thou openly strivest against; for then thy Dianah
would bring thee in no gain, which is thy greatest care to uphold, and this is
witnessed in thy conscience, for a truth against thee; yea and this Scripture,
which thou quotest in 2 Pet. 1.19, 20. will witness against thee to be a lier
of the Apostle, for that speaks of the world within which shines as a light in
a dark place which thou art not, yet come to know, and therefore thou denies
the truth, but I tell thee we are in that measure of light, so that we are able
to comprehend thee, and show thee thy confusion, and deceit; therefore
silence, from bringing the Prophets or Apostles for thy proof, for they
testify against such as thee, who pretendest to teach others, and to be a guide
to the blind, a light of them which are in darkness, and an instructor of the
foolish, Romans 2.19.20.
and art not yet taught thy self but art dark and blind, and ignorant of the
light, and wants instruction thy self: by thy own confession therefore what an
impudent liar art thou, who before said thou usely spoke by the motion of the
Holy Ghost, and guided by an infallible Spirit, and now not come to that full
knowledge of the light that thou need no man to teach thee: but the Prophets
and Apostles was come to that before they was made teachers, and they by the
effect of their Ministry turned many from darkness to light, Act. 16.7. Ephesians.
8.5.1 Jonn. 2 22.31. Que.
and brought them to the knowledge of the Anointing so that they needed no man
to teach them therefore silence thou deceiver, for thy blessings is curses, and
therefore profits not the people at all.

Whether they be not the deceivers, that cry Lo here, and lo there, that draw
people to look at a Christ, in a Heaven far off, without them, or at a
Jerusalem, far off without them, when as they that cannot witness Christ in
them are Reprobates.

And in thy Answer, thou confessest, P. Ans.
that they that cannot witness Christ in them, are in a Reprobate condition:
but thou confessest, that thou will not say, that all who speak of a Christ
within them, shall be saved, yet thou grants, that those Teachers who points
only at a Christ without them, or to any other spiritual Kingdom of God, then
what must be within, saying, Lo here is Christ, and lo there is his Kingdom,
may be both deceivers, and deceived themselves for the present.

Herein thou condemnest thy Brethren, Reply.
to be deceivers, and deceived, who are set up, unpheld, and maintained, by the
same earthly power as thou art, who are such as cry all, lo here and lo there
without, and wholly draw the peoples minds without, from the light within
them, that should lead them to the knowledge of Christ and his Kingdom,
incensing them that it is natural, and insufficient; and though thou do here
profess to the contrary, yet art out, of thy own mouth, judged to be out of the
state of salvation, who only professest Christ within, yet art found as deep in
sin and deceit, and as void of Christ or his Light, as the rest of thy
Brethren, who art doting without, as before out of thy mouth is sufficiently
proved, and so thy self art the greatest deceiver, only the Serpents subtlety
more resined; but that thou accusest us, that we cry, lo here amongst the
people called Quakers, Christ a lone is to be found; Thou art a lier, and
speak not from an infallible spinit, but from a lying spirit, which many can
witness against; yet they that are of God hear, as he that can receive it let
him.

Whether they be not out of the faith of Christ, Que. 32.
that receive honor, or respect persons?

And in thy Answer thou say, men may receive honor, and yet be in the faith
of Christ, which to prove, P. Answ,
thou quotest Phil. 2.19, 20.2 Cor. 6.16, 17.1 Cor. 11.1, 2, 3.2 Cor. 8.23. and
many other which does not at all concern the matter of my Query; yea thou
say, men may respect persons, and be in the faith, which to prove thou
quotest Act. 26.25. 2 Kings 3.14. Psalm. 15.4. but thou confessest it is a great
hinderance to the faith, and the believing in the true word, for men to seek
the honor of men, more then the honor that comes from God, John 5.44. And
thou say, it is also a blot and blemish to the true Believers, to respect the
ungodly, that are great and rich in this world, before the true Saints that are
poor; yea thou say, it is a plain denial of the faith, and a good conscience
also, to respect persons in doing of justice, whether for favor or reward,
Exodus 23.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

All these Scriptures which thou have here quoted, Reply.
does not at all justify the earthly honor, which you earthly ones give and
receive one of another: neither was these things written to the world, as thou
makes use of them; neither did those whom the Apostle speaks of, seek after, or
receive earthly honor, as you do, who are called of men Master, who are set up
in the chief seats of the Synagogues and love greetings in the markets and
uppermost Rooms at feasts, and all the earthly honor as may be: all which
Christ declared against to the Pharisees, and judged them to be in the
unbelief; in whose steps ye are found, and therefore in the unbelief also:
neither does any such earthly honor belong to any virtue or grace, John 5.4
42, 43, 44 Act. 26.31, 32. Ast. 24.5. Act. 22.22.
for Christ has declared against it; but they that honor God, them will God
honor: neither does any of these Scriptures which thou have quoted, justify
the respect of persons, which the Apostle declared against in James 2. neither
did Paul respect the person of Festus, when he called him Noble Festus; for in
that he did not adore his person, nor bow to, nor worship it; but Festus did
that which was noble toward Paul, and judged him not worthy to suffer bonds
according to their Law: which few of the Rulers of these days will do; but
rather will wrest and pervert their Law to their own wills, to persecute those
that now are in Paul's condition, and guided by Paul's spirit, and such they now
call pestilent fellows, and raisers of sedition, and adjudge them not worthy to
live amongst men, though they have nothing more against them, than the Heathen
had against Paul; and notwithstanding, all this does not justify your adoring,
worshipping, and respecting men's person, having them in admiration for
advantage sake, yea though wicked corrupt men, though you do not see it,
because the gift blindes your eye) for they that are proud and persecuters, are
wicked and corrupt, and by such you are set up, upheld and maintained, and
therefore adore and worship their persons, having them in admiration, because
of this advantage; but the poor Saints are both by you and them persecuted and
despised, and you join together against them, because they cannot worship the
Beast and his Image as you do; Rev. 13.8.
and thus out of thy own mouth, art thou judged; and that Scripture which thou
quotest in James 2. will witness against thee, and that also in Exodus 23. for
it is well known, that you professed Ministers have been the greatest actors
ever, in stirring up the Rulers to persecute the innocent, yea any in whom the
appearance of God was manifested, in testimony against your deceitful ways:
and the Rulers through favor and respect to you, have and do act in their
corrupt wills, contrary to all Law or equity against such, and have oppressed
the strangers as Vagabonds and idle fellows, though the Law of the Nation allow
them liberty, being freeborn in it, which to this day is witnessed in diverse
places of the Nation, which that of God in your Consciences will also witness:
and such as those deserves neither honor nor respect, but must perish in their
iniquity; but in thou accused us to deny deserved honor and respect to be
lawful is a very falsehood, for we honor and respect Justice, grace, ertue, and
all goodness in our hearts; but you that are blind put injustice, for justice,
and evil for good, and turn the grace of God, into laciviousness, Isa. 5.20
Qu. 33.
Jude 4.

Will thou own trembling and quaking now, yea on nay?

And in thy Answer, P. Ans.
thou seems to own it in words, also stealing others expressions out of the
Scripture, to answer my Query; but thy life does not steal it, neither do
thou own it where it is witnessed, but makes a scoff at it, as before is
proved; and thy ignorance of the same may easily be discerned, (in this thy
Answer) by any who have tasted of the power of God, who are come to the earths
trembling and quaking; and whereas thou denies to tremble and shake, as John
Gilpin and others did, comparing them with the man possessed with the unclean
spirit, in Mark 9.20. and to be a Quaker always thou deniest.

Thou never wast a true Quaker yet, Reply.
as may easily be discerned, by this thy discourse of it, who judge by
Reports; and compares the power of God unto an unclean spirit, which power made
the Devils to tremble in John Gilpin, unto which thou art not yet come; though
John Gilpin from that departed, and followed the deceit, and so was led into
deep deceit and Imitation, and so gave occasion to such as thee, who wait for
occasion to blaspheme the truth, and speak evil of the things thou know
nothing of, but by Reports, which if the true fear of God was in thy heart
placed, thou durst not do: therefore thou and John Gilpin shall receive your
reward, where thou shall quake for ever, if thou do not speedily repent, and
own the truth which in thy conscience is witnessed: but those others of ours,
whom thou accusest, thou do not nominate; and therefore accusest thou know
not who: but any such foaming at the mouth, and the like, which thou here
speaks of, we do deny, and returns it into thy own bosom, who art foaming out
thy own shame.

What is the pure Religion, and whether in it thou dwell? 34. Qu.


And in thy Answer, thou have nothing to say, P. Ans.
but what thou stealest out of the Scripture, from their experience, who spoke
it forth, and thou quotest that in James 1.27. which says, the pure Religion
and undefiled before God, is this, to visit the Widows and fatherless in their
affliction, and to keep themselves unspotted of the world, and thou also
quotest that in Mat. 23.33.38.39, 40. and says, It is to love the Lord our
God, with all our hearts, mind and might, and our Neighbor as our selves; and
in this Religion thou say, thou desire to dwell, and walk, and remain for
ever, without being shaken.

But thou must be much shaken before thou come into this Religion; for thou
have not yet proved, Reply.
that thou art yet in it; but these Scriptures which thou have here quoted,
will witness against thee, to be a stranger to it, though it is an easy thing
for to set down others Declarations, when they are before thee; but how do
thou keep thy self unspotted of the world, when as thou art drowned in, and
art so greedy of it, that thou carest not how thou gettest it, so thou gettest
it, as before is sufficiently proved out of thy own mouth, and have been all
along laboring contrary to Scripture, to justify thy taking of gifts and
Rewards of the world: and how do thou visit the Widows and fatherless,
unless it be for thy Tithes, or that they have to maintain thee, and so rather
to add affliction upon them? or what do thou do in this kind, but thou have
a selfe-end in it, let that in thy Conscience judge thee; and if thou did
love the Lord God with all thy heart, thou would not have thy heart so in the
earth, thus to delude and deceive peoples souls for gain and lucre, and to take
away the fruits of their labors by compulsion, (if they will not give it thee)
though thou do nothing for them, as before is proved against thee, to thy
shame and confusion of face; and thus thy heart is adulterated from God into
the earth, 1 John 2.15.
and the love of God abides not in thee, who art in love with the world; and
thus thou loves thy Neighbor as thy self, when for selfes-sake thou would
destroy him both body and soul; and thus I need no other weapon to cut off thy
head, then what thou thy self bring.

What is the difference betwixt the Jew outwardly, 35. Qu.
and the Jew inwardly, and how shall we know the one from the other?

And in thy Answer thou say, the Jew outwardly desires to make a fair show
in the flesh, P. Ans.
or external man, with his outward Circumcision or Reformation, Gal. 6.12.13.
in voluntary worship, and not sparing the body, Col. 2.23. he observes the
lesser Commands, and leaves the greater undone, Mat. 23.23. and in one point he
goes beyond, as thou say, he pays Tithes exactly; he makes clean the outside
of the Cup and Platter, Reply.
and makes all foul within, Mat. 23.15, 26. etc. and so here is enough to
manifest that thou art the man; for here thou have plainly read thy self, and
out of thy own mouth shall thou be judged, without contending or reviling, as
thou accusest us; for thou have been striving all along hitherto, to set out
thy self, and make a fair outside, like a Reformation, though the hypocrisy
of thy heart thou could not thereby hide from the light; and who are more
strict in voluntary worship? but you can pamper your bodies, which shows your
zeal is not so hot; and instead of observing the lesser Commands, and leaving
the greater undone: you leave all undone that will not stand for Self; and
preach up, and uphold these things for Commands, for which you have no
Scripture, and so preach for Doctrine the Commandments of man, Mat. 15.9.
as the outward Jew did; but if one ask you for your proof for these things,
thou say, it suffices you, that there is no Command to the contrary; yea for
thy self covetous ends thou art not ashamed to fetch up old Commands, (that
were fulfilled, and so ended) for a cover for thy deceit; as here also thou
would seem to do in accusing us for not paying Tithes exactly, as the
Pharisee did, which I know is the great grief of thee, and thy Brethren,
because we put not into your mouths; Mich. 3.5.
and therefore ye even prepare War against us, but when the Pharisee said he
paid Tithes, they was then due; for the Priesthood to which Tithes belonged,
was not yet fulfilled, and therefore not changed, and therefore it was his duty
so to do; but you Priests have so blinded the Pharisees, and professors of
these times, that they are so exact in paying you Tithes, and putting into your
mouths, because you daub them up, Ezekiel. 22.28.
crying peace to them, though they have no Command from God for it; and you
take it as exactly, but you have but few such that you dare trust without a
Law; for (as thou say) the greatest part of them are earthly minded, (like
their Teachers,) and how have thou been cleansing thy outside of the Cup, as if
thou wast unblameable in this outward righteousness, and so holy in thine own
eyes, that in words thou professest perfection, and as if thou knew the
highest estate of Christianity, and wast in the pure Religion without spots,
and guided by Gods spirit, usualy speaking by the motion of the Holy Ghost, but
even condemned thy Brethren, and would not answer for them; but said, thou
was none of these Hirelings, nor greedy Dogs, etc. but yet could not keep thy
tongue for uttering forth the foulness of thy heart, which has overwhelmed
thee all along, and out of thy own mouth have been proved a liar; and thus thou
art plainly dealt with, and judged out of thy own mouth; and the Scriptures
aforesaid, which thou have quoted, shall stand and witness against thee.

But the Jew inwardly thou say, trusts in the Lord Christ, P. Ans.
and has no confidence in the flesh; but this thou do not, for then thou
would trust him for thy maintenance* and not stand in need of the arm of
flesh, upon which thou relyest: neither do thou first make clean the inside
of the Cup, that the outside may be fair also, as thou say, the inward Jew
does; but though thou have been much laboring with feigned words of thy own
wisdom, and selfe-justification, to deck and adorn the outside, painting it
with Scripture-words and expressions, yet thy inside is so foul, that it
defiles the outside also, so that it makes thee odious to all but the blind;
and manifests thy heart to be yet uncircumcised from sin, and a stranger to the
inward Cross, by which thou art not crucified to the world, nor the world to
thee; for then it would not suffice thee to take the tenth part of the increase
of the labor of the Laborers, by the will of man, without any Command from
God, as thou do, living at ease like a Droan upon the same, and therefore thy
heart is far off uprightness: all which the Jew inwardly, thou say does
witness; and thus in a word, thou see there is as much difference betwixt the
one and the other, as betwixt Saul and Paul, a persecutor and an executor of
Christ's Doctrine and way; and thus in a word, thou have marked out thy self,
and art found out of the way and Doctrine of Christ, persecuting, despising,
and gain, saying those that abide in it; and thus by thy fruits art thou known,
as thou say, the one may be known from the other; And thus proud Goliath, thy
head is cut off with thy own sword.

Whether they that profess themselves the Ministers of Christ, Que. 36.
and cannot give account of their Ministry and faith, but acts contrary to the
Scripture, the Doctrine and practice of the Ministers of Christ, and teaches
people so, be not such as abides not in the Doctrine of Christ, but brings
another Doctrine, and so are the Witches, Magicians, and deceivers, Antichrists
and false Teachers, who are not to be received, but denied.

And in thy Answer thou confessest, P. Ans.
that they which are truly such in Doctrine and life, as this Query describes,
may be truly termed spiritual Witches and Magicians, and must be rejected as
false Teachers, and Antichrists.

Here thou have passed the sentence unto thy own condemnation; Reply,
for thou art the man, as sufficiently is proved, both out of thy own mouth,
and the Scriptures, which thou thy self have quoted as aforesaid; and so
henceforward, let all people take notice, that thou Thomas Draton of King
Rippon in Huntingtonshire, art a spiritual Witch and Magician; and they are to
reject thee, as a false Teacher and an Antichrist, as here out of thy own mouth
is plainly proved; and this, him thou call James Parnell, does testify, and
deny thee with thy Sorcery, Ribbonds, Stones, Waters, Glasses, Powders, Charms,
and other like Enchantments, which thou, who art given up to believe lies,
impudently would cast upon him, and those thou call his confederacy, who
abhorrs all such abomination, and therefore returns it into thy own bosom,
from whence it comes.

And thus thou say by clear Scripture and experience, Priest.
thou have answered the bold Queries, of him who is known to the World, to be
out a boy, or stripling.

As thou begannest with a lie in thy mouth, Reply.
so also thou endest with a lie; for by plain Scripture, and true experience,
thou have not answered these Queries; for in many things thou may find no
Scripture at all in the least to countenance thee, then thou pleadest old
stories and Records, and says also, it suffices thee, that there is no
Scripture to the contrary; but thou shall know, that in any thing that thou
do, in which the Scripture will not stand for thee, it will in the same stand
against thee; and also when thou did wrest any Scripture for thy own ends, it
was made use of to witness against thee in the same; and how have thou answered
by thy own experience, when as thou stole the Apostles Declaration, and set it
down, even word for word, to prove the estate of a Christian, when as it was
proved out of thy own mouth, that thou art not come to witness in possession,
the lowest estate of a Christian; and thus thou might have been ashamed to
boast of thy Age, who art found such an impudent liar, as to say by clear
Scripture and experience, thou answered these. Queries, (which are not so bold
as true,) in which all that are not wilfully blind, will witness against thee;
and thus him thou contemnest, as a boy or stripling, is made able to cut off
thy head with thy own sword; and therefore henceforward, let shame and
confusion of face cover thee, for boasting of thy age, who yet know not,
That the wisdom and power of the Almighty, stands not in the number of years,
or the arm of flesh; but the righteous are as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1.

And now to thy Counter-Queries, as thou call hem, which for a Compeiment,
thou biddest me give he leave to propound, but meaned not to stay to know
whether I did so or nay.

First concerning honor and respect to be given to men.
And to the substance of these Querie, I answer, that Christ himself cries
down all earthly honor and admiration, and respect of man's Person, and only
attolerates the honor that is of God, and comes from God and belongs unto the
seed of God which is not known amongst you Children of this world, whose honor
and glory is of this world, in whom the seed of the Serpent rules head, to
which no worship not honor is due, the which all the world wonders after and
worship the beast and his image, but none of these Scriptures which thou have
quoted, does at all maintain, your heathenish breeding, worship, honor,
manners and respect as you call it, but now he is risen and reigns to whom all
Nations must bow, to whom alone, belongs all honor, praise, dominion and
thanks: therefore silence proud flesh that would go about to rob him, its you
that are offended in him, and persecute him because he cannot bow unto you, and
as for that Scripture, Honor all men, I answer with another Scripture which
thou have quoted, Psl. 15.4. in whose eyes a vile person is contemned: here all
men are not honored but in the Lord, therefore you that abide not in the
doctrine of Christ, must not be received nor bidden Gods speed: And as for that
Scripture, Lev. 19.22. which thou quotest in thy seventh Query I answer with
Solomon's words, wisdom is the gray hair, and an undefiled life is old age:
Wisd. 4.8.9.
and this is not without honor, though by the world condemned.

And to thy 9 Query, whether standing bare, 9 Query.
with the head uncovered, before the Magistrates be not a decent posture, sense
it is a posture that the Apostle requires in the behalf of God; which to prove
thou quotest, 1 Cor. 11.4.5, 6, 7, 8.

I answer, no man must be honored in respect to his person, Ans.
and the honor of justice and equity lies not in the putting off the hate, or
keeping it on, but it is a heathenish custom, contrary to any Scripture rule
or example, and therefore not a decent but an unseemly posture, (as thou
call it) for men so to adore one another persons: and that Magistrate that
seeks for, or owns such a thing, stands in his own will and is partial, and
rules not for God, but for himself, and such God does not style as Gods upon
earth, (as thou say) but rather unjust stewards: and thou blind guide read
in the 3 verse of the Chapter aforesaid, Jam. 1.2
and see what is the head of the man: but thy head is the Serpent, and
according to thy own meaning most of ye Priests condemns your selves in this,
who commonly have your heads covered with Caps, when you pretend to pray or
prophesy.

And that Scripture, 1 Timothy 6.11. which thou have quoted in thy 10. Querie, and
Romans 10.10. which thou have quoted in thy 11. Querie, was not spoken to the
world, who accounts man in gay clothing, and a Gold Ring as a superior, and a
man in vile and poor raiment as an inferior, and accordingly prefers them and
respects them, contrary to Scripture, and you leaders cause them to err,
therefore wrest not the Scripture, for your own ends, lest in turn to your
destruction 2 Pet. 3.16.

Whether the pronounce of the second person, Q. 12.
singular, may not out of the Hebrew and Greek be as well rendered you as thou,
especially since in the plural number, it is always rendered ye and not thee,
and the Dutch tongue, whence we borrow much of our language has (you.)

Here thou son of Babylon, Ans.
who art thy carnal reason in thy languages confused, who stumblest at the
plain language (thou:) what is that in thee that cannot bear the word thou,
which is the single proper language to a single person, as well as you, which
thou confessest is a borrowed language: and thus the Hebrews and the Grecians
and the Romans and the Dutch will condemn you, who are content with their
natural language.

Whether it has not been ever accounted rude Q. 13.
and Rusticall in this Nation for inferior men to speak unto others their
superiors by the word (thou) and not you, and also to stand with their hats on,
unless leave were given them so to do.

Thou blind sot, thou have laid thy self naked to the world (with thy rude
and rusticall Querie) it was never accounted so, but by Dives-nature which is
swelled with Pride and arrogance, yea that which would be above God, which must
come down into the pit: Is not God the superior of all, then why do you give
unto him that rude and rusticall language, (as thou call it): here thou
manifests thy self amongst the Heathen, who know not God, who exercise
Lordship and authority one of another, and so you rule in your own wills, Mat.
20.25.
and would not suffer your fellow creatures to put their hats on their heads,
but as you give them leave, and so are out of the doctrine of Christ, with your
rude and rusticall Spirits; And was not (thou) the language betwixt God and
Adam, and betwixt God and Moses, and so all along the Scripture to one
particular person, Genesis 3.11.12. Exodus 10 11.12.
then whether or nay is thine a rusticall proud Spirit, that can not receive
the language thou give unto God: and thus thou have sufficiently fomed out
thy shame: and I am sure now thou speak not by the motion of the Holy Ghost.

Whether ever Christ or his Apostles taught us to alter or violate the civil
speeches and customs of the Nation where we live, Que. 14
by which our reverence to others is expressed, and accordingly expected, if
not commanded also and thou quotest, 1 Cor. 10.32.

Christ is not your teacher, for out of his doctrine ye are found, in the pride
of your hearts, Answ.
contemning his speech and language, and are not contented with your natural
language, but borrowes of others, in which custom we are not to follow you,
out of the language of the Scripture, and so here by thy Querie, you express
no reverence of God, because to him you use the word Thou, which you do account
an uncivil speech therefore now see what is that which takes offense, at that
which God accepts; it must needs be of proud Lucifer, and that same took
offense at the Apostle, who said Give no offenre, yet the truth is a stumbling
stone, and a Rock of offense, therefore now see how thou stumblest at the noon
day: Isa. 59.10.

Thy next is concerning Salutations at your meetings with others, or departings
from others.
Unto which I answer, that your heathenish customs traditions and salutations I
do deny, and know them to be contrary to Scripture: for, says it, let him that
names the name of God depart from iniquity; therefore you that are in iniquity
do take his name in vain, and make a custom and byword of it, amongst your
selves when you meet with or depart from one another, and so your Children
learn it at you, and by imitation use his name before they do know whether
there be a God or nay.

And to that in Ruth 2.4. and to that in Psalm. 1 29.8. which thou have quoted
in thy 15. and 16. Qu. I answer, They that there named the name of the Lord
knew him and that in the Psalm will witness against you, that you have nothing
to do to name his name, nor to have such words spoken to you, who know him not:
and read what God says to the wicked, in Psalm. 16. and why call ye me Lord and
do not the things which I say: but the salutations of the Saints I own, who are
not by custom lead; Luke 6.46.

And to Math. 10.12. and Luke 10.5. which here thou have quoted, I answer that
you are no Ministers nor Messengers of Christ, who are found out of his
doctrine, therefore peace is not given you to speak, but as false Prophets you
speak it to that which is for death, because that puts into your mouths; and
even prepares war against those that do witness the Son of peace.

Thy next is concerning meat, drink, and apparel.
And to thy first Query of that, I answer, All the creatures of God are good in
their places, and all things for the use of man who dwells in the moderation,
but cursed to you, who live under the curse, in the lust, under whom the
creation groans, who know not the pure wisdom, that made all things, 1 Cor.
10.31. Romans 14.17.
to teach you how to use all things, to the glory of God, and therefore are out
of the right: and thy 23.24. Qu. are here answered, but you are they whose
Kingdom stands in meats and drinks and apparel, who are taking thought what to
eat, what to drink, and where withal to be clothed, math. 6, 15.

And to this Querie, Qu. 22.
where has God enjoined men to drink water, in any part of his word.

I answer thou may be ashamed to boast of thy age, who ask such a
childish Querie: I might as well ask thee, where God enjoined men to drink
bear, for water is the original of all drinks, for in the days of old, water
was the common drink; have thou not read of Jacobs well, where Christ drunk,
then who art thou that despisest water, it is a sign thou servest the lust,
but if any drink water who know the goodness of it, what is that to thee? who
injoynes thee to drink water?

And in thy 25. Querie, thou answerest thy self.
And this Querie is, Whether one may not satisfy the flesh even in over fasting
and overwatching the body which to prove thou quotest, Col. 2.23. Qu. 23.


But I perceive thou will have a care of that, who have been pleading so much
for the body which is the most thou mindest; thy zeal is not so hot: but they
that dwell in the power of God are free from this, and yet know how to keep
under the body and not satisfying the last, but you that know not the Creator,
trust in the Creature.

And here thou ask, Qu. 27.
whether are not the Saints to sanctify their meats and drinks, by Prayer and
Thanksgiving, before and after they eat and drink, which to prove, thou quotest
1 Timothy 4.5. and Romans 14.16.

To the pure all thingsare pure, Ans.
but thy prayers are abomination, who art in the lust; but which of these
Scriptures maintains your Custom after meat; Tit. 1.15.
but the Saints receives nothing of God, Mal. 1.2
but with Thanksgiving, and glory to God, but your blessings are cursed, and
here is thy 28. Query answered also.

Whether the Apostles Interdiction be absolute against all Ornaments, Qu: 29.
or Comparative only; and thou have quoted a Scripture in 1 Pet. 3.3, 4. which
answers thee: where thou may read, what Ornaments he approves of, and here
thy 30.31.32. Query is answered; but moderation in every thing I own, but what
is wast is for the lust, both in Kings, Princes, and great personages, (as thou
call them) but with us there is no respect of persons, neither taking
thought, what to eat, what to drink, or wherewithal to be clothed, as the
Children of this world do, amongst whom thou art found; but our Kingdom is not
of this world: and Israel after the flesh was a figure of Israel after the
spirit: therefore now read their adorning if thou can, and remember no
Creature was made for the lust, though lustful men abuse them.

Thy next is concerning Pride.
And thy first Question of this is, whether pride does lie in Apparel (though
there may be much wastfulness, vanity, and ostentation committed therein) or
inwardly, in the heart and mind of the poor, as well as of the rich, and thou
quotest Mark 7.21.22, 23.

The Scripture which thou have quoted, Answ.
does answer thy Question, where pride lies; but Apparel is a dead thing, and
no pride in it, but the vanity and wastfulness (which thou confessest is
committed therein) figures forth the pride of the heart; and where riches is,
this is shown: (therefore you Priests, look at home, and judge your selves)
though poor and rich be both in one nature before the Regeneration, Ephesians. 2, 3.

Whether one of the greatest things, that puffs up the hearts of men, be not
knowledge? Qu: 34.
whether it be true or false, and imagined only: and thou quotest 1 Cor. 8.1, 2.

You that are carnal, and fleshly, Ans.
are puffed up with your fleshly notionall knowledge; and in that yo usteal
from others experiences; but the true knowledge of the spirit puffs not up, but
judges down that which would be exalted; but this unto thee, is a mystery,
because thy knowledge has blinded thy eye, who art confused in thine
Imaginations; so read thy self in the Scripture aforesaid, which thou have
quoted.

Whether another thing that exalts a man in pride, Qu: 35.
and makes him despise his Brethren (and perhaps, those that are better then
himself) be not a Conceited and selfechosen holiness, seeing such a proud Saint
is brought in Isay 65.5. which thing also (thou say) is verified in the
Pharisee and the Publican, Luke 18.15.

Thou have here answered thy self, with these Scriptures, wherein thou may
read thy self, Answ.
who think thy self more holy then thy Brethren, and would only answer for
thy self, and not for thy Brethren, though thou art found in the same
practices; but thou blind Pharisee, he was not a Saint, which was spoken of in
Isay 65.5. but he was a Saint, which said, We are of God, and the whole world
lies in wickedness, 1 John 5.19. and here also thy 36. Question is answered,
with the Scripture which thou have quoted, 1 Timothy 3.6. who art a false Teacher,
doting about Questions.

And here thou ask whether a young man be not the pronest of all other, Que.
31.
to be thus seduced and puffed up: and thou quotest 1 Timothy 3.6.

Thy spite is much against youth; but him thou shootes at, Ans.
thou can not hit, because thou art blind, and can not divide the word
aright; but thou may plainly have readthy self in that Chapter aforesaid,
and find that thou art the novice who knows not the truth, but despisest the
young man, because of his youth, which is contrary to Paul, 1 Timothy 4.12.

And thy next is, to maintain Swearing.
And thy first Query of this is, whether it be lawful now, Qu. 31.
in the new Testament to take an Oath before lawful Authority, to put an end to
controversies, and thou quotest Heb. 6.16.

This which thou go about now to uphold manifests thee an enemy to Christ
and his Doctrine, Ans.
who says, Swear not at all; for says he, it has been said in the old time,
thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oath;
but I say unto you, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay be
nay; for what is more is evil: now here he does not only forbid false
swearing, but also all swearing, Mat. 5.33.34. etc. and also the Apostle James
does the same, in James 5.12. both which Scriptures thou have quoted in thy 39.
Query, and so here out of the Doctrine of Christ, again thou art found in the
evil; and all you that cannot believe one another without swearing, and so are
more then yea and nay; and what is more is evil, (says Christ:) now read your
condemnation, and as for that in Heb. 6. there the Apostle was speaking by way
of comparison, how the Lord made a Covenant, and confirmed it with an oath,
which is Christ Jesus the everlasting Oath, who says, swear not at all: and
the Apostle brought a comparison* from men in strife and controversy; but this
does not at all maintain swearing now; for strife and controversy is out of
the Doctrine of Christ, and such runs into the swearing, and into the evil,
amongst whom thou art found upholding the evil and opposing Christ's Doctrine,
and so art found in the condemnation of the Devil, James 5.12. this was not the
Saints practice; for in the new Covenant, neither strife nor swearer is; and
thus you leaders cause men to err, by upholding that which Christ is against,
and here thy 39. Query is answered.

Here thou ask whether Paul himself did not swear, Que. 40.
in these words, 2. Cor. 11.10. as the truth of Christ is in me, etc.

Oh thou enemy of truth, that would hear scandal, and accuse Paul for
swearing, that so thou might uphold swearing: but by what does he here swear?
this is plain Language.

And thy next is concerning outward material Churches, and the public
exercises therein.
Most of these Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 17th Query,
Answ.
wherein I have declared why I object against your Steeple Houses, which thou
call Churches.

Here thou ask if such meetings may not be mixed Assemblies, Qu. 44.
of learned, and unlearned, of believers and unbelievers, and thou quotes 1
Cor. 14.23.

But the un-believers are not owned by the believers, Answ.
though he come amongst the believers, as in 2 Cor. 6.14. 15, 16, 17, 18. then
the Ministers are far off, being maintained by unbelievers, as thou art; for
though thou confessest the greatest part are earthly minded, and worldly
minded: thou yet art maintained by them, and I am sure, they that come into the
true faith, which purifieth the heart, come out from amongst you, so that you
are not much mixed; for you are all one nature, like Priest, like people.

And in thy 47. and 48. Query, thou ask, if Christ and his Apostles, did not
frequent the Synagogues.

Yea they did, Answ.
and so do we your Idoll-Temples; but therein the Jews will condemn you, who
suffered them to speak, as in that Scripture which thou have quoted in Acts 13,
14, 15. which shall stand and witness against you, who will not suffer us to
speak in your Steeplehouses, but suffers your flocks to hale us forth, and fall
upon us like Wolves, and your Magistrates to hale us to prison; therefore read
your condemnation, you persecuters, and thy 49. Query is answered already with
the other aforesaid.

Here thou ask, Qu. 50.
if the Prophet did not complain to God, against the profaners, and destroyers
of the Synagogues, in Psalm. 74.4, 5, 6, 7.

This Scripture which thou have quoted, does answer thee, but it does not
uphold your Idols Temples, Answ.
who worship you know not what, wherein you teach for Doctrine the traditions
of men, and there are found in the steps of the Pharisees, offering up your
abominations, as Christ marked you out in Mat. 6.5. where he meant as he spoke;
and all you do there, is for self, and not for God; for he says, in vain do
you worship him, Mat. 15.7, 8, 9. and here thy 51. Query is answered, but take
notice, your Steeple Houses are not the houses of God, as before is proved.

Is it unlawful to call, either Baptism, Que. 52.
or the Supper of the Lord, a Sacrament or obliging Mystery? since that name
imports no more, and you cannot deny, but that both these are mystical things,
and obliging mysteries, to the washing away of sin, and the following of Christ
into his life and death. Is thy Baptism now become an obliging Mystery to the
washing away of sin, Answ.
which in thy Answer to my 21. Query, thou said, was not absolutely necessary,
but lawful only? can it wash away sin, and yet not be necessary; but this is
all thou know of that mystery that washes away sin, or deire after it; for
where sin is washed away, this confusion stays not behind.

Yea I do deny that there is any thing in your sprinkling Infants, or your
Bread and Wine (which does profit) as is manifest by these that receive them of
you, who never yet was washed from their sins and pollutions, or ever tasted of
the death of the Cross; 1 Cor. 12.13.
but the Baptism I own, and the Supper of the Lord I own; but the word
Sacrament I deny, for the which you have no Scripture, whatsoever thou say it
does import.

And thy 53.54. and 55. Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer, to my
21. Query, and thy 56. and 57. Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer,
to my 25. Query.

Who is there among you who are called Quakers, Que. 58.
or the other Sectarians your forefathers, that has rightly declared the
mystery of Christ's body and blood in your dissentings from us? since none of
you have declared this according to our Lords intent, John 6.33.

As for Sectarians (as thou call them) they are in your Generation: Ans.
and art not thou ashamed to call them our forefathers, when as they now join
with you against us, yea and in this very thing, wherein they are blind as you
are; but the mystery we know, and have declared to the comfort of many a
restless soul, who never could find true comfort in your dark and dead forms,
as thousands in the Nation will witness; and this we have declared according to
our Lords intent: therefore thou lier and slanderer, stop thy mouth, and take
not his name in vain, and that Scripture in John 6.33. which thou have quoted,
will witness against thee, in that thou would uphold: and thy 59. Query is
answered with thy 56. and 57.

And thy next is concerning the present Ministers and Teachers, and their
maintenance.

Were there no Ministers in this Nation, Qu. 60.
that held forth the truth amongst us, till you and your associates rose up?
since we have our Lords promise, the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
the Church, and, be hold I am with you to the end of the world.

What is become then of all your forefathers, Que. 61.
theirs and ours, who died since the Apostles days, till your rising up with a
pretended spirit?

Thou carnal one, Answ.
have thou nothing to do, but to raise the dead, to dispute about? but, to
answer a fool, I say they are gone, as the just and righteous Judge has
disposed; but now he calls all every where to repent, his Trumpets are
sounding a warning, and there was none that preached for hire, that held forth
the truth in the life and power of it, but made a Trade and gain of the Letter,
from it speaking a divination of their own brain, as you do now, and those was
your forefathers; but if you had the Lords promise, that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against you; for the Lord will be with you; then what need
you a Law of man to set you up, uphold you, and maintain you: therefore it
follows, the Lord is against you and his promises does not belong unto you, who
dare not trust him; and therefore are but pretenders, and this the spirit of
truth in us can tell you.

If there were some taught of God before you were called, Que. 62.
why are they not owned by any of you?

Thou art not one that art so taught; for thou art found out of his Doctrine,
therefore with that stop thy mouth, and do not belly us: for who receive and
obey the truth, we do own, whatsoever they have been, and here also thy 63* and
64. Query is answered.

And thy 65.66. and 67. Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my 9.
and 10th Query. Ans.


Is the teaching Priesthood to cease, Que. 68.
till the spiritual Melchizedeck come unto us, to bless us after the
slaughter of all our enemies, with the heavenly bread and wire, Genesis 14.18.19.
Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. that you say the Priesthood of Aaron with the Law annexed of
Tithes, is ceased under the Gospel.

Yea, so it is ceased: and those Scriptures does not prove to the contrary but
that in Heb. 7. does affirm it, Answ.
(...) before proved; but in that you uphold it, in taking Tithes, you deny the
spiritual Melehizedeck; and if that be the teaching Priesthood, which thou
meanest, it is already ceased, to many who are come to see the end of it; but
the gift blind your eyes, and therefore you still uphold it, and lead the
blindes into the ditch, and so the woe is to you, and not the blessing; and
this Scripture in Ephesians. 4.11, 12. etc. does not at all maintain you, and here
also thy 69. Query is answered.

And thy 70.71.72, and 73. Queries are answered in my Reply to thy Answer to my
14th Query.

Did ever the Church of Rome cast greater reproaches upon the Protestant
Ministers, Que. 74.
then you do; and are you not Jesuited by some of her Emisseries, that you
would have them all one with another, rooted out at once; yea can the Devil
himself desire more in this kind?

I see no difference in the ground betwixt the Church of Rome and you; Answ.
for they are bloody persecuters, and upheld by a persecuting Law, and so are
you (who call your selves Protestants) and therefore no reproaches, to call you
persecuters, hirelings, false Teachers, and greedy Dogs, as the Prophets of
old called your forefathers, in whose steps you are found, as is before
proved; but howsoever, thou with thy lying spirit termest us of the Jesuits,
both thou and thy Brethren have in this been sufficiently proved liars:
therefore by the sword of the Lord you must all be rooted out, yea ye must all
fall together, Zach. 13.7. Ezekiel. 21.91.10, 11.
he will make a grievous slaughter, from the least to the greatest; for his
hand is stretched out against you; and therefore your Father the Devil bestirs
himself amongst you, to stand up for his Kingdom; and where did ever the
Church of Rome persecute any, sparing the life, more then you do: therefore let
guilt strike you, and put not the Devil so far from you, when as he fights for
you; ^or. 10.4, ^
but carnal Weapons we shall not use against you, to root you out, but our
Weapons are spiritual and mighty through God to the pulling down of strong
holds: therefore tremble all ye enemies of God.

Thy next is concerning the Inward light.
Is there not a false light as well as a true light, Qu. 75.
and thou quotes, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14. Thou have answered thy self with this
Scripture, and I have already proved that this false light rules in thee, as an
Angel of light, who art a Minister of Antichrist, transforming thy self as a
Minister of Christ, but out of their life and practice art found, and therefore
guided by a false light, which is an evil eye, and dangerous darkness, so
that thou can accuse others, but can not see the falsenesse and deceit of
thine own heart, but thinks that thou speak by the motion of the Holy Ghost,
when as therein thou have sufficiently been proved a lier, and thus Satan
rules in thee, and makes thee believe he is God, 2 These. 2.4. and here is thy
76, Querie answered also, and that Scripture which thou quotest in Math. 6.23.
shall stand and witness against thee.

Are we not therefore, to try men's pretended light by the law and word of God,
and thou quotest Isa. 8.20.

You neither know the law nor word or God, P. Ans.
and therefore relyes upon the law and word of man, contrary to the law and
word of God* and yet pretendest to the light and the law and the word of God
and so by it art tried, and found to be a deceiver who puts the letter for the
word and the letter for the law, both which is within: but according to thy own
meaning, thou art out of the light, who attest many things contrary to the law
and testimony as before is proved.

What may men think of your pretended light, who hate so many of your brethren
in the Ministry of England? Que. 78.
and thou quotest, 1 John 2.9.

The thoughts of man is vain, Ans.
and would thou have the light tried by that? here thou erres from the law,
and from the testimony, and so confirms my former answer: therefore cease thy
false accusing, from the evil thoughts of thy heart, for none of my brethren
in the Ministry of God do I hate: but I deny that thy brethren are mine, Mat.
23.35.
for you are spring of another seed, and so are become another generation, in
which the righteous blood is found shed, and therefore murderers; unto whom
belongs this in 1 John 2.9. and Chap. 3.15. where you may read your selves.

Is there not another light to go before the light of Christ, Qu. 79.
seeing the wise men that came from the East, were guided unto Christ by a
star? Mat th. 2.

Thy ignorance of Christ and his light, Answ.
thou have here manifested, and so confirmed my reply to thy answer to my 30.
Querie, that thou would not have confessed that Christ does enlighten every
one that comes into the world, had not John so plainly affirmed it in, Ioh. 1.
and that thou never yet saw his star, who thinks that it is not his light:
therefore thou that would set up another light before the light of Christ,
art a deceiver and a bringer in of false lights.

Is not the sure prophetical Word, Qu. 86.
a light that shines in a dark corner, till the true day light arise, in your
hearts? 2 Pet. 1.19.

But it is the light of Christ, that leads unto Christ the perfect day? Ans.
which light shines in darkness, and darkness comprehends it not, and
therefore thou looks without, John 1.5.
for another light before the light of Christ.

Whether the life of Christ be not the true light that men are to wait for,
Qu. 8 1.
and wherein the true Children of light are to walk? and thou quotest, John
1.4. and Ephesians. 5, 9.

Thou have here answered thy self, Ans.
for his life is the light of men, which they must wait to know within them,
to guide them: and thou that would set up another light, before this light,
art a deceiver; and this is the light which now is come into the world,
testifying against the world, John. 3.19.20.
and manifesting you to be the de^^^ers of the world, who have long set up
false lights to draw from this true light, the minds of people: therefore now
you can no longer hide your selves from this true light, you stand up to oppose
it where it is set up, and some calls it a natural light, and an insufficient
light, but it is your condemnation.

Thy next is concerning Prophets and Prophetesses
Whether some men may not be acted with a Spirit of falsehood, Que. 82.
and delusion, even then when they think they Prophecy by the Spirit of God as
Zedekiah was, 1 King 22.

This is already answered in my reply to thy answer to any 6th. Query: Ans.
and thou in diverse places to be thus acted.

Whether the Lord did ever send forth boys or striplings to be his prophets
and public teachers, Q. 83.
seeing John the Baptist who was born to be a Prophet, of the most high, and
was filled with the Holy Ghost from his Mothers womb, was not sent forth to
preach and Prophecy till he was 30 years old Luke 1.15.

How often have I made thy folly and ignorance, Ans.
in this to appear? and that thou might be ashamed to boast of thy age, who so
often have erred not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God, who would
limit it to time and age, in which I have before sufficiently answered thee and
now I say the Lord sent forth Jeremiah when he was but a Child, Ier. 1.6.7.
Psalm. 8.2. Mat. 21.
and out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, the Lord has perfected his
praise, therefore hence-forward stop thy mouth, for despising any bebecause of
their youth, but know this that whomsoever God calls to his Ministry, he by his
power and wisdom does fit them, for the same, and contrary to the reason of
man, does the Lord work, therefore if thou wast not blind, thou would not so
much look at the creature, Math. 11.25.
but at the power of God in the creature: but as it is written, He has hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them unto Babes: and here
thy 84. Querie, is also answered.

Whether the Lord will break his own orders and commands, Qu. 85
expressly set down in his word, where he says (as you already heard) by Paul
1 Timothy 3.6.

And unto this I have already answered, Answ.
at to thy 37, Querie: therefore thou blasphemer, stop thy mouth and be ashamed
thus to accuse the Lord, because he is pleased to make his power known, in
babes and youth, for Timothy, to whom Paul writes this Epistle was himself but
a youth, as Paul writes 1 Timothy 4.11.12. and there read thy rebuke,

Where did Christ or his Apostles send forth women to be public prophetesses
as you have don many and some of them not long since infamous for lewdness of
life. Qu. 86.


Oh thou impudent one, Answ.
how do thou provoke the Lord to indignation against thee, that dare lay any
such thing to the Charge of Gods elect? oh thou lier, whom do thou accuse of
lewdness? we abhor thy words for all lewdness, and profaneness we testify
against, wheresoever it does appear, or any thing contrary to the pure divine
light, which now in thy conscience, and many other consciences does here
witness, for us, against thee who art given up to beleivelies, and report
them: therefore read thy portion in Rev. 21.8. and read an answer to thy
Querie, in Joel. 2.28. where the Lord says the sons and Daughters shall
prophesy, Romans 16.1.2.3.4.
and none other do we own but who immediately are carried forth by the Spirit of
the Lord, without the commission of man: therefore thou falsely accusest us, who
say we send forth any.

If you be extraordinary Prophets immediately inspired as many of you pretend to
be, Qu. 87.
where are the miracles which such inspired men wrought in times past?

But that we are so inspired thou do not believe, Ans.
(as may easily be discerned by thy Querying) and therefore unto thee no sign
shall be given who art in the adulterous generation who cannot see the signs
that follow the truth, Math. 16.4.

What have you foretold by way of praediction, Qu. 88.
which has accordingly come to pass as the Prophets, Apostles and inspired
men were wont to do?

If thou can tax us to the contrary thou may, Answ.
we bear not witness of our selves, but he that beleives has the witness
within himself.

And as for thy 89.90.91. and 92. Queries, they are answered in my reply to thy
answer to my 16. Querie, and thy 93. Querie, is answered in my answer to thy
Query concerning Salutations.

Whether is a multitude of disciples and followers, Que. 94.
sure figne that his doctrine is from heaven, who is followed, seeing the way
is broad that leads to destruction and many there be that find it, and thou
quotest, Math. 7.13. and 2, Pet. 2.22.

Many are called but few chofen, Answ.
and many for a time followed Christ, so that the ruler said if we let this
fellow alone, all men will go after him, which is the cry of you and your
rulers, now against the messengers of truth, and have thou never read of the
multitudes that followed Christ, but few there be that enter, John 11.48. Mat.
7.14.
because strate is the Gate; but devide England into parts, and see if the
greatest number belong not unto you, who are in the broad way: your lives
preach you forth, therefore now thou should have first asked thy self this
Query, and said Is it I, and so have laid thy hand upon thy mouth.

Seeing this age is earthly-minded and willing to serve God, Qu. 95.
with that which costs them nothing contrary to the pious and noble spirit of
David 2 Samuel 24.24. is it any great wonder that your doctrine against Tithes,
should find so many willing yea greedy entertayners of it, as it has done
since it was first broached?

The more is your shame, who are teachers in this age, that are so
earthly-minded, Answ.
who have so long taken their moneys for that which is not bread, and their
labor for that which profits not: Isa. 55.2.
do you not herein manifest your selves to be such as run, and the Lord never
sent you, Ier. 23.21.22.32.
and therefore you profit not the people at all, but they are still
earthly-minded, how have you then sown spiritual things? but I shall prove
that the earthly-minded ones still stick unto you, for you have a law made by
the will of man, so that if they refuse to pay you, and forsake you, then by it
you cast them into prison, and by your law take treble damage, and this they
know, and therefore consult with their earthly minds, that it is better to pay
the lesser then the greater, there is much difference betwixt servings God and
your bellies.
though the lesser is a greater oppression: and thus mank deny the truth,
though they are convinced in their consciences thereof, therefore that which
leads any from you, to take up this cross to own the truth, and deny you of
Tithes, the same crucifies the earthly mind, and lead to suffer for
conscience. And the noble Spirit of David condemns you: for whereas he refused
upon gift, you will take upon gift, and if they will not give it you, you will
take it by force, therefore this Scripture affords witnesses against you, but
hereby thou confessest, our doctrine costs them nothing; then how said thou
before that James Parnels Gospel was not without charge, and thus out of thy
own mouth art thou proved a liar.

Did ever Christ or the Apostles disturb the Priests, and Ministers of these
times, Qu. 96.
while they were teaching the people, as many of you and yours have done?

Both the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, Answ.
declared against the deceivers, false Prophets, Mat. 24.24. Ier. 23. Ezekiel. 34.
Ioh. 10. Ier. 5.31.
false Priests and Hirelings, and the Apostles was haled out of the Synagogues,
and out of the Temple, as Christ told them John 16.2. as we by the same spirit
do now against you, whom we find in the same steps, and here thou art
answered, if this be it thou call disturbance; but it is because you would
bear rule by your means, and suffer nothing to be published, that is against
you, or strikes at your Diana.

Does the Gospel ordinarily call any man from his lawful Calling, Qu: 97.
whereby he should maintain himself and his Family? and thou quotest 1 Cor. 7,
20. Ephesians. 4.28.

Yea it does, and the Scripture holds forth the same that they was ordinarily
called from their outward Callings, Answ.
to preach the Gospel to every Creature: Amos. 7.14.15. Mark. 16.15. Math.
4.18.19.20.21.22.23.
neither does either of these Scriptures which thou have quoted prove to the
contrary; and how many Scriptures did thou quote in thy Answer to my 15th
Query to prove that the Ministers of the Gospel might forbear working, and not
to entangle themselves with the affairs of this life: yet in all could not
prove thy self a Minister of the Gospel, and now thou questions the truth of
the Scripture, because neither thou nor thy Brethren was called, according to
Scripture; but whomsoever the Lord calls unto his work, he does take care both
for him and his Family; but you that are not called by him, dare not trust him,
without a Law of man.

And in thy 98. and 99. Query, 2. These. 3. Mat. ^8.7.
thou seems to accuse us with some that turned from the truth, and yielded to
the deceit of their hears, and so gave occasion to such as thee, who wait for
occasion to blaspheme the truth; but it is no new thing, 1 Timothy 14.15.
but the same which the Scripture declares of in diverse places: therefore says
Christ, offenses must come, but woe unto them by whom they do come; Mat. 26
Mat. 27.5.
for there was then many such as thee in that age who (as thou do) waited for
occasion to blaspheme the truth; but if thou had been then, how would thou
have accused Christ, who had but twelve Apostles, and one of them betrayed him,
and then hanged himself, and another denied him: therefore let this stop thy
mouth, for speaking evil of the things thou know not; and as for Spencer and
Gilpin, whom thou here nominates, the truth is sufficiently cleared of them in
other Books; and the Priests have owned them, as they did Judas, which is the
name of all that turn from the truth, after they have received it.

Have so many fallen into distraction or madness in any Sect, Qu: 100.
or under any Doctrine, as there has done amongst your hearers, especially
where the number of Disciples was no more?

Look at home, and answer thy self, witness your Universities, Ans.
as you call them; for it is the fruit of your studies, who would find out
that by your wit and wisdom, which the Lord has hid from you; and all that you
cannot settle in security and blindness, you lead them into madness, confusion,
and distraction, if they do not in time forsake you, as many will witness at
this day that they are led by you into such a Wilderness, that they know not
which way to get out, neither do you know how to direct them, for you are in
confusion your selves, Mat. 15 14.
and so the blind leads the blind into the ditch: therefore this might have
stopped thy mouth from falsely accusing us; but I remember truth was ever
accounted madness and folly by the blind World, who know not that Godliness is
great gain. And in thy 94. Query, thou wast questioning the truth of our
Doctrine, because of the multitude of Disciples, and now by the fewness; and
thus thou contradicts thy self, and then after much of thy filthy stuff,
which all along thou have vented forth of thy old bottle against us, which upon
thee I have returned again from whence it came: thou seem to accuse our
book, but do not show wherein, and therefore I pass it by, as knowing thy
lying spirit, and then thou stealest the Apostles words, for a Cloak for the
deceit of thy heart, 2 Cor. 13.7, 8, 9. which the Apostle spoke from a true
and upright heart, but thou from a false deceiptful heart, as all along has
been sufficiently proved, and thy prayers to be abomination, and that thou have
nothing to do to name the name of God in thy mouth, who art a worker of
iniquity, and a stranger unto God, who art found out of his Doctrine; 2 Timothy 2,
19. 2 Ioh. 9.
and therefore with this Scripture I shall mark thee, 2 John 9.10. that all may
know thee, and turn away their ears from thee, who art not to be received, but
denied; and therefore whosoever receives thee, or thy Doctrine, the same
departs from the Doctrine of Christ; and therefore let this be a Caveat to all
people, to whom it shall come, and look upon thee to be as Anathema, Maranatha,
1 Cor. 16.22.

This from a friend, to all souls witnessed in all consciences by the eternal
Light of God, by which I am known and received. I. P.

THE END.

