Two famous Battles fought in Ireland: Wherein the Protestants under the
command of the Earl of Ormond, Sr. Charles Coote, and Sr. Simon Harcourt, slew
great numbers of the Rebels, routing them from one Town to another, and took
diverse prisoners to their great joy and comfort.

Faithfully related in a Letter, sent from Mr. Ralph Parsons in Dublin, to Sr.
William Brewerton, a worthy Member of the House of Commons.

Received by the last Post, February 23. 1641.

Whereunto is added, The brave Adventures and Victorious exploits of Captain
Thomas Steutevile, near unto the Town of Drogheda in IRELAND.

two soldiers

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright, 1642.

February 19, 1641. Noble Sir,
I Now send you all the news from the parts about Dublin, from the other
Provinces we have none.

Letters of the twelfth give us, that the Earl of ^rmond, Sir Charles Coote,
and Sir Simon Harcourt, went with two Thousand foot, and three Hundred horse to
the Nase, the first night they lay at New Castle, seven miles from Dublin, that
evening they sent to Racoole two hundred horse to burn what was left, one
Hundred went to the Town, the other staid in ambush, they no sooner came to the
Town, but they were encountered with one Thousand Rogues, the horse retired to
their ambush, which made the Rebels follow hard after them, in disorder, which
the horse perceiving, both troops charged home and killed numbers of them, and
so burnt the Town, next day the Army went to the Nase, which they burnt not,
the Rebels durst not abide their coming, the Soldiers got very much pillage,
and so back to New Castle, they have burnt all the Towns this side the Nase,
I shall not trouble you with their names, some prisoners of quality taken, as
the Ashess and Aylmores.

The twelfth of this instant, the Lord Lambert went forth of Dublin, ^o a place
called Lauglinston, where were a Thousand Rogues, the Lord fought with the
Rebels, rou^ed them and killed above a hundred, took much Pillage, and so
returned home, in all these actions wherein you may see Gods great goodness we
lost not one man, but a Soldier hurt, the Lord Lambert brought home some
twenty prisoners, which I believe are now hanged, there came one Captain
Codogan the fifth of this Month from Tredagh by Sea, he went away again the
twelfth, and there was to follow him instantly three Ships, and some ten
Gabards to victual the Town for two months, I pray God send them safe, he
brings news that all are well there, and have killed above a thousand of the
Rebels, since Sir Henry Tichburnes being there, the Lord Moore shows himself a
gallant man, and ventures as far as any man: there is a jury at the Kings
Bench, where are indicted the Freeholders of the Countries of Dublin, Kildar,
Mead, and Wicklar, I believe they will not appear, then the Bills of Treason
cannot but pass.

I am confident the King will get land enough to plant a better, and a more
permament generation, and Gods true worship settled. Sin you may see how the
case stands about Dublin, I doubt not but where resistance is made in other
parts, the English will do the like; if the King and Parliament please, that
our succors go overspeedily, we shall be able to run through the Kingdom,
for assure your self the Rebels want powder, and that m ght be stopped, if
shipping were on the coast to keep away that provision, so consequently the
work the shorter. There has not a passage been made to Dublin from hence this
six weeks, I believe the reason the Post boats dare not venture, but with a
very fair wind, least they be driven amongst the Rebels, some Pinnace with
Ordnance for that purpose were very convenient, that would not care to go in
all weathers, and would be able to defend her self, if occasion were, I send
you a Proclamation which gives you what the state do there. We hear that Sir
Nicholas White and his eldest son are for Treason in the Castle, he is a great
and leading man in the Country of Kildare, I believe by this something is done
with him at the Kings Bench Bar; the offense, that he stood on his Castle at
Lexis, where the poor English were Pillaged, and that the Commanders were in
his house, and some of the Pillage found there, his son at the Nase with the
Rebels, he is father in law to the Lord Castello, and Master Tafe, there may be
some working, but you know what to do.

Sir I am afraid I am too troublesome, I shall take my leave and shall over be

Yours to do you faithful service RALPH PARSONS.
I hope to morrow morning our Soldiers will under sail, all reardy for that.



A TRUE RELATION Of those passages which happened unto Captain Thomas
Steutevile, unto the Town of Droghedagh, else Tredagh.
ON Sunday, Captain Stutevile late in the night set sail, having with him the
Swan, two Friggots, one Gubard, and two long Boats. And going along the Coasts,
the Captain sent out of the Swan some Musqueteeres to the Sherreis, where he
found the enemy fled, but had left behind them much goods, which being all
taken aboard by them, they set the Town on fi^e: and with it got above 500 l.
worth of Corn. Then returning unto their Ship on Tuesday, they came safe to the
Bar of Droghedah, where Captain Stutevile with his five small Vessels laden
with Victuals and Ammunition put over, and went up the River not without much
danger; the Rebels having made a kind of a Block house upon the entrance into
the River, whereon they had planted two pieces of Ordnance, and all along in
Treaches within both sides of the River were placed Musq^eteers; and he being
not able to pass, but continually within Musket Shot of either, for two miles
together; his Ordnance but seldom availing him any thing (by reason of the
height of the shore above him;) yet (God be thanked) he got safe within the
Town with his Vessels, without the loss of a man (he having with him 124
Musketeers, besides Ship men.) But to express the joy of the Soldiers in the
Town, requires a quicker Genius than mine own, or at least one that had felt
their wants. The Rebels supposing that there would be such joy, and that by
reason of the Soldiers, now having store of victuals, they would altogether
drown themselves in security, (as it is thought) dealt under hand with some
Centuries that were on the Walls, and brake in at a place where there had been a
Shallop-Port, so that two might come with stooping low, on a breast; in at
which, it is certain 500 got, and marched a great way into the Town, until at
last one of their chief Captains was perceived by a common Soldier of ours,
to turn a Piece of Ordance that stood upon the bridge, toward the Town.

The Soldiers seeing this, shot, and killed the Captain, and gave the Allarum.
Whereupon our Soldiers gathered so fast, that they wholly discovered the
Rebels, and had the killing of 160 of them, and took prisoners 40, some escaped
through the place they came in at, and others over the Wall, yet many brake
their necks at that sport; some one 100 is thought to be yet in the Town,
hidden in Papists houses, and is confessed by some of the householders that were
found faulty that way; that it was intended by the Townsmen, to have cut the
throats of all the Officers that lay in their houses, upon this assault. But
(God be thanked) in all this we lost not one man. And on Thursday, Captain
Steutevile set forth out of the Town, and came with less danger than before
to the Bar, where he was on ground, and was forced to stay for want of water;
for the Tide being spent, he lay in a manner dry, the rest of the Shipping
forsaking him; whereupon the enemies came down, thinking to have taken him and
his Ship; but he laid about him so well, that he killed 20 of them; yet they not
contented with this (but like desperate villains) got underneath the stern of
the Ship some 30 of them, where he could do them little hurt, and there they be
labored themselves with a Pick-axe and a crow of iron, and brake the Ship
almost through; whereupon he threw some six Grenades amongst them, and they
finding themselves fewer by six, by reason of them, and many of themselves to
want plasters about the thighs and shins; and the 7th cast, thought their
heels their best safeguard, leaving behind them some Pikes and Swords, one
Target, Picke-axe, and a crow of iron. Then he finding himself quit of them,
the next Tide hoysted up sails, and came in this day safe into our Town of
Dublin; but we cannot hear any certainty of the other Vessels that forsook
him, only we fear that by reason of the winds, they were driven Northerly.

FINIS.

