The Judge Charge; DELIVERED IN A SERMON BEFORE M. Justice Hale, and M.
Sergeant Crook, Judges of Assize, At St. Mary-Overies in Southwark, Martii 22.
1658.

As also setting forth, The Necessity of MAGISTRACY, For the Weal of a People.

WITH A serious Item and Admonition to all unruly Spirits, that despise
Dominion, and resist the Ordinance of GOD.

By Rich. Parr, M. A. sometimes Fellow of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford, now Pastor
of Camerwel in the County of Surry.

So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty,

Jam. 2.12. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

London, Printed by J. C. for Nathaniel Brook, at the Angel in Cornhil. 1658.

To the High Sheriff OF The County of Surry, THOMAS WALKER Of Camerwel, Esquire
SIR,
THis Sermon was preached at your request; and having performed it, as I was
able, and as suitable to the occasion as I could think on: afterward you
thought it not unfit to be made a little more public by Printing; and your
demands, with others that heard it, have at last prevailed with me thus to send
it abroad, though very much besides my inclination and resolution.

The Subject of this Discourse, for the main, appertains to an Assize-business,
fitted for, and applied to those Persons concerned in and about that Court of
Judicature: and in truth, observing the great neglect of most Men, as to the
faithfulness of performance, though under an Oath to do all things justly and
honestly, I labored to convince Men of, and persuade Men to their Duty as they
fear God, and must give an account one day, how they have acted in their
several Places; and lest Men (otherwise of honest Principles) might err for
want of Direction in many Points, I made it much of my Task to inform them from
God's Word: and if this Sermon fall into their hands, and they will read it
with as sincere intention as I preached it, it may serve them to some purpose.

Besides, there are some Passages in it by way of Corollary, which are very
seasonable for these Times, to be considered, while that Anti-Magistratical
Spirit is up, which so much thwarts the Peace of a Nation and Scripture-Command.

And if any thing in this Sermon has had, or hereafter may have any influence
upon the Hearers or Readers, and it serve either for Caution or Direction, I
have all I aim at.

Mean time, I hope I may not lie under the censure of any that fear God, for
what I have done this way, seeing I am not guilty of Flattery, Temporizing or
Curiosity: if any thing offend, it will be my plainness, (for my manner is to
be so) and if I am (as it is very often my lot) more bold then welcome, as long
as it is for God and Reformation, I can bear it well enough: and this Sermon had
the bap to be thought so.

Besides, I have no Temptation to believe I shall get any worldly advantage by
this Sermons printing, nor any other that exposed it, because of the Subject
treated on: and sure, it cannot be thought a desirable Preferment, to go in the
crowd with so many, too many Pamphlets that are printed to little purpose; and
this must fare as they do, for ought I know. And I think the Stationers-stall
is no such throne of Honor, that Men should be ambitious to let their Names
lie there: But fare it as it may with Many, yet if Any may get some good by it,
I can bear the rest.

And now, Sir, you must own it: for on your account it was preached, and on
yours and others printed. And if it were Truth and Good when delivered, it is so
still: and seeing you were one of them that took up your part of it to
practice, as you did effectually, and were not at a shame and scorn, to follow
the Exhortation, which had so much of Charity in it: And the Reverend Judges
were pleased to own what was given them too, in their practice, for that
Session: and that it may be a Memento to all that fear God, and in commission
within any County, to act toward a reformation, as to those many abuses up and
down among us, much to the dishonor of God; specified in the close of this
Discourse, of which I would mind them again. Upon those Considerations, I
yield to let it pass abroad; and I think in respect of your place, your
compliance with the Truths delivered, and Obligation of Friendship, you are the
Person fitted for this Dedication, from

SIR, Your Pastor, Friend; and for my Dear Lord and Master Christ, your
Servant, Richard Parr.
Camerwel, May 6. 1658.
The Text.
2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. 6. And said unto the Judges, Take heed what ye do: for ye
judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.

7. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it:
for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gift.


YOu have in this Chapter, a Model of good Government, and a Systeme of an
Assize-Court, both for persons that are to act, and things that are to be
determined in this Court of Judicature.

1. You have God the Supreme King and Lawgiver, in whose Name all just Laws
run, Isa. 33.22.
and by whose Command all good Laws must be executed justly for his Honor.

2. You have likewise mention made of Jehosaphat, an upright man (for the main)
and religious King, next under God Supreme over Judah, v. 1. who was (as all
good Kings should be) very circumspect at this time, and careful about
reformation of what was amiss both in Church and State; and in it, he had an
eye to God's Honor, and the peoples good, both for Body and Soul: see v. 4.

3. And because the burden was great, too great for one Man to bear well, and
the Abuses to be reformed many, he chose certain Men, Men of wisdom and
integrity, to put good Laws in execution; and these are called Judges, v. 5.
persons entrusted under him, the King, with the Administration of
State Affairs; to whom he gives strict charge, in the Name of God, to execute
true justice, to advance to the utmost of their power, the honor of God, and
weal of the State, in subordination to God, without any respect of persons, but
only to God, as v. 5. And he set Judges in the land, throughout all the fenced
cities of Judah, city by city.

4. There is mention made of other Officers who are appointed to serve the
design of Reformation and justice, which were to wait on this business, v. 11.
Also the Levites shall be officers before you. So much for the persons that arc
to rule in a good State, and to execute justice.



1. Matters of civil controversy between man man, doubtful and disputable,
about Titles, Bargains and Contracts, which are brought to the Court, not yet
determined or agreed on. And this I take to be the business of your Court of
Nisi prius, v. 8.

2. Matters Criminal, of higher Misdemeanors, Murders and Felonies, Treasons or
Blasphemies: and this seems to be the concernment of that Court of Life and
Death, v. 10. between blood and blood.

And the same all-knowing righteous God sits over both Benches, and is with you
in the judgment of each person and cause. This is an High Court of justice,
and we need no other Court of High-justice.

3. Then thirdly, there is another business for the Judges to do at this Court,
to receive complaints of Grievances, and to see them redressed, and to look to
the standing-Magistracy of the respective places where such are to be reformed,
to execute the Laws in such cases provided for the weal of the Public: see v.
10. Ye shall even warn them that they trespass not, etc.

And this may likewise include the Judges charge to the grand Inquest about
Presentiments and about Oaths, and to Deponents and Witnesses, that they trepass
not by connivances or false accusations, and false witnessing in any of the
matters before them in the judgment: for as your charge is strict, so should
you give a strict charge to others; for it concerns you, as you shall heat anon.

And so you have the Analysis or Resolution of this Chapter, at least so much
as concerns the Judges commission, place and office, and the matters that fall
under their judicature.

weighty matters before them to be judged and determined.

Wherein you may observe,

Jehosaphat, he that was King of Judah, a good Prince, and one that feared God,
and loved his Subjects, and would have justice done in all his Dominions.

pro bono publico, intending by them a thorough Reformation. Inde latae Leges
ne fortior omnia posset, Ovid 3 Fast. (...), Arles. Eth. 5.
For what else were good Laws made, if not to be executed? and what else is a
Magistrate in his Administration, but Lex loquens, one that must give life to
the Law, which otherwise would be but a dead Letter?

3.

And in naming them, we shall give you (to prevent another labor, for brevity)
the fuller sense and meaning of the words from the Original, to make our
Inference complete, and Application home.

1. About the matters you are to determine, and must pass your judgment,
Videte quid vos facientes: the Hebrew Text, (...)
Look what you are a doing. Quid sitis facturi: so Tremelius: Take heed to what
you are about. The Syriack has it thus, fully: Videte quid agati^, fortes
estote, and decernite judicium verum: Take heed, and decree just and true
judgment with zeal and courage.

Consilium praecedat opus, ne absurda sequantur.
And these together make the first Duty to consist in this: That in the trying
of Causes, you consider heedfully the Question: observe your Rule you are to
judge by; search after the truth, This was that which Solomon begged of God, 1
King. 3.9, 28.
which lies deep, take pains to sist it: mark well the proofs, understand the
cause, use your judgment and wisdom in discussing the point, search out by
trial: Take heed to what you are about.

It is not an easy matter to be a just Judge or Determiner of intricate
things; considering how many actors and advocates, that are subtle and crafty
on either side in very many Causes that come before you. Deal courageously.
Take heed you do no wrong. This is the first cautionary counsel.

2. About the Sentence which must proceed from you to end the controversy,
according to the intent of the Law.

When you have found out the truth, Iniquitas est ab aequitatis regula in
alterutram partem declinati^. Osor. de Just. (...), Sept. Justum esse facile
est cui vacuat pectus metu. Sen.
and discern what is to be done in the case, cease not to apply the Rule,
deliver the Law impartially: which is the second Injunction in the charge, Take
heed, and do it. Custodite, keep the rule and truth together: facite, do it:
fortes estote, be ye valiant and resolute; fear not to do Justice: Observate
and facite, serve and do it: so the Septuagint. Judges must be very wise, and
very valiant, that they may administer true Justice impartially.

3. The Caution for prevention or interruption in the manner and matter of
executing just judgment: 1. Respect no man's person. Libertatem arguendi
amittit qui ab eo accipit qui ideo dat ne corrigatur, Ambros.
2. Take no man's bribe; let no man daunt you; no gift corrupt you; no friend
bias you: Qui induit personam judicis, exuit amici, Cicer. For, Deuteronomy. 16.19. a
gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous.



1. The Judgment you pass is for or against the Lord, as it is right or wrong:
the matter concerns man, but the justice concerns God. Truth is God's Cause,
which he would have maintained.

2. God is with you in the judgment, and in the matter ye judge, and in the
sentence ye give: with you, 1. with his presence of intuition; sees what you
do: 2. with his presence of protection and approbation in your Justice doing:
3. or, with his presence of correction, to punish and judge the Judges, if
corrupt or negligent.

3. God is your King and Judge, and also your Pattern, which you must follow in
this: He cannot be bribed to do unjustly, nor flattered or awed into
partiality; neither must you: if you will approve your selves to God in the
business, you must not let Justice fall through fear, or sell it for gain:
neither careless, coward or covetous can be a good Judge.

4. As you fear the Lord, as his dread is upon you, or as you love and honor
him, if you would have any favor from him, if you would approve your selves to
him; Take heed and do it, let the fear of the Lord be upon you. Dare not to do
wrong to any, dare not but do Justice to all; if you fear God, you need not
fear man.

It Is true, I read of one Judge (but I find not his Christen-name) that feared
not God, but his Surname was Unjust, -- Hear what the unjust judge says, Luke
18.2, 6. He that fears not God, nor regards what wrong he does to man, he will
surely be unjust for any advantage; but he that fears God, dares not be unjust.

And truly except you fear God, it will be but a sorry relief poor innocent
and wronged ones will find, by going to Law before the unjust, 1 Cor. 6.1.
Dare any of you having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust?
They had better take wrong at home, then come so far, and pay so dearly for it.
But as you fear the Lord, so do that which is just: which is the fourth
Argument in the Text.

And thus you have the parcels of the Text laid together, which here make up
the indispensible duty of the Judges to perform strictly, according to the rule
and direction. In it ye have the Quid fieri debet, and the Quod factum valet,
for the discharge of a good conscience in this Office and employment. And this
being followed according to the Rule, whatever the success may be, tanta faece
populi, in times of so great corruption, yet let Judges and all in commission,
discharge their duty faithfully, and they shall have an Euge from the Lord,
Well done good and faithful servant.

And by this time you find, that this Text is that good Law which Solon never
knew, when he complained, That there wanted one good Law, to make us put all
the good Laws made into execution.

And a more full and authentic Law then this of the Text, for that purpose,
cannot be made or found. Here is a Rule by which you must walk; here is a Judge
which will judge you, if you judge not aright: then so judge ye, and speak, as
those that shall be judged by the Law, Jam. 2.12. and your Pattern you have;
not a careless Gallio, nor a fearful, man-pleasing, bribe-expecting Foelix, nor
yet an injurious Ananias, a whited wall: but the Sovereign just Judge, the
great God over all, who is to be your Pattern, and him you are to have still in
your eye.

So have I done with that part of the Discourse which is for illustration of
the sense and meaning of the words, to make way for the inference and
Observations.

Now before we come to the more proper Conclusion for this occasion, it may be
fit to mind you of something from the scope and coherence, which may somewhat
contribute to rectify some extravagancies, which if not reduced and allayed in
time, may bring confusion upon the whole frame.

There is an Anti-Magistratical Spirit up, and it makes a great noise; which
may be checked by this truth, if men will yield to truth:

That Magistracy is an appointment of God, Doct. 1.
for the good of his people; it is his Ordinance.

This is easily proved, if Scripture and Experience may be taken for current
testimony: and this very Chapter makes it clear: here is Jehosaphat the King,
and the Judges, with other Officers; and these over the people of Judah, Psalm.
78.68.
which was the tribe of his peculiar choice; of which Christ himself came after
the flesh, from David, through the Line of Jehosaphat.

And if we look back on the times before this, we find Judges of Gods
appointment: the last of that kind of Government, under the name of Judges, as
Supreme, was Samuel, whom God appointed to rule the people: and as good as he
was, though he settled the Church, and kept the Commonwealth in quiet, kept his
yearly Assize in Bethel, Gilgal and Mizpeh, besides his deciding causes at home
in Ramah; yet the inconstant fickle Many were weary of him and his rule: but
God was angry with them, and laid this to their charge, that they had rejected
not Samuel, but the Lord, 1 Samuel 8.7. that he should not reign over them: and
although he was angry with them for their rebellion, yet gave he them a King to
rule: but when their wickedness had enraged his anger to wrath, he took away
their King, as you may find, Hos. 13.11. I gave them a King in mine anger, but
I was wrath when I took him away; I took him away in my wrath. And when
Government ceased, men did that which was right in their own eyes, and set up
false Gods, and false worshippings, and offered violence one to another; no man
was safe, meeting with a stronger them himself; then violence and confusion
prevailed: they were ruled by no Laws but that of their own wills; Judge. 17.6.
Judge. 21.25.
for in those days there was no king in Israel, and then Gods wrath was up. But
when the Lord intends a mercy and a blessing to a people, hear what he says, I
will restore the judges as at the first; and upon the account of mercy and
favor: Isa. 1.26.
That God set up David, and after him his Son Solomon, and gave them Honor,
Rule and Wisdom, 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
because God loved Israel.

Was not Corah's rebellion against Moses and Aaron, their Governors, disowned
of God? and were they not punished with a death which was not common? Numb. 16.
compared with cap. 27.25.
did not the earth gape and swallow them? and gave them that quick passage to
Hell, in the heat of their rebellion? and is not that a terrible example for
all of their spirits?

The Hebrews have a Proverb, Migrandum est ex eo loco in quo Rex non timetur:
People that fear a judgment from the Lord, should make haste from that place
where the King is not reverenced and obeyed, because God will punish rebellion
with some fearful judgment: Ruin is the child of Resistance of God's
Ordinance first or last, and mischief puts a period to the lives and designs of
mischievous men.

But lest Old-testament-proofs may seem with some of lesser authority, see what
is in the Newtestament: that of St. Paul to the Romans, Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4. How
read thou there? does not St. Paul, one that had the Spirit of Christ, and
knowledge of his Will, write this by way of command, as well as prudential
direction or counsel, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; (...).
let no man exempt himself as free from subjection: and he gives the Reason or
Argument in the following words, to oblige the conscience to this Duty: for
there is no power but of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God. God has
appointed some to rule, and some to be ruled. Whososoever therefore resists
the power, (...).
resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist, shall receive to
themselves damnation, v. 2. The same Apostle to Titus, Tit. 3.1. (...).
gives this in charge, Put them in mind to be subject to principalities, to
obey Magistrates, etc.

It is true, we know Magistracy is distasteful to the proud and ungodly world,
because it keeps men's lusts from raging, Quid non libido mentis humanae struat?
quid non malorum pruriat? statum lacessunt omnipollentis Dei, calumniosis
litibus. Prudent. Him. in Infideli.
and binds the hands from doing mischief. And sure no man can be against
Magistracy and good Order, but he that would be subject to no Law of God: and
how can he be a good man then? are they not called by St. Jude v. 8. Filthy
dreamers, that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities? Exodus 22.28. Thou
shall not revile nor curse the ruler of thy people. The Apostle Peter, another
of Christ's Followers, gives the same thing in command: 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to
the king as supreme, or unto governors, as unto them sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well: for so is the
will of God, v. 15. This then is not commanded, as though the ordinance of
Government were of man's invention, but of Gods appointment to be managed by
men, such as are appointed to this Rule and Office, to punish evil doers as God
has ordained, and cherish and protect those that do well. This is the end of
Magistracy.

The Anti-Magistratical Spirit then must not be owned of God, nor can be
secured by Scripture. If the foundations be destroyed, Psalm. 11.3.
what can the righteous do?

But we must wave this point as to further prosecution, and take up one of more
immediate result from the Text: and it is this:

That if Judges mean to discharge their duty well, Doct. 2.
and approve themselves to God, it must be their care to judge rightly, and
administer justice impartially, without regard to man, as to what he is, or
what he gives.

This is God's Charge to Judges, and thus good Judges must do in discharge of
their Duty, if they fear God. This Inference lies close in the Text, which
renders this Doctrine Divinity, and a ruled-case for Judges, as a Principle of
their Religion, and Rule for their Practice.

And it were enough to quote the Text for proof: but because you proceed
secundum allegata and probata, and out of the mouth of two or three witnesses
every word shall be established, Mar. 18.16.
as says our Savior; take two or three more proofs for this: Deuteronomy. 16.18, 19,
20. there Judges are set their business: They shall judge the people with just
judgment: Si vis Tribunus esse, imo si vis vivere, manus militum contine.
Valor. Imp. Epist. ad Tribunum.
thou shall not wrest judgment: thou shall not respect persons, neither take a
gift; for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise. That which is altogether just
shall thou follow, that thou may live. So Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor,
nor honor the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shall thou judge thy
neighbor. The merit of the Cause must be taken up, and not the Person, either
poor or rich: pity and respect must be laid aside in this matter: a poor man
must not be upheld in a wrong Cause, nor a rich great man regarded for his gay
clothing or Gold-Ring; but justice must be done to each, Jam. 2.2, 3, 4.
as their Case is, or else there is partiality, which is forbidden: for, he
that justifies the wicked, poor or rich, or condemns the righteous, small or
great, are both alike abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17.15. See in Job the
character of a just Judge, and his manner, Job 29.14, 15, 16. I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a robe and a diadem: I
was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame: I was a father to the poor, and
the cause which I knew not, I searched out: And I brake the jaws of the wicked,
and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. And again, in that of Deuteronomy. 19.15, 16.
concerning the Judge, how he must deal in a case of witnessing: At the mouth of
two witnesses, or at the mouth of three, shall the matter be established. And
the men between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before
the priests and the judges, and the judges shall make inquisition; and thine
eye shall not pity, but life shall go for life, eye for eye, hand for hand, and
foot for foot, v. 21. So see your apportment, and to what you are to heed, Romans
13.3, 4. To be a terror to evil works, and to encourage the good: and they must
not bear the sword of Magistracy in vain; but distribute to every own his due,
as his works are found to be.

And thus you have some few of those many Directions which are given to Rulers
up and down in the Word of God.

But would you consider a little, the Reasons why Judges ought to be
circumspect and inquisitive into to Causes for Trial, and to be courageous in
the impartial Sentence? Besides the Reasons in the Text, (which prevail with
all men fearing God) there are some farther Considerations, which may make you
more circumspect about the matters you are to judge, and the Sentence you are
to pass.

Eccles. 8.2.
therefore must you use the best of your skill, to find out the truth and
justness of the cause, because of the Oath ye have taken. Good men fear an oath,

2 Chronicles. 9.8.
as men of wisdom and skill, yea, men of integrity, to do right to all, and
wrong to none. You are taken as it were into Gods Throne, and to supply the
place, and do Gods work with men; Psalm. 82.6.
and you are called petty-gods; therefore must you do your utmost, and be
diligent to search out the truth: for cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently or deceitfully, Jer. 48.10. Had you not need be circumspect
then?

they are many of them matters of high concernment; some of them of life and
death, and matters of making or undoing of men, as to their outward.

And the truth lies deep, and the points nice which are controverted Causes,
not unlike for obscurity to that brought before Solomon, 1 King. 8.22.
about the living child, laid claim unto by two mothers at once, stiffly
pleading each their interest in the child; but of right it belonged but to one
of the two; and if care and wisdom had not been used, the right might have
suffered wrong. Now with you it is much alike, and oftentimes as Seneca speaks,
Involuta veritas in alto latet.

Had you not need therefore to be very cautious and diligent in your
Inquisition, lest you do wrong to whom you ought to do right? for as Austin
says of ignorance in a Judge, so may we say of the carelessness of a Judge,
Negligentia Judicis calamitas innocentis est.

(i.e.) they are not men of truth and honesty, not ordinary morality: you may
not readily believe all reports, nor take upon trust without your own search,
nor rely upon their own words, nor own many men, though they swear to it:

1. For there are some Right Worshipful, Oppressors; and Gentlemen, criminous:
some that would have Naboth's Vineyard, or his Life; and have wit and money
enough to make the best of a bad matter, and will speak big words, Prove. 18.5,
7.
and would fain awe the Judge, to make him judge according to their tale and
interest. You had need of care and courage, seeing some men are such.

2. There are Advocates which plead before you, and they have art and tongue
enough for their Clients, and an hand for a Fee, right or wrong, and are able
to make the best of a bad matter, or so to entangle the truth, or hide it, that
'twill require wisdom indeed, to find out the fallacy: for of such Sophists
may be said, as Prudentius in his time in his Hymn against Infidels,

Solvunt ligantque questionum vincula
Prud. Hymn Infideliis.
Per syllogismos plectiles;
Fidem minutis dissecant ambagibus,
Ut quisque lingua nequior.
3. There are Witnesses, and upon Oath. I should not name an Oath, nor you hear
of it without trembling: because of oaths the land mourns; not only vain, but
fallacious also. Yet you (my Lords) know, that there are Knights of the Post
abroad, and no doubt you have in your observations discovered how far fear or
respect, Non solum ille reus est, qui falsum de aliquo profert; sed and is qui
cito aurem criminibus praebet, Isid. lib. 3. de summo bono.
malice or reward, will prevail with the ungodly Vulgar to bear false witness,
and stand to it too. Had you not need to be circumspect then, because of such
whose consciences are Iron, and whose brows are Brass?

4. There are some likewise which have a great part in the transactions of
Causes, which should be men of steady heads and honest hearts, and under an
Oath too they are all. But, alas! how often do you find them abominably
deceived, or wilfully mistaken, or tamely led by a Foreman, and basely biased
by some squint-eyed respect, fear or affection? In as much, that you have cause
to say, The united many are deceived as well as the divided unity. And alas,
among all these, how, but too often, is the good truth tortured, and judgment
wrested? and will be still, if you (the Judges) take not very great care to
relieve it. Take heed therefore: for you need be circumspect in that respect
also.

And so have I done with the Doctrinal part of my Text, wherein you have heard
your Charge, and how it has been proved by Scripture and Argument, to be your
indispensible Duty.

We come now to the Applicatory part; as it is my Message from the Lord, and my
Duty as I fear the Lord; and I must be faithful in it too, lest while I press
you to yours, I forget or neglect my own: for this Take heed in my Text is my
Rule and Injunction as well as yours; I must do it, and shall: I fear God.

APPLICATION.
1. In the Name of God to you, the Many, 1. To the Many.
that are hither come, and have no farther business, then to be lookers on at
this time, and to observe the transactions of the several Courts, without much
awe of Gods presence upon your Spirit, or due respect to Magistracy or Justice.

1. Be it known unto you (whoere you are) believe it, and receive it for a
truth, That Magistracy is an Ordinance of the great God, for the good of
Mankind: take heed therefore that you resist not nor murmur against it; but
obey it, and submit unto it for the Lords sake, lest ye be found fighters
against God, and suffer as evil doers, bringing upon your own heads damnation.
Submit your selves, says the Apostle, to every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake: for so is the will of God; and in so doing, you do well, 1 Pet. 2.13, 15.
God will not endure you, if ye will not endure that which he has ordained.
Romans 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists, resists the Ordinance of God; Romans
13.2.
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation: whether you be
great or small, few or many.

2. To you that desire to live quietly and honestly in the world, and to keep a
conscience void of offense toward God and Man, let this be for your comfort and
encouragement; in so doing, the Magistrates are your Guardians, and the Law
your Protection: Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil, Romans
13.3. if you do well, and walk within compass: if Rulers fear God, they must
preserve the innocent. The Law was not made for a righteous man, to condemn or
vex him; but for the wicked, to punish them. If thou do evil, or mean to be
wicked, you must expect to smart by it. In 1 Timothy 1.8, 9, 10. as there, so in
this case with us, The law is good, if it be used lawfully: knowing this, that
the law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient,
for the ungodly and for sinners; for murderers and man-slayers, for
whoremongers, for liars, for perjured persons, etc. to curb and to condemn
such. But it is for the sake of the Good also, that good Laws and good
Magistrates are ordained, that these might not be wronged, A culpa cum sitis
innoxii, non estis ulli obnoxii.
that they may live quietly. Take heed therefore that ye walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise: take heed ye do no ill, but well; so shall ye not
only be protected, but praised.

3. To all you that have heard what a strict charge the Judges lie under, and
that as they scar God, and must answer for it, if they perform not, their duty
as they ought, both for finding the Offenses, and executing right Judgment
impartially: Let it be for terror to you that lie under any guilt, though not
yet discovered, or that have wicked designs in hand not yet brought to the
birth. Know, that if you be brought to the Judgment Seat, your wickedness
shall be found out, and your punishment must be according to your fault; you
may not expect to escape by any means: be afraid, for he bears not the sword
in vain; for he is the minister of God to execute wrath on him that does evil,
Romans 13.4. And let me tell you that are guilty of murder or theft, of perjury
or blasphemy, of adultery or fornication, of oppression or false accusation, or
of any other crime or misdemeanor condemned by the Laws of God, or just Laws of
the Land; that though for the present your faults lie hid, while the faults of
others are discovered; yet know, that your hiding is but a sorry security for
your life or liberty; your secrecy from the eye of man, and protection from
the stroke of Justice to be executed by man; and so ye are not afraid: yet
consider with trembling, that the all-knowing Judge, the great God, has
discovered you already, he needs no Informer, you are all bound over to that
great Assize, where he sits in Judgment immediate. 1 Cor. 4.5.
The counsels of the heart are not hid from him: for there is nothing hid that
shall not be discovered, nor covered that shall not be made known. For God will
bring into judgment every secret thing. Eccles. 12. las.
It is but a little while, Romans 14.12.
and God will call us all to an account, for what we have done, and for what we
should do, and have not done; how we have acted upon the stage of this world:
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
ceive the things done in his body, 2 Cor. 5.10.
and every one must bear his own burden, according to that he has done. Then,
Sirs, what will become of the wicked, the unjust and the ungodly? where shall
they appear? shall not the wicked be turned into Hell? O what a fearful thing
it is for wicked men to fall into the hand of the living God! Heb. 10.31.
when he is angry, he is a consuming Fire.

Take heed therefore what you do, that you do nothing against God and his Laws;
for though man may not find you out, God will; and who can protect you?
therefore if you have done foolishly, repent, and do so no more. So much for
the first Use, to you that (it may be) thought your selves not much concerned
in this business.

II. Now my next business is to you who are more nearly concerned in the work
of this Court of Justice; lift up your ears, and attend to your Charge, and
take heed you do your Duty.

1. To those that have Causes and Suits depending.
1. A few words of caution and advice to you that have or may have any Causes or
Suits to be tried and determined; take heed what you do: if two be at variance
about any thing, the right lies but on one side, one must be in the wrong: lay
not claim to that which of right belongs not unto you. And in case you be
ignorant of the Cause, see (if you please) your Counsel, and tell him truly how
it stands with you; and that you would not stand in an evil or wrong Cause:
make not your Cause better then it is, but tell him the truth, that you may
proceed or desist as your Cause is good or bad.

Well, if you fear God, you will not hire him to advocate in a wrong Cause, to
pervert Judgment, and abuse the Judge: take heed you do not.

But if you will go to Law right or wrong; know, and be sure, though you may
prevail here, you shall be cast at the High Court of Appeal for poor wronged
Ones in another World. Contend not in or for any thing here on Earth, which you
dare not appear with before God. And if this be seriously considered, many Men
might let fall their Suit, which they know is not just and right. And if you
must to Law, take heed you hire not Witnesses, or tamper with them, to make
them speak and swear for you falsely. O the guilt of false witnessing and
perjury will be on your Souls, as well as theirs! take heed what you do in this
Case also.

2. If the matter in controversy and Suits commenced be about words and
brawlings, (as too many be) why, for shame, be not common Barrators; let not
your weakness appear so in public. Is there not a wise man among you at home,
where you dwell, to take up the dispute, and moderate your passions, but you
must be at a great charge and pains, to be laughed at, and counted fools for
your labor, and made the common talk and recreation of the standers by? Why,
Friends, if you are so unhappy as to have such frivolous controversies, will
you usher up your heats of passion to this Court? O be not such Fools as to
publish it on the housetop; it is too much you have done, to enter on a
controversy of such a nature; be not so brutish to persist in your errors.

O that Judges would sharply reprove such clamorous and contentious Spirits,
and all those that dare appear to plead for contentious persons. If there be
any such among you, let fall your Suits, and follow Christ's counsel, Christ's
counsel for ending Law-causes.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with him, Mat.
5.25.

2. To those that are come for witnesses.
2. To you that are Witnesses in any Cause depending, or against the Prisoners
at the Bar; take heed what you swear, and take heed you speak the truth, and
nothing but the truth, without fear, favor, hopes of gain, or malice. I Will
give you in these two or three Scriptures your caution and direction, Exodus
23.1. Thou shall not raise a false report: put not thine hand with the wicked,
to be an unrighteous witness. Add to this the ninth Commandment, Exodus 20.16.
Thou shall not bear false witness. Thou will not, if thou fear God, either
forge a falsehood against any, nor maintain a falsehood, bearing witness: see
Prove. 19.5. A false witness shall not go unpunished, and he that speaks lies
shall not escape. For if you do, the Judge may find you out, and punish you;
but if he do not, to be sure God will. And if there be any amongst you, that
are come with false accusations or slanders, ye are of your father the devil,
who was a liar from the beginning, an accuser and slanderer, John 8.44.
Rev. 12.9, 10. his works ye do, and wages ye will undoubtedly have. Take heed
of false accusations and slanders: whose life is safe, whose estate or
livelihood secure, if thou make no conscience of this? (...).
Accuse no man falsely, Luke 3.14. i.e. whisper not any accusation against
another wrongfully, neither to pleasure such as seek occasion against one, nor
to blast him, or expose him to wrong.

3. To the Jury.
3. To the Jurors: you are returned to succor your Country, and serve the
designs of the Court. It is expected you should be men of sound heads and
honest hearts, men of conscience and parts; that you fear God, and understand
your Duty. The lives and estates of men are much in your power; the Law has
committed it to your Verdict. Now if you go about this business carelessly,
partially, or give up your blind consent to your Foreman, without weighing
seriously the proofs and directions, you may and will wrong the truth, shame
your selves, blemish the care and discretion of them that returned you for good
men and honest; abuse the Judge, spoil a good Cause, cause the guiltless to
suffer, and the guilty to escape; dishonor God, wrong your Country, and ruin
your own Souls.

Take heed therefore what you do, and do according to your Oath; let the fear
of God be upon you: you are Jurymen, be not perjured men: you come to the
Court, and are sworn, O do not go away from it for-sworn men. Alas, when you
come home, what will you do with those Oaths, which will rot your consciences?
Take heed what you do, and be diligent, wise and impartial, and that you do as
good men should do that are under an Oath.

4. To the Counsel and Lawyers.
4. I have not many words to them, because there are not many of them within
hearing: it seems it is not their manner, to leave their Market to follow the
Judges to a Sermon.

Well, you that are here, if you be capable of a little good counsel for your
selves, who pretend to give so much to others; Take heed what you do. Do you
fear God indeed, as you pretend? and will you plead in any Cause you know God
disowneth? are not you to plead for the Lord, as well as the Judges to judge
for God? have you a dispensation to speak as you please for your own advantage,
right or wrong? may you speak against the truth and right, as well as for the
truth? God is the great Patron of truth and innocence, and dare any of you
plead against it, that would not be found against God?

The Apostle Paul, going about to make it manifest to the Corinthians, that he
and the other Ministers of Christ were not Reprobates, this is one of the
Arguments he uses, 2 Cor. 13.8. For we can do nothing against the truth, but
for the truth. And have you power to do and plead again the truth? Take heed
you be not found --

David makes it one Petition in his Prayer, That he might be delivered from a
lying lip, and deceitful tongue. O Sirs, take heed you wrest not judgment: the
Law of God for you is this, Psalm. 120.2.
Thou shall not speak in a cause to decline after many, Exodus 23.2.
to wrest judgment: and, he that justifies the wicked, be he never so great or
rich, or for whatever advantage, Prove. 17.15.
or he that condemns the just, be he never so poor or friendless, both are to
God an abomination.

And if you know a forehand, that the cause you plead for be bad, and that you
speak against be good, and yet will bend your strength, wit, Oratory, and
interest in your Judge, to defend the Bad, and overcome the Good; A good man,
that fears God, would not be in your Gown, with your conscience, for all the
money in your purses, nor reputation you have for master-skil in the Laws.
Sirs, Men are emboldened to do wrong, and dare do it the rather, because they,
the worst of the worst of them, can find some to defend them among your robe.
But to you I have to say, Take heed, God sees you, and knows what you speak,
and what you design. Consider that of Tully; he would have A good Orator, a
good man also: Vir bonus, as well as dicendi peritus. I remember what somewhere
I have read of Justus Jonas, that famous Lawyer, what was said at his death,
for all his great skill in the Law:

Quid juvat, innumeros scire atque evolvere casus,
Si facienda fugis, si fugienda facis?
This man knew well, and did ill: Mat. 16.26.
and what will it profit a man to gain much of the world by his skill, and lose
his soul at last? Prudentius has this severity against all those which use
their wit and interest to wrong ends:

Vae captiosis, sycophantarum strophis:
Hymn in Indeliis.
Vae versipelli astutiae.
I shall give it no other English then what I find in the Prophet Isaiah, Woe
unto them which call evil good, Isa. 5.20, 21.
and good evil; that put light for darkness, and darkness for light; that put
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Woe unto them that are wise in their own
eyes, and have wit to do evil. Take heed what you do: let the fear of God be
upon you, and refrain your tongues from evil, and lips from guile, and hands
from bribes, if you mean to see good days, and be blessed in another world, 1
Pet. 3.10.

5. To the High Sheriff.
Sir, besides your presence and Guards for the quiet securing the Reverend
Judges in the discharge of their Duties, and due Administration of Justice; you
are to see to it, that faithful sober men, able and honest, be returned from
the several Quarters of the County, to serve upon the several Juries; which,
it is presumed, you have done, as you fear God. Besides, you are to see to your
Underofficers; you must take heed you allow not any of Gehezi's Acquaintance
in your service: neither you, your man, nor man's man, must take a bribe, nor
wrong any. But the main thing I would entreat of you, and let me prevail with
you, if you fear God, take heed to yonder poor Prisoners, take care of them; I
mean not, lest they should escape your chains, and break your bolts; I suppose
there is good care taken for that, as there should be too: But, Sir, for the
Lords sake, and in tenderness to their poor Souls, provide for their
instruction. Some now in your custody, it may be, must die for their crimes;
others may escape with their life, and yet as unfit to live, as others to die:
now the request is, that they who are for death, may (as much as possible) be
fitted for death; and those for life, fitted to live better. Do that for them
and to them, which hitherto has not been done to any purpose by any before you
(as their business) in this County, (but you have a good exemplar for it in the
City) prevail with some conscien ious men, that love the Souls of the poorest
wretches, to deal with the Prisoners condemned, most seriously and feelingly,
that poor condemned wretches may not go hence to another world, without some
Soul-conviction and repentance. Do this as you fear God, and have compassion on
poor Souls, and settle it in your time.

6. To the Judges and the rest in Commission.
And now, my Lords the Judges, and you the rest of the Bench, who are by your
places to act for the weal of the public: Suffer me but a little; for I have
yet to speak (as Elihu in Job) on Gods behalf. Job 36.2.


Do ye fear God? if you do not, you are not worthy your places, nor fit to
rule; and if you fear God, you must and will act and judge for God, for
Religion, for his Servants; and you will act against all persons and things
which are against God and his Laws.

If you would have God honor you with his presence of approbation and
protection, 1 Samuel 2.38.
you must honor him by your zeal for his Cause. Tantus quisquis est, quantu^
est apud Deum.
And if God honor you not, your titles of Right Honorable, and Right
Worshipful, will do you little good.

There are two things especially you must aim at, Qui tarde fecit diu noluit,
Sen. de Benef.
if you mean to show your selves for the Lord, and welfare of the people: you
must take care, and do what you can, and as soon as you can, while the prize is
in your hand, lest you be found tardy;

1. To root out all manner of vice and wickedness.

2. To promote and maintain Godliness, and all things thereto belonging. For by
these two, either a Nation is made or marred. Righteousness exalts a nation,
but sin is a reproach to any people, Prove. 14.34. And for this end are
Magistrates set up over Nations, to root out evil, and to build and plant
goodness, Jer. 1.10.

If you give not a check to wickedness, Qui non vetat peccare cum potest,
jubet, Sen.
you encourage it; if you encourage not good, and be examples of it your
selves, you check and suppress it: if it be in your power to hinder vice, or
punish it; to promote godliness, and reward it: In cujus manus est ut
prohibeat, jubet agi, si non prohibet admitti, Salvian de Providentia.
and if for all this, you will not do the one nor other, you may be accounted
by God as accessory to the evil; and unprofitable Servants, as to the
improvement of the Talent God has entrusted you with, to do good withal. If
you cannot change the hearts of wicked men, you may restrain their hands, and
bind up their lusts, that they break not out so fast. If you cannot promote
godliness, sobriety and righteousness, as you would, do it as much as you can;
and you will do more then many: for though some speak it fair, yet do it little
service; wish well to goodness, but do nothing for it. Now if you fear God, you
must do it; take heed and do it. You have good Laws, have you not, Impunitas
ausum parit ausus excessum, Bern. de Consid. lib 4.
against drunkenness, perjury, blasphemy, thieving, idleness, swearing? etc.
and if you have but as much zeal and courage to put them into execution, as you
have power in your hands to do it, vice should not so overtop, and carry all
before it. Did you but take care that those Laws made against the profanation
of the Lords day, and against revilers of the Ministry and Ordinances, Virtus
assurgere non potest ubi vitium libero passu commitatur.
were but duly executed upon Offenders, vice should not so jet it uncontrolled.
I know not where on earth to sue for redress of these, and many the like
grievances, if not from you, who are entrusted with the civil sword of
Magistracy: and will you bear the sword in vain, and not so much as draw it out
for a terror to evil works? It Is possible, by the Laws, you may hang up some
few Sheep-stealers, Pilferer, and High-way-men, for the value of 6 or 7 s. but
have you no law to punish those that rob God, and the souls of poor people?
will not Blasphemy, and counterfeiting Christ and his Gospel, bear an action in
your Court? is there no Law against spiritual thieving, and false coining?
Well, if the Laws of men be defective herein, the Laws of God are full enough:
and if you forbear to show your selves full of dislike as to all wickedness,
spiritual as well as bodily; yet God is a jealous God, and will meet with you
and them all one day, and wickedness shall not go unpunished: for God will do
it, if you do not.

O the despite that is done every day to the precious truths of God, by men of
corrupt judgments! how insolent they are, because they may! how do some
earnestly contend against the faith once delivered to the saints, while all men
should contend for it? how quickly would the Gospel and Kingdom of our dear
Lord Christ be destroyed, if Christ had no more care of his Church then men
have? O Sirs, this is not the least of your concernment, to do what you can to
suppress those that suppress Christ, and the truth of Christ. You know you are
to judge for the Lord, and to look to his honor: and is the Gospel of Christ,
and its free Dispensation, of no concernment to God, you, or the Nation? Are
the glad tidings of Peace, Reconciliation and Salvation to the poor lost world,
such ill news, that it must be permitted to be contradicted and blasphemed? Is
the Ministry of this Dispensation such an eyesore and burden to the world,
that it must be cast out of protection, and exposed to the dirt, drivel, foam
and rage of the very scum of vain, deluded and profane wretches, and our
persons exposed to violence, wrong, calumny and reproach of the vilest men,
only because of our Office and Calling, which we know (though they will not)
that it is of God? Why may we not have the benefit of good Laws? as freeborn we
are as any of you; and I could magnify our Office too: and must we of all men
be deprived of the privilege of English Men and English Laws, because we are
Ministers? Do you not see how the poor Clergy are vexed? and he is a sorry
fellow now adays, that cannot reproach, molest and undo a Minister. Do you not
see how they are abused, as David's Messengers he sent in kindness to visit
Hanun, and to comfort him? but ill was their entertainment, very barbarous
their usage: Hanun took David's servants and shaved them, and cut off their
garments in the midst, 1 Chronicles. 19.2, 4. even so it is now with the servants of
Christ in the Ministry, sent to the world with tidings of the dearest love, 2
Cor. 5, 20.
and surest peace, with tenders of rich mercies. And this is all the harm we
mean to do, (if we can) to bring your Souls to Christ, and acquaintance with
God: yet how are we used for this our labor of love? why, we are made the
laughing stock of the Profane, and the contempt of the Mighty; and too often
it is, that we must be judged by those that hate our Office and Order: is not
this for a lamentation?

Sirs, will you judge our distress, and right us, if you can? be not ashamed
nor afraid to do us open right, when others are not afraid to do us open wrong.
If any of us be an evil doer, let him suffer, spare him not: but if we are like
to suffer for Christ's sake, if you love Christ, you cannot but relieve us, and
right our wrong, and suffer us not to be abused. Will you take heed and do it?
But if you will not for all this, remember it was a Gallio which cared for none
of these things: but he that was a man after Gods own heart, did revenge the
wrong done to his servants. 1 Chronicles. 19.8.


2. There is one grievance more you must help this County in, and rid the
Country of, those innumerable Pest-houses, we mean the Tipling-houses, that
pester the whole Nation, and ruin whole Families; the very bane of their
neighborhood, the ulcers of a Commonwealth, the Devils Nurseries. In them you
have Gods sacred Name blasphemed, his creatures abused; there you have the
contentions of wicked men and lewd, there confederacies and combinations are
entered into; there your plots are laid for thieveries and robberies; thence you
have your Goals filled, and so many Families impoverished: and must these be
tolerated? Sirs, you that are the standing Magistrates of the County, will it
be for your honor (think you) to give license to such? so many? Some (you say)
there must be: but why so many? If you tolerate no more then need, there need
not one of ten of what there are: and if some inconveniences must be winked at,
why not as few as may be? Well, if you mean not to suppress them, let this be
granted, That their Signs may be set up, that men may know what is to be found
within, and whither Ale-house-haunting does determine; let these Motto's be on
their Sign, and over their Door: Here you may buy beggary and disgrace at a
dear rate: Here you may learn the way to the Stocks, the Goal, the Gallows,
and to Hell.

O that you would do the County a little right in this, while you are met
together; and put some period to the increase of them at least, if not to their
extirpation: take heed and do it, and to some purpose let it be done, or else
you will leave sadness upon the hearts of good people that fear God among us,
when they shall see that God is still dishonored, and that Magistrates have so
little concernment for it.

And now (to conclude) my Lords the Judges, and you the rest in Commission;
seeing it is in your power to relieve us, let me beseech you, for the Lords
sake, for your own sakes, for the Countries sake, and the sake of all that fear
the Lord among us; do something to purpose against wickedness and its
instruments, and something for godliness. I am the more encouraged to speak
unto you, because of the expectation we have, and the knowledge we have of your
zeal and justness. I must let you know, that if you do not something this way,
you disappoint many that are looking after it from you. Now as you fear the
Lord, leave among us some vestigia of your justice and goodness, and be sure
you lay the ground of future reformation, as well as execute justice, as to the
emergent Causes before you; that so you may give us cause (when you are gone)
to bless God for you, that you were here; and to love and honor you, as many
as fear God: and give some cause to the wicked to fear you; let them see that
you bear not the sword in vain. Give us some cause to say with gladness, We had
(I Will take leave to use your names) Hales and Crook, those good men and just
among us; and that on March 22. began good Discipline and Reformation to take
rise in our County. O what an honor would this be to you, and what a comfort
to us? Therefore in the Name of the Lord, ye Judges, Take heed what ye do: for
ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts.

Glory to God alone.
FINIS.

