The Parliaments praise, reforming our bad ways.
JACOBS wrestling for a Blessing.
LOrd, show thy might,
Maugre the spite
Of all thy foes,
Which thee oppose:
Leave not thy Church
Now in the lurch,
But let us have
What we do crave;
For what we stand
Here in this Land,
A full reformation
Throughout the Nation:
Now to effect this thing
God bless our gracious King;
Let Him with Peers, and Commons,
Obey Gods Royal summons,
And join with full consent
In this blessed Parliament,
His chiefest instrument
(Wherewith he is well content.)
Of such a reformation,
Intended in this Nation;
In Church and Common weal,
As his word shall reveal;
By learned, and 2 Pet. 1. 4. Partakers of the Divin nature.
divine non tantum Theologi sicut elati Prelati) no proud talkers only of G^d,
but humble walker^ with God, Micah 6. 6.
Divines,
Whose luster in our Kingdom shines.
Whom (in these days, though many call them Roundheads.
Yet future times may truly style them Sound-heads.
When they for us shall fully bring to pass,
What God shall show them in the Looking-glass
Of his most Sacred writ, to be his will,
And we the same shall faithfully fulfill,
Reform us, Lord, conform us to thy Law,
Give us the grace of thee to stand in awe,
And to prevent great Judgments now at hand,
To love thy Truth and for it stoutly stand
Let us not spare money, plate, horse, nor Arms,
For to resist approaching ghostly harms.
Yea to preserve the means of saving grace,
Let us not fear to look death in the face;
Let Us keep our Vows and Protestations new
And bid all Babels baubles quite adieu.
Renew our hearts, o God* make us true Saints,
And rid us from our fears and sad complaints;
Then make us thankful all in word, and deed.
For thy great help in this our greatest need;
Thy grace, Lord, grant us for our chief relief,
In these most sad, and heavy times of grief.
Thus still prays William Will-peace,
what ere says William Nill-peace, etc.
Bellum Episcopole Cedant arma togae
Bellum papale. Ne procedant arma togae.
Lest bloody Prelates bloody wars proceed,
Lord, make our hearts for grief of sin to bleed;
Our bloody sins have caused these bloody times,
Yet, Lord, forgive us all our heinous crimes,
Give us repentance true, for all our sins,
Which removes thy wrath, and thy favor wins;
Purge thou our hearts by a true faith in thee
That (quick or dead) our souls f^ll safe may be:
Grant us the grace to fast from sin always,
That thou may hear us when we fast, and pray,
For Ireland, (now the Land of thy just ire)
That thou would daigne timely to quench that ^ire
Of wrath, and fury, which is flaming there,
And unto England does approach so near:
Arise, arise, do thou maintain thy cause.
Thy harmless Sheep defend from wolvish jaws.
Who thirst for blood, and side with bloody Rome,
Let such, o God, receive a bloody doom:
Perform thy promise, Lord, and come with spee^
To help thy Churches in their greatest need;
For which great mercy w^ will give thee praise
So long as thou shall here prolong our days.
The Scottish Puritans.
WHo seriously against new Rome protest,
Who in themselves and others sin detest;
Who shunning always all ill-worship vain,
Would have Christ only by his Word to reign,
Who do refuse to quaffe whole Cups, and Cans,
Such are good Scotlands honest Puritans.
The sottish Anti-Puritans.
WHo do against old Romans 1. 7.
Roman Saints protest
Who hate no sin, but there at make a jest;
Who will not have Christ by his Word to reign,
But still embrace humane inventions vain:
Who do delight to quaffe whole bowls, and Cans,
These are the Ier. 4. 22. 5. 4.
sottish Anti-Puritans.
Orandum est, ut sit cor mundum in mundo immundo. Psalm. 51. 10. LOrd, do thou
make me Purussancti in cola montis.
pure in heart, and then
Let me be called a Puritan by men;
So taken in Christ for such an one indeed,
This grace will help in these sad times of need.
O Comitia faelicia.
O Happy Parliament
From Gods great mercy sent.
To work a reformation
In this most sinful Nation,
Of Church and Commonweal,
All maladies to heal,
To purge the sons of Levi,
A task most hard and heavy:
Dejicere Saulos,
Erigere Paulos;
To detect, and deject the Saul's,
To protect, and erect the Paul's.
Laetificare bonos,
Tristificare malos,
To make glad the sad,
To make sad the bad.
Securis pro securis.
To cut off the Brambles, briars and thorns,
Chiefly, the pushing rammish Romish horns:
All known delinquents, and malignant foes.
Who much our Kings and Kingdoms good oppose.
Summum pro jure tribunal.
To give to each oppressed wight
What is by Law his due, and right:
To make good Laws for Church, and Commonweal,
In both all breaches to repair, and heal:
That peace, and truth continue all our days,
And God for both may have the laud, and praise.
Laus tibi magne Deus.
Thy God, O England, now is purging thee,
And woe to thee, if thou not purged be;
Most justly then may he to thee thus say,
Expect no purging till thy dying day:
What heart-griefe is it that God does appeate,
And with so great a blessing draw so near,
To tend to us in this sinful Nation
A true, and perfect form of reformation;
Agreeing wholly to his Holy Word,
Yet to receive it we will not accord:
Vouchsafe, O Christ, according to thy Word,
(Which will great joy and gladness us afford)
To pluck up by the roots out of this Land
All Plants not planted by thy fathers hand:
Thy Kingdom come in spite of all thy foes,
Who still thy Kingly Office much oppose;
And fearing loss of worldly pomp, and gain,
Will not endure thee over them to reign.
Forgive us Lord, give us repentance true,
Our stubborn wills unto thy will subdue;
And let us all thy Scepter now embrace.
That thou may show the brightness of thy face
On us, and ours, and our posterity,
When we thee worship in true purity
Of heart, and life; and use that Discipline
Which is contained in thy Word divine:
So righteousness and peace shall kiss each other,
And we still live in godly love together;
And with new hearts, and tongues true praises sing
To thee our Lord; and our Caelestiall King.
Nuncia laeta piis.
Welcome this news so good, and true,
Old England is becoming new *
* In fieri, utinam in facto esse,
Mira facit Dominus, sua facta stupenda colamus,
Gens renovata colat, men's renovata colet:
Laudet ob ista Deum.
England and Scotland truly united.
Faciam eos in gentem unam, olim dixit rex noster magnus Iacobus.
Faciam eos in mentem unam jam dicat Rex noster Carolus Magnus.
This Union will be a most precious Union, it shall be the chief Union, and the
chief Union of the Union.

For this unanimous union to be made by a Parliamentary agreement touching
Doctrine, and Discipline truly Christian, both truly agreeable to the word of
Christ, to be received, and for ever established in both Nations; together with
a firm, and durable peace between these united Kingdoms, let England pray,
and say amen; let Scotland pray, and say amen, amen, let Ireland pray, and say
amen; and least all the prayers of these three Nations take no effect, let the
AMEN himself say amen.

AMEN dixit Amen.
Fecit miranda Jehovah.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.

The true Protestants Iubile for peace, and unity between England and Scotland,

Laudamus Domin^ Magni magnalia nostri,
Qui nos Romany eripit insidiis.
We laud, and praise the goodness of our God,
Who has not scourged us with a Romish Rod
Slily conveighd into a Scottish hand,
By Lordly Bishops; who by their command
(Abusing regal power) the good estate,
Of two great Kingdoms sought to ruinate,
By forcing on the Scots inventions vain,
Which did Gods public worship much distaine:
But thanks be to our God who now has brought
Their crafty vile endeavors unto naught,
And turned their plots which would have cost much blood,
Into a firm peace for both Kingdoms good:
Then let us with our Scottish brethren true,
Render unto our God all praises due;
By holy lives, and real reformation,
Of things offensive in each sinful nation;
First in the Church, and then in Common weal,
That God in mercy may the Nations heal;
Let Us keep our Vows and Protestations new,
And now bid Rome, and all Romes trash adieu.
So Righteousness, and Peace shall kiss each other,
And we still live in godly love together;
And with new hearts, and tongues true praises sing.
To God our Lord, and our Caelestiall King.
Printed at London, for Thomas Banks, and William Ley. 1642.

FINIS.

