TWO SPEECHES MADE BY JOHN PYMM Esquire; the one after the Articles of the
Charge against the Earl of STRAFFORD were read.

THE OTHER, AFTER THE ARTICLES of the Charge against Sir GEORGE RATCLIFFE were
read.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN BARTLET, and are to be sold at the gilt Cup, near
St. Austine gate. 1641.

Mr. PYMS SPEECH MADE THE 25th. of November. 1640; After the Articles of the
Charge against the Earl of STRAFFORD were read.
My LORDS,
THese Articles have expressed the Character of a great and dangerous Treason;
such a one as is advanced to the highest degree of malice and of mischief: it
is enlarged beyond the limits of any description or definition: it is so
heinous in it self, as that it is capable of no aggravation: a Treason against
God betraying his Truth and worship; against the King, obscuring the glory, and
weakening the foundation of his Throne; against the Commonwealth, by deshroying
the Principles of safety and prosperity. Other Treasons are against the Rule
of the Law; this is against the being of the Law: It is the Law that unites the
King and his People; and the Author of this Treason has endeavored to dissolve
that Union; even to break the mutual, reversall, indissoluble band of
protection and Allegiance, whereby they are, and I hope ever will be bound
together.

If this Treason had taken effect, our souls had been inthralled to the
spiritual Tyranny of Satan; our Consciences to the Ecclesiastical Tyranny of
the Pope; our Lives, our Persons and Estates, to the Civil Tyranny of an
arbitrary, unlimited, confused Government.

Treason in the least degree, is an odious and a horrid Crime: other Treasons
are particular; if a Fort be betrayed, or an Army, or any other treasonable
fact committed, the Kingdom may outlive any of these: this Treason would have
dissolved the frame and being of the common wealth; it is an Universal, a
Catholic Treason; the venom and malignity of all other Treasons, are
abstracted, digested, sublimated into this.

The Law of this Kingdom makes the King to be the fountain of Justice, of
peace, of protection; therefore we say, the Kings Courts, the Kings Judges, the
Kings Laws: the Royal Power and Majesty shines upon us in every public
blessing and benefit we enjoy: but the Author of this Treason would make him
the fountain of Injustice, of confusion, of public misery and Calamity.

The Gentiles by the light of Nature had some obscure apprehensions of the
Deity, of which they made this expression that he was Deus optimus maximus, an
infinite goodness, and an infinite greatness. All sovereign Princes have some
Characters of Divinity imprinted on them; they are set up in their dominions to
be Optimi, Maximi, that they should exercise a goodness proportionable to
their greatness.

That Law term, Laesa Majestas, whereby they express that which we call
Treason, was never more thoroughly fulfilled then now: there cannot be a greater
laesion or diminution of Majesty then to bereave a King of the glory of his
goodness. It is goodness (my Lords) that can produce not only to his people, but
likewise to himself honor and happiness. There are Principalities, Thrones and
Dominions amongst the Devils; greatness enough; but being incapable of
goodness, they are made incapable both of honor and happiness.

The Laws of this Kingdom have invested the Royal Crown with Power
sufficient for the manifestation of his goodness and of his greatness: if
more be required, it is like to have no other effects but poverty, weakness,
and misery, whereof of late we have had very woeful experience. It is far
from the Commons to desire any abridgement of those great Prerogatives which
belong to the King; they know that their own Liberty and Peace are preserved
and secured by his Prerogative, and they will always be ready to support and
supply his Majesty with their lives and fortunes for the maintenance of his
just and lawful power.

This (My Lords) is in all our thoughts, in our prayers, and I hope will so be
manifested in our endeavors; that if the proceedings of this Parliament be not
interrupted as others have bin the King may within a few months be put into a
clear way, of as much greatness, plenty and glory as any of his Royal
Ancestors have enjoyed.

A King and his people make one Body: the inferior parts confer nourishment
and strength, the superior sense and motion: If there be an interruption of
this necessary intercourse of blood and spirits, the whole Body must needs be
subject to decay and distemper: Therefore obstructions are first to be removed
before Restoratives can be applied: This (My Lords) is the end of this
Accusation, whereby the Commons seek to remove this person whom they conceive
to have bin a great Cause of the obstructions betwixt his Majesty and his
People: for the effecting whereof they have commanded me to desire your
Lordship that their proceedings against him may be put into as speedy a way
of dispatch, as the Courses of Parliaments will allow.

First, that he may be called to answer, and they may have Liberty to reply,
that there may be a quick and secret examination of witnesses: and they may
from time to time be acquainted with the depositions: that so when the cause
shall be ripe for Judgment: they may collect the several Examinations and
represent to your Lordships in one entire Body the state of the proofs, as
now by me they have presented to you the state of the charge.

(...)
