TWO SPEECHES DELIVERED IN PARLIAMENT. THE ONE, By Master PYM, the 17th. of
March. THE OTHER, By Master HOLLIS the 21. Both worthy Members of the House of
COMMONS.

WHEREIN, They desire a speedy course to be taken for rectifying of grievances,
and punishing enormous crimes in this Kingdom: As also, the bringing of the
ATTVRNEY-Generall to his ANSWER.

LONDON. Printed for Andrew Coe, and Marmaduke Boat. 1642.

The Speech delivered by Mr. Hollis one of the Members of the House of Commons,
now conjoined in PARLIAMENT.
With his Arguments against Master Harbert His Majesty's Attorney General,
for drawing the Articles of high Treason against himself, and the other five
Members of the said House.
Mr. Speaker,
THe subtlety, policy, and dubious ways, bearing rule in a man corrupted,
whose evil actions come within the compass, and justly claim the due reward
of exemplary punishment, is always working; although by the destruction and
utter delabition of the virtuous, and innonocent (whose words and works,
actions and endeavors, can be termed to lay holds on nothing but realties) to
clear himself: The actions, conditions, and endeavors of the good man, being
always the contrary, there being no vicissitude or coherence with them, in
respect they are mere opposites, the one seeking to perform duty both to God
and man, through his true dealing for the truth, the other seeking what in him
lies, for the advancing of impiety: The good man joining with his practice, is
daily labors for the defense of virtuous and pious designs, thereby seeking
with vigilancie to bring the malignant persons to deserved punishments, it
being a work, which in conscience is due both to God, his King, and Country.

First, To God in respect of Religion, and the true and real Faith we now
profess in the Church of England, without which we are nothing, being no less
then mere Atoms to the World, and the just Antipodes to a ground Faith. No
faith can stand without that true Foundation of Christ, no grounds of salvation
can be had, but by and through those extraordinary merits and sufferings, which
we are partakers of in Christ: if so, then does our Savior da^^^ suffer in the
instigations, and quo^^ all provo^ against him all which are vi^^ated by those
who are many ^mal g^^n^s to the truth.

Secondly, To the King, what greater abuse can there be to His Sacred Majesty
then by the continual sufferance, the Subject, endures through the ill
Counsel administered to our Sovereign, being done under the color of Loyalty;
yet in proving in matter, no better then flat abuses to this whole Kingdom.

Thirdly, If that God and the King, so much suffer by the aforesaid means, the
poor Subject and Country can do no less; witness the daily disturbances which
are now a days, being so many, that there is no County almost within his
Majesty's Dominions, but has delivered their humble petitions to this
Honorable Assembly, for removal of the said grievances and the depriving of
the aforesaid persons of their usurped authority.

Mr. Speaker,
IT is palpable that the wicked man, cares not though he dishonours God in the
highest degree, may he but defend himself and vices, though to the utter
abolishing of Religion, King, and Country, (aforesaid) if opposite to his
designs.

We have had the experience of the evils and great troubles that have been
raised in this State by ill instruments, men of power and authority in the
same, and not only of public misdoers and open enemies, but also of many
privare draffected spirits, whose outward carriage has procured to themselves
esteem and respect in their County. Nay, so well have they bin approved on,
that their Country has not misled them, with both their estates and
privileges, as electing them Members of this high Court of Parliament; wherein
also for a long time, they have discharged their duties to their King and
Country; nay, and attained the general estimation and respect of all men, as
worthy members of the Commonwealth; but their hearts disagreeing with their
outward qualities, being not upright and perfect, have at least showed
themselves in their perfect colors, and brought them-selves to shame and
dishonor.

Mr. Speaker,
I Have further to spoken of nothing but generals ^ow I intend to insist upon a
per^^^^ar, being the Gentleman, who as yet stands (...) by this Honorable
House, His Majesty's Arturney General, who has bin a man, upon whom all these
Honors aforenamed, have bin couferred in the Parliament, and no lest esteemed
by His Majesty; his place therein being sufficiently honorable, he needed not
to have proceeded so far as to prove ambitious, or malicious; which of the two
I can nominate, nor am able to distinguish, was his error, or whether he is
guilty of both; how ever, it does appear, his heart was not right in
discharging his duty in that great place committed to him; and as he was a
Member of the Parliament, had he bin faithful to his King and Country, he had
never undertaken this Enterprise to accuse us of treason, and draw the
accusation against us himself for which we have already, and further are bound
to answer.

Mr. Speaker,
HIs offense is of a high nature, of dangerous consequence, a maniselt Breach
of the Privileges of Parliament, an apparent treachery (if found to rely upon
him) against those accused Members, of which I am the least, yet moved to speak
in the Cause, The offense is generally against the whole State, deserving great
punishment for the fame.

By this he has made himself guilty of those misdemeanors, that other
Delinquents have bin impeached, and accused for, and nothing inferior to them
in their crime. This design was a great offense (if by him advised) against His
sacred Majesty himself, in seeking to work an evil opinion in him concerning
his Parliament, and their proceedings in the great affairs, of both Church and
State. This is the matter that discourages this Hononrable Assembly in
proceeding in such businesses, as may be for the honor of their King and
Country; when they perceive that all their endeavors; and dutiful actions,
are not well accepted by his Majesty, This and such like ill Counsels has
caused all this distraction in the State.

Mr. Speaker,
THe Charge is apparent against him, the accusation is apparent before (as
though void;) therefore I in behalf of the rest of the Members, most humbly
desire you would proceed to voting him upon the same, as he shall be found
guilty, and his reward may be contributed for the same: I for my part have
performed my promise to those other Members accused, in moving you in the
business; To whose consideration I now leave it, as being best able to
determine of a matter of so great weight.

Master Pyms Speech, the 17. of March, 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
THis great Council, as Tully said of the Senate of Rome, is the soul of the
Commonwealth, wherein one may hear and see, all the grievances of the Subjects,
and in the multitude of such Counselors there is safety. Amongst whom, the
greatest privilege is liberty of Speech; And theffore I humbly offer it unto
you, to take it into your serious consideration, whatwrong has bin done
herein, and what judgments has bin against the Members of this house, for
speaking nothing, but what has bin for the good of the Commonwealth, which
said judgments has bin against Law and Reason, being without president.

What grounds are there, that a Parliament which is the highest of all Courts,
should be questioned by inferior Courts and Judges; as if the Common Pleas
should question the King's Bench, or the Chancery be questioned by either of
them; perhaps the Authors of it have nature to plead for themfelves, which
indeed teaches every man to preserve himself.

This perhaps makes them advance that, and those Members which otherwise must
condemn themselves; and such things have bin done to maintain their
proceedings; as not only to intrengh upon the liberties of Parliament; but also
the whole Commonwealth, wherein I had rather suffer for speaking the truth,
then the truth suffer for want of my speaking.

Where was evermore piety in a Prince, and more loyalty in Subjects; and yet
what Commonwealth ever suffered like this? His Majesty is the Sun, which
although it ever shine in it self gloriously, yet by reason of clouds, it many
times does not so appear to us; and if his Majesty by reason of bad members,
may not appear in such splendour: let us labor to Eclipse those Clouds, that
endeavor to stand betwixt us, and the Beams of his favor; otherwise what will
it avail if the Fountain be clear, if the streams that issue there from be not
so: also I will only instance in some of the like particulars.

If we look into the face of Religion, that is now out-faced by a Company of
Seminary Priests, who what they want in power, have in malice against the
Protestant; So long as the Pope his agents amongst us: But these are the
enemies of the Church, without it; we have those likewise within the Church,
who can pull down, but never build up, demolish, but never establish the true
Church: Such are those whom we rearm Non-Residents, that serve the Church more
for living then loving; such as oversway all by worldly preferments, and
feveralities of Benefices: Christ made it the Touchstone of Peter's love unto
him, to feed his sheep and Lambs, but these men look at their own private
gains, not laboring duplicately for those double honors which they daily get.

What thing is there more against the Laws of this King and nature, then for
one man to have above one wife, and one shepherd more then one sheepfold.

These are the dumb dogs the Prophet speaks on, that cannot utter a word for
God, of whom the people may seek spiritual food, but can find none. Others
there are that preach, but not the Gospel, but themselves; teaching that the
King has an unlimited power, and that the Subject has no propriety in their
goods.

These are bad Divines, and worse and more ignorant Statesmen, who under the
name of Puritans condemn all, who truly profess Religion. There are surely
many that under the form of godliness cloak impiety; but to teach that a man
can be too holy, is the Doctrine of Devils.

The inconveniences like to come, and already fallen upon the Kingdom, may be
justly said to arise from these several Heads of ill Councels;

1. Such as those are the most pernicious dangers that can fall upon us or come
to a State. It is usual in this kind to compare Politic bodies with the
natural: The Natural body is endangered diverse wait, either by outward
violence, which may be seen and pr^vented, or by less appearing malidies,
which grows upon the body by the distemper of the air, immoderate exercise or
diet, etc And when the causes of the disease are clear, the remedy is easily
applied: But d^seases which proceed from the inward p^rt, as the liver, the
heart, or the brain, it is a hard thing to apply an apt cure to such diseases;
the Counsels are of this same nature, for the mischiefs that come by such
Counsels, corrupt the vital parts, and overthrowes the administration of
public government.

2. That there are such ill Counsels about the Kings most excellent Majesty,
most palpably appears, when as the main course of government has bin so
employed; as Popery thereby has bin rather maintained then excluded the Laws
subverted, and no d^st^n^^ on between Justice, and Injustice: and that there is
still reason to doubt, is apparent by courses taken, to advance mischievous
designs; but that his Majesty's wisdom and goodness kept them from the
heart, though they could not be kept out of the Court.

3. The ill Counsels of these times are in their own, not ours, more
mischievous and more dangerous then the ill Counsels of former times: Those
being only to please the King and Prince, and to raise Prerogatives these being
miseries sufficient: But the ill Counsels of these times are to alter Religion
and Law.

4. That these ill counsels have proceeded from a spirit and inclination to
Popery, and have had a dependency on Popery. The Religion of the Papists is a
Religion incomputable to any other Re^igion, destructive to all others and
whosoever does withstand their Religion, (if it lie in their power) they bring
them to ruin; these counsels therefore must needs be pernicious.

5. Fifthly and Lastly, while these evil Councels continue unchanged, it is
impossible that any assistance, aid, or advice, that the Parliament shall take
to reform, will be effectual for the public: We that are the instruments of
State, may put things in action and good order; but as long as these evil
Councels are on foot, we can expect no good event: Wherefore I shall desire
this Judicious Assembly to consider of it, And I that have discharged my duty
in motioning, shall likewise join with you for the effecting of all things for
the good of this Kingdom.

FINIS.

