Chymia Coelestis. DROPS FROM HEAVEN; OR, PIOUS MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS On
several places of Scripture.

By Ben. Parry, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To His Highly Honored Friend WILLIAM GLYNNE, Esquier.
Dear Sir,
GIve me leave to present you with a few meditations, which owe their birth to
that place wherein your Honorable Father received his; and therefore by a kind
of Alliance may seem to challenge your acceptance. The solemn retirements of
those silent walks, gave life to these thoughts; which now under your name dare
show themselves abroad, and from the society of Groves and Echoes take the
liberty of a more open view: They are not that which the world usually calls by
the name of study (though heaven cannot be too much studied on) but the
exercise only of a few spare thoughts sometimes, on a pious subject; a tribute,
which no Godly mind can pay too often. And I was the more ambitious, they
should receive the honor of their Dedication from your hand as being so well
acquainted with your virtue, and the nobleness of your spirit; which is
already become its own Herald, beyond the loudest Encomium my pen can give.
Let Philosophers count the orbs and reckon up the stars, none can speak so
feelingly of Heaven as he that loves it best. Of all Knowledge, experimental
is the noblest; and of all Meditation, that which informs not only the mind,
but the manners too. The end of Divine Contemplation is reformation, and he is
but a dry Christian whose life consists more in speculation then in practice:
and though I am no Preacher, yet I hope, without putting me to the trouble of a
Complementall excuse for being in print, you will pardon my ambition, if,
desirous to acknowledge my engagements to your Noble Relations (as a testimony
of my respects to your self) I have made choice of this, having no other way
to manifest how much I desire to be esteemed,

SIR, Your affectionate servant. BEN. PARRY.
Oxford November. 1658.
The Epistle to the READER.
READER,
PErhaps the Title may Invite thy Eye, though the meannesse of the Comment may
not merit thy Perusal. They are indeed the experiments of but a very young pen,
though the subjects are so divine, they would find work enough for the
Gravest in that Profession. And they have so little of any affected or
elaborate Curiosity, that I need not tell thee, They are only the sudden
effusions of a few pious minutes in my vacancies from other studies. And who
can Employ his thoughts better at any time?

And therefore I took no other pains than not to breathe them to the Air
only, but some Noble Conservator that might recall my thoughts; and put me in
mind again of That which so equally concerns all Eternity.

If you wonder at their hasty ambition of being in Print. It was not indeed the
Request of Friends, or any such threadbare motive, that stole them out. I knew
not well what else to do with them, and therefore thought it as good to let
them be lost in the World as in my Trunck: And though I am not so confident, as
to think they are so good as to merit thy Applause; yet I hope they are not so
bad, but they may be worth the Reading.

Farewell.
Chymia Coelestis. Drops from Heaven; OR, Pious Meditations and PRAYERS.
ECCLES. chap. 12. v. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


REmember thy Creator, etc. It is one of the best expressions in the
Preacher's Sermon: For who knows whether he shall live to be old? And yet that
voice which speaks so loudly to the whole World, and still will tell the end
thereof, is scarce audible in the ears of many. It Is one of this Divine
Singer's most harmonious Lessons; and yet the World is not pleased with the
tune: Strange! that the Sweetest of Preachers should have so few followers
being his oratory is so Divine: and yet it is a Text, which though they will
neither hear nor read, they cannot choose but see; for the whole world is but a
Comment on it: Every Creature we do but look on, preaches this Doctrine, which
we can so carelessly sleep out, with our eyes open. Nature carries this memento
in her forehead; the very Brutes in this can reason with us; and it is strange
that Man should forget his Maker, did he but remember himself: But alas, youth
loves not to be put in mind of Heaven, 't would spoil his memory, and make him
think of his Prayers too often. Piety, will but dull his blood, Religion makes
him look old; the thoughts of Heaven, and another World will make him graver
then becomes his years, his blood tells him he is not yet in a temper to turn
Divine, he may serve God time enough, when he can do nothing else; Thus these
earthly objects of Pleasure hurrie away our thoughts from Heaven and its Purer
Joys; we can spend the beauty of our years in vice, and think to please God
well enough with the deformities of age: we can revell our piety and time away
in vain delights, and think our selves strong enough to force Heaven, and
become religious when we are withered with infirmities, and have nothing left
us but repentance and a tomb. We are so well pleased with the sweetness of
sense, that we are careless of any other felicity; and so much delighted with
the happiness of sinning freely, that we could willingly be of that Religion
which tolerates vice most. We place our devotion with the Epicure in the riots
of Nature, sportfull meetings are our religious Exercises, a Sermon is as
troublesome as a Funeral to us; to hear of our end amidst our pleasure sounds
like a death's Lecture, the unwelcome echo of the Grave. Let the Preacher
lesson us never so well, to remember our Maker, We had rather follow Satan's
doctrine to Enjoy the World as long as we can, and think of Heaven at our
leisure.

And shall the Lusts of the World, O Lord, be greater in my Soul then the Love
of thee? shall the temporary delights of sin drown the memory of thy glory? My
Life is but a Span, and yet I beseech thee shorten that rather then it should
be spent in a neglect of Thee: better this Earthly tabernacle should be
dissolved, then become a Theater for sin to revell in; Let me pay Nature the
debt I owe her, sooner then perhaps she would call for it, rather than run in
score with thy Justice: it is better I should dye and be lost in the memory of
the World, than forget Thee: Thou broughtest me from nothing, not to sin, but
to serve thee, and have imprinted in me a ray of Thy self, that I might not
seek mine own, but Thy Will, nor pursue the World but Heaven; make me therefore
to see the solid and ravishing consolation that is in serving thee; what Joy
accompanies thy grace, that so I may no longer follow my sense but my Savior.
It is none of the least sins of our youth that we are careless and forgetful
of Thee our Creator: and no wonder we are so insensible of the Joys to Come,
that live in such a constant and continued neglect of Heaven.

Make me therefore, O my God, to consider, that had I the fruition of all that
I can wish, or long for here, I should not only not be satisfied but in the
end find how miserable he is that sets his heart on any thing but Thy self:
teach me therefore so to enjoy the World that I lose not thee, nor the memory
of that Blessed reward thou have promised to them that Honor Thee.

GENESIS Chap. 2. v. 8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden.


WHat an airy fancy was it of some then, to place Paradise beyond the middle
region? could they transplant the earth at pleasure? or did the clouds, like so
many moving walks, become a seminary of vegetables? Was Erasmus of this opinion
when he wished himself encaged betwixt heaven and earth? How vain is ambitious
frailty in its quest after knowledge! We search for Paradise with more
Curiosity then Adam lost it: and when we cannot find it here, yet we will fancy
it a place, though above our reach. That there was a Paradise, we need not
doubt; He that made it tells us so: but where to find it, he that lost it,
knows not. So suddenly does sin blast our most innocent pleasures. Scarce had
Man taken a view or walk in Paradise, but this expelled him: the earth was but
in its youth, scarce warmed by the new born Sun, when this withered it into a
sterill and decrepit Complexion: nay the heavens, scarce seated in their orbs,
were shaken by it, and interrupted almost in their Motions by the pride and
fall of Angels. No sooner had the Serpent breathed out his Contagion, but
Paradise changed it is vordure. The Creatures fly from the Garden of the world;
and infected Man is shut out from his beautiful enclosure: he that was an
Inhabitant of pleasure it self, for whom the most choice and various
fragrancies of the New Created earth were epitomized together, is stripped and
cheated of his happiness by the Spirit of lies, and is glad to be beholding to
a Figtree for his first vestment. How perfectly has his naked Issue inherited
his fortune? how many of his wretched sons have been ever since selling their
Paradise for an Apple? How does the Covetous wretch adore his Mammon, his
yellow God, and Coins heaven and his Salvation into Money, though the stamp be
Hell, or the image of the beast? how readily will ambition Court Hell it self
to serve his interest, make no scruple to sell his Soul for a Glorious vanity,
and worship Satan for a kingdom? how does the Sensualist make his life an
interlude, leaving Paradise for Tantalus his Garden, and makes wantonness his
heaven, pleasure his Divinity, and never thinks of a better or another life,
but when he is in danger of losing this? How many upstart lights has Satan
sprung to darken Religion, and eclipse the Gospel? how many eyes has he put
out by opening; pretending to cloathe us with more Knowledge and Sanctity, that
he might dismantle us of heaven and happiness? I had rather be for ever blind
then use an eye salve of the Devils prescribing; and be for ever ignorant then
learn Satan's lesson, to belie heaven and distrust my Maker.

So miserable has sin made us, O Lord, that by it we have lost not only
Paradise but heaven too; forfeited not only the pleasures of this life, but
also the joys to Come, and with the true Comforts of the world are stripped of
thy favor too. He whom thou made the Monarch of the Creatures, groans under
the bondage of sin; and by the Misery of his Crimes, has cancelled almost the
glory and miracles of thy work. And now might we have been extinguished in our
guilt, had not He, who is the brightness of thy Glory dropped a new life into our
eclipsed natures by the power of his Blood and Merits; and, by reconciling us
to thy self, given us an admission to better and more enduring pleasures.
Grant therefore that having obtained mercy, we may walk accordingly; that
being bought for heaven, we may no more sell our selves to sin, nor vainly
prefer a few moments of pleasure before an eternity of joy; that so, when our
souls shall expire with our breath, they may be transplanted to that Paradise
that never fades, and enjoy the pleasures of eternity in the bosom of thy
Glory.

1 King. Chap. 10. v. 18. Moreover the King made a great Throne of Ivory, and
overlay'd it with the best Gold.


It Was fit that the best of Kings should be sutably served; and now he sees
himself in so glorious a condition, he need not repent of that happy and
eternal election he made in Gibeon: where amongst all his Sacrifices there was
none so pleasing as that which he made of himself to the disposal of his God.
Did the Princes of the world but make Solomon their Pattern, they might
participate of his fortune, and find a more Glorious Hand supporting their
Scepters, beyond the reach of the most admired Achitophel. It Is not the paint
but the piety of a Throne that both secures and adornes it. He must needs be
the greatest of Princes whom God Crowns; the richest Monarch, that, besides
the enjoyments of the world, receives even a Treasure from heaven. Piety never
went unrewarded. God can bestow on his, as well the felicities of this life, as
that which is hereafter. But if Solomon bow down to Harlots, his Crown must
fall; and if he forsakes God, sin dethrones him. Greatness cannot privilege
from punishment, nor the eminency of a Throne excuse the guilt thereof. He that
breathed out so many Divine Songs, is struck dumb at the aires of a female
tongue, and those Ivory steps the seat of Honor grow black with sin. Had his
Guard of Lions proved true, they would have quickly dismembered those Sirens,
that having lost their virtue had nothing but their vices left to charm their
fury with. Solomon's youthfullnesse in his old age, praecipitated him the sooner
to his end, the end both of his life and Glory.

O Lord, if Solomon's Throne was so glorious, how infinitely transcendent must
Thine be, from whom Solomon received his: that under which the pillars of the
earth tremble and in comparison of which the luster of the heavens is but a
spark. Though thou have many thrones, yet the most glorious one is that of thy
Mercy, which thou art pleased to open to the penitent Sinner. I will look upon
the glittering gilded eminencies of the world with more delight, because I see
the footsteps of thy Glory in them: and the royalties of the earth shall make
me but with the greater reflection aspire after the enjoyment of that Throne,
whose beauty and holiness ravishes the Seraphick Attendants with joy
unspeakeable and full of Glory.

1 King. chapter 19. v. 9. And he came thither unto a Cave and lodged there.


SEe how malice has forced Eliah to a Cave, and he that could not have the
Liberty either of Life or Conscience amongst the Children of his People, was
glad to find out a narrower Enclosure to save both. The Prophet that spoke so
many Wonders is for the time become an Hermit; 't was but a kind of a type and
praeludium of after-Ages. For, when, through him, I look on those famous
Votaries of the Church, who, to overcome the World relinquisht it, turning
Caves into Oratories, Caverns into Chapels, and filling the hollownesse of a
silent Grot, with diviner Echoes, than nature knew; I cannot choose but admire
the purity of that zeal, which made solitude its mirth and the freedom of a
melancholy devotion the only object of their Glory; sequestring themselves
from men that they might be fitter companions for Angels; and leaving all other
Employments that they might exercise their Graces: These divine Retirers put
Satan to the trouble of coming out of his way to tempt them; and so well obeyed
their Masters rule, Fast and pray, that their whole Lives were a Lent. When
they could not dye, they lived his Martyrs.

If these Pious Exiles, whose Virtue has more Praises then Practices (men
loving now the World too well to leave it) have by so noble a Confinement made
their memory as sacred as their Lives. How great a miracle must he be, that
lives a religious and devout recluse among the crowd of sinners? and when the
objects of the World face him, Conquers more nobly, by opposing than
retreating? He was a true Soldier that spatt his tongue into the Harlots face,
lest it should comply with the wantonness of hers; and taught his Blood by
nobler motions to obey his Virtue, not his Nature. And he is the divine Hermit,
who by not Loving the World leaves it, whilst he lives in it; and excluding
himself more from the sin than the society of men, shows, he would not be
beholding to solitude for the Glory his Virtue can acquire. Happy he, that by
thus Enjoying, both Conquers, and Deserts the World, and makes his way to
felicity through those Sirens that Salute him!

O My Savior, if I cannot follow Thee in the Wilderness, yet I will Worship
thee in the Garden, where those Divine accents of thy Voice thrice subdued thy
Murderers. Teach me to conform my self to that life which has so astonished
the World, those sufferings that made the highest Horror a pleasure, and the
Loss of Life a Satisfaction in saving mine. Thou have taught me that the
noblest way to Conquer, is in the midst of Enemies.

Job chapter 11. v. 10. In all this did not Job sin with his lips.


BEhold this Miracle of patience from whom Hell it self could not extort one
mis-becomming accent! One that could turn his sighs into Music, breathe
Divinity in Groans, and Conquer Satan in his tortures, that could turn his
Sorrows into Sermons, his Pains into pious Lectures; and in all his Misery not
vent the least Invective that might stain the purity of his Maker. What an
admirable Creature is the valiant, though afflicted, Soul; whose hopes are
mounted above the World, that makes his Cross his Triumph, and bears his
Sufferings with so much patience, you would think he felt them not, as if Piety
had made him insensible: his Humility has taught him to entertain his
pressures with so much pleasure, you would think he were in love with Misery;
so nobly, that he becomes his very misfortunes, and makes them amiable his
Devotion, like the Philosophers Stone, turns all into Gold, and though he live
never so poor, yet he is sure to dye rich. His very grave becomes a Cabinet of
Precious dust, and his reward is Heaven; to compare him to a Rock that
out-braves the waves and lies fixed when it is overwhelmed; to say, that his
Piety, like the Sun, becomes more transparent by being clouded; or that; like
the Palm, he Conquers the very clogs that load him: these are but poor
Encomiums for so Divine a Spirit: like the lower Spheres, that, carried about
by a higher Orb, yet have a motion of their own. Though he be surrounded and
hurried away with storms, yet still his heart is the true Lodestone that
points at Heaven. Tell me of Stones that expel poison, herbs that fright away
Thunder-spels, or incantations; these are but poor Virtues, Compared with his.
Like a Diamond, his afflictions do but shape and point him to a Luster fit to
be enchaste among Saints, and Rings of Seraphins: his flames do but purify
and make his stamp the brighter, and he is not ashamed of his misery because he
thinks it as much glory to live as to dye a Martyr. How often did Satan call
Job Coward for his patience, in hopes at least to make him rail against
Heaven? He knew he had no other way to conquer him but by himself: indeed, God
is then best pleased when he seems to frown at us, and He makes us Sufferers
that he might make us Saints. The Israelites must pass thorough a breast of
Enemies, if they would come to Canaan. He deserves not to win Heaven, whose
piety is such a coward that he dares not fight for it.

And shall the leight afflictions of this present World, O Lord, discourage us
from thy Service, and drive us from the Joys to come. Thou discoverest thy
Love even in our punishments, and thy Goodness in the midst of our
Misfortunes: Whilst we profanely question thy Providence, and grumble to
entertain the smallest trouble for thy Sake. Were we sensible of thy Glory and
the brightness of our reward, we should not only submit in a comely obedience
to thy Will, but also triumph in our Sufferings; and rejoice even in the
meanest Condition, that we might show how much we value thy favor, beyond the
interests of the World.

Cant. Chapter 11. V. 1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys.


NAture's perfume, the Rose, displayes its treasures through the air,
enveigling our senses at once both with its Beauty and Odours. Other flowers
like Hippocrates have more Color then smell; but this grows Lovely in its
witherings, and retains a sweetness even in its dust: and when it leaves to be
a poesy may be turned into a Cordial; as if Nature had Epitomized the virtues
as well as the beauties of other Vegetals into one, and made its Paradise in a
Rose. I see, I can cull not only Physic but Divinity from it, and discover the
wonders of Creation in the blushing enclosures of a flower. The smallest
Violet, as the poet sings, breathes a Diety, and every Plant wears the Livery
of Heaven: but in the Crimson attire of a Rose, I find a more Lovely Emblem of
Him, who is the Rose of Sharon. A Rose in his immaculate Conception, in the
beauty and purity of the Divinest Life that ever was or can be, A Rose in his
Crown Crown of thorns, the perfume of his prayers, and the fragancy of his
miracles. Were the whole earth turned into an Arabia, and it is richest odours
sublimed to a perfume; were nature rifled of all it is sweets, and it is most
ravishing vegetables, crowded to a posy; yet were they infinitely below the
sweetness of this Rose. Not that Sentinel of nature, the Marigold, the early
nymph of the goddess of the morn, that rises from it is golden bed at the first
appearance of its Lover; not the Suns wooer, the Heliotrope, that strives to
kiss and Circulate with that beaming Mover, as if nature had flowerd the earth
with Stars or made it is Colored progeny idolaters of the Sky; nor all those
growing Prodigies that enamour both our eye and thoughts to admiration, are not
worthy to be Compared to this Heavenly Mirror, the Rose Sharon.

O my Savior, I will run after the odor of thy perfumes, and pant after those
spiritual delights that stream from thy Throne. Thou art infinitely amiable; O
imprint on my soul a purity that makes men capable of thy heavenly infusions,
the Divine irradiations of thy Grace and Love. What is the Comeliness of the
Creatures but a drop of that transcendent excellency that is in thee? O let it
be my delight, as it is my felicity, to imitate the perfect innocence of thy
life, that through the sweetness of thy merits my Sacrifices may be found
pleasing; and that, when this corruptible shall be changed, and this mortal
put on immortality, I may receive the reward of the faithful, the inheritance
of the just, and be made partaker of everlasting Glory in thy presence for
evermore.

Genes. Chap. 28. v. 12. And he dreamed, and behold a Ladder set upon the
earth, and the top of it reached unto heaven; and behold the Angels of God
ascending and descending on it.


NO sooner had Jacob made a stone his pillow (such is the happiness of
contented humility) but a glorious Vision salutes his eye: that obedience which
brought him from, his father on a journey to Syria, became a nobler guide, and
showed him the way to heaven; those divine Travelers, the Angels, ascending
and descending before him. Happy solitude, that met with such heavenly company!
the hardship of his lodging was abundantly recompensed by this blessed
interview, when the God of his father, the Lord of all creatures, appeared unto
him, reviving him with the gracious supports of his promises and providence.
When I look upon the posture of this happy sleeper, I cannot choose but wonder
at the vanity of those, that expect visions from heaven on their beds of down,
and look for revelations amidst their pleasures; their tender spirits would
grow fick, and out of love with piety, should it disturb or contradict their
ease: How quickly would their devotion catch cold, should they, with David, get
up at midnight to pray? God drops not his miracles into the lap of the wanton,
nor communicates the riches of his glory, but to those who are resigned to him.
John must be an Exile, before he can be the Divine; and have conference with
none but Angels, if he would be a fit Notary for heaven. Those holy men, that
had no other company than solitude and their prayers, could not have traffick'd
so purely with heaven, had they not disclaimed all commerce with the world; and
disroabing themselves of all secular interests, obtained a nobler furniture of
grace, and became vessels of honor.

Jacob here had no other Canopy, but the air; no other lights to his bed, than
the lamps of heaven; and the Angels pass too and fro, as it were a guard to
secure him. How securely does he rest, that leans on Providence, and makes That
the depository of his soul! Repose thus blessed becomes a Sanctuary, nor need he
fear to be disturbed in his sleep, that makes God his keeper; or that his pious
night-thoughts shall have any other dreams, than those of peace.

Jacob had no sooner closed his eyes, but those holy Porters unlock the
Heavens, and invite him up; but it is by a ladder: We cannot climb heaven in a
moment; the way to happiness is but by degrees, and, as our Savior tells us,
it is narrow too. Every virtue is a step to eternity, and he is so much nearer
heaven, that daily treads his vices under. We cannot be too good proficients in
a holy life, or think that in the smallest acts of piety we have enough to
carry us to happiness: it is not a few steps, but a constant progress that
mounts us thither. O how bad is he that thinks himself too good to be made
better.

The Promises of thy Glory are infinite, O Lord, and yet how carelessly do we
embrace them? Thou have shown us the way unto thy Self, and yet we are not
only unwilling but even weary of walking to thee. Alas, Are the joys of thy
kingdom not worth the coming to? can we think to climb up unto thy Throne by
a lame and idle Devotion? how nimbly do we pursue the vanities of the world,
but pretend a faintness in thy service? We can run after the perishing
concernments of this life, but make little or no progress in the race, which
Thou have set before us; Quicken us, O Lord, and make us more earnest and
zealous in thy service; and as thou have sent thy son to bring us to thy Self,
do thou likewise send thy Spirit to sanctify us for. Thy self; and then we,
who of our selves can scarce move unto thine Altar, will, by the assistance of
thy Grace, run the way of thy Commandments.

Proverbs 18. v. 14. But a Wounded Spirit who can bear?


NOt the purest temper, not the vastest Bulk, the world it self, that
hospital of sinners, cannot; for it groans and travailes, it self, to be
delivered. Heaven was no longer a place for those ambitious spirits, who
exchanged their glory for those flames, which torture them not so much as that
infinite despair, which for ever secludes, and sequesters them from it. No
wonder some think, there is no other hell then this, for its torments are not
to be matched: Stakes or Gridirons are but flea-bites to this vulture: tortures
of the newest fashion, are pleasant Martyrdoms, easy pains, compared to this.
Those dying miseries, do but storm, and affright sense; whilst this living
death, this killing Life, displayes its cruelties on a more heavenly object;
and striving to destroy and rifle an Immortal part, makes death it self a
gentle murderer to it. Skreeks of Owls that add blackness to the very night
it self, groans of parting souls that fill the ear, and room, with trembling
Epitaphs, writ in characters mournful as the grave and silence; are harmonies
to the dying Elegies of a wounded spirit, that breathes nothing but bleeding
Satyrs against it self. See how with David it goes mourning all the day, and
all the night too, surrounded with black and fatal Ideas, and turns his bed
into a bath, which those weeping springs, his eyes, have made; and instead of
bright and gentle aires, breathes nothing but dark and trembling accents, which
the buisy Devil labors to refound back in doleful and despairing Echoes.
How sadly does it expostulate with heaven, My dearest God, what is become of
that Lovely attribute, thy Mercy? are the treasures of it shut up from a poor
sinner? and will thou be a God of mercy to the whole world, and wilt not to me!

O let me for ever dwell in dungeons deep beyond the reach and sight of man, so
I may but enjoy the brightness of thy face. Let me live more poor and
disconsolate then Job upon his Dunghill in a naked and forsaken deformity, so I
may but hide my spots, and put on a Beauty in my soul, which may invite thine
eye again.

Who ever thou art that now riotts it in the world, and dalliest with
damnation, did thou but know the agonies of guilt, the cruelties of a
Murdering sin, and the stings thy pleasures leave behind them, how quickly
would thou sacrifice thy life to nobler services, and employ thy time in
sweeter thoughts; Were thou now to die, how would the terrors of an evil Life
affright thee, when every sin would appear a Messenger of horror, and the
flattering world prove but an infernal Comforter.

Show me that Gyant-Conscience this would not at length Master, that frozen
soul these flashes would not melt and blast again, that Steel-backt sinner
whom gentle loades will not at length numerously over-burden.

The world knows not a misery like it, the terrors of the Grave are trifles
to it, which could it but shroud the Guilty soul, and in it is dark and solitary
regions promise a freedom from future Misery, how willingly will it buy its
peace with death, and beg its sharpest Dart for a speedier passage: loss of
friends or fortune, Crosses to the very bone are but Scratches to these wounds:
give me a Catalogue of afflictions and there is none I think, except this,
which is not tolerable: But a wounded spirit who can bear?

How unsupportable, O Lord, is the burden of a Wounded Spirit? how terrible are
the Stings of Conscience, and the apprehensions of thy wrath? how miserable is
he that securely wraps himself in Sin, and grows insensible of his guilt
till the memory of his Crimes revive it; and when death puts him in mind of the
World to come, has nothing but the horrors of his Life before him. Thou have
placed an impartial Register in our bosoms which no flattery can bribe, nor
tears Silence, from reminding us of thy Justice; and yet how many are there
whose Leviathan-consciences, break the Silver Cords of thy Law like threads of
Towe; and are so far from acknowledging their guilt, that they are hardened in
impenitence? But teach me, O Lord, as I sin so to sorrow daily; that so when
I shall come and appear before Thee, I may find no other terrors, no other
sins my accusers, then those which I have, if not thoroughly crucified, yet at
least seriously repented of in my self before.

Eccles. Chap. 12. v. 13. Fear God and Keep his Commandments: for this is
the whole Duty of Man.


ANd yet how few are there that perform it, which yet is not so much our duty,
as it ought to be our delight. He that has but once got the habit of adoring
his Maker, will quickly find Religion but a pleasure; and that Law which
seems so hard and unpleasing to the World, will be but a recreation to his
Soul.

But alas, How little is there of David's piety amongst us now, when instead of
delighting in Gods Law, we deface it more; and are so far from meditating in it
either day or night, that we never think upon it at all: It Is the duty of the
world now to sin confidently, and an argument of much valor, to banish this
timorous religion of fearing either God or his Law. The Preachers doctrine is
now grown worse then a paradox, mere Apocrypha, it is heresy to revive it. To
tell us of our duty, is to scandalize the times, that so officiously break the
Law.

And no wonder there are so many Atheists; there was never such a time to
engender them as now. Track Antiquity to its first rise, and you cannot match
this age again. The world never multiplied so fast in sin; abominable Sects,
like Colonies, new plant the earth; profaneness is grown hereditary, and sprouts
out by propagation: so that, in time, posterity may perhaps become Heathens.
Were God and his promise mutable, a deluge would be but a slight punishment.
We do not only sin, but glory in it more, whilst some, not content to be
private and silent Atheists, proclaim it loud, and are mad to have the credit
of being known so; as if we could not be ingenious enough, unless we denied our
Maker. No wonder, religion is out of tune, when there is no harmony of a
Church; of that Christianity sounds low, when common Morality is not heard.

And yet it is a lesson we cannot learn too well, a tribute we cannot pay too
much, too often. We owe our beeings to the bounty of his hand, what homage then
can we better pay, then that, which by glorifying of him, purchases a Crown
for our selves.

Tell me, ye blind followers of the world, what is the glory ye pretend to? Ye
that laugh at heaven, and make divinity a mantle for unrighteousness, that,
with the Pharisee, count formality your religion, and make an outside-piety
your duty. Alas, Heaven is not got by pious frauds, gilded crimes, or
fortunate transgressions; nor the divine Eye to be deluded with a painted zeal.
It Is not a pretended sanctity that can cloathe us with immortality, nor a
fashionable devotion only, that will carry us to heaven. How miserable is he,
whose god is the world, and makes it his religion to neglect his Maker.

What did Thou bestow our reason on us for (O Lord,) but to harken unto the
voice of thy Law, that the Celestial Oratory of thy Word, might at least win
us from an ignorant profaneness? Shall Heathens that had no other end no other
reward for their piety, than some temporary applause or the inward triumphs of
their Spirits for doing well, outstrip us in the beauties of a Moral life;
and we that have higher and purer hopes, be scarce honest for thy sake? Shall
they that knew Thee not be more passionately Good, than we that have found out
Heaven and expect eternity to succeed? Though it was not in the power of Man to
find Thee, till Thou did reveal thy self in Christ, yet now having so richly
and fully shown us the Treasures of thy Love, shall we not strive to do
something for thy Glory? Make us, we beseech Thee, to consider the advantages
that are in thy Service, the happiness that attends obedience, and that Crown
which is the reward of Faith, that so out affections being mortified unto these
perishing objects here below, may be enlivened only with desires after those
Eternal Excellencyes that are in Thee.

Luke Chap. X. v. 25. And a certain Lawyer stood up and tempted him, Saying,
Master what shall I do to Inherit Eternal Life?


IT was the best Question that ever he put, and gained him more then all his
Pleading ever did besides; nor could it be any dishonor to him, from a Lawyer
to turn Solicitor in such a suite.

This was the highest Case he ever met with; for 'twas his Soul's; and where
he could better be his own Clyent, then Counselor. All his Law could never
have divided it, had He not so fortunately met with Divinity it self to
resolve him.

How blind are they that think to find out the hidden Mysteries of
Salvation, by their own shallow brain; that grope for happiness and eternity
in Natures bosom only; that make Aristotle their Bible, and go no further
than his Ethics to learn Divinity, whose curiosity is their Religion, and
triflingly pour out the happiness of their time; on some Learned Manuscript,
Sacrificing their Nobler Meditations to Nature only; They study the World so
long that they forget Heaven, and are so taken with the Pen of some Witty
Mortal, that they seldom peruse Scripture, that Language of Life, the
Celestial Oratory of the Spirit.

The good Lawyer has so long labored in other men's business, he had almost
forgot his own; his many motions had well nigh talked away his better part:
'twas now time to speak for himself; and, after all his wrangling, think of a
Writ of Ease.

How natural are the Thoughts and Enquiries after happiness in every one? The
very Pagans would have a Paradise, as well as gods, of their own making; and
rather then want a felicity, they would fancy an Elysium.

It Is the genuine Ambition of the Soul to thirst for something beyond the
World: how vain are they, then, that make the World their happiness, and place
Heaven in their Enjoyments here? how Inquisitive are some Lawyers of the
World, whose question it is, How they may grow Rich, whose Divinity it is to
become wealthy, and count a good purchase the best inheritance. See how the
Ambitious man gapes after preferment, and places his felicity in his fortune,
making honor his Heaven, worshipping the Glittering world, and sels Eternity
for a title.

See how the Covetous wretch locks up Heaven in his Chest, and ties his
happiness in a bag: whose Diety is his Money, and still his Question is, how
to get more. See how the sensualist Courts the world and makes pleasure his
happiness, that spends a good inheritance on his lusts, but never seeks how to
get a better.

So sadly do our vices drown Religion that we are inquisitive after any thing
but Heaven: we all run after happiness, but cannot over-take it, because it is
not to be grasp't within the arms of Mortality. It Is not all the flattering
honors and gilded frailties of the World, that can match Eternity, and bring
us to a never dying Mansion: we must look for somewhat that is as immortal as
our Souls, more durable then time, and cannot receive a period with our
breath. It Is every Man's Case as well as the Lawyer's; and every Lawyer's as
well as his: it is a Question that will become any Profession, for it concerns
all to enquire betimes what shall they do to inherit Eternal Life?

With what pleasure, O Lord, do we embrace and run after our earthly
advantages; but seldom reflect upon that time when we and all things with us
shall receive a period? We can entertain any thing with more delight, then
that which concerns us most, the happiness of the World to Come.

We are more earnest after the perishing interests of this Life then in laying
up a treasure for eternity, and making provision for our inheritance above: We
beseech thee, make us to see the little use, but the great vanity that is in
this World; that so the pleasures of it may not steal away our thoughts from
the Contemplation of a Better.

Matthew Chap. 15. v. 28. And he said unto her, O Woman, Great is thy faith.


HAppy she, that was found worthy so great an expression! her female tongue
made amends for all its former follies, having now by its pious answers merited
so divine an encomium. Poor woman, how rich was she, in whose breast was minted
a treasure which Kings and Princes compared, are beggars to. All Palestine with
its balm and spices, could not furnish her with an antidote to revive her child
and charm away the Devil. See the miracles of Faith, that could save two
souls the, Mother's and the Daughter's!

So miraculous that even a grain of it can remove Mountains, level Hills,
and plain the most rugged and lofty Soul into an humble and fruitful valley.

'Twas this that smoothed the surface of the Ocean, that made the waves a walk,
and turned their furious curles into a pavement for Peter's feet. 'Twas the
Centurion's faith that stav'd death away from his servant, which all his Guard
could never have kept off; that restored the blind man's eyes again, and made
him see better than nature could have done. All the wonders of the Gospel were
still closed up with, Thy faith has healed thee. And yet that Faith; which
then wrought so many miracles, is now become the greatest miracle it self,
whilst some take the sign for the thing; they place the greatness of their
faith in the greatness of their works, and have so good an opinion of
themselves, that they think it faith enough merely to do well. Others hope, to
be canonized for their doctrines, though not for their lives, scorn the company
of all religious duties, and think to travel to heaven by their faith, which
is alone. Obedience, true sorrow for sin, that lovely robe of a mourning soul,
and the nobler ornaments of our spiritual warfare, are but empty ceremonies,
and both these men's Creeds are of their own making: but heaven is not got by
speculation only; He that places his faith in his brain, and thinks religion
has not its agenda too, may like Moses view and talk of Canaan a far off;
but never enter it. Our Obedience must be louder then our Pretensions; it is not
a noise that will Saint us, it is not our Professions only but our Practices
too, that proclaim our faith.

Though our Merits cannot reach heaven, yet our endeavors may, if unfeigned;
because there is a mercy that will pardon our defects: all the blossoms of our
Piety sprout out from this stem, and he that either believes or loves his
Savior, cannot think he strives too much to live well.

This was the woman's Faith here, and she had scarce poured it out with her
Tears, when Satan all affrighted forsakes his hold, not able to abide the
Echo of its sound, seconded by the diviner accent of our Saviors Lips. And
this faith must be our Amulet against sin, and by its diviner charms drive
Satan to his chain: It Is this that prepares heaven for us, that makes us
survive our toombs, become Immortal in our graves, and promises eternity to
our dust; it is this that seals our happiness and brings us there where the
same Jesus shall receive us with an Euge to his Glory,

Thou sentest thy Son, O Lord, to die for us that by believing in him we might
have life. He under whom thou have put all things, was pleased to put himself
under them and left his Throne to be Crucified for our souls, that we might
receive the Triumphs of his passion, and be partakers of his Glory. O let not
those miseries of our natures which first invited thy mercy, make us incapable
of it: let not those that knew Thee not but by thy miracles, be more zealous in
their acknowledging thy goodness, then we who by the manifestation of thy love
plead an interest in thy blood. But grant that we may live in a perpetual
Gratulation to thy merits, who came from the Bosom of thy Father to save our
souls. To this end do thou give unto us that faith without which it is
impossible to please thee, and with which thou give every other grace: teach
us so to rely on thy mercy that we may not neglect the means, or think that a
Dead faith will carry us to that life, which Thou have promised to none but
such as work out their salvation with fear and trembling.

John: Chap. 20. v. 11 And she stopped down, and looked into the Sepulcher.


SEe how religiously Mary stoopes to behold her Savior in his Toomb, whilst
her younger Sisters that spend more time on their dress then their devotion
will scarce kneel to their prayers. 'Twas not an apparition of Angels in the
shape of Ghosts, nor the mournful silence of a toomb, where dwelt no other
object then death, clothed all in horror, that could fright her from her
contemplation.

See the power of Divine love that can even with pleasure look that in the
face, whose very aspect only strikes the world to palenesse; and stand not
only at its door, but enter into its chamber to meet heaven; and without
fear in the sad and solitatry vault, repose it self among the bones and
carkases of the Dead, and make a Coffin its pillow till the morn. Thus the
martyrs triumphed in their flames, and were charioted up in raptures by fire;
as if the greedy element had warmed them only. How nobly did they meet death,
and sang Anthems to the music of their Chains, as if they had been rather
Priests then sacrifices in that cruel solemnity!

How sweetly did Stephen close his eyes after he had seen Jesus, and heaven
opened; and then cheerfully expired under an heap of stones; a monument
richer than the proudest marble, having with his own blood writ himself this
Epitaph, the best of any; I am the first Martyr.

Thus the Saints made their torments their pleasure, and turned death with all
its terrors into a scene of mirth. 'Twas not the rage of Tyrants, nor the fury
of the most ingenious kinds of torture, that could force them from the love of
Jesus.

He that loves his Savior will with Mary not only stoop, but step into a
Toomb, and passionately embrace even a Coffin for his sake, he will look on
death but as the Messenger of his Glory the Harbinger of his happiness; and
therefore with St. Paul all in raptures, all in flames, beg a dissolution;
whilst his soul full of nothing but approaching heaven is all in ecstasies
transported thither.

How hardly can we be persuaded, O Lord, to forsake the vanishing pleasures of
this life for thy glory and our own happiness? How unwillingly should we lay
down our lives for thy sake or the Gospells, that can so hardly part with one
sin in obedience to thy Law? Thy yoke is easy, and thy service a perfect
freedom; and yet we count thy sanctuary a prison, thy law a trouble, and can
scarce sacrifice so much time to our devotions as to pay unto Thee the honor
due unto thy name. Pardon and pity this Corruption of our frames; and teach us
whether we live or die; to delight in that for which thou made us; even to
glorify Thee: that so whenever this earthly tabernacle shall be dissolved we
may receive our change with joy and be carried by Angels to an everlasting
inheritance.

Joh. Chap. 11. v. 25. Jesus wept.


O Who can hear this and not dissolve all in pious showrs? Can the most most
frozen eye read this and not thaw its self all in streams? He that has not
so much piety as to weep for himself or his sins, yet let him have so much
humanity as to accompany his Savior's tears.

And yet see how the marble Jews, instead of seconding, censure his grief
with a, Could not he that restored the eyes of the Blind, have kept Lazarus's
open?

No wounder they would not be mourners with him, who were to be murderers of
him, and be but little sensible or compassionate of his tears whose cruelty
was scarce satisfied with dearer drops, when his whole body became an eye that
wept blood.

And yet, Divinest Savior, how many are there that bear thy title, but indeed
are Jews, that pretend to wear the livery of thy name, but blot out the golden
characters of thy cross. How coldly must they needs be affected with thy
tears, that are scarce sensible of thy sufferings; and be but careless of thy
life, who are so forgetful of thy death?

O Mary, how richly are thy tears now required, those eyes that became moving
baths for thy Savior's feet, did sure now run over to see His brim-full and
distill drops, whose very inbalming revived thy Brother.

O Lazarus! did thou but know thy glory, thou would dye still, to be so
lamented, and willingly be buried in thy grave again to be so honorably bedewed.

No question, when thou were a spectator of his sufferings, but thou did
exceed the women in their tears, and sacrifice thy Eyes in showers to thy
divine Restorer.

This was indeed the grearest funeral that ever the world saw, or is like to
see; for the Lord himself was a Mourner here.

Divinest Savior, thou wept'st so those that could not, and for many that
would not weep for themselves, and would not deny thy tears who pouredst out
thy life: thou art so in initly good, thou desire but unfeigned sorrow for sin
to excuse the gilt thereof; and yet so far are we (such is our misery) from
accompanying thy tears, that we can scarce weep for our own sins. O teach us,
in a pious gratitude to do something for thy sake, who have done so much for
ours; that as thou have glorified thy self by our redemption, we may also
glorify thee by a constant thanksgiving; and may no more sell ourselves to
sin, that have been so dearly bought for heaven and the joys of thy kingdom.

John: 12. v. 2. But Lazarus was one of those, that sat at the table with him.


CAn the dead eat then? was not Lazarus but new wound up in his grave, and is
he set at meal? Is his toombe turned into a table? and does he wipe his hands
in the napkin that bound up his head? He that was ready to have feasted worms
now feasts himself, and is risen from his dead companions a guest amongst the
living.

We read indeed of some that all pale and liveless, were stretched out for a
coffin but revived again, when that little spark of life, that lay glimmering
in the expiring embers, in a corner of the panting heart recovered its flames.
But here death and Lazarus had embraced too closely to be so parted. His soul
had likely taken its flight before, and his body lay so long in his mothers
arms, 'twas just dissolving into its principles again: and behold him now
above, ground, as if but newly risen from his bed, all fresh with life and
vigor: he has changed his chamber, and from the lower regions of the other
world is returned to his old lodgings, where he is now at supper thronged with
multitudes of people that come not for alms, but to be spectators of this
wonder. Had the end of the world been then, or a resurrection of others for
company, Lazarus at his arrival to the world again, might well have phansied
with his countrymen, that the second life should be on earth, and heaven kept
in pleasures here.

No, Lazarus, though now alive thou must dye again to live for ever; nor must
thy revivall now, con ummate thine, but manifest Gods glory; though it be thine
too, above expression, to have been thus the subject of it. Thou needst not
fear to dye again having done it once, nor doubt but that he who raised thee
now, will do it hereafter too. Did thou ever think to have enjoyed this
world again; or to have been freed from thy imprisonment, till the great and
general delivery? 'Twas beyond thy Sister's faith till she saw it; and now
having had two lives, if thou spentest the former on thy self, or the world,
thou did wholly sacrifice the latter to thy divine Restorer.

How many expiring souls, all frighted with the horror of their crimes, could
they but have their span a little lengthned; or, after an age's durance in
their graves, but revive a little before their doom; how gladly would they
turn their songs of pleasure into penitential anthems, their profane notes
into diviner airs; and tune out their lives in pious strains.

But alas! he that cannot employ this life well, in vain expects to do it in
another, which he is not worthy of might it be obtained. He whose piety here
has reached him a taste of heaven, a glimpse of happiness, will be so little
in love with the vanities of this world, that instead of desiring a longer or
another life here, he will be but ambitious of leaving This.

It was by thy power, O Lord, That Lazarus, carried out to his grave, should
return alive. That Mournful expression (thy friend is dead) drew thee to the
discovery of thy love and power, in his resurrection. O let there be the same
concurrence of thy Grace and spiit, to the raising and reforming of my soul to
a new and holy life; it was the misery of expiring man that drew thee from the
bosom of thy Father to redeem him. O let the Scepter of thy word and truth be
as powerful in its heavenly influence upon my soul, as the Prophet's staff
that revived the dead; that so dying daily I may live for ever, and being
p^epared for my death, may enter into that life from which nothing but sin can
exclude me.

Joh. Chap. 13. v. 23. Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his
Disciples whom he loved.


SEe how sweetly is the Disciple Couch't? how boldly does he make his Master's
breast his pillow, loading him with a double burden, his sins, and himself?

Blessed familiarity! Would not Kings leave their thrones to have been in his
room, and ambitiously forsake their Golden Canopies, for such a teposure? Here
might the vastest ambition both seat and satiate it self without aspiring
higher: the greatest Avarice might here have found a treasure beyond which it
could not cover. What Lover would not scorn the lap of the most admired
female, for such an enjoyment, and become a Diviner Amorist.

Was not this Disciple above the rest? If this be not a precedence, what is? a
dignity which none besides himself succeeded in.

Happy Favorite! Who would not have trampled Crowns and Scepters for such
preferment? Had Mary, in whose bosom (once Love's Cradle) so many wantons
lulled themselves, that turned her eyes into Living Mineralls, and her hair
into a towell of the newest fashion, been graced with such a privilege, not
her eyes only but the noblest rivolets of her blood would have overflowne, all
transported out in grateful streams. How pleasingly does the Disciple lay his
ear to that Heart which was the life of the world, as if he would count its
motions, and by its Divine pulse be rockt asleep in raptures?

Behold, O my soul, and see in the posture of this happy man, the Emblem of thy
own felicity, the place of thy reception and future Glory. Art thou ambitious
of it here, then behold him on his Cross with his arms extended to receive
thee: O run and roll thy self on that Breast, the fear of Love, wherein lies
all the treasures of thy happiness. Thou have a privilege even beyond the
Disciple, for thou may not only lean and depend, but embrace him too:
Incircle him now then with the choicest endeerments of thy soul, the most
passionate raptures of a Lively faith; and so the same Jesus that permitted the
Disciple here to lean on his breast, will receive thee likewise in his arms
hereafter, and place thee for ever in the bosom of his Glory.

Math. Chap. 16. v. 26. For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul?


ANd yet men had rather lose their souls than the world. He for whom the world
was made, makes himself for the world, disappointing himself of all his
Glory, and by a more then brutish transmutation, buries the Divinity of his
soul all in earth.

Hear this then ye, Inhabitants of the world, ye that foul all in sense, and
climb no higher then the elements for Heaven; that can pawn your souls for a
fading pleasure, and count a delightful misery your felicity.

Hear this, thou aspiring Vapor, whose ambition elevates thee to consume thy
self; thou that wilt worship Satan for a Kingdom, and do him homage for a
Crown, paying him a revenue worth a thousand worlds, the immortal tribute of
a soul; till thy triumphs be turned to torments, thy revellings of honor into
regrets of horror, and thy Chair of state into a bed of flames.

Hear this, thou Sensualist, whose soul is as unconfined as Brutes, that
pantest for pleasure more then ever the Camaelion did after air, thou that
wadest all in sin, and overwhelmest Morality in floods of vice, bathing thy
self in those wanton streams that drown thee, that countest religion but a
fable, the lives of Saints a melancholy Romance, and laughest at heaven as if
eternity were but a fancy.

Hear this, O thou Miser, whom the Silver Rhetoric of a bag can court to
Hell, and art greedily won to damn thy self at the Music of a purse; that
can gaze thy self blind at the splendor of a Gemme and cursest Geography
for describing riches beyond thy reach; wishing thy self an Indian that thou
might dwell among Treasures, and inhabit Mines, till thy very hair became
silver indeed, till thou thy self went all turned to Ore, and and every Bone
into a wedge of Gold.

Hear this, ye Gallants, that are so enamounted with the fashions of this
world, that ye have lost all Idaea's of a better ye that live merely to please
your sense, and feed your luxury with the curious martyrdom of a thousand
creatures. As ye have purer veins, have purer passions too, and have nobler
inclinations for heaven: the riches of your attire will not cloathe you with
immortality: should you sell your estates when ye die, 'twould not purchase
paradise. It was the best speech the old Orator ever uttered when he said, he
would not buy repentance so dear. 'Twas but an extemporary expression, and yet
all his Rhetoric could never match it: that one strain was worth all his
Orations and will outfame the labors of his pen.

Could we treble the lives of Patriarchs, and with them the pleasures of the
grandest Epicures; Could we, like Cleopatra, in a dissolved pearl swallow the
treasure and pleasure of a kingdom at a draught; or command the Creatures as
peremptorily as ever the Centurion did his servants; had we all the enjoyments
we can either wish or fancy, what ever the ambition of the most vain and
carnal appetite can long for; were the whole earth turned into a paradise, or a
constant spring beautifying its face. Could we live and not grow old, or being
old not feel the miseries of age; could we unwind time again and reverse it is
wheels, stop the celestial Mercuries, the posts of heaven, in their course
and set the Great Clock of the world backward again; nay, were our bodies as
durable as our souls, that we could out live Time it self, and be above
ground, even when the world shall receive its period: yet what shall we get, if
after all our imaginary felicities and sliding contentments, we become a
sacrifice for hell, enlisted in the cursed catalogue of the damned crew, a
victime for eternal flames, lost for ever from God and Heaven. Then tell me who
ever thou art and ask Dives himself, What is man profited though he should
gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

What is there in the world, O Lord, that we should love it thus, weary our
selves in vain desires and make the pleasures of this life our felicity? How
hard is it for him that is a stranger to thy law to perceive the emptiness of
those enjoyments he has so long rolled himself in, to resist the tempting
advantages of sin, and undervalew the flashes of this life for that glory Thou will impart. My God, teach me so to enjoy the world that I lose not Thee, let
the blessings thou bestovvest quicken and increase, not dull my devotion; raise
up my obedience not drown my gratitude: that so the vanities of the world may
be my scorn, and the joys of heaven my only ambition; that I may never for a
perishing fruition in this life lose both my soul, and thy grace, together.

Matthew. Chap. 5. v. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.


WHo then would not strive to become pure? No wonder David, was so earnest for
a clean heart, and a right Spirit: if this be the reward of Piety who would not
become religious? Blessed Spirits! how happy, how pure are ye, that behold the
face of your Heavenly Father, who would not labor to imitate you here, that he
might be like you there, and possess joys such as raptures never knew. Shall
the false and treacherous vanities of the World steal away our hearts, and rob
us of the hopes of this Glory, the fruition of this Sight?

A Sight, in Comparison whereof the royalties of the World, the triumphs and
splendours of the eye, and the beauty of the whole Creation is not worth the
looking at. A sight, which no eye ever saw, but may, if it do not blindly lose
it self on objects here. No Ear ever heard its perfect description; but may
the Harmony and Halelujahs of it, if it bow not to the charms of sin and the
music of the flesh.

It Is a sight, whose Ideae cannot be drawn by the most lively, and subtle
Speculations of any Scholastic brain though never so Angelical; it is not fancy
but piety can reach it.

The Divine Traveller St. Paul himself, though newly there, could not give us
a Copy of it; and Scripture Characters it out but in Similitudes, to show how
infinitely transcendent is that Glory which is so much above expression, so
much above all comprehension. Were all the Diamonds the earth is mother of,
mustred to a Splendor they would not match the smallest glance of the Sun's
eye: and yet that noble Luminary surrounded with so many waiting Stars, that
beg their luster from him, is but a spark to the Brightness of of His face.

Who then would sacrifice that part to the World, which may become the
instrument of so much happiness? and suffer the extravagancies of his blood to
revell there, where nobler passions and flames should triumph?

He that would dwell among the Spirits of the just, must teach his own to
become so; and turn his body to a Temple, wherein his heart must be the the
Altar and Sacrifice too; or rather a kind of Sanctum Sanctforum, for the
choicest Gifts of the Spirit, to inhabit.

The Seat of Life must be turned into the Seat of Love, and the palace of the
Spirits into a Court of Graces, and then that part which (as Naturalists
observe) is the first that lives, and the last that dies, shall become purely
vital, and not dye at all.

Nothing but a Trinity can fill this Triangle, which we must therefore shape to
the purest form, and teach it in all its pulses, to beat nothing but Heaven
and Sanctity. Our breasts must become Clossets of Devotion and our hearts the
Cabinets of innocence and prayer, enricht with that great diamond, a lively
faith, the Lamp at which all our smaller Graces as Candles light themselves,
and like Stars borrow their Luster from this Luminary.

It Is not a heart that can dance to the Tune of any Religion, and pretend a
Sanctity which it wears only in its face, that makes Fancy its Conscience, and
stiffnesse of humor tenderness of Spirit.

No, it is a heart robed with Humility and Crowned all with Love, perfumed by
Prayers, the odours of Charity, and the fragancies of a pious life, that
couches it self within the arms of our Savior's Spouse, and becomes a mourner
in its perfections, that looks upon the World as the Enemy of its Glory, and
had rather dye then be a Rebel against Heaven. It Is such a Heart that prepares
us for this Vision; and happy is he, that is such a Puritan.

Strengthen us therefore, O Lord, against the vanities of the World, and raise
up our thoughts to the Contemplation of thy Glory. Level in us every proud
thought that dares exalt it self against the power and purity of thy Law: and
Sanctify us for thy self and thy Service more, that the practice of a Holy
life may be, as it ought, our chiefest employment, that so when we depart from
hence we may be received to Thee, and being seen no more here may for ever see
there, what before, neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor heart conceived,
the Glory thou will impart in the fruition of Thy self.

Matthew. Chap. 8. Verse. 2. Lord, if thou will Thou can make me clean.


IS not sin a Leprosy! Then the Lepers Prayer, is every Sinners too. He
that had seen the Leper's body, would not have wondered at his Prayer: and yet
could he but have viewed his Soul, he might perhaps have seen objects of more
prodigy and Horror: the miseries of his blood which had lost its verdure, and
become but an unprofitable friend to Nature, every part being as it were
dead-alive, by so unnatural a Nutrition, taught his tongue this Necesary though
Mournful kind of Confidence, Lord, if thou will.

And He, whose Compassion never fails, to show that his Goodness was as
great as his power, would not reject a Suite wherein his Mercy was concerned;
and those limbs which might have been sooner drowned then bathed into a Cure,
reassume new life and beauty by the bounty of a Touch.

Thus the Leper is new bodyed again: but we read not of any Cure wrought upon
his better part, and that perhaps had more need. The bedrid Man his Successor
was far happier, whose sin and disease were both taken away together.

How many are there that, like the Leper, look no higher then their bodies,
whose Superficies is all their religion; whilst the nobler piece that gives
them life, lies all neglected under some Chronicall infection?

Our blood shall have all the delicacies, that Art or the most Chymicall Luxury
can invent to feed its flames; whilst our brighter part, the Divine and
Celestial fire which inspires us, lies all quenched and robbed of its immortal
aliment, and can carry back nothing but a dim and Hectic luster to it Maker.

The torment of Limb shall teach us more devotion in an hour then all the
concernments of our Souls could do in a year before, and the deformity of the
meanest part will be an object of more shame and sorrow to us, then those pale
and infernal shapes that attend sin and disfigure Heaven in us.

Of all plagues this is the greatest and yet least feared, as if Hell were but
a Toy, Damnation a Pleasure, and the miseries of our Souls a Recreation to us.

Show me that beauty that is not a Leper, that innocence which carries not a
guilt to blush at; that Saint, that infant man, that knows not what it is to
sin.

Were our veins purer then the lips of Violets that perfume the Chemistry of
the air, the drops of the Morn; were Adam's sin a stranger to our blood,
and our birth clear, as the Morn, innocent as the new-blown Rose: yet the
deformity of our lives would soon teach us this prayer, and the blackness of
our very thoughts would silently proclaim our ugliness.

And yet, was not there not in those days a Generation that were clean in
their own eyes, that justified themselves even in their impurity and counted
all the World but Lepers to them? Was not the Pharisee a greater Leper than the
Publican, though so proudly he displayed his best plumes? His very Pride
carried more Contagion with it, than the other Man's Sins all put together.

He that trusts to the merit of his own paint, may lose Heaven and those
joys which an humbler Confidence secures.

O Lord, though I am not so bad perhaps as some, yet am I so b^d in my self,
that the Leper here is a beauty to my Soul, Lazarusse's Corpse a comeliness to
my sores: yet were I more impotent then the Cripple of Bethesda, more Leprous
then the Nine, whose ingratitude was more loathsome then their disease; were
those Legions, ejected by thy word, received in me; were I as bad as Satan
could wish to make me; yet I know thy Goodness and I do not doubt thy power.
For, Lord if Thou will, Thou can make me clean.

Matthew. Chap. 24. v. 39. And knew not, until the Flood came and took them all
away.


HOw securely did these sinners cram themselves for destruction? or, as if
forseeing their inundation, they would by full stomachs labor to prevent an
entrance. Life and luxury were such inseparable companions here, that nothing
but Death could part them. They had waded so long in an Ocean of sin, it was
impossible to escape drowning, and not be surrounded with the depths of a quick
and overflowing judgment.

Noah might have preached himself dumb, and have sooner talked himself asleep
in mild and fluent admonitions, than awake these drunkards; had not the waves
made use of a rougher language; and, in their own swelling dialect, the
prodigious roaring of the depths buried them and their riotts in silence
together.

Had not God otherwise promised the world how often had it since been deluged?
They were but eating and drinking; but we do even glut and carrouse it in sin,
commit ryots upon Hell, and can teach the Epicure himself to revell.

Our forefathers were but dwarfs to us in sin, whose transgressions have to far
transcended theirs in bulk, that we are become greater Giants in iniquity then
those of the first age.

So monstrous is Sin still in its productions, that the whole earth like an
infernal Africa brings forth new prodigies of vice daily, that (were the world
in a consumption as some think it is, in virtue only, and the iniquities of the
times) when they seem to be quite full, are but increasing still.

They were but cold phlegmatic crimes that drowned the world, to the fiery
sins of this hotter age, that shall (and have already almost) set it in a
combustion. It Is another element then that of water, must punish the feared
Consciences of this age; and chains of darkness must fetter those that run
after new lights, the metors of their own invention.

The world was already drowned in sin, when the waters, to complete it is
excess, came and carried away these living-dead men, and buried them in the
same grave together.

Such is the fruit of a careless life, the miseries of a retchlesse
impenitency; they were revelling in their feasts when the greedy element
devoured them, and they that drank iniquity like water, had a fit punishment
for their iniquity. The waves grow high and mount up to a tomb, the sea
becomes a spacious monnument both to hide and wash away their sin, and they
that swam in mirth, are now swallowed up in streams, and little dreaming of
their deaths, are shipwrackt in their very houses in the midst of their
pleasures, being fatally suprized by a terrible and unwelcome guest.

So righteous art Thou, O Lord, and infinitely pure, that thy Justice, though
it may seem to wink at, yet will not pardon impenitence, nor pass by the
resolved impieties of wilful transgressors: and yet so infinitely good that
thou never heightenest thy punishments but when men do their iniquities; nor
are thy judgments epidemicall but when sin is so. Thou that desire not the
death of a sinner, would not have destroyed so many even all, had not their
transgressions been so universally prodigious, that they came up in a cry
together to pull down thy justice. And though thou have since out of the
greatness of thy love and compassion promised a security from the same, yet
not from all punishment. Let the memory therefore of those that perished by thy
wrath for their neglect, remind us of our duty and thy glory; that so the
examples of thy judgments upon others, may teach us, by a lively repentance to
prevent our own.

Luke Chap. 7. v. 5. For he loves our nation, and has built us a Synagogue.


BEhold the character of a good Magistrate! one that might well be styled the
father of his country though a Roman, whose patronage so eminently extended
itself over both, and the best part of their commonwealth.

This man was Chief not only in place but in piety too, all Judea could not
match him, which since it lost its freedom, was not wont to find or enjoy the
happiness of such Rulers: and had they not hated Idolatry they would have
worshipped this lover of their nation.

Herod indeed, did re-build their Temple, but it was more for fear then love;
'twas not out of piety but policy, the better to get the crown; 'twas his
ambition not his devotion, that founded that stately edifice; not so much out of
zeal to God or his country, as out of pure religion of becoming King.

Such is the Sanctity of the world; which makes Gods Honor, not the
foundation, but a passage to their own; turns religion into a footstool for
ambition, and makes heavenly pretensions a staircase to iniquity.

The Centurion here was a benefactor to the Nation out of pure zeal; and if not
of their religion, yet a great friend to it; whose charity, not content to show
it self in the management of their civil interests only, so nobly employed
its power for the good of their souls and Church.

Unlike the Rulers of the world, whose Religion it is to have none at all, and
are such lovers of sacred Foundations, that instead of laying new, they are the
only new fashion Templers, that dare fight for to ruin the old, and defend
their pulling down. Piety is lovely even in the meanest, but in Kings and
governors it carries a splendor like those rays that surround the head of a
pictured Saint.

Pyramids, whose proud-reach dares justle the clouds and make them stumble in
their race; Piles of Alablaster carved to various shapes and pictures, lively
as the dead, and the more like because both breathless; Tombs of marble;
Vaults of brass, are but poor monuments, worthless conservatours, to that
building without hands, wherein deceased Piety eternally shall live.

The Centurion here by building Synagogues, raised a structure to his own
memory that has out lasted them; and the Jews, ravished with such unwonted
favors in a Ruler, to express their Gratitude, run in streams to Jesus, and
petition him to heal his Son, pressing him with an argument of great force with
them; for, He has loved our Nation, and built us a Synagogue.

Such honor have all they that Honor Thee, O Lord, whose zeal for thy Glory,
seldom returns empty to themselves: the meanest offering to thy Altar, is not
only accepted, but rewarded too; and they that make it their Ambition to exalt
thy Name, shall not have theirs forgotten.

Let not those that knew Thee not, be more passionate for thy Glory then we,
whose very Profession ought to adorn our Religion; whose bodies ought to
become Temples, fit to entertain thy Spirit, the spirit of Holiness of Love.

Thou will now no more be worshipped in Synagogues, but more spiritual
Assemblies: Teach us therefore, to turn our souls into Sanctuaries, and to
raise up our thoughts in more lively addresses that we may not so much
endeavor, to obtain the worlds time by a moral fame as by the Sacrifice of
obedience, the Righteousness of eternity.

Luke Chap. 9. v. 57. Lord I will follow Thee, whithersoever Thou go.


IT was the best resolution he ever made: nor can any blame him for his
boldness, when it was his glory to have been an intruder; he might have gone
on long and far enough, and not have met with such heavenly Company. Was it
his Confidence, or his Love to Jesus, that put him on?

See with how pious an importunity he accosts him, whom perhaps, he had never
seen, nor known before but by his Miracles only; and that life which so
astonished the eyes of the world, could not but attract his and his heart too;
and therefore thinking it no presumption to use all means of bettering
himself, nor willing to lose so fair an opportunity of becoming happy,
ambitious of an admission, all in raptures without any other Complement then an
humble earnestness, salutes Him. Lord, etc.

Nor could our Savior's poverty stop or weaken his resolve, or discourage his
intention; being not only Content, but Ambitious to share even in the miseries
of so good a Master, in whose very wants he should find a felicity beyond all
the enjoyments of the earth.

Is not this Man a president for the whole world? He that will not follow Jesus
out of love, yet let him not for shame suffer a Jew or Publican to outstep and
strip him too. Are the joys of an everlasting Bliss, of so poor a value; that
they are not worth the coming to? or shall we think any step too weary that
brings us to happiness?

Were the way to heaven but strewed with roses or a thousand pleasures to
revive the flesh, the sensualist would turn a constant walker there, and be
the foremost in those paths; the rich Man cannot follow Jesus for his precious
Luggage: with which, because he cannot; without it, he will not stir.

The Epicure will not be of a Religion that prescribes him temperance; for
although perhaps he might make a shift to pray, he cannot tell how to fast.

The way to heaven is too narrow for Ambition, whose lofty port loves not to be
strained in its passage, but must have a road wide as the world or Hell can
make him, wherein his train of sinful glories may follow him in a breast
together.

So difficult a thing it is, to leave the world even for heaven, and strive
against the blandishments of sense for an invaluable bliss; as if all our
hopes, all our happiness were lap't and tied up in the Concernments of this
life only, and no other expectation for us besides the pleasures of Mortality.

And yet how many are there that pretend to follow Jesus but are mere strangers
to his footsteps, that pursue tracks not of his making, but their own finding.
That path which so many holy men have footed before us, is too common, too
profane for them to tread in; they have found out a nearer Cut of their own,
and think they shall come to Heaven the sooner by turning out of the way. So
unfortunate is that zeal which will needs be wandering after spurious and
impostur'd Lights; and scorning the usual footsteps of the Church, loses it
self in the blind and dark Meanders of Enthusiasme.

The way to heaven is not in a Corner, and however narrow, is open still: it is
a path whose prospect is happiness; nor need he fear to lose his way, that
does not wilfully turn out of it, the poor Man here, all transported, runs to
Jesus, and mixing Humility with Resolution, because he will not be denied, in a
begging kind of Confidence tells him, Lord etc.

Who would not foot it even through wants and wildernesses, to come to Canaan?
He that follows Jesus shall have no Cause to repent his journey. He shall find
such treasures even in the poverties of religion, so much of Heaven and
Contentment in the seeming miseries of a pious life, that he will not need much
persuasion to make it his own resolution here, and cheerfully leave all to
follow Jesus.

Do thou therefore elevate our souls from the world, O Lord, and make them
covetous of seeking thee and the things that are above: Thou art ascended to
thy Throne in the rapture of Glory, draw our souls after thee in the raptures
of Love and spiritual exaltation, that we may make the virtues and perfection
of thy Life the rule of ours, and grant that we may not be so affected with the
things of this world, that we should have no passion for thy Glory: but make us
to walk Cheerfully in that way which thou have gone and set before us, that as
we live by thy Goodness, we may live to thy Glory; and as we move in Thee, we
may be ever moving toward Thee, till we enjoy the Happiness of an eternal
rest in thy Kingdom.

Matthew. Chap. 9. v. 38. Pray ye, therefore, the Lord of the Harvest, that He
would send forth more laborers into his harvest.


NO Prayer more necessary than this, nor this ever so much as now. Who would
not burn and labor in his devotions, and earnestly press heaven with
restless and religious votes to Compassionate our want?

Every one may well make it his vocation now, without encroching on another
office, and turn laborers in so pious a work as this, to pray for the
prosperity of the Gospel.

Who can see the Garden of the Lord become a desert, folds of Lambs inhabited
by foxes, the House of prayer turned into the ruins of Sacrilege, and the
Messengers of our peace glad to become the objects of our pity, without
mournful and Compassionate reflections? How vainly do they pretend affection
that strip their Mother, and count the exorbitances of their Phansies, the
decencies of the Gospel.

Can there be any want of Laborers where so many are, where every man becomes
one himself? when sheep become shepherds, and Flocks are Metamorphosed into
Pastors. Every one can now handle the religious sickle; he that can but talk or
smatter Scripture, thinks himself divinely called, sufficiently inspired for a
Sermon; and out of the simplicity of his zeal will needs be climbing up a
pulpit.

Thus multitudes of teachers produce a scarcity, and we want the more by having
so many. We may well pray then for a new Mission, or the taking away of those,
that do not hedge, but devour the vineyard.

He that loves his Savior will delight and triumph in the felicity of his
spouse, in whose arms alone we can mount to happiness, and ever beg a
perpetuity of its Glory. He deserves not to reap or share in the bliss of an
immortal harvest that will neither labor himself nor pray for the prosperity
and increase of them that do.

And who, O Lord, can cast his Eye upon thy bleeding Spouse without a tear? or
upon its unruly Adversaries without a Sigh for its protection? O let thy
accustomed mercy stop the wildest Boar, and root out the most mischievous
foxes that may destroy it. Thou have founded It upon a Rock, no storms shall
ruin it, and have placed it on high to be seen and approacht by all; let us
not blindly turn out of the Way, or fall into praecipices for want of knowing
guides. Let not thy Oracles become dumb for want of Priests; or the Glad
tidings of our Peace, be turned to silence, for want of faithful messengers;
but thou, O Lord, both supply defects, and reform abuses that sensibly creep
in: forgive the Zeal of those, they know not what they do.

Let the Light of thy countenance graciously dispell that darkness and
confusion wherein we lie Eclips't. Then shall we sing and Praise Thy Power.

Matthew. 2. Verse. 10. And when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding
great Joy.


COuld a Star become such a welcome object to Astrologers, whose eyes had
contracted an acquaintance with the Spheres and taught the Planets to become
familiar? Or was it the appearance of a new born Light that crowned their Joy.
That Stars should become guides, and not only light but Lead me too; 'twas
indeed a wonder they never saw before, and which no Astronomer besides
themselves, though never so celestial, could yet Parallel.

Had Aristot^e known this, he would have made the Stars the Dieties of the
Spears, and not pearcht Intelligences at their backs to roll them. This was
some living splendor, sure, that could both shine, and show the way. A
luminary more quicking then that Giant one, that spreads the Morn, and carries
Time within his arms. And they whose ruder devotion, whose Idolatry taught
them to adore the Sun, could not but religiously salute the Herald of a
brighter One they came to worship.

See how Pagans foot it from the East, and cheerfully make it but a walk from
the remotest Climate to come and worship a Redeemer; while some will scarce
travel from their chambers to present a cheaper offering of gratitude than
this. They counted it the best journey they ever made, and for a testimony of
their joy presented offerings, the richest their Countries yielded, and made
the Inn their Temple, to pay the tribute of their adoration in, to the Lord of
Glory; whilst some sacrilegiously strip him of his Divinity for the greater
honor of his name.

They had but a single star to guide them, but we can show multitudes of new
lights to darken the Gospel, troops of Quaking comets, the Apparition of whose
zealous and fiery aspects, would rather fright then lead the way.

Thus pretended Illuminations of our own making, do not embrighten but eclipse
religion; and instead of opening blind us more; It was a real not affrighted
luminary that steered the Wisemen here, who triumph't to behold that day which
we study to forget. If they were not Kings, yet their very fortunes would have
made them Illustrious: Never had Travellours before, so splendid a Convoy, so
bright a Guide.

The heavens proclaim thy glory, O Lord, and the firmament reveals the
excellence of thy wisdom. 'Twas fit that thou who have clothed the world
with light and inricht it with so many rolling mirrours, should have one to
be the herald of thy nativity. All the creatures, even with delight obey thy
will, whilst we rebelliously stop our ears to the harmony of thy law. The wise
men had no sooner notice of thy birth, but they grew angry with time it self,
till they began their journey; and, that they might be sure not to loose their
way, thou sentest out a Convoy; a Starr becomes an Evangelist and runs post to
guide them. So fortunate are good motions when they are put in practice, they
that would seek thee, shall not want means to find thee though it be by
miracle. Thou can steer us by a brighter luster than that of a Star, even
the illuminations of thy grace and Spirit.

Philip. Chap. 4. v. 12. I know both how to abound and to suffer need.


DIvinest Saint! how few besides thy self have learned it? It Is a Lesson the
world has long ago putt by; not so much because it is so hard, as because its
unpleasant.

Were the way to heaven but set with pleasures for sense to revell in, 'twould
quickly become an open and an easy walk: were there no rubs, no trials to to
be past thorough, who would not become a Saint? The Crown of Glory would be as
Common as a Garland; were there not one of Thorns to be worn first.

The world cares not for a Religion that carries neither pomp nor pleasure
with it, but instead of rich and high enjoyments preaches temperance and
patience only. Even some of them that pretend heaven most, would not willingly
learn this, but abundantly provide for their better fortunes: and those wants
our Apostle learned so nobly to sustain, too many out of better devotion
labor, not to know.

He that bids us seek heaven first, tells us, that to long for earthly
enjoyments is a Heathens wish: For after all these things do the Gentiles seek.
And shall Christians live like heathens still, and look no higher then the
world? shall they that make eternity their sphere sit and roll themselves in
the bosom of an under element, and poorly make the pleasures of mortality
their aim alone?

Was it for this, He that made the heavens bowed them and came down, leaveing
his throne to bring us thither, that we should lie and grovel in our phlegm
for ever?

How vile and vain a Creature is that man, that wraps up his felicity in the
dull enjoyments of this life, and still resignes himself to sense alone? Tell
me, O thou that swimmest in plenty and drownest heaven in oblivion, should the
luminaries put on their purple robe, and changing their lustres, like bleeding
Meteors turn their rays into crimson streams; were the air now filled with
blasts of the last Trump ecchoing an approaching judgment; how prodigious
would that change look, what vast and horrid affrightments would the memory of
thy profane and irreligious fulness then strike and scare thee with? Alas
the enjoyments of the world are so poor, that he which places his hopes in
their fruition, will quickly find himself but an eternal Beggar, a miserable
Dives.

And yet such is the sanctity of the world, to laugh ar religious poverty, and
deride the exigences of a pious life as an enemy to nature. He knows not the
joys of an expected eternity, that thinks there is no felicity beyond this
span.

Did we but know the reward shall crown that the world calls Misery, the
happiness that waits on the most suffering and dejected devotion, we should
triumph in our wants, be in love with hardship, and embrace even beggary with
delight. We should be content not only to die but to live martyrs, rejoice
even in the lowest ebb to win heaven, and cheerfully learn with the Apostle
to want here, for that fulness which knows none hereafter.

And yet how hardly can we endure even the smallest trouble for thy sake O
Lord? So insensible are we of thy goodness, so forgetful of thy power, that
we do not only in our wants accuse and condemn thy Providence, but are ready
even to turn infidels in our misfortunes. Make us therefore, O Lord, to see the
vanity both of the world and our own hearts, that the pleasures of it may
neither drown, nor the crosses of it deject our hope or discourage our
obedience. Let that glory which thou have promised to those that conquer the
world for thy sake, be ever in our eye; that so, in whatsoever condition we are
in, we may still be found crowned and triumphing in Faith.

Luke. c. 19. v. 9. This day is Salvation come to this House.


NO wonder Zacheus then made such haste to come down, and quickly forsook the
friendly branches at such News. He whose ambition climbed no higher then a
Sight of Jesus, was all transported at the Honor of receiving Him. Had he been
taller perhaps, he had not been so happy; it was his Littleness exalted him,
and he who was not only the Lowest, but, perhaps, the meanest of the Company,
for his fortune became the Envy of the Multitude.

He that dwells in Everlasting splendours, and treads the Heavens under,
exposed Himself to the Courtesy of the World, whose Charity was so Cold that
he must invite himself, and be beholding to a Sinner for his entertainment.
Had the Princes of the World but known Him, they would have quickly sure
surrendered up their Thrones, and counted their palaces too poor a Lodging for
the Lord of Glory. And the Vain Jews whilst they expect a Messiah all in
pomp, a Redeemer that should come into the World in Majesty and tr umph, are
become not so much the relics as ruins of a Nation, a wandering Monument of
prodigious impiety throughout the earth.

Stand still, ye Monarchs of the World, and behold your Maker now beneath you:
and if ye have not placed all your happiness in a Kingdom here, Learn
Humility from so Blessed a President. He that came to save Sinners thought it no
dishonor to be in their Company; and, as it were to make amends for his
entertainment, and to make Zacheus compleately happy He tells him, This day is
Salvation come to this House.

A reward which none besides Hims lfe could give, and which he that has, need
never fear being poor again. Who would not welcome his Savior on such terms,
and Sacrifice even all his fortunes at once to be so infinitely repa 'd? We
cannot make too much provision for our happiness, nor welcome Heaven at too
much charge And yet how many are there of so sparing a zeal; they will be at no
Expenses in their Worship, like the thrifty Disciple; they will not go to the
Cost of Serving God Handsomely; How happy was Zacheus, whose poor habitation
our Savior picked out beyond the rest to harbor, in and Honor with his
presence: nor yet was so Rich a Mercy confined to him alone, but extended to
the whole World too; Every family may, if they will, share in the same fortune,
This day is Salvation come to every one.

Hear this then, whoever thou art that Sacrificest thy Soul to any thing but
Heaven, that dancest to the Music of the World, and make Eternity a Stranger
to thy thoughts. Can thou deny thy Savior an admission, or think it a
trouble to leave the foolish interests of the World, and welcome the most Holy
Jesus. Behold the Miseries of our Natures which will not be persuaded to become
happy, but suffer an immortal joy to be lost for ever in embraces here.

Thou have brought us from Nothing, O Lord, that we might see thy Salvation;
that we who might have been for ever without Thee, might through the Knowledge
of Thy self be made partakers of thy Glory. O Enliven us that we may give up
our selves wholly to thy Service, and perpetually study to do something to the
Honor of thy Name, that we may not throw away those Souls on the vanities of
the world, which thou have given us for Thy self, and to be employed in thy
Service: but that, Sacrificing our Wills to Thine, and our lives to a perfect
Love of Thee, we may find that joy which accompanies thy Grace here, and that
Glory which knows no end or change hereafter in Thy presence for evermore.

Math. Chap. 13. v. 43. Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father.


WHo then would not be ambitious of so bright a change, to become purely
Celestial; to have his body turned into a Luminary, and every part
transformed to luster? when man shall become not only a Living soul, but a
Living splendor too; and his immortal breath, in it is reunion, instead of
parts find beams to quicken.

Hear this, ye blind admirers of the world, that look no higher then a Diadem,
a purple robe, or some honorable trifle, and sell your brightest inheritance
for a splendid toy.

Hear this, ye Beauries, that carry charms of Luster in your faces, and think
your eyes are not only spheres but treasuries of Light; whose attire Emulates
the stars, and carries splendor with it; that wear your happiness on your
back, and count a silver vanity your Glory.

Hear this, who ever thou art that can dote on shadows, the flashes of a
transitory pomp, and for a glorious Mortality bidst adieu to heaven and an
Immortall-blisse. Could thou put on a roabe of Stars, or pull rays from
that Royal luminary that embrightens the world, they would be but gloomy
splendours, bright obscurities to that Glory that enwraps a Saint. The luster
of the heavens is but an emblem of our own: the Prince of planets that
dishevells his rays, and revels it in splendor, the great Magazine that stocks
the world with light, is but a Curtain to that Tabernacle that shall invest us.

Our toombs are our wardrobes for heaven, and those Chambers of death whose
hangings are winding sheets overlaid with dust, are the out-rooms that strip us
for our robe of immortality; the opening of our Graves is the beginning of our
happiness, and we are gathered to our fathers that we may be gathered to
eternity.

If that Glimpse which the Disciples saw in the mount made them wish for three
tabernacles or an eternal abode there, how shall the beauty of revealed
Heaven, and the glory of an ascended Savior, ravish us with desires after its
enjoyment? It was the Martyrs comfort amidst their tortures, that though their
members were in pieces, yet the hairs of their head were numbered. Were thou
bottomed in the seas depth, his power can buoy the up, if crusted into the
earths rubbish, he can abstract and form thee a finer creature then ever thou
were. If Peter's shadow could cure the sick, how powerful must He be who is
Peter's Glory? He whose name is in the Book of Life, dies here but to be laid as
it were in a Press, to be extracted a purer model for eternity.

Who then would not only despise the world, but welcome even misery for so
invaluable a reward, triumph in his greatest eclipse, and become cheerful in
the midst of chains? He that knows the glory of his inheritance, will little
value those pleasant trifles, those rich nothings the world admires, the
painted joys of an imaginary felicity: but, in nobler and Diviner
expectations, prepares himself for that change which knows none; where he
shall have nothing else to do but to live forever, and be eternally received as
once the Disciple into the Bosom of his Savior.

Thou did make us for thy self, O Lord; and when we by our sins and follies
had for ever lost thee, Thou did restore us to thy self again, that we
might not be eternally deprived of Thee, our only Good. O fill us with
perpetual meditations of thy Love, let those joys which are so much above our
thoughts, be ever in them; let our inability to comprehend the happiness of thy
kingdom heighten the piety of our ambition after it more, that we may walk in
some measure worthy of so Divine a purchase as heaven, and as thou have
prepared it for us, do thou prepare us for it. Prepare us with all those
heavenly graces that may entitle us to it, and with all those spiritual
desires that may make us breathe and long after it; that so our hearts being
there before, we our selves may come after, and being transported in our
desires may be also in our persons, to everlasting enjoyments.

Luke 18. v. 11. The Pharisee stood up and prayed thus; God I thank thee, that
I am not as other men are, etc.


HOw ungratefully does the Proud Pharisee thank heaven? how strangely has
pride altered him? He that used to make long prayers, intends to be but short
now: he stands up. He comes not to pray, but to bray; not to adore God but to
commend himself. Here is not in the humor of being very devout, being so taken
up and ravished with his own graces, that he had scarce either the time or the
patience to remember the divine Author whose goodness he would seem to
acknowledge, but it is so colldy, 'twere better he were unthankful still. He
exceeded other men indeed, for his impudence was superlative.

Had he known himself better, he would have been more thankful, and less
proud.

How largely does he urge heaven with his worth, but makes no apology for his
Pride: he thanks God indeed, but it is in transitu, rather a complement then a
Prayer, though it be a sin to worship images, he thinks it none to be his own
idolater; and therefore dares present God with a catalogue of his own merits.
How perfectly has the world learnt his lesson? How do the Catholic Pharisees
pride themselves in a supererogatory devotion and think to climb heaven by a
ladder of their own making; glorying in a superabundant piety, and triumphing
in a meritorious excess, of doing even more then they need.

How nimbly do our Trembling Enthusiasts too, follow their leaders steps here,
in a sanctimonious pride by a supercilious purity presuming to reform the
world, and new model it, again: That saint themselves Stylo novo, and with
the Pharisee not only thank but tell God plainly, they are not as other men:
That raylingly proclaim themselves the great light of the world, and in a
pious Lunacy would new gospel it again, extravagantly proscribing all
religions but their own. These melancholy Pretenders seclude themselves from
others, and by a sullen devotion, are become so strangely divine, that they
have almost lost their humanity.

So that if the Pharisee was not as other men, yet these are as like the
Pharisee as may be, having so exactly learnt both his nature and religion.

So natural is it for us, O Lord, to be deluded even in our best Performances;
and (whilst we vainly think our selves not only better then others, but good
enough, in Thy Sight) to be carried into presumption. It Is humility crowns all
our Graces and puts a Beauty on our requests, whilst the confidence of our own
merits does not only deforme but seclude us from thee.

Teach us therefore with such gratitude to use thy gifts, that we become not
forgetful of our selves or Thee. Whilst others Pride themselves in a
meritorious supererogation, let us endeavor humbly to confess and bewail our
imperfections. Let not a spiritual Pride seize upon our souls, so shall we be
innocent from the Great Transgression.

Romans Chap. 6. v. 21. For the end of those things is death.


WHo then would propose that for his happiness which shall perish with
himself, whose end is not only death but hell, and will destroy him not only
now but hereafter too. Indeed, were there no hope that our remains should
revive again, or the ruins of our frame rise up to a finer shape, we might well
drown our selves in enjoyments here, and fix our felicity in pleasures. Every
man might then without sin become an Epicure, and he that could invent new
fashions of luxury, would not only be more ingenious but more fortunate too.
Morality, would be all vice, and yet vice it self no more a crime but our
felicity: not to be extravagant then, were a sin against nature, and he that is
most Brutish would be most Rational. Law would then become an enemy to
Humanity, there could be no society but in confusion; and in spite of policy
(were there no heaven no hell) we should pleasantly mingle to a chaos, and obey
no other discipline then that of riot. Every one might then turn Atheist
without scandal; to be without God in the world would be no misfortune; every
man might be his own without blasphemy.

Could they that live, dye like Brutes too, and revive no more, the comfort of
not being damned would be greater then the sweets of sin. But alas, he that
dies now must live again that his life may be rememberd; nor yet is it so much
the fear of Death as the horrors of a guilty conscence, the terrible presages
of a future eternity that scares the departing soul: The pangs of expiring
nature are nothing to those stings; the memory of our crimes bring with them.
The sorrows of the Grave and our being here no more for ever, are joys to the
miseries that are to come.

Tell me thou that hug'st the world then, and gropest for paradise in a grove
of sins: thou that make earth thy treasure, and wrap'st up the riches of thy
hopes in time's bosom or the enclosure of a span: when those bright and nimble
guides of life, thy eyes, shall grow weak with age, or weary with pain; when
every limb shall become an object of sorrow; and those parts that were so
officiously employed in sin, shall become instruments of despair. When that
delicious frame, that darling edifice, thy Body, shall by its tottering qualmes
and trembling convulsions affrighten its disconsolate owner, how will the
flashes of a future justice and the terrors of thy end confound thee!

Can those enjoyments that flattered away thy soul restore it now? can those
pleasures that stole heaven from thee recover it again? can thy vanities
assuage thy sorrows or the memory of thy sins the misery of thy end?

Where Is that music whose aires, like David's harp, might charm the cries of
conscience, and by its strains drop a harmony that might still the trouble of
thy anguisht soul?

Where are those trophies, thy ambition purchased at the easy rate as only
sinning for that Honor, for which thou have sold heaven? that sovereignty for
which thou becamst a slave thy self and lost the freedom of thy soul? Cannot
all thy Greatness raise thee up a little, and by a power once so much feared
and applauded reprieve thee from the grave or a more eternal prison?

Where are those treasures thou soldest thy best inheritance for, whose
ravishing splendours took away thy sight and made thee blinder then themselves?
Can they neither bribe nor buy thy pardon? or will the grave know no other fee
then so rich a misery?

Where are all those diversions that robbed thee of thy piety, and the thoughts
of thy Maker? those pleasing vanities that took away all sense of heaven and
foresight of thy end? Are all vanished to a toomb and an unwelcome period? are
all thy jollities terminated in a Coffin, and no other object left to keep thee
company but thy Crimes, and those terrors thy guilt presents?

Behold now then, ye Lovers of the world more then of God, and see the picture
of your end, those ruins you have so smoothly built on. Try if all your
imaginary felicities are proof against this shaft, or can secure you from this
intruder, the single Conqueror of the world, whose very prison is but a
reserve for a worse, and its execution here but a repriefe for a more lasting
and yet living death. He that lived in pleasures, must live in flames, and
having revell'd it in sin, riot it in tortures; and the misery is, that wishing
not to live, he can never die.

And yet how vain are our desires still after the world, O Lord? how soon, how
smoothly are we led by the false and transitory pleasures of this life from
Thee? The wages of sin is death, and yet how foolishly do we prefer its
service before thine, whose reward is life? The end of profaneness is eternal
ruin, and the pleasures of impiety period in confusion; and yet we sadly
embrace the proffers of sin, before the promises of thy glory. Pity, O Lord,
the frailties of our natures, and forgive the irregularities of our lives: fill
us with noble desires after Thee, that the vanities of the world may be our
scorn, and thy Glory only our Ambition; that we may not for a present
enjoyment in this life, lose the hopes and inheritance of a better.

Luke Chap. 15. v. 10. There is joy in the presence of the Angels of God, over
one sinner that repents.


SO great are the Concernments of an immortal Soul, that it is recovery from
the world sets heaven in a triumph; and it is return to it is Maker is welcomed
back in Quires: the angels sing his recantation, and rejoice as if they
themselves were made happier by his conversion.

And yet is not the joy of Angels greater then that of the soul it self: when
it has found and regained it is Maker, its sighs are turned into songs, and it is
tears to raptures: each drop is not only counted and kept up, but turned into
a stream of joy. His sorrows are turned to consolation, his troubles into
peace, and the storms of conscience into calmes of love.

Such are the fruits of a holy penitence, the happiness of a religious
contrition. He that went mourning all the day, and turned Anchoret for grief;
whose life was a torment and the grave his fear, that desired not to live and
yet was afraid to die, is now transformed into sweeter passions, and breathes
nothing but the praises of his Deliverer.

See with what indignation he looks upon the world, whose embraces had so long
imprisoned him, to whose false allurements, he had been so much a servant.
Those pleasant trifles he once admired are now his contempt, and those shadows
of felicity he once so much pursued he has now exchanged for more celestial
enjoyments and enduring pleasures.

And indeed, Who that has once truly tasted heaven can well relish the world
again? whose choicest feasts are worse then an Egyptian diet to this Manna,
and its largest road of pleasure but a precipice to that way whose narrowest
path carries freedom and felicity. He that has once found the goodness of
his Maker, and those joys that flow from his service, will sacrifice himself
in pious resolves; and grieving that he was so long a stranger to his law, all
transported beg both pardon and support.

Tell me, who can character the pleasures of this new birth, the joys of a
converted soul restored to heaven and his maker? He that feels it can express
it but in raptures, and silent signs, the echoes of his heart. Even the
Angels here can sing it only, not describe it; and in Seraphick consorts give
us notice, not a copy, of it.

Thus the heavens become harmonious, and the frame of nature that groaned under
the disorder of man's sin, is again revived and set in tune by pardon. And no
wonder if the creation feel a silent music in it is limbs, when the Lord our
Maker is not only the Author, but a partner in this triumph proclaming even
his delight in such happy renovations, and that he is best pleased when sinners
fly to the refuges of his mercy, and humbly beg the riches of that Grace and
favor, which he only can give, and which he never refuses to them that seek
him.

So infinitely good art thou, O Lord, that thou do not only invite but bring
us to thy self; and not only call but cause us to return. We know thou
desire not the the death of a sinner, having so freely sacrificed thy Son for
sin; and that thou delightest in pardoning it, for thou have proclaimed thy
self so. Though thou did not spare thine Angels when they fell, yet in the
riches of thy mercy thou have contrived a Redemption for our souls, even by the
blood of Jesus. Fill us with perpetual adorations of thy love, that thy
goodness which is so ready to pardon sin, may encourage us to beg it; and to
continue constant waiters on thee in thy worship here, till we are made
companions of those blessed spirits hereafter that rejoice in the recovery and
salvation of a sinner.

Matthew. c. 6. v. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his,
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you.


AND He that loved his Savior would, no Question, do it: but alas, that which
ought to be the first is scarce the last of our thoughts, the least and worst
of our performances.

Such Lovers are we of Heaven that we think it no sin to serve our selves
first, and make our Creator wait the leisure of our Devotion. Miserable
Creatures, whose Religion reaches no higher then their bodies, for whose very
Superfluities we study to provide, whilst our Brighter part lies all naked and
unthought of. Such Strangers are we even to our own Souls, so insensible of
the joys to come, that we look no higher then the World, and in sphearing all
our hopes within Mortality as if we had nothing durable beyond our breath,
suffer Eternity to be forgotten. We cannot live without our Maker, and yet how
do our lives neglect Him? how eager, how ambitious after an enjoyment here,
but carry not the smallest passion for his Glory. The jollities of the World
swallow up all thoughts of Heaven, and in the pleasures of sense we can drown
Immortality.

What is that we sacrifice our selves to, but the hopes of a felicity? The very
Pagans rather then want a Bliss would fancy one in lovely shades, and place
the triumphs of immortality in those amorous walks, their Ghosts should revell
in. And who can hope for Heaven that neglects it, or expect the joys of this
Kingdom that looks not after it? Without Holiness no man shall see God, and
he cannot be Master of much Sanctity that profanely loses himself in sin,
and is a Stranger to that piety which can truly Enrich Him beyond all the
treasures of the most splendid and fortunate transgression. How miserable are
they then whose pleasures only divert them from their Maker, and have no other
Apology for their neglect of Heaven, than what sin can make; that Court the
World, and for a fading embrace exchange a Diadem of Bliss, a Crown of Life.
Were the whole World turn d into a Seraglio of delight, and every region to an
Arabia; could every field become a Paradise, and every object we meet, bring a
Magazine of pleasure with it; had we all the enjoyments this Life can triumph
in; yet we should quickly find them, without God, but miserable fruitions. Is
there any thing dearer then our lives, and yet even these are of no value in
respect of a better: the very exigencies of Nature are trifles to the
concernments of our Souls. It is better to starve, then dye for ever and lose
God; it is better to go naked then not to be clothed with immortality; it is
better we should want here, then hereafter that fulness which knows none.

And yet, How many are there that had rather lose Heaven then the World, pawn
their Consciences sooner then want, and for a fortune sell away their very
Christianity. How many make sin their study, and think it a credit to invent
new methods of impiety; and are such careful providers for Eternity, that they
will be laboriously wicked; and for a profitable iniquity think it no loss to
be thrivingly damned. Are there not nobler ways of living then by losing our
names and Souls at once? Is infidelity a preservative against misery? and must
we build our supports on the ruins of our faith? Piety makes no man poorer,
nor does religion rob us of our enjoyments but makes them sweeter. Our
contentments are not lessened but enlarged and lengthned by adoring the Giver,
nor is he the further from, but the nearer to a blessing, that begins with
Heaven, and preferres his Savior before the World. Designs thus founded are
not ever unfortunate, and he that plots for his Soul as well as his body, shall
learn a policy will bafle the World, and nonplus its wisest Generations; when
after all his losses he shall find a reward richer then all the revenues of
the Earth together.

And yet so insensible are we O Lord, both of thy Glory and our own felicity
that we can entertain any thing with more pleasure then the thoughts of an
eternity, we can spend the allowance of our time in sin, and sacrifice even all
our years to vice; but count a moment too long, too much to be employed in thy
service: we can dwell and drown our selves in pleasures, and think a few spare
minutes a fair gift of time for our devotion. The treasures of the world are a
poor gain for the Morgage of a Soul, and the loss of thy favor; even the
richest enjoyments of this life, are but wretched contentments without Thee. Do
thou therefore elevate our Souls, and withdraw them from these beggarly
elements to purer and more celestial addresses: let thy Kingdom be, not our
refuge only but our choice; and the perfect resolution of our souls to despise
the flatteries of the world, for that glory which nothing but our sins can
deprive us of: And as thou have made us for thy self, O Lord, enable us to
continue so, that as we have received all that we have from thy bounty, we may
sacrifice all our desires to thy glory: knowing that as nothing in this life
can make us happy without thee, so nothing can make him miserable that has Thy
Kingdom for his Inheritance.

A Prayer.
O Lord, who inhabitest Eternity; Thou art Exalted above all Principalities and
powers, Saints and Seraphims are ravished with thy Glory, Angels and Archangels
adore thy Greatness, Holiness and Honor wait upon Thy Throne, the Scepter
of thy Kingdom is an everlasting Scepter, Thou love Righteousness and
hate iniquity; and therefore they that come before Thee must worship Thee in
Spirit and in Truth, if they would be either heard or received of Thee: We
confess, we are not worthy to appear in Thy Presence, that can present unto
Thee no other offering, than Sinful and deformed Souls, which deserve no
longer to be accounted thine; having lost that purity and likeness which made
them so.

We are not worthy to receive any more tenders of Mercy that have so often
despised it, nor to see what is the riches of thy Love, that have so unworthily
preferred the trifles of this Life before the treasures of thy Grace. Thou
made it the end of our Creation, that we should Glorify Thee; but we, of all
thy Creatures, have least performed it. That time which we should have employed
in adorning and devoting our lives to thy Worship (which is our most rational
and religious service) have we Sacrificed to sin, and the pleasures of the
World.

Thou art so infinitely Good, that thou desire but unfaigned Sorrow for sin
to excuse it; and yet so miserable and deeply guilty are we, that we cannot
bring so much as humble and contrite Spirits to plead for our selves. Thou
did so love the World, that Thou sentest thy Son to dye for it: But we have
so loved the World, that we have despised Heaven and our Savior, rejected the
Holy One whom. Thou have sent, and by our unworthy lives dishonored that happy
Name, whereby we are called Thine, and entitled to thy Kingdom.

But though our sins cry aloud for punishment, yet the voice of thine own
mercy, and Our Saviors blood, begs more powerfully for Pardon. O Let His
Sufferings be our reconciliation, his punishment for sin our freedom from it;
let the bitterness of thy wrath on Him, be turned into the sweetness of thy
love to us, that his cross may be our triumph, and the merits of his passion
the purchase of our peace; and grant that having obtained mercy, we may walk
accordingly; that being bought for heaven, we may no more sell our selves to
sin, nor prefer a few moments of pleasure before an eternity of joy.

Make us to consider those Divine ties that bind us to serve Thee, the infinite
and abundant testimonies of thy love which invite our gratitude, and that
happiness which is the reward of them that seek Thee: O let not the motions of
sin be more powerful in us than the obligations of thy grace, nor the
pleasures of this life of more value to us than the joys that are to come. But
make us to walk cheerfully in that way which thou have set before us, that our
temptations may but strengthen us more; that neither the crosses nor yet the
pleasures of this life may be able to deject or drown our piety; but that in
whatsoever condition we are, we may be still found crowned and triumphing in
faith.

O thou infinite Goodness, teach us to a door Thee with our whole heart, and to
conform our lives unto thy law with a perfect constancy. Make us to consider
that exceeding weight of glory which thou have promised to those that strive to
conquer the world for thy sake. O let those joys which are so much above our
thoughts be ever in them; let our inability to comprehend the happiness of thy
kingdom, heighten the piety of our Ambition after it more: that the greater
thy goodness is, the greater may our desire after it be, the greater thy love
the greater our obedience, and the lesser our deserts the greater our humility.

Make us to see the little use, but the great vanity of this world, that so the
pleasures of it may not steal away our hearts from the contemplation of a
better; but that our lives may be a perfect and perpetual sacrifice of
obedience, ever pleasing in thy eyes. O let thy service be ever most
delightful to us, that we may labor to improove our selves before Thee, by
our inward and only desires after thee; that whatever defects attend our
actions this may be inseparable in us, even to fear thy name. That so leading
holy lives here, we may lead happy and heavenly lives hereafter, and being
filled with Righteousness, we may be filled with glory and possess joys
unspeakable for evermore.

A Poenitentiall Prayer.
THe flesh evermore rebelleth against the spirit in me, O my God; and the
infirmities of my nature are too strong for me of my self to conquer. Behold
how my frailties fight against my soul, and have wounded me before thee. O
shall my sins be stronger then thy grace, and the errors of my life more
powerful then thy law? The pious incense of a contrite spirit is a sacrifice
thou do not usally despise; and O that I could exhale my self in showers,
and drop away my soul in tears, that my iniquities could fly away in sighs,
and the guilt of my life be wiped off in religious streams. Pity my
irregularities, O Lord, and forgive my crimes: how long shall I groan under the
bondage of sin, and weary thee too with the burden of my corruptions. Thou
delight'st to pardon sin, and shall mine remain? Thou desire not the death
of thy creatures, and shall I be forsaken? I cannot live without Thee nor enjoy
the comfort of my very being till thou revive me: it is better I had not been,
than that I should lose Thee; and it is better I should be no more for ever,
then not regain and find Thee. Return, O thou comfort of my soul, and fill me
with thy love. Purge the stains and wash away the blemishes of my life by thine
own blood, renew and quicken my spirit with the joys of Thine. Sanctify my
will with a pleasing obedience unto thine, let the merits of my Savior's
righteousness beautify my soul, clothing me with innocence and purity of
heart here, and everlasting immortality in thy kingdom hereafter.

A Prayer of Thanksgiving.
MY dear and glorious Maker, what shall I render unto Thee for all thy
mercies? There has not a moment of my life past by, without being made happy
to me by some token of thy love. Thou did purify my birth by Baptism, I was
no sooner come into the world but thou did seal me for Heaven, taking away
the guilt which no innocence but that of Jesus could conceal or pardon; and
abolishing those characters of sin and death, which were so inseparably
imprinted on my nature, that no law but that of thy spirit could wipe away; and
having brought me into the bosom of thine own Spouse, and placed me amongst
thy children, have fed me with continual mercies and means of grace: that I
might see there has been no defect in thy goodness, but my acknowledgments,
nor in thy promises but my performances. And indeed, my God, I cannot look
upon these obligations without horror for my ingratitude, nor remember these
precious testimonies of thy love without a religious confusion of soul for my
great neglect and forgetfullnesse of thee. Nor can I plead an excuse in the
weakness of nature only, for those sins I have been too willing a comitter
of. And yet my God, behold how thou have loved me, sending thy son to reconcile
me to thy self, that I might find access unto thy Throne, and inherit the
joys of thy kingdom. Behold how thou have loved me in reprieving me from that
wrath my sins have long ago deserved, and as if thou did not or would not
take notice of my crimes, have made me an object of thy care and an example of
thy love, abounding in perpetual dispensations of mercy to my soul. I will
therefore sacrifice my self, O Lord, in praises to thy name, and in the memory
of thy goodness keep an everlasting Jubilee in my soul, thou have shown me the
way unto thy Self and that in Thee only are hid all the treasures of my
happiness. I will be no longer then a servant to the world, and bestow the
nobler addresses of my soul on perishing and empty nothings; and for a poor
fugitive drop here below, lose Thee the ocean of bliss and glory. And that I
may despise the flatteries of the world, O Lord, do thou inspire me with
desires after Thee only, and enable me to do something for thy sake, who have
don so much to make me happy; that so my life may be a sacrifice of obedience
ever pleasing in thy eyes.

The Index.
Meditations on Eccles. 12. v. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
Youth. Fol. 1. Genesis 12. v. 8. And the Lord God Planted a Garden Eastward in
Eden. 5 1 Kings 10. v. 18. Moreover the King made a great throne of Ivory, and
over-laid it with the best Gold. 9. 1 Kings 19.9. And He came thither unto a
Cave, and lodged there. 11 Job 11.10. In all this, did not Job sin with his
Lips. 14 Canticles 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon, and the Lilly of the Valleys.
17 Genesis 28.12. And he dreamed, and behold a Ladder set upon the Earth, etc. 19
Prove. 18.14. But a wounded Spirit who can bear? 23 Eccles. 12.13. Fear God
and keep his Commandments, etc. 27 Luke 10.25. And a certain Lawyer stood up
and Tempted him, saying, Master, What shall I do, etc. 31 Matthew. 15.28. And He
said unto her, O woman great is thy faith. 35 Joh. 20.11. And she stooped down,
and looked into the sepulcher. 39 John 11.35. Jesus wept. 42 Joh. 12.2. But
Lazarus was one of those that sat at the Table with Him. 45 Joh. 13.23. Now
there was Leaning on Jesus Bosom, one of his Disciples whom Jesus, loved. 48
Matthew. 16.26. For what is a man profited, if he gain the whole world, and
lose, etc. 51 Matthew. 5. v. 8. Blessed are the Pure in heart, for they shall see
God. 56 Matthew. 8.2. Lord if thou will, Thou can make me clean. 60 Matthew.
24.39. And knew not, until the flood came and took them all away. 64 Luke 7.5.
For He Loved our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. 67 Luke 9.57. Lord I
will follow Thee wheresoever Thou go. 71 Matthew. 9.38. Pray ye therefore the
Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth more laborers into his Harvest.
75 Matthew. 2.10. And when they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding, etc.
78 Philip. 4.12. I know both how to abound and to suffer need. 81 Luke. 19.9.
This day, is Salvation come to this house. 85 Matthew. 13.43. Then shall the
Righteous shine forth as the Sun, etc. 89 Luke 18.11. The Pharisee stood up and
prayed thus, God I thank thee, etc. 93 Romans c. 6. v. 21. For the end of those
things is Death. 96 Luke c. 15. v. 10. There is joy in the presence of the
Angels of God, over one sinner that repents. 101 Matthew. c. 6. v. 33. But
seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. 104
A Prayer. 111 A Penitential Prayer. 114 A Prayer of Thanksgiving. 119


FINIS.

