Good Tidings for SINNERS, Great Joy for SAINTS;

OR, A Word to the World, and two to those that are chosen out of the WORLD.

Wherein is held forth, First, the sweet tenders of grace from the Father
through the Son to all dejected Sinners; he Invites them, he Woes them, he
Entreats them, nay, he beseeches them to accept of mercy.

IN The second part of this Book, called, Two words to those chosen out of the
World, is spoken to the Saints under their several Forms, taking notice first
of the things commendable in them: and in the second place reproving them for
things amiss among them.

With a short Prophecy of the downfall of Presbytery, Independencie,
Anabaptismie, Vain Notions, Free Will.


With a brief description of a true Church State, against which the gates of
Hell shall not prevail; it being founded upon a rock, it will stand against
all Waves and Storms, that either Men or Devils can raise against it.

I will give you all one heart, and one way.
Then the Lord shall be one, and his name one.
Robert Purnell. Printed at London for Giles Calvers, and are to be sold at
the Black-spread Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1649.

To the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I shall in few words give thee a just account, why I have
written this little Book In these latter days many books are published, some
good and wholesome: but few to ends not carnal; for with every man is
imperfection more or less, I must own it also. Yet I faithfully profess, that
had my own credit or advantage been my inducement hereunto, these thoughts had
been buried in the womb; because I know, I could reap no such fruit; or if I
did, it were but vanity. He that gave me my being, has given me a command to
learn of him; not only to love his people, but also to love his enemies,
Matthew. 5.44.

God having kindled in me, a love to you both Saints and Sinners; I have here
written a word to the one, and two words to the other: Romans 1.14. I am debtor
to the Greek, and to the Barbarian, both to the wise, and to the unwise:

And to thee fellow sinner, is the first word; because I see many of those that
undertake to teach thee, shutting the door of the kingdom against thee; and
instead of the Gospel of Christ, they preach to thee Moses, at least Elias; and
that in the letter. The things I lay before thee, and commend unto thee; are
such, and only such, as I my self have past through, and found abundance of
comfort in: And looking upon that place 2 Corinthians. 1.4. I find it my duty to
endeavor to comfort others with the same comfort wherewith I my self have
been comforted of God.

Expect not hear a pleasing method, sugard words, nor scholasticall
expressions; for that savours more of the wisdom of man than of God. Though it
be not scholastic yet if thou find it authentic; let it have acceptance
with thee. First read, and then judge of what I have said; and the Lord that
has power, give thee understanding in all things.

In the first part of this ^o^k called, A Word to the World, is held forth in
few words; the sweet tenders of grace from the Father through the son, to the
poor dejected Sinners; wherein God (...), woes, and entreates them to be
reconciled to himself. He ^^swers all the Objections that lie in the way, he
uses very strong and powerful arguments: He not only says but swears, he
delights not in the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11.

In the second part of this Book called, Two Words to those chosen out of the
World; I my self having had communion with the Sain^s in each of those forms,
more or less* their principles and practices I have in some measure weighed,
examined, and tried with an unbyassed affection: And I find among all these
(except those in this book excepted) many excellent, sweet, and sound truths,
both in Doctrine and Discipline, Principle and Practice, worthy not only of
commendation, but also of our imitation.

But notwithstanding, there are many things that savor more of the flesh than
of the spirit among all these Assemblies, which are rather of man's invention
than of Gods institution: as their knowing Christ and Saints after the flesh;
crying, Lo here, lo there is Christ; and most in a sense building upon the
Sand. Wherefore I have here Prophesied of their fall, in which I mean not that
they shall be without Church Order; but they shall have Pastors and Teachers,
Elders and Deacons, Helps and Governments. But the ground of this communion
shall be spiritual union: and when this day is dawned, and this day star risen
in our hearts, Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim;
Presbyterians shall not so bitterly cry out against Independents, nor
Independents have such hard thoughts of the Presbyterians. Yea, they will be
ashamed to own one another by these fleshly titles; but look upon and love one
another as Christians, members of the same body, heirs of the same Promise,
children of the same father: having all the same spirit, all clothed with the
same robe, inclined to the same work; ruled by the same Word and Spirit. And so
their love to each other shall arise from the Union in the Spirit. And against
this Church State the gates of hell shall not prevail.

A WORD TO THE WORLD.
THat Sin had its first entrance into the World by Adam, we all know; What sin
is in it own nature, most of us do know; But that sin is clearly taken away by
the second Adam, Christ Jesus, that, very few do know.

Poor sinner, why do thou lie groaning, come along with me, and hear Christ
thy Lord speaking to thee.

Quest. What is that that does so trouble thee?

Answ. Oh! my sins, my sin.

Quest. What is sin?

Answ. The breach of a command, or the transgression of a law.

Chr. Though thou have broken this law, yet consider, that there is one to be
found, that has kept it; first, in thy nature: secondly, for thee, and imputes
the keeping of it to thee, as really, as if thou had fulfilled it thy self;
Art thou a sinner? Christ says, He came to call sinners, and why not thee?

Sinner, Oh, but I am one of the greatest of sinners.

Chr. Yet consider what the Lord says in these Scriptures, Joh. 1.29 Behold
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World. 3. Joh. 16. God so
loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son, to take away the sins of
the world. 1 Timothy 1.15. He came into the world to sinners, of whom I am chief.

Object. Oh, but though he came to save sinners, it is a question, whether he
died for all sinners, and therefore I question, whether he came to call me, or
to take away my sins, I see no ground why I should believe; nay, I cannot
believe, Faith is too high a thing for me to attain unto.

Answ. But consider, God is the alone worker of it, Heb. 12.2. And when thou
look upon Faith, and see it too hard a thing for thee; yet consider that
nothing is too hard for God, who has undertaken to work it.

Ob. It I could see a promise wherein God had promised to work it, that were
something.

Quest. What art thou? A Jew or a Gentile, Scythian or Barbarian?

Ans. I am a Gentile, a sinner.

Chr. Thou these are promises for thee, see Matt. 12.21. Romans 15.12. In him
shall the Gentiles trust, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

Sin. But all Gentiles do not, neither shall they believe; therefore if I
could see my name written in Scripture, and a promise made to me in reference
to that name, then there were hope indeed.

Chr. Thou art just like Thomas, Joh. 20.25. Except I shall see in his hands
the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side; I will not believe:
Well, says Christ, thou shall see the print of the nails, reach hither thine
hand, etc. Will thou see thy name inscripture indeed?

Sin. Yea, with all my heart, But I fear it is not there.

Chr. Why do thou doubt? all things are possible to him that believes: will thou see thy name? Then what is thy state? How is it with thee?

Sin. My state is miserable, I am full of blindenes and ignorance, and can
understand nothing in a spiritual way.

Chr. Here is thy name then recorded, Isa. 50.10. Who so walks in darkness and
sees no light, let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon God.

Sin. But I am dead almost, my heart and my flesh do fail me.

Chr. Why, can thou read the beginning of the verse ( with David) and not the
latter end of it, and God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever:
Psalm. 7^.26.

Sin. But I am weak (faith another poor soul) where is my name?

Chr. The weak shall be as David, there is thy name.

Sin. But says another distressed soul, I am quite dead; where is my name?

Chr. Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and
Christ shall give thee light: There is thy name.

Sin. But I have not ears to hear Christ voice, nor strength to arise; if I
could hear.

Chr. But Christ can give strength with his voice, as to Lazarus, come forth,
and he came forth.

Sin. Here is comfort for these indeed; But oh! that you could show me my name,
in scripture, and God speaking to me by name; Then I should believe and rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory.

Chr. Well: What is thy name?

Sin. Rebel; That is my name; for I have rebelled against the Lord ever since
I was born; I have lived in a continual breach of every command.

Chr. Yet behold thy name, Psalm. 68.18. Christ has received gifts for men;
yea, for the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them: Read thy
name in every promise, endeavor to see thy name enrolled in the book of Life,
where all the Devils in Hell, and all the wicked men in the world can never
blot it out.

Sin. Oh! says another poor distressed soul, I have no mind, nor heart to
seek after God, Where is my name?

Chr. Isa 65.1. I am found of them that sought me not, There is thy name:
though thou will not seek for him, yet he will seek and find thee.

Sin. But I cannot believe; Where is my name, says another?

Chr. 2 Timothy 2 13. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny
himself.

Sin. But I have called and cried for mercy, and that often, yet God would not
answer me: Where is my name?

2. Says another, others have prayed for me, and the Lord gave them an answer;
he was not sent to save me: Where is my name?

3. A third poor soul steps in, and says, I spoke with the Lord, as it were,
and he told me, I was a Dog; and that Dogs have nothing to do with Childrens
bread; oh, where is my name?

Chr. Will you see all your three names together?

Sin. Oh that it might be so, faith the troubled soul.

Chr. Then read and well consider that 15. Matt. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
And behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him,
saying; have mercy on me O Lord, thou son of David: But he answered her not a
word: There was the first step of his denial.

Secondly, His Disciples came and besought him, saying, send her away, for she
cries after us. But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost
sheep of the house Israel. There is the second branch of his denial.

Thirdly. Then came she, and worshipped him saying: Lord help me, But he
answered and said, it is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast it to
dogs: There is the third branch of his denial.

And she said, truth Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from their
Masters table: Then Jesus answered and said unto her; o woman, great is thy
faith; be it unto thee even as thou will.

Oh the unsearchable love of a tender father, to a prodigal Son!

To sum up all in a word; Search diligently in what state thou stand,
examine well thy present condition what it is: and when thou have found out the
true temper of thy soul; that thou can truly say, thus and thus it is with
me: Then search the Scriptures, for they were written for thy learning; and
thou shall find upon serious consideration, that some one or other of the
Saints (gone before the) has been in the same condition, and yet has found
mercy: Then thou will break forth with Paul, and say, There is no tentation
has befaln me, but such as is common to all men, and the Lord will deliver
me. 1 Cor. 10 13. etc. Are thy sins so many that thou can not look up! so it
was with that precious saint, David, Psalm. 40.12. Psalm. 38.4.

Dear friend, who ever thou art that read these words, let me tell thee, I
speak by experience; I have been in so sad a condition, even as it were in
despair: And when I have read or heard these words, that such and such of the
Lords own children, were in the same condition; my heart has begun to revive
and say, well: The Lord has dealt no otherwise with me, than he has with such
a Saint left upon record: now I see, I am not alone in this heavines, I cannot
now say; Was ever sorrow like unto my sorrow. Lam. 1.12. But I can now say with
Jeremiah, Lam. 3 32. Though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion,
according to the multitude of his mercies. I remember that sweet place of
Scripture: 2 Cor. 1 3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, who comfort us in
all our tribulations, that (says he) we may be able to comfort them that be in
trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

Here by the way we may take notice, that it is a duty well becoming the
Saints, to endeavor as instruments in Gods hands, to comfort others with the
same comforts, wherewith the Lord has comforted them, Come ( says David) I
will tell thee what the Lord has done for my soul.

Again: Oh thou drooping sinner, listen a little unto the voice of Christ, and
thou shall hear him calling to thee and saying, Come come unto me all ye
that be weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. He calls thee, he
invites thee, he entreates thee, he beseeches thee to come in, and to be
reconciled unto the Lord thy God. See and consider well that Scripture 2. Cor.
5 20. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you
by us, we pray you in Christ stead be you reconciled unto God, you see he is
willing to have sinners reconciled to him, and that he does manifest, by many
demonstrations, or evidences.

First, His patience toward thee all this while, he is long suffering, not
willing that any should perish 2 Pet. 3 9. Romans 2.4. The goodness of God, or
the patience of God does (or should) lead thee to repentance.

Secondly, He does manifest his willingness, in that he has made this the
masterpiece of all his works, to provide a Savior for us: in sending his Son,
and making him a curse for us, in this great work the Lord does proclaim to
all the world, Oh all you people of the world, if I had not been willing to
be reconciled to you, or rather, to have you reconciled to me, (as I have for
ever been) I would never have sent my dearest Son from the bosom of my
love, to die for you. So that this is the greatest work; all my other works
are subordinate to this. In this was the love of God manifested to us, that he
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we should live through him,
1 John 4.9.

Thirdly, The Lord does profess this to the people, That there is no one thing
wherein he does more glory, than to show mercy to poor sinners, yea to his
enemies. Micah 7.18. He delighteh in mercy. Exodus 34. The Lords glory passed
by, and what was that? The Lord, the Lord, most merciful and gracious, long
suffering etc. Pardoning iniquity, transgressions and sin. Here is my glory.
Hence it is expressed, Isa. 30.18. Therefore will the Lord wait that he may be
gracious, and therefore will he be exalted that he may have mercy upon you.
So then, the Lord does account himself, an exalted God, when he has brought
in a sinner to accept of mercy.

Fourthly, The Lord does express his willingness even with a sigh (as it
were) which does much denote his willingness, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Oh that there were
such an heart in them, that they would fear, my Name and keep my Commands,
and that for one good too, for so the words follow, that it might be well with
them, and with their children for ever. Now these people had said before,
whatsoever the Lord has spoken we will do. Oh that there were such an heart
in them (says the Lord.)

Fifthly, The Lord does express his willingness with an oath too, and that,
the greatest that ever he took; That sinners shall not dye. Ezekiel. 33.10, 11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your
evil ways, for why will you die, oh house of Israel etc.

Sixthly, God does manifest his willingness in this; that above all other
works, this work of believing on him, is most pleasing to him, and our not
believing, is the greatest offense that we can give to God, Joh. 6.29. This is
the work of God, that you believe on him whom he has sent, as if the Lord had
said, This does please me better than any other work, Let a poor soul come
in, and roll himself upon the love of God in Christ, for reconciliation. This
is a more glorious work, than the conquering of a whole world; If you give all
your goods to the poor, and your bodies to be burnt, all is nothing if this be
wanting. Joh. 3.19. This is condemnation that light is come unto the world, and
men love darkness more then light. In a word, bind all your sins together
in a bundle, (except this sin of unbelief) and put them in a balance
together, And put this sin of unbelief in the other balance, you shall find
that unbelief will weigh down all the rest, and from this unbelief, as the
root, springs all other evils, as the branches.

Seventhly, Consider further, God does seek to sinners first: Therefore it is
said, The Lord Christ came to seek and to save them that were lost. Isa.
45.22. Look unto me and be you saved all ye ends of the earth, the Spirit and
the Bride say come, and let him that is a thirst come and take of the waters of
life freely.

Eighthly, Consider, the Lord sends forth his grace to allure thee and to entice
thee, a sinner, to come to him, He does with cords of love draw the heart to
come, He sends forth his mercy to stand before the soul, and tender its
service (as it were) to the sinful soul, Hosea 2.14. Therefore will I allure
them says the Lord. There was a great breach between this people and God, as
you may see at large in this chapter, And yet says the Lord I will allure them
Hosea 11.4. I will draw them with the cords of men: with the bands of love.

Ninthly, The Lord is so yielding unto his creatures, that to keep his own
honor and glory he cannot yield further. At first, we are all going astray,
the Lord calls us back. 2. We were going to prison, The Lord steps in, saying,
I will provide a surety. The Covenant of works requires satisfaction, says
the Lord, I am contented to take this, in a surety. We are like a Beggar,
begging an alms of one that passes by, to whom it is answered, I will give
thee oh Beggar that which thou desire, but thou must come and fetch it: I
cannot come says the Beggar, I want legs: I will give thee legs (says the
giver) that thou may come. But says the Beggar, when I am come, I have no
hands to receive that which you will give me: I will give thee hands also. Oh!
But I want wisdom to make use of that gift: I will give thee wisdom says
the Lord. Oh that ever, so glorious a God, should so far stoop and yield to
his poor creatures, as to answer all questions, clear all doubts, and take
away all scruples!

Tenthly, He yet comes nearer to a sinner (as it were) and does profess, that
the greatest sins that ever they have committed against him, shall not hinder
them from coming to him, nor him from pardoning them. Isa. 1.18, Come now and
let us reason together, says the Lord. though your sins be as Scarlet, they
shall be as white as Snow. Oh here the Lord proclaims that all thy sins past
shall be done away, Thy continuance in sin will be thy undoing, if any thing.

Eleventhly, Again Consider, The Lord does in his Word use very powerful
arguments, to draw the heart to be reconciled to him; He does not only offer
mercy, and set it before the soul, but he does labor with strong reasons, and
arguments, and motives, to draw the soul to himself, and does use these
arguments, that will take the heart most. Sometimes he does draw arguments
from his equity. Ezekiel 18.^5. Are not my ways equal says the Lord.
Sometimes from our nec^ssity. Joh. 3.36. He that believes not, the wrath of
God abides on him. Sometimes from the benefit and profit we shall have, if we
do come in; Prove. 1.23. Turn ye at my reproof, and behold I will power out my
Spirit upon you, I will make known my words unto you. Oh blessed promise! one
would think, this should break the heart of Devils; as if the Lord had said,
well, though thou have been a great sinner, and though thou have rebelled
against me ever since thou wast born; yet if thou will but turn at my reproof,
or say to thy God, Turn us and we shall be turned, (for I must do it) I will
power out my Spirit upon thee, I will give grace and ^^ory, a House, a City, a
Kingdom, Light, Life, and all things: The Lord does seem to out-bid all other
comforts that we have in sin; therefore he does tell us of honey, milk,
raiment, such things as do most take with our hearts, that so he might gain us
to come in and be at one with him. Now I shall appeal to your consciences, that
have felt this in some measure: Does not the Devil come with strong arguments?
The World with the like? And wicked men with strong persuasions? The
corruptions within you with strong motives? And yet does not the Lord out-bid
them all, and so win the Soul to himself.

Twelfth, Consider further, The Lord comes and answers all objections that lie
in the hearts of sinners.

Ob. 1. Says one I am unworthy; I have nothing in me that good is:

Ans. The Lord says, Isa. 55. Come and buy milk and wine without money, and
without price, three times it is spoken in one or two verses. So that God does
set forth his kingdom by milk, wine and bread, things useful for the body;
sometimes by a marriage, sometimes by a supper, wherein are all kinds of
dainties; sometime he does invite them to the supper, and to the marriage of
his Son, and sometimes does compel them to come in. Then the Devil working
with our corrupt nature; does what he can to make the Soul slight the Gospel,
and to look upon the blood of the Covenant as a mean thing: When the soul does
begin indeed to apprehend the greatness and sweetness of the Gospel of glad
tidings, then steps in Satan; What such a one as thou have such mercy? Fellow
sinners; mark the policy of the subtle Devil, he does at first labor to set at
naught the Gospel, accounting it as a mean thing: But when the Lord does shine
through that mist, and show the soul the excellency of his son, and the glory
of the Gospel: Then comes the devil the other way, saying, with thee these be
great things indeed; But thou art vile and base both in thy principles and
practice: and can thou think that God ever intended these things to thee?
What to such a one as thou art; Then the Lord answers for thee, Come without
money and without price, as if he had said, though thou have no ability to do
any thing; yet come I will make thee rich enough; thou have no money (that is
no self righteousness) let not that hinder, Revel. 22.17. The Spirit and the
Bride say come, and let him that bears come, and let him that is a thirst come,
and whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely.

Ob. It may be (says the Soul, though the Lord does require nothing before
hand; yet when I am come he will require hard things of me, I must live so
strictly, and abandon all my pleasures, what? shall I leave all those pleasant
ways, and have nothing but according to the word, and according to conscience;
Then farewell all the comfort and joy of all our life, if we come to this once.

Ans. I appeal to you, whether your hearts have not been kept of by such
things as these. But now (o fellow sinners) mark how Christ does take off these
objections, Matthew. 11. Come unto me and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon
you (and mark what follows) my yoke is easy and my burden light. As if Christ
should say, I will lay no yoke upon you but what is easy, nor any burden but
what is light. And this I affirm, though this may seem to be hard to you at
first; you will find the ways of God more easy than ever you found the ways
of sin: Do but ask them that have any experience of the love of God to them,
and they will tell thee; that they have found more sweetness in one day, in
following of God, than they found in the ways of sin many years: Prove. 3.17.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peaceable paths:
Now if you will believe the spirit of God, you see there is more peace, more
joy, more sweetness, more comfort than ever you had before.

13. Again consider, The Lord does not only use strong arguments, and answer
all objections. But he is importunate too, as first; He does cry out after
sinners; Prove. 1. Wisdom cries in the streets, and so Prove. 9. and Isa. 55.
He does make Proclamation, Ho, every one that thirsts come! He does
importune, and bid come, over and over again, and again; Come, come, come,
three times together: So that God does seek more earnestly to sinners, than
they do to him. It may be thou will seek to God once for a mercy thou want,
and give over; But behold, God calls to thee again and again, come, come, come.

14. If all this will not prevail with sinners to come in, yet the Lord leaves
them not, but appeals to the very Consciences of sinners, and deals with them
that way. If you were in great distress concerning your estate or life, and
you go to a man that has both wisdom and power to help you; and open the case
to him, but cannot prevail: then you bring strong arguments; and they do not
move, then you take away all objections: but yet prevail not; then you
importune him, and urge your arguments again and again; and all this does not
prevail; then you appeal to his own conscience whether you have not spoken
right to him, saying; I will even leave this to your own conscience to judge of
it; and this many times does prevail when nothing else will: even thus (of all
the world) does God deal with sinners and appeals to their own consciences.
Isa. 43.26. Put me in remembrance: let us plead together. Declare thou that
thou may be justified: as if the Lord had said, If thou can declare any
thing why thou do not come, that lies in thy way, I will remove it, and
thou shall be accepted. Ier. 2.5. Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have your
Fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me. Verse 31. Have I been a
barren wilderness to Israel. Ezekiel. 18.25. Hear now o house of Israel, are not
my ways equal? are not your ways unequal? as if the Lord had said, do you
think in your conscience, that these ways that you walk in are right? Is this
equal, that sinners should go on their days and pass their time in sin; and
when they can sin no longer, then to plead for mercy: Is this equal? If this
will not do, the Lord will say, Conscience let him alone; So conscience may be
quiet, but the Lord has left pleading with him.

15. Again, the Lord has many times brake forth into tears to see the
stubbornness of m^ns hearts: O Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc.
if thou had known in this thy day the things that make for thy peace. Now
suppose that Christ should come and weep over a company of poor sinners, as he
did over Jerusalem, saying, o thou sinful soul, had thou known in this thy
day, the things that belong to thy peace, and suppose thou should see one
tear trickling down after another, and he should say; Oh, that this people did
but know the things that belong unto their peace: If thou had a heart of
stone, it could not but melt.

16. The Lord does foresee, what a little honor he shall have of this sinner
when he has brought him home; he sees still that thou will have abundance of
corruption in thy heart, and that thou will grieve his holy Spirit, and walk
very offensively, dishonor the way of Religion, and open the mouths of the
enemies as David; I say, God does foresee, that after he has taken all this
pains to bring thee unto himself, what a little honor he shall have by thee,
and yet he does persuade thee to come: This also does note his willingness to
save thee.

Lastly, consider, that after the Lord our tender Father has used all these
means and many more to bring in sinners; yet he is contented to wait a long
time upon sinners, and to take advantages to win them. Isa. 30.18. The Lord
does wait that he may be gracious unto you. O how many years has the Lord
waited upon me, and thee, and other sinners: How long has he knocked, and yet
we let him stand at the door. O Jerusalem will thou not be made clean, when
shall it once be. Isa. 51.17, 18. I smote him, and he went on frowardly; but I
have seen his ways, and will heal him, and restore comfort to him, and to his
mourners. Though he went on frowardly, I will restore comfort to him.

Now put all this together, and see how infinitely willing God is to save thee,
o thou drowping sinner.

Quest. If any should ask a reason, why God is so importunate and desirous to
draw up sinners to himself?

Answ. 1. The ground of this love is in himself, and I can give no reason of
it, but the same that he has left upon record, Exodus 33.19. I will be gracious
to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy.

2. He does this, because mercy pleases him: Micah. 7.18. I will pardon
because mercy pleases me, says the Lord; Now then, that that does please a
man, he is ever desirous after: The scripture says, He does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men; but he shows mercy willingly,
because he delights in it.

3. The blood of Christ his only son does cry aloud in the ears of the Lord
for mercy; and that obedience of Christ wherewith the Lord is satisfied, is so
well pleasing to him, that whatsoever this blood does plead for, God must needs
grant: Now the blood of Christ, cries mercy, mercy Lord, for sinners; the
blood of Abel cried vengeance, vengeance; but the blood of Christ speaks
better things, and cries pardon, pardon. Nothing in the world can stop the
current of Gods mercy to a people, when it does come to the blood of Christ;
Then says the father of mercies, open all the floodgates now, and let mercy be
showed in the highest degree; seeing the blood of my son cries for this:
though this be wonderful mercy to pardon such a great sinner, there is not a
drop only, but a Sea of mercy, to cleanse thee thoroughly. Come, says the
Lord, let us reason together, though your sins be as scarlet; they shall be as
white as Snow. Isa. 1 18. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions
for my own name sake, and will not remember. thy sins. Isa. 43 25. Put me in
remembrance, says the Lord, put me in remembrance of this my promise, and let
us plead together, says the Lord; Declare these words with thy mouth, that I
have put into thy heart, that thou may be justified. Isa. 43.26.

O thou troubled sinner (for to thee I speak) I mean thee, to whom sin is a but
then; See how our tender father has dealt with our brother prodigal; Luke 15
28. He arose and came to his Father; but when he was yet a great way of, his
Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran, and fell on his neck and
kissed him.

1. Take notice, his father sees him, before he sees his Father. No sooner does
a sinner think of looking toward heaven, but the Lord spies him and pities him.

2. He saw him whiles he was a great way off; he was but in the beginning of
his way to come: his father might have let him alone till he had been come
quite home to his house, and it had been singular mercy to have bid him welcome
then; but it is done whiles he is a great way off. So thou art at a great
distance from the mercy of God in thy apprehension, that is, thou can not
believe, nor scarce hope in his mercy; yet he will draw nigh to thee.

3. The scripture says, his father had compassion on him: I see the Lords
bowels yearn, work, and stir within him at the sight of his son, Jer. 3.20.
Therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him,
says the Lord. Jer. 9.24. I delight in loving kindness, Mich. 7.18. He
pardons because mercy pleases him.

4. It is said, that his father ran: How rich, abundant mercy had it been in
his father, though he had stood still, till his son had come to him: But what
mercy is this? he will go toward him, and give him a meeting; O mercy! that
his father ran not from him; but what mercy call you this, that he runs to him:
Why, would it not have served (if he would needs go meet him) to have walked
toward him with a soft and grave pace? No, no, that will not serve the Lords
turn: if a sinner will but go toward the Lord, mercy will not go a foot-pace,
but runs to meet him; yea, mercy draws him and puts him upon coming at
first-step: The sons pace is, he arose and came he came walking toward his
father; this is the fathers pace he ran; the son most needed to have run, his
belly was pinched with hunger, yet he only walks, but his father runs,
bowels full of mercy outpace bowels pinched with hunger.

5. I see him falling upon his neck, that is, he hugged and embraced him, How?
fall on his neck? Who would not have been loath to have touched him? yea, to
come near him? Is he not in his loathsome stinking rags? Smells he not of the
Swine he kept? Could a man come near him without stopping his Nose? Would not
a man be ready to cast up his Stomach, upon such an embracement? Mercy is not
nice and dainty, will God thus embrace a Prodigal in his loathsome rags? Oh
sinner be encouraged to draw near to God, for the worst of all wickedness and
baseness in the world cannot make him rejct thee. Ezekiel 16.4 5, 6.

6. But yet behold, a greater wonder than all the rest: I see him kissing his
Sorne; who could have brooked to have embraced a person, in so futhy a pickle?
Much less would any one kiss such a one; what kiss those lips that had been
so lately lapping in the Hogs-Trough: Those lips that had so often kissed those
base and beggarly Harlots; Kiss him? A man would rather have thought he would
have kicked him, and yet his Father kisseth him. There is a passage somewhat
like this, Genesis 33.4. And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on
his Neck, and kissed him. A strange and wonderful thing that he that had
threatened to kill him and came now upon that errand to kill him and all his,
That his heart should be so strangely altered by God, that killing should be
turned into kissing: It was very strange that Esau should kiss Jacoh, but it
is more strange here, that this Father should kiss this Prodigal.

Read and consider well these Scriptures.

Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the World.

Luke 2.10.11. Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to
all people. That is, That unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a
Savior which is Christ the Lord.

John 3.16. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, to this
end, that all that believe in him should not perish, but have life everlasting.

John 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but
that the world through him might be saved.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a true saying that Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief.

Heb. 13.12. Jesus that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the Gate.

1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus
Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins and not for ours
only, but also the sins of the whole world.

Rev. 5.8. Thou wast killed and have redeemed us to God out of every kindred,
tongue and people.

Psalm 145.19. He will fulfill the desire of them that fear him.

Zach. 13.1. The Lord has opened a Fountain for sin and for uncleanness.

He every one that thirsts come then. Isaiah 55.1.

Blessed are they that bunger and thirst, for they shall be filled. Math. 5.6.

If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. John 7. ver. 37, 38.

And he that comes to me I will in no wise cast off; oh mark, I will in no
wise cast him off, John 6.37, that is, there is no corruption in thee, nor all
thy enemies without thee, that shall so far prevail with me, as that I
shall forsake thee.

Oh then come unto me, come unto me, all you that are heavy laden, and I will
undoubtedly give you rest.

1. Consider, He that has made these promises, is able to make them good.

2. He is not only able to do it, but he is willing to do it, he delights
in it.

3. He is not only able and willing, but he is faithful too in keeping
promise; In so much that not one title shall fail of all that he has
promised: He never says, Seek ye me in vain.

1. Take notice, the Lord keeps open house, Rev. 22.17. Let him that will,
come and take of the water of life freely.

2. Because of our backwardness to come, he invites, Isa. 55.1. He, every one
that thirsts, come.

3. He answers objections, and takes away all excuses, in these words, come
without money and without price, though thou have not righteousness to commend
thee to me, yet come, without money and without price.

4. He assures thee, thou shall be welcome, John 6.37. Him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast off.

5. He tells thee, that if thou come, thou shall not loose thy labor, He will
give thee rest, Mat. 11.28.

He will give thee rest from thine own righteousness, that thou shall see
thy acceptance in the righteousness of another, and so cease from thine own.
He will give thee rest, that is, he will still those troubles that arise in
thine heart, and take off those veiles from thine eyes, and the bondage that
lay upon thy heart, and show thee that he has set the free from hell, death,
law, sin past, present, and to come, and so gives thee faith, which is the
evidence of things not seen, which will evidence this to thy soul: Thy soul
no sooner apprehends this, but presently it will be ready to break forth in these
words of Mary, Luke 1.46, 47, 48. My Soul does magnify the Lord, my Spirit
has rejoiced in God my Savior: For he has regarded the low estate of his
handmaid etc.

And now to draw to a conclusion (for as I said in the beginning) I have but a
Word to the World. 1 He gives free liberty to come. 2. He invites thee 3. He
will bid thee welcome. 4. He will case thee of all thy troubles.

Object. But thou will say, Hear are indeed sweet rules and blessed promises
amongst these things that you have laid down. But I have no abillity to walk
in the one, nor heart to embrace or believe the other, and I find it written,
Jer. 10.23. The way of man is not in himself, It is not in man that walks to
direct his steps.

Answ. But consider, he requires nothing of thee, but what he has promised
he will enable thee to do. For instance, Isa. 1.16. He requires thee, and
says, wash thee and make thee clean, put away the evil of thy doings, cease
to do evil: Learn to do well. Here is his precept, and thy duty. Now turn
from this precept to that promise, Jer. 3^.8. I will cleanse them from all
their iniquities, whereby they have sinned against me. Now when thou go
about that duty required, and find thy self unable, then look to that same
promise; And in the apprehension thereof, thy soul shall look up, and go
about the work in the strength (not of thy self) but of the mighty God of
grace, who has spoken, and will do it for thee. So for Repentance, He
commands thee to repent. Acts 17.^0. Thou go about it, but find the work
of Repentance (true and unfayned) too hard for thee to perform: Then turn
from this precept to that promise, Acts 5.31. And when thou there see, that
he that has commanded thee to repent, even the God of power, and truth, and
that cannot lie, has engaged himself to enable thee to the performance
thereof, will thou not be encouraged?

Again, He commands thee, not to let sin reign in thee, Romans 6.12. And is not
the promise nigh thee (ver. 14.) that it shall not reign in thee

Object. Thou will say, These promises indeed are made to the Elect, and to
Saints!

Answ. Let that be granted: Yet art thou excluded? Can thou say thou art not
elected? How will thou prove it? will thou dive into the secret Counsel of
God? It is too deep for thee to fathom. Do thou complain that thy wicked
life does evidence it? Well; Consider then: have thou denied Christ? So did
Peter, have thou persecuted Christ? did not Paul so? And yet for all this, were
not they elected? In a word; There is not a man or woman under the whole
Heavens can justly or truly say, he or she is not elected, of this many
reasons and testimonies might be given, but I would not be tedious.

He commands thee to love him, with all thy heart with all thy strength and
with all thy soul, Deu. 10.12. and Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord comes in with his
promise, saying. I will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to
love the lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou
may live. He commands Col. 3 5. To mortify thy earthly members which are
upon the earth etc. And Micah 7 19. he undertakes the work: He will subdue
our iniquities, and cast all our sins into the depth of the Sea.

2 Cor. 15.2. The Lord says by Paul, Thou must keep in memory, what is
preached unto thee. But thou will say (as most do) thou can not remember;
then have recourse to that promise, John 14 26. There the Lord undertakes and
promises to thee, saying, He will teach thee all things, and bring all things
to thy remembrance, whatsoever he has said unto thee. So David Psalm 25 5.
intreates the Lord to teach him, and instruct him in his way. And in Psalm.
25.12. The Lord undertakes the work, and Psalm. 32.8. The Lord says to him, I
will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go; I will guide
thee with mine eye. And so for all things whatsoever the Lord thy God requires
of thee in any Scripture; In the same or another Scripture he comes in with
his sweet, and blessed promises of assistance, to enable thee unto it: He knows
right well as says Jeremiah, chap. 10.23. Ehe way of man is not in himself,
it is not in man that walks to direct his steps. In a word, consider; There
be many of the greatest promises amidst the greatest precepts. So Deuteronomy. 10.20.
He commands thee to fear him, and Jer. 32.39. He comes with a sweet promise
saying, I will give thee an heart to fear me, and in another Scripture. I
will put my fear into your hearts. Truly friend, the consideration of this,
will sweeten all the commands of the Lord unto thee, and it will cause thee to
set about what is required, in the strength (not of thy self) but of the Lord,
then go on, and be strong in him and in the power of his might. Now to draw
to a conclusion, consider these particulars.

First, That if after all these sweet encouragements, invitations,
entreatings, persuasions, beseechings, thou continue still in unbelief, and
will not come to him that thou may have life, although he does protest that
him, that does come to him, he will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. It is the
greatest of thy sins, and it may be, thou shall hear the Lords voice changed
and telling thee, the axe is laid to the root of the tree, and he that brings
not forth good fruit shall be hewn down and cast into the fire: Or suppose
thou should hear him saying to thee as once he was to Jerusalem, Mat.
23.37. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children
together even as a Hen gathers her Chickens, but ye would not: Behold your
house is left unto you desolate. Prove. 1.24. 25. Because I have called and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, verse 26. I also
will laugh at your calamity, and mock when your fear comes. Read and well
consider that in Heb. 12.16, 17. Esau having slighted and undervalued his
birthright, would afterward have repented, but could not, though he sought
it with tears. Therefore to day if you will hear his voice harden not your
hearts.

Secondly, Consider; The day is at hand, in which all the Nations of the world,
all the Tribes, Kindreds and Tongues under the heavens that now are, ever were
or shall be, I say all, both small and great shall be gathered together before
the judgment Seat of Christ. Math. 25.32.33, 34. etc. Yea the Sea shall give
up her dead, and the Grave shall give up her dead: Death and Hell shall give up
their dead. Rev. 20.12, 13, 14. In another place we read, that we shall all
appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, and all that ever thou have done,
good, or evil, shall be laid open before all the world, all thy sins, secret
and open, shall be brought to light; and thou shall be judged according to thy
works, Math. 25.32, 33, 34, 35. Rev. 20.12, 13. Then when the secrets of all
hearts are laid open, if thou art found a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ,
and that thou have made him thy confidence, then thou shall in that terrible
day stand up with boldness, 1 John 4.17. And thy Judge (which is thy Savior)
shall say to thee, as in Matthew. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit
ye the Kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world, then shall
all tears be wiped from thine eyes, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away,
there shall be ease without pain, beauty without blemish, credit without
disgrace, in a word, thy privileges and enjoyments shall be so great, as the
heart of man cannot conceive, much less his tongue report: for thou shall be
like him. 1 John 3.2.

But if thy name be not written in the Lambs book, if thou continuest still in
unbelief, and endest thy days with an evil life: Oh what a terrible day will
this be unto thee! 2 Pet. 3.12. The heavens shall be on fire and dissolve; the
earth also it shall melt with fervent heat: then, if the rocks and mountains
might fall on thee, thou would think it a favor, to hide thee from the face
of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for the
great day of his wrath is come: and who shall abide it? Rev. 6.16, 17, etc.
Then shall thou hear that dreadful sentence pass on thee, Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. Consider a little, this doleful sentence.

1. Thou must depart from the presence of the Lord.

2. Thou departest (not blessed but) a cursed wretch. Depart from me ye cursed.

3. Not only into fire, but into everlasting fire, no hope of returning.

4. The companions that thou shall have there, are the Devil and his Angels,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. And this dreadful day will come as a thief in the night, 2 Pet.
3.10. In which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the element
shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth also and the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up, etc. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved. 2 Pet. 3.11. What manner of persons ought you to be, in all holy
conversation and godliness? Oh! then take heed, Watch and pray, for you know
not how near the time is. Mark 13.33. The day of the Lord comes as a thief
in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. Wherefore (beloved) seeing that you look for such
things, be diligent that you may be found of him in peace, without spot and
blameless, 2. Pet. 3.14.

Thirdly, consider, if it should be a few months or years before this great
and terrible day come; yet it may not, for ought that thou know, be many
days, no, not so much as many hours or minutes, before thy particular end
come; in which, thou shall be gasping for life, and breathing out thy last
breath: If then thou look up, God will appear as an angry Judge; if thou look
down, the bottomless Pit will strike terror into thee; on thy right hand, thy
sins stand accusing thee; on thy left hand, the Devil is ready to execute Gods
eternal sentence upon thee; within thee, thy conscience gnawing; without thee,
thy friends bewailing. So that look which way thou will, above thee, beneath
thee, within thee, without thee; every object will add to thy misery.
Therefore, Oh, remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before these
evil days come Eccles. 12.1. Entreat the Lord, as David did, Psalm. 39.4. Lord
make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is; That I may
know how frail I am. And will thou know how frail thou art, oh vain man?
then consider,

One scripture says of thy days, it is as water spilt upon the ground, 2 Samuel
14.14. Another scripture says, Our days are like a shadow. Psalm. 102.11. And
as if that were too long, Job says, Job 7.7, My life is but a wind: Psalm.
102.3. Our days consume like smoke. We all do fade as a leaf, Isa. 64 6.
All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower of the grass, the
grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. 1 Pet. 1.24. And as if
all these resemblances signified too much length, to hold forth the shortness of
our life; the holy Ghost does contract it shorter. Psalm. 39 5. Thou have made
my days as an hand breadth. And as if that resemblance also, were too long, he
says in the same verse, Mine age is as nothing. Well then does the scripture
in many places say, We are like a buble of the brook, a tale that is told, or
a dream. Oh how should the serious consideration hereof, teach thee so to
number thy days, that thou might apply thine heart to true and perfect
wisdom. Or as the wise man says, Eccles. 12.6. Remember thy creator before
the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, for as death leaves
thee, so Judgment will find thee, etc. In a word, it is a point of high
wisdom, to be often thinking and meditating of out latter end, for the Lord
himself faith, Deuteronomy. 32.29. That they were wise, that they understood this, to
consider their latter end. So he that made thee, teach and perfect thee.

Two Words to those chosen out of the World.
NOw I shall come to speak two words to those that are chosen out of the World.

First, Generally, to all the Saints.

Secondly, More particularly, to the Saints under those titles, or forms, by
which they are most commonly known.

1 The word in general. To all that are truly godly, for now to you I speak,
even to you my fellow members, and brethren in Christ. Awake, awake, Put on t^y
strength O Sion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, thou holy City.
Isa. 52.1. Arise my beloved, and come away, 2 Can. 10.13. For the day is
dawning, and the day star arising in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19.

Oh Saints! Consider a little upon what ground you stand, upon what foundation
you are built: do thou believe there was such a Christ as the scriptures
mention? Do thou believe that this Christ took thy nature, and also thy
sins? Do thou believe, that in this thy nature, he fulfilled the law, took
it away, nailed it to the Cross, and so is become the end of the law to all
that believe? also freed thee from sin past, present, and to come, and so from
death the wages thereof? do thou conceive; that God will make good his
gracious promises, in particular these? Isa. 25.7, 8, etc. He will destroy in
this mountain, the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil
that is spread over all nations, He will swallow up death in victory: And the
Lord God will wipe away tears from of all faces, And the rebuke of his people
shall be taken away, from off all the earth. Do thou believe that the
knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters the Sea, and that We
shall all know him from the greatest to the least. Jer. 31.34. Do thou
believe those words, which the Lord spoke to Daniel, chap. 7.27. And the
kingdom, and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole
heavens (mark this word under the whole heavens) shall be given to the people
of the Saints, for their kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all
dominions, shall serve and obey them. Do thou believe those words, Isa.
30.26. Moreover the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and
the light of the Sun shall be sevenfold? Do thou believe, that the Lord will
wipe away all tears from off all faces, and that there shall be no more sorrow
nor crying: neither shall there be any more pain. Revel. 21.4. Do thou
believe what the Lord says, in Isa. 35.10. And the ransomed of the Lord shall
return, and come to Sion, with songs, and everlasting joy, upon their heads;
They shall obtain joy and gladness; and sorrows and sighing shall fly away.
Do thou believe the Lord will heal all our backslidings, all our
distractions? and compose all our differences? and give all his people one
heart and one way? Jer. 32.39. Read understandingly, that 11. Isa. 6.7, 8, 9
The Woolfe also shaell dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down
with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the fatling together; and
the Cow, and the Bear shall feed their young, and lie down together. And the
Lion, shall eat straw like the Ox, and the sucking child shall play on the
hole of the Aspe, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the Cockatrice
den. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all mine holy mountain, for the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. Light
is sown for the righteous; and gladness for the upright in heart. Isa. 79 11.12.
Therefore rejoice in the Lord ye righteous and give thanks at the remembrance
of his holiness. These (and, many scriptures more, which for brevity I omit) do
show thee, o most noble overcomming Saint, that glorious times are coming;
wherefore, gird up the loins of thy mind, be sober, and hope to the end, for
the grace that is to be brought unto thee, at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1
Pet. 1.13. And when he is revealed; amongst many mercies, which thou shall
receive, I will only mention two.

First, he shall appear without sin; and thou shall appear so in him Hebr. 9
the last.

Secondly, Thou shall be like him; for thou shall see him, as he is. 1 John
3.2, etc. Then when thy soul apprehends this, it will even break forth into
praises, and songs of deliverance, as once David: God let in a light, whereby
he saw his sins pardoned. Psalm. 103. 1, 2, 3, 4. Bless the Lord O my soul, and
all that is within me, bless his holy name. Bless the Lord O my soul and
forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals
all thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy life from death, who crowns thee with
loving kindness, and tender mercies. If thou ask, why I do ci^e so many
scriptures, and not explain them, I answer. Remember to whom I speak, that is,
to the chosen generation, to the Saints enlightened, and they have the sum of
them opened to them already; or at reast they have the spirit of God in them,
which is the truest Key to unfold, or unlock the mystery of them, unto them.

Object. 2. But I suppose; that many of these forementioned promises were made
unto particular Saints, as, to the Jews, or the like; And so have been
fulfilled to them: And if so, Then what matter of comfort can they administer
unto me?

Answer Suppose it were so; That they be fulfilled already: (which I know,
most do say) yet in some measure (through Gods goodness) I do know the
contrary; they are wholly, or for the greatest part, yet to be fulfilled: as I
could prove by scripture; but I forbear because I would not be tedious. But
suppose they were made to some particular Saints, and fulfilled to them, yet
they are in whole, or in part, appliable to thee, as to instance in one
scripture for all. Josh. 1.5. The Lord promised Joshua, that he would never
leave him nor forsake him. And the Apostle in Heb. 13.5. presses the Saints to
make use of, and to lay hold on that promise, as made to them, though it was
made to Joshua many hundred years before.

Object. 3. If they be yet to be fulfilled, it is a great question whether I
shall live to see any of them fulfilled, and then what comfort do they hold
forth to me?

Answ. If thou do not live to see them fulfilled with thy bodily eyes, yet
with the eye of Faith, which is the evidence of things not seen ( with natural
eyes) Heb. 11.1. Thou may see them fulfilled to thee: as the Saints Hebr.
11.13. They all dyed in the Faith, not having received the promises, but having
seen them a far off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, that is,
They lived in the enjoyment of them, in the Spirit. Again, 1 Thessalonians 4.16.17.
There are promises made; one, That the dead in Christ shall rise first, and
another, That we shall ever be with the Lord. And in the 18. verse. He commands
the Saints, that they should comfort one another with these words. Then (in one
word) this is the sum to be learned from hence; that we should not only
rejoice in the present enjoyments, but live in a full expectation of (and
comfort in) what we shall shortly enjoy; and comfort one another with these
words.

Is not that time drawing near which is prophesied of, Rev. 11.15. And the
seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven, saying, the
Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Son
Christ, and he shall reign for evermore. Wherefore, most noble over-comming
Saints, Servants of the most high, and mighty God, look for great alterations,
and mighty changes. See what desolations God will make in the earth, when he
has accomplished his work upon mount Sion, then he will Judge the Mountain
of Esau; that is, when God has fully brought up his people to enjoy nothing
but himself, then he will declare himself to be a God taking vengeance, on
his, and our enemies. Wherefore rejoice O you Saints, for the time of your
singing is come. The day of our redemption is appearing. Howl oh Babylon:
Mourn oh thou proud opposer of Christ, thy pride is falling, thy end is
coming: Who will mourn for thee? Then shall all thy lovers stand a far off,
for fear of thy torments; they stand far off, they will not come near to
comfort thee. Be silent then, oh all flesh, for the Lord is risen out of his
holy habitation. Then will thou break forth as in Isa. 25.9. And it shall be
said in that day, This is our God; we have waited for him: This is our Lord;
we have waited for him; we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation. Then by
this glorious appearing he will destroy the face of the covering cast over all
people, and the veil that is spread over all nations, and he will swallow up
death in victory, and the Lord God will wipe away tears, from off all faces,
and the rebuke of his people shall be taken away, from off all the earth: for
the Lord has spoken it. Isa. 25.7, 8. Oh Saints, lift up your heads, your
redemption draws nigh; and now will our God make good to us, that which is
written. Zephe. 3.9. I will turn to the people of pure Language, and they
shall serve me, with one consent. This pure Language is the Language of the
Spirit.

Is appointed by God to put an end to these divisions, not till then shall the
envy of Ephraim depart, and the enemies of Judah be cut off, Ephraim not envy
Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim. Then the Kingdom, and the dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom, shall be given to the Kingdom of the Saints;
Whose Kingdom, is an ever lasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and
obey them, Dan. 7.27. Then the Nations that will not serve thee (that is Christ
in the Saints) shall perish Isa. 60.12 Now God, having given you all one heart,
and one way, as it is written Jer. 32.19 Now shall be brought to pass that
saying, Isa. 11.6, 7, 8. The Woolfe shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid etc. verse 9. They shall not hurt nor destroy in
all mine holy mountain, for the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the Sea. The envy of Ephraim shall depart, and the
Adversaries of Judah shall be cut off: Then all you, the Israel of God, shall
have your Fathers law written in your hearts. Then you shall cease, teaching
one another, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all of them know me, from
the least to the greatest of them, says the Lord, Jer. 31.34

My dear friends, I have much more to write unto you of these things, but
being more straightened in time, than in love; at present, I shall pass by many
things, first concerning the restitution of all things spoken of Romans 8.19, 20,
21, 22, 23. and Acts 3 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And to in many other Scriptures,
which for present I omit, and then, what shall follow upon the restitution of
all things Rev. 11.15. Rev. 21.2, 3, 4. These things were in my heart, to write
of distinctly, seeing that all, as well Saints as sinners are extremely
ignorant of these tnings, though most clearly held forth in Scripture, that a
man can hardly speak of them, though he speaks no more than the History holds
forth, but one is offended and another is troubled, therefore at present I am
silent therein: As our Lord said, I have more things to speak, but ye cannot
bear them now; and this Scripture likewise, Have thou faith? have it to thy
self etc. So I pass by that which thou shall shortly enjoy, and come to
speak a few words of what many of the Saints do already enjoy, and oh that
all the Saints did but truly consider these ensuing things, which I never
received of man, neither was I taught them by man: but of God alone.

Thou that art a believer, consider;

First, The law that thou have broken, Christ has kept, fulfilled, and taken
away.

Secondly, Thy sins which were many, both original, and actual, of
omission, and commission, thy sins past, those present, and those to come, are
all laid upon Christ, and the wages due to them heereceived.

Thirdly, Consider, Upon what account thou now stand, before the Father, not
of thine own righteousness but the righteousness of Christ.

Fourthly, Consider, That thou being made free from sin, do reckon thy self
so, Romans 6.11. Likewise reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God.

Fifthly, When thou art thus built upon Christ; and thus rooted, and grounded
in him, Ephe. 3.18, 19. Then thou shall be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the height, and depth, breadth, and length of his love, and to know the
love of Christ, which passes knowledge.

Now follows, the fruit of this knowledge; The soul that is enlightened, will
not go on in sin, but the love of Christ will constrain him from a course
of sin, I shall speak a word to every one of these particulars, briefly, and
plainly.

1. Of the first, the Law, that thou have broken, Christ has kept, fulfilled,
and taken away. The Law required obedience of thee, Christ comes, and yields
obedience for thee, and imputes it to thee, Romans 5.19. As by the disobedience
of one, many are made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
righteous. The Law required the keeping of every title, of the first and second
Table, Christ comes and walks up to it, step by step. So that the Law could no
sooner require obedience, but presently Christ yields obedience, as it was in
the old Testament prophesied, and in the new, testified of him. The Law
required an holy life; Christ lived a holy life: The Law required perfect
obedience, as well in the principles, as in the practice; Christ yields it in
both: The Law requires death for the least disobedience, and though Christ had
not broken it in any title, yet he representing the persons of those that had
broken it, became obedient unto the Law in this also, Phillip. 2.8. And being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross: And that the Law is done away by Christ see 2
Cor. 3. four times in that chapter it is said to be done away. Also Romans 7.
Romans 10.4. and so the 2, 3, 4. chap. to the Galathians, and many other
Scriptures.

2. Consider, Thy sins which are many, both original, and actual, of
omission, or commission, against the first Table, or the second, thy sins,
past, present and to come, are all laid upon Christ, and the wages due to them
he received, Isai. 53 6. And the Lord has laid on him, the iniquities of us
all: 1 Pet. 2.24. Who himself, bare our sins in his own body, on the tree,
etc. 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him to be sin for us, that knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, Mat, 8.17. Himself took our
infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

3. Consider, Upon what account you stand before the Father, viz. not of your
own righteousne, but upon the account of the righteousness of Jesus Christ. 1
Cor. 1.30. He is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. Phil. 3.9. And be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the righteousness of God by Faith.

4. Consider, If the Law be fulfilled, thy sins pardoned, and thou now
stand before thy Father, by the righteousness of another, Then thou can
not but look upon thy self as free from sin, and so break forth, as in Romans
6.11. Likewise, reckon your selves dead unto sin indeed, but alive unto God.
Being then made free from sin, ye became the Servants of Righteousness,
Romans 6.18, But now being made free from sin, and become Servants to God, ye
have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Rom 6.22 Collo.
1.22. He has reconciled you in the body of his flesh through death, to
present you holy, and unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight, 1 Thessalonians.
3.13. Now one that is, 1. Holy, 2. Unblameable, 3. Unreproveable, must needs be
free from sin.

5. When thou art thus rooted and grounded in love, thou shall be able to
comprehend with all Saints, What is the breadth, and length, and height, and
depth, and to know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephe. 3.18. So
shall thou be filled with all the fullness of God, verse 19. My thinks I see
many of the Saints, even breaking forth in the language of Mary, Luke 46,
47.48. My soul does magnify the Lord, my Spirit does rejoice in God my
Savior, (and then gives occasion of this Joy) for he has regarded the low
estate of his handmaid. The tongue of the dumb does begin to sing, the eyes
of the blind to be opened, and the ears of the deaf to hear. Read the 35.
of Isaiah: that whole chapter, briefly and plainly lays down, by way of
prophecy; that he, our tender father, is bringing down the mighty from their
seat, and exalting them of low legree: yea, he rebukes Kings for your sakes;
your God, is no respecter of persons: If Kings and Princes rebel against him,
and his chosen ones, he will bring down their heads as low as the block, and
if these great ones endeavor to separate God and his people, God will separate
their heads from their bodies, you see these days of ours do witness to
this; in a word, He is pulling down the Kingdoms of men, and setting up the
Kingdom of his dear Son. And how does the brutish Malignant, rage, and the
poor blind Presbyterian murmr, at the going on of Gods work, let me say to
both as Prove. 1.22. How long you simple ones, will you love simplicity? What;
do you not know that God, has an attribute of justice, that he will magnify,
as well as that of his mercy. If he afflict his own dear children whom he so
loves, will he not execute vengeance on his adversaries? Be silent then all
flesh before him, for the Lord will bring to pass his work; yea his strange
work. True Justice has no respect of persons: wherefore turn your murmuring,
and repining, into rejoicing, and thanksgiving for the just judgments of God,
upon the enemies of his truth. O you most noble overcomming Saints, servants,
of the most high God, you shall judge Angels as well as earthly Kings. Your
Father loves you, and therefore he will honor you, (nay, he does honor thee
already.) Th^s^ that honor me I will honor, says the Lord. First,

1. He calls thee his servant, and that is a great honor, to be a servant to so
heavenly a Prince, but, as if that were too little.

2. He calls you his chosen ones, his friends, Joh 15.15.

3. He calls you his brethren and sisters. Heb. 2.11.

4. He calls you his sons and daughters, a more near relation, yet as if that
were a style too low to express his tender love unto you.

5. He calls you his chosen Spouse, and Wife, Rev. 21.9.

6. He calls you members of his own body, 1 Cor. 12.12.

7. He tells you, ye are coheires with himself, Romans 8.17.

8. He tells you, that the glory that the Father gave to him, he has given to
you; that you may be one, as the Father and he are one.

9. He tells you, that you are not only one in the body; but one in the spirit
also. 1 Cor. 6.17.

10. And lastly, He tells you that this is but a short taste of what you shall
be, 1 John 3.1.2.

How will the consideration of these near relations cause you to break forth
with the holy Ghost, 1 John 4.17. As he is so are we in this present world, Or
as in Heb. 2.11. Both he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified are all
one: again, Hence it is, that the Lord says, He that touches them, touches
the apple of mine eye: In a word, the Lord takes all the wrongs done to any of
his, as done to himself. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink. I
was a stranger, and you took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me not. Sick,
and in Prison, and you visited me not: In as much as you did it not to one of
the least of these, you did it not to me.

Again, consider, As thy most wise God, turns all things to his own glory; so
likewise he turns them to thy good: To instance in a few things, as first; The
very fall of Adam, wherein the Devil thought to have wrought thy ruin, God in
his wisdom has turned it to thy greatest good. And in the same thing, wherein
the Devil thought to cast thee, thy God appointed to recover thee: Adam fell
through unbelief; thou rifest again by Faith; and the state in which thou
stand in the second Adam, is a more firm and glorious state than that of
the first Adam. So that thou have gotten many privileges by his fall: For
instance,

1. Adam, though made without sin, yet might sin. Now it is impossible for
thee, as thou art made a new creature by Christ, to sin. 1 Ioh. 3.6, 9

2. The first Adam was made inferior to Angels, but the second Adam has made
thee equal with (if not above) the Angels Luke 22.36. Matthew. 22 30.

3. The first Adam had power over visible creatures of the earth; but thou
(being restored by the second* Adam) have power over principalities, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places. Ephesians. 6.12. 2 Cor. 10.4.

4. Adam was made righteous, and that was a glorious state, but the second Adam
has made thee the righteousness of God in him. 2 Corin. 5. verse. 21.

5. The first Adam, in his best estate, was subject to fall by the temptation
of evil Angels. But nothing can make a separation between thee and thy God.
Romans 8.35.

6. Adam had but a temporal paradise, at the best; but the sons of Sion by
virtue of their second Adam have a spiritual Paradise. Heb. 12.22, 23.

Oh, the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledgeoff God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. Well does John
say, Ioh. 3.36. He that believes on the soune, has everlasting life, mark:
he does not say he shall have everlasting life; but he has it already. And
particularly he has it thus,

1. He has everlasting life in the promise; Fear not little flock: it is your
fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom

2. He has it in the first fruits: for what is heaven, but a more full
enjoyment hereafter of what is begun here?

3. He has it even now in possession, by Christ his head; for Christ his head
is entered in already. Oh then you servants of God! If you be entered into
heaven, if you have received a kingdom that cannot be moved, Serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear.

So having spoken a word in general, to all the sons of Zion; give me leave to
speak a word in particular to each of them under their several forms, and
herein, I shall somewhat differ from the practice of most men.

I shall first take notice of those things that are commendable in the Saints,
to whom I write; to cherish and commend that. And

Secondly, Reprove them sharply (but yet in the Spirit of love and meeknes)
for the evil among them. So did Paul with the Church of Corinth. 1 Corin. 1.4.
and so to the 15. verse. So dealt Christ with the Church of Ephesus Rev 2. from
the first ve^se to the end of the fifth. And in the same manner he spoke to the
Church of Pergamus, Revel 2. from the 12. verse to the end of the 16. And so
when he wrote to the Church of Thyatira, Revel. 2.18, 19. I know thy works, and
charity* and service, and faith, and thy patience; and how thou growest, for
thy last works be more than thy first. So having taken notice of the things
commendable, and praised them for that, verse 20. in the next place (not the
first) he reproves their evil, saying, Nevertheless I have a few things
against thee, etc.

In this order or method, I shall at present speak; not in opposition to, or
denial of any way now in practice amongst the godly, and warranted by the
Scriptures.

A Word to those that have taken to themselves the name of PRESBYTERIANS.
My Brethren,
MY hearts desire and prayer to God is, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ
the Father of glory may give unto each of you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, in the knowledge of him: That you may be able to comprehend, with
all Saints, what is the breadth and length, and height, and depth, and to know
the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, that you might be filled with all
the fullness of God; I thank my God on your behalf, for the grace of God that
is in some measure given to many of you already, by Jesus Christ. God has made
some of you isntrumental, for the conversion of souls, by the preaching of his
Word. And I my self, must acknowledge to the glory of God, and to your praise;
that I have had many sweet and heavenly refreshments by your teachings, and
solid discourses, both in public and private. In some things God has
enlightened me by you; and in some other things, I have been convinced by you;
and in some other things, I have been confirmed by you: These things I speak by
experience; and besides, I have heard from some others, that they have also
received the like benefits from the Lord by you. Again, Many of you are men of
tender consciences, In so much that when you see but the very appearance of
evil, you will abstain from it. And the Charity of many of you to the Poor
is very large, as appears by the relation of many poor Souls, whose bowels you
have refreshed; and appears also by your stirring up others, to the performance
of that duty.

By my Brethren! there are faults amongst you: therefore I have a few things
against you.

1. Why do you so frequently complain against this present Parliament, and
Army, saying; they be pulling down Magistracy and Ministry? are they pulling
down any such Magistracy or Ministry, as Christ has set up? Or else such as
Antichrist has set up, and acted his designs by? Let him that is spiritual
judge: if you examine our present Magistracy and Ministry, by the word of
Truth; you shall easily see, that they are not according to Christ, but to
Antichrist.

First, Touching the Magistrate, I appeal to your Consciences; Has he been the
Magistrate of God, for good to thee, in countenancing them that do well; and
punishing of evil doers, or rather: Has he not continually, for a long time,
punished those that do well; and countenanced those that do ill: Herein, I
will appeal to the sons of Sion to judge: Have they not banished, imprisoned,
reproached, persecuted, despised, and contemned, and that to the highest pitch
of their power, all those, in whom the fruits of the Spirit of Christ have
appeared in any measure? And is this a lawful authority which we ought to
obey? Then let us never account it blasphemy, to say, that the most wicked of
actions are lawful and just: For is any thing less from the will of God, or
more contrary to his commands, than this? Is not one unrighteousnes as absolute
a transgression as another?

It is worth you pains to examine, what lawful authority is? and let us
consider,

It is said, Romans 13.1. The powers that be, are ordained of God. There is no
power (that is lawful) but it is of God; for this is most true, that the most
high God is to reign in the kingdom of men: and whosoever are his instruments
in governing, they must derive their power from him, and act purely the command
of God, and no more, nor no less, but even so; as it is recorded of the
children of Israel. Exodus 39.42, 43. They had done the work of the Tabernacle,
as the Lord had commanded, even so they had done it. And (therefore it follows)
Moses blessed them. Wherefore were they blessed? Sure, you see, not for their
own inventions, but for their obedience: so purely and exactly after the
command of God. And Paul says, Be not the servants of men, that is; do not
you observe the things that men do command, unless God has commanded them.
But you will ask, How may we know the true power, from the false? Oh, that you
were so teachable. Then

The Scripture will tell you, that the lawful powers are of God; both of his
Commandments, and bearing his image, holy as he is holy; being a terror not
to good works, but to evil. And whosoever does resist this power (only this)
he resists the Ordi^ance of God, and shall receive judgment to himself.

But the Parliament and Army do not resist this power (spoken of by Paul to be
obeyed) But they do resist (and I admire that you the Seers do not see it,
that they do resist) that power spoken of by Micha, Mic. 3.11. The heads
thereof that do judge for reward (and that establish iniquity by a law) the
Priests thereof that teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof that divine for
money; and yet lean upon the Lord and say, is not the Lord amongst us; No evil
can come upon us. That the powers of this nation (that have been resisted) have
been and are such, their late actions are proofs, than which nothing can be
more full or plain, to men of reason.

2. For the Ministry, that are said, to be pulling down: what are they?
Apostles from Christ or from our Universities? who has taught them? God or
man? How are they constituted Ministers? By God or man? a power internal or
external? By the hand and power of Gods Spirit upon their souls, and in them;
or the hands of flesh upon their heads of flesh, without them? They fast and
pray for them; but is it therefore certain, that God does hear and grant that
particular thing? What is their principle? The Spirit and living power of God?
Of the natural and carnal Spirits of men? What is their knowledge? Of Faith,
or of reason merely humane? Is it of the Type, or Truth? Letter, or Spirit?
Form, or Power? have they received it by Revelation, or Tradition? And what is
the end of most of them? Is it not worldly honor and power, earthly riches?
will they preach if their profit invite them not? Do they reckon themselves
rewarded, if they receive not money? Is not their cry great, and their labor
extreme for Mammon, judge you. But these Ministers are made such, in a way of
imitation: They say, they follow the pattern of the Apostles: But is it so? The
Apostles had a glorious Spirit of light and power, poured out upon them;
mightily manifested in them, so that they were in a holy ecstasy, seeming as
men drunk, filled not with Wine, but the Spirit: that they plainly saw the
promises and prophesies fulfilled in them; and the world also might see, and
say, that God was in them, because of the works that were done by them. They
professed and declared, that they had not their doctrine of man, nor by man;
but by God: they were not instructed through, or by means of the fleshly
Organs, or faculties of their bodies: or any fleshly, or outward form. But say
they, the Gospel of God is revealed in us, from Faith to Faith; the Spirit of
God does reveal it to us; we have tasted, and seen, and felt of the Word of
Life. The things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God; but we have the
Spirit, etc. And now are the pourings out of the Spirit upon all flesh,
heretofore prophesied and promised, etc. By all which and other expressions of
scripture, which are many and abundant; it is apparent that the Apostles had a
ministration of light, life, power, and efficacy in them; which went forth by
them in marveilous operations. Now they could with great boldness and clearnes
declare, and Preach the mysteries of the Gospel; because they had a clearness
of sight of them, by a proper demonstration and immediate manifestation, the
Spirit of God dwelt in them, taught them plainly; and they certainly knew, that
he taught them; they had sure experience, as we by our bodily sight have
experience or knowledge, that the Sun shines.

But amongst all these pretenders to the ministry, and that appropriate to
themselves that function, so distinct, as being the true and singular
Apostle-imatators, or as if they were thereunto anointed and sanctified above
the rest of Christians, their brethren; where is he that God has made so
distinct by any gifts or endowments which either are comparable to those of
the primitive Christians, or do competently enable him to declare the mystery
of the Gospel which as spiritual, so deep and mysterious? Or wherein is he a
Minister more than an ordinary Christian? Nay I will be bold to say, that if
they that are called the Ministers, had but so much true light of the Gospel
revealed in them, as many private weak Children of God, it would cause them
absolutely to be ashamed to be termed Ministers, so unlike are they to and
untruly counted such. Can their humane wisdom, their schoole-learning and
arts, which are flesh and of the world, unfold unto them the mystery of
Godliness (so great?) If so, then the Apostle said not truly, That God has
hid the things of his Spirit from the wise and prudent of the world, and
revealed them to babes. And then also may the natural man perceive the things
of God, though Paul says he cannot.

And now if all your worldly and fleshly wisdom be no more to be accounted
of, what then is your ministry? What is your complaint and murmuring against
the Authority of the Nation? What are they pulling down, Apostles of Christ, or
imposters of Antichrist, Shepherds that feed the Sheep, or Wolves that devour
them; do they pull down their feeders? or else their fleecers? Are they
pulling down leaders or seducers? May I not say to you in this case as our
blessed Lord said to Nicodemus in another case, John 3.10. Are you Masters in
Israel, and know not these things. Indeed they are pulling down such a
ministry as is spoken of by the Prophet Micah, Micah 3.5. Thus says the Lord,
concerning the Prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth,
and yet cry peace, and he that puts not into their mouths, they even prepare
war against him. And in the next verse you may read their judgment at large.

Well then, will you be offended with Parliament and Army for pulling down
such a magistracy and ministry, as this, let me beseech you: Give over with
speed least you fall with them.

Again; My friends: I do admire that you complain of the badnesse of these
times, surely you do but dream, for if you do awake, you shall plainly see,
that they are the best times with us in England, that ever we had, to live by
faith, what? Has the Lord with the Besome of destruction swept away the head
of the enemies of truth? And yet sad times?

What? Does he take Princes and Lords which were so high, and bring their
Heads so low as the Block? And yet sad times?

What? Have the Saints in obedience to the command of their Father, given them
to drink of the bitter, that they have given you so long? And yet sad times?

What? Is the Lord making inquisition for blood; and meeting the same measure
to his enemies, as they have meeted to his people? And yet sad times? What? Is
the Lord magnifying the attribute of his Justice, upon his and our implacable
enemies? And yet sad times?

What? Is the Lord pulling down the powers of the world, and the Kingdoms of
men, and setting up, or at least making way to set up the Kingdom of his own
dear Son? And yet sad times?

Has the Lord prospered our Armies and given us so many Victories over them
that would have devoured us? And yet sad times?

My Brethren: I am afraid you did not mourn with Jerusalem, because you do
not now r^joce with her. It is true, unto some, the times are sad, but to whom?

Answ. To the deceivers of our nation, for these times do discover them, and
(plainly) it is a bad time for false Prophets and corrupt Judges, for God has
threatened their ruin, it is bad times for Babylon and all her brats, for the
day of her destruction is dawning, and the hour of her plagues is coming when
Kings and Princes, Nobles and Merchants, shall all lie howling, weeping and
wailing, crying alas, alas* And all the Saints shall stand before the presence
of their tender Father, singing, rejoicing and praising the Lord for his
judgments upon their enemies.

Again; You Ministers of the Presbiterian Congregations, methinks you have
lost your beauty: I do not see you in the affections of the Heirs of promise,
the Sons of Sion as formerly, the cause of this must be in the people or in
your selves; and I have spent a little time, and made diligent search for to
find where the cause lies, and have, with an impartial heart, weighed the
Saints in one balance and you in another: And I find you, not them, to light.
I mean, I find the cause of your being slighted to be in your selves,
wherefore let me entreat you to take a word of advice from me, for, I assure
you, I have taken advise from you, and (I hope) shall again, though you look
upon me as only worthy to be your servant or scholar, and not your teacher,
yet I pray you, mind what Job says, He will not despise the counsel of his
Servant. And if you will indeed hear with your ears, treasure up in your
hearts, and practice in your lives these ensuing things, you shall soon grow
in favor both with God and man.

Then there be four things that you must lay aside and forsake, and there be
five things that you must immediately do.

First, Lay aside or leave of charging your hearers for breach of the Scotch
Covenant, until you have repented of your own breach of that Covenant, for
how can you preach, thou shall not steal and steal your selves? How can you
boldly reprove another for sin, when you your selves are guilty of the same?
How can you pull out the moat that is in your brothers eye, until you have
pulled out the beam, that is in your own eye. I will appeal to your very
Conscience then, whether you be not breakers of covenant in the highest nature:
For says the Covenant, You must bring to condign punishment all delinquents:
and you have often declared in the faces of your Congregations, besides, in
your private discourses, that the King was a delinquent in the highest nature:
and yet almost all of you were against the bringing him to condign punishment.
Shall not many of the Army; which never took the Covenant; and yet had their
hands in bringing malignants to punishment, rise up in judgment against you,
which took a covenant to do it; and yet above all men were against it; If this
be not breach of Covenant, I do not know what is a breach.

Again, you covenanted to endeavor in your places, the reformation of
Religion, according to the scriptures; but if you examine your
Church Discipline by those rules there held forth, and you shall see you have
broken the Covenant in this also. And more I could show you; but a word to the
wise is enough: O my dear friends do not you be like the Tribe of Levi in the
days of Isaiah, Isa. 28 7. They err in vision, they stumble in judgment; I
say, do not you be like them in their sin, least the Lord make you like them in
their punishment; and so speak to his people as Isa. 28.11. With a stammering
lip and another tongue will he speak to his people: and you that a little
before were cried up of many, as the only Ministers of the Gospel, now are
made like to those prophesied of Micah,. 6, 7. Therefore night shall be unto
you, that ye shall not have a vision, and it shall be dark unto you, that ye
shall not divine: and the Sun shall go over the Prophets, and the day shall be
dark over them. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded:
yea, they shall all cover their faces, for there is no answer of God.

2. Lay a side or leave off, that cold, lukewarm letter-preaching, which seems
to be only in the notion, received from tradition; having a form, but not the
power: Remember how it was with Paul, he compared spiritual things with
spiritual; and most of you (for I speak not of all) compare letter with
letter, and so come up with a voice of words, so cold, that some of your
hearers begin to sleep, and others to withdraw from your Congregations. Those
that do indeed attend to what you speak, are profitted very little by it. O
come then, in the fullness of the Gospel of Christ; and as you have received
the gift (not studied) so administer the same. See what Paul says, Romans 15. v.
8. I will not dare to speak of those things which Christ has not wrought in
me: to make the Gentiles obedient by word and deed. Again, 2 Cor. 10.15, 16.
We will not (says the Apostle) boast of things without our measure; that is,
of other men's labors: We will preach the Gospel, and not boast in another
man's line; of things made ready to our hands. Let me then appeal to your
consciences, whether this be your practice. Again, Why do you tie your selves,
to preach only so long, and not sometimes longer, or shorter: did ever the
Prophets or Apostles do so? Why do you tie your selves, to speak only from
one text, in one Sermon? did ever the Prophets and Apostles tie themselves
constantly as you do your selves to this. But think not that I write against
preaching an hour, or speaking from, or to a particular text; for I am not
against it: but only, this your making ties; where God does not tie you, and
cry up forms, more then the power of godliness.

3. Leave off the Idolizing of humane learning, and use it only in its place;
then you will look upon it as convenient, but not of absolute necessity: it
will enable you with expressions, but not with spiritual interpretations.
Never think that you know more of the mind of Christ than others, because you
know more of of the tongues than they: Alas! take all the learning, arts,
parts, in the whole world, and give them together into one man; yet this man by
all his parts, wit, and arts, in Logic, tongues, and phylosophie, is unable to
give a true spiritual sense of one of the easiest and plainest scriptures. The
spiritual mystery is so high, he cannot reach it; so deep that he cannot
fathom it; so long, he cannot measure it; and so broad, that he cannot
comprehend it. Hence it is, that many in our days, are great scholars in
humanity, and mere ignorants is divinity. Was not Paul a great scholar, as
he testifies of himself; and yet ignorant of Christ, knowing nothing of the
spiritual sense of scriptures. O you scholars, have you been so long at
Oxford and Cambridge (the two eyes of our land) and can you not see without
Spectacles: have you been at the fountain, and must the streams teach you? Do
you not know, that there is a spiritual learning as well as a humane? If you
do know it, why do you give, a false interpretation of most scriptures; taking
them in the litterall, when they are to be understood, in the spiritual sense.
To instance, in one for all, 2 Pet. 3.16. There are somethings hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned wrest, as they do also other
scriptures to their own destruction. Now the question is, of those things in
Paul's Epistles, which Peter here speaks of, as hard to be understood, and which
the ignorant did wrest, the question is: What is meant here, by unlearned? Does
he mean unlearned in humane, or unlearned in spiritual things?

Answ. Me thinks the Apostle in the same verse, resolves the scruple.

1. For, first it is said, Paul wrote these things according to the wisdom
given unto him; which is not meant wisdom of the world, for God does account
that but foolishness (says the scripture) and Paul renounced it also, and
said; I came not with excellency of words, or of wisdom, showing unto you the
testimony of God: Neither (says he) stood my Word and Preaching, in the
enticing speech of man's wisdom; but in plain evidence of the Spirit, and of
power: that your Faith should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of
God. And we speak wisdom, and not the wisdom of this world, etc. but we speak
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hid wisdom, etc. which the Princes
of this world have not known, etc. But God has revealed them unto us, by his
spirit, which searches the deep things of God, etc. and which we have
received, that we may know the things that are given to us of God, etc. Which
things also we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches; but which
the Holy Ghost teaches, etc. 1 Cor. 2. chap. throughout; which you see does
abundantly testify, that Paul spoke not according to humane learning: read
also 1 Gal. 12.16.

2. Peter, here says, that one of those difficult sayings of Paul, which the
unlearned understood not, was this; That the long suffering of our Lord is
salvation; which being a spiritual thing (as all the things of salvation are)
cannot be understood by natural wisdom; for the things of God, knows no man,
but the spirit of God: therefore Paul's wisdom was spiritual, and their
unlearnednes, there spoken of, was this; that they had not that wisdom, in
which he knew salvation; that is, the wisdom of God: for worldly wisdom they
might have, and be nevertheless ignorant of all spirituals.

Thirdly, They were unlearned, that is, they had not the learning, by which
they might understand those things in the sense which would tend to their
salvation, or true knowledge of God; and that, surely is only a spiritual
sense: For else to wrest it to another sense, could not be to their destruction.

Fourthly, Peter here exhorts the Saints, to take heed of that error of the
wicked, least they also should be lead away with it, accounting it (you see) a
wicked error. And then in the next place, exhorts them to grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of Christ, as being a thing contrary to that wicked error,
and a remedy against it. Now if the knowledge of Christ and growing in grace,
be a remedy against that error; then, it is most plain, That their
unlearnednesse (which is there said, to be the cause of their error) was not
of humane tongues and sciences (for then Peter would have bidden them study
these to keep them from error:) But it was of the grace of God, and of the
knowledge of Christ they were ignorant or unlearned; and therefore he bids them
grow in that grace and knowledge, that they might not err.

So that that saying of Peter being thus truly understood; it is most plain
that their unlearnednesse which caused them to err, was their ignorance of
Grace, and of Christ, not of humane learning:

To which also let me add these rules, viz.

First, That a man's principle, by which he does converse with (or apprehend)
any thing; must be of a nature suitable to the nature of that thing which he
converseth with or apprehends; as in particular,

You cannot apprehend or discover any object of sense, by the principle of
reason; for example, you cannot by your reason (or any thing else, but your
sense of hearing) apprehend or know, that there is any sound or noise, nor how
it sounds. But the care and voice are suitable: not a voice and another
sense, as, we cannot see a voice, etc. Just alike impossible it is for reason
(merely natural) to know spiritual things, as the scripture says, the
natural man knows not the things of God: nature has not a power suitable to
attain to them.

Second rule, Every evil or defect is remediable, only by its contrary good,
or supply; as darkness is remediable by light, carnalnesse by spiritualnesse,
weakness by strength, ignorance by knowledge, etc.

Which two Rules (if you observe them) will help to the underderstanding of
those words of Peter.

But if yet you are persuaded that your Universitie learning can dive into the
spiritual sense of scripture, I would propose to a whole Synod of your
function to reconcile these Scriptures hereafter cited, that are in the letter
so contradictory one to another, for instance,

One Scripture says, Thou must love thy Father, Mother, Wife, Children etc
Another Scripture says, Thou must hate all these if thou will be my disciple
Luke 14.26. One Scripture says of God, Anger is not in me: Another says, He
is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7.11. One says, Ye do always
resist the holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. Another says, They could not resist the
Spirit by which he spoke, Act 6.10. Another Scripture says, That he that says
he has not sinned, is a liar and the truth is not in him, 1 John 1.8.10. One
Scripture says of John, That he was not Elias, John 1.21. Another says of the
same John, That he was Elias, Math 11.14. Matthew. 11, 12.

I might instance in at least 40. Scriptures thus contradictory in the letter.

Now this is the thing that I would ask you, whether through the understanding
of tongues or arts humane, you can give the true genuine sense of those
Scriptures? surely you cannot, for these Scriptures were pend by the holy
Spirit, whose mysterious language, the ear of man natural cannot hear, nor
his heart conceive much less his tongue express or interpret.

To conclude, you do ignorantly look upon your selves as so many learned
Apostles, now considering that there are many Aquillas and Priscillas that can
teach you the way of God more plainly. Read and well consider that Acts 18.25,
26.

That place of Peter about the unlearned, has led me to a long digression, but
now to return again to advise you.

Fourthly, Lay aside or leave off your kindling of flames in the State, and
blowing the bellows of contention and vain jangling, and fall to preaching
the Gospel of peace: Let the State Governors alone with the State affairs.
And also let the Lord Christ alone with the discipline of his Church. Let it
not be said of you as once it was of the Highpriests, that they were the only
enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and yet the great pretenders to it. Do not
reproach the Lords people as once they did, for believing in and following of
their Lord Christ, saying, Have any of (us) the Rulers believed on him? No,
none (said they) but a few ignorant people that know not the law. Do not
accuse the Lords people in your Pulpits, as the Priests did Paul, Act. 24.5.
saying, he was a pestilent fellow; amover of sedition, and a ringleader of the
sect of the Nazarens. Least the Lords people should answer you as Paul did
them, Acts 24. v. 14. After the way which you call heresy, so worship I the
God of my Fathers, etc.

So having spoken of the things that you must lay aside, or forsake; Give me
leave, as briefly as I may, to lay before you a few things that you ought
immediately to practice; I say, immediately: because it is high time, if you have
not staid too long.

First, If you be the Ministers of Christ, observe your Commission given you
Mark 6.15. and Matthew. 28.19. The sum of which is this, Go ye to all the
world and Preach the Gospel to every creature; And Paul elsewhere gives an
account of his commission, and says, Christ sent him to preach the Gospel, and
so he went Preaching peace by Jesus Christ. Seeing God in these latter days
speaks unto us by his Son Heb. 1.2. Why do you speak so much by Moses; you say
Moses must prepare us for Christ sure that is not in Your Commission: Me think
I hear you saying with Peter; Master, let us build here three tabernacles, one
for Moses, one for Elias, and one for thee; and there appeared a bright cloud,
upon the appearance of which, Moses and Elias (which was John Baptist) vanished
away. And God answered Peter from heaven, and told him, This is my beloved
son: hear him. Why do you then build a tabernacle for Moses, and another for
Elias, seeing the bright cloud has expelled the dark administrations of them
both.

O then follow the advice of Christ, and keep close to your commission; and
into whatsoever house you enter, let your first words be, Peace, to this house,
Luke 10.5.

Why do you teach repentance before Faith, seeing true and unfeigned
repentance is a fruit of Faith, not a preparation for Faith. The Ninevites
believed God before they proclaimed a Fast: and thou must first look upon
Christ, whom thou have peirced, by Faith; before thou can mourn, as one
mourns for his only Son. The goodness of God will lead thee to repentance.
Romans 2.4. And the grace of God will teach thee to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, 2 Tit. 11. verse. 12.

Faith is a notable groundwork, in a sense of true repentance; without this
Faith, it is in vain to think to build up our selves in sanctity of life, and
sincerity of conversation; For he that comes to God must first believe, that
God is: Heb. 11.6. And without this Faith, it is impossible to please God: and
whatsoever is not of this Faith is sin, Romans 14.23 My friends, is not faith the
first stone in the spiritual building, the first step in a Christian race, the
first link in our golden chain of Christianity, the first act of our new life,
the first degree in our holy conversation, the first round in your Jacobs
ladder, whereby you ascend up into the presence of your Lord? Should you not
acquaint your hearers first with the doctrinall part of Divinity, before you
press the practical part; endeavor to have them truly principled, and then
press obedience as the fruit of those principles; I have heard some of you
say, that whatsoever obedience does flow from any man; if it flow not from good
principles, that obedience is in a sense disobedience. See what Christ commands
Matthew. 12 33 Make the tree good, and his fruit will be good, and good reason,
for Matthew. 7.18. a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit. Now here is the
reason, why you see so little fruit of all your labors? you preach so much,
yet do so little good: you do not do Gods work in his own way; you preach and
contend for order, and scarce are any in the kingdom more out of your order,
than your selves. In a word, you require good fruit from a corrupt tree, and
Christ tells you, it cannot be. When David taught his son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28
9. He instructs him first in the doctrinall part, before the practical part;
He must first know the God of his Fathers, before he is pressed to serve him:
This was Paul's advise, Titus 3.8. Again, our blessed Lord Christ, Joh. 15.4.
exhorts the people first to abide in him; and being in him by Faith, then bids
them bring forth fruit, saying, as the branch cannot bear fruit, except it
abide in the Vine; no more can ye except ye abide in me. So Paul dealt with
the Collossians, 1 Coll. 9.10. He prays and desires, first that they might be
filled with the knowledge of Gods will; and then verse. 10. (as the fruit of
that knowledge) that they might walk worthy of the Lord, being fruit full in
every good work.

2. The next thing that you should practice after you have exalted Christ
alone, to be the only King, Priest, and Prophet, not in word only, but in
power; in expecting the teachings of God the father to your souls, by, and
through him, have recourse to his rules in the Gospel for your practice: and
then you will not look so much upon Synods, and not be ashamed to confess him
before men: If you have been in the Pulpit delivering his message, why are you
so afraid to have your doctrine questioned? why will you not give your hearers
that liberty, that Christ has given them; to judge of what you have said? are
you ashamed to own Christ, when his doctrine is examined? Or else, do you find
your selves unable by sound doctrine to convince the gainsayers. But you will
say, If any be not satisfied, let him come to us in private; let me ask you:
where have you a rule for that? do you not deliver your things publicly? And
do not the scriptures tell you, that a public evil must have a public
reproof? But you will say, we have done no evil: we have preached Christ
according to our commission. Then (my friends) never fear to have it
qu^stioned: but (I beseech you) if any can object against what you have taught,
so he do it in the spirit of meeknes, rather to find out truth, then to carp
at truth: And seeing Christ has given him that liberty. 1 Cor. 14. Do not you
deprive him of it. If you would but make trial of this; I will assure you, you
might gain many privileges by it: In particular, I will show your two or three.

1. You will take away all just occasions, for any to cavil at your doctrine,
or speak evil of you in private.

2. You will increase your own knowledge; for there are some Aquila's and
Priscillas do hear you: and you also may be more enabled to instruct.

3. It will make the luster of the truths which you assert, the more
beautiful, if you vindicate them.

4. It will make all your sayings seem the more worthy serious and sober
consideration.

O that I could see the ministers of England, as willing to be taught, as they
are to be teachers; as swift to hear, as to speak: Truly, this were a way to
untie the greatest things we want in our kingdom.

3. When you have exalted Christ alone, and diligently observed his Commission;
next I beseech you, be tender of his Lambs, and feed them; and so much the
rather, because they are yet standing in the streets of Sodom, and the Dogs of
Egypt do bark at them: Oh send forth no more Dogs to bark and snap at the
poor tender ones; for they have a tender father, the Almighty Lord God, that
does take all the injuries done to them, as done to himself; and takes notice
of all the hard sayings against them, as you may read at large in the Epistle
of Jude 15.

But you will (as I have heard you) say, we speak not against those that are
truly godly; but we cry out against blasphemers.

So was our blessed Lord Christ persecuted, and reproached under the name of a
blasphemer. Luke 10.33.

And so was Stephen (a man full of the holy Ghost, and of Faith) accused for a
blasphemer. Acts 6.13.

And they were great learned men that did this: and this is written for some to
learn. Again, Christ was called a deceiver, Matthew. 27.6. And a Wine-bibber.
Matthew. 11.19.

It would be worth your labor, to examine from the beginning of the Bible to
the end; how in all ages, and under all administrations, the Priests, and
Levites, and pretended Ministers, which would be known by the names of
Prophets, Seers, Watchmen, or Leaders, and in this present generation above all
others, have had their hands in (almost) all the Wars, divisions, combustions,
uproars, tumults, and troubles in the Kingdom. For matter of blasphemy,
heresy, superstition, Idolatry, etc. were not this tribe the ringleaders, as
also in persecuting the Lords people: nay, the greatest opposition that our
Lord Christ himself met withal, was from that tribe; and have not they the
chiefest hand in our present troubles, I leave to the whole kingdom to judge.
Wherefore, my friends, consider upon what ground you stand, and upon what
foundation you are built: and let it be your study to put out, not to kindle
flames in the kingdom; to heal the wounds with which we languish, not to make
more. Remember these words of Christ; Blessed are the peacemakers. Matthew. 5.9.
I know this is the practice of some of you; but truly, the number of such is
but few: yet I do believe there are, and so in all former ages, there were a
few scattered up and down, that were true Prophets waiting upon God for an
heavenly message; and that they do receive and declare unto this kingdom.

4. Seek not your maintenance in an unjust way: But cast your selves upon the
providence of God; as for the salvation of your souls, so also for the
maintenance of your bodies; can you trust God with a soul, more worth than ten
thousand words; and can you not trust him with a little earth, your bodies. You
teach us to pray for daily bread, and you do well: but must you selves take
canal care for yearly bread; if not, what means this bleating of Sheep, and
lowing of Oxen; your pleading for Tithes in your Pulpits. On my friends! be
ye sure to do Gods work; and I will pawn my life for him, he will pay you
your wages: feed his Lambs, and your God will give you your meat in due season:
O let the same mind be in you, as was in your brother Paul, 1 Cor. 9.15. where
he renders three reasons why he would not preach for money, not tithes.

First, because he would not make his glorying void, 1 Cor. 9. v. 15.

2. Because he would not make the Gospel of Christ chargeable to them, verse. 18.

3. He would not compel any to pay money or tithes for preaching, least he
should hinder the Gospel of Christ.

How many such Paul's have we in our days; is there indeed one of a thousand:
yes, (my friends) there are through Gods goodness (to my knowledge) a few.

I speak not in this against a just maintenance for a true ministry, for then
I should sin against God and my own Conscience; for I know God says, he has
ordained that they that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: and my own
conscience tells me that if they have sown unto me spiritual things, I should
not keep back from them carnal things. All that I here speak against is this,
your looking for your maintenance in an unjust way.

Fifthly, Give no offense unto any man, neither to Jew nor to Gentile, nor to
the Church of Christ; but keep a conscience void of offense both toward God,
and toward man: be patient toward all, speak evil of no man; seek the glory
of God before your own honor, and the good of his people as your own good: and
as you would that others should do unto and speak of you, so do and speak you
of them; in all you actions, propound Christ, for your pattern; and learn of
him, for he was meek and lowly.

Now to you called Independents.
I May say to you, as once Paul did to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.4. I thank my
God always on your behalf; for the grace of God that is given you by Jesus
Christ. Yea I may say to you as Christ did to the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.2.
I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou can not
bear them that are evil, and thou have tried them which say they are
Apostles, and are not; and have found them liars. And thou have born, and have
had patience under all thy reproaches; for thou have had many opposers,
reproachers, slanderers, back-biters, and evil surmisings against thee; if
thou hold to the end, and art willing to be a follower of Christ, as well in
his humiliation, as in his exaltation; thou have a fellowship with him in the
one, as well as in the other.

Again, This I find in thee (O thou Independent.) Thou desire to walk by
rule. When thou would know the mind of God, thou look into the
testimonies of his revealed will, the Old and New Testament; Thou groundest
what thou hold, upon that word; thou accountest the principles and practices
evil, that are not warranted by that word: And if men come unto thee, and
speak with the tongues of men and angels, thou will (with the noble Bereans)
seach the Scrip ures, to see, whether the things they speak of be so or no; and
if they speak not, according to that rule, thou will presently conclude; it is,
because there is no light in them: Nay, thou know, that if a man come, and
preach any other Gospel than that which thou have received, 1 Gal. 8, 9. he is
to be accursed: and this thou have also (to thy commendation) the more others
do slight, despise, and lay aside the scripture, as a thing out of date; the
more thou do embrace it, read it, confer, and meditate on it; and account
it sweeter than the honey, or the honey comb, and esteem it (with Job) more
than thy natural food. Thou know right well, they were written for thy
learning. Again, I may say of thee, as once it was said of the Church of
Pergamos, 2 Revel 12.13. I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's seat is: yet thou hold fast Christ's name, and have not denied his
Faith. Again, this thou have, that thou withdrawest from every brother, that
thou clearly see to walk disorderly; thou do reprove, rebuke, and exhort
with all long suffering. Again, this thou have; thou look to the spiritual
growth of those with thee: thy members watch over one another, and in love
reprove one another, and many of you do it in the spirit of meeknes, as you
would that they should do unto you in the same case, even so you do to them.

Again, This you have; you take a special care of the poor among you, and you
loath the unjust practices of some other Congregations of the Presbyterians,
that gather a just maintenance for the Poor in an unjust way: They cut large
thongs, but it is of other men's Hides: they do not with Christ choose Deacons,
but with Antichrist Collectors. Some of which must pay the Poor, and are sure
never to receive their money again, though they borrowed it for that purpose:
but God be thanked (oh thou Independent) thou have not so learned Christ; thou
know well, that the Lord loves a cheerful giver, and accepts none but a
Free Will offering: you give unto all, but have a special regard unto the
household of Faith, according to rule. Gal. 6.10.

Again, This thou have, thou forsakest not the assembly of Saints, as the
manner of some is; you hear the Word in public, and build up one another in
private; you do not (as some others) cry up the public, and contemn the
private; nor cry up the private in contempt of the public: thou look into
the Gospel and find both of them commanded and commended, and therefore
make use of both: Thou know that as God is no respecter of Persons, so he
is no respecter of places. Thou find him teaching thee in public and also
in private; abroad, and at home; thou find him in the Fire to save thee, and
in the Water to help thee, and in the Prison to free thee: thou know thy God
is in all places, and yet comprehended in no place.

Now having thus taken notice of the things commendable in thee, according to
that rule, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 And as Christ dealt with the Church of
Ephesus, 2 Rev. 2.3.

Give me leave also to deal plainly with thee, as Paul did. 1 Cor. 1.11, 12.
and as Christ with Ephesus: and then, I shall not spare to tell thy
Congregations and Members, that there are faults, amongst you; therefore I have
somewhat against you.

1. If you be not guilty of that sin that Paul reproves the Corinthians, for 1
Cor. 1.11, 1^. I am sure you are guilty of that sin that is reproved, 2 Jam. 2,
3.4. You have the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory, with
respect of persons; for if there come into your assembly (as James faith) a man
with a gold ring, and in goodly apparel; and there come in also a poor man
in vile raiment, you are apt to say to him in gay clothing; Sit thou here, (in
a good place) and though you do not in plain terms or words, say to the poor,
stand thou there, or sit at my footstool; yet you let him stand at a distance,
or sit at your feet: and James tells you, Jam. 2.4. Ye are partial. And many
times those poor ones whom you slight, God has chosen; and the rich ones,
whom ye honor, God has rejected: verse. 5. Has not God chosen the poor of
this world rich in Faith, etc.

2. You are strange to those that are called Presbyterians, which many of them
being truly godly, you should visit; and if there be any way of wickedness in
them, reprove them; if they be low in their principles, endeavor to raise
them; and where they are imperfect in the way of God, teach them more
perfectly: Love not one man, because he is an Independent, hate none for being
a Presbyterian; for this were to know men after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.

3. There is utterly a fault among you in that many of you do fashion your
selves according to this world; if there be any new foolish fashion going, ye
are in have to take it up with the first, quite contrary to the command of God,
1 Pet. 1.14. And as in your apparel, so in your long hair; why do you
Christians were it like Ruffians? It is true I know that as religion stands not
in meat or drink, so neither stands it in clothes nor hair long or short:
But your abuse of this does dishonor religion, grieve the Saints, and harden
the world, especially of the first of these, to wit, clothes. Therefore I
beseech you hear a few words further.

Is your Kingdom or glory of this world or in things outward, or fleshly, or
even in vanity? Is it your work appointed and your delight (ye Saints) to
please the irrational fancies of your fleshly minds? Can you who are so
distinct and distant in your principles from the carnal and ungodly, so suite
and conform to them in those things whose very fountain or cause is none
other but ignorance of God, which also are rationally censured even of those
that are without? Have you not better enjoyments: no better kingdom than this?
Is not your glory within? Is not the most excellent your satisfaction, his
presence in your hearts your great refreshments? Union and conversation with
him your heaven and blessedness: Do you walk as Christ did: Whose meat and
drink was to do the will of his father, are you like him?

And seeing your fashions are costly, let me ask you, do you believe that God
has given you so much of his creatures for any such purpose? Can you say to
the Lord, we bless thee in our souls that thou have given us these creatures,
and disposed our hearts by thy spirit to use them thus? Did ever God call such
things sacrifices well pleasing to him? Or have you the creatures in such
superabundance, or are better opportunities so scarce that you cannot better
use them? do you think so? Then harken hither.

Here are many of us poor miserable wretches, whose bodies pine for hunger and
thirst, and starve with cold: Some of us are exiles and strangers, some of us
in prison, some of us sick, some wounded, lame, some weak, some widows,
fatherless and friendlesse. Here we stand before you, ye see us, ye know
us: and can you yet withold relief? Have you no bowels of compassion? Has
mercy taken wing and returned to her eternal fountain that sent her forth?
Has she no tabernacle nor temple with men? Has she left all hearts to
hardness? Will she not vouchsafe us any of her divine bounty now, but leave
us desolate, captives to necessities till they have pursued our flesh to
dissolution? Where are these promises of our dear redeemer, to dwell with men
to the end of the world. When shall the powrings out of the spirit of grace
(promised) be? Or where are those Temples of his habitation, that we may go
unto them? Will no man show us? Ah sad! Oh doleful case miseries devour us:
and pity is departed from us.

Oh dear friends: Are there all these sad cries and tears, and yet do your
vain pleasures bewitch you to be deaf? Awake, awake, for now your Lord
commands, go hear what those my (and your) poor membes say, see why they
weep: Lord, they cry for want.

Chr. What, want? And thou stand by with such rich stores of mine? Oh most
unfaithful! Most unkind! Do thou love me: and do I hunger in my members?
and wilt not feed me with mine own? but imbessell those my stores to such
base Harlots as thy fleshly fancies. Ah unfaithful wretch, get hence, thou
shall not stay with me, nor see my face these many days. I desire you to
consider whether Christ does not speak thus to your Spirits. But I have
digressed and now I return.

4 This is also a fault among you, that you do not pity the poor blind
world, and endeavor to bring them into the knowledge of the truth, by laying
before them the free love of God through Jesus Christ; all your studies are how
to build up Saints, therefore to them you do altogether speak: Nay I have
heard Sermon after Sermon in public, besides your practice in private, and
you speak only to Saints enlightened, though most of the people to whom you
speak are yet in the old man, and have need of such a Sermon as Christ
preached to Nicodemus. And so you are blameworthy as the Presbyterians are,
yea more than they, for many of them do teach the practical part of divinity
before the doctrinall; and you tell of great enjoyments, before your hearers
are truly principled; he that does truly preach the Gospel must preach to
sinners to convince them, as well as to Saints, to confirm them. If you will
indeed be followers of Christ, you must not content your selves to preach a
piece of the Gospel, for Christ when he came among sinners he was entreating
and persuading them and calling them to come to him that they might have life;
He often encouraged them to come to him, telling them, he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. He bids come unto him, all you that are
weary and heavy laden, and he will give you rest: And says, They that come to
me I will in no wise cast off. And when he gave his Commission to his
Disciples, he told them, they must preach the Gospel to every creature. Oh
then pity the world, pray for the world, rebuke, instruct, exhort, persuade,
and beseech them to be reconciled to God: your father lets the Sun shine and
the Rain fall upon them, and bids you learn of him to love them.

Do they revile thee? Then with Paul, bless them, 1 Cor. 4.12. Do they
persecute thee? Then with him suffer it, 1 Cor. 4.12. Do they take away thy
cloak? give them thy coat. Do they smite thee on the one cheek? offer the
other.

Do they curse thee as Shimei did David? Then as David, let them alone: It may
be the Lord has bid them do it. To you it is given, in the behalf of Christ;
not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake: And how know thou,
but that he will reward thee good for all their evil. If thou wer'st of the
world, the world would love thee; but because he has chosen thee out of the
world, therefore the world does hate thee.

A Word to those that go under the name and title of ANABAPTISTS.
MY Brethren, there are these things worthy of commendation among you.

You meet often together, and when you come together, as good Stewards of the
manifold grace of God; as every one has received the gift, so he does
administer the same: you exceed, in some sort, all other Churches, namely in
this; That you do administer a right ordinance to right objects: you will do
God work in Gods way, I mean, you Baptize those to whom Baptism belongs; you
do that which is required, and as it is required. And in some measure you do
according to the command of Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. You warn them that are
unruly: you do comfort the feeble minded, support the weak; and in some
measure ye endeavor to have patience toward all men. And when men begin to
deny, or slight Gods ordinances, you withdraw your selves from such; and this
also is found in you, for which, I commend you: You look upon the scripture, as
written for your learning; and therefore you often read, and meditate of it;
you cannot bear with those that slight it, and speak reproach fully of it: you
have experience, that God does teach you by his word mediately, more than by
immediate revelations.

But, my Brethren, there are faults among you; therefore I have a few things
against you, wherefore bear with me, if I deal plainly with you: first, the
Scripture bids you speak evil of no man; why then do you imagine in your
hearts, and speak evil of the Independent, because he will not be rebaptized?
Why do you so judge the Presbyterian for Baptizing children, to whom it does
not belong. They do not see by your eyes, therefore they cannot walk by your
ruks: are they in darkness in this? so once wast thou: Do thou outstrip
them in this? it may be (nay I am sure) they do go beyond thee in other
particulars of obedience: Do they neglect the ordinance of Baptism? that is
their evil; but thou do rest upon it, and this is thy evil: do they sin in
sleighting Baptism, thou sinnest in idolizing of it: Oh then, be sparing to
censure, and judge thy Brother!

Here is another branch of your miscarriage; you suffer no man (though never so
well gifted) to speak among you: no, though he be able to teach you all,
unless he be joined to you by the ordinance of Baptism with water, and though
he be baptized with the Baptism of the Spirit, without which that of water is
nothing; you hear him not.

Again, you often take Scripture in the literal, when you should take it in
the spiritual sense; When Christ speaks of the baptism of the Spirit, you
understand it to be of Water: In a word

You live much under the administration of John, who tells you, that he must
decrease, but not so much under the administration of Christ who shall increase.

Again, you make Baptism the ground of your communion, and so disorder, what
God has ordered; for the ground of communion should arise, first, from that
union you have with Christ your head; and secondly, from that near relation you
have each to other, as being one in the same spirit: In a word, your knowledge
that you have one of another, is after the flesh: when will you be of Paul's
mind, 2 Cor. 5.16: to know no man after the flesh: I may truly say of you, as
once it was said of Apollos, Acts 18.25. that he was instructed in the way of
the Lord; knowing only John's Baptism of water: and surely you have great need
as once he had, to have Aquilla and Priscilla to take you aside, and teach you
the way of God more perfectly, etc.

A Word to those that hold Free Will, and General-Redemption.
MY Friends, some things I have observed from you, by my being among you; which
I desire to learn of you, and for which I commend you: I have seen you bearing
one another burdens, relieving one another necessities, according to your
abilities, often visiting one another, with many outward expressions of that
inward love, which you bear one to another, these things ought to be done; and
there are other things which you ought not to leave undone; as also to love
those that are not under your form.

These Principles also do you hold.

First, That Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom for all; and you prove it by
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 2. v. 6. 1 John 29. 1 John 2. v. 2. 2 Cor. 1.15.

Secondly, That remission of Sins ought to be preached to every creature; which
proves the first, that Christ gave himself a ransom for all; and therefore
remission of sins must be preached to all, and that you prove by these, and the
like Scriptures, Luke 24.47. Mark 16.15 Luke 10.5. Isa. 45.22.

Thirdly, That every one is to believe the forgiveness of his sins; for if
Christ died for all, and the Gospel ought to believe, and that all are called
upon to believe: you bring these and the like Scriptures, John 1.7. John 17.21.
Now if your principles drawn from these or the like Scriptures, be according to
the spiritual sense of them; you do well: So much for the things worthy of
commendation in you.

But my friends, there are many faults among you, for which I have at present,
a few things against you.

The first, is your abuse of Scriptures: first, in taking them in a literal
sense; secondly, looking into, and speaking of only those scriptures, that
seemingly in the letter do confirm your principles: Whereas if you rightly
understood them, you would find the sense of one scripture to stand with the
sense of another; As to instance a little in the forenamed things.

First, you say, That Jesus Christ gave himself a ransom for all, and
remission of sins is to be preached to all: Now compare those scriptures with
Romans 8.30. where he speaks of particular, not of general predestination. So
when he speaks of election to the Ephesians, he points at a particular, not at
a general election. And when Christ prays John 17. he prays not for the
world, but only for those whom the Lord had given him out of the world. And
Joh. 6.44. There can none come to him but whom the father draws. Read and
well consider that one Scripture, which all of you are not able to answer, Acts
13.48. And as many as were ordained to eternal life believed. I know what
false gloss you put upon this text through your ignorance; you say the
original says thus, As many as believed were ordained to eternal life. And
with this false sense you deceived me for a few days, but when I searched the
original, I found you liars, for that word is truly translated; and I have
spoken with many poor souls that you have deluded with these and the like
things. You say election depends upon qualifications and bring these or the
like Scriptures, The Lord chooses to himself the man that is righteous, never
minding that other text which says, there is none righteous no not one. So
then, if he chooses none but the righteous, and there are no righteous, not
one, then he chooses none. Oh you simple ones, how long will you love
simplicity? Scorners delight in scorning? and Fools hate knowledge? If this
text does speak to any such in England this day: It speaks to, and concerns you
chiefly.

Did you never read with understanding that text which says, that we and all
the Nations of the World are in the hands or God, as clay in the hands of the
potter, who makes one vessel to honor, another to dishonor as he pleases:
And if there be any man so impudent to say, as I have heard some of you say,
that then God is partial. See how Paul checks such, Romans 9.19.20. Oh man who
are thou that replyest against God, shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it why have thou made me thus?

If thou will know a reason why the Lord does elect some to life and to pass
by others, he is pleased to give thee no other account than this Exodus 33.19. I
will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will show mercy to whom I
will show mercy; and whom he will he hardens.

If thou will also know a reason why he will cast some into the pit of
destruction, and give to others life everlasting: I answer, God has no rule to
act by but his own will, so that for him to do what he wills, is just, and
it is just for no other reason nor upon any other ground, but this, viz.
because it is his will to do it, and this is the justnes of man's actions, to
do what God has commanded or declared that he will have man to do. Now I
say, this is the reason why he will cast some to destruction, viz. to magnify
his justice, or perform his will determined upon such as do transgress the
law given them, and for this cause is such destruction just, because it is that
which the eternal will or decree has appointed to follow upon transgression.
And after the very same sort does he exalt the attribute of his mercy in the
salvation of others. Read the 9. of the Romans and thou will find most of
that chapter spent in disputing this very thing.

Another gross error that you hold contrary to the scripture is this, That the
soul is mortal as well as the body.

Again you hold and teach, That if God commanded the Gospel to be preached to
all, and Christ dyed only for some, then God commands a lie to be preached to
the most part of men, and that is blasphemy to say that God commands a lie to
be preached.

Again, You ground your own particular faith upon that general redemption,
and if your ground be false, your faith must needs be so; for no good fruit
proceeds from a corrupt tree; and wherein does such faith exceed that of the
Devils, that believe and tremble.

You say there is a power in every man to do whatsoever is commanded, a power
to choose and a power to refuse; you cite that of Joshuah and the like
scriptures. Behold I have set before you this day, life and death, choose you
whether etc. Ergo (say you) the people have power to choose and to refuse.

You say also that upon your doing, or not doing, depends your eternal
blessing or everlasting cursing, and yet unless it be in some few things which
I have fore-spoken in your commendation, you are the most unfruitful people
that ever I came amongst, except our new upstart wantons or new Notionists (to
whom I shall speak next.) You spend the most of your time, in speaking evil
of almost all other Christians that walk not by your rules, and hold not to
your errors, you back-bite and reproach them with that bitterness of spirit,
as is more suitable to the principles of Heathens than of Christians, I will
forbear to speak the one half of what I have been an eye witness unto of
this kind, in that little time when I was among you. You spend your time to
spy a Mote in your Brothers eye, but when will you pull the Beam out of your
own eyes.

Again, You hold that a man may fall from Christ or Grace, you have often
affirmed that a man may be a child of God to day, and a limb of Satan to
morrow, that he stands by obedience and not by grace.

When he does well he is accepted.
When he does ill be is rejected.
And so by your errors, our salvation seems to depend upon works, and so
the free grace of God is nullified, and the obedience of Christ made of none
effect; and in effect you plainly deny Christ: In a word,

You hold more foolish, sottish, unsound, unwarrantable, and uncomfortable
points; than any Sect; And your conversation is just answerable to your
principles, so join both together and behold their ill shapen form and fruit.
1. By them both you dishonor God. 2. You grieve his people. 3. You delude the
world 4. You cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of.

Remember therefore from whence you are fallen and repent or else the Lord will
come unto you quickly, and fight against you

A word to the new upstart Wantons that deny Gods Ordainances, or New
NOTIONISTS: full of Whimsies.
MY Friends, I have spent a few days and made diligent search to find
something in you worthy of commendation, that so I might speak to you as I
have to other Churches, taking notice of your Good and of your evil, but (my
Friends) I cannot find any thing among you but blasphemy and heresy, and
trusting in lying vanities. Therefore as John said in another case 1 John 1.3.
I shall say to you in this case. That which I have seen and heard declare I
unto you: and what I shall now charge you with, I have been an eye and care
witness of, in conversing with you and being among you. Our Lord Christ speaking
to the seven Churches of Asia by John, discovers in each of them something
worthy of commendation, but when he comes to the seventh Church, the
Laodiceans, there was not so much as one grain of goodness to be found in
her: And yet this Church looks upon her self as the only excellent Church,
transcending all the rest, Rev. 3.17. I am rich and increased with Goods,
(says she) and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art wretched,
and poor, miserable, blind, and naked.

Here is thy state to a hairs breadth, oh thou New Notionist, thou look
upon thy self as one gone beyond all others in high enjoyments, and that can
live upon God without use of ordinances, and worship God without forms.

You say the Scriptures are not the word of God.

Some of you have said the Scriptures will teach you to lie, and steal, you
say God cannot be dishonored by any Action you do.

And some of you have said, the reason why they will not be drunk, is, because
they would not waste their money and cause others to laugh at them, and because
it is hurtful to their bodies, not for any dishonor to God.

You say, That the Scriptures do not concern you, that it is only a
declaration of the Administrations that others have formerly been under and
worshipped God in, you say there are one hundred and fifty lies in it.

You deny the resurrection and the judgment, and say that there is no sin in
the world, but that all actions are alike.

You say that the highest enjoyment and perfection that a Christian shall have,
is in this life.

You make your own wills your rule, and when you are carried forth by them, you
say you are carried forth by the Spirit of God.

You say there are neither Angels nor Devils, but an administration of life,
and an admistration of death, or one of light and another of darkness.

When you come together you spend your time for the most part in jesting
stories and Carnal merryment, and if any reprove you for it, you say you are
carried forth to it.

You speak evil of others that wait upon God in the use of means, you call
them Legallists, Formallists etc.

Most of you despise to hear any Minister preach, though never so excellent a
teacher.

Some of you say that you can make better Bibles your selves, than that which
is made already; saying, this Bible is but the opinions of men. You call
Prayer, and all other Ordinances, bondage.

You say, if one man kill another, it is God that does it; yea, you can use
deceit in your particular Callings, and say, you do no evil.

You care not for the weak, how you offend them; nor for the strong, if you
grieve them.

And you above all other Sects in the world, cause the way of truth to be evil
spoken off; most of the offenses are come by you (we be unto you) as says the
Scripture. The Presbyterians hear of your blasphemies, errors, and
abominable things that you hold: and because some of you were heretofore
Independents, and some Anabaptists; It makes the Presbyterian cry out so
bitterly against the Independents and Anabaptists, thinking them to be all such
as you are; when I must needs bear witness for them both, they do hate your
principles, and practices, as they do the Devil, the father of them; In a word,
you have turned with the Dog to the Vomit, and with the Sow to the wallowing
in the mire.

Wherefore, If there by any sparks of grace remaining in you; If there be any
consolation in Christ, any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if
any bowels of mercies: then, oh then, remember from whence you are fallen and
repent! Learn of the Prodigal Son, and come back again to your Father: for
you have fed a long time upon husks, and your companions have been the Swine.
You have back-slidden from your God, return to him again: It may be he will
receive you: Seek meeknes, seek righteousness; it may be you may be hid in the
day of the Lords anger. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your
doings; cease to do evil, learn to do well.

There is also another sort of people called Millenarians, who hold that Christ
shall come, and Reign a thousand years upon earth personally: But seeing the
number of these is but few, and their errors (for the most part) but in
circumstantials, not in substantials; I shall at present omit to say any thing
to them.

A Word to another sort of People, that are under none of those Forms.
THere are also a quarter part, if not more of the People of England, that are
not under any of the aforesaid forms; neither Presbyterians, Independents,
Anabaptists, Free-willers, nor those up-start men of vanity and empty notions
last mentioned; I say, They walk not, nor keep company with any of these, but a
distance.

And these are of two sorts.

The first is a precious, sweet, moderate sort of men and women, looking after
and enquiring into the power and glory of truth, and godliness, more than the
form: They clearly see all those to whom I have spoken before, to be in
extremes, either toward the right hand, or toward the left; and for the most
part knowing Christ after the flesh; yet this sort not under forms, look on
those that are under forms, for many of them to be (as indeed they are) members
of the same body, whereof Christ is the head. These men desire to know no man
after the flesh; they love not any man because he is a Presbyterian; neither do
they hate another, because he is an Independent; They desire to have their
moderation known unto all men, seeing the Lord is at hand: As these men's hearts
are tender to all, so their Purses are open to all. They desire to be good,
more than to be thought of others to be so; and esteem the power of godliness
more than the form.

But secondly, there are another company, and these are the greatest part, that
are under none of the aforesaid forms; who look upon all the rest, and count it
strange, that they run not with them to the same excess of riot, speaking
evil of them all: The greatest piece of these men's Religon is, to watch for
the haltings of the rest. These men and women spend their time, for the most
part, in gaming, drinking, backbiting, railing at all others, that will not
do as they do. These will not join themselves with the Presbyterians, because
they will not love them: They will not come among the Independents, because
there they shall meet with reproof; they esteem their liberty more than their
Religion: therefore they keep company with those, where they may have their
liberty.

A few Words by way of Prophecy of the downfall of Presbytery, Independence,
Anabaptisme, Antinominisme, Free-Willers, Vain-Notionists, and all other Sects
now extant in England.
A word in general to all the Saints, who are under any of the aforesaid Forms.
OH all you servants of the most high and mighty God, heirs of Promise, and
Sons of Sion; look for great alterations, and mighty changes, see what
desolations God will make in the earth, and look for nothing but the Lord to
be revealed from Heaven, which will be mighty in his dispensation and exceeding
glorious in revelation, strong and powerful in operation. He will bring to
pass his determination, that is, he will destroy in this Mountain, the face
of this covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all
Nations, Isa. 25.7.

If you ask what this veil is, that shall be taken away.

I answer, There are many vailes whereof this is one, thy knowing of Christ and
Christians after the flesh: As soon as ever the Lord took this veil of our
dear brother Paul's eyes, see what a change it wrought immediately upon him, 2
Cor. 5.16. Henceforth know Ino man after the flesh, yea though I have known
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth know I him so no more. Our looking upon
men and loving them because they are under this or that form, is a knowing
them after the flesh. Presbyterians look upon others of the same judgment,
worshipping God in the same form, and therefore love them. But let these speak
never so little against their form, and presently they cast them out of their
affections. and also the Independents, they know men after the flesh much after
the same manner: And likewise the Anabaptists, and Free-willers, they are
veiled with the same veil. And therefore what I say to one Sect, I say to you
all; you shall speedily receive a total rout: You have gathered your selves
together, but you shall be seattered, yea you shall be broken in pieces. Lo
here is Christ, (the Presbyterian says) in the public ordinances, therefore
highly esteem the public preaching, and frequent the public assemblies.
Then comes in the Independent, and taking a strict view of the Presbyteriall
Way, sees many disorders amongst them, and so seperates himself from them, and
joins himself to those o^ his own judgment, and so meet in private, saying
in effect, Lo here is, Christ, Lo here is Christ: Then stands up the Anabaptist
in opposition to both, and says, Christ is not with you in public, nor with
the Independent in private, But Christ is with us in the baptism of John. Lo,
lo, here is Christ: Then comes in he that holds general redemption and
free will, and says, Christ is among none of you all, for you do eclipse his
freegrace, and limit his unlimited mercy, for he dyed for all, but you say it
was but for some. 2. The Gospel is to be preached to all, but yon say, though
he preached it to all, yet he intended it only to some. 3. Whereas we hold that
all should believe the remission of their sins, you say, none can believe but a
few that are elected. But we hold that as in the first Adam all dyed, so in the
second Adam all are made alive. So that, if any perish, let him thank
himself, for upon his obedience, or disobedience, depends his weal or woe,
and so God does neither elect one, nor reprobate another, before he has done
good or evil. Lo here is Christ, here is Christ, say the Free-willers.

And so all other Sects, Lo here is Christ, says one, Lo there is Christ,
says another, wherefore if they shall say unto you, Behold he is in the
Desert, Go not forth, Behold he is in the secret Chambers, Believe it not.

You all have built your outward house of external discipline, upon the sand,
and it must fall because it is not grounded upon the rock Christ, you have made
your communion the ground of your union, and that must fall, because it is not
the Lords but man's building

Quest. But how do you know that Presbytery must down, and Independency,
Anabaptisme and the rest of the Sects must down.

Answ. I answer, Christ told the Jews John 8.56. that Abraham saw his day and
was glade Now if Abraham by faith did see the day of Christ, coming in the
flesh, many years before he came, why may not I and others see the day of
christ coming in the Spirit to destroy all fleshly forms, some few years
before it be finished.

But if thou ask, How shall I know that thou prophesiest true concerning the
downfall of all these.

I answer thee in this case, as the Lord himself answered his people in
another case, Deuteronomy. 18.21.22. If thou shall say in thine heart, How shall we
know the word that the Lord has spoken, from the word that he has not spoken?
The Lord there answers, When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if
the thing come to pass, it is from the Lord, if it come not to pass, it is
not from the Lord.

Again, I have by faith seen all these opinions fallen, and I have heard from
many others that they have seen them fallen also. Therefore that which I have
heard and seen, declare I unto you, that you might have fellowship with the
Father and the Son in the spirit, for then, and not till then, you will give
over saying, as (in effect) you do, I am of Paul, I am of Appollo, I am of
Cephas: Then you will not so much cry up a form but endeavor the power of
godliness.

Deliver thy self, then, oh Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon,
Zecha 2.7. For the Lord shall slay Babylon, and call his Servants by a new
name, Isa. 65.15.

A short description of a true Church State, or communion of Saints that shall
stand against al opposers.
PAul* writing to the Church of Corinth, beseeches them in the name of Christ,
that they would endeavor a perfect joining together, in one mind and one
judgment, and good reason he had for so doing, for he well knew that all
joynings whatsoever that were imperfect, were not of God, and so could not
stand. In opposition to all such imperfect unitings or unsound communions, he
disswades this Church of Christ, from pleading or standing for patties, and
from saying, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos etc. He does in effect, tell them
they must cease from knowing Christ and Christians after the flesh, for that
must vanish. He does persuade them not to build upon the sand, for that will
fall. The Spirit of Christ does exhort you to give over saying, lo here is
Christ, lo there is Christ, for that is unsound and cannot stand.

That communion of Saints, that shall stand, against which the gates of hell
shall not prevail, let the wind blow, the rain descend and the floods come
and beat upon it, it will not fall, for it is founded on a rock. That
communion then is this.

A communion that does arise or flow from union, I say, It is a communion of
Saints, arising from a clear apprehension of their union with Saints, 1 Cor.
12.13, 14. For by one Spirit are we all baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Gentiles, bond or free. And have been all made to drink into one
spirit, for the bod^^s not one member but many* verse 20. For now are they many
members, yet but one body. Now when a Saint comes to see that every one in whom
the Lord Jesus appears, though in the least measure, is a member together
with him in the same body, whereof Christ is the head; then his heart longs
to join himself in fellowship with such, who have fellowship with the father
and the son in spirit, whether in ordinances or otherwise.

He considers that he and all the faithful under the whole Heavens have all
one father, all one mother, all one elder Brother, all one calling, all one
hope of their calling, all clothed with the same robe, all inclined to the
same work, all united by the same spirit, all ruled by the same word, and so
he honors them all, as the body of Christ, and nourishes and cherishes them
all, as his own body. Oh who can break the linkes of this golden chain? Who
can throw down this spiritual building? No, no, The gates of hell cannot
prevail against it. Read, and well consider that in the 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ etc. or as it is in
the margin, be you built up a spiritual house. Go now through all the Shires
and Cities of England, and enquire, nay make diligent search among all sorts of
people, professing and pretending, to Christ, for such a Congregation, that of
lively stones has built up such a spiritual house, and note that Church: It
shall never fall.

Oh where is such an assembly of Saints to be found, as is spoken of Ephesians.
2.22. that are built together for an holy habitation of God through the spirit.
Shall I appeal now to thy very conscience, and ask thee, oh thou zealous
Presbyterian. Is your building which is so much cried up in England, such a
building?

Shall I appeal now to thy conscience, oh thou Independent; and ask thee, Art
thou built up for an habitation of God through ^he spirit? Do thou indeed
offer up a spiritual sacrifice? Me thinks there is so much truth in both the
Presbyterian, and the Independent. as to answer in the negative.

Well then, Hence it is you love one Saint, and hate another because you are
not perfectly joined together; You yet know Christ and Christians after the
flesh, you have been joined together in one form, but not united together in
one spirit. But the day is dawning before you, and the day star is rising in
you, at the appearance of which your communion shall be in the spirit as well
as in the form, and your love shall be to all as well as to some, and when you
are absent in body (as Paul) you will be present in spirit, joying and
beholding their spiritual order.

Now there are many reasons why the Saints ought to be thus joined together:
Take two,

1. Because they are commanded to stand fast in one spirit, Phil. 1. 27. And
how can they stand fast in the Spirit if they be not joined in the Spirit.

2. Because that worship wherewith they must worship God, must be a spiritual
worship, John 4.23.24. 1 Pet. 2.5.

And until Saints are thus joined together they are not fitly joined,
according to that Ephesians. 4.16.

Neither until they be thus united in one spirit, can they be said to have any
fellowship of the Spirit, according to that Phil. 2.1.

Again until they be thus united in one spirit, how can they yield obedience
to that command Ephesians. 4 3. Endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace. And that they might keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace, see what powerful convincing arguments he brings, Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
There is one body, (says he) and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism: One God and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. Mark then (I beseech
you) the Lord by Paul does here lay down. 1. The union thou have with him, 2.
The union thou have with his people, and from both these, as from the ground,
he puts his people upon a sweet communion and fellowship both with himself and
his people. Upon this rock has Christ built his Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against a Church thus stated. But I have been in communion
with all sorts of Professors now extant in England, and waded out of one form
into another, and at the last I have clearly found that much of their building,
has been upon sandy foundations, I shall then shut up all with one word of
advice to all.

Oh ye sons of Sion! Behold your union with God, consider also that ye are
one, not with some (only) but with all the Saints under whatsoever form they
be. Wherefore love them all, pity them all, do good to them all, and as you
are united in one spirit, so let the the word and spirit be your rule. When you
have gathered your selves together according to the order of the Gospel,
choose to your selves Pastors, and Teachers, Elders, and Deacons, make use of
all Gods ordinances but rest upon none, look upon them all but as Pipes and
Organs through which he conveyes himself to the soul etc.

Quest. But me thinks I hear some say, What religion, or (at least) opinion
is he himself off, that has written this Treatise? He can be no Presbyterian,
for he writes against them: He is no Independent, for he reproves them: No
Anabaptist, for he dislikes them: No Free-willer, for he writes directly
against them: What then is he?

Answ. I answer, I am a Christian.

You will say, So are all the people of England, Christians.

But that I deny, For though there are many Christians of man's making, yet
there are few, yea very few of Gods making.

But you will say, What are they then, if not Christians.

I answer, There are many Heathens, and Turks, Jews, and Infidels many
Canaanites, and Amorites, Perrizzites etc.

But I am a Christian, This name was given first to the disciples in Antioch, I
believe in one God, Father of all, and in one Lord Jesus Christ redeemer of
all, and in one sanctifying Spirit of Grace; I believe that it is the office of
the Father to elect, the office of the Son to redeem, and the office of the
Holy Ghost to Sanctify those and only those, whom the Father has elected,
and the Son redeemed, And I do believe my own interest in all these,
without which the knowledge of it is nothing; the Father loves me freely, the
Son manifests that love to me, and the Spirit does evidence it in me: The
Father loves me, as redeemed by his Son; The Son looks upon me, and loves
me, as being given by the Father, for him too redeem; And the Holy Ghost
seeing the love of the Father in choosing me, and the love of the Son in
redeeming me, he also sets his love upon me, and manifests this unto me, which
is the earnest of my inheritance. I believe that God has his being in
himself, and gives being to all other creatures, and the cause, why he made
me, was for his own glory, and the end, why he elected me in Christ, was that
I should bring forth fruit to him, I know I am not my own I am bought with a
price, wherefore I desire to glorify God with my body and my soul, which are
the Lords. I endeavor, as to love God, so also to love his people, not some
but all, and to love my enemies, desiring to become all things to all that I
might in my place gain (...)* I do bel^^ve that I (...) to give no just
offense to the Jew, nor the Gentile, (...) the Church of Christ, wherefore as
much as in me lies, I endeavor to keep a conscience void of offense both
toward God, and toward man. I love all, and yet I desire to withdraw my self
from every brother that walks disorderly.

I do believe that I am a Servant of Christ.

I do believe I am a Friend of Christ, John 15.15.

I do believe that I am a Brother of the Lord Christ, Heb 2.11.

I do believe that I am in as near relation to Christ, as the wife is to the
husband, Rev. 1.9.

I do believe that I am a Member of his own body, 1 Cor. 12. verse 12.

I do believe that I am a Joynt-heire with Christ, Romans 8.17.

I do believe that I am joined to the Lord, and so one Spirit with him, 1 Cor.
6.17.

I do believe that the Lord takes all the evil done to me, as done to
himself, Zac. 2.8. Mat. 25.45.

I do believe that I have everlasting life already, according to that John
3.36.

1. In the promise, fear not little flock, it is your fathers pleasure to
give you a kingdom.

2. In the first fruits, for what is heaven hereafter but a more full
enjoyment of what is begun here.

3. I have everlasting life already in possession by my head Christ.

I do believe that all this is but a taste of what I shall be, according to
that 1 John 3.1, 2. Now are ye the sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what you shall be. But when he shall appear ye shall be like him. The serious
consideration of which, (I doubt not) will draw up my conversation more and
more to be in heaven, even whilst I remain here on earth.

I do beelve that my sins by Christ are taken out of the sight of God.

I do believe that the design of Christ was to take it away out of my
Conscience, that there might be no more conscience of sin, Heb. 9.14.

I do believe that as Christ has taken away sin out of the sight of God,
and out of my own Conscience, so in due time, he will take away sin out of my
conversation, according to that scripture 1 Pet. 1.15. and Luke 1.75.

In a word, I do believe, my sins past, present, and to come, are all laid
upon and done away by Christ, Isa. 53.6.

I do beleve that as there was no good foreseen in me, that did cause the
Lord to set his love upon me, so there is no evil that can be done by me, that
can cause him to hate me.

A Word to the Parliament the Representative body of the Kingdom.
I Cannot put a period to this little Volume, without one word to you, who are
Members of the High Court of Parliament. Honored Worthies, you have begun
well, go on that we may find in England that that was so earnestly sought for
in Jerusalem, Jer 5.1, Men executing judgment, and speaking the truth: And
then why may we not expect to be partakers of the mercy there promised; a
pardoning of the sin, and a healing of the Land. Eye the Lord Jesus in all your
actings, and advance his Kingdom, as much as in you lies: honor him and he
will honor you, and endeavor with David to deliver his Lambs out of the Lions
mouths, for they are tender in your Fathers eyes, let them be so in yours: Your
undaunted courage in not fearing the faces of men, and your executing of
justice upon all offenders, without respect of Persons or partiality: as it is
very acceptable in the sight of God, so the sound of it is very sweet in the
ears of his People. And as the Saints in England have put up many Petitions at
the Throne of Grace, that God would give you undaunted Spirits; and having by
experience found God answering their request by your late actings, as touching
the King and Lords; they are now turning their Prayers into Praises, to the
Almighty for answering their Prayers in assisting you. And the more difficulty
you found in the work, the more God will honor you for the same.

But Right Honorable Worthies, What should be the cause that the people of
England whom you do represent; yea, they that have chosen you, and have ever
since with their Lives and Estates assisted you: What is the reason, that they
all with one voice since the death of our late King are saying to you, as once
the children of Israel to Rehoboam after the death of their King, 1 King. 12.4.
Ease us of our heavy burdens, take away our taxations so heavy: and you have
answered the people as Rehoboam did, if not in your words, yet in your deeds:
saying, My little finger shall be heavier than my Fathers loins, and whereas
you had a heavy yoke before, I will make it heavier: and whereas my Father
chastized you with whipps, I will chastise you with Scorpions.

If you say, this is none of our answer, or practice; Let me ask you, What
means the Excise, the doubled contribution, and Free Quarter, and many other
grievous taxations and assessements: And when we consider the time in which you
increase and continue these devouring Caterpillars, it does aggravate your
evil, as well as our sense of the misery; as to instance.

1. In a time when our trading at Sea is spoiled, and our Ships daily lost and
taken.

2. In which our trading by Land is almost utterly decayed.

3. In which all sorts of provisions for the nourishment of our almost famished
bodies is risen almost to a double price.

4. Though what little Money and Pla^e we had, we lent before upon the Public
Faith; which proves a dead Faith, or at best, but a historical Faith: For
notwithstanding all Promises, we receive none of it back again.

5. In a time, in which many People are but, as it were newly returned to their
Homes, after banishment for a long time from their habitations and estates,
left to the cruel mercies of the adversary.

6. In which many thousands have had their Houses burnt to ash^s, and cry for
help to their neighbors that have escaped that calamity.

7. And lastly, Which adds to our misery more than all the rest; In a time,
when we expect a full deliverance; having by the assistance of the Almighty
power, gotten the victory over all our enemies: so that we may yet lament in
the words of Jeremiah; We looked for Peace, and there is no good: and for
times of Peace, and behold trouble.

God has put into your hands a power, if you have but hearts to make use of
it, to take off these heavy burdens, wherewith your friends are laden.

Are not the Crown Lands in your hands, and all the treasures thereunto
belonging: Are not also the Bishops Lands in your hands.

Are not all the Customs in England in your hands, which amount so high.

And also Delinquents Fines and Compositions.

And yet must we have Excise remain? and Contribution doubled? Is this the
reward that we shall have for all our Obedience to you? Oh consider, consider!
To reward us evil for all our good, it is not sound; and to make your friends
your foes, it is not safe: Shall I acquaint you with what I know, and that upon
sound ground. If the King had gotten the day, and all into his hands, as you
have: would not he have freed those that assisted him? And have maintained his
Army upon the cost of those that did oppose him? did not his practice begin to
testify the truth of this? So tender was he of those that assisted him in his
extremity.

And will not you that profess your selves to be the servants of Christ, and
favorers of his people; do as much for Christ, as he for Antichrist? Oh
then! Oh then! let the cost light upon those that were the cause; and they that
forced you to raise an Army, let their estates pay the Army.

FINIS.

