A TREATISE Concerning the BROKEN SUCCESSION OF THE CROWN OF ENGLAND:
Inculcated, about the later end of the Reign of Queen Elisabeth.

Not impertinent for the better Completing of the General Information intended.

LONDON: Printed Anno Dom. 1655.

OUT OF THE PREFACE.
The Purpose of the Book.
THE Purpose of this Treatise is to prove, That the next Successor of England
must needs be very doubtful.

The First Part of the Book.
The Civil Lawyer declares, That albeit the Titles by Succession were clear,
yet that as things stand now in England, and other Countries near adjoining,
there may be a great Doubt which of them shall prevail.

The Second Part.
The Temporal Lawyer shows that the Titles and Pretensions of all the Ten or
Eleven Families of the English Blood Royal, which remain at this day, are
Ambiguous and Doubtful, according to the Common Laws of England.

That Succession by Nearness of Blood is not by Law of Nature, or Divine; but
only by Humane and Positive Laws of every particular Country, and
consequently may be altered by the same.
CAP. I.
Such are not to be admitted, of whom no good is to be expected.
THE Government is Ordained for the benefit of the Commonwealth; therefore no
Reason or Law, Religion or Wisdom in the World can admit such Persons to the
Government of the same, by whom no Good, but Destruction may be expected; as
for example, by a natural Fool, or one that were a Turk, or Moor in Religion.

Other Conditions, besides Prioritie, are requisite, which are assigned by the
Commonwealth.
Ergo, Some other Conditions also must needs be requisite, besides the mere
Prioritie in Blood; and these Conditions are not prescribed by any Law of
Nature or Divine, but assigned and limited out by the Authority of every
particular Country and Commonwealth, to the which the Prince is bound.

To live in Company comes of Nature; but the Form thereof by the Laws of
every Country.
The Sociabilitie, or inclination to live together in Company, man with man
(whereof ensues both City and Commonwealth, as Aristotle gathers) and in
like manner, Government and Jurisdiction of Magistrates, which is necessary
for the maintaining of that Society, is of Nature, and consequently of God,
that is Author of Nature; But the particular Form or manner of this or that
Government, in this or that fashion, is not by Law either Natural or Divine,
but ordained by particular positive Laws of every Country; for if it were by
the Law of Nature or Divine, it should be all one in all Countries, seeing God
and Nature is one to all.

To live in Company is Natural to man, and the ground of all Common wealths.
All ground of Realms and Commonwealths depends of this Point, as of their
first Principle, For that a Commonwealth is nothing else but the good Government
of a Multitude gathered together, to live in one: And therefore all old
Philosophers, Lawmakers, Plato de Repub. Cic. de Repub. Arist. Pol.
and wise men, that have treated of Government or Commonwealths, as Plato,
Cicero, Aristotle, etc. do make their entrance from this first Principle, to
wit, That man by Nature is sociable, and inclined to live in Company, whereof
do proceed first, all private Houses, then Villages, then Towns, then Cities,
then Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

1. Proof. Inclination Universal.
In all Nations, never so wild or barbarous, we see by experience that by one
way or other, Pompon. Mela. lib. 3. cap. 3. 4. Tacit. l. 8.
they endeavor to live together, either in Towns, Caves, Woods, Tents, or other
like manner, according to the custom of each Country; which universal
instinct could never be but by impression of Nature it self.

2. Speech.
The use of Speech is given to man for this end and purpose, otherwise little
available were it, Arist. l. 1. Polit. c. 12. 3, 4.
if men should live alone, and converse with none.

3. Imbecillitie and Nakedness of Man.
Man is born more infirm and naked, than all other Creatures, not able to
provide and defend himself, Theoph l. de Plant. Plutarch. co^ de fortuna; and
l. de pietare in parents.
but by the help of others; which is a token that he is born to live in
company, both for his necessity to be helped by others, and also for his own
commodious living, seeing no man of himself is sufficient for himself;
wherefore wittily said Aristotle, That ho which flies to live in Society, is
either Deus aut Bellua; a God, or a Beast: for that either he does it, because
he has no need of any, which is proper to God; or else for that he will do
good to none, and feels not that natural instinct, which man has to live in
conversation; which is a sign rather of a Beast, than of a Man.

4. The use of Justice and Friendship.
If man should not live in company of others, Justice and Friendship should be
utterly in vain; Justice, whose office is, To distribute to every one his own:
and Friendship, which is so necessary and equal, Cic. lib. de Ami citia.
Vt nec aqua, says Cicero, nec igne, nec ipso sole pluribus in locis utamur
quam amicitia.

5. By the Holy Scripture.
Dixit quoque Dominus Deus, Genes. 2. v. 18.
non est bonum hominem esse solum, faciamus ei adjutorium simile sibi. Of which
words is deduced, That as this first Society of our first Parents was of God,
and for so great purpose, the one to be helped by the other; so all other
Societies, which grow of this first, stand upon the same ground of God's
Ordination, for the self same end of man's utilitie.

Government and Superiority is also of Nature. 1. Necessity.
Without Government, Superiority and Jurisdiction of Magistrates, the
aforesaid Society can in no wise subsist: it follows therefore that
Government is of Nature, as well as the Society it self. For except there be
some Order kept among men, to reward Virtue, chasten Vice, and relieve the
Afflicted, Job 10. v. 22.
there is nothing to be hoped for, but horror and confusion; for that one would
devour and consume the other.

2. Consent of Nations.
There was never yet Nation found, among whom men living together had not some
kind of Magistrates or Superiors to Govern them; Cic. lib. 1. de natura Deorum.
which general Consent, Cicero calls Ipsius vocem naturae.

3. Civil Law.
The Civil Law proves also this point in the beginning of our Digests, where
the second title of the First Book is, De originie juris and omnium
Magistratuum, Lib. 1. Digest. Tit. 2.
of the beginning of the Civil Law, and of all Magistrates; which beginning is
referred to the Principle of natural instinct, and God's institution.

4. Holy Scripture.
God concurreth also expressly with this instinct of Nature, as when he says to
Solomon, Prove. 8. Romans 13.
By me Kings do Reign; And S. Paul to the Romans avoucheth, That Authority is
not but of God, and therefore he which resists Authority, resists God.
Viz. Authority in it self according to the first institution, as also lawfully
laid upon any persons, but not wrongfully.

Particular Form of Government is not of God, or Nature, but free to every
Country.
So those two aforesaid Points, to wit, The Commonwealth, and Government of
the same, are of Nature; But the particular Forms of Government are left unto
every Nation and Country to choose, either Democratia, Aristocratia, or
Monarchia, according as they shall like best; for if they were determined by
God or Nature, they should be all one in all Nations; which they are not:
seeing we see that every Nation almost has her particular Form, or manner of
Government: Aristotle lib. 2. Polit.
And the cause of these Differences Aristotle attributes to the diversity of
men's Natures, Customs, Educations, and other such causes, that make them make
choice of such, or such Forms of Government.

Diversity of Government in diverse Countries and Times.
And this Difference of Government is not in diverse Countries only, but also at
diverse times in one and the same Country: For the Romans first had Kings, and
after rejecting them for their evil Government, they chose Consuls annual,
whose Authority was limited by a multitude of Senators, and these men's Power
by the Tribunes of the People, and sometime Dictators; and finally, they came to
be Governed by Emperors.

The like may be said of many Commonwealths both of Asia and Greece; and at
this day of Europe.

In Italy, now divided into so many Commonwealths, every one of them almost
keeps a different Form of Government: Millan, as also Burgundy, Lorayne,
Bavire, Gasconie, and Brittanie the lesser, were once distinct Kingdoms, now
Dukedoms. Whole Germany, many years together a Kingdom, now is divided into so
many Dukedoms, Earldoms, and other Titles of Supreme Princes.

Castile, Arragon, Portugal, Barcelona, which were first Earldoms only, and
after Dukedoms, and then Kingdoms, are now all united under one Monarch: Boeme
and Polonia, Dukedoms once, now Kingdoms. France first a Monarchy, under
Pharamond, Clodion, Merouye, Childerick, and Clodovaeus, was after divided into
Four Kingdoms, to wit, one of Paris, another of Soissons, the third of Orleans,
and the fourth of Metz: and afterward made one Monarchy again. England first
a Monarchy under the Britains, and then a Province under the Romans, and
after divided into Seven Kingdoms at once under the Saxons, The Jews. lib. Genesis
Lib. Exodus Lib. Job. Lib. Judge.
and now a Monarchy again under the English. The People of Israel also were
under diverse manners of Government, in diverse times; first under Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: then under Captains, as Moses, Josue, etc. then
under Judges, as Othoniel, Acod, Lib. 1 Reg. Lib. Machab.
Gedeon, etc. then under High Priests, as Hely and Samuel: then under Kings, as
Saul, David, etc. then under Captains and High Priests again, as Zorobabel,
Judas, etc. until they were brought under the power of the Romans.

So as there can be no doubt, but that the Commonwealth has power to choose
their own fashion of Government, as also to change it upon reasonable causes;
and God no doubt does approve it.

The Commonwealth limiteth the Governors Authority.
And as the Commonwealth has this Authority to choose and change her
Government, so has she also to limit the same with Laws and Conditions:
Therefore the Consuls of Rome were but for one year, other Officers and
Magistrates for more, as their Commonwealth did allot them. The Dukes of
Venice at this day are for their Lives; those of Genoa for two years. The
Dukedoms of Ferrata, Urbin, and Parma, are limited only to Heirs Male; and for
defect thereof, to return to the Sea of Rome; as Florence, and Mantua, for like
defects to the Empire.

How a Natural Prince is to be understood.
When men talk of a Natural Prince, and Natural Successor; if it be understood
of one that is born within the same Realm or Country, and so of our own
natural blood, it has some sense; but if it be meant as though any Prince had
his particular Government or Interest to Succeed by Institution of Nature, it
is ridiculous; for that Nature gives it not, as has been declared, but the
particular Constitution of every Commonwealth.

Of the Form of Monarchies and Kingdoms in particular, and the different Laws,
whereby they are to be Obtained, Holden, and Governed in diverse Countries.
CAP. II.
A Monarchy the best Government.
ARistotle, Seneca, and Plutarch do hold a Kingdom to be the most perfect
Commonwealth among all other, and the very first.

His Antiquity.
Of all other it is the most ancient; for we read that among the Syrians, Medes
and Persians, their first Governors were Kings. 1 Reg 8.
And when the Children of Israel did ask a King at the hands of Samuel (1000.
years before the coming of Christ) they alleged for one Reason, Dionys. Halic.
lib. 5.
That all Nations round about them had Kings for their Governors; and at the
very same time the chiefest Cities and Commonwealths of Greece, Cornel. Tacit.
lib 3.
as the Lacedaemonians, Athenians, Corinthians, and others, Cie. lib. 1. offic.
were governed by Kings. The Romans also began with Kings.

It resembles the Government of God, and Nature.
This kind of Government (as do gather S. Hierom. lib. 2. Epist 12.
Hierom and S. Chrysostom) resembles most of all the Government of God,
Chrysostom. ho. 23.
that is but one: represents the excellency of one Son, of one Soul in the
Body: it is also most conformable unto Nature, by example of the Bees which do
choose unto themselves a King, and do live under a Monarchy.

St. Peter's Authority.
Subjecti estote omni humanae Creaturae propter Deum, 1 Pet. 2.
sive Regi quasi precellenti, sive Ducibus ab eo missis, etc. says S. Peter,
where he seems to signify that a King's Government is the best among all
others; seeing at this time when he wrote this Epistle, the chief Governor of
the world was not called King, but Emperor; though indeed between the title of
King and Emperor there is little or no difference in substance, but only in
name.

Utilities of a Kingdom.
This Government, not only in it self, but also by his Effects and Utilitie, is
the most excellent: For in the Monarchy of one King there is more Unity,
Agreement, and Conformity, and thereby also Celerity commonly in dispatching of
business, and in defending the Commonwealth, than where many Heads be: less
Passions also in one man, than in many.

Inconvenieneies of other Governments, as of DEMOCRATIA.
In Democratia, especially where Cunning men are admitted, such as were the
Orators in Athens, and the Tribunes in Rome, who could move the Waves, raise up
the Winds, and kindle the Fire of the vulgar peoples Affections, Passions, and
Furies at their pleasure; there is nothing but Sedition, Trouble, Tumults,
Outrages, and Injustice committed upon every little occasion: By which we see
that of all Commonwealths, these of Popular Government have soonest come to
ruin; as do witness not only the old examples of Greece, Asia, and Africa, but
also many Cities in Italy, who upon the Fall of the Roman Empire, took up unto
themselves Popular Governments, wherein they could never rest, until they came
under the Monarchy of one Prince or other, as at this day they do remain.

Of ARISTOCRATIA.
For Aristocratia, as it does participate of Monarchia and Democratia, or
rather tempereth them both: so has it both good and evil in it; but yet
inclines more to the evil, for the disunion that commonly by man's infirmity
and malice is among those heads: For which cause the States of Venice and
Genoa, which were wont to have simply this Government of Aristocratia, were
enforced in the end to choose Dukes. The Division and Factions among the
Senators of Carthage, was the cause why Aid was not sent to Hannibal their
Captain in Italy after his so great and important Victory at Canna; Tit. Live.
l. 30.
which was the very cause of the saving of the Roman Empire, Eutrop. l. 3.
Oros. l. 5. and 6.
and the loss of their own. As also afterward the Emulations and Discord of
the Roman Senators in the Affairs and Contentions of Marius and Sylla; and of
Pompey and Caesar, was the occasion of all their Destruction, and of their
Commonwealth with them.

Why Helps are given to Kings.
Therefore it appears that of all other Governments Monarchy is the best:
But for that a King is a Man as others be, and thereby not only subject to
Errors in Judgment, but also to passionate Affections in his Will; It was
necessary, That the Commonwealth should assign him the best Helps that might
be for Directing and Rectifying both his Will and Judgment.

Laws the first Help, why given.
The first Help is the Law, Arist. l. 3.
which Aristotle says, Est men's quaedam nullo perturbata affectu: Pol. cap.
ult.
and in the same place adds, That he which joyneth a Law to Govern with the
Prince, Lib. 3. pol. c. 12
joyneth God to the Prince; but he that joyneth to the Prince his Affection to
Govern, joyneth a Beast: So that a Prince Ruling by Law, is more than a man, or
a man Deified; and a Prince Ruling by Affections, is less than a man, or a man
Brutified. In another place also the same Philosopher says, That a Prince that
Rules hemself, and others, by his own Appetite and Affections, Lib. 1. pol. c.
2.
of all Creatures is the worst, and of all Beasts is the most furious and
dangerous; for that nothing is so outrageous as Injustice armed, and no Armor
is so strong, as Wit and Authority.

Councils the second Help, why given.
The Monarchy of ENGLAND tempered.
The second Help that Commonwealths do assign to their Kings and Princes, be
certain Councils, as we see the Parliament of England and France, the Courts in
Spain, and Diets in Germany, without which no matter of great Moment can be
concluded: And besides this commonly every King has his Privy Council, whom
he is bound to hear; and this was done to temper somewhat the absolute Form of a
Monarchy, whose danger is, by reason of his sole Authority, to fall into
Tyranny, Arist. lib. 4. pol. cap. 10.
as Aristotle notes. [In the Monarchy of England all the Three Forms of
Government do enter more or less; In that there is one King or Queen, it is a
Monarchy: In that it has certain Councils which must be heard, it
participateth of Aristocratia; And in that the Commonaltie have their Voices
and Burgesses in Parliament, it takes part also of Democratia.] All which
limitations come from the Commonwealth, as having Authority above their
Princes, for the good of the Realm.

Restraint of Kings among the Romans.
Why Kingly Government left in Rome.
This Restraint has been in all Times and Countries; Tit. Live. lib. 1. Dec. 1.
as for example, The Romans that began with Kings, gave their Kings as great
and absolute Authority as ours have now adays, but yet their next in Blood
Succeeded them not of necessity, but new Kings were Chosen partly by the
Senate, and partly by the People. So as of Three Numa Pompilius. Tullius
Hostilius. Tarquinus Priscus.
most excellent Kings that ensued immediately after Romulus, none were of the
Blood, nor yet Romans born, but rather Strangers Chosen for their Virtue and
Valor: Tit. Live. lib. 1. Dec. 1.
So for the neglecting of their Laws the Senators slew Romulus their first
King, and cut him in pieces; and for the same reason, expelled Tarquinius
Superbus their last, and all his Posterity, and with them the Name and
Government of Kings, which was changed in the Regiment of Consuls.

Restraint of Kings among the Grecians.
In Greece, and namely among the Lacedaemonians, Arist. lib. 2. Pol. Cap. 8.
Plut. in Lycur.
their Kings Authority was so restrained by certain Officers of the People,
called Ephori (which commonly were five in number) as they were not only
chastened by them, but also Deprived, and sometimes put to death.

Restraint of Kings in Christendom.
In Germany.
The Emperor can neither make War, nor exact any Contribution of men, or Money
thereunto, but by the free leave and Consent of all the States of the Germane
Diet or Parliament; And for his Children or next in Kinn, they have no action,
interest, or pretense to Succeed, but only by free Election, if they shall be
thought worthy: Nay one of the chiefest Points that the Emperor must Swear at
his entrance is this, Sleidan, lib. 8. Anno 1532. Blond Decad. 2. l. 3. Crant.
l. c. 25.
That he shall never go about to make the Dignity of the Emperor Peculiar or
Hereditarie to his Family, but leave it unto the Seven Electors, free in their
power to Choose his Successor, according to the Law made by the Pope Gregory the
Fifth, and the Emperor Charles the Fourth, in this behalf.

In Polonia and Bohemia.
The Kings of Polonia and Bohemia can neither do any thing of great Moment,
Herbert. lib. 9. hist. Polon. Cromerus l. 3. hist Polon.
without the consent of certain principal men called Palatines or Castellans;
neither may their Children of next Blood Succeed except they be Chosen, as in
the Empire.

In Spain, France, and England.
In Spain, France, and England, the Privileges of Kings are far more eminent,
both in the Power and Succession; for their Authority is much more absolute,
and their next in Blood do ordinarily Succeed: for as touching Authority, it
seems that the Kings of France and Spain have greater than the King of
England; for that every Ordination of these Two Kings is Law in it self,
without further Approbation of the Commonwealth, which holds not in England,
where no general Law can be made without Consent of Parliament. But in the other
Point of Succession, the restraint is far greater in those other Two Countries
than in England. For in Spain the next in Blood cannot Succeed be he never so
lawfully Descended, but by a new Approbation of the Nobility, Bishops, and
States of the Realm, as it is expressly set down in the Two ancient Councils of
Toledo the Fourth and Fifth. Nor can the King of Spain's own Son at this day be
called Prince, Council Plet. 4. c. 74. and Council s. c. 3.
except he be first Sworn by the said Nobility and Estates, as we have seen it
practiced in the King Philip's Children. In France, Women, neither any of their
Issue, though Male, are admitted to Succeed in the Crown: And therefore was
Edward 3d. of England, though Son and Heir unto a Daughter of France, Anno 1340.
which was left by her Three Brethren Sole Heir to King Phillip the Fourth.
Anil. hist. France lib. 2.
the fair her Father, put by the Crown; As also was the King of Navar at the
same time, Son and Heir unto this Woman's eldest Brothers Daughter named Lewis
Huttin; Gerard du Haillan. lib. 14. hist. France.
notwithstanding all their allegations: And Philip de Valois, a Brothers Son of
Philip the fair's, preferred to it by General Decree of the States of France,
Franc. Bellef. lib. 5. c. 1.
and by Verdict of the whole Parliament of Paris. Anno 1327.
And albeit the Law Salica, by virtue whereof the Frenchmen pretend to exclude
the Succession of Women, Gerard du Haillan, lib. 13. hist. France. and Anno
1317. and lib. 14 Anno 1328. and lib. 3. del estat. de France.
be no very ancient Law, as the French themselves do confess, and much less
made by Pharamond their first King; yet do we see that it is sufficient to bind
all Princes and Subjects of that Realm to observe the same, and to alter the
Course of Natural Descent; and that the King of Navar only by virtue thereof
does at this day pretend to be the next in Succession to this goodly Crown,
and to exclude both the Infanta of Spain, and the Prince of Lorrayn that now
is, who are Children of the last King's Sisters.

Propinquitie of Blood, not Sufficient.
By which we see, That it is not enough for a man to allege bare Propinquitie
of Blood, thereby to prevail; for that he may be excluded, or put back by
diverse other circumstances, and for sundry other reasons.

Kings lawfully Possessed, may be Deprived.
Yea, The Commonwealth has not only the Authority to put back the next
Inheritors upon just Considerations, but also to Dispossess them that have been
lawfully put in Possession, if they keep not the Laws; As by examples of all
Nations it might be proved. And God for the most part has wonderfully
prospered the same.

Titles of Princes once Settled, not to be Examined by private men.
Not that it be lawful to Subjects for every mislike to band against their
Princes: Nay if a Prince be once settled in the Crown and admitted by the
Commonwealth, every man is bound to settle his Conscience to obey the same, In
that he may lawfully command.
without examination of his Title or Interest, because God disposes of
Kingdoms, and works his will in Princes affairs.

Yielding too much to Princes brings a Tyranny.
But to make Princes subject to no Law or limitation at all, and to free them
from all Obligation unto the whole Body whereof they are the Heads, as though
they had been created Kings from the beginning of the world, or as though the
Commonwealth had been made for them, and not they for the Commonwealth, were
to bring all to such absolute Tyranny as no Realm ever did or could suffer
among civil People.

The mean which is to be kept. The Argument of the next Chapter.
So as all Duty, Reverence, Love, and Obedience is to be yielded to the Prince
which the Commonwealth has once established: So yet retains still the
Commonwealth her Authority not only to restrain him, if he be exorbitant, but
also to chasten and remove him upon due and weighty considerations: And has
the same been done and practiced at many times in most Nations with right good
success to the weal-publick.

Of Kings lawfully Chastised by their Commonwealths for their Misgovernment:
And of the good and prosperous success that God commonly has given to the same.
CAP. III. EXAMPLES.
The Ordination of God in the Commonwealth of the Jews, does authorize the
same doings in other Commonwealths.
FOr Examples out of the Scripture, though some man may chance to say, That the
things recounted there of the Jews, were not so much to be reputed for Acts of
the Commonwealth, as for particular Ordinances of God himself; yet it does
make rather for, than against this purpose; because other Commonwealths may
the sooner practice that wherein they have God his own authority and
approbation.

Examples out of the Jews. SAUL.
First then Saul, though he was elected by God to that Royal Throne, yet was he
by his order slain by the Philistians, for his disobedience, and not fulfilling
the Laws and limits prescribed unto him: And David was chosen in his room,
which proved such a King, as he was a most perfect pattern for all Kings to
follow; and so lived, and so died, as never Prince (I think) before him, nor
perhaps after him so joined together both Valor and Virtue, Courage and
Humility, Wisdom and Piety, Government and Devotion, Nobility and Religion.

AMON.
Amon was lawful King also, and that by natural Descent and Succession, for he
was Son and Heir to King Manasses; yet he was slain by his own people, quia non
ambulavit in via Domini; and Josias was brought in his room; of whom it is
written, Fecit quod erat rectum in conspectu Domini, and non declinavit neque
ad dextram neque ad sinistram.

Examples of the Romans. ROMULUS.
Romulus the first King of the Romans, Halic. lib. 7.
as has been said before, having by little and little declined into Tyranny,
was slain and cut in pieces by the Senators; and in his place was chosen Numa
Pompilius, the notablest King that ever they had, Tertul. lib. de Praescrip.
contra haeres. Justin Martyr. Apol.
who prescribed all their Order of Religion, and manner of Sacrifices,
imitating therein the Ceremonies of the Jews; as Tertullian and others do note;
began the building of the Capitol; and added the two Months of January and
February to the year.

TARQUINIUS SUPERBUS.
The expulsion of Tarquinius Superbus their seventh and last King, Tit. Live.
lib. 1. Dec. 1. Eutrop. lib. 1.
for his evil Government; and the alteration thereby of the whole Government by
the establishing of Consuls, had so prosperous a success, that whereas at the
end of their King's Government they had but fifteen miles Territory without the
City; it is known that when their Consuls Government ended, and was changed by
Julius Caesar, their Territory reached more than fifteen thousand miles in
compass.

JULIUS CAESAR.
When Julius Caesar upon particular ambition had broken all Law both Humane and
Divine, Dyon. in Caes.
and taken all Government into his own hands alone, he was in revenge thereof,
slain, as the world knows, by Senators in the Senate House; and Octavianus
Augustus preferred in his room, Suet. in Caes.
who proved afterward the most famous Emperor that ever was.

NERO.
After Nero 6th. Emperor which succeeded lawfully his Uncle Claudius, and was
afterward deposed and sentenced Which was the first judicial Sentence that ever
the Senate gave against Emperors.
to death by the Senate for his wicked Government; albeit Peace ensued not
presently, yet within few months the whole Empire fell upon Vespasian, and his
Son Titus, two of the best Governors that those times ever saw. Corn. Tac. lib.
20. and 21. Egesip. lib. 5.


DOMITIAN.
To cruel Domitian, (whose death the Senate is thought in secret to have
procured, being not able to perform it openly by Justice; for that he did
presently by public Decree allow of the same, disanulled all his barbarous
acts and pulled down every where his Arms and Memories) did succeed five
excellent good Emperors; Eutrop. in vita Caes.
to wit, Nerva, whom the Senate chose in his room, Trajan, Adrian, Antonius
Pius, and Marcus Aurelius.

HELIOGABALUS.
Heliogabalus for his most beastly life and foul actions, was deprived and put
to death by the Soldiers of Rome, Anno 124.
at the request and public Approbation of the Senate and People; Aelius Lamp.
vita Heliog.
who Ordained in his detestation, That never Emperor after him should be called
more Antoninus (and so it was observed.) and preferred to the Empire in his
room his Cosen named Alexander Severus, Herod in vita seven.
who proved one of the most rarest Princes for his Valor and Virtue, that ever
the Roman Empire has had.

MAXENTIUS.
Maxentius was drowned in the River of Tiber, and he, surnamed afterward
Constantine the great, succeeded in the Empire, and was the man that all men
know, and the first Emperor that publicly professed himself a Christian, and
planted our Faith over all the world.

CONSTANTINE SIXTH, And IRENE.
Constantine the Sixth, was for his evil Government first deposed, Whereby
followed the change of the Empire from the East to the West.
and his eyes put out by his own Mother Irene, who usurped the Empire; but
being not able to Rule it in such Order as it was needful for so great a
Monarchy, she was deprived thereof by the Sentence of Leo. the third, and by
consent of all the People and Senate of Rome; and Charles the Great, King of
France, and of Germany, was crowned Emperor of the West, and so has that
Succession remained unto this day, and many worthy men have succeeded therein,
and infinite acts of Jurisdiction have been exercised by this authority; which
were all unjust and Tyrannical, if this change of the Empire, and deposition of
Irene and her Son for their evil Government had not been lawful.

Examples out of France. CHILDERICK. 3d.
Childerick 3d. King of France, for his evil Government and Faineantise, was
deposed by Zachary the Pope, at the request of the whole Nobility and Clergy
of France, Who alleged, Bells. lib. 1. Gerard. lib. 3. Aemil. lib. 2. Clem.
That their Oath to Childrick was to honor, serve, obey, maintain, and defend
him against all men; as long as he was just, religious, valiant, clement, and
would resist the enemies of the Crown, Baudin. En la chronique des Roys de Fran.
punish the wicked, and conserve the good, and defend the Christian Faith;
Which being not observed on his part, they ought not be bound to him any
longer, nor would not be any longer his Subjects: and so chose and Crowned
Pepin in his place, whose Posterity reigned for many years after him, and were
such noble Kings as all the world can testify.

CHARLES of Lorrayne.
Charles of Lorrayne, last of the race of Pepin, for the evil satisfaction that
the French Nation had of him, was by the Authority of the Commonwealth put by
the Crown; and Hugo Capetus preferred to it; Anno 988.
whose Line has remained and possessed it unto this day.

Examples out of Spain. FLAVEO SUINTILA.
Flavius Suintila King of Spain, was, both he and his Posterity put down and
deprived, Isid. in hist. Hispan.
in the fourth Council National of Toledo, and one Lissinando confirmed in his
place.

ALONSO, 11th.
Don Alonso 11th. King of Castile and Leon, Son to Ferdinand the Saint,
Estevan. de Garibay. l. 13. de la hist. de Espan. cap. 15.
for his evil Government, and especially for Tyranny used toward two Nephews
of his, was deposed of his Kingdom by a public Act of Parliament in the town
of Valliodolid, after he had reigned 30 years; and his own Son, Don Sancho 4th.
was Crowned in his place; who for his valiant acts was surnamed Elbravo, and it
turned to great commodity to the Commonwealth.

PEDRO.
Don Pedro the Cruel, Son to Alonso 12th. having reigned 18. years, was for his
injurious Government, dispossessed of his Crown by King Henry his bastard
Brother, Garibay. l. 14. cap. 40. 41.
whom the States of the Country had called out of France, and Crowned: and
though Pedro was restored again by the black Prince of Wales, yet God showed to
favor more Henry, because he returned and deprived Pedro the second time, and
slew him in fight hand to hand; and being set up in his place (which his
Progeny has enjoyed to this day) he proved so excellent a King, as he was
called el Cavallero, and el delas mercees, the knightly and bountiful King.

Don SANCHO, 2d.
Don Sancho Gapelo, lawful King of Portugal, having reigned 34. Garibay. l. 4
de hist. Portug. cap. 19.
years, was deprived for his defects in Government by the universal Consent of
all Portugal, and approbation of a General Council at Lions, Pope Innocentius
the Fourth, being there present, who did authorize the said State of Portugal,
at their Petition, to put in Supreme Government, Don Alonso, Garib. in hist. de
Portug. lib. 34. c. 20, and 21.
Brother to the said Sancho, who was Earl of Boulongne in Picardie by the right
of his Wife: which among other great exploits, was the first that set Portugal
free from all Subjection and Homage to the Kingdom of Castile, which unto his
time it had acknowledged.

Greece. MICHAEL CALAPHATES, and NICEPHORUS BOTONIATES.
Michael Calaphates, Glicas in Annal. part 4. Zon. Annal. co. 3. invita Mick.
Calaph.
Emperor of Greece, for having trodden the Cross of Christ under his feet, and
being otherwise also a wicked man, was deprived: As was also the Emperor
Nicephorus Botoniates for his dissolute life, and preferring wicked men to
authority.

Polonia. HENRY. 3d.
In our days Henry 3d. King of France, In Liceus Rep. Polon. ad Henricum
Valessum. p. 182. 184.
was deprived of the Crown of Polonia, (whereof he had also been Crowned King
before) by public Act of Parliament, for his departing thence without license,
and not returning at the day denounced by public Letters of peremptory
commandment. Gagneus, part 1. de rebus Polon.


Suetia. HENRY.
Henry late King of Suetia, was put down and deprived by that Commonwealth,
Poilin. lib. 32. hist de France Anno 1568.
and his Brother made King in his place, whose Son reigns at this day, and is
also King of Polonia: And this Fact was allowed by the Emperor, the King of
Denmark, and all the Princes of Germany, near about that Realm.

Denmark. CISTERNE.
Cisterne King of Denmark, Sleydan. lib. 4. hist. An. 1532. Munst. lib. 3.
Cosmogr. in descript. David. Paulus Jovius in viris Illust.
for his intolerable cruelty, was deprived and driven into banishment,
together with his Wife and three Children; and his Uncle Frederick Prince of
Holsatia, was chosen King, whose Progeny yet remains in the Crown.

England. King JOHN.
King John of England, for his evil Government, and for having lost Normandy,
Gasconie, Guyenne, and all the rest which the Crown of England had in France,
made himself so odious and contemptible, as first he was both Excommunicated
and Deposed by the Pope at the suit of his own People; and, to make his Peace,
was enforced to resign his Crown in the hands of Pandulfe the Pope's Legate;
Polid. hist. Angl. lib. 15. Anno 1212.
and afterward falling back again to his old defects, though by making his
Kingdom tributarie in perpetuum to the Sea of Rome, he had made the Pope of his
side for a time; the People notwithstanding did effectuate his Deprivation the
18th. Anno 1216.
year of his reign, first at Canterbury, and after at London; And called Lewis
Prince of France, Son to Phillip 2d. and Father to Saint Lewis, and chose him
for their King, and did swear him Fealty with General Consent in London. Anno
1216.
Anno 1216. But King John's death following presently after, made them turn
their purposes, and accept of his Son Henry, before matters were fully
established for Lewis; And this Henry, which was 3d. of that Name, proved a
very worthy King; and reigned 53. years, which is more than ever King in
England did, leaving Edward 1. his Son Heir, not inferior to himself in manhood
and virtue.

EDWARD, 2d.
But this Edward 1. had a Son Edward 2d. who falling into the same or worse
defects than King John had done, was after 19. years reign deposed also by Act
of Parliament holden at London the year 1326. Polyd. lib. 18. hist. Angl. Anno
1326.
appointed to be called Edward of Carnarvam from that hour forward, and his
body adjudged to perpetual prison, where at length his life was taken away
from him in the Castle of Barkley: and his Son Edward 3d. was chosen in his
place; who either for Valor, Prowess, length of Reign, acts of Chivalrie, or
the multitude of famous Princes his Children left behind him, was one of the
noblest Kings that ever England had.

RICHARD, 2d.
Richard the 2d. Son to the black Prince of Wales, for having suffered himself
to be misled by evil Counselors, to the great hurt and disquietness of the
Realm, was deposed also, after 22. years reign by a Parliament holden at London
the year, Polyd. lib. 20. hist. Aug. 1399
1399. and condemned to perpetual Prison in the Castle of Pomfret, where he was
soon after put to death: and in his place was by free Election chosen the noble
Knight, Henry Henry 4.
Duke of Lancaster, who proved afterward so notable a King, as the world
knows.

HENRY, 6th.
Henry 6th. after almost 40. years reign, was deposed, imprisoned, and put to
death also, Polyd. lib. 23. hist. Angl.
together with his Son the Prince of Wales, by Edward 4th. of the House of
York: And this was confirmed by the Specially of London.
Commons, and afterward also by public Act of Parliament, because the said
Henry did suffer himself to be overruled by the Queen his Wife, and had broken
the Articles of Agreement made by the Parliament between him and the Duke of
York, and solemnly sworn on both sides the 8th. of October. 1459. (though
otherwise for his particular life he were a good man) and King Edward 4th. was
put in place, who was one of the renownedest for Martial Acts and Justice, that
has worn the English Crown.

RICHARD, 3d.
This man having left two Sons, his Brother Richard Duke of Gloucester put them
to death, and being the next Heir Male, was authorized in the Crown, but
Deposed again afterward by the Commonwealth, Anno 1487.
which called out of France, Henry Earl of Richmond, who took from him both
life and Kingdom in the Field, and was King himself by the name of Henry 7. And
no man, I suppose, will say, but that he was lawfully King also; which yet
cannot be, except the other might lawfully be deposed.

If the said Deprivations were unjust, the now Pretenses are unlawful.
Moreover is to be noted in all these Mutations what good has succeeded
therein to the Commonwealth; which was unjust, and is void at this day, if the
Changes and Deprivations of the former Princes could not be made, and
consequently none of these that do pretend the Crown of England at this day,
can have any Title at all for that from those men they descend, who were put in
place of the deprived.

If Kings established may be Deprived, much sooner Pretenders.
And if this might be so in Kings lawfully set in Possession, then much more
has the said Commonwealth power and authority to alter the succession of
such as do pretend Dignity, if there be due reason and causes to the same.

Wherein consists principally the lawfulness of Proceedings against Princes,
which in the former Chapter is mentioned: What interest Princes have in their
Subjects Goods or Lives; How Oaths do Bind or may be Broken by Subjests
toward Princes; And finally the difference between a good King and a Tyrant.
CAP. IV.
1. Objection against the Assertions in the last Chapter.
BUt although by Nature the Commonwealth has authority over the Prince to
choose and appoint him at the beginning; Du Belay. Apol. Cath. part 2. paragr.
9. and Apol pro Reg. cap. 9.
yet having once made him, and given up all their authority unto him, he is no
more subject to their correction; but remains absolute of himself. As every
particular man has authorized to make his Master or Prince of his inferior,
but not afterward to put him down again, howsoever he bears himself toward
him.

2. Objection.
When the Children of Israel, being under the Government of the High Priest,
demanded a King of Samuel; he protesting unto them, 1 Reg. 8.
Well, quoth he, you will have a King, hearken then to this that I will say,
Hoc erit jus Regis qui imperaturus est vobis; He shall take away from you your
Children, both Sons and Daughters, your Fields and Vineyards, etc. and shall
give them to his servants, and you shall cry unto God in that day from the face
of this your King; and God shall not hear you, for that you have demanded a
King to Govern over you.

Assertions of Bellay.
Yea Bellay, and some other that wrote in flattery of Princes in these our
days, do not only affirm, That Princes are lawless and subject to no account or
correction whatsoever they do; 1. Bellay apol. part 2. parag. 7 and apol. pro
Rege cap. 6. and 24. and 26.
But also, That all goods, chattels, possessions, and whatsoever else
commodities temporal of the Common wealth, are properly the Kings, and that
their Subjects have only the use thereof; so as when the King will, he may take
it from them by right.

Answer to Bellay his First Assertion.
But for the first, 1.
That Kings are subject to no Law, Is against the very Institution of a
Commonwealth, which is to live together in Justice and Order: for if it
holds so, instead of Kings and Governors to defend us, we may set up public
murderers, ravishers, thieves, and spoylers to devour us: Then were all those
Kings before mentioned both of the Jews, 2.
Gentiles, and Christians, unlawfully deprived, and their Successors unlawfully
put up in their places; and consequently all Princes living at this day are
intruders, and no lawful Princes.

Answer to Bellay his Second Assertion.
Of the second saying also, That all temporalities are properly the Princes,
and that Subjects have only the use thereof, no less absurdities do follow: 1.
First it is against the very first principle and foundation of the Civil Law,
which at the first entrance makes this division of Goods, That some are common
by Nature to all men, as the Aer, the Sea, etc. Others are public to all of
one City or Country, but yet not common to all in general, as Rivers, Ports,
etc. Some are of the Community of a City or Commonwealth, but yet not common
to every particular person of that City, as common Rents, Theaters, the
public house, and the like: Some are of none, nor properly of any man's Goods,
as Churches and Sacred things: And some are proper to particular men, as those
which every man possesses of his own. 2.
Besides it overthrows the whole nature of a Commonwealth, makes all
Subject to be but very slaves: for that slaves and bondmen in this do differ
from freemen, Arist. lib. 1. pol. cap. 4. 5.
that slaves have only the use of things without property or interest, and
cannot acquire or get to themselves any dominion or true right in any thing, 3.
but it accreweth all to their Master. Lastly, If all Goods be properly the
King's, why was Achab and Jezabel so reprehended and punished by God, 3 Reg. 28.
for taking away Naboth's vineyard? Why do the Kings of England, France and
Spain ask Money of their Subjects in Parliament, and that termed by the names of
Subsidies, Helps, Benevolences, Loans, Prests, Contributions, etc? How have the
Parliament oftentimes denied them the same? Why are there Judges appointed for
matter of Suits and Pleas between the Prince and the People? Cap. innovam. 10.
de casibus, and cap. super quibusdam 26. de verboru^. signif.
Why does the Canon Law inhibit all Princes upon pain of Excommunication, to
impose new Impositions upon their People without great necessity, and free
Consent of the givers? Nay, why be all Princes at this day prohibited to
alienate any thing of their own Crown without consent of their People, if they
be Lords of all, and the People have interest in nothing?

Answer to the Allegations out of the Prophet SAMUEL.
Touching the words of Samuel, they are not to allow or authorize Injustice or
Wickedness in any King. But to threaten the Jews with the disorders of Kings,
for that they rejected the moderate Government of their High Priests, and had
demanded as a matter of more Pomp and Glory to be ruled by Kings, as other
Heathen Nations about them were; which did suffer great extortions and
tyrannies of their said Kings. For the principal points recorded to all Princes
throughout the whole course of Scripture are, Diligere Judicium and Justitiam,
apprehendere Disciplinam, and facere veritatem. And for not observing them,
many Princes have been punished by God himself.

By what Law Princes are punished.
Now to know by what Law the Commonwealths do punish their Kings; It is by all
Law both Divine and Humane: Divine, for that God does approve that form,
conditions, and limitations which every Commonwealth does choose unto it self:
Humane, for that all Law both natural, national, and positive does teach us,
That Princes are subject to Law and Order. And it is not so of a Commonwealth,
as it is of a private man, because a private man's voice being but one, does
not make the Prince wholly, as the Commonwealth does; Besides, having once
given his voice, to make his Prince, he remains subject and inferior to the
same: But the whole Body superior, who giving his authority up to the Prince,
does not deprive her self of it, but may use it, when need shall require, for
his own defense, for which he gave it.

Where one of the Contractants breaks, the other is no more bound.
And then that power which the Prince has from the Commonwealth, is in very
truth but potestas vicaria or delegata, given with such restrictions, cautels,
conditions, and oaths on both parts (the Prince and the Commonwealth) as if
the same be not kept on either part, the other is not bound to observe his
promise neither: And this is among the very rules of both the Civil and Canon
Law; In Regulis utriusque Juris. Vide in finem sent. Decret. Reg. 75. 69.
Frustra fidem sibi quis postulat servari ab eo, cui fidem a se praestitam
servare recusat. And again, Non abstringitur quis juramento ad implendum quod
juravit, si ab alia part non impletur cujus respectu praebuit juramentum.

In things evil promised, Oath binds not.
Moreover, where the fulfilling of our Oath, does contain any notable hurt, or
inconvenience against Religion, Piety, Justice, Honesty, or the Weal-publick,
or against the party himself to whom it was made; it is both lawful, honest,
and convenient, to leave the performance thereof. As for example, In that Herod
commanded St. John Baptists head to be cut off, Matthew. 24.
which he did for his Oaths sake to the Daughter of Herodias; no man will deny
but that the thing had been far better left unperformed, Reg. 68. in fine 6.
Decret.
and the Oath better broken than fulfilled; according to another rule of the
Law, In malis promissis fidem non expedit observari.

Two principal Cases when Oaths hold not toward a Prince.
So in these two Cases Subjects Oaths may be left unperformed toward the
Prince; First, when the Prince observes not at all his promise made to the
Commonwealth at his admission: And then, when the performing of their oath
should turn to the notable damage of the Weal-publick.

These Two Cases touched in the Deprivation of Childerick of France.
These Two Cases were touched in the Deposition of Childerick, when the Bishop
of Woitsburg, in the Name of all the Nobility and Commonwealth of France,
Aemil. l. 2. hist. France. Belf. in vita Child. Gerard. lib. 3.
made this Speech to Zachary the Pope, Truth it is that the French have sworn
Fidelity to Childerick, as to their natural King, but yet with Condition that
he on his part should also perform the Points that are incident to his Office;
as to defend the Commonwealth, protect the Church of Christ, etc. which if he
does, the French are ready to continue their obedience and allegiance unto him;
But if he be apt for none of these things, and nothing else may be expected
whilst he is King, but detriment to the State, ignominy to the Nation, danger
to Christian Religion, and destruction to the Weal-publick; Then it is lawful
for you, no doubt (most holy Father) to deliver the French from this band of
their Oath, etc.

The difference between a King and a Tyrant.
When a King declineth once from his Duty, he becomes a Tyrant; Plato. Dial.
1. de Repub. Arist. lib. 2. Pol. cap. 3.
And as a good King's end and Office is to make happy his Commonwealth; so
the Butt of a Tyrant is to destroy the same: A King rules according to
equity, oath, conscience, justice, and law prescribed unto him; and a Tyrant
is enemy to all these conditions: Cic. lib 3. de Legibus.
Vt populo Magistratus, ita Magistratui praesunt leges, says Cicero,
Theodosius, and Valentinianus, two worthy Emperors; Cod. l. 1. Tit. 14.. digna.
Digna vox est (said they) Majestate Regnantis legibus se alligatum fateri: But
the Tyrant Caligula is justly detested, Suet. cap. 23. in Caligula.
who said, Memento mihi omnia, and in omnes licere. And the Emperor Trajan
certainly is to be immortally commended, who delivering the Sword to a Praetor,
Zon. Tom. 2. in Trajan.
or Governor in Rome, Take this Sword (said he) and if I do reign justly, use
it for me; and if not, then use it against me. The Occasion of the next Chapter.
Which in effect and substance are the same words that our Christian Princes
use at this day at their entrance when they promise to rule justly, and
according to the Laws of their Country, and upon that Condition take the Oaths
of their Subjects Obedience, Protesting, That if they perform not this, that
then their Subjects are free, as before, from all Allegiance.

Of the Coronation of Princes and manner of their Admission to their
Authority, and the Oaths which they do make in the same unto the
Commonwealth, for their good Government.
CAP. V.
Since the People made the Prince, it is likely he did it with Conditions for
his own good.
FOrasmuch as not Nature, but the Election and Consent of the People has made
the first Princes from the beginning of the world; It appears most certain
and conform to all reason, That they were not admitted to that Power and
Dignity without some Conditions and Promises also on their parts, for using it
well; because it is not likely that any people would ever put their lives,
goods, and liberties in the hands of another, without some assurance of justice
and equity: And hereof came to pass that both the Romans and Greecians
prescribed to their Kings those limits before mentioned.

More Religiously observed among Christians, than other Nations.
And the more orderly the Prince comes to his Crown, the more express and
certain are their Conditions between him and the People; As on the other side,
the more violent he gets his authority; as those ancient Tyrants of Assyria,
Nemrod and Belus did, and at this day is done among the Turks, the less
Conditions of just dealing may be expected: Therefore among the Christians this
point of Mutual Oaths between Prince and Subjects, has been much more
established, made clear, and reduced to a more sacred and Religious kind of
Union, than before: for that the whole action has been done by Bishops and
Prelates, and the astipulation on both sides, has passed and been Regestred in
sacred places, and with great solemnity of Religious Ceremonies.

The manner of Admitting Greek Emperors.
Anastatius.
The East, or Greek Emperors of Constantinople (after the Empire was translated
from Rome thither by Constantine the great, first Christian Emperor) though
their coming to the Crown were nothing so orderly, as at this day it is used;
yet they were wont, above a thousand years agone, to have an Oath exacted at
their hands by the Patriarch of Constantinople. Zon. com. 3. Annal. in vita
Anast.
As of Anastatius the first, writes Zonaras, Antequam coronaretur, inquit,
fidei confessionem scriptam, qua polliceatur se in dogmatibus Ecclesiasticis
nihil esse novaturum, Niceph. l. ib. cap. 29. Evagr. l. 2. c. 3
ab eo exegit Patriarcha Euphemius vir Sanctus and Orthodoxus. And diverse other
Conditions also did he promise, before he could be Crowned, as the taking away
of some Tributes, the giving of Offices without Money, and other like points
appertainting to reformation and good government.

Michael.
Of Michael the first, writes the same Author in these words, Zon Tom. 3 in
vita Michaelis. Anno 820.
Michael ubi diluxit, magnam Ecclesiam ingressus, a Patriarcha Nicephoro
Imperatorio diademate est ornatus, postulato prius scripto quo promitteret, se
nulla Ecclesiae instituta violaturum, neque Christianorum sanguine manus
contaminaturum.

The Latin Emperors.
Otho. 1.
In the West Empire (given to Charles the great and his posterity) this Point
is yet more settled, and more inviolably kept: For albeit it went by succession
for the most part at the beginning, yet were they never admitted to the same
without this circumstance of swearing to Conditions of righteous Government: As
Otho 1. who being Son and Heir to Emperor Henry 1. Duke of Saxony, surnamed
the Faulkner, and named by him to the inheritance of the said Crown of
Germany, did nevertheless make his Oath, and received his new approbation of
the People: for the Archbishop of Moguntia (chief Primate of all Germany)
bringing him to the Altar where he must swear, said these words unto the
people, Behold, I bring you here Otho, chosen by God, and appointed out by his
Father Henry our Lord, Anno 940.
and now made King by all the Princes of this Empire; Witichindus gest. Saxon.
lib. 1.
if this Election please you, do you signify the same by holding up your hands
to heaven. Which being done, he thereupon took the Ornaments and Ensigns of
the Empire, and put them upon the Emperor, telling him the signification of
each thing, and what it did bind him unto, and taking his promise to perform
all. And after all, includes the story, Rex perfusus oleo Sancto, coronatur
Diademate aureo ab Episcopis, and ab eisdem ad solium Regale ducitur, and in eo
collocatur.

Institution and manner of the Emperor's Creation, used at this day.
In the year 996. Pope Grerory 5. in a Synod holden in Rome, did by the consent
of Otho 3. Emperor and Nephew unto this other Otho, appoint this form of
Election for the time to come of the Germane Emperors, That he should be chosen
by six Princes of Germany; Three Ecclesiastical, which are the Archbishops of
Moguntia, Colen, and Trevires; and Three Temporal, Blend. Decad. 2. lib. 3.
Crant. l. 4. c. 25
to wit, the Duke of Saxony, the Count Palatine of the Rhene, and the Marquess
of Brandeburge: and when these six voices should happen to be equally divided,
that then the Duke of Bohemia (for then it was no Kingdom) should have place
also to determine the Election: which was approved by all the Princes of
Germany, and other Christian Princes and Estates of the world. Sleydan lib. 1.
hist.
And Sleydan writes the manner and conditions of the said Election to be
these* First of all, that after any man is chosen Emperor, Anno 1519.
he is to be called only Caesar, and the King of the Romans, and not Emperor
until he be Crowned; and presently after his Election, he swears these
Conditions, To defend the Christian and Catholic Religion; to defend the Pope
and Church of Rome, whose Advocate he is; to minister justice equally to all;
to follow peace, to keep all Laws, rights and privileges of the Empire; not to
alienate or engage the Possessions of the Empire; to condemn no man without
hearing his Cause, but to suffer the course of law to have his place; In all
and whatsoever he shall do otherwise, that it be void, and of no validity at
all. Whereunto he swears first by his Legates, and then gives a coppie of
his Oath in writing to every one of the six Electors, and after this goes to
the City of Aquis-gran to be Crowned in the great Church, where, about the
middle of the Mass, the Archbishop of Colen goes unto him in the presence of
all the People, and asks Whether he be ready to swear and promise to observe
the Catholic Religion, defend the Church, minister justice, protect the
Widows and Fatherless, and yield dutiful honor and obedience to the Pope of
Rome. Whereunto he answering, That he is ready to do all this; the Archbishop
leads him to the high Altar, where he swears in express all these Articles;
which being done, the said Archbishop turning himself to the Princes of the
Empire and People there present, does ask them, Whether they be content to
swear Obedience and Fealty unto him, who answering, Yea; he is anointed by the
said Archbishop before the Altar; and then do come the other two Archbishops of
Moguntia and Treveris, and lead him into the Vesterie, where certain Deacons
apparel him in his robes, and do set him in a Chair, upon whom the Archbishop
of Colen says certain Prayers, and then delivers him a Sword drawn, and
puts a Ring upon his finger, and gives him a Scepter in his hand, and then
all the three Archbishops together do put on the Crown upon his head, and
leading him so Crowned and Apparelled unto the high Altar again, he swears
the second time, That he will do the part of a good Christian and Catholic
Emperor. Which being ended, he is brought back and placed in the Imperial Seat
and Throne, where all the Princes of the Empire do swear Obedience and Faith
unto him, beginning with the Electors, and so to all the rest in order. And it
is to be marked, That the Emperor swears three times, once by his Deputies,
and twice by himself, before his subjects swear once unto him.

The manner used in Polonia.
In Polonia, which being first a Dukedom, was made a Kingdom about the year
1000, the manner of the Coronation of their Kings, is in substance the same, as
that of the Emperor: for the Archbishop of Guesna, Metropolitan of all Polonia,
declares to the King before the high Altar, the End and Condition of his
Office and Dignity, unto what Points he must Swear, and what do signify the
Sword, the Ring, the Scepter, and the Crown: And the King's Oath thereupon
being taken, the Marshal General of the whole Kingdom, does ask with a loud
voice of all the Nobility and People there present, Whether they be content to
submit themselves unto this King, or no? Who answering, Yea; the Archbishop
does end the residue of the Ceremonies, and does place him in the Royal Throne,
where all his Subjects do Homage unto him.

The manner used in Spain before the entering of the Moors.
Sisinandus.
When Spain remained yet one General Monarchy under the Goths, before the
entering of the Moors, Sissinandus (who had expelled King Suintila for his cruel
Government) in the Fourth National Council of Toledo, Ambros Mor. lib. 11. cap.
17. hist. Hisp. praef. ejusdem Concilii.
holden the year 633. prayed with submission the Prelates there gathered
together, to determine that which should be needful for the maintaining both of
Religion and State: and so after matters of Religion* Conc. Tol. 4. cap. 74.
they first confirm the Deposition of King Suintila, together with his Wife,
Brother, and Children; and then authorize the Title of Sissinandus: but yet
with this insinuation; We do require you that are our present King, and all
other our Princes that shall follow hereafter with the humility which is meek
and moderate toward your Subjects, Cap. 74.
and that you Govern your People in Justice and Piety, and that none of you do
give sentence alone against any man in case of Life and Death, but with the
consent of your public Council, and with those that be Governors in matters of
Judgment: And against all Kings that are to come, we do promulgate this
sentence, That if any of them shall against the reverence of our Laws* exercise
cruel Authority with proud domination and Kingly pomp, following only their
own concupisence in wickedness, that they are condemned by Christ with the
sentence of Excommunication, and have their separation both from him and us to
everlasting judgment.

Chintilla.
Sissinandus being dead, one Chintilla was made King in his place; under whom
were gathered two other Councils, the 5th. and 6th. of Toledo, in which matters
were determined about the Succession to the Crown, Conc. 5. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. and
Con. 6. cap. 16, 17, 18.
Safety of the Prince, Provision for his Children, Friends, Officers, and
Favorites after his death, against such, as without the approbation of the
Commonwealth, did aspire to the same. And among other Points a severe Decree
was made in the 6th. Council, concerning the King's Oath at his admission,
Conc. Tol. 6. cap. 9.
That he should not be placed in the Royal seat, until among other Conditions
he had promised by the Sacrament of an Oath, That he would suffer no man to
break the Catholic Faith, etc.

After the entering of the Moors.
Don Pelago.
After the coming in of the Moors, one Don Pelago, a young Prince of the Royal
Blood of the Goths being fled among the rest to the Mountains, was found and
made King; and having began the recovery of Spain, Amb. Morales lib. 13. cap. 2.
by the getting of Leon, left a certain Law written in the Gotish tongue
touching the manner of making their King in Spain, and how he must Swear to
their Liberties and Privileges: whereof the first Article says, Before all
things it is established for a Law, Liberty, and Privilege of Spain, That the
King is to be placed by Voices, and Consent perpetually; and this to the intent
no evil King may enter without consent of the People, seeing they are to give
to him that which with their blood and labors they have gained of the Moors.
For the fashion of making their Kings in that old time, it remains still in
substance at this day, but the manner thereof is somewhat altered; for now the
Spanish Kings be not Crowned, but have another Ceremony for their admission
equal to Coronation, which is performed by the Archbishop of Toledo, Primate of
all Spain.

Manner used in France.
Two Manners thereof.
In France have been two manners used of that Action; the one more ancient has
endured 600. years, from Clodoveus, (that was Christened, and Anointed also and
Crowned at Rheims by S. Remigius) unto the time of Henry 1. and Philip 1. his
Son, before the 12. Peers of France were appointed to assist the Coronation,
Lib. 3. de lib. estat. fol. 238.
which now is the chiefest part of that Solemnity. In the old fashion, as
says du Haillan, the Kings were lifted up and carried about upon a Target by
the chief Subjects there present, according to the manner of the Spaniards. But
for the substance of the admission it was not much different from that which is
now.

The Old Manner.
Philip, 1.
For example, Belf. hist. Fran. lib. 3. c. 20. in vita Phil. 1.
the Coronation of Philip 1. Henry 1. his father desiring for his old age to
establish him in the Crown before his death, did ask the consent and
approbation both generally, and in particular of the Nobility and People, for
his admission: Whom finding all willing, he brought him to Rheims, where in the
great Church, the Mass being began, upon the reading of the Epistle, Memoures
du Fillet c. du Sacre des Roys.
the Archbishop turning about the Prince, declared unto him what was the
Catholic Faith, and asked him, Whether he did believe it, and would defend it
against all persons; who affirming that he would, his Oath was brought unto
him, whereunto he must Swear; which he took, and holding his hands between the
hands of the Archbishop, read it with a loud voice, and signed it with his own
hand: The substance of the Oath was, That he would preserve unto the Clergy
all Canonical privileges, and all Law and Justice unto them; as every King was
bound to do; and furthermore administer Justice unto all People given him in
charge. Then the Archbishop taking his Cross, after he had showed unto all the
audience the authority that the Archbishop of Rheims had to anoint and Crown
the King of France, and asked license of King Henry the Father, Belf. l. 3. c.
20.
Il esleut Philippe son fili pour and en Roy de France? Which the Popes Legates,
and the Nobility, and People did approve, crying out three times, Nous
l'approvvons, nous le voalons, soit fait notre Roy.

Institution of the newest Manner.
This Manner was altered specially by Nephew to Philip 1.
Louysle Jeune, who, leaving still the substance of the action, added thereunto
diverse external Ceremonies of Honor and Majesty; and amongst other ordained
the offices of Twelve Peers of France, Six Ecclesiastical, and Six Temporal;
who ever since have had the chiefest Places and Offices in this great action.

First,

THe Archbishop and Duke of Rheims anointeth and Crowns the King.

The Bishop and Duke of Laon, bears the Glass of Sacred Oil.

The Bishop and Duke of Langres, the Cross.

The Bishop and Earl of Beauvais, the Mantle Royal.

The Bishop and Earl of Koyon, the King's Girdle.

The Bishop and Earl of Chaalons, the Ring.

The Duke of Burgundy, Dean of the Order, holds the Crown.

The Duke of Gasconie and Guyenne, the First Banner quartered.

The Duke of Normandy, the Second Banner quartered.

The Earl of Tholosa, the Golden Spurs.

The Earl of Champanie, the Banner Royal, or Standard of War.

The Earl of Flanders, the Sword Royal.

And this day the King is apparrelled three times, and in several sorts; 1. As
a Priest; 2. As a King, and a Warrier; 3. As a Judge.

Philip, 2d.
This day Lewis, specially for the Coronation of his Son Philip Agustus, Anno
1179.
whom he caused also to be Crowned in his days: Belf. in vita Augusti.
In this Coronation (whereunto Henry 2. of England, as Duke of Normandy, who
held the Crown, and one of his Sons, as Duke of Gasconie, were present) the
King being summoned by the Archbishop to keep all Privileges of the Church,
Law and Justice; answered, I do promise and avow to every one of you, and to
every Church to you committed, That I will keep and maintain all Canonical
privileges, law and justice due to every man, to the uttermost of my power,
and by God's help shall defend you as a good King is bound to do in his Realm.
And then laying his hands upon the Gospel, made his Oath, in these words, Au
nom de Jesus Christ, re jure and promets au peuple Chrestien a moy Subject ces
chooses, etc. First that all my subjects be kept in the union of the Church, and
I will defend them from all excess, rapine, extortion, and iniquity; Secondly,
I will take order that in all judgments justice shall be kept with equity and
mercy, to the end that God of his mercy may conserve unto me with yo^ my
people, his holy grace and mercy; Thirdly, I shall endeavor as much as
possibly shall lie in me, To chase and drive out of my Realm, and all my
Dominions, all such as the Church has or shall declare for Heretics, as God
shall help me and his holy Gospels: Then he kissed the Gospels, and after Te
Deum sung, and other particular Prayers said by the Archbishop, he was Vested,
and the Ring, Scepter, Crown, etc. were put upon him, with declaration what
they signified: After all that the Archbishop and Bishops did bless him; and
then by the said Archbishop, and the other Peers, was led unto the Seat Royal,
where the Crown was put upon his head, etc.

France Author of this manner of Coronation.
Albeit the substance of the Ceremony of Sacring and Anointing Kings be much
elder than the Christian Kingdom of France; yet is this particular and
Majestical manner of doing it by way of Coronation, the most ancient in France
above all other Kingdoms, round about: And it is probable that most of them
have taken their forms of anointing and Crowning from her, for the affinity
and likeness of the one to the other: Estev. Garibay lib. 22. c. 1.
as may be seen by that of Germany and Polonia before recited; by that of
Navarra, brought in by certain Earls of Champanie, according to the use of
France; and others: But among all, England seems to have taken it most
particularly from them, not only for that diverse English Kings have come out of
France, but also for that in very deed the thing it self is all one in both
Nations.

The Manner of Admission in England.
First, As the Archbishop of Rheims does this Ceremony in France, so in England
the Archbishop of Canterbury; And the first thing the said Archbishop requires
at the King's hands, is about Religion, Church matters, and the Clergy;
whereupon the King swears, and gives up his Oath in writing, Holinsh. in his
Chron. page 476 and 1005.
which he lays down with his own hands upon the Altar: the words are these;
That he will, during his life, have reverence and honor unto almighty God, and
to his Catholic Church, and unto his Ministers, and that he will administer
Law and Justice equally to all, and take away all unjust Laws. Which after he
has sworn, the Archbishop turning about to the People, declares what the King
has promised, and asks, Whether they be content to submit themselves unto
this man as unto their King or no, under the Conditions proposed? Whereunto
having yielded, he put's upon him the Royal Ornaments, as the Sword, the Ring,
the Scepter, and Crown; and namely he gives him the Scepter of St. Edward the
Confessor, and then adds this exhortation, Stand and hold thy place, and Keep
thy Oath; with a great commination on the behalf of almighty God, if he takes
the place, and breaks his Oath.

Henry, 4th.
In the admission of Henry 4. Stow in vira Richard 2. in fine.
the People were demanded thrice, Whether they were content to admit him for
their King? And the Archbishop of Canterbury having read unto them what this
new King was bound by Oath unto, 13. Oct. 1359.
he took the Ring, wherewith to wedd him to the Commonwealth, (which wedding
imports a mutual Obligation) which was showed to the People by the High
Constable, and then put upon the King's finger, who kissed the Constable in
sign of acceptance, etc.

Edward, 4th.
Edw. 6th. Mary. Elisab.
In the admission of Edward 4th. the Peoples Consent was asked at two several
times very solemnly, Stow in vita H. 6. page 709.
notwithstanding that he had proved his Title by Succession before in
Parliament. And in the Coronation of Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen
Elisabeth's, the Peoples consent and their acceptance was not only demanded,
but the Princes corporal oath also taken upon the Evangelists.

What is due to only Succession by Birth, and what interest or right an Heir
apparent has to the Crown, before he be Crowned or Admitted by the
Commonwealth; and how justly he may be put back, if he have not the other
parts requisite also.
CAP. VI.
Belloy's Assertions upon this Matter. Assertion, First.
BElloy's Assertions about this matter are plain and gross flatteries, Written
(as it is thought) in the favor of the King of Navarra. Bell. Apol. Bell. Apol.
cath. par. 2.. 7.
and opposite to all reason of State, and practice of the World. First he
says. That all Families which enjoy Kingdoms in the world were placed therein
by God only, and that he alone can change the same. Which indeed if he refer
unto God's universal providence, it is true that all is from God either by his
Ordinance or permission; but speaking of the next and immediate causes; clear
it is that men do also concur therein, and that God has left them lawful
authority so to do for the public benefit.

Assertion, Second.
His Second Assertion is, That where such Princes be once placed in Government,
and the Law of Succession by Birth established, Apol. cath. par. 1.. 7.
there the Princes Children, or next of Kinn, do necessarily succeed, by only
Birth, without any new choice or approbation of the People, Nobility, or
Clergy, or of the whole Commonwealth together.

Assertion, Third.
Whereunto he joyneth, That a King never dies, for that whenever, Apol. pro.
Rege. c. 6. and. 34.
or howsoever, he cease by any means to Govern, then enters the Successor
by Birth, not as Heir to the former, but as lawful Governor of the Realm,
without any admission at all, having his authority only by the condition of
his Birth, and not by adoption or choice of any.

Assertion, Fourth.
The Fourth which has been touched before, is, That a Prince once entered to
Government, Apol. cath. par. 2.. 7.
and so placed, Et pro Rege Cap. 9.
as has been said, is under no Law or Restraint at all of his authority, but
that himself only is the quiek and living Law, and that no limitation can be
given unto him by any power under heaven, except it be by his own will, and
that no Nation or Commonwealth can appoint or prescribe how they will Obey, or
how their Prince shall Govern them; but must leave his authority free from all
bands of Law; and this either willingly, or by violence, is to be procured.

Assertion, Fifth.
The Fifth, That albeit the Heir apparent which is next by Birth to any Crown,
Apol. pro. Rege cap. 20.
should be never so impotent, or unfit to Govern; as if (for examples sake) he
should be deprived of his Senses, Madd, Furious, Lunatic, a Fool, or the like;
or that he should be known on the other side to be most Malicious, Wicked,
Vicious, or abominable, or should degenerate into a very Beast; yea if it were
known that he should go about to destroy the Commonwealth, and drown the Ship
which he had to guide; yet (says this man) he must be Sacred and Holy unto
us, and admitted without contradiction to his inheritance, which God and Nature
has laid upon him, and his direction, restraint, or punishment must only be
remitted to God alone, for that no man, or Commonwealth, may reform, or
restrain him.

Succession by Birth, better than mere Election.
Indeed Succession is much to be preferred to Election, for that, as has been
showed before of the Government of a Monarchy in respect of other Forms,
Succession has commonly far fewer, and lesser inconveniences.

Reason, First.
First, Election is subject to great and continual dangers of Ambition,
Emulation, Division, Sedition, and Contention, which bring with them evident
peril of universal destruction; whereas by Succession these occasions of strife
are cut off.

Reason, Second.
Besides, The Prince is in present possession, knowing that his Son, or next of
Kinn, is to be his Heir, has more care to leave the Realm in good order.

Reason, Third.
Succession also brings less Mutations in the Commonwealth; for that the Son
following his Father, does commonly retain the same Friends, Counselors, and
Servants; pursues the same actions and intentions, and for the most part with
the same manner; whereas he which enters by Election, being an Alien, and
never likely friend to his predecessor, does alter and turn up-side-down all
things.

Reason, Fourth.
Fourthly, He that comes by Succession, having been much respected still for
his Title to the Crown, brings with him less Passions of Hatred, Emulation,
Anger, Envy, or Revenge against particular men, than he that enters by
Election, who having been equal to others before his advancement, and holden
contention with many, must needs have matter of quarrel with them; which he
will seek to revenge when he is in authority: and they on the other side will
bear him less respect, and more unwillingly be under him.

Reason, Fifth.
Whereunto may be added the preeminence and privilege of Premogeniture and
ancestrie of Birth so much respected and commanded by holy writ; Genesis 15. and
49.
so that although Jacob were ordained by God to inherit the Benediction, Deuteronomy.
21. and 15
yet would God have him to procure the said Privilege of Eldership from Esau
his elder Brother. 2 Paral. 21. and 3.
Wherein may also be noted, Exodus 3. and 2.
That yet this privilege is not so inviolable, Romans 9. and 13.
but that upon just causes it may be broken: Genesis 28. and 27.
and so in matters of State it was often practiced by God himself; as when
Juda, the 4th Tribe, and not Ruben the first, was appointed to enjoy the
Scepter of the Jews; and when Solomon tenth Son of David was appointed to be
his Successor, not his first or second.

Election and Succession do help one another.
And so, where in Succession, there are inconveniences, as some be or may
fall, the remedy is, First to assist the Prince with Directions, and wise
Counsel, if he be capable thereunto; if not to remove him, and take in another
of the same Blood, in his place. And by this means Election and Succession do
help and moderate one another, and remedy one another inconveniences.

Answer to the first Question propounded at the beginning.
Now to the first Question made at the beginning of this Chapter, What is due
to Succession or Prioritie of Blood alone? Great honor and respect is to be
born unto the same, for that it is the principal Condition that leads
infallibly to the next Succession of the Crown; If in the same Person do concur
also other necessary circumstances and conditions, which were appointed at the
same time, and by the same authority that the Law of Succession was
established.

Answer to the Second.
To the Second, What Interest an Heir apparent has to the Crown before he be
Crowned; If he have the Conditions before required, he has the same Interest
to the Kingdom, which the King of the Romans, or Caesar has to the Germane
Empire after his Election; who yet is not Emperor before he be Crowned. Or as
in a Contract of Marriage there is Betrothing made between the parties by words
de futuro, and is not properly Marriage, but espousal only; and the Wedding,
made by words de praesenti, or by mutual present consent of both Parties. So an
Heir apparent, before he be Crowned and admitted, is but Betrothed to the
Common* wealth for the time to come; and is married afterward by present
mutual Consent and Oaths of both Parties.

What Respect is due to an Heir Apparent.
Wherefore the Commonwealth in rigor of Justice owes no Allegiance to the
Heir apparent (though his Predecessor be dead) until he be Crowned; because
indeed till then he is not their true King and Sovereign; else it were in vain
to ask the Realm again three times at their Coronation, Ger. du Haillan lib. 3.
de l'Estat. p. 241.
Whether they will have such a King or no? And in the old time they were
accustomed to reckon the years of their reign only from the day of their
Coronation.

But in the latter ages, for avoiding of Tumults, and better keeping of Order,
it has been ordained, That from the death of the former Princes all matters of
Government shall pass in the Name of his next Successor. And for better account
of years, That the beginning of his Reign should be reckoned from the day of
the Death of his Predecessor.

A Rare Example of HENRY the Fifth, who had Fealty done unto Him before He was
Crowned.
Again, By that in all Countries the Subjects take their Oaths only after the
Princes has Sworn, it appears that before they were not bound unto him by
Allegiance. And for the Princes of England, it is expressly noted by English
Historiographers, That no Allegiance is due unto them before they be Crowned;
Polyd. lib. 22. hist. Angl. in vita Henr. 5. Stow in the beginning of the life
of K. Henry 5.
and that this Privilege happened only to Henry the Fifth, for his exceeding
towardliness, and for the great affection of the People toward him; to have
Homage done unto him before his Coronation and Oath taken. Which, both Polydore
and Stow do affirm never to have been offered before to any Prince of England.

Admission is of more importance, and has prevailed against Right of
succession.
Whence it is gathered, That the Title of Succession without the Admission of
the Commonwealth, cannot make a lawful King: and that of the two, the second
is of far more importance; which may be proved by many examples: As of William
Rufus that Succeeded the Conqueror; King Henry the first his Brother: King
Stephen's, King John's, and others, who by only Admission of the Realm, were
Kings against the Order of Succession. Sir Tho. Moor and Stow.
Henry and Edward the 4th. did found the best part, and most surest of their
Titles and the defense thereof, upon the Election, Consent, and good will of
the People. And for this cause the most Politic Princes, that had any least
suspicion of Troubles about the Title after their deaths, Du Hail. l. 6. H.
Anno 1001 Anno 1032.
have caused their Sons to be Crowned in their own days. As Hugh Capetus Robert
his eldest Son, and Robert Henry the first his second Son, excluding his elder.
Henry also procured the same to Philip the first his eldest Son: Anno 1061.
And Louys le Gros unto two Sons of his, first to Philip, Anno 1131
and after his death to Louys the younger: And this Louys again unto Philip 2.
his Son. The Prince of Spain is Sworn always and admitted by the Realm during
his Father's Anno 1180.
Reign. The same Consideration also moved King David to Crown his Son Solomon
in his own days. 3 Reg. 1.
And in England King Henry 2. considering the alteration that the Realm had
made in admitting King Stephen before him, against the Order of Lineal
Succession, Pol. and Stow in vita Hen. 2. Anno 1170
and fearing that the like might happen also after him, caused his eldest Son
Henry the third to be Crowned in his life time; So as England had two Kings
Henry's living at one time with equal Authority.

How the next in succession by Propinquitie of Blood, has oftentimes been put
back by the Commonwealth, and others further off admitted in their Places,
even in these Kingdoms where Succession prevails; with many Examples of the
Kingdoms of Israel and Spain.
CAP. VII.
Examples of the Jews.
SAUL.
David Elected to the prejudice of Readiness Sons.
ALbeit God made Saul a true and lawful King over the Jews, and consequently
also gave him all Kingly Prerogatives; whereof one Principle is, To have his
Children succeed after him in the Crown: yet he suffered not any of his
Generation to succeed him, but elected David, who was a stranger by birth, and
no kinn at all to the deceased King, Rejecting thereby from the Crown, not only
Isboseth, 2 Reg. 2. and 22.
Readiness elder Son, though followed for a time by Abner Capt. General of that
Nation, with eleven Tribes; but also Jonathan his other Son, who was so good a
man, and so much praised in holy Scripture. Whereby it is evident that the
fault of the Father may prejudicate the Son's Right to the Crown, albeit the
Son have no part in the fault.

DAVID.
Solomon, to the prejudice of Adonias, and his Brethren.
David being placed in the Crown by Election, free Consent, 2 Reg. 2. and 5.
and Admission of the People of Israel (though by motion and direction of God
himself) no man will deny, but that he had given him all Kingly Privileges
and Regalities, as among other the Scripture testifies that it was assured him
by God, Psalm. 131.
That his Seed should Reign after him; yea, and that for ever: Yet this was not
performed to any of his elder Sons, 2 Paral. 6. 3 Reg. 1.
but only to Solomon, his younger and tenth Son, who by the means and
persuasions of Queen Bersabe his Mother, and Nathan the Prophet, was chosen and
made King by his Father, to the prejudice of his elder, Adonias, and the rest
of his Brethren: Which though it seems to be wrought by humane means and
policy, yet was it principally by the special instinct of God himself.
Whereby we are taught that these, and like determinations of the People,
Magistrates, and Commonwealths, when their designments are to good ends, and
for just respects and causes, are allowed also by God, and oftentimes are his
own special drifts and dispensations, though they seem to come from man.

Jeroboam to the prejudice of Roboam, Solomon's Son and Heir.
After Solomon's death, Rehoboam his Son and Heir coming to Sichem, where all
the people of Israel were gathered, for his Admission; and having refused to
yield to certain Conditions for taking away of some hard and heavy Impositions
laid upon them by Solomon his Father, which the People had proposed unto him;
ten Tribes of the twelve refused to admit him for their King, 3 Reg. 12.
but chose one Jeroboam his Servant, a mere stranger, and of poor Parentage,
and God allowed thereof for the Sins of Solomon, leaving Rehoboam over two
Tribes, and Jeroboam over ten.

God's dealing in his Commonwealth, a president for all others.
Although we may say that in the Jewish Commonwealth God almighty did deal
and dispose of things against the ordinary course of man's Law, as best liked
himself, whose Will is more than Law, and is to be limited by no Rule or Law
of man; and therefore that these Examples are not properly the act of a
Commonwealth, as our Question demands; yet are they well brought in, because
they may give light to all the rest. For if God permitted and allowed this in
his own Commonwealth, that was to be the Example and Pattern of all others: no
doubt but he approves also the same in other Realms, when just occasions are
offered, either for his service, the good of the People and Realm, or else for
punishment of the sins and wickedness of some Princes.

Examples of SPAIN.
Four Races of Spanish Kings.
Spain, since the expulsion of the Romans, has had Three or Four Races of
Kings. Ambr. Morales l. 11. hist. c. 12.
The first is from the Goths, which began to reign about the year 416, and
endured by the space of 300. years, until Spain was lost to the Moors; And to
them the Spaniard refers all his old Nobility. The second from Don Pelago,
who after the Invasion of the Moors, was chosen King of Austurias about the
year 717. Ambr. Morales lib. 3. cap. 2.
and his Race continued adding Kingdom to Kingdom for the space of 300. years,
until the year 1034. The third, from Don Sancho Mayor, King of Navarra, Moral.
lib. 37. cap. 42, 43, 44.
who having gotten into his Power the Earldoms of Arragon and Castilia, made
them Kingdoms, and divided them among his Children; And Don Fernando, his
second Son, King of Castilia, surnamed afterward the Great, by marrying of the
Sister of Don Dermudo, King of Leon and Asturias, joined all those Kingdoms
together; and this Race endured for 500. years, until the year 1549; Garibay
lib. 20 cap. 1.
When, for the Fourth, the House of Austria came in by Marriage of the Daughter
and Heir of Don Ferdinando, surnamed the Catholic; which endures until this
day.

The First Race.
For the First Race, Council. Tol. 5. cap. 5.
because it had express Election joined with Succession, Council. Tol. 4. cap.
74.
as by the Councils of Toledo it appears, it can yield no valuable examples
for this place.

The Second Race.
Don Alonso, to the prejudice of Don Favila his Children.
In the Second, Though the Law of Succession by Propinquitie of Blood, Episc.
Tuyens lib. 1. hist. Lud. de Molin lib. du Hared.
was established; yet many examples do testify, That the next in Blood was
oftentimes put back by the Commonwealth upon just causes. Don Pelago's Son
Favila. Amb. Mor. l. 23 cap. 6. 9. and 10. Sebast. Episc. Salam. in hist. Hisp.
being dead after two years Reign only, none of his Children, though he left
diverse, were admitted, (because they were young, and unable to Govern) But Don
Alonso the Catholic, his Son in Law, who for his valiant acts was surnamed the
Great.

Don Aurelio, and Don Silo, to the prejudice of Don Fruela and his Children.
To Don Alonso succeeded his Son Don Fruela, who was first a noble King; But
for that he declined to Tyranny, and put to death wrongfully his own Brother
Don Vimerano, rarely beloved of the Spaniards, he was himself put to death by
them. Anno 768. Moral. lib. 13. cap. 17.
And albeit he left two goodly lawful Children, yet in hatred of the Father,
neither of them was admitted by the Realm to succeed him; but his Cozen German
Don Aurelio, brothers Son to Don Alonso the Catholic, Moral. cap. 21.
who after six years Reign dying without issue, a brother in Law of his named
Don Silo was admitted.

Don Vermudo, to the prejudice of Don Alonso the Chaste; who nevertheless
come's in again afterward very happily.
This Don Silo being also dead without issue, and the Spaniards anger against
Don Fruela being now well assuaged, they admitted his aforesaid Son Don Alonso
the younger, surnamed the Chaste; though his Reign for this time endured very
little; being put out by a bastard Uncle of his Don Aluregado, with help of the
Moors; who after six years Reign dying also without issue, the matter came in
deliberation again, Whether Don Alonso the Chaste, that lived hidden in a
Monastery, should be admitted again, or rather his Cozen German Don Vermudo,
Son to his Uncle the Prince Vimerano, (whom his Father had slain) The Realm
determined Don Who was of the Ecclesiastical Order, having been made Deacon.
Vermudo, though he were much farther off by Propinquity of Blood; for that he
was judged for the more valiant and able Prince, than the other, who seemed to
be made more acquainted with the life of Monks, than of a King: Neither do the
Historiographers of Spain reprehend this Fact of the Realm. But King Vermudo,
after three years Reign, being weary of a Kingly life, and feeling some scruple
of Conscience that he had forsaken the life Ecclesiastical, Mor. cap. 21. and
29.
he Resigned willingly the Government unto his said Cozen Don Alonso the Chaste,
Anno 791.
who after all his affliction, having been deprived four times, Reigned yet 51.
years, and proved the most valiant and excellent King that ever that Nation
had, both for his valor and other virtuous deeds; and had great friendship with
King Charles the Great of France, who lived in that time.

Don Fruela, to the prejudice of Don Ordonio's Children.
Don Ordonio the Second dying, Anno 924.
left four Sons and one Daughter, and yet the State of Spain displaced them
all, and gave their Kingdom to their Uncle Don Fruela, second Brother to their
Father; Mor. lib. ib. c. 1
And Morales says, That there appears no other reason hereof, Anno 924.
but only for that these Sons of the King deceased were young, and not so apt to
Govern well the Realm as their Uncle was, [And this notwithstanding that the
said Morales writes, That at that time and before, the Law of Succession by
Propinquitie of Blood, was so strongly confirmed, that the Kingdom of Spain was
made an inheritance so intayled and tied only to the next in Blood as there was
no possibility to alter the same.]

Don Alonso 4th. Son to Ordonio, to the prejudice of Don Fruela his Children:
And Don Ramiro, to the prejudice of the Children of Don Alonso.
And after a years Reign, this King Fruela being dead, and having left diverse
Children at man's state, they were all put by the Crown, and the eldest Son of
the aforesaid Don Ordonio the second, named Don Alonso the fourth, was chosen
for King: Who leaving afterward his Kingdom, and betaking himself to a
Religious habit, offered to the Commonwealth of Spain his eldest Son, named
Don Ordonio, to be their King; but they refused him, and took his Brother,
Uncle to the young Prince, Mor. l. 19. c. 20. Anno 930.
named Don Ramiro, who reigned 19. years, and was a most excellent King, and
gained Madrid from the Moors.

Don Sancho el Gordo, to the prejudice of the young Son of Ordonio the Third.
To Ramiro the second, Anno 954.
succeeded his elder Son Don Ordonio the third, who after 7. years reign,
albeit he left a Son named, el Enfante Don Vermudo, yet he was not admitted;
but his Brother Don Sancho 1. surnamed el Gordo, Uncle to the young Prince: Mor.
l. 16. c. 24.
And the reason of this Alteration Morales gives, First that the said Enfante
was a little Child, and not sufficient for Government, and defense of the
Country. But yet after Don Sancho had reigned, Moral. lib. 17. cap. 1, 2, 3, 4.
and his Son Don Ramiro the third, after him; he was called and made King by
the Realm under the name of Vermudo 2. who left after him Don Alonso 5. and he
again his Son Don Vermudo 3. who Marrying his Sister Dona Sancha (that was his
Heir) unto Don Ferinando, first Earl and then King of Castile, (who was second
Son to Don Sancho Supra.
Mayor King of Navar) he joined by these means the Kingdoms of Leon and Castile
together, which were separated before: And so ended the Line of Don Pelago, and
entered the Blood of Navar.

The Third Race.
Dona Berenguela, to the prejudice of her elder Sister Dona Blancha, and her
Son St. Lewis of France.
For the Third Race. Anno 1201. Garib. lib. 11. cap. 12. and 37.
Prince Lewis of France, who afterward was King Lewis 8. Son to Philip
Augustus having married Dona Blancha of Spain, that was Niece to King John of
England by her Mother-side; [upon these Conditions on the part of King John,
thereby to make Peace with the French, that she should have for her Dowry all
those Towns and Countries which the said King Philip had taken upon the English
in Normandy and Gasconie; And on the part of Spain, That if the Prince Henry,
(only Brother to the said Lady Blanch) should die without issue, then she
should Succeed in the Crown of Spain] got Lewis 9. by her: And yet Prince Henry
her Brother dying without issue, both she and her Son were put by, and excluded
by the State of Spain, against the evident Right of succession, and
Propinquitie of Blood; And her younger Sister Married to the Prince of Leon, by
whom he had Fernando the St. of Castile. Gar. l. 13. c. 10. Anno 1207.
Dona Berenguela was admitted. And the only Reason they yielded thereof, was,
not to admit Strangers to the Crown.

Don Sancho el Bravo, to the prejudice of his Nephews Don Alonso, and Hernando
de la Cerda.
The Prince of Spain Surnamed, De la Cerda, for that he was born with a great
Gristle Hair on his Breast.
Don Alonso, Nephew to St. Fernando, dying before the King his Father, left two
By Blancha, St. Lewis of France his Daughter.
Sons, Don Alonso, and Hernando de la Cerda, whom the Grandfather left
Commended to the Realm, as lawful Heirs apparent to the Crown: Yet for that one
Uncle of theirs, younger Brother to their Father, named Don Sancho el For his
Valor.
Bravo was like to manage the matters of War better than they; he was, by a
general Parliament, Holden at Segovia, 1276. made Heir apparent of Spain, and
they put back, in their Grand-father's time, and by his, and the Realms
consent. And this Don Sancho coming to the Crown in the year 1284. the two
Princes were put in Prison, Anno 1276. Anno 1284.
but afterward at the suit of Philip 3. of France, their Uncle, they were let
out, and endued with certain Lands, and also they remain unto this day: And of
these do come the Dukes of Medina, Celi, and all the rest of the House of
Cerda, which are of much Nobility in Spain at this time; and King Philip that
Reigns, comes of Don Sancho, the younger Brother.

Henry the Bastard, and his Race, to the prejudice of King Petro, and his Heirs.
When Don Pedro the Cruel, King of Castile, was driven and his Bastard Brother
Henry 2. set up in his place, John of Gant, Garibay lib. 15 cap. 1. Anno 1363.
Duke of Lancaster, having Married Dona Constancia, the said King Peter's
Daughter and Heir, pretended by succession the said Crown of Castile, as indeed
it appertained unto him; But yet the State of Spain denied it flatly, and
defended it by Arms, and prevailed against John of Gand, as did also the Race
of Henry the Bastard against his lawful Brother. And though in this Third and
principal Descent of the Kings of Spain, when these Changes happened, the
matter of Succession were most assuredly and perfectly established, yet no man
will deny but that the Kings of Spain who hold by the latter Titles at this
day, be true and lawful Kings.

This King Henry the Bastard had a Son named John the first, who succeeded him
in the Crown of Spain, and Married Dona Beatrix, Daughter and Heir of King
Ferdinando the first of Portugal. But yet after the death of the said
Ferdinando, the States of Portugal would never agree to admit the said Juan for
their King, Garibay lib. 15 cap. 22. and l. 34 cap. 39.
for not subjecting themselves by that means to the Castilians: And took rather
a Bastard Brother of the said Don Ferdinando, named Don Juan, a youth of twenty
years old; whom they Married afterward to the Lady Philippe, Daughter of John
of Gand, by his first Wife Blancha, Duchess and Heir of Lancaster, in whose
Right the Kings of Portugal and their Discendents do pretend unto this day a
certain interest to the House of Lancaster.

Diverse other Examples out of the States of France, and England, for proof that
the next in Blood are sometimes put back from succession; And how God has
approved the same with good success.
CAP. VIII.
Though the Crown of France never come to any Stranger; yet it Changed twice in
it self, and had Three Rancks.
COncerning the State of France, albeit since the entrance of their first King
Pharamond, they have never had any stranger come to wear their Crown; yet among
themselves have they changed twice their whole Lineage of Kings, and have had
three Discents and Races as well as the Spaniards; 1 Anno 419.
The first of Pharamond, 2 Anno 751.
the second of Pepin, and the third of Capitus, 3 Anno 988.
which endures unto this present.

The First Rank.
The First Rank shall be let pass, for that some perhaps may say that the
Commonwealth and Law of Succession was not then so well settled, as it has
been since, and also because it were too tedious to peruse all the Three
Rancks, for the store that they may yield.

Examples of the second Rank.
Carloman against the Law of Succession, and the Order of his Father, parted
equally the Realm with his elder Brother Charles.
Pepin le Bref, first King of the second Race, left two Sons, Charles and
Carloman, and his States and Kingdoms by Succession unto the eldest; Charles
the Great. And albeit by that Law of Succession the whole Kingdom of France
appertained unto him alone; yet the Realm by his authority did part it equally
between them two; Ger. du Hail. l. 3 Anno 768.
as Gerard du Haillan sets down in these words, Estant Pepin decede, les
Francois eslurent Roy, Charles and Carloman ses fills, a la charge qu'ils
partagerrient entr'evor egalement le Roy. Belf. lib. 2. c. 5.
And the very same cites Belforest out of Egenart, an ancient French Writer.

Charlemayne preferred to his nephews against succession.
After three years reign Carloman dying, left many sons; the elder whereof was
named Adalgise; but Belforest says, That the Lords Ecclesiastical and temporal
of France swore fidelity and obedience to Charles, without any respect or
regard at all of the children of Carloman, who yet by right of succession
should have been preferred; Paulus Aemil. hist. Franc.
And Paulus Emilius a Latine-writer says, Proceres regni ad Carolum ultra
venientes, regem eum totius Galliae salutarunt: whereby is showed, that
exclusion of the children of Carloman was not by force or tyranny, but by free
deliberation of the Realm.

Lewis 1. deposed Charles le Chauve, his fourth son admitted to the prejudice
of his elder brothers.
To Charles the Great succeeded Lewis le Debonnaire his only son; An. 814.
who afterward, at the pursuit principally of his own three sons by his first
wife, Gerard lib. 5. An. 834.
( Lothaire, Pepin and Lewis) was deposed, and put into a Monastery. But
coming afterward to reign again, An. 840.
his fourth son by his second wife, named, Charles le Chauve, succeeded him,
against the right of succession due to his elder brother Lothaire.

Louys 2. to the prejudice of his elder brethren; and his bastards to the
prejudice of his lawful sons.
After Charles le Chauve came in Louis le Begue, An. 678.
his third son, the second being dead. and the eldest for his evil demeanure
put by his succession. This Lewis left by his wife Adel trude daughter to King
Alfred of England, a little infant newly born; and two bastard-sons of a
Concubine, Louys Louys the 3d and Carloman the first.
and Carloman; who, for that the nobles of France said, That they had need of a
man to be King, and not a child, were, to the prejudice of the lawful
successor, by the State chosen jointly for Kings, and the whole Realm was
divided between them. An. 881.
And Q. Adeltrude with her child fled into England,

Charles 4. to the prejudice of Louys 5.
And Odo to the prejudice of Charles 4.
Of these two Bastards, An. 886.
Carloman left a son, Louis le Faineant, which succeeded unto him; But for his
slothful life and vicious behavior was deprived, and made a Monk in the Abbey
of St Denis, where he died. And in his place was chosen for King of France
Charles le Nephew to Charles le Chauve. An. 88.
Gros, Emperor of Rome, who likewise afterward was for his evil government by
them deposed, and deprived not only of the Kingdom, but also of his Empire,
and was brought into such miserable penury, as diverse write he perished for
want. In his place was chosen Odo Earl of Paris, and Duke of Angers, of whom
came Hugh Capet.

Charles the simple to the prejudice of Odo.
But being soon weary of this man's government, they deposed him as he was
absent in Gasconie, and called Charles Son to Louys le Begue.
(named afterward the Simple) out of England to Paris, and restored him to the
Kingdom of France; leaving only to Odo for recompense the State of Aquitaine,
with title of a Duke.

Ralph 1. in the place of Charles the simple.
This Charles through his simplicity being allured to go to the Castle of
Peronne in Picardie, was made there prisoner, and forced to resign his Kingdom
unto Ralph King of Burgundy. An. 927.
And his Queen Algina, or Ogen, daughter of King Edward the elder, of England,
fled with her little son Lewis that she had by him, into England unto her
Uncle K. Adelstan. And Charles through misery died soon after, in the said
Castle of Peronne.

Lewis d'Outremer son to Charles the Simple established.
But this Ralph dying also three years after, Son to Charles le simple.
the States of France called out of England Lewis (therefore named d'Outremor),
and crowned him; And he was a good King, and reigned 27 years.

Hugh Capet to the prejudice of Charles of Lorrayne.
Louys d'Outremer left two sons, Lothaire, who succeeded him, and Charles whom
he made Duke of Lorrayne: Lothaire had a son named Louys, who was King after
him, but died without issue. And so the crown was to have gone by succession to
his Uncle Charles. Notwithstanding the States of France, for mislike they had
of his person did put him by, and chose That surname was given him when he was
a boy, for that he was wont to snatch away his fellows caps from their heads.
Hugo Capetus Earl of Paris, who by approbation of the Commonwealth was
crowned, and his race endures until this day.

Hugh Capet his title not by usurpation.
And all the French Chronicles do justify this title of Hugo Capetus against
Charles. Belf. lib. 3. cap. 1. Anno 988.
Nangis an ancient and diligent writer of the Abbey of S. Denis, defends it
in these words: We may not grant in any case that Hugh Capet may be esteemed
an Invador or Usurper of the Crown of France, seeing the Lords, Prelates,
Princes and Governors of the Realm did call him to this dignity, and chose him
for their King and Sovereign Lord. Upon which words Belforest says: For in
very truth we cannot by any other means defend the title of Hugh Capet from
usurpation and felony, then to justify his coming to the Crown by the consent
and will of the Commonwealth.

A speech used by the Ambassador sent from the States of France to Charles of
Lorrayne, after his exclusion.
Here is to be noted somewhat out of the speech, which the Ambassador sent by
the States of France, after their election of Hugh Capet, Gerard. lib. 6. Anno
988.
to Charles of Lorrayne, did use unto him as follows:

Every man knows (Lord Charles) that the Succession of the Crown and Realm of
France, according to the ordinary Laws and Rights of the same, belongs unto
you, and not unto Hugh Capet now our King; but yet the very same Laws which do
give unto you this right of Succession, do judge you also unworthie of the same,
for that you have not endeavored hitherto to frame your life and manners
according to the prescript of those Laws, nor according to the use and custom
of your Country of France; but rather have allied your self with the Germane
Nation, our old enemies, and have acquainted your self with their vile and base
manners. Wherefore seeing you have forsaken and abandoned the ancient virtue,
sweetness and amity of the French, we have also abandoned and left you; and
have chosen Hugh Capet for our king, and have put you back; and this without
any scruple or prejudice of our consciences at all; esteeming it far better and
more just to live under Hugh Capet the present possessor of the Crown, with
enjoying the ancient use of our Laws, Customs, Privileges and Liberties, than
under you, the inheritor by nearness of blood, in oppression, strange customs,
and cruelty. For even as those which are to make a voyage in a ship upon a
dangerous sea, do not so much repent, whether the Pilot which is to guide the
stern be owner of the ship or no, but rather whether he be skilful, valiant,
and like to bring them in safety to their way's end, or to drown them among
the waves: even so our principal care is, that we have a good Prince to lead
and guide us happily in the way of Civil and politic life, which is the end
why Princes were appointed. For that this man is fitter to be our King. And so
Charles was excluded, and the Frenchmen thought themselves secure in conscience
for doing the same; which God also has seemed to confirm with the succession
and happy success of so many noble and most Christian Kings as have issued out
of this Line of Hugo Capetus unto this day.

Examples of the Third Rank.
Henry 1. to the prejudice of his elder Brother Robert.
In this Third Line, Robert, Hugh* Capet his son, who succeeded him, Gerard
lib. 6. Anno 1032 and 1037.
had two sons, Robert and Henry; whereof the younger was admitted, and Robert
put back; partly because he was but a simple man in respect of Henry, and
partly for that Henry was greatly favored and assisted in this pretense by
Robert Duke of Normandy.

Lewis 6. like to be dis-inherited for the hatred of his father K. Philip 1.
When Philip 1. Gerard lib. 7. Anno 1110.
son to this Henry was deceased, the people of France were so offended with his
evil life and Government, Belf. lib. 4. cap. 1. and lib. 5.
as that his son Louis le Gros was like to be dis-inherited for his sake; if
some of his party had not caused him to be crowned in have, and out of order
at Orleans, for preventing the matter.

Charles 8. for his father Lewis xi.
So the State of France had once determined, Comineus in Comment. l. 1. in vita
Lud. XI.
to put back Charles (afterward the Eight) from his succession, for the hatred
they bare to his father Lewis the XI. if the said father had not died while the
other was very young.

Examples of England.
Diverse changes of Races in England.
For England, it has had as great variety and changes in the race of their
Kings, as any Realm in the world. For first, after the Britains it had the
Romans; of whose, and their own blood, they had Kings again of their own: After
this they had them of the Saxon and English blood; and after them of the Danes;
and then of the Normans; and after them again of the French; and last of all,
it seems to have returned to the Britains again in K. Henry 7. for that his
father came of that race.

Examples before the Conquest.
Egbert 1. before his nearer in blood.
To pass over the ancient ranks of the British, Roman and Saxon races, until
Egbert King of the West Saxons, and almost of the rest of England besides (who
therefore is said to be properly the first monarch of the Saxon blood, and
first commanded that Realm to be called England, as ever since has been
observed) this man Egbert being for his prowess in jealousy to his King
Britricus, was by him banished into France, where he lived a Captain under the
famous King Pepin, till that Britricus dying, he returned into England; where,
Polyd. lib. 4. Hist. Angl. in fine An. 802.
though he were not the next by propinquitie of blood, yet, as Polydor says,
omnium consensu Rex creatur; and proved the most excellent King that ever
before the Saxons had.

Adelstan, bastard-brother, to the prejudice of his his lawful Edmond, and
Aldred.
This Egbert left a son, named Elthelwolfe, or Adelwulfe, or Edolf, who
succeeded him; and had four sons, Ethelbald, Ethelbert, Ethelred, and Alfred;
who were all Kings one after another; and for the most part most excellent
Princes, specially Alfred the last of all, 872.
whose acts be wonderful: He left a son as famous as himself, which was
Edward the elder: who dying, left two lawful sons, Edmond and Aldred, and one
illegitimate, He erected the Universitie of Oxford Polyd. lib. 5. Hist. Angl.
Stone page 130 Anno 924.
named Adelstan; which being esteemed to be of more valor then the other two,
was preferred to the Crown before them; and was a Prince of worthy memory.
He brought England into one perfect Monarchy, having expelled utterly the
Danes, and quieted the Welchmen: Conquered Scotland, and brought their K.
Constantine to do him homage. Restored also Luys d'Outremer his nephew to the
kingdom of France.

Aldred to the prejudice of his Nephews Edwin and Edgar.
This Adelstan dying without issue, his lawful brother Edmond was admitted,
Polyd. l. 6.
who left two sons Edwin and Edgar; but for that they were young, An. 946.
they were put back, and their Uncle Aldred preferred, who reigned with the
good will and prais of all men.

Edgar to the prejudice of his elder brother Edwin.
Aldred dying without issue, his elder Nephew Edwin was admitted to the Crown;
but yet four years after he was deposed again for his lewd and vicious life,
and his younger brother Edgar admitted in his place, An. 959.
who was one of the rarest Princes that the world had in his time. Stow says
he kept 3600 ships in this Realm.

Canutus Dane, to the prejudice of Edmond and Edward, Englishmen.
This Edgar had by his first Wife ( Egilfred) Edward, called the Martyr; and by
his second ( Alfred) Etheldred: Which Alfred, An. 978.
to the end that her Son might Reign, caused Edward to be slain; and so
Etheldred came to the Crown, though with much contradiction moved in hatred
specially of the murder of his Brother. This Etheldred was driven out of this
Kingdom by Sweno King of the Danes, By his first Wife.
who possessed the Realm; and dying left a Son, Canutus; with whom, Etheldred
returning after the death of Sweno, made an Agreement and Division of the
Realm; And so died, leaving his eldest He had two more, and one Daughter, which
died all without issue. By his second Wife, Imma, sister to Rich. Pake of
Normandy, she had Edw. the Confessor and Alured, who at the coming of Sweno,
fled with their Father into Normandy. Anno 1018.
Son Edmund Iron-side to succeed him; who soon after dying also, left two Sons,
Edmund and Edward, but the whole Realm to Canutus, who pretended it to be his
by a Covenant made between Iron-side and him, That the longest liver should
have all: and so with the Realm took the two Children, and sent them over into
Swethland. And was admitted not only by the consent of the Realm, but allowed
also by the Sea of Rome. And he lived and proved an excellent good King, and
after twenty years Reign died much mourned by the Englishmen.

Harald Bastard, preferred to his lawful Brother Hardicanutus.
This Canutus left a base Son, Anno 1038.
named Harald, and a lawful one, named Hardicanutus. But Harald was by the more
part of Voices chosen before his lawful Brother.

Hardicanutus preferred before his nearer in Blood.
After the death of Harald, Anno 1041.
Hardicarnutus was chosen, without any respect, either to Edward the Confessor
and Alured, Sons to Etheldred, that were in Normandy; or to Edmond and Edward,
Sons to his Son Iron-side, that were in Sweathland, though in proximitie of
Blood they were before him.

Alured and Edward the Confessor, before Edmond and Edward, their eldest
Brother's Sons.
But this Hardicanutus dying without issue, Alured second son to Etheldred by
his second Wife, against the priority both of his Brother, and his Nephews,
that were in Swethland, was called to be King; but being murdered by the way
by Goodwin the Earl of Kent, his elder brother Edward the Confessor was
admitted yet before Edmond and Edward sons to his elder brother Iron-side; And
the said Edward the Confessor was a most excellent Prince, and Reigned in
Peace, almost twenty years.

Harald 2. to the prejudice of Edgar.
Edward being dead without issue, The States made a great Consultation, whom
they should make King; and first of all excluded him that was only next by
Propinquitie of blood, which was Edgar, eldest son to Edward the Outlaw, son
to Edmond Iron-side, Polid. lib. 8. Anno 1066.
because he was a Child, not able to Govern the Realm; And Harald, son to the
Earl Goodwin by the Daughter of Canutus, was admitted.

William Duke of Normandy, his Title by Election.
But William Duke of Normandy pretended to be chosen Anno 1066.
before by and the same testified by his last Will. Ger. du Hail. l. 6 Anno
1065.
Edward the Confessor with the consent of the Realm; which, though no English
Authors do avow it clearly, seems notwithstanding very probable: Because the
said William had at his Entrance many in England that did favor his pretense;
and that, as Gerard says, At his coming to London he punished diverse by name,
for that they had broken their Oaths and Promises in that behalf: Moreover, by
alleging his Title of Election, he moved diverse Princes abroad to favor him in
that action as in a just quarrel; which it is not like they should have done,
if he had pretended only a Conquest, Ger. Chron. Cassin lib. 3. cap. 34.
or his Title of Consanguinity, which could be of no importance in the world.
Among others, Pope Alexander 2. (whose Holiness was greatly esteemed in those
days) did send him his Benediction, Anton. part. 2. Chron. tit. 16. cap. 2.
and a precious Ring of Gold, with a Hallowed Banner. St. Anthoninus Archbishop
of Florence commended his enterprise. But howsoever he got the Victory, and God
prospered his Pretense, and has confirmed his offspring in the Crown more
than these Five hundred years.

Examples after the Conquest.
William Rufus and Henry 1. to the prejudice of their elder brother Robert.
William the Conqueror left three sons, Robert, William and Henry, and by his
Will the Kingdom to William, named Rufus, forsom particular displeasure against
his elder son; who being at his fathers death absent in the war of Jerusalem,
Polyd. in vita Gal. Conq.
was put back, although the most part of the Realm was inclined unto him; An.
1087.
and William Rufus, by the persuasion of Lanfrake Archbishop of Canterbury, was
established in the Crown: And he dying without issue, An. 1100.
his younger brother Henry, against the right also of his elder brother Robert,
absent again in the war of Jerusalem, did by fair promises to the people, and
the help of Henry Newborow Earl of Warwick, and Maurice Bishop of London, get
the Crown; wherein God did so prosper him, that his said brother Robert coming
afterward to depose him of it, he took him prisoner, and kept the Crown.

King Stephen preferred to Henry 2. his nearer in blood, and Henry again to
Stephen his issue.
This King Henry left a daughter, which had of Jeffrey Plantagenet Duke of
Anera a son named Henry, whom Henry his Grandfather caused to be declared Heir
apparent in his days. But yet after his deceas, because Prince Henry was but a
child; 1135.
the State of England did choos Stephen Earl of Boulongue, and son to Adela,
the Conqueror's daughter, putting back both Henry and his Mother. But again for
that this Reign drew all England into factions and divisions; the States in a
Parliament at Wallingford made an agreement that Stephen should be lawful
during his life only, An. 1153.
and that Henry and his off spring should succeed him; and Prince William, King
Stephen's son, was deprived, and made only Earl of Norfolk.

King John to the prejudice of his Nephew Arthur.
This Henry 2 left Richard, Jeffrey and John: Richard, surnamed Coeur de Lion,
succeeded him; and dying without issue, Called commonly, by the Frenchmen Jean
sans terre.
John was admitted by the States, and Arthur Duke of Britain, son and heir to
Jeffrey, Together with two daughters of his.
excluded, who coming afterward to get the Crown by war, was taken by his Uncle
John, who murdered him in prison.

Louys Prince of France to the prejudice of King John, and King John's son
afterward to the prejudice again of Louys.
But some years after, the Barons and States of England misliking the government
of this King John, rejected him again, and chose Louys the Prince of France to
be their King, and did swear fealty to him in London: 1216.
depriving also the young Prince Henry John's son, of 8 years old; but upon the
death of King John, that ensued shortly after, they recalled again that
sentence, disannulled the Oath and Allegiance made unto Louys Prince of France,
and admitted this Henry Henry 3.
to the Crown, who reigned 53 years.

The Princes of York and Lancaster had their best Titles of the authority of
the Commonwealth.
From this Henry 3. take their first beginning the two branches of York and
Lancaster. In whose contentions the best of their titles did depend upon the
authority of the Commonwealth. For as the people were affected, and the
greatest part prevailed, so were they confirmed or disannulled by Parliament.
And we may not well affirm, but that when they are in possession, and
confirmed therein by these Parlaments, they are lawful Kings, and that God
concurreth with them; For if we should deny this point, we should shake the
states of most Princes in the world at this day.

The Commonwealth may dispose of the Crown for her own good.
And so to conclude, As propinquitie of blood is a great preheminencie toward
the atteining of the Crown, so does it not ever bind the Commonwealth to yield
thereunto, and to shut up her eyes, or admit at hap-hazard, or of necessity,
any one that is next by succession; but rather to take such an one, as may
perform the duty and charge committed. For that otherwise to admit him that is
an enemy, or unfit, is but to destroy the Commonwealth and him together.

What are the principal points which a Commonwealth ought to respect in
admitting or excluding of any Prince that pretends to succeed; wherein is
handled largely also of the diversity of Religions, and other such causes.
CAP. IX.
Seeing the Commonwealth is to know and judge of the matter, no doubt but God
does allow of her judgment.
He who is to judge and give the sentence in the things, is also to judge of the
cause; for thereof is he called Judge: So, if the Commonwealth has power to
admit or put back the Prince or pretender to the Crown, she has also
authority to judge of the lawfulness of the causes, considering specially that
it is in their own affair; and and in a matter that depend's wholly upon them,
for that no man is King or Prince by institution of Nature, but only by
authority of the Commonwealth. Who can then affirm the contrary but that God
does allow for a just and sufficient cause in this behalf, the only Will and
Judgment of the Weal-publick it self; supposing always that a whole Realm will
never agree, by orderly way of Judgment, to exclude the next Heir in Blood
without a reasonable Cause in the sight and censure.

The Pope is to obey the Determination of the Commonwealth, without further
inquisition; except it be in Cases of injustice, and Tyranny.
And seeing that they only are the Judges of this Case, and are properly Lords
and Owners of the whole business, we are to presume that what they Determine is
just and lawful, though at one time they should Determine one thing, and the
contrary at another (as they did often in England, being led at different times
by different motions) and it is enough for every particular man to subject
himself, and obey simply their Determination, without further inquisition;
except he should see that Open Injustice were done therein, or God manifestly
offended, and the Realm endangered. Open Injustice; if not the true
Commonwealth, but some Faction of wicked men should offer to Determine the
matter without lawful authority. God offended, and the Realm endangered; where
it is evident that he that is preferred will do what lies in him to the
prejudice both of God's glory, and of the Commonwealth; as if a Turk, or some
notorious wicked man and Tyrant, should be offered to Govern among Christians.

Whence the Reasons of Admitting or Receiving a Prince, are to be taken.
Now to know the true Causes and principal Points, which ought to be chiefly
regarded, as well by the Commonwealth, as by every particular man in the
furthering or hindering any Prince; we must return to the End wherefore
Government was appointed; which is to defend, preserve, and benefit the
Commonwealth; because from this Consideration are to be deduced all other
Considerations for discerning a good or evil Prince. For that whosoever is most
likely to defend etc. his Realm and Subjects, he is most to be allowed and
desired, as most conform to the end for which Government was ordained. And on
the contrary side, he that is least like to do this, deserves least to be
preferred: And this is the Consideration that diverse Commonwealths had in
putting back oftentimes Children and impotent People (though next in blood)
from succession.

Three Chief Points to be regarded in every Prince.
And here shall be fitly remembered what Gerard recounteth of the King of
France; Ger. lib. 3. de l'Estat. p. 242.
that in his Coronation he is new apparrelled three times in one day; once as a
Priest, and then as a Judge, and last as a King armed; thereby to signify
three things committed to his charge; first Religion, then Justice, then
Manhood and Chivalrie; which division seems very good and fit, and to
comprehend all that a WealPublick has need of for her happy State and
Felicity both in soul and body, and for her end both supernatural and natural.
And therefore these seem to be the three Points which most are to be regarded
in every Prince.

Why it is here principally treated of Religion.
For the latter two, because they have been often had in Consideration in the
Changes aforesaid; and Religion, whereof then scarce ever any question or doubt
did fall in these actions, rarely or never: And because in these our days it
is the principal Difference and chiefest Difficulty of all other; and that
also it is of it self the first and highest, and most necessary Point to be
considered in the Admission of a Prince; therefore it shall principally be
treated of in this place.

The Felicity of the Soul, is the chiefest End appointed to every
Commonwealth.
First we are to suppose, That the first and chiefest End that God and Nature
appointed to every Commonwealth, was not so much the temporal Felicity of the
Body, as the everlasting of the Soul: And consequently that all other things of
this transitory life are ordained to serve and be directed to that higher End.
And this was not only revealed to the Jews by holy Scripture; but also unto
the Gentiles and Heathens by the instinct and light of Nature it self.

What End Pagan Philosophers and Lawmakers had in their doings.
For there was never yet Pagan Philosopher that wrote of framing a good
Commonwealth, neither Lawmakers among them that left Ordinances for the same
purpose; Which besides the temporal end of directing things for the body, had
not special care also of matters appertaining to the mind; to wit, of
nourishing and rewarding virtue* and for restraining and punishing of vice and
wickedness.

Institution of Sacrifices by Nature.
Examples of Noah, and Job.
And Nature did not only teach man that he should serve God; but also how he
should serve him: to wit, That the chiefest and supremest honor that could be
done unto him in this life, was the honor of Sacrifice and Oblations; which we
see was practiced even in those first beginnings of the Law of Nature, before
the Levitical Law. For so we read in Genesis of Noah, Genesis 8.
That he made an Altar and offered Sacrifices to God upon the same, of all the
Beasts and Birds that he had in the Ark, Odoratusque est Dominus odorem
suavitatis. And the like of Job that was a Gentile, Job. 1.
and lived before Moses, Sanctificabat filios, consurgensque diluculo offerebat
holocausta per dies singulos.

Example of the Indians.
Religion the chief End of a Commonwealth and Magistrates.
Among the Indians also, where never any notice of Moses Law came, there was
never any Nation sound that acknowledged not some kind of God, and offered not
some kind of Sacrifice unto him. And though both in distinguishing between
false gods and the true God, and in the means of honoring him, they have fallen
into most gross and infinite errors: as also the Gentiles of Europe, Asia, and
Africa; yet it is evident hereby that by God and Nature the highest and
chiefest End of a Commonwealth is Cultus Dei. And consequently that the
principal care and charge of a Prince and Magistrate even by Nature it self,
Geneb. lib. 1. Cronal. de 1. Aetate.
is to look thereunto. As among the Ancients, both Jews and Gentiles, their
Kings and chief Magistrates, for many ages, were also Princes; And diverse
learned men do hold that the Privilege and preeminence of Primogeniture, Genesis
25. and 29. Deuteronomy. 21. 2 Parel. 21.
consisted principally in this, That the eldest Sons were Priests.

The same proved by Authorities.
Nulla est gens, Cic. l. 1. quaest. Tuscul. and De Natura Deorum. lib. 1. Plut.
adversus Colotem.
says Cicero, tam fera, nulla tam immanis, cujus mentem non imbuerit deorum
colendorum Religio. And Plutarch writing against a certain Atheist of his time,
says thus, If you travel far Countries, you may chance to find some Cities
without Learning, without Kings, without Riches, without Money; But a City
without Temples, and without gods and Sacrifices, no man yet has ever seen.
And finally, Aristotle having numbered diverse things necessary to a
Commonwealth, adds these words, Arist. lib. 7. Polit. cap. 8.
Quintum and Primum. Circa rem Divinam cultus, quod sacerdotium Sacrificiumque
vocant.

The absurd Atheism of our time in Politics.
And therefore we see how false and impious is the opinion of diverse Atheists
of our time, who affirm, That Religion ought not to be so greatly respected in
a Prince, as though it were his chiefest care, or the matter of most importance
in his Government: False and impious opinion, specially among Christians, who
have so much the greater obligation to take to heart this matter of Religion,
by how much greater light and knowledge they have of God. And for this cause
also in all the Princes Oaths taken at their Admission (as before has been in
the fourth Chapt.
recited) the first and principal point of all other is about Religion and
maintenance thereof; not only by themselves, but also by their Lievtenants, etc.

The Oath given by the Emperor Justinian, to all his Governors to take at their
Reception.
And the Civil Law yields a very solemn Form of an Oath which the Emperor
Justinian was wont to give to all his Governors, etc. of Countries, etc. before
they could be admitted to their Charges: An. 560. Collat. 2. Novel. Constit.
Justin. 8. tit. 3.
which is as follows, Juro per Deum omnipotentem and filium ejus unigenitum
Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum and Spiritum Sanctum; and per Sanctam gloriosam
Dei genitricem and semper-virginem Mariam, and per quatuor Evangelia quae in
manibus meos teneo, and per Sanctos Archangelos Michaelem and Gabrielem, puram
conscientiam, germanumque servitium me servaturum sacratissimis nostris Dominis
Justiniano and Theodosiae conjugi ejus, occasion traditae mihi ab eorum
pietate administrationis. Et quod communicator sum sanctissimae Dei Catholicae
and Apostolicae Ecclesiae, and nullo modo vel tempore adversabor ei, nec alium
quocunque permittam quantum possibilitatem habeam: Et si vero non haec omnia
servavero, recipiam omnia incommoda hic and in futuro seculo in terribili
judicio magni Domini Dei and salvatoris nostris Jesu Christi, and habebo partem
cum Juda, and cum lepra Geizi, and cum tremore Cain, in and super poenis quae
lege eorum pietatis continentur, ero Subjectus.

Why Princes should be endued with Religion.
This Oath did all the Governors of Christian Countries take in old time: By
which Oath, and the other Oaths which Emperors and Kings did make themselves at
their admission about this point; we may see that it is their chiefest and
highest end, and office, to assist their Subjects to the attaining of their
supernatural end, by knowing and serving God in this life; For that otherwise
God should draw no other fruit or commodity out of humane Commonwealths, than
of an assembly of brutish creatures.

He that wants it, is guilty of high Treason against God.
And therefore whatsoever Prince or Magistrate does not help his Subjects to
this end, omitteth the first and principal part of his charge, and commits
high Treason against his Lord and Master, in whose place he is; and
consequently is not fit for that place and dignity, though he should perform
the other two parts of Justice and Valor never so well.

Lack of Religion the chiefest Cause and justest to exclude a Prince.
Whereof it ensues, That nothing in the world can so justly exclude an Heir
apparent from his Succession, as want of Religion; nor any cause whatsoever
justify and clear the conscience of the Commonwealth, or of particular men,
that in this cause should resist his entrance, as if they judge him faulty in
this point.

If a Marriage may be dissolved, much more a bare Betrothing, such as is
between an Heir apparent and a Commonwealth.
St. 1 Cor. 7.
Paul determines plainly, That if two Gentiles married together in their
Gentilitie (which none denies to be true marriage, for so much as concerns
the Civil Contract) and afterward the one of them being made a Christian, the
other would not live with his party, or if he do, yet not without blaspheming
of God, and tempting him to sin; In this case he teaches, That it is
sufficient to break and dissolve utterly this heathen marriage; and that the
Christian may marry again; and this only for the want of Religion in the other
party: Dig. l. 23. tit. 1 lib. 8. and 10.
Which being so in actual marriage already made and consummate; how much more
may it serve to undo a bare betrothing, which is the case of a Pretender only
to a Crown, as before has been showed.

Whether Difference in Religion be Infidelity.
But some may say that St. Paul speaks of an Infidel or Heathen, that denies
Christ plainly; which is not the case of a Christian Prince, though he be
somewhat different in Religion. To which is answered, That supposing there is
but one only Religion that can be true among Christians, as both Reason and
Athanasius his Creed does plainly teach us; and moreover seeing, that to me
there can be no other Faith or Religion available for my salvation, than only
that which I my self do believe, Act. 23.
for that mine own Conscience must testify for me, 1 Cor. 8.
or against me: 2 Cor. 5.
certain it is, 1 Pet. 3.
that unto me and my Conscience he which in any Point believes otherwise than
I do, and stands wilfully in the same, is an Infidel; for that he believes
not that which in my Faith and Conscience is the only and sole truth, whereby
he must be saved. And so long as I have this opinion of him, albeit his
Religion were never so true, I shall do against my Conscience, and sin damnably
in the sight of God, to prefer him to a Charge, where he may draw many other to
his own Errors and Perdition, wherein I do persuade my self that he remains.

How he that does against his Conscience sins.
And this Point is founded upon that which St. Paul says against such
Christians, Romans 4.
as being invited to the Banquets of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 8. and 10.
did eat the meats offered to Idols, (which themselves do judge to be unlawful
to eat) which he says was a damnable sin; not for that the thing in it self
was unlawful, but for that they did judge it so, and yet did the contrary; S.
Christ. hom. 36. in h. Epist. Orig. l. 10.
And the reason he yields presently, Quia non ex fide; omne autem quod non
est ex fide est peccatum: Doing a thing (though in it self indifferent) against
their own Conscience, Theod. in hunc locum.
which must be their witness at the latter day.

How dangerous a sin, to favor a Pretender of a contrary Religion.
Now to apply this to the matter of England, I affirm and hold, That for any
man to give his Help or Consent toward the making of a King, whom he judges
or believes to be faulty in Religion, how good or bad soever he be, or of
what side soever the truth be, it is a most grievous and damnable sin. And is
guilty of all the evils, miseries, and calamities which may ensue by his
Government, whether they do so or no; Because knowing in his belief that he is
like or in disposition to bring all those evils: yet he does further, or not
resist him.

How far it is also against Wisdom and Policy to prefer a Prince of a contrary
Religion.
Moreover, besides the matter of Conscience, It cannot in Policy, but be great
folly and oversight for a man to promote to a Kingdom, wherein himself must
live, one of a contrary Religion to himself: For let the bargains, agreements,
and promises be never so great, yet seeing the Prince once settled, must needs
proceed according to the principles of his own Religion: it follows also that
he must come quickly to break with the other Party: And so many Jealousies,
Suspicions, Accusations, etc. will light upon him, as not only he shall not be
capable of such Preferments, Honors, and Charges, which men may deserve and
desire in their Commonwealths; but also he shall be in continual danger, and
subject to a thousand molestations and injuries: and so, before he beware, will
become to be accounted an enemy, or backward man: Which to remedy, he must
either dissemble deeply, and against his own Conscience make show to favor and
set forward that which in his heart he does detest (which is the greatest
calamity and misery of all other) or else to avoid this everlasting perdition,
he must break with all the temporal commodities of this life, and leave the
benefits which his Country might yield him: And this is the ordinary end of all
such men, how soft and sweet soever the beginnings be.

The Conclusion of the whole Speech.
That the next Heir after the Queen, must needs be very Doubtful.
And therefore to conclude all this Speech, Seeing there be so great
inconveniences and dangers, in respect both of God and man, body and Soul, to
advance to the Crown a Prince of contrary Religion; And considering that in
England there is so great diversity of Religions, as the world knows,
between these Parties and Factions that have to Pretend or admit the next
Prince after Her Majesty that now is: Calling to mind also the great Liberty,
Scope, and Authority which the Commonwealth has to determine, even against
the clear right of Succession: And laying finally before our eyes the manifold
and different Acts of Christian Realms, before mentioned, in this affair. It
appears (as it was propounded in the beginning) That it is a very doubtful
case who shall be the next Prince after the Queen: And much more, if above all
this it be proved also, (as it shall be in the Second Book) that among such as
do or may pretend of the Blood Royal at this day, their true Succession, and
next Propinquitie by birth is also uncertain and disputable.

FINIS.
CAP. I.
BOOKS WRITTEN
1.
BY one Hales, 1.
surnamed Clubfoot, Clerk of the Hamp. in which the Lord Keeper Bacon was
thought to have a hand; and Sir William Cecil a privitie.

2.
In favor of the Lady Katharine Gray, daughter of the Lady Frances, Duchess of
Suffolk, the daughter of Marie, younger daughter of Henry 7. to prefer her
before the Scot descended of Margaret the elder daughter.

3.
Because he was a Stranger or Alien; 1.
therefore not to inherit by Law.

4.
Henry 8. 2.
had authority given him by two Parlaments of 28. and 36. to dispose of the
Succession by his last Will; and ordained, (his own issue failing) that the
offspring of Mary should be preferred before that of Margaret.

5.
Against this one Morgan a Divine of Oxford (with the advice of Judge Brown, II.
as it was thought) wrote, first to clear the Queen of Scots from her Husbands
death: 2 handled her Title to our Crown: 3 against the Book of Knox, of the
Monstrous Government of Women.

6.
And John Leisley, III.
Bishop of Ross in Scotland, confuteth the first point: 1 That the Statute that
bears the inheritance of Aliens (made 25 Edw. 3.) is only to be understood of
particular men's inheritance: 2 There is express exception of the King's
Children, and Offspring, in the Statute: 3 The Practice both before and since
the Conquest to the contrary.

7.
The second: If Henry 8. made such a Testament, it could not hold in Law; But
that he made it not, besides many probabilities, the testimonies of the Lord
Paget, Sir Edw. Montague, Lord Chief Justice; and William Clark, who set the
King's stamp to the Writing, avowed before the Council and Parliament in Queen
Mary's time, That the testament was signed after the King was past sens and
memory.

8.
Robert Heghington, IV.
Secretary to the Earl of North. writes in favor of the King of Spain, as
next Heir to the House of Lancaster.

Another writes in the behalf of the Dukes of Parma, V.
as next Heir of Portugal; VI.
another for the Infanta of Spain as the Heir of Brittanie.

CAP. II.
Of the Succession of the Crown from the Conquest, unto Edward the Third's time.
The issue of William the Conqueror.
WILLIAM the Conqueror had four Sons, and five Daughters. Sons, 1. Robert, Duke
of Normandy: 2. Richard died in his youth: 3. William Rufus: 4. Henry the
first. Daughters, 1. Sicilie, a Nun: 2. Constantia, wife of Alain Fergant, Duke
of Britanie: 3, Adela, or Alice, wife of Stephen, Earl of Bloys, etc. The
other two died young.

Robert, Duke of Normandy.
Robert of Normandy, and his Son William, were ruined by Henry 1. Robert pined
away in the Castle of Cardiff; William slain before Alost in Flanders, whereof
he was Earl, by an arrow.

Henry 1.
Of all the Children of Henry 1. Mande first married to Henry 5. Emperor, had
issue Henry 2. by Geoffrey Plantagenet, Duke of Anjou, etc. her second Husband;
he Reigned after King Stephen.

The beginning of the House of Britanie.
Constantia, the Conquerors second Daughter, had issue Conan 2. le Gros; who
had issue Hoel, and Bettha, wife of Eudo Earl of Porrhet in Normandy (her
Father made her his Heir on his death bed, disadvowing Howel) she had issue
Conan 3. He, Constantia wife to Geoffrey third Son to Henry 2. by whom she had
Arthur, whom King John his Uncle put from the Crown of England, and murdered.
After which Constantia married Guy Vicount of Touars, a Britan: and their issue
have continued till this, in the infanta of Spain, and the Duchess of Savoy
her sister; whose Mother was sister unto the last King of France.

Anna the Heir of Britanie, had by Lewis the 12. of France, one Daughter,
Claudia; of whom and Francis the first, came Henry 2. whose Daughter was Mother
to the Infanta, etc.

King Stephen.
Adela, or Alice, the Conquerors third Daughter, had issue Stephen Earl of
Bouloyne, chosen King after Henry 1. before Mande his Daughter, because a
Woman; and before her Son Henry 2. because he was but a Child, and a degree
further off from the Conqueros, but especially by force and friends; whereby he
prevented also the Duke of Britain, Son to his Mothers eldest sister. He had
two sons, who left no issue; and Mary, wife to the Earl of Flanders, whose
right, if any, is descended to the Spaniard.

Henry 2. his Sons.
Henry 2. had issue by Eleonora, the Heir of Aquitaine, William, who died young.
Henry Crowned in his Fathers time, and died without issue: 3. Richard Coeur de
Lion, who died without issue: 4. Geoffrey who married Constance the Heir of
Britain, as aforesaid: 5. John, the King, who had issue Henry the third.

Henry 2. his Daughters.
His Daughters were, 1. Eleonora married to Alphonso 9. of Castile: 2. to
Alexis the Emperor: 3. to the Duke of Saxony: 4. to the Earl of Toulouse.

Eleonora had Henry of Castile, who died without issue; and Blanch, married to
Lewis of France, of the Race of Valois, whose issue continues: and Berenguela
married to the Prince of Leon; whose Son Ferdinando, by the death of his Uncle
Henry without issue was chosen King of Castile, before Saint Lewis the son of
Blanch aforesaid, because a stranger.

16.
The right which France had to Aquitain, Poictiers and Normandy, came to them
by the aforesaid Blanch; who was married thither, on condition to have for her
dower all that John had lost in France, which was almost all he had.

Henry 3. his Issue.
Henry 3. had Edward 1; he Edw. 2. he Edw. 3. and Edmund Crook-back Earl or
Duke of Lancaster; whose heir, Lady Blanch, married John of Gant the third son
of Edw. 3. from whom came the house of Lancaster. Also Beatrix married to John
2. Duke of Britain, from whom descended the Infantas Mother.

That Edward Crook-back was not elder then Edward 1.
Edward Crook-back was not Edw. 1. elder brother, and put by only for his
deformity; 2. he was born 18 Junii, 1245; and Edward 16 Junii, 1239. ( Matthew.
West. who lived at the same time;) 2. he was a wise Prince, and much employed
by his father and brother in their wars; 3. his father advanced him in England,
and would have made him King of Naples and Sicilie; 4. having the charge of the
Realm at his father's death, and his brother absent; he attempted no
innovation; nor he, nor any of his children made any claim to the Crown after
that; 5. If he had been elder, the title of Lancaster in John of Gant his
Issue, whose mother was heir unto Edmund, had been without contradiction; nor
could the house of York have had any pretense of right.

The Issue of Edward Crook-back.
Henry the second, Earl of Lancaster and grandchild to the aforesaid Edmund,
was created Duke of Lancaster by Edward 3. He had but one child, the Lady
Blanch, wife of John of Gant, by whom he became also Duke of Lancaster. His
three sisters were matched, one to the Lord Maubery, of whom the Howards of
Norfolk; Joane 2. Mary married to the Earl of Northumberland; from whom the
now-Earl: 3. Eleonor, married to the Earl of Arundel, of whom the late Earl
descended.

CAP. III.
The Succession from Edward 3. The houses of Lancaster and York.
Edward 3. his Issue.
EDward the third had five sons; 1. the Black Prince (he Richard second, in
whom his line ceased) 2 Lionel Duke of Clarence; 3. John of Gant, Duke of
Lancaster by his wife Blanch; 4 Edward of Langley Duke of York; 5. Thomas of
Woodstock Duke of Gloucester.

The Title of the House of York.
Lionel of Clarence had one only daughter and heir, Philippe, married to
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March; they Roger; he Anne Mortimer, married to
Richard Earl of Cambridg, second son of Edmund L. of York: His son Richard, by
the death of his Uncle (slain at Agincourt) came to be Duke of York (his
father of Cambridg, being executed for a Conspiracy against Henry 5.) And was
the first of the house of York that challenged the Crown, and died in the
quarrel: His son was Edward the 4.

The Issue of the Duke of Gloucester.
Thomas of Woodstock had only one child, Anne, married to the Lord Stafford;
whose issue came after, in regard of this marriage (for Thomas was Earl of
Buckingham too) to be Duke of Buckingham, some of whose blood are yet in
England.

The Issue of John of Gant by his first Wife.
John of Gant had three Wives; 1, Blanch the heir of Lancaster aforesaid, by
whom he had Henry 4. and Philippe, married to John King of Portingal; from
whom are lineally descended such as at this day claim interest in that Crown;
and Elisabeth, married to John Holland Duk of Exceter; whose grandchild
Henry, left only Anne, married to Sir Thomas Nevil Knight, from whom the Earl
of Westmerland is lineally descended.

By his second Wife.
By his second, Lady Constance, daughter of Peter King of Castile, he had
only one daughter Katharine, married to Henry the third, King of Castile; of
whom the King of Spain that now is, is lineally desended.

By his third Wife. Henry 7. his Title.
His third, Katharine Swinford, daughter to a Knight of Henault; and attending
on his wife Blanch, he used as his Concubine in his wife Constance's time, and
begat of her three sons and one daughter; and after married her to Swinford an
English Knight; who dead, and his wife Constance also, he married her, Anno
1396, and caused his said children by her to be legitimated by Parliament, Anno
1397.

Henry 7. his Title from Lancaster.
His sons were, 1. John Duke of Somerset; 2. Thomas Duke of Excester; 3. Henry
Bishop and Cardinal of Winchester: His daughter Jane married to the Earl of
Westmerland. The Issues of all these were soon spent, except of John of
Somerset, who had two sons, John and Edmund: John one only daughter, Margaret,
married to Edmund Tidder Earl of Richmond, by whom he had Henry 7. Edmund and
his three sons all died in the quarrel of the House of Lancaster without Issue.

The line of Clarence, and Title of the Earl of Huntington.
George Duke of Clarence, second brother of Edw. 4. had Issue Edw. Earl of
Warwick, put to death by Henry 7. and Margaret Countess of Salisbury, married
to Sir Richard Poole of Wales, by whom he had Henry, Arthur, Geoffroy, and
Reynald (after Cardinal) Henry Lo. of Montague (put to death, with his mother,
by H. 8.) had Katharine married to the Earl of Huntington, they the now Earl,
etc. and Wenefred married to Sir Tho. Barrington. Arthur, Marie, married to Sir
John Stanny; and Margaret to Sir Tho. Fitzherbert. Geoffrey, Geoffrey Poole;
he Arthur and Geoffrey, which yet live in Italy.

Henry 7. his Issue. The Title of Scotland, and of the Lady Arbella.
Henry 7. had by the eldest daughter of Edw. 4. (for of all the other three
remains no issue) besides Hen. 8. Margaret, first married to the K. of Scots;
they James 5. who Mary, mother to the now King. After married to the Earl of
Anguis; they Margaret, married to the Earl of Lenox; they Henry married to the
last Queen, and murdered 1566. and Charles married to Elisa. Ca4dish, by whom
the Lady Arbella.

The Title of the Lord Beacham, and his brother.
Marie the second daughter, first married to Lewis 12. of France, without
issue; then to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk; they Francis, married to Henry
Gray Marquis Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk, beheaded by Q. Mary; they Jane,
married to Dudley, (both beheaded) Katharine, first married to the Earl of
Pembroke; and left by him to the Earl of Hartfort (as themselves affirmed) in
the Tower: from whom descends the Lord Beacham, and Edward Seymer his brother.

The Title of the House of Derbie.
Eleonor second daughter to Chapter Brandon and the Queen of France, was married to
Henry Clifford Earl of Cumberland: they had issue Margaret, married to Henry
Earl of Derbie: who had issue the last and the now Earl.

CAP. IV.
The Controversy between the Houses of Lancaster and York.
The Pretense of the House of York.
BY Richard Duke of York, son of Richard Earl of Cambridg aforesaid, etc. That
considering he had by descent joined in him the right as well of Lionel Duke of
Clarence, second son to Edw. 3. as of Edward Duke of York, the fourth son of
Edw. 3. he was to be preferred before the House of Lancaster, claiming only
from John of Gant the third son of Edward 3.

Richard 2. Deposed.
Edward 3. in his old age for the love he bare to the black Prince, confirmed
the Succession by Parliament to Richard 2. his son; and caused the rest of his
sons to swear thereunto. Richard 2. for his misgovernment was deposed by common
consent, and Henry 4. chosen in his place; which himself and his issue
possessed about 60 years. The question is, Whether King Richard were rightfully
deposed or no.

That a King may be deposed on just causes.
First that a King on just causes may be deposed, is proved by Reason: because
the rule being given by the Commonwealth, on condition of just government;
that much violated, the condition is broken, and the same Commonwealth may
take the forfeiture. This proved by the authority of all Lawmakers,
Philosophers, Divines and Governors of Commonwealths; and by example of diverse
Depositions, which God himself has blessed with good success.

Proved by reasons and examples of Divinity.
An ill Prince is an armed enemy, with his feet set on the Realm's head;
whence he cannot be plucked but by force of Arms, Object. God may cut him off
by sickness, or otherwise; and therefore we are to attend his good pleasure.
Answ. God always binds not himself to work miracles, nor often with
extraordinary means; but has left upon earth, unto men and Commonwealths,
power to do justice in his Name upon offenders. Examples hereof are Ehud
stirred up by God to kill Eglon, King of the Moabites by a stratageme, Judge. 3.
and the Philistines to kill, David to persecute Saul; Jeroboam to rebel against
Roboam the son of Solomon, 2 Reg. 11. and 12. Jehu to depose Joram and Q.
Jezabel his mother, 4. Reg. 9. The Captains of Jerusalem at the persuasion of
Jehoiada the High Priest, to conjure against Q. Athalia, whom they deposed, and
Joash chosen in her room, 4. Reg. 11. All which he might have removed without
bloodshed, if he would: But he appointed men to work his Will by these
violent means, to deliver that Commonwealth from oppression, and for the
greater terror of all bad Princes.

Allegations of the Lancastrians that King Richard 2. was justly Deposed.
Just causes of Deposing Richard 2. were; He murdered his Uncle the Duke of
Gloucester without form of Law or process. He put to death the Earl of Arundel,
banished Warwick, Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, and Henry Duke of
Hereford and Lancaster (and after King) whose goods and inheritance descending
to the said Henry from his Father, he wrongfully seized on. He suffered the
Earl of Oxford, his minion, to put away his wife, a goodly young Lady,
daughter of Isabell his father's sister, and to marry another openly to her
disgrace. And in the last (evil) Parliament he made, would needs have all
absolute authority granted to 6 or 7 his favorites to determine of all matters.
Grieved with these exorbitant indignities, the more or better part of the Realm
called home by their Letters Henry 4. deposed Richard 2. by Act of Parliament,
by his own confession of unworthie Government, and his voluntary resignation
of the Crown to the said Henry by public instrument. All this without
bloodshed: And in almost all this, Edmund L. D. of York, (the head of that
family, together with Edward Duke of Aumale his eldest son, and Richard Earl
of Cambridge his younger (the Grandfather of Edward 4.) assisted the said Henry.

That Henry 4. had more right to Succeed unto Richard 2. than Edmond Mortimer
heir of Clarence; much more any other.
King Richard 2. deposed, the question is, Whether Edmond Mortimer then alive
(his Father Roger being slain in Ireland a little before) Nephew removed of
Lionel Duke of Clarence; or Henry Duke of Lancaster, son of John of Gant should
have Succeeded in right. For Henry is alleged; his being nearer to the former
King by two degrees, and proximitie of Blood (though not of the elder Line) is
to be, (or has been) preferred in these cases. 2. His Title came by a Man, the
others by a Woman (not so much favored by Law nor Reason.) 3. The said Edmond
being offered the Crown by Richard Earl of Cambridge (who had married his
Sister Anne) and other Noblemen, at Southampton; he judged it against equity,
discovered the Treason to Henry the fifth, by whose command those Noblemen were
executed, 1415. Thirty years after which; Richard Duke of York, son of the
aforesaid Earl, and Anne (for Edmond her brother died without issue) set his
Title on foot. And whereas Roger Mortimer, Father of this Edmond was declared
Heir apparent by a Parliament 1382, that was done by Richard 2. from the hatred
he bore to John of Gant, and his son Henry; (rather than for the goodness of
the others Title:) the cause whereof was, Because immediately after the death
of the Black Prince, diverse learned and wise men held opinion, That John of
Gant, eldest son of Edward 3. then living should rather succeed, than Richard,
jure Propinquitatis. This made the old King Edward 3. confirm the Succession to
Richard 2. by Parliament, and the Oaths of his Uncles, and made the young King
Richard 2. hold first, and his son in jealousy, and hatred ever after, as
distrusting the likelihoods of their Title.

Declaration of the Heir Apparent in the Princes life, being Partial, no sure
president.
Partial establishing of Succession by Parliament, is no extraordinary thing
with Princes, which yet most commonly have been to little purpose. So did
Ricbard 3. cause John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, and Son to his sister
Elisabeth, Duchess of Suffolk, to be declared Heir apparent; thereby excluding
his Brother Edward's four Daughters, etc. So did Henry 8. prefer the issue of
his younger sister, before that of his elder. So did Edward 6. declare the Lady
Jane Gray, his cozen Germain removed, to be his Heir and Successor; excluding
his own two sisters: Such, say they, was the aforesaid Declaration of Roger
Mortimer by Richard 2. to as little purpose, as from little equity.

Uncle preferred before the Nephew diverse times. Contra. Sect. 83.
That John of Gant should have in right succeeded his father, rather than
Richard himself, as nearer to his father, is proved by the course of diverse
Kingdoms, where the Uncle was preferred before the Nephew. 1. In Naples (much
about the same time) Robert before Charles the son of Martel his elder Brother.
2. In Spain, Don Sancho Bravo before the Children of Prince Don Alonso de la
Cerda (from whom the House of Medina Celi is descended) by sentence of Don
Alonso the wise, and of all the Realm and Nobility, Anno 1276. 3. In the
Earldom of Arthois, Mande, before Robert, son to her Brother Philip, by
sentence of Philip le Bell of France, confirmed by the Parliament of Paris, and
by his Successor Philippes de Valois, whom he the said Robert had much assisted
in the recovery of France from the English. 4. In Britanie, John Breno Earl of
Montfort, before Jane Countess of Bloys, Daughter and Heir of Guy his elder
brother, by sentence of Edward 3. and the State of England, who put him in
possession of that Dukedom. 5. In Scotland, where albeit Edward 1. of England
gave sentence for John Baliol, Nephew to the elder Daughter, excluding thereby
Robert Bruise, son to the younger; yet that sentence was held to be unjust in
Scotland, and the Crown restored to Robert Bruise his son, whose posterity holds
it to this day. 6. The like whereof in Naples, Lewis Prince of Taranto, son to
Philip, prevailed before Joan the Niece of Robert aforesaid, who was Philip's
elder brother (though Philip died before Robert) because he was a man, and a
degree nearer to his Grandfather than Joan. 7. And in England it self, Henry
1. preferred before William, son and Heir of Robert of Normandy, his elder
brother. And King John preferred before Arthur, D. of Britanie, the son and
Heir of his elder brother Geoffrey, because he was nearer to Richard his
brother, then dead, than was Arthur: Which Right of his the English inclined
still to acknowledge and admit, and thereupon proclaimed him King;
notwithstanding that the French, and other Foreign Princes of stomach, opposed
themselves against it.

King John rightfully preferred before his Brother Arthur.
Against this last: King Richard when he was to go to the Holy Land, caused his
Nephew Arthur to be declared Heir apparent to the Crown, thereby showing his
Title to be the better. Answ. 1. It was not by Act of Parliament of England, for
Richard was in Normandy, when he made it. 2. Richard did it rather to repress
the amhitious Humor of John in his absence. 3. This Declaration was never
admitted in England, but renounced by consent of the Nobility in his absence.
4. Richard himself at his return disadvowed it, appointing John to be his
Successor, by his last Will, and caused the Nobles to swear Fealty unto him,
as to his next in blood.

The Opinion of Civil Lawyers touching the Right of the Uncle and Nephew.
Contra. Sect. 83.
This Controversy divided all the Lawyers in Christendom; Baldus, Oldratus,
Panormitanus, etc. for the Nephew: Bartolus, Alexander, Decius, Alciatus,
Cujatius, etc. for the Uncle: Baldus himself at length concludes, That seeing
rigor of Law runs only with the Uncle, being properly nearest in blood by
one degree, and that only indulgence and custom permits the Nephew to
represent his Father's place; whenever the Uncle is born before the Nephew,
and his elder brother dies before his Father (as in the case of John of Gant
and Richard 2.) he may be preferred: for the elder brother cannot give or
transmit that thing to his Son, which is not in himself before his Father die;
nor can his son represent what the Father never had.

The Common Law deals not with the Point of Succession to the Crown.
Touching the Common Law; the right and interest to the Crown is not expressly
decided in it, nor is it a Plea subject to the rules thereof, but superior, and
more eminent; nor are the Maxims thereof always of force in this, as in
others. As in the case of Dower, Copercenars, and Tenancie by the courtesy. No
more ought they to be in this case of inheritance; as by the former eight
Presidents has been showed. The Common Lawyers then refer this point of the
Crown to Custom, nothing being in effect written by them touching it. Only the
best of our old ones favored that title of Lancaster: and Chancellor Fortescue,
and Sir Tho. Thorope, chief Baron of the Exchequer in Henry 6. his time, were
much afflicted for it by the contrary faction.

The Princes of York often Attainted.
The Princes of York forfeited their Right by their Conspiracies, and Attainder
thereupon; as R. Earl of Cambridge, put to death therefore by the Judgment of
his Peers, his elder brother, the Duke of York, being one of the Jury that
condemned him. His son Richard, Duke of York, was also attainted of treason
(after many oaths to Henry 6. sworn and broken by him) and his son Ed. 4. with
the rest of his offspring to the ninth degree, at a Parliament at Coventry,
Anno 1459. But the House of Lancaster was never attainted of any such crime.

The House of York came to the Crown by Violence and Cruelty.
Edward 4. entered by violence, wilfully murdering, besides diverse of the
Nobility, Henry 6. a good and holy King, and his son Prince Edward,
dispossessing the House that had held the Crown about 60 years together; in
which time their Title had been confirmed by many Parlaments, Oaths,
Approbations, and public Acts of the Commonwealth, and the consent of all
foreign Nations. All which had been enough to have autorized a bad Title.

Those of Lancaster better Princes than those of York.
The 4 Henry's of the house of Lancaster were far more worthy Princes, then the
4 Princes of the Houses of York; as Edw. 4. Rich. 3. Hen. 8. Edw. 6. And if the
affairs of any the former, especially the 3d, succeeded not, the chief cause
thereof was the sedition, rebellion and troubles raised by those of York, and
their contention against the Princes of the Houses of Lancaster.

The Cruelty of the Princes of York, one to the other.
The Princes of York have not been only cruel to their enemies, but to
themselves too; embrewing their hands in their own blood: Then when they had
ruined the other, George Duke of Clarence conspired against Edw. 4. his own
brother; with whom reconciled, Edw. caused him afterward to be murdered at
Calis. Rich. 3. murdered his two young Nephews; and Henry 8. a great number of
that House, as Edmund de la Poole his Cousin German; Henry Duke of Buckingham,
his great Ant's son: extinguishing that, and ruining this family. Also Henry
Courtney Marquis of Exceter, his own Cousin german, the Lady Margaret Countess
of Salisbury, and daughter to George D. of Clarence; and her son the L.
Montague, etc.

The kindness of the Princes of Lancaster.
But the Love, Union, Confidence, Faithfulness, Kindeness and Loialtie of the
Princes of Lancaster toward the other was very notable, as in the 2 brothers of
Henry 4; and the 3 brothers of Henry 5. and in five or six Dukes of Somerset,
their near Cosens; which argues both a mavelous confidence those Princes had
in that quarrel, and a great blessing of God unto the whole family that
agreed so well.

The Successes of such noble Houses as followed either party.
Another blessing seems to be bestowed on them; That no ancient great Houses
are remaining at this day in England, but such as chiefly took their parts; as,
Arundel, Oxford, Northumberland, Westmerland and Shrewsbury: whereas the chief
partakers of the other Faction are all destroyed; as, Mowbray Duke of Norfolk,
De la Poole Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Salisbury, the Earl of Warwick, and
many others.

CAP. III.
Examination of the Title of the House of Scotland. Sect. 28.
Allegations for the K. of Scots.
1. THat he is descended of the eldest daughter of Henry 7. without bastardie,
or other lawful impediment; and therefore has the right of prioritie. 2. The
benefit would accrue unto the Commonwealth, by the uniting of England and
Scotland, a point long sought for. 3. The establishing of true Religion in
England.

He is not of the House of Lancaster, but rather of York.
He is not descended truly of the House of Lancaster, because not of the Lady
Blanch, the true heir thereof: but of Kathathine Swinford, whose children were
unlawfully begotten; (though afterward legitimated by Parliament) so that his
best Title is by York, inferior to that of Lancaster, and therefore is to com
in after them of that House.

Foreign birth not just impediment in Succession to the Crown of England.
He is Foreign born, and therefore excluded by the Laws of England from
inheriting within the land. Answ. 1. This Assertion in an universal sens is false; for a stranger may purchase, and inherit by the right of his wife: 7 and
9 Edw. 4. 11 and 14 Henry. 7. 2. The Statute of 25 Edw. 3. is to be
restrained unto proper inheritance only: viz. That no person born out of the
Allegiance of England (whose father and mother were not of the same Allegiance
at the time of his birth) shall not demand inheritance within the same
Allegiance. 3. This Statute touches not the Crown, nor any, except express
mention be made thereof. 4. The Crown cannot properly be called an
inheritance of Allegiance, or within Allegiance; being held immediately from
God. 5. The Statute means inheritance by descent only; but the Crown is a
thing incorporate, and therefore goes as by Succession. Now if a Prior, Dean,
etc. or other head incorparate, though an alien, may inherit or demand Lands in
England, notwithstanding the Statute, much more may the Inheritor to the Crown.
6. Express exception is made in the Statues of Enfants du Roi; which word
cannot but include all the King's offspring, and blood-Roial. 7. King Stephen
and Henry 2. born out of the Realm, and of parents that were not of the
Allegiance of England when they were born, were yet admitted to the Crown
without contradiction: which argues, that by the course of the Common Law there
was no such stop against Aliens; and that if the Statute would have abridged
the ancient liberty in this case of Succession, it would have made special
mention there, which it does not.

The King of Scots excluded by the last Will of Henry 8.
Henry 8. his Will, whereby he excludes the offspring of Margaret S. 4. Which
though somewhat infringed by the testimony of two or three. S 7. yet it is plain
it was his own Will, because he commanded it to be drawn, written, and sealed,
and never revoked it: Besides it is subscribed by many witnesses, and enrolled
in the Chancery by his own command; enough to make it good against the
assertion of those few, who to please the time wherein they spoke, (in Queen
Mary's time) might say and ghess the King was past memory when his stamp was
put to it. Now to make good what he did, two Acts of Parlaments, 28, and 35. of
his Reign, gave him full authority to dispose of this Point of Succession, as
he and his learned Council should think best for the Commonwealth.

By a Statute made in the 27th. of Elisabeth.
27. Elisah. a Statute was made, That whosoever shall be convinced to conspire,
attempt, or procure the Queens death, or is privy, or accessory to the same,
shall loose all right, title, pretense, claim, or action, that they, or their
heirs have, or may have to the Crown of England. Now the late Queen of Scots
being attainted and executed by the authority of the said Parliament, and for
breach of the said Statute, it is easy to determine what Title her Son has,
claiming only by her.

The Uniting of Scotland with England, dangerous to the English, or like to be.
1. Only the increase of Subjects: but those rather to participate the
Commodities of England, than to impart any from Scotland. 2. The natural hatred
of that People unto us, and their ancient inclination to join with our enemies
the French, and Irish against us, are Arguments of great mischiefs likely to
ensue by that conjunction. 3. The Scot must needs hold in jealousy so many
Englishmen, competitors of the Blood Royal, and therefore will fortify himself
against them by those Foreign Nations, of whom he is descended, with whom he is
allied, as the Scots, French, Danes, and uncivil Irish, which will prove
intolerable to the English. 4. The King, both for his own safety, and for the
love he bears to his own Nation, will advance them, and plant them about him
in chief Places of credit; which must needs breed Emulations and Controversies
between them and the English: Then must he of Force secretly begin to favor and
fortify his own, to the incredible calamity of the other, as Canutus did his
Danes, and William the Conqueror his Normans, neither of them enemies to the
English blood, nor evil Kings, but careful of their own safeties; for herein it
is impossible to be neutral. 5. The Romans with all their Power and Policy
could never unite the hearts of England and Scotland in peace, nor hold the
Scots and North-Irish in obedience of any authority residing in England: What
then are we to hope for of this King herein?

The Religion of Scotland unpleasing to our State.
His Religion is neither fit for our State, wherein Archbishops, etc. and
Officers of Cathedral Churches are of much dignity; and there suppressed: nor
will be pleasing to our Nobility, to be subject to the exorbitant and popular
authority of a few ordinary Ministers; which the King himself is there content
to yield unto. And therefore it is likely, that few will be forward to
entertain that King for the reforming of Religion here, that has no better
Order in his own at home.

For the Lady Arabella.
For the Lady Arabella, is alleged, her being an equal degree of Descent with
the King of Scots: Her being above him, in all hopes for herself, or benefit to
the English, that can be expected in an English Prince, and a Prince born in
England.

Against Her.
Neither she, nor the Scot are properly of the House of Lancaster: and the
Title of Lancaster is before the Pretense of York, ut supra. 2. The testament
of King Henry 8. barreth her as well as the Scot. 3. Her Descent is not free
from Bastardie, for Queen Margaret soon after the death of her first Husband
married Steward Lord of Annerdale, who was alive long after her marriage with
Anguis: and it is most certain also, That Anguis had another Wife alive when he
married the said Queen. All this confirmed by the Lord William Howard (Father
to the now Admiral) sent into Scotland by Henry 8. of purpose to enquire
thereof; who reported it to King Henry, Queen Mary, and diverse others. For this
cause King Henry would have let the marriage between Anguis and his Sister;
and chiefly caused him to exclude her issue. 4. She is a Woman, and it were
perhaps a great inconvenience, that three of the weak sex should succeed one
the other. 5. All her Kindred by her Father is mere Scottish. In England she
has none but by her Mother, the Candishes: a mean Family and Kindred for a
Princess.

CAP. VI.
Examination of the Title of the House of Suffolk: being Darby and Hartford.
Sect. 29. 30.
The Earl of Hartford's Children, illegitimate.
THe Children of the Earl of Hartford Discending of Lady Frances, the eldest
Daughter of Charles Brandon, are proved illigitimate. 1. Because the Lady
Katharine Gray their Mother was lawful Wife to the Earl of Pembroke, (when
they were born) not separated from him by lawful authority, or for any just
cause; but abandoned by him, because her House was come into misery and
disgrace. 2. It could never be lawfully proved that the said Earl and Lady
Katharine were married, but only by their own Assertions; not sufficient in
Law: Therefore was the marriage disannulled in the Arches, by public and
definitive sentence of Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury, not long after the
Birth of the said Children. 3. When the Marquess of Dorset married their
Grandmother the Lady Frances, he had another lawful Wife, sister to H.
Fitz-allen, Earl of Arundel, whom he put away to obtain so great a marriage as
was the Lady Frances: This bred much hate between the Marquess and Earl ever
after: but the Marquess favor with K. Henry, deprived the other of all remedy.
And therefore may their Mother the Lady Katharine seem illegitimate too.

Bastardie in the issue of Charles Brandon.
Charles Brandon had a wife alive, when he married the Queen of France, by
which wife he had issue the Lady Powyse, wife of the Lord Powyse: and this
wife of his lived some time after his marriage with the Queen.

Darby's Evasion.
This Wife (say the Friends of Darby) died before the birth of the Lady Eleonor
the younger daughter, their ancestor; though after the Birth of the Lady
Francis, Hartford's ancestor.

Hartford's Confutation of the first Bastardie.
To the first Bastardy of Hartford, their Friends affirm, That the Contract
between the Lady Katharine, and the Earl of Pembrook was dissolved lawfully,
and judicially in the time of Queen Mary.

Hartford's evasion of the second Bastardie, in the behalf of his Second born,
Edward Seymore.
The Lady Katharine being found with Child, affirmed the Earl of Hartford to
be the Father: Hereupon he being sent for out of France (where he was with Sir
N. Throgmorton, and had got leave to travel into Italy) confessed it at his
return; and both of them affirmed they were man and wife: but because they
could not prove it by witnesses, and for attempting such a matter with one of
the Blood Royal without privitie, and license of the Prince, they were both
committed to the Tower: where they used means to meet afterward, and had the
second Son Ed. Seymore. Now the first Son may be ligitimate before God, yet
illegitimate before men, and therefore incapable of Succession. For the second,
to be legitimate, whereas there wants nothing but witnesses, (for the
presence of Minister is not absolutely necessary) to justify their marriages
by Law; The Queen herself, her Counsel, and as many as had the Examination of
these parties, upon their first act, or Childbirth, are witnesses unto them;
besides their resolution to continue man and wife protested before them and
confirmed by this effect of their second carnal meeting in the Tower.

CAP. VII.
Examination of the Title of the Houses of Clarence and Britanie.
Against the House of Clarence in general.
THeir Claim is founded only upon the Daughter of George Duke of Clarence,
younger Brother of Ed. 4. So that as long as any lawful issue remains of the
Daughters of the elder brother, no claim or pretense of theirs can be admitted.
2. If the pretense of Lancast. be better than that of York (as before it
seems to be proved, S. 36. 38. 40. 42. etc.) then holds not this of
Clarence, which is merely of York. 3. The House of Clarence has been often
attainted; 1. In George himself. 2. In the Countess of Salisbury his Daughter,
and Heir. 3. In the Lord Montague her Son and Heir: whereby their whole
interests were cut off. For albeit since those attainders it has been restored
in Blood, yet has not that been sufficient to recover unto that House the
ancient Lands and Titles of Honor thereunto belonging: for they were forfeited
to the Crown, as is also to the next in Blood unattainted, the prerogative of
succeeding to the Crown: unless special mention had been made thereof in their
restoration.

Against the Earl of Huntington, in favor of the Pooles.
Upon the attainder of the Lord Montague with his Mother of Salisbury, all such
right as they had, or might had being cut off in them, fell upon Geoffrey,
brother of the said Lord. 1. Because he was not attainted. 2. He was a degree
nearer unto the Duke of Clarence, (and thereby has the Privilege of an Uncle
before the Niece, (S. 34. 40.) than the Lady Katharine. 3. He was a man, she a
woman (and neither of their Fathers in possession of the thing pretended) which
privilege of Sex got the last King of Spain the Kingdom of Portugal. 4.
Inconvenience of Religion; (this point altered by the death of the last Earl).

First Title of the Infant; as Heir unto the House of Britain, from William the
Conqueror. (Sect. 12.)
She is descended of the ancient Royal Blood of England: from the eldest
Daughter of the Conqueror, Constance: whereof her friends infer two
Consequences. 1. When the Conqueror's sons died without issue, or were made
incapable of the Crown (as Henry 1. seemed to be for the violence used to his
elder brother Robert, and his son William, Sect. 11.) then should the elder
sister have entered before King Stephen, who was born of Alice or Adela her
younger sister.

The coming of a Woman no bar to inher: in England.
Though the Salick Law seems to exclude her from the Crown of France; yet
from the inheritance of England, Britanie, Aquitayne, etc. coming to her by
Women, and falling ordinarily in Women, nor that, nor other Law excludes her.

Second Title of the Infant by France, whereof she is Heir general, from Henry
2.
She is Lineally descended from Eleonor the eldest daughter of Henry 2. (Sect.
15.) by whom she is Heir general of France, and thereby of England (Sect. 15.)
for three reasons. 1. King John by the murder of his Nephew Arthur of
Britanie, forfeited all his states whatsoever: Now this happened four years
before his son Henry 3. was born; and therefore the Crown by right should have
come to the said Eleonor his elder sister. 2. Arthur being prisoner in the
Castle of Roan, and suspecting that he should be murdered by his Uncle John,
nominated the Lady Blanch, daughter and heir to Eleonor to be his Heir; which
were it not good, yet when he and his sister was put to death, she and her
Mother were next of kinn unto them, for any more of England, (S. 12.) 3. John
was actually deposed by the Barons and States of the Realm, 16 Regni sui, and
Lewis of France the Husband of Blanch elected and admitted, with their whole
consent: to whom they swore Fealty and Obedience in London, for him and his
heirs, and posterity, 1217. giving him possession of London, and the Tower,
and many other important places. Now ableit that they chose after his John's
son Henry 3; Yet Titles and Interests to Kingdoms once rightly gotten, never
die, but remain ever for the posterity to set a foot: so came Hugo Capetus to
the Crown of France, Odo Earl of Paris his ancester, being once elected,
admitted, and sworn King, though after deposed, and Charles the simple chosen.

Third Title of the Infanta, from Henry 3.
She is Lineally descended of Beatrix, daughter of Henry 3. (S. 17.) Now seeing
that the posterity of both her brothers Edward and Edmond, (the heads of the
two Houses of Lancaster and York) have oftentimes been attainted, and excluded
from the Succession by sundry Acts of Parliament, and at this day are at
contention among themselves; why may not the right of both Houses, by
Composition, Peace, and Comprimise, at least, be passed over to their Sisters
issue?

Objections against the Infanta.
1. These her Claims are very old and worn out. 2. Her claims are but
collateral by sisters. 3. She is a stranger, and Alien born. 4. Her Religion is
contrary to the State.

Answered by those that favor her Title.
Antiquity hurts not the goodness of Titles to Kingdoms (when occasion is
offered to advance them) which commonly are never presumed to die, and nullum
tempus occurrit Regi. 2. Collateral Lines may lawfully be admitted to enter,
when the direct either fail, or are to be excluded for other just respect. 3.
The point of foreign birth is sufficiently answered before. ( Sect. 50.) 4. The
impediment of other Religion is not universal, nor admitted in the judgment of
all men, but only of such English as differ in Religion from her: to the rest
(and those many) it will rather be a motive to favor then hinder her title.

CAP. VIII.
Examination of the Houses of Spain and Portugal.
The Duchy of Lancaster belong's to Portugal.
THe King of Spain is lineally descended from the two daughters of John of
Gant, by his two first wives: ( Sect. 23, 24.) the former whereof, (the Lady
Blanch) being heir of the Duchy ( Sect. 19.) when the posterity of his
issue male by her came to be exstinct (as it was in the children of H. 6.)
there is no reason, but the issue of his daughters (those that claim by
Portugal ( Sect. 23) should succeed; at least in the inheritance of that Duchy.

The Crown of England to John of Somerset, son to John of Gant.
But for the right and title to the Crown of England, which came by John of
Gant himself (third son of Edw. 3: and eldest that lived when he died) John
Earl of Somerset, though begotten out of matrimony, yet afterward legitimated
( Sect. 25.) his eldest son by Katharine Swinford was to inherit before the
Lady Philippe his sister, by the Lady Blanch.

The first reason of Portugal against Somerset.
Against which the favorites, of Portugal allege diverse reasons. 1. Being born
out of Wedlock, and in Adultery, ( Sect. 25.) and continuing a bastard many
years, he could not be made legitimate afterward by Parliament, to that
effect of Succession to the Crown, before Q. Philippe of Portugal, and her
children born before his legitimation; who thereby had vim acquisitam (as the
Law says) which could not be taken away by any posterior Act of Parliament,
without consent of the parties interessed.

Second Reason.
John King of Portugal married the Lady Philippe, with condition to enjoy all
prerogatives that at day were due unto her; which was six or seven years before
his legitimation. For Don Alonso and Don Edwardo, the two sons of the said John
and Philippe were born in the years 1390, and 1391. And John of Gant married
Katharine Swinford, and legitimated her children in the years 1396, and 1397.

Third Reason.
The marriage of John of Gant with Katharine Swinford helps little to better
this legitimation; (which by the rules of the Common and Civil Laws is but a
bare deposition:) for their children were Spurii, begotten in plain Adultery,
not in fornication only; and consequently the Privilege that the Law gives to
the subsequent marriage of the Parties, by legitimating such children as are
born in simple fornication (where the parties are single) cannot take place
here; nor can any legitimation equal, much less prefer the legitimated, before
the lawful and legitimate by birth.

The Fourth Reason alleged by the Favorers of Portugal against the Issue of
John of Somerset.
When Henry 6. and his son were extinguished, and Edw. 4. usurped the Crown,
there remained of the Lady Philippe, Alfonse the Fifth, King of Portugal her
Nephew; of John of Somerset, Margaret Countess of Richmond his Niece. The
Question is, which of these two Competitors of the House of Lancaster, and in
equal degree from John of Gant, and Henry 6. should have Succession by right
immediately after the death of Henry 6. Alfonso (say they) for three Reasons.
First, he was a man, and Margaret but a woman (though she came of the man,
and he of the woman.) 2. He descended of the lawful and eldest daughter; she
of the younger brother legitimated. 3. He was of the whole blood to H. 6. and
she but of the half: In which regard he was to be preferred, at least, in
all the interests of Succession which were to be had from Henry 4. only, and
were never in his father John of Gant, which were many; as his right gotten by
arms, upon the evil government of the former King; his Election by Parliament,
and Coronation by the Realm, etc. (see for the rest Sect. 35. 43.) Besides when
King Richard 2. was dead, he was next in degree of propinquitie unto him of
any man living; as has before been proved, Sect. 36.

CAP. IX.
The Genealogy, and Controversies of Portugal.
76.
The Genealogy of Portugal.
Emanuel had by one wife six children. 1. John 3. he John, that died in his
father's time; he Sebastian, slain by the Moors in Barbary. 2. Isabel
Grandmother to the present King of Spain. 3. Beatrix, Grandmother to the Duke
of Savoy. 4. Lewis, father of Don Antonio, lately deceased in England. 5. Henry
Cardinal, and after King. 6. Edw. father of Mary Duchess of Parma, who has two
sons, Ranuntius Duke of Parma, and Edward a Cardinal, and father of Katharine,
Duchess of Braganca yet living; whose Issue is, Theodosius Duke of Braganca,
Edward, Alexander and Philippe, young Princes of great exspectation.

Five pretenders unto the Crown of Portugal.
Sebastian being dead, Henry son of Emanuel succeeded; who being old,
unmarried, unlikely to have issue; before him was debated the right of five
Pretenders to the Succession of that Crown; vid. Philippe of Spain, Philibert
Duke of Savoy, the Duke of Parma (his mother being then deceased) Don Antonio,
and the Duchess of Braganca: the three first by their Deputies, the fourth (
Anthonio) by himself, and for himself; the fifth by her husband the Duke and his
learned Council. Of these, the Duke of Savoy was soon excluded, because his
mother was younger sister to K. Philip's mother, and himself younger then
Philippe.

Don Antonio a Bastard, and excluded.
Don Antonio was also rejected and pronounced a bastard by the said King Henry,
for many reasons. 1. He was taken to be so all his father's life time, and
that without question. 2. Certain Decrees coming out from Rome, in the time of
Julius 3. against the promotion of bastards; he sued to the said Pope to be
dispensed withal. 3 His father Don Lewis has oftentimes testified by word and
writing that he was his Bastard, and signified as much in his last will. 4. It
is likely that if Lewis had married his mother, who was base in birth, and of
the Jewish (as some stories affirm) he would have made some of his friends and
kindred acquainted therewith, as a matter so much important to them to know;
which he never did: though the King avowed himself was present with him at his
death. 5. If he had been legitimate, why did he not pretend the Succession
before the said King, next after the death of Sebastian, being son to his
elder brother, as well as was Sebastian. 6. Whereas he had produced witnesses
( vid. his mother, sister, with her husband, and two others) to prove, that his
father before his death had married with his mother in secret: the said K.
Cardinal affirmed, that upon their examination he had found they were suborned
by Anthonio: because they agreed not in their reports, and because some of them
confessed they were suborned: whereupon he has caused them to be punished.

If not, why not Duke of Lanc.
Seeing that in England we hold the said Don Anthonio for true King of
Portugal, I see not how we can deny his children their right, at least to the
Duchy of Lancaster: whereof whosoever is right heir of Portugal, should be
rightest heir, ( Sect. 70.).

Allegations to prove the Duke of Parm's right.
That he represented his mother, and she her father, Lo. Edward, who, had he
been alive, had carried it from his elder sister Elisa. K. Philip's 2. mother:
consequently his issue to be preferred before hers. 2. Against the Duchess of
Braganca, that his mother was the elder sister, therefore he who represented
her person, was to be preferred before her.

For the Duchess of Braganca, and against the point of Representation.
She was born and bred in Portugal: Philip and Parma were foreign. 2. She was
nearer by a degree unto Emanuel, and Henry the Cardinal, then the Duke of
Parma. 3. Against the representation urged by Parma, that no representation was
admitten in the Succession to the Crown of Portugal; but that every pretender
was to be taken and preferred according to the Prerogatives only of his
Person, as the next in propinquitie of blood, or the man before the woman, and
the elder before the younger, if they be in equal degree of propinquitie to
the former Kings.

Touching Representations. (Contra Sect. 40.)
The last King Sebastian entered the Crown by way of Representation, not by
propinquitie of blood, the Cardinal being brother, and he but Nephew unto the
former King John 3. ( Sect. 82.) Answ. He was of the right descendant line of
K. John 3. and the Cardinal but of the Collateral; and all Law allows the
right line to be served and preferred before the Collateral be admitted: This
was the cause of his coming to the Crown, and not representation.

Allegations of King Philip's right to Portugal.
Seeing then that Representation was not admitted, but every Pretendor
considered in his own person only ( Sect. 82.) King Philip being in equal
degree of propinquitie of blood with the Duchesses, alleged he was to be
preferred before them both: because a man, and born before them. 2. The
inheritance of Portugal (besides that it belonged to the Crown of Castile, of
old evidently belonged to John, King of Castile, by the marriage of Beatrix,
daughter and heir of Ferdinand King of Portugal: after whose death it was
conferred by election of the People on John, M. of Avis, bastard-brother of the
foresaid Ferdinand: and by him the said Beatrix, and her posterity wrongfully
debarred and excluded.

King Philip his own carver in Spain.
When these contentions were at the hottest, died the K. Cardinal, before he
could decide them. Whereupon the K. of Spain taking his right to be best; and
(because a Monarch, and under no temporal Judge) thinking he was not bound to
attend any other, or further judgment in the matter, but might by force put
himself in possession of his own (as he took it,) if otherwise he might not
have it; he entered upon Portugal by force of Arms, and at this day holds it
peaceably. The end of the controversy.

An Objection in behalf of Representation in the Succession of England.
Representation takes place in England: So as the children of the son, though
women, shall ever be preferred before those of the daughter, though men.
Therefore seeing the Lady Philippes right to the Dukedom of Lancaster, and
Crown of England (mentioned Sect. 70, 72, etc.) is to be preferred according
to the Laws of England; only it follows, that the right of Succession
pretended by the Princes of Portugal from the said Lady Philippe, should be
determined only by the Laws of England, which admit of Representation.

Answer to the former Objection.
The question is not here, by what Law this pretense by Portugal to the Crown
of England is to be tried: but rather who is the true and next heir of John of
Portugal, and the Lady Philippe, heir of Lancaster: which once known, it
little imports by what Law he pretends his right unto England; whether of
Portugal, or England: though to determine this first and chief point of the
Succession of Portugal, the Laws of Portugal must needs be the only Judges,
and not those of England.

CAP. X.
Whether it be better to live under a Foreign or a Home-born Prince, a great
Monarch, or a little King.
Against Forrein-Government the opinion of Lawmakers.
ARistotle, Answered (S. 112).
in all the different Forms of Commonwealths which he prescribes in his 8
books of Politics, ever presupposes, that the Government shall be by people
of the self-same Nation: the same also do presume all the Lawmakers therein
mentioned; as, Minos, Solon, Lycurgus, Numa Pompilius, and the rest.

Of Orators and Writerr.
Demosthenes his famous invectives against Philip of Macedonia, that desired to
encroach upon the State of Greece; Answered (S. 113).
and his Orations against Eschines, who was thought secretly to favor the
pretenses of the said foreign Princes. The books of the Italians, when they
speak of their former subjection to the Lombardes, Germans, French, and their
present to the Spaniard. The late writings of the French against the power of
the house of Guise and Lorrain, whom they hold for strangers.

Of Nations by their Proceedings and Designs.
The desperate and bloody executions of diverse Nations, Answ. (S. 111)
to the end they might rid themselves from stranger's dominion, are arguments of
the very impression of nature herself in this matter: for examples whereof, see
Q. Curtius, lib. 5. and 6. And the Sicilians, who at one Evensong-tide slew all
the French within their Island, whom themselves had called and invited thither
not long before. And the English, who murdered all the Danes at one time: and
would have don as much for the Normans, if themselves had been strong enough, or
the advers party less vigilant. And the French in the time of Charles the 7.
when nothing could repress them from revolting every where against the English
Government, of which at length by hook and crook they wholly freed themselves.

Of Holy Scripture.
The authority of holy Scriptures is evident in this behalf; Answ (S. 114.)
Deuteronomy. 17. 16. Thou shall make them King over thee whom the LORD thy GOD shall
choos out of the number of thy brethren: thou mai'st not set a stranger over
thee, which is not of thy brethren.

In the behalf of Foreign Government.
This hatred of Stranger's Government, is but a vulgar aversion of passionate,
or foolish men; Passionate by corruption of nature, whereby men are inclined to
think evil of others; especially their Governors; and the more the farther they
are from us in kindred or acquaintance; foolish, as those that weigh not the
true reasons, causes, or effects of things; but only the outward show, and
popular apprehension, grounded for the most part in the imagination, or
incitation of others, who endeavor only to procure tumults.

It imports not what Countrimam the Prince be, so his Goverement be good.
All passion against stranger, or unto others laid aside, we are only to
respect the fruits of good and profitable Government; the peace and propriety
of the Subject: which what Prince (be he native or foreign) soever procures
us, is fittest for ours or any other Government: for after a Prince is
established, the common subject has no more conversation with him, nor
receives further personal benefits of him, than of a mere stranger. Then if
he govern ill, what is the Subject the better by his being Home-born.

Home-born Princes and Tyrants.
As in the like case the children of Israel said of Rehoboam, Quae nobis pars
in David, vel quae haereditas in filio Jesse? 3 King. 12. 16. whom they
abandoned, and chose Jeroboam his servant, and a stranger. And what availed it
the Duke of Gloucester, Tho. of Woodstock, that he lived under his Nephew Ric.
2. or the Duke of Clarence the right of his brother (Sect. 4.) or the De la
Pooles, Staffords, Plantagenets, their being under their near kinsman Henry 8.
by whom they lost both their lives, possessions and kindred. Many other
examples might be drawn from the Romans, Sicilians, Spanish, English, etc. who
have been much the wors for their homeborn Princes.

Opinion, and the being under several Governors, make's strangers, or no
strangers.
Who be strangers, and who not, depends much of the opinion and affection of
each people, and nation the one toward the other: but chiefly their being
under the same, or several Governments. The house of Guise, and their kindred,
were held for strangers in France; yet came they but out of Lorrain, a Province
bordering upon France; and of the same nation, language, and manners; only
under another Prince. The Florentines are hated and held strangers in Siena,
where they govern: albeit the one State be not 30 miles from the other; and
both of one nation, language, and education. On the contrary, the Biscayns
hold not the Castillians for strangers; nor the Normans and Britains the
French; nor the Welsh the the English; a different people, and of different
language.

Three means of coming under foreign Government.
One Nation may become subject to another, either by Conquest, as the Welsh were
to the English; the English to the Normans and Danes, Sicilia and Naples to the
Spaniards, etc. Or inheritance, as Aquitaine and Normandy to England; the 17
Provinces to Spain; Britanie to France. Or by mixed means of force and
composition, as Milan to Spain; Ireland to England; and Portugal in our days
to Spain.

The Condition of Conquest, and the wisest Conquerors.
Conquest is of these three the hardest for the Subject, all standing at the
Will and Humor of the Conqueror, whom either anger, fear, or jealousy of his
assurance may often drive to hold a hard hand over the Conquered; at least for
a time, until his State be settled: Yet have these ever (at least the wisest)
dealt like Physicians, who after a vehement Purgation minister Lenitives, and
soft Medicines, to calm and appease the good Humors left, and to strengthen the
whole body again, that it may hold out.

Commendation of the Roman Government, best to their Foreign Subjects.
The carriage of the Romans was so just, considerate, sweet, and modest toward
all Foreign Nations they had conquered, that it allured diverse Nations to
desire to be under them, and to be rid of their natural Kings; as the Subjects
of Antiochus, and Mithridates. Other Kings to gratify their subjects,
nominated the Roman Empire for their successor, as Attalus of Pergamus, and
Ptolomie of Egypt, and others. Their manner was to do most favors, and give
most privileges unto the most remote Nations, they having the best ability to
Rebel against them: wherein this circumstance of being most strangers, most
helped them.

So are the French to the Britans, etc.
The like rule of Police have all great Monarchs used ever since. As in France
the States of Gasconie and Guyen (conquered from the English) pay far less
tribute to the King, than those of the isle of France it self. The Britains
which were old enemies, and came to the Crown by marriage, pay much less than
they. The Normans somewhat more than either, because they lie somewhat nearer to
Paris; yet less than the natural Frenchmen.

Venetians to Candia.
The Candians pay not the third part of the Impositions (unto the State of
Venice, whereto they are subject) that do the natural subjects of Venice, in
Italy: because it is an island a part, and stands further off.

Spaniards to their Subjects of Italy.
The Subjects of Naples, Scicilie, and Milan, pay not the Aloavalla; viz. the
tenth penie of all that is bought and sold, and imposed upon the natural
Spaniards; nor are they subject to the Inquisition of Spain (especially not
Naples and Milan) nor does any Law, or Edict made in Spain hold in those
Countries, except it be allowed by the States thereof; Nor may any of their old
Privileges be infringed, but by their own consents: Nor are they charged with
any part of the extraordinary Subsidies, which the King requires of Spain.

And of the Low Countries.
The Flemings enjoyed great tranquillity under the Dominion of Spain, before
they revolted: having a Governor of another Nation over them: but his time
being but short, he strove principally to get, and hold the Peoples good will,
thereby to be grateful to his King at his return home: and if he attempted
ought against them, they complained by their Chancellor residing for them in
the Spanish Court (for all Foreign Nations have their particular Counsel there
about the King) and by his mediation, obtained many Privileges. Now in the
space of 28. (in all which time they have been suffered to traffic freely into
Spain) years of their Revolt, there has not a quarter so many been punished by
order of justice, as Conte Lewis their natural Prince caused to be executed in
one day in Bruxells, which were 500. Nor had Alva any thank of the King, for
putting to death Count Egmont, and Horn; whereas in Arragon, a nearer State,
there were many heads chopped off upon a late insurrection. So that the
Circumstance of being strangers, and dwelling far off, does them great
pleasure, and gives them many Privileges above the home-born, or near
limitting subjects.

The States of Italy better Governed by their late Viceroys, than their
former home-born Princes.
In Italy, if you compare the number of the afflicted, and executed by
Justice, or otherwise, under their home-born Kings, with that which has been
since, you shall find twenty for one, especially of the Nobility: the reason
is, their Kings were absolute, and acomptant to no man; and being but men, and
having their passions and emulations with the Nobility, which they might
satisfy without control; they pulled down and set up at pleasure, and
oftentimes made but a jest of Noblemens lives and deaths. But Viceroys have no
authority, nor commission to touch principal persons lives, without relation
given thereof to your King and Council, and their order touching it. Then
knowing that after their three years Government is ended, they must stay forty
days as private men, under the succeeding Governor, to answer their former
proceedings against all that shall accuse them; they take heed what they do,
and whom they offend.

The late Kings of England extremely cruel to their Nobility.
To come nearer home, and to omit those which in the time of Wars, Rebellions,
and Commotions (occasions somewhat justifiable) have been cut off, within the
space of one five years of Henry 4. there were executed in peace by Justice,
and the Princes Command, 2 Dukes, 1 Archbishop, 5 Earls, the Baron of
Kinderton, and four Knights. Within almost as little a space of Ed. 4. his
time, 2 Dukes, 3 Earls, 2 Barons, 3 Knights, and many other afterward (for
this was but in the beginning of his Reign) But when all doubt of Contention
about Succession (which moved those two Kings, the more excusably, to these
cruelties) was taken away, in Henry 8. his time, were either cut off, or clean
put down, 2 Queens his wives, 3 Cardinals, 3 Dukes, 1 Marquess, 2 Earls, 2
Countesses, 6 Lords, 6 or 7 Abbots, Knights in great number, Gentlemen
infinite; What Spaniard could, or durst have done so much?

Better to live under a Great, than a little Monarch.
1 He is best able to defend, and protect his subjects. 2 He has ordinarily
least need to Pill, and Pole them; (for a little King, though never so mean,
will keep the State of a King, which his subjects must maintain) 3 He has more
to bestow upon his subjects, for reward of Virtue, or Valor. A great
Prerogative unto every subject, to be born under one that has much to give;
whereas he that is born in the Cities of Geneva, or Genoa (let him be of what
ability, or worth soever) can hope for no more preferment than those
Commonwealths can give, which is all too little; what then would it be, were
there many worthy men born there at one time?

A Foreign Prince living among us without Foreign Forces.
Another manner of living under Foreign Princes, is when the Prince comes to
dwell among us without Forces; As did King Stephen and Henry 2. who were natural
Frenchmen, and as King Philip in Queen Mary's time here in England; and the
last King of France in Polonia; so should his Brother Monsieur have done here
if the marriage between him and the Queen had gone forward.

Fit for our present State, and beneficial to any.
No danger, nor inconvenience can justly be feared from such a King: The
benefits are, 1 He subjecteth himself rather to the Realm and Nation, than they
to him, and if he live, and marry in England, both he and his Children will
quickly become English: 2 For his assurance, he must be enforced to cheerish
the English, thereby to gain, and perpetuate to himself their good will and
friendship; 3 He enters with indifferent mind toward all men, having no
kindred, or alliance within the Land, to whom he is bound, nor enemy against
whom he may be incensed; so as only merit and demerit of each man must move him
to favor or dis-favor, a great foundation of good and equal Government. 4 He
might be admitted upon such Compositions and Agreement, as both the Realm
should enjoy her ancient Liberties, and perhaps more (for Foreign Princes upon
such occasions of their preferment commonly yield to much more than the
Domestical) and the home-born Pretenders should remain with more security, than
they can well hope for under an English Competitor.

A Foreign Prince, with Foreign Support.
A third manner is, when the Prince brings Forces with him for his own
assurance, and these either present; as the Danish Kings, and after them the
three first Norman Princes (who either by the help of their first subjects
already in England, or by others brought in by them afterward, wrought their
evil) Or that his Forces be so near, as he may call them in when he lists,
and that without resistance, as may the Scot, whom no Sea divides from us.

Insupportable to our, or any State whatsoever.
All danger and inconveniences may justly be feared from such a King; yea all
the mischiefs, either of Domestical or Foreign Governments. For those of a
Domestical Prince are, Pride, Cruelty, Partiality, pursuing of Factions,
particular Hatred, extraordinary advancing of his own Kindred, extreme pinching
and punishing of the Subject, being sure of his own party within the Realm, by
reason of his presence, and therefore the less respective of others. These
vices such a Foreign Prince is the more subject too, than the Domestical, as
having both external Counsel of a People that hate us, to incense him, and
their external Force to effect his and their Designs. The mischiefs of Foreign
Government are, Tyranny of the Prince, the servitude of the People; filling
and planting the Realm with strangers, and dividing among them the Honors,
Dignities, Riches, and Preferment thereof. All which are incident (in all
probability) to the third kind of Government, and to be feared in the
succession of the King of Scots, whose case is within the second Branch
thereof, and may hereafter be within the first.

Foreign Princes affected by some Countries. Best Roman Emperors, strangers.
Where Kings go by Election, commonly they take Strangers (in the second kind
Sect. 105.) so did the Lacedaemonians and Romans in their first Monarchy; and
of late the Polonians in the Succession of their three last Kings; and the
Venecians by way of good Policy, have made a perpetual Law, That when they are
to War, and must needs choose a General, he be a stranger; to wit, some Prince
of Italy, who is out of their own States; thereby to have him the more
indifferent, and equal to them all. Among the latter Romans, their best, and
most famous Emperors were strangers, as Trajan and Adrian, Spaniards: Septimius
Severus, an African; Constantine, English: Their worst Romans, as Caligula,
Nero, Heliogabalus, Commodus.

Foreign Government: which best, which worst.
This Second then* ( S. 105.) is the best: In the first kind, of being under
Foreign Government, and as a Province to be ruled by Deputies, Viceroy's, etc.
as the States mentioned ( S. 19.) and as all the Provinces of the old Roman's
States were, all things considered* and one taken with another, the Commodities
and Securities are more, and the damages and danger less, than in the
Government of Domestical Princes: And all the mischiefs of Foreign Government
are only incident to the third and last ( S. 105.) Other imputations to the
other two proceeded, from the blindness and passion of the vulgar, and some
private men most likely to be interessed therein. ( S. 91.)

An Answer to the former Objection (S. 89.) against Foreign Government.
Upon other occasions and humors, the vulgar will do as much against their own
Countrymen and Princes, as the Sicilians did against the French, etc. ( S.
89.) and often have, both in England and else where, when they have been
offended, or that seditious heads have offered themselves to lead them into
tumults.

Aristotle Answered, (S. 89.)
Aristotle in his Politics never handled expressly this our Question, and
consequently weighed not the reasons on both sides, and so left it neither
decided nor impugned; and he that was Alexander's Master, the Master of so many
Foreign Countries, could not well condemn it.

Demosthenes Answered, (S. 88.)
Demosthenes was well feed by the King of Asia, to the end he should set
Athens, and other Grecian Cities at ods with Philip. On the other side, if
Athens a Popular Government wherein the force of his tongue made him have
greatest sway and authority, were to have come under a Monarch, he should have
been in like credit: as he fell out to be: for all the time that Alexander
lived, he continued in banishment.

Answer to the Objection out of Deuteronomy. (S. 90.)
When the Command was given in Deuteronomy. no Nation besides the Jews had true
Religion among them; the chiefest and highest think to be expected in the
admission of any Magistrate; for that it concerns the true and highest end of
a Commonwealth, and of all humane society: but Christ's coming into the world
took away this restraint: So that all Christian Nations are alike, for so much
as belongs unto Government.

CAP. XI.
Examination of the likelihood of each Pretender to the Crown of England.
Whereby a Pretender may soonest prevail.
THe prevailing, or not prevailing consists either in the Religion of the
Pretender, or in the Strength of his particular Family, Friends and Allies,
both at home and abroad.

Every one will prefer a Prince of his own Religion.
Religion (being at this day threefold, viz. Protestancy, Puritanism, and
Papistrie) is likely to be of much respect in the Advancement or Depression of
each Pretender. And albeit in the entrance of King Ed. 6. Queen Mary and her
Majesty, diverse men of different Religions, for other respects concurred
together in those Princes Advancement, (which many of them repented after at
better leisure) yet it is now likely to be otherwise. 1 Because the Titles of
Pretenders are now more doubtful. 2 Men are become more resolute in matters of
Religion, and by long contending, the greater enemies. 3* Men of a good
Conscience will hold it a point of little zeal at least, if not of Atheism, to
set their hands to the Advancing of a Prince of contrary Religion to
themselves. 4 Men of discretion hold it to be against all Rules of Policy, to
promote to a Kingdom in which themselves must live, one of a contrary Religion:
for let what bargains, agreements, vain hopes, promises soever be made before
hand; yet the Princes once settled, they are sure to be oppressed by degrees: So
that they must either dissemble, or suffer persecution.

The likelihoods of the Protestant party.
The Protestant, that has the power and authority of the State in his hands,
is likely to do much; especially if he can conceal for a time the decease of
her Majesty, until he may put his Affairs in order: but this is held to be
either impossible, or very hard; so ardent are men's minds in such occasions,
and so capable of new designments, impressions, and desires are all kind of
subjects upon such great changes. The most wealthy, and strong Member of this
Body is the Clergy, as Bishops, etc. and their followers: the Nobility and
Privy Council are uncertain. The House of Hertford was wont to be in their
favor, but of late they are the more devoted to Arabella, and the House of
Derby.

Privy Council out of office during the vacancie of Princes.
Though the authority of the Privy Council be supreme during the Prince's
life; yet it is not so afterward: nor have they any public authority at all,
but according to their several former callings of Noblemen and Gentlemen. Then
is every man free, until a new Prince be established by the Commonwealth,
which establishment depends not upon the appointment or will of any few, or
upon any man's proclaiming of himself (for diverse are like to do so) but upon a
general Consent of the whole body of the Realm.

The Strength and Affection of the Puritans.
The Puritans, whose profession seems to be the more perfect, are more
generally favored throughout the Realm, (if not of Papists) than the
Protestant; which make's even all those Protestants, who are less interessed in
Ecclesiastical livings, or other preferments depending on the State, very much
affected to them. Their side is held to be the most ardent, quick, bold,
resolute of any other: as those which have a great part of the best Captains,
and Soldiers, and great Towns (where Preachers have made the more impression
in the Artificers, and Burgesses) much devoted to them: Nor want they
probabilities of having the City of London, the Tower, and most part of the
Navy much inclined to them: Their Foreign party will be the reformed Churches
of France (now not many) and of the Low* Countries. The Earl of Huntington was
the Lord Beacham (by reason of his marriage) is most affected by them. The King
of Scots, if not a stranger) would also be for his Religion very plausible.

The Strength and Affection of the Papists.
The Papists, least in show, because held under, yet are of small consideration
in respect of their home and foreign party. At home they are either Recusants,
or such as accommodate themselves, for wordlie respects, unto all external
proceedings of the time and State; of which sort are the most part of the
Country People, of whom the contrary Preachers are not so frequent. To them
such as are discontented do easily join also, and omnes qui amaro animo sunt
cum illis se conjungunt. 1 Reg. 22. 2. as the most afflicted by the present
state. Besides, there is ever likely a certain natural compassion in most men
toward those that suffer, and of compassion comes affection, of affection
desire to help. Moreover the persecution against the Papists has much stirred
them up to far more eager defense of their Cause, and has wrought a great
impression in their hearts. Their affection is thought indifferent toward any
one, be he Stranger or Domestical, who is likest to restore their religion; not
much inclined to any one of the pretenders in particular: a point of great
Consequence, by reason of the incertainty, and likely to give them great sway,
wheresoever they shall bend at that day.

The Foreign Strength of the Papists very great and important.
The Foreign Helps are (besides the exiled English, who have both Friends and
Kindred at home) the affections of Foreign Princes, and States Favorers of
their Religion; whose Ports, Towns, and Provinces be near upon England round
about; and for such a time and purpose cannot want commodity to give succor;
which thing weighed together with the known inclination that way of Ireland,
and the late declaration made by many of the Scottish Nobility and Gentry, to
favor that Cause, are arguments that this Body is also great and strong, and
likely to bear no small sway in the deciding of this Countroversie.

For, and Against the King of Scots.
Likelihoods of the Scot, besides the Prioritie of his Title in vulgar opinion,
are his Youth, his being a King, his moderate Nature, having shed little blood
hitherto, his affection in Religion to such as like thereof: On the other-side,
the Reasons of State before alleged against him, especially his Alliance with
the Danes, and dependence of the Scottish Nation seem to weigh much with
Englishmen ( S. 53.)

For, and Against the Lady Arabella.
For Arabella is alleged her being a young Lady, and thereby fit to procure
affections; and that by her marriage she may join some other title with her
own, and thereby friends. Against her, her being nothing at all Allied with the
Nobility of England; her Title as doubtful as the rest, if not more ( S. 56.)
Her Religion can be no great motive either for, or against her: for by all
likelihood it is as tender yet, green and flaxible, as is her age, and sex.

The Kindred and power of Beacham and Derbie.
The Lord Beacham and Earl of Derbie have had their Titles examined before, (
Cap. 6.) Their difference in mean and Kindred is great: For Derbie far
exceeds the other in both: For the Kindred of Hertford are but few, his
father being the first raiser of his House: But Derbie has, besides the
Stanleys (which are many, and of good power) the Lords Sturton, Monteagle,
Morley, Dacres of the North, the Earl of Cumberland, some of the Arundels,
Poynes of Gloucester, and many others; besides Lancaster, Cheshire, and
North Wales; which for the most part depend upon him.

The Likelihoods of the Earl of Huntington.
The Earl of Huntington his Alliance is not great; in the last Earl it was,
the Earl of Leicester, and Warwick, and Sir Philip Sidney living; besides he
was like to have the whole power of London (a matter of great importance and
which advanced Ed. 4. two several times) by which means, and by all the forces
and affection of the Puritan, and much of the Protestant, he was thought to be
in great forwardness. But now these great Pillars failing, no man can assure
himself what the success of this Earl or his issue will be.

A Short Survey of all Foreign Pretenders.
The Infanta Pretendent of the House of Britain is a Princess of rare parts,
both for beauty, wisdom, and Piety. The two young Princes of Parma were imps of
great expectation, and diverse ways near of Kin to the Spaniard; As near to
whom are the Children of the Duchess of Braganca, who are all Princes of rare
Virtue and Valor; and of singular affection to the English nation; which diverse
of them, traveling Portugal, have tasted. What the means of the Spaniard is,
all the world may see; what his, or any of their success will be in this
matter, no man can determine.

That there will be Wars about the Succession.
This Affair will not be ended by any possibility moral without some War, at
least wise, for some time at the beginning; and that for diverse Reasons.

The First Reason.
The matter cannot be Disputed and determined during Her Majesty's life without
evident danger of her person, for many Causes in the like case, and especially
now, that she grows to be old, and without hope of issue.

The Second Reason.
The Declaration of an Heir arparent now made, would move infinite Humors and
Affections within the Realm, and stir coals, and cast firebrands over all the
Kingdom (perhaps further) which now lie raked up and hidden in the Embers.

The Third Reason.
The Declaration, though it were now made by Parliament or Authority of her
Majesty, would not fully end the Controversy: For albeit some Pretenders that
should be passed over or put back, would perhaps be silent for the present; yet
afterward it is certain they would both speak and spurn when occasion were
offered.

The Fourth Reason.
This Declaration would be dangerous to him were declared: for on the one side
it would make her Majesty very jealous of him; On the other side, unite and
arm all other Pretenders, and their followers, against him: And of all
recounted by our Histories, to be declared in this manner none (being not Kings
Children) ever came to Reign.

The Fifth Reason.
The Pretenders being so many, and their Pretenses so ambiguous as they be, it
is to be thought, That none, or few will presently at the beginning abandon
their Hopes and Titles, but prove at least what Friends will stand to them, and
how matters will go for, or against them; especially seeing they may do it
without danger of Law, their Rights and Pretenses being manifest: and for this
first Assay arms are necessary.

The Sixth Reason.
If any would in process of time forgo their Titles (as diverse will at length,
and many must, for one only can speed) yet that they be not seized or oppressed
on a sudden, and at first by the adverse party, as the course is in such
cases, it is likely each one will arm himself and friends at the beginning: for
better Conditions will be granted them being armed, than being naked; and the
more that stand together on their guard, the easier and sooner Peace may they
procure of him that Prevails: for a displeasure is sooner pardoned to a
multitude, or potent adversary, than to one, or a weak one. Now the Common
peril of the not prevailers, knitting them together for their own defense,
besides their own safeguard, will be the ground of much security to him also
that Reigns: they being not likely to conspire against him, because they are
many, and by consequent not easily drawn to agree among themselve, whom to
prefer, where he pulled down.

No main Battle, but rather a Composition.
This matter is not like to come easily to any great or main Battle, but rather
to be ended at length by some Composition and general Agraement: and that for
this Reason.

The Reason.
The Pretenders are many, and their Power and Friends lying in diverse and
different parts of the Realm; they will one fear the other, and seek to
fortify themselves where their strength lies, especially toward the Ports
and Seafide, for receiving of Succor. Therefore will they not much urge nor
press one the other in the beginning, but every part attended rather to
strengthen it self for the time.

Which of the Pretenders are likeliest to bear it.
There be two sorts of Pretenders, the one Foreign, the other English: Of
Foreign, the Infanta it likest to bear it, or some other by her Title, laid
upon him by her friends good will. Of Domestical, the Earl of Hartford's
second Son.

Of Foreign, the Infanta, and why.
1 She is a Woman, and may easily join (if her Father will) the Titles of
Britanie and Portugal together. 2 She is unmarried, and by her marriage may
make some other Composition, either at home or abroad, that may facilitate the
matter. 3 She is a great Princess, and fit for some great State; and other
Princes of Christendom would perhaps more willingly concur in such a
composition of matters by her, and by casting all Foreign Titles on her, than
that the King of Spain should add this Kingdom unto his Monarchy: A thing
which those Princes his neighbors in reason of State, would not so well allow
of. 4 Some such moderation would take away much of the aversion of the English
from Foreign Government: For hereby no subjection would be feared to any
Foreign Realm, but rather diverse benefits to the Realm of England. ( S. 106.)

Of Domestical, the Earl of Hartford's second Son, and why.
He seems to be cleared of the Bastardie that lies nearest of all upon those
Children; and therefore to be preferred before his elder Brother ( S. 62.) 2 He
is unmarried, a point of no small moment for the joining or fortifying of
titles, and for making of Compositions of Peace and Union with the opposite
parties. 3 His Religion is not (...), and consequently every party may hope to
draw him to their sides; being free to follow what he shall think most
expedient for his own advancement, without Knot or Obligation to follow other
men's affections or judgments; as he would be presumed to be, were he married,
or much obliged to any other Family.

FINIS.
THIS Manuscript Treatise of Broken successions of the Crown of England, coming
from the hands of a Popish Priest, and comprehending the substance of what was
written and published by Father Parson's the Jesuit, under the name of Doleman,
for ends best known to themselves; but justly suspected, to be no way for the
Freedom of the English Nation, may give the greater occasion for the wisdom of
latter times, to prevent those Commotions toward confusion, as might seem to
threaten a second Part of that horrid Design of the Gun-power Treason, November.
5. 1604.


