The PARLIAMENTS X. Commandments.
I. THou shall have no other Gods but Us there LORDS and COMMONS ass-embled at
Westminster. II. Thou shall not make any Adresses to the King, nor yield
obedience to any of his Commands; neither shall thou wear any Image either of
him or his Posterity; thou shall not bow down unto him, nor Worship him, for
We are jealou^ gods, and will visit such sins unto the third and fourth
Generation of them that hate us, and will not observe our Votes, Orders and
Ordinances. III. Thou shall not take the Names of Us, your GODS in vain, for
we cannot hold you guiltless that take our Names in vain. IIII. Remember that
thou keep holy the Fast Day, for that is Our Sabbath; In it thou shall do no
manner of Work, for we have blessed that Day, and hallowed it. V. Thou shall
neither yield Honor nor Obedience to the King (thy Country; Father) or thy
Natural Father or Mother, so We will make thy days long, in the lands which
we shall take from the ungodly and wicked ones, to bestow upon thee. VI. Thou
shall Remove the Wicked One from his Throne, and his Posterity from off the
face of the Earth. VII. Thou shall edify the Sisters, and abundantly increase
and multiply the Saints. VIII. Thou shall get all thou can; part from
nothing: do no right, take no rong, neither pay any Debts. IX. Thou shall be a
Witness for us, against whomsoever we judge to be Wicked, that ^o We may cut
them off, that the Saints may enjoy abundance of all things. X. Thou shall
enjoy thy Neighbors House, his Wife, his Servant, his Maid, his Ox, or his
Ass, or any thing that belongs unto him; Provided he be first Voted (by US) to
be a wicked or ungodly Person.
All these Commandments We require you, and every of you with all diligence
to observe; and We your LORDS and GODS will incline your hearts to keep the
same.
The Parliaments PATER NOSTER.
OUr Fathers, which think your Houses of Parliament to be heaven; you would be
honored as GODS, because CHARLES his Kingdom is come unto you; your wills
must be done on earth, as unto the God of heaven; you have gotten the day, and
dispose of our daily bread; you will not forgive any, neither must you look to
be forgiven; you lead us into rebellion and all other mischiefs, but cannot
deliver us from evil. Yours is the Kingdom, the power and glory, Parliament
everlasting. Amen.

The ARTICLES of their FAITH.
I Believe in CROMWELL, the Father of all Schism, Sedition, Heresy and
Rebellion, and in his only Son Ireton, our Savior, begotten by the spirit in
a hole, borne of a winching Mare, suffered under a house of Office at
Brainford, he deserves to be drawn, hanged and quartered, and to remain
unburied; for he descended into Hull, the third day he rose up in Rebellion
against his KING, and now sits on the right hand of the gods at Westminster;
he believes there is no holy Ghost, nor Catholic Church, nor forgiveness of
sins, but the Communion of the Sisters, the resurrection of his Members, and
Parliament everlasting. AMEN.

Ordered, That these new Commandments, Pater Noster, and Creed be read in all
Parish Churches, and Congregations, throughout England and Wales.

HE^*


