To the Right Honorable LORD, PHILIP Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery, etc. One
of those Noble PEERS who in these Revolting Times continue faithful to the
Cause of GOD and the Commonwealth: T. B. wishes increase of Grace in this
Life, and Eternal Glory in the Life to come.
Right Honorable,
THe Author of this Discourse sent it over from New England, without a Title,
without a Dedication. The Title is supplied: And now I make bold to supply the
Dedication, by publishing the Book under your Honors Name and Patronage; which
I suppose the Author himself would do, if he were here present, in regard of
that near dependence which his Reverend and Learned Father once had upon your
Lordships Honorable Father of Renowned Memory, Mr. Robert Parker that famous
Divine, whom the Prelates persecuted out of the Land, for opposing their
Ceremonies, especially the Cross in Baptism.
from whom he received his whole Livelihood; besides many other great and
extraordinary Favors which his Wife and Children talk of to this very day. I
will not go about to commend the Work, which does sufficiently commend it Self
and the Workman too; of whose worth I could speak much, if I were not so nearly
allied unto him as I am: Only this I will say, (which all that are well
acquainted with him know to be true) He is a man of singular parts, eminent in
Learning, supereminent in Grace, strangely mortified to the World, wholly
addicted to the Service God and the Church. So craving pardon for my great
boldness in approaching so near, being but a stranger, I humbly take my leave,
and desire to approve my self

Your Honors truly devoted Servant in the Lord, Thomas Bailey.
Jan. 7. 1646.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, it is certain, that the Interpretation of a great part of
Prophecies, depends on a just and due accommodation of the numbers of the
years. But the numbers are various, the 1290, 1260, 490, 1000, 2300. To set
beginning and end to one of these, without relation to the rest, and so to run
at large, is easy. But we are confined. And such terms of beginning and end,
must be to one as will be suitable to the terms of all the rest: Which is a
very difficult thing to discover. Two ways of accommodation I have espied,
agreeable to all numbers, which in this Discourse I have proposed to
consideration. The former does bring in the end of the reign of Antichrist, and
the beginning of the glory of New-Jerusalem, about the year 1650: The other
way, about the year 1860, that is, above 200 years hence, as shall be showed in
the Discourse. Which of these two is to be chosen, I am not able at present to
determine. Two or three years more of experience would have showed which way to
steer. Willingly therefore would I have stayed a little longer, before I had
published any of my thoughts concerning Prophecies, that I might have been
instructed to write more surely and punctually, and without such uncertain and
problematical manner of discourse as now I must be forced unto: But I am not to
look at my own ends, neither am I to serve my self, but Christ and the Church:
Wherefore Christian Reader, accept at my hands what I do communicate in this
writing; desiring and seeking therein the benefit of Sion. I would have
presented it more elaborate; but my weakness and occasions bindered. Tidings I
bring of sad times, and tidings of great joy to follow after. My spirit has
been grieved to declare the former: But I must be faithful, and declare the
whole Truth according to my judgment. Nevertheless, what is the affliction to
the glory succeeding? If the time of the end be not yet come, we may, look for
an easier affliction, and every day expect deliverance: But then the
Restoration following will be only greater then before, not perfect. If the
time of the end be come, then we must expect and prepare for the sad time of
the three years and half yet future, Apoc. 11.8. and then perfect Restoration
will follow after, to be completed in (heavenly perfections. I determine
nothing in this point. Read and judge, and make application as God shall please
to move. Farewell.

November 20. 1645.
Imprimatur Joseph Caryl.

Concerning the first Vision of the Image, Dan. 2.
The Controversal part.
THe main Controversy in this Vision, is about the Iron feet and legs, and the
stone that smote them. The opinion of some is, that they signify the
Successors of Alexander in the Grecian Kingdom, and especially the Seleucidae:
and the stone cut out of the mountain, Christ at his first coming, and his
Spiritual Kingdom following.

This cannot stand,

First, because every metal signifies a distinct Kingdom, and the fullness and
complement thereof, from the beginning to the perfect end: and therefore the
Brazen belly and thighs, are the whole and perfect Grecian kingdom; and
accordingly the legs and feet of Iron do signify another kingdom distinguished
from the Grecian, which cannot be the Seleucidae and other Successors in the
same kingdom. For as the Golden head does signify the whole Babylonian
kingdom, the Silver breast the whole Persian; so the Brazen belly and thighs the
whole Grecian, including the Seleucidae and other Successors in the same
kingdom. For these make up the integrity and fullness of the Grecian kingdom,
as much as the Successors of Nebuchad-nezzar make up the integrity of the
Babylonian, or as much as the Successors of Cyrus do concur to the perfect
constitution of the Persian. And so when the Grecian kingdom is proposed, Chap.
8.21, 22, it is expressly described as constituted, not only of Alexander the
Great, but also the Seleucidae and other the Successors in the same kingdom.

Secondly, because this Vision must reach unto the last days, Chap. 2.28; which
could not be, if the legs and feet, the extreme and utmost part of the Image,
should end in the Seleucidae; forasmuch as this kingdom expired before the
birth of Christ.

Thirdly, because the legs are said to be of Iron, in comparison of the parts
and kingdoms going before, which were of weaker metal: whereas the Seleucidae
and other Successors of Alexander, had not the strength of Alexander. Chap.
8.21, 22. Thou will say, The kingdom is represented by Iron, only in relation
to the Church, whereunto it was more terrible then the former. I reply, 1. As
the two first kingdoms are represented by unequal Metals, the first of Gold,
the second of Silver, to note an absolute inferiority of the one unto the
other, Chap. 2.39: so by proportion, the two following of Brass and Iron, to
note an absolute imparity in strength, between the later and the former.
Wherefore the Iron kingdom must be absolutely and in it self stronger then the
Brazen, and not only in respect of particular exercise and employment of its
strength against the people of the Church. 2. The Iron kingdom is expressly said
to be as Iron, because it bruised all these, that is, the former kingdoms; and
not because more terrible to the Jews, Verse. 40. 3. Because it is the same with
the fourth Beast, with the Iron teeth, Chap. 7.7; which is therefore so
represented, because it devoured the whole earth, and not the Jews only, Chap.
7.23. 4. Because Nebuchad-nezzar and Haman in the former Kingdoms, were more
formidable to the Jews then the Seleucidae; and therefore there is no reason
that in this respect the fourth kingdom should be represented by Iron, in
comparison of the former kingdoms, as stronger and more terrible then those.

Fourthly, in the days of these kings, shall the God of heaven set up the
Kingdom of his Son: whereas the kingdom of the Seleucidae and the whole Greek
Empire was utterly dissolved before the birth of Christ, Verse. 44.

Neither can the stone that smote the Image be Christ at his first coming, and
his Kingdom immediately following unto the end;

First, Because the kingdom signified by the stone, must break in pieces all
the other kingdoms: whereas the Seleucidae and kingdoms going before, did not
stand until the birth of Christ, to be broken down by his Kingdom following:
and were as broken down before, so by another kingdom, the power of the Romans.

Secondly, because if they had continued till after the birth of Christ, yet
his Kingdom that was and is between his first and second Coming, was not
appointed for the breaking down of all earthly kingdoms: this being the time of
the Gentiles, Luke 21.24, and for the Adversaries to reign, and for the Church
to be trodden under foot, Apoc. 11.2, 15.

Thirdly, because the kingdom here spoken of, does break in pieces all other
kingdoms; so that those being utterly extinct, this alone does stand in place
of them, Verse. 44. Now this state is not to be expected under the kingdom of
Patience, or before the fall of Antichrist, when the kingdoms of the earth
shall be the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall reign for evermore, Apoc.
11.15, 18.

Fourthly, what prerogative and advancement had it been for the Kingdom of
Christ Spiritual, to have broken down the Seleucidae and other horns of the
Greek Empire, as long as another kingdom, the kingdom of the Romans, succeeded
in their place, to beat down the Church by the Heathen Emperors and
Antichrist, for longer space of time, and with greater and more terrible
persecution then ever was before?

Contrarily I affirm, that the legs, feet and toes of Iron, do signify the
Roman kingdom:

1. Because it is represented by a distinct Metal coming after the Brazen belly
and thighs, which is the Grecian. For no other distinct Monarchy came after the
Grecian but this, as History does show.

2. Because it is stronger then all the rest, and breaks them in pieces, Dan.
2.40.

3. The Iron legs and feet are parallel with the Iron teeth of the fourth
Beast, which signifies the Roman kingdom, Dan. 7.7.

4. The ten toes representing the ten kings, are accordingly a character of the
Roman kingdom, Apoc. 12.3. and 13.1. and 17.

5. It is such a kingdom as must stand to be destroyed by the kingdom of the
Saints, in the end of time, and therefore can be no other then the Roman
kingdom yet continuing under Antichrist.

The stone is the kingdom of the Saints, as it is interpreted Dan. 2.44, 45,
with Chap. 7.26, 27. And that it is the kingdom to be set up at the fall of
Antichrist, it appears by these Arguments.

1. Because it shall be set up to destroy all adverse kingdoms in the world,
which cannot be expected till about the time of the fall of Antichrist, Verse.
44.

2. It shall be set up without hands, or without the help of man, by the hand
alone of God Almighty, Verse. 44. Chap. 8.25.

3. Because this kingdom shall not rise till about the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet, which is the time of the fall of Antichrist, Apoc. 11.15, 16, 17.

4. Then, and not before; it shall fill all the earth, Verse. 34, 35, 44, 45;
that is, all kingdoms shall be subject unto it, Chap. 7.26, 27. Compare Revel.
11.15.

Of the Image, Dan. 2.
The second Part, containing the Exposition.
FOur Metals do constitute the Image: Gold; Silver, Brass, Iron. These
signify four Monarchies: the head of Gold, the first Monarchy, The Babylonian:
the second Metal, Silver, constituting the breast and arms, The Persian. The two
Silver arms, the two arms of the Monarchy, The Medes and Persians, Chap. 8.1,
2, 3. The third Metal, Brass, constituting the belly and thighs, The third
Monarchy, which is the Grecian. The belly notes the beginning and greatness
of this kingdom; under Alexander the first King. The joints between the belly
and thighs, note the plucking up of this kingdom after Alexanders death, to be
divided into four, whereof the principal were two, the one of the Seleucidae,
the other of the Lagidae, figured here by the two thighs of Brass. See Chap.
11.4, 5.

The fourth Metal of Iron, constituting the legs, feet and toes, signifies
the fourth, which is the Roman kingdom. The two legs do note the division of
the kingdom into the Empire of the East, and the Empire of the West, first
begun by Anthony and Augustus Caesar, afterward established by Constantine,
anno 330, and again more perfectly by Theodosius, anno 395.

At the ancles there is a joint dividing between the legs and feet, to note
the intercision of the Empire by the Northern Barbarians. By these the Roman
Empire was dissolved and broken into ten kingdoms, here signified by the ten
toes. They began effectually to invade the Empire after Constantine the Great,
and ceased not until they had disjoynted it into ten parts: which came to pass
upon the death of Valentinian the third, about the year 455. Clav. Apoc. on
Rev. 8.
The ten parts are thus reckoned by a learned Author; Britons, Saxons, Franks,
Burgundions, Wisigothes, Sueves and Alans, Vandals, Alemans, Ostrogothes,
Greeks. But it may be also probably said, that the Kings dividing the Roman
Empire after Constantine the Great, are called Ten only in relation to the
primitive division of the Empire, under Augustus Caesar, at which time it was
exactly divided into ten parts, Strabo Geogra. in fine.
as Strabo expresses. Thus Saracens, Turks, or any other dividing the Empire,
may be comprehended under the name of the ten horns, though they be not exactly
ten in present existence.

Of these feet and toes, or ten kingdoms in the divided Empire, three things
are proposed.

First, that hereby the Roman Empire should be divided, Verse. 41, in these
words: -- And whereas thou samest the feet and toes part of Potters Clay and
part of Iron, the kingdom shall be divided.

Secondly, that some of these kingdoms should be weak and transient, some of
them strong and permanent. This is expressed, Verse. 41, 42, in these words: But
there shall be in it of the strength of the Iron, forasmuch as thou saw the
Iron mixed with miry Clay: And as the toes of the feet were part of Iron and
part of Clay; so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. The
Goths and Vandals, and diverse others, proved brittle, quickly dissolved; but
the Irony strength appeared in the Franks, by whom the Empire was restored in
the Image of its former glory. But after Charles the Great, this Empire also
was in divisions, and the parts continued in the Title of the ten horns, in
relation to the division which was at first.

Thirdly, it is said of them, that they should mingle themselves with the seed
of men; that is, endeavor again by Marriages to unite the divisions; but yet
the kingdoms should not be united, but continue in distinction, as Iron cannot
be mixed with Clay, Verse. 43. And of the truth of this attribute, we have had
frequent experience in these later times.

The destruction of this Empire by the stone, Verse. 34, 45.
THe stone does signify the Saints, Verse. 44. with Chap. 7.22, 26. It is cut
out of a great mountain, which is the Roman Empire, bearing rule before upon
the earth, the Dominions of Antichrist, Verse. 35, 45. From hence the Saints are
cut out, by professed separation and victorious exemption. They are thus cut
out without hands, that is, by the only power and finger of Almighty God, as
it is interpreted, Verse. 44, 45. Thus they began to be cut out, anno 1160, in
the Waldenses, and continue so unto this day: And the extraordinary hand of God
was seen therein, as the strange arising, growth, prevailing of them does
manifestly declare. But their absolute cutting out and exemption from the power
of Antichrist, is that which is to be expected at the term of the slaughter of
the two Prophets: when their rising by the power alone of God Almighty, without
the help of man, is thus described, Revel. 11.11. And after three days and an
half, the spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their
feet; and great fear fell upon them that saw them: and they ascended up to
heaven in a cloud, etc.

And so this stone, or kingdom of the Saints, shall be set up even in the days
of those Kings, Verse. 44; that is, of Antichrist and the ten horns signified by
the feet and ten toes: which it striking, shall dash in pieces, and they shall
be no more, Verse. 35. Then this stone, or kingdom of the Saints, having been
set up immediately after the three days and half, now upon the destruction of
Antichrist his Kingdom, shall become agreat mountain, and fill the whole earth,
Verse. 35, 44. A great mountain, that is, the supreme kingdom: filling all the
earth, because all dominion shall be subject unto it, Chap. 7.14, 27. Ezekiel.
17.22, 23.

The second Vision or Prophecy, Dan. 7.
The Part Controversal.
AS for the three first Beasts, there is little or no Controversy moved about
them. I come unto the fourth, described Verse. 7, 8, etc.

Some, by the fourth Beast, understand the Successors after Alexander in the
Grecian kingdom, and especially the kingdom of the Seleucidae: and by the
little horn, Antiochus Epiphanes. Graserus has largely and learnedly oppugned
this opinion; from whom I allege against it these Arguments.

First, the kingdom of the Seleucidae belongs to the third Beast, and is one
of the four parts into which the Greeian kingdom was divided after Alexanders
death, expressly represented in his four wings and four heads, Verse. 6: the
truth of which interpretation will clearly appear, by comparing Chap. 8.8, 22.
and 11.4. For the king of Grecia is expressly distinguished from Alexander, as
the whole from the part, comprehending both him and the quadrupartite division
among his Successors, Chap. 8.21, 22. Therefore both he and the Seleucidae,
with other his Successors, are included in the third Beast, and cannot be
extended to the fourth.

Secondly, because these four Beasts arose successively to subdue the world,
Verse. 2, 3. But the Seleucidae and other successors of Alexander, succeeded
into it already subdued by him.

Thirdly, the Preface prefixed to the fourth Beast: -- Afterward I saw in the
Visions by night, and behold. The proposing of him without a name, as an
unknown and strange Monster; the sollicitous and curious enquiry of Daniel
concerning him, Verse. 19; the bestowing of a far larger and more accurate
description upon him then upon the former Beasts, do plainly argue, that the
fourth kingdom here signified, is far more great and wonderful then any of the
former, and therefore cannot be the kingdom of the Seleucidae.

Fourthly, the fourth Beast is said to be dreadful, and terrible, and very
strong, in comparison with the Beasts going before; having Iron teeth and
Brazen nails, devouring and breaking in pieces, and stamping the residue under
feet. But the kingdom of the Seleucidae was weaker then that of Alexander, as
it is expressly said, Chap. 8.22, and did not devour and destroy so as the
former kingdoms, as entering upon a world subdued already by Alexander the
Great; therefore the fourth kingdom cannot be the kingdom of the Seleucidae.
Thou will say, The fourth kingdom is thus expressed, not in relation to the
world or state general, but to the Jewish Church, unto which it was more
terrible and stronger then the former. But it is manifest, that the Iron
strength is the character of this kingdom distinguishing it in a general and
unlimited comparison with the kingdoms going before. To exert in some one
particular place, such as Judea, more cruelty, by reason of the weakness of
the people, and not by reason of his own absolute strength; is not a sufficient
reason that he should be characterized and distinguished from the others by the
character of strength and fear fullness: No more verily then the Spanish
Inquisition, or Phalaris, or some other Tyrant, may be superlatively compared
in strength with Cyrus, Alexander, Julius Caesar, because more cruel and
formidable then they, in respect of some weak and not-resisting persons, over
whom, without exertion of much strength, they might easily exercise their
tyranny. Again, their strength was not so much terrible to the Jews as
Nebuchad-nezzar or Haman were. And the Jews against the Seleucidae, would have
vindicated themselves into liberty, and had defended themselves sufficiently,
had not the Romans come upon them, and broken them down at last, and the
Seleucidae together. Lastly, it is expressly said, that the fourth kingdom is
thus strong, irony and terrible, not only in relation to the Jews, but also to
the whole earth. For it is said, that it should devour the whole earth, and
tread it down, and break it in pieces, Verse. 23. And Chap. 2.40, it is expressly
said to be of Iron, because it shall bruise and break in pieces all the former
kingdoms. And how shall this be verified of the Seleucidae?

Fifthly, this Beast is said to be unlike to the Beasts that were before it;
whereas the kingdom of the Seleucidae was like other kingdoms. Some say it was
unlike in respect of the ten horns. But these (as they will have it) are ten
succeeding Kings; which in kind and nature is ordinary to all kingdoms. They
say it is extraordinary in this respect, because some of the Egyptian Kings are
mixed in the number. But what ground of such a mixture? Because (say they) they
are described, Chap. 11, whereas there is no mention of ten horns, Chap. 11;
the number there not adaequately ten: no reason to extrude some, to intrude
others, but rather contrary to reason, as Graserus shows.

Sixthly, the fourth Beast has ten horns, and a little horn arising after
them, by whom three of the former were rooted out, Verse. 7, 8. How will this
agree to the kingdom of the Seleucidae? They say they are ten succeeding Kings,
whereof Antiochus Epiphanes is the tenth and last, and the same the little
horn. But if only by succession, then really in all particular differences of
time, it had but one horn, and so the kingdom might rather be said to have one
horn then ten. 2. These ten horns here described, existed at the same time, not
by succession, because the little horn arose among them, Verse 8, and his look
was more stout then his fellows, Verse 20.3. How can Antiochus Epiphanes be
both the little horn, and also the last of the ten, seeing the little horn is
said to arise besides and after them? Verse. 8, 20, 24. 4. Antiochus cannot be
the little horn, because the little horn arising, grows greater and greater,
and more stately then the other horns, Verse 8, 20, whereas Antiochus was not
so great as his father Antiochus Magnus. 5. What are the three horns, and how
did they fall before Antiochus? Verse. 8. It is said that they are Ptolaemcus
Philopater King of Egypt, Seleucus the brother of Antiochus, and Demetrius. But
was Seleucaes rooted out, because he died by slow and lingering hatred? And how
can Demetrius be one of the three, which was not reckoned by the authors of
this opinion among the ten? Verse. 8. Lastly, by the fall of the three, the
little horn grew greater then the rest, whereas nothing was added to Antiochus
beside the ancient kingdom of the Seleucidae. 6. The little horn is to rage
against the Saints a time, two times, and an half. How will this agree unto
Antiochus? Because (say they) the Temple was profaned by Antiochus three years
and ten days But here it is half a time, or half a year, as also it appears
by comparing Chap. 12.7. Apoc. 12.14. 7. The Beast falls in the destruction
of the little horn, Verse. 11. But the kingdom of the Seleucida did not fall in
Antiochus Epiphanes.

Seventhly, this fourth kingdom is extended until the last Judgment by fire,
Verse. 9, and the opening of the books, Verse. 10. with 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Apoc.
19.20. By comparing of which places, it is clear that these expressions cannot
be understood of the torments and death of Antiochus, but of the last Judgment.

Eighthly, it is extended until the coming of Christ in the clouds of heaven,
Verse. 13, 14, which is his second coming, Apoc. 1.7. Matthew. 24.30. and 26.64.
For it is not said that he ascended in the clouds, but that he came, Verse. 13.

Ninthly, it is extended to the time when all the kingdoms of the earth shall
be the Lords and his Christ's, Verse. 14. with Apoc, 11.15; and when the kingdom
shall be given to the Saints of the most High, all hostile forces utterly
suppressed, Verse. 14, 26. Chap. 2.44. Apoc. 11.17, 18. And how can this be
verified in the kingdom of the Seleucidae?

And upon these grounds I conclude with Graserus, that the fourth kingdom here
spoken of, is not the kingdom of the Seleucidae. Now the third Beast being the
Greek kingdom, what should the fourth be but the kingdom following, which is
the Roman kingdom? which I also prove by these Arguments.

1. First, because after Alexander and the division of his kingdom into four
parts in his Successors, proposed in the description of the former Beast, the
Roman kingdom did immediately follow.

2. Because one badge of this Beast is the ten horns, which is attributed to
the Roman kingdom, Apoc. 12.3. and 13.1, 2. and 17.9, 10.

3. Because the Monarchy signified by the fourth Beast, continues to the last
Judgment, Verse 9, 10, with Apoc. 20.11, and to the destruction of the Beast
and Dragon at the time of the end, Verse 11, with Apoc. 13.6. and 19.20. and
20.10, and to the coming of Christ the second time in the clouds of heaven,
Verse 13, with Apoc. 1.7. and to the rising of New Jerusalem, the kingdom of
the Saints, Verse. 14, 26, with Apoc. 11.15.

4. Because the same space and form of duration is attributed to the little
horn as to Antichrist of the Roman kingdom, Verse 25, with Apoc. 12.14;
therefore the little horn is Antichrist, and the fourth Beast the Roman
kingdom. I add, that the characters of the little horn and of Antichrist are
the same, as may appear, by comparing Verse 25, 8, with Apoc. 13.5, 6. Now
Antichrist arising in the Roman kingdom, if the little horn arising be
Antichrist, then the Beast wherein he rises, is the Roman kingdom.

5. Because in all other partieulars the description of the fourth Beast
agrees to the Roman kingdom, as may appear in the partioular Exposition.

The Opinion of Graserus is examined.
LEarned Graserus, by most of all the foresaid Arguments, most learnedly and
satisfactorily oppugneth the Opinion of Junius and his followers; who hold the
fourth Beast to be the kingdom of the Seleusidae, and the little horn Antiochus
Epiphanes. As for Graserus his own judgment, he holds that the fourth Beast
is the Roman Empire; but the little horn upon which the greatest part of this
Prophecy and Vision is spent, he holds to be Mabomet, in the special
Accommodation.

First (says he) Because this little horn grows up with an aspectable or
discernable increase; which agreeeth not unto Antichrist, but to Mahomet. Answ.
It is evident that his rising is described as hardly and difficultly
discernable, because Daniel is brought in curiously prying and considering,
before he perceives or spieth him, Verse. 8, which agrees not to Mahomet, but
Antichrist.

Secondly (says he) the little horn does not arise out of the Beasts body, but
without it: and is here proposed, not because it arose from the Roman Empire,
but because he made assault against it, there fixed his Seat, and emulated his
disposition. Answ. What more plain, then that it arose out of the Beast,
forasmuch as it arose among the ten horns, which were the horns of the Beast?
And where should this little horn be presented unto Daniel, unless in the
Beast before him?

Thirdly (says he) because the Antichrist or Pope of Rome does gather, See
more in the Explication.
make up, and repair the horns of the Roman Empire: but this little horn
rooteth out and subdueth three of them; and therefore he is rather Mahomet.
Answ. The three horns are three Provinces of the Roman Empire, as Chap. 8.21,
and three adverse and hostile Kings therein; which Antichrist subduing,
established his own horns. I find no other Argument of moment. But now I will
also show my reasons why the little horn is only Antichrist, and not Ma^mit.

That the litte Horn is Antichrist.
1. BY the ruin or destruction of this little horn, the fourth Beast, or
Roman kingdom, is said utterly and finally to fall, Verse. 11: whereas by the
fall of Mahomet it would rather be established: Therefore he is not Mahomet,
but the Antichrist of Rome.

2. The destroying of the Beast and little horn, by giving them up to the
burning fire, is described in such forms as are in the Revelation interpreted
of Antichrist, Verse. 9, 10, 11, with Revel. 19.20. and 20.10, 11. Dan. 7.13,
14, with 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

3. This little horn is conjoined with the ten horns, Verse. 7, 8, 20, 24,
accordingly as Antichrist is conjoined with them, Revel. 13 and 17.

4. The characters attributed to him, are the same which are attributed unto
Antichrist. As, 1. That he shall speak great things with a presumptuous mouth
against the most High, Verse. 8, 25, with Revel. 13.5, 6. 2. That he advances
himself above the Civil Magistrate, Verse. 20, with 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. 3. That he
changes Laws and Times, Verse. 25. with 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4. 4. That he makes War
with the Saints, prevails against them, Chap. 7.21, 25. with Revel. 13.7.

5. The time, two times, and a half, determined for the space and duration of
the little horn, will not agree to Mahomet: and it is the space expressly and in
propriety determined upon Antichrist, Dan. 7.25. with Revel. 12.6, 14. and
13.5, 6. Wherefore I conclude, The fourth Beast is the Roman kingdom, and not
the kingdom of the Seleucidae: and the little horn, neither Antiochus, neither
Mahomet; but only Antichrist, or the Pope of. Rome.

Of the three horns which the little horn is said to overthrow, Chap. 7.8, 24.
1. IUnius and his followers, affirming the little ho^^ to be Antiochus
Epiphanes, say, that the three horns are Ptolomey, Seleucus, and Demetrius.
This opinion has been impugned before.

2. Others holding the little horn to be Mahomet, say, that the three horns are
Syria, Egypt, and Africa, which were subdued by the Saracens. But this opinion
also has been impugned in part before, where it has been showed, that the
little horn is the Pope of Rome, and not Mahomet, and therefore the foresaid
Countries cannot be the three horns, subdued by his people, which are the
Saracens. I add, that the Countries subdued by Mahomet and his followers, were
not only three, but many more; as Arabia, Judea, Philistia, and the Countries
adjacent; Syria, part of Asia the less, Egypt, Numidia, Barbary, Spain, etc.
and therefore cannot be precisely signified by three horns.

3. Others understanding by the little horn the Heathen Emperors of Rome,
affirm that the three horns plucked up by them, is the liberty of choosing
Deputies, and the Government of certain Countries, which Augustus took from the
Senate. But the Heathen Emperors arose in great height at first, and therefore
could not be a little horn. And as for the three horns, it is unreasonable to
think that the power of choosing Deputies is a horn, or can aptly concur to the
making of three: And as for the Countries the Government whereof Augustus took
from the Senate to himself, they were not subdued or plucked up by the roots,
as there it is said; and besides, they were not three, but ten, as Strabo
writes, Geog. circ. fin.

4. Others affirming the little horn to be Antichrist, say that the three horns
are the Greeks, Longobards, and Franks, which were subdued by the Pope of Rome
successively. But I object, that the Greeks and Longobards were not properly
subdued by him; he had not yet attained to the power of decreeing and making
War, but only by entreaty he petitioned the help of Kings, by whom they were
subdued. 2. The three horns are expressly fixed, partly in Judea, and partly in
the South and East, in the way and passage thereunto, Chap. 8.9, 10; and
therefore cannot be the Greeks, Franks, and Longobards.

5. I think, for my own part, that these three horns are the three Mahumetan
Kings, one in Asia, the other in Syria, the third in Judea, which were subdued
by the Pope and his Western Armies, about the year 1099. First, because about
this time the Pope began to decree and make War himself, and not before. 2.
This was one of the greatest acts that Antichrist ever did; and therefore fit
to be a character of him. 3. These Kings were precisely three, and properly
subdued by him. 4. They are properly in Judea, and the South, and East, in the
passage thereunto, Chap. 8.9. 5. These were subdued immediately before the War
against the Saints, as it follows in the Prophecy, Chap. 7 and 8. 6. The
parallels will show the same, Chap. 7.8. and 8.9. and 11.22, 25.

The second Vision or Prophecy, Dan. 7.
The second Part, containing the Explication.
FIrst, the general confusion and unsetling of the world by Wars, is signified
by the striving of the four winds upon the great Sea, Verse. 2. See Apoc. 13.1.

Secondly, after these tumultuous Commotions by War, the Conquest or general
Victory falling at last to one, four kinds of Monarchies successively arise.
They arise out of the Sea upon the earth, Verse. 3. as Apoc. 1.31. that is, out
of an unsettled State in warlike confusions, represented by a Sea tossed with
winds, into a peaceable and fetled Regiment and Monarchy, represented by the
earth, Apoc. 13.11.

Thirdly, the first Beast, a Lion, reprefenteth the Bab^lonian Monarchy. The
Beast like a Lion for strength, has also Eagles wings, in respect of
exaltation above men, ^er. 48.40 Ezekiel. ^7.3.
and victorious celerity in Achievements, Obad. v. 4. 2 Samuel 1.23. Jer. 4.13.
His wings are plucked; that is, he is deprived of Imperial eminency, whereby he
was lift up above men; of his wealth and Dominions; as it came to pass by
Darius the Mede, and Cyrus of Persia. He is made to stand upon his feet, as a
man; that is, brought down to the common rank of men. And a man's heart is given
him; that is, low and common spirits; not imperious and irresistible, as
before.

Fourthly, the second Beast, a Bear, represents the Persian Monarchy, in
respect of ravenous cruelty. It raised up one Dominion, enduring no Mates in
the Empire, but subduing, first the Medes, then the Babylonians, and uniting
all in one Government. It has three ribs in its mouth between its teeth. By
their teeth beasts do make their Conquests. The three ribs between them, are
the three parts conquered by the Persian Monarch, in that he pushed Westward,
Northward, Southward, Chap. 8.4. His great and large Victories joined with much
cruelty, slaughter, and spoil, are signified by those words said unto him;
Arise, and devour much flesh, Verse. 5.

Fifthly, the third Beast, a Leopard, represents the Grecian Monarchy, in
respect of subtilty, rapidity and celerity, Jer. 5.6. Hab. 1.8. Dan. 8.5. This
kingdom set up by Alexander the Great, was after his death divided into four
kingdoms, signified here by the four wings, whereby it was exalted above men;
whereof were four Kings, signified here by four heads. See Chap. 8.8. and 11.4.
Apoc. 12.14.

The fourth Beast, representing the Roman Empire, Verse. 7.
THe Empire that next succeeded after the Grecian, was the Roman; and
accordingly it is signified by the next, which is the fourth Beast. Concerning
which, observe these Particulars.

First, the admirable condition of the fourth Beast, in comparison to the
former, is marked out by a Preface larger then ordinary: After this, I saw i^
the Visions by night, and behold.

Secondly, it is proposed as a strange and unknown monster without a name, in
these words, A fourth Beast. The reason is, because of the dissimilitude of the
Roman Empire to all precedent kingdoms, and the strange variety of the forms
thereof, as it is expressed afterward. And besides, it has a composition and
concurrence in it self of all the properties of the former Beasts; being
likened to the Babylonian Lion, to the Persian Bear, and to the Grecian
Leopard, Revel. 13.1, 2.

Thirdly, it is suid to be dreadful and terrible; which notes the ability and
readiness of this Empire to annoy with great evils: for a ready power of
hurting greatly, is the ground of dread and terror.

Fourthly, it is strong exceedingly: for the Roman Empire has been strong as
Iron, in comparison of all other kingdoms, breaking and bruising them all,
Chap. 2.40, and devouring the whole earth, Chap. 7.23.

Fifthly, it has great Iron teeth; which signify the conquering Captains,
such as Scipio, Pompey, and Caesar, strong, irresistible as Iron, in comparison
of all before. And for the same cause, the Roman Empire is represented by Iron
legs, Chap. 2.40.

Sixthly, Gras. de Antic.
it has nails of Brass, Verse. 19. A Beast makes his assault for victory with
his his teeth; and after victory, uses his claws to tear. Therefore as the
teeth are the Captains making Conquests; so the nails are the Roman Senate and
Provincial Magistrates; these being of Brass, as the other were of Iron,
because somewhat milder then the Captains.

Seventhly, the actions of both teeth and nails are set down in the next words.
Of the teeth thus: It devoured and brake in pieces. Of the feet and nails thus:
It stamped the residue with the feet thereof. Thus the Roman Empire by its
Captains devoured the weaker, brake in pieces the stronger; and by its
Magistrates stamped the residue under feet; handled and tare at pleasure the
conquered, crowing and insulting after Conquests.

Eighthly, the extent of Victory is added, Verse. 23, that it shall devour the
whole earth; that is, a great part thereof, even from the River Euphrates into
Great Britanny. See Luke 2.1.

Ninthly, It is added, that it was unlike to, diverse from the Beasts that were
before it. This is said both in respect of present state, and also in respect
of multiplicity of forms successive therein. For, to use the words of Graserus,
it endeavored to fit and frame the Forms of all other kingdoms to it self, but
altered. And in respect of diversity and strange multiplicity of Forms of
Government, it is represented Apoc. 12.3. and 13.1. and 17, by seven heads, and
an eighth, and ten horns. The Governments were of Kings, Consuls, Tribunes,
Decemviti, Dictators, Roman Emperors, Popes, with the ten Kings.

The alteration of the Roman Empire by the ten horns and Antichrist.
FOr about Four hundred years, the Roman Emperors continued in their Majesty,
even until the end of Constantine the Great; and then began effectually to be
broken down, and to be dissolved into ten kingdoms. This is that state of
change which is expressed in the end of verse. 7, in these words: And it had ten
horns. More distinctly, verse. 24: And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten
kings that shall arise, and another shall arise after them. Now the Empire
beginning to be effectually dissolved at the foresaid time, stayed not in
falling by degrees, until about the year 456 it appeared broken into ten parts,
as a learned Author has showed on Apoc. 8. The kingdom of the Britons, of the
Saxons, both in Britanny; of the Franks, of the Burgundians, in France: of the
Westgothes, in the Southern part of France, and part of Spain: of the Sueves
and Alanes, in part of Spain: of the Vandals, in Africa; a little before, in
Spain: of the Alemans, in Rhaetia and Noricum, Provinces of Germany: of the
Eastgothes, in Pannonia; a little after, in Italy: of the Greeks, in the
reninant of the Empire. Though this Decharchical division does not still
continue exactly, yet it is sufficient that it was so at first. And I give
instance in the four horns, that are said to come up after Alexanders death,
whereby all the Successors in the Grecian kingdom are understood in their
divided kingdoms, although the Quadripartision was only at first, and lasted
not above Three and twenty years. So the Turks are signified by four Angels,
because their division was quadripartite at first, on this side Euphrates,
Apos. 9.14. But the several Kings dividing the Empire, though they were in no
difference of time exactly ten, yet may be called ten in relation to the first
Decharchical division thereof under Augustus Caesar; whereof see Strabo in the
end of his Geography. And thus whosoever divided the Empire, as Saracens, and
Turks, etc. may come under the name of the ten horns in general.

The Vision and Prophecy of Antichrist, Verse. 8, etc. An historical Narration
of the two Wars of Antichrist.
THere were two notable Wars of Antichrist, which are mentioned in Daniel; his
War against the Turks and Saracens, and his War against the Waldensian
Witnesses of Truth: the one in the East, the other in the West, both very great
as ever any were, both about the same time succeeding one another, both
immediately following the fullness and perfection of the Antichristian kingdom
in Hildebrand. Both Wars properly the Wars of Antichrist, voluntarily raised
upon conscience of his Decree; and both so like and equal, that the later was
of as great weight and difficulty as the former, as Thuanus the Historian does
expressly testify. The Sultans, and Kings of the Turks and Saracens, about the
time of Hildebrand, had made an Inundation over Asia, Syria, and Judea, most
cruelly persecuting the Christians there inhabiting. Hildebrand's next
Successor save one, Urbanus the second, about the year 1095, appointing a Synod
of Bishops and Princes at Cl^remont, decreed the Expedition against them, for
the recovering the holy Land; by the happy success whereof, those arms of
Inundation were overflown again by another Inundation. As for the second War,
we may take notice of the greatness and moment thereof, and its immediate
succession in time, after the War against the Turks. To this end, mark what
Thuanus writes in the Preface of his History. When exquisite punishments could
nothing prevail against the Waldenses, but that they increased daily, at last
complete Armies were leavied against them, and a War of no less weight then
that which was waged before against the Saracens, was also decreed against
them. And for the immediate succession of this War after the War against the
Turks and Saracens, yea, conjunction in time therewith, mark what another
writes. The Pope (says he) turned the Armies of the Cross, which had been
first appointed against the Saracens, upon his adversaries the Waldenses.

A brief Relation of the state, proceedings, and Wars of the Waldenses and
Aloingenses, gathered out of the Book entitled The History of the Waldenses
and Albingenses.
OBserve first, that the Popes Expeditions against the Turks and Saracens,
overflowed them about the year 1098: and Sixty two years after, that is, in the
year 1160, the Waldenses arose in France, professing the same Doctrine that we
do now, and made an absolute separatation from the Church of Rome. The Pope
used what means he could to root them out; but the more they were persecuted,
the more they multiplied: so that on a sudden they filled that great Tract of
Land which ^^eth between the Alps and the Pirenaean mountains. Pope Innocent
the third, perceiving the insufficiency of former Persecutions, called a Synod
in the year 1204, and there decreed that the Expeditions of the Cross, which
had been appointed against the Turks, should now be turned against the
Waldenses: and the Catholics (says he) that shall take up the Cross for
rooting them out, let them enjoy the same pardon of their sins which is granted
unto them that go against the Turks, for the recovering of the holy Land. For
the stirring up of this flame, he sent about his Preachers, who in likelihood
carried themselves as a little after, when taking this or such like Texts; Who
will rise up with me against the evil doers, and who will stand with me against
the workers of iniquity? they were wont to conclude their Sermons in this
manner: Ye see now, dearly beloved, how great is the malice of the Heretics:
ye see also how much hurt they do in the world: ye see again how religiously
and by how many godly ways the Church labors to reclaim them: But these
means can do no good with them; nay, they defend themselves by Secular power:
And therefore the holy Mother the Church, though unwilling, and with grief,
does call together a Christian Army against them. Whosoever therefore has the
zeal of faith, whosoever there is whom the honor of God does touch, whosoever
there is that will have that great Pardon, let him come and take the Cross,
let him join himself to the War of the Crucifix. By these and such like means,
P. 2. c. 6. p. 36.
a great Army of voluntary Soldiers came together, in the year 1209, to the
number of Three hundred thousand, besides many other great Levies in the year
following. At which time, the Earl of Tolouze, the Earl of Besiers, the Earl of
Foix, the Earl of Coming, and Prince of Bearne, stood out in defense of the
Waldenses against the fury of the Pope. The Popes Agents and Soldiers took
their Cities, Towns, and Castles, spoiled and pillaged their Countries; killed
by the Sword, captivated, burned, hanged, and dismembered, with most merciless
and cruel behavior: until about the year 1213, and so forward, when the
Waldenses began to rise again with a little help; fire going forth of their
mouths, and devouring them that hurt them. Neither could the Pope any more by
War effectually prevail, until turning to policy and deceit, by flatteries and
lying promises he did utterly overflow and break them down. For about the year
1228, the old Earls of Tolouze and Foix being dead, Page 117
the young Earl of Tolouze was allured by the Abbot of Grandselve, to come to
Meaux in France, there to conclude a Peace: fair promises pretended, and
assurance given of safe return. There, contrary to faith and promise, the Popes
Agents did catch the Earl under hatches, enslaved him to the Pope. By the like
flattery they took the Earl of Foix. In depth of policy they set upon him by
the forced mediation of the deceived Earl of Tolouze, by whom they thought they
could most aptly and effectually work and accomplish their designs. He
accordingly wrote to some of the subjects of the Earl of Foix, who being
frighted with the apprehension of their ruin, should entreat their Earl both
to have compassion on himself and subjects, who would doubtless be overthrown
by this violence: that they show him that there was an excellent opportunity
offered, the only means to make them live in perfect peace, if they would
persuade him to submission. By the requests and tears of these frighted
persons, and the deceitful plots and tricks of the Popes Agents, this Earl was
taken also; and delivered up, as a gage of his affection, the Castles of Foix,
Page 130.
Montgailard, Montreal, Vicdesos, and Lordat, for the good of the Peace in
general, while he yielded the homage demanded. Thus a Peace and Composition was
made by these two Earls, through submission to the Pope; which two props being
gone, Page 130.
the Earl of Coming and Prince of Bearne could not continue. See then, to
appearance, the end of the Albingenses, when in the year 1234, Trancavel a
Bastard-son of the Earl of Besiers, stood up in their defense with most
prosperous success. To take him off, the Popes Agents used another politic
device: for they cunningly wrought on him by the mediation of the deceived Earl
of Foix, through great promises and threats of danger, to bring him to some
peaceable design; and their craft successefully prospered in his hand. (...).
134.
And thus were the Waldensian Princes overflown and broken down by Peace and
crafty devices, and not by War: and their Churches fell with them. For although
the horrible and consuming destruction of the Waldenses, was hotly and eagerly
continued by the Monks Inquisitors, Hist. Wald. ^ 1. b. 2. ^2. p. 9.
from the year 1206, to the year 1228; yet now their Princes being by subtilty
thrust under hatches, their destruction did in comparably increase. For from
hence arose that great Persecution by the Monks Inquisitors, (...) 2. b. 2. ^.
122, 124
who taking this poor people disarmed and forsaken of their Leaders, as many as
would not forsake their Faith, kindled their fires more then ever, whereby they
were utterly rooted out, and the remnant seattered to the Mountains, and over
all Europe. This I thought needful to presix, that the Prophecy following
might more clearly be understood. Now we proceed in the explication of the Text.

Concerning Antichrist, these Particulars are showed, Verse 8, etc.
1. THat his rising is among the ten horns, in these words: There came up among
them. So that the first rising of Antichrist does concur with the first rising
of the ten horns. And so expressly, Revel. 17.12, they receive power as Kings at
one hour with the Beast. And Antichrist was to be manifested upon the removal
of the Roman Empire, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, which began effectually to be removed by
the ten Kings after Constantine the Great: proportionately with the fall of the
Roman Empire, and the rising of the ten Kings, the rising of Antichrist must
concur; who therefore began gradually to proceed, together with the irruptions
of the Barbarians into his kingdom, and dissipation of the Empire; and in 606
was openly enthroned. But, Dan. 7.24, Antichrist is said to come up after the
ten horns. This understand of his open enthroning, which began in 606, after
the Inundation of the ten Kings: but secretly and hiddenly he arose before,
even among them, and together with them, as here it is expressed.

2. He is called Another horn, that is, another beside the ten, and as it is
expressed verse. 24, diverse from them: they being Political, he also
Ecclesiastical, by usurpation of an independent authority Spiritual.

3. He is called A little horn, because little at first, as only Primate and
Metropolitan of the Churches of Italy, and by little and little encroaching
upon the power of the ten Kings, by small and scarce discernable degrees of
proceeding. Before the time of Constantine, the Bishop of Rome was only a poor
and mean Minister, therefore called Vile, or of low condition, Chap. 11.21;
from which weak low estate, he cunningly and secretly came up among the ten
horns, until he overtopped them.

4. His first arising is intimated to be hidden, obscure and secret, scarce
discernable; and therefore he is so represented among the horns, that Daniel
does not epsy or discover him, but by a prying eye, and a mind curiously
considering. Therefore it is said, I considered the horns, and behold, there
came up among them another little horn.

5. It is added, that before him three of the first horns were plucked up by
the roots. The first War of Antichrist which was waged by him, after he came to
the fullness of his kingdom. As the Roman Empire fell, so gradually he arose.
He was openly enthroned in 606. A temporal Dominion was given him by Pipin, in
755: But his authority arose not so high, as generally to overtop and command
at pleasure the Kings and Emperors, until the time of Hildebrand, after 1073.
Thenceforth he began to decree and make Wars himself, and by Imperial authority
to command the Kings and Emperors of the West, to go forth as subjects in the
Wars decreed by him. And from the foresaid 1073, he had seditiously stirred
Wars in Germany: but the great and notable War directly decreed by him, with
voluntary and general submission of Kings, Princes, and Emperors, was that
which was decreed at Claremont about Two and twenty years after, in 1095,
against the Turks and Saracens, which here follows to be described. And in
this War it was verified which was here said of Antichrist, that three of the
first horns were rooted up before him. For within about three years after the
foresaid Decree at Claremont, by the year 1099, he by his Soldiers of the
Cross rooted up, subdued, caused to fall (as the phrases run, verse. 8.20, 24)
three Kings of the Turks and Saracens: Solomon in Asia, Cassianus in Syria, the
Egyptian Caliph in Judea. That these three Kings are meant, I am more then
probably convinced, from Chap. 8.9. and 11.29, places exactly parallel, where
they are expressly restrained to Judea the pleasant Land, and to the East and
South in the way unto it, which must be Syria and Asia, from the Northern horn
of Macedonia, as shall be showed when I come unto the next Chapter. In mean
time, observe these phrases arguing the places to be parallel.

1. There came forth a little horn, Chap. 8.9. Behold, there came up another
little born, Chap. 7.8. 2. Which waxed great unto the South, and to the East,
and to the pleasant land, Chap. 8.9. Before whom three fell, Chap. 7.8. 3. He
shall destroy the holy people, Chap. 8.24. He shall wear out the Saints of the
most High, Chap. 7.21, 25. 4. He shall magnify himself in his heart, Chap.
8.25. He shall speak great things, Chap. 7.8, 25. His look was more stout then
his fellows, verse 20. 5. He extolled himself against the Prince of the Host,
the Prince of princes, Chapter 8.11, 25. He shall speak words against the most
High, Chap. 7.25. 6. By him the daily Sacrifice was taken away, Chap. 8.11. And
he shall think to change Times and Laws, Chap, 7.25.

And as it is here said, that three kings were rooted up from before him; so
Chap. 11.22, The arms of a stood shall be overflown from before him: which is
to be understood of the Turks and Saracens, as I trust to show, when I come
unto the place. But here a Doubt arises, How these three Mahumetan Kings are
called three of the first horns, seeing the ten were numbered without the
comprehension of them. Answ. They may not be called formally three of the first
horns; that is, as under the form and special kind of them; but only
materially, as being the same only in outward figure, and now applied to a new
representation. And this is proved by Verse 24, where although in respect of
the outward figure and type, he is said to root out three of the first horns;
yet when the thing signified comes to be spoken of, it is only thus said,
that ten horus are ten kings that shall arise; and another shall arise after
them, and he shall subdue three Kings. Mark, it is not said, that he shall
subdue three of them, or, three of the former Kings, as in the Type; but only
three kings, as if distinguished from the former ten.

But secondly, and more satisfactorily, it may be answered, that in a more
general sense the ten horns may comprehend any that divided the Empire, such as
Turks and Saracens then, as has been said before. But whereas it may be
objected, from Apoc. 17.17, that the ten horns give their kingdoms to the
Beast, it is to be understood not of the ten horns in general, but of those
only who adhered to the Beast. The Goths and Vandals and Burgundians are
among the ten horns, and yet they survived not to give their kingdoms to the
Beast: proportionably we may judge of the Turks and Saracens.

6. And thus far of the first War of Antichrist against the Turks and Saracens.
His second War follows, against the Saints, which is described Verse 22. I
beheld, and is, this horn made war with the Saints, and prevailed against them.
Verse. 25, He shall wear out the Saints of the most High. Which second War began
against the Waldesian Protestants since the year 1160, and yet continues, and
must, until the end of the Reign of Antichrist, when the ancient of days shall
sit in Judgment, and the kingdom of New Jerusalem shall be set up, Verse. 9.10,
26.

7. He is said to have eyes like the eyes of a man, Verse 8. either in respect
of his feigned courtesy and flattering humanity, Chap. 8.25, or in respect of
his intolerable pride and arrogance, Verse 20, with Psalm. 12.3, 4, and 18.27;
or rather in respect of wisdom and policy, Chap. 8.25, with Zech. 11.17, and
the eye of his Philosophical and Scholastical understanding, whereby he is said
to see and understand dark mysteries, Chap. 8.23.

8. He is said to have a mouth speaking presumptuous or great things, Verse 8,
25; that is, magisterially to teach and dictate false Doctrines, and such as
are of a high nature, against the Person, Offices and Worship of the Son of
God, Revel. 13.5, 6, and with great insolency and presumption of spirit, Dan.
11.36, and with Scholastical profundities, and an ambitious style of speaking,
Dan. 8.23.

9. It is said particularly, that he shall think that he may change Laws and
Times. He shall not only change them, but also think it lawful for him so to
do, as supreme Vicar of Christ on earth. So he shall change Laws, by removing
the daily Sacrifice, or true Worship, in reading, hearing, and teaching of the
Truth, in Prayer and Sacraments; and by setting up his abominations and
Antichristian Idolatries, Chap. 11.30, 31, and Doctrines of devils, Chap.
11.37, 38, 39. Times he changes, by ordaining superstitious holy days.

10. His look is said to be more stout then his fellows, that is, then the ten
horns, Verse. 20, whereby is signified his exaltation of himself above Kings and
Princes; whereof see Chap. 11.36, 37.

11. The duration of Antichrist is determined by a time, two times, and a half,
Verse. 25; that is, One thousand two hundred and sixty years, as it is expounded
Revel. 12.6, 14. The rising of Antichrist is to be fixed at the beginning of
the fall of the Roman Empire, and rising of the ten horns. But of this more
fully in another place.

12. And thus much of the description of Antichrist his nature, actions,
characters, and duration. Now his Fall and Ruin is described in this manner.

1. Daniel is said to behold till the horns were set up. Set up, not cast down,
according to the Original. This is to note that Antichrist continues his reign
and persecution until the setting up of the Thrones of Judgment. So it is more
plainly said, Verse 21, 22, 25, 26.

2. The ancient of days did sit. This is God the Judge, called the ancient of
days, because he ever lived to take notice of, and now infallibly to bring to
remembrance all the ancient and long-past villainies of the Man of sin.

3. His garments were white as snow, to note the righteousness of his
Judgments, Will and Actions. So his Throne is white for the same end, Revel.
20.11, 12.

4. The hair of his head is like the pure wool, to note the righteousness of
his Counsels and Decrees.

5. His throne is like a fiery flame, and his wheels like burning fire, to note
his speed and wrath in coming unto Judgment.

6. A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him, to note the issue and
execution of his Judgment, beginning in temporal consumptions, ending in
eternal burnings.

7. A thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand stood before him; to note the assistance of his Saints and Angels
numberless, in the sentence and execution of the last Judgment, 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.

8. The Judgment was set, and the Books opened. It is set for the destroying
of the fourth Beast, the Roman Empire, and Antichrist, after the time, two
times, and a half; beginning in temporal destruction, finished in eternal, and
completed universally in the Resurrection, at the end of Forty and sive
years, Chap. 12.11, 12. The Judgment must be set, to destroy great Babylon
unto the end, Verse. 26; that is, unto end of the said years, and to the full
end and destruction of all the relics and remainders of Babylon Spiritual.
And the Books are opened, to signify an open discovery of all the works of
Antichrist and his followers, that they may be proportionably rewarded.

9. Daniel is said to behold them upon the setting up of the thrones of
Judgment, and again, to behold till the Beast was slain: to note, that
although the deadly blow is given unto Antichrist at the first erecting of the
Thrones of Judgment; yet the destruction of his kingdom is gradually to be
brought unto perfection, as in Forty five years before expressed.

10. The destruction of Antichrist is declared in three degrees. 1. The Beast
is slain. The Beast is the Roman Empire, subsisting under Antichrist and his
horns: and it is slain, to note the deadly blow given thereunto at the
beginning of the Judgment, in the battle of Gog and Magog. whereof read Ezekiel.
38. Revel. 20.8. 2. His body is destroyed. This is the second degree, noting
the gradual destruction of great Babylon, the Body and Kingdom of the Beast,
partly by intestine slaughter, partly by the parts falling off and oppressing
her under the Standard of the Witnesses of Truth, Ezekiel. 39.1, 2, 3. Revel. 17.
The third and last degree is thus expressed: And his body was given to the
burning fire, which notes the full end and absolute consumption of all the
relikes of the kingdom by the end of the Forty five years. Compare Verse 26
with Revel. 19.20. and 20.14.

11. As concerning the rest of the Beasts, it is said, that they also had their
dominion taken away, and that their lives were prolonged only for a season and
a time, Verse. 12. The meaning seems to be, that not only the Roman kingdom,
but all the rest before expressed, after the manner thus described, passed
away: forasmuch as they all were temporary, and appointed of God to continue
only for a time and season, the kingdom of the Saints only eternal;
concerning which in the next words.

1. Daniel beholds this in night-Visions, because while the dark night of
Calamity covers the Antichristian world, the light arises on new Jerusalem,
Isai. 60.1, 2. and 21.12. Dan. 12.1.

2. One like the Son of man (...) in the clonds of heaven. The Son of man is
Christ the Head, including also his Body the Church, as appears by the
interpretation. Verse. 26, He is said to come; and this is his second coming, in
a large sense, comprehending his coming to bear rule on earth, by setting up
his Kingdom, breaking down the enemy, and this the space of Forty five years:
and then his visible appearing at the Resurrection immediately ensuing, to
finish his new Jerusalem begun, in heavenly perfection. And in this large
description his second Coming is usually taken in the Prophets. He is said to
come in the clouds of heaven; that is, on high, above the glory and power of
the kingdoms of the earth, in the supereminent majesty of his Kingdom, Revel.
11.12. Isa. 52.13. Matthew. 24.30.

3. He is said to come to the Ancient of days; that is, as Mediator, to obtain
the kingdom for his Saints, removed from the enemy. So the Lamb is said to
approach to him that sat upon the Throne, to receive the Book: notwithstanding
he that sits on the Throne, is also Christ as God, Revel. 5.7.

4. It is added, that they brought him near before him. Until better light may
shine, I cannot but conjecture that they do signify the Saints. These bring
Christ near to the Ancient of days by the importunity of prayers, for the
obtaining of the Kingdom, and removal of it from the Beast.

5. Hereupon, dominion is given unto him, and glory. To him, that is, to Christ
and to his Saints, Verse. 26, 27. This kingdom begins with the beginning of
the fall of Antichrist, and with the setting up of the Thrones of Judgment, as
appears Verse. 21, 22, 26, 27, and is absolved in heavenly perfection, at the
Resurrection immediately ensuing.

6, The greatness of his kingdom is signified in these words, that all people,
nations and languages should serve him. Hereby is signified the Universal
Conversion of the remnant of the earth, who at the fall of Antichrist shall be
subject to Christ and his Ordinances, in the hand of his holy people, the
Witnesses of Truth: for which cause they are also said to be subject to them,
Verse 26, 27. Isai. 60.10, 12. All that shall withdraw their necks from such
subjection, shall be destroyed. Dan. 12.12.
And this is the first state or rising of new Jerusalem, the space of Forty
five years, before its completing in the Resurrection: which state is
especially described by all the Prophets, as also the first states of all other
changes, as of the Greeks in four horns, Dan. 8; of the ten horns, Chap. 7; of
the Turkish four Angels, Rev. 9; of the Waldensian professors; all which states
are specially described, as being the original of the changes.

7. The Duration of the kingdom is signified in the next words: His deminion is
an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed.

The third Vision or Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 8.
The Controversal Part.
ABout the precedent Beasts and horns described in the Vision, there is no
Controversy; and therefore I descend unto the little horn, which has been
hitherto (for ought I know) according to the letter expounded of Antiochus
Epiphanes. But that it is not so to be expounded, I prove by these Arguments.

1. The little horn that magnified himself unto the South, and East, and
pleasant Land, is by parallel comparison the same little horn that rooted out
the three, Chap. 7.8. Now that little horn (as it is most evident) is
Antichrist or the Pope of Rome, belonging to the Roman kingdom; and therefore
cannot be Antiochus.

2. This little horn arises when the transgressors shall come to the full, and
in the end of the Grecian Empire, Chap. 8.23; whereas Antiochus was in the
midst, and far from the time of the great and full degree of the transgressors.

3. The horn here spoken of, is in respect of his beginnings called a little
horn: whereas Antiochus was not so low at first, as to be called a little
horn. For (to use the words of judicious Graserus de Antich. p. 76.) Antiochus,
in respect of his Parentage, and Condition of Fortune which he had thereby, was
so great, even from his Infancy, that then in the world known unto us, there
was scarce another to be compared with him; being the undoubted son of
Antiochus the great, and after Seleucus Philopater his elder brother, right
Heir of the kingdoms of Asia, Babylon, and Syria.

4. Because this horn is said to wax very great, in comparison of the former
horns, Verse. 9: whereas Antiochus (although he was great from his beginning)
yet did not attain unto a condition greater then his fathers. Concerning which
let the words of Graserus be observed, proceeding in the place before
alleged. He never had full possession of the whole kingdom of his father
Antiochus the great, which he possessed before the Roman War: the sinews of
War also failed him not once. And as for that which Junius alleges
concerning his taking of Egypt; if that were true, yet it would little help his
cause, seeing it is manifest that his father Antiochus did not less exploits
against Egypt. Indeed Antiochus Epiphanes did the second time invade Egypt; but
with such a success; that he got more dishonor then honor thereby. Neither
in other Wars was he so happy and fortunate, that therein he might be so far
preferred above his Ancestors. In sum, Antiochus Epiphanes had little or
nothing more then the meaner sort of the Kings of Syria. Thus far Graserus.

5. How did Antiochus Epiphanes so excellently magnify himself unto the South,
and to the East, and to the pleasant Land? How unto the East; forasmuch as he
was ignominiously put to flight and expelled out of Persia in the East, by the
Citizens of Elemais? How against the South; seeing in both his Expeditions
against Egypt, Noutler. Cron.
he was at last shamefully repulfed: the first time, by the Captains of
Ptolomaeus; the second time, by the Ambassador Popilius? And how unto the
pleasant Land; forasmuch as after his Intestine cruelty on the Jews, his
Princes and Armies were in Judea overthrown and put to flight by the Jews and
their Captain Judas Maccabaus?

6. The acts of this little horn are extended to the time of the end, Verse. 17,
and of the last wrath, Verse. 19; whereas Antiochus Epiphanes died long before
the Birth of Christ.

7. In the judgment of a learned Author, the Two thousand three hundred days
mentioned Verse. 14, are unappliable to Antiochus Epiphanes. And Pererius
shows out of the first Book of Maccabees, that Antiochus his Persecutions
began in the year of the Grecian kingdom 143, and ended in the year 148, 1 Mac.
1.21.22. and 4.41, 52. Perer. in Dan. page 509, 510.
which could not be longer then six full years; and therefore it cannot fill up
exactly the measure of Two thousand three hundred days, which space contains
six years, three months, and twenty days. For the three months and twenty days
would overabound. Pererius, to salve this difficulty, says, that the years Two
thousand three hundred may be extended to the death of Antiochus, which was in
the next year following. But according to the words of Daniel, and the drift of
the interpretation of the authors of this opinion, the foresaid years Two
thousand three hundred must not end in the death of Antiochus (although if they
should, yet the difficulty of exact accommodation would still remain) but in
the cessation of persecution and calamity of the Church, and in the purgation
of the Sanctuary, Verse. 13, 14; which being referred to the Jews in the time of
Antiochus, came to pass exactly in the year of the Greek Empire One hundred
forty eight, as has been said, and cannot be extended to the year following.

Having showed that this little horn is not Antiochus Epiphanes, now I will
add a few Arguments to prove that it is Antichrist or the Pope of Rome.

First, because it is described in a parallel description with the little horn,
Chap. 7.8, which must of necessity be Antichrist, as has been proved.

Secondly, because it is a general and constant Apostacy, and in the time of
the end, which is said under this little horn to come to pass, Verse. 12.17,
19, 26. Add to this, that it is described with phrases attributed to
Antichrist elsewhere, as Verse. 24, with Chapter 11, 36. and 8.11.12; therefore it
is the Antichristian Apostacy, and the little horn under whom it is,
Antichrist.

Thirdly, the description of the little horn is parallel with the description
of the vile person, Chap. 11.21, whom we have showed to be Antichrist. Compare
Chap. 8.9, with Chap. 11.21, 22. and 8.17, 19, with 11.35. and 8.9, 10, 24, 25,
with 11.23, 24, 25, 33, 34. and 8.11, 12, with 11.31. 32.

Fourthly, because the Apostacy under this little horn, is called (...), Verse.
12, transgression; and in the next verse, where it is asked how long the said
transgression should last, it is called (...), The transgression making
desolate; which is the same with (...) or (...), Chap. 11.31, and 12.11, The
abomination making desolate, which is manifestly to be understood of the
Antichristian abomination; and therefore the little horn is Antichrist, under
whom it is.

Fifthly, the little horn is here interpreted in such a description as is not
agreeable to any other, but unto Antichrist; as that he is joined with fullness
of the Transgression or Apostasy, verse 23, and that he works rather by
policy and craft, then by strength; and by peace marvellously destroying the
holy people, Verse 24, 25. Lastly, all the other parts of the description will
most proportionately and most congruously agree unto Antichrist, as may be seen
in the Exposition.

The third Vision or Prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 8.
The second Part, containing the Exposition.
THe Ram heavy laden with Wool, and fleshy, does signify the Persian
Monarchy, Verse 3, 20, represented by a Silver breast and arms, Chap. 2.32, in
respect of riches, wherewith being laden and made slow, at length it became a
spoil to the kingdom following. It is said that this Persian Ram had two horns,
which were high; it is signified by two arms, Chap. 2.32, which are the two
first, proper and principal kingdoms of the Empire, the one of the Medes, the
other of the Persians, Chap. 8.20. It is added, that one of the horns was
higher then the other, and the higher came up last. For Cyrus of the Persians
came up after Darius of the Medes; and being higher then he, united the
Dominions of both into one entire Monarchy; so of two, it raised up one
Dominion, Chap. 7.5. This Persian Monarch is said to push Westward, Northward,
and Southward, Verse. 4. Southward, unto Egypt, Ethiopia, and Lybia: Northward,
to the Pontick Nations: Westward, unto Hellespont, and the Isles of the
Mediterranean Sea. His irresistible and successeful power is declared in the
next words: First, in Winning; for no Beasts might stand before him. Secondly,
in Holding; for none could deliver out of his hand. Thirdly, in Disposing of
the kingdoms won and held according to his pleasure; for he did according to
his will, and became great.

The Goat of Grecia, Verse. 5, 6, 7, 8, 20, 21.
THe Goat more nimble, swift and potent then a Ram, exceeding in respect of
lust, does signify the Greci^^ Monarchy. Notable for celerity of Atchivements,
and excess of Luxury, in eating, and drinking, and lust: for these causes,
represented by the belly and thighs of the Image, Chap. 2, and by the swift and
nimble Leopard, Chap. 7. This Grecian Goat is said to come from the West, that
is, Macedonia; and on the face of the whole earth, that is, over all the
Persian Empire: and touching not the ground, to note extraordinary celerity of
Warlike Inundation. For in the space of about six years, the Persian Empire was
subdued. The notable horn between the Goats eyes, is the first King in the
Greek Monarchy, Alexander the great, Chap. 8.21. He is fixed between the eyes
of the Monarchy, because encompassed with sage Counselors, as it were the
eyes thereof, excellent in wisdom and counsel, beyond any that came after in
the same Empire. This the History does show. So that the greathorn between the
eyes, does note the conjunction of counsel and strength for the achievement of
the Conquests. The Conquest of the Persian Monarchy is elegantly declared inthe
two next Verses, ver. 6,7. The Persian Monarchy is presented before him as a
Ram heavy with Wool and fleshinesse, made slow and unweildy with multitude of
Riches, Countries, Soldiers. And the Ram is also represented, standing against
him, not running, as Alexander, to note his slownesse, want of courage;
intentin rather to defend then offend. He is also represented standing by the
River, which may either signify the River Euphrates, about which the Persian
Ram resided, encamped, and prepared for defense: or else the River, that is,
the multitudes and Nations in the Persian Monarchy, as Revel. 17.2, 15, by
which the Persian Monarch stood, lingering, as trusting to his multitudes for
defense, and standing or encumbered therewithal. Against this Persian Ram, the
Grecian Goat makes assault: First, he is said to come against him, in relation
(as I suppose) to the slower preparations of Philip King of Macedonia: then to
run unto him, in the swift and speedy Marches of his son Alexander the Great;
and in the heat of his strength (as the Oraginal expresses) because Alexander
marched toward him as with great speed, so with great strength, not cooled by
any doubtings or fearfulness, but enlivened and made vigorous by the furious
heat of courage and undaunted resolution. This Verse 6. Thirdly, he is said to
come near the Ram: for after coming by slow preparations, and running by quick
and furious Marches, Alexander did at last draw near to the huge Armies of the
Persian Ram. Fourthly, being come near, he is said to be moved against him,
that is, forthwith, without lingering and delaying, to have his courage and
choler stirred up to Battle. Darius was a delaying Captain, and fearful; but
Alexanders heat and resolution could not endure dilation. Fifthly, he is said
to smite the Ram, by overthrowing the Persian Armies in Battle. Sixthly, the
next degree of proceeding consists in breaking his two horns. For the Armies
being overthrown in Battle, forthwith the Persian horns and kingdoms came under
his dominion. Seventhly, it is added, that there was no power in the Ram to
stand against him: to note, that the Persian Monarch after overthrow, repaired
frequently his Armies, restored Battle, but ever fell more and more. Eighthly,
it is added, that he cast him down to the ground; to note an utter extinction
of the Persian kingdom, after various and sundry overthrows. Ninthly, he
stamped upon him, that is, after full Conquest, crowed, insulted, triumphed.
Lastly, it is said, that there was none that could deliver the Ram out of his
power; to note an overthrow not only of the Persian kingdom, but of all helps
and neighbors adjacent; yea, and Alexander also afterward proceeded to the
conquest of the Countries all about. These are the ten degrees of the
proceeding of the Grecian kingdom in the conquest of the Persian, each one
following the other in nature and description; and the truth of all this, is
abundantly witnessed by Histories. It is added, Verse. 8, that therefore the
Goat waxed exceeding great, as having subdued so many Countries, and joined
them to the kingdom of Macedonia. But when he was at the greatest, his great
horn was broken, Verse. 8. For Alexander, in the midst of his strength, youth,
power and greatness of dominion, suddenly, beyond the opinion of men,
perished, Chap. 11.4; and in place thereof, four horns came up to the four
winds of heaven. For Philippus Aridaeus took possession of Macedonia in the
West: Amigonus of Asia in the North: the Seleucidae of Syria and Babylon in the
East: the Lagida of Egypt in the South.

Antichrist of the Roman Empire, Verse. 9, to the end.
ANd out of one of them] That is, from the northern parts of the Macedonian
horn.

Came a little horn] That is, Antichrist; not in respect of natural or
political derivation, but only in respect of local proceeding from out of the
same place and Country which formerly was the horn of Macedonia. By the leave
and special agreement of the Greek Emperor, Antichrist did locally come forth
with all the western Troops against the Turks and Saracens, thence to advance
himself to the South, and to the East, and to the pleasant Land, as it is
following in the next words.

But it may be said also, and happily more probably, that the Pope proceeded out
of one of them, because he came out of the Roman kingdom, which here for
brevity sake may be comprehended under those four horns: and upon this ground,
that after a hundred years, when these four horns had not yet come to the midst
of their duration, the Romans having surprised one of them, did afterward join
with the rest remaining, in the dilaceration and division of the Greek Empire.
So in the end of their kingdom Antichrist does arise, Verse. 23, because in the
end of the Roman kingdom, which in respect of its primitive state came into
the number of those four horns, concurring in the dilaceration of the Greek
Empire.

2. Observe that he is said to arise from a little one: so signifies (...),
that is, from low, obscure, and scarce discernable beginnings, as Chap. 7.8.
He came to maturity in Hildebrand, after the year 1073, or thereabout. His Wars
followed: The first against the Turks and Saracens, beginning anno 1096: The
second against the Saints, from after anno 1160, breaking forth into
perfection, anno 1209.

3. Coming forth or locally proceeding from the Northern parts of the
Macedonian horn, from Constantinople by Nicea in the North parts of Asia, he is
said to wax great unto the South, unto the East, and to the pleasant Land.
Herein his War against the Turks and Saracens is fully comprehended; against
whom his first assault was from Nicea in the North, Paul. Aemyll.
to Lycia, Pamphilia, Cilicia, being directly the Southern bounds of Asia.
There Solymannus the Turkish King was subdued. His second assault was from
thence Eastwardly, even to Edessa and Euphrates: Syria subdued: Cassianus the
second Turkish King there vanquished. His third assault was from thence unto
the pleasant Land, Judea: there the third Mahumetan King, the Egyptian Caliph,
was overcome. Thus he subdued three Kings; thus orderly he pushed to the South,
to the East, and to the pleasant Land, Chap. 7.8.

Or thus: He grew up to the South, by pushing against the Saracens in Afrike,
anno 1087, with wonderful success. Sigonius. Then to the East and pleasant
Land ten years after, in the Wars before described.

4. His second War against the Saints is thus described, Verse 10; as that he
waxed great even to the host of heaven; that is, the Christian Church: That it
cast down of the host of the stars to the ground; that is, of the Waldenstan
Protestants, partly by open War, immediately succeeding the War against the
Turks; partly by intestine Persecution. A million of men was devoured in this
War. It is added, that, being not content to cast them down, after conquest he
stamped on them, to note his crowing, triumphing, and insultation over them.
Compare Ap^^. 12.3, and Chap. 13.3, 4. Apoc. 11.9, 10.

5. His rising up against Christ himself is thus described, as that he
magnified himself even to the Prince of the Host that is, See Josh. 5.14, 15.
unto Christ the King and Savior of his people, Chap. 7.25. and 11.36. and
10.21. and 12.1. and 8.25. Apoc. 1.11. and 17.14. The manner of this
presumption is declared in the words following, Verse. 11. For by him the daily
Sacrifice was taken away; that is, the true Doctrine and Worship of God
according to his Word. And the place of his Sanctuary was cast down] That is,
his residence to be worshipped; abominations being advanced into his place. All
this was done (...), from him, that is, from his counsel, instigation, and
Pontifical Decrees, immediately executed by Christian Princes and
Ecclesiastical Superiors. See Chap. 11.31.

6. The general Apostacy of the Christian Church by his procurement, is
described in the next words, Verse. 12. And the host was given up against the
daily Sacrifice into transgression] And the host, that is, the general part of
the Christian Church, as the word is used, Verse. 10. Rev. 12.3. Was given up
against the daily Sacrifice] That is, the truth of Doctrine and divine Worship.
Into transgression.] Or, by transgression; that is, into Apostacy, even to the
setting up of the abomination or transgression of desolation, as Verse. 13.
Chap. 11.31. Images, canonized devils, breaden god. And it cast down the truth
to the ground] That is, the truth of the Gospel, the holy Covenant, Chap.
11.22, 30. And it practiced and prospered.] Whereby is signified a continuation
of the Christian Church under the Antichristian Apostacy, to the oppressing of
the truth and professors of the same.

An Explication of the Explication added about Antichrist, Verse. 13, etc. Verse.
23.
VErse 15, Daniel, signifying by Type the Witnesses of Truth in the last time,
is first moved to seek for the meaning of the Vision; and thereupon Gabriel
appears in the similitude of a man, being sent at the voice of Christ,
sounding from the River Ulai; which signifies the unsealing of this and other
mysteries to the Saints of the last time (for unto Daniel himself they were to
be unknown, Chap. 8.26, 27 and 12.4, and to all other before the last time,
Acts 1.7. Matthew. 24.36; only to Daniel, as in a Type, an explication is given,
to be fully perfected in the Antitype, the later Saints, who were alone to
understand the same) and unto these the mysteries were to be unsealed in the
meaning, as here unto Daniel typically in the bark of words, and at the voice,
that is, the command of Christ, sounding as from the River Ulai, so from among
the multitudes, Tongues and People, over whom he especially reigns in the
Roman Empire, Revel. 17.15, 2. Christ also signifies the Revelation by his
Angel, Revel. 1.1; and Michael, the great Prophecy, by the ministry of an
Angel in the similitude of a man, Dan. 10. And at the presence of the Angel,
Daniel is terrified and falls into a deep sleep, as proportionably the Saints
of the last time, to whom these mysteries are discovered under the
Antichristian Persecutions: but he is revived, as they also have been and shall
be, and he is told that the Vision is of events to be fulfilled in the last
time, the last wrath, the time of the end, Verse. 17, 18, 19.

The Ram is interpreted as before, Verse 20, and the Goat, Verse 21. His great
horn, and the four succeeding, Verse. 22, but not in the strength of the great
horn, Alexander the Great; also as before.

Verse. 23. And in the end of their kingdom, when the transgressors shall come
to the full] That is, when the Christians revolted into Idolatry, shall come to
the fullness of their Apostacy. For the Transgressors are here called (...),
in relation to the (...) the Antichristian transgression making desolate, Chap.
8.12, 13, by which the Christian Church began to be made desolate ever since
the beginning of the One thousand two hundred and sixty years; but the
Apostacy or Spiritual desolation came not toward fullness or perfection, till
about the time of Hildebrand, after which time the greatness of Antichrist
here spoken of, arose, and the increasing himself by his two Wars.

And a King shall stand up] This is, Antichrist, hiddenly with the Barbarians,
Chap. 7.8. Apoc. 17.12, openly after them. He came to maturity in Hildebrand,
and afterward.

It follows, Of an hard or fierce countenance] That is, of a proud and
imperious look, not only in relation to the Saints, but also to the Princes of
the earth. In respect of whom it is said, Chap. 7.20, that his look was more
stout then his fellows, as being proudly imperious and tyrannical also unto
them.

And understanding dark sentenoes] That is, dark and profound subtilties, such
as the Pope and his Clergymen profess, in their Philosophical speculations
and questionary Theology. And his power shall be mighty] That is, after the
time of his maturity; which came to pass in Hildebrand after, anno 1073. But
not by his own power] Because his power did mediately consist in the power of
the Christian Princes voluntarily subjected unto him, Apoc. 13.3. and 17.17.

And he shall destroy wonderfully] Beyond all former example. See Chap. 11.24,
25, 26. The truth hereof is manifest by the History to the full. And shall
prosper] For he must stand One thousand two hundred and sixty years, Apoc.
11.2, 3. Dan. 12.7. And shall practice] To wit, by Military Expeditions and
cunning devices. And shall destroy the mighty] That is, the Turks and Saracens,
as Chap. 11.25, 26. And the people of the holy Ones.] That is, the Waldenses,
in a second War equal for greatness to the former, and immediately succeeding.

Verse 25. And through his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his
hands] For by craft and policy he brake down the Waldenses, and Princes of the
Covenant; as it is expounded Chap. 11.23, 24. And he shall magnify himself in
his heart] By exalting himself above Secular Kings and Magistrates, Chap. 7.20.
and 11.36. And by peace he shall destroy many] For under pretense of Peace, he
entered by flatteries into the Waldensian Countries, and made incomparable
havoc and destruction by his Harpyes the Monks Inquisitors, Chap. 11.21, 23,
24, 33. In peace also he destroyed them, because in cold blood and times of
peace, by course of unjust Laws, and not of Wars. He shall also stand up
against the Prince of princes] That is, Christ Jesus, Prince of the kings of
the earth, Apoc. 1.5, by subverting his Institutions, and setting up his own
abominations. So it is expounded, Chap. 8.1^, 11. and 11.37, 38, 39. But he
shall be broken down without hand] That is, without the hand of man, and by the
only power of God Almighty. The phrase is expounded, Chap. 2.44, 45. See 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. Dan. 7.19, 22. Chap. 12.1. Apoc. 17.4. and 19.19, 20, 21.

A Question is asked, Verse. 13. How long? And the answer is Verse 14, To the
evening and morning Two thousand and three hundred.

The Two thousand and three hundred of mornings and evenings, are just half so
many complete days, to wit, One thousand one hundred and fifty days: and days
are years. See in Luthers Life.
If these begin from the year 360, together with the year 1290, Chap. 12.11,
they will end at 1510, when by Luther the Sanctuary began to be purged; and
because of the round number, that year may be pointed at rather then 1516 or
1517. Although from Damasus, the first Pope that entered in after the manner of
an Antichrist, to wit, from 367, the One thousand one hundred and fifty years
will expire precisely at 1517. But because two evenings are according to
Scripture to every complete day, Exodus 12.6, and proportionably two mornings
also; and forenoon is morning, and afternoon is evening, Exodus 29.39. Dan.
9.21; and also the evening of the night, to wit, the forepart thereof, Psalm.
30.5, 6, and morning, Exodus 14, or later part thereof; and so after this
manner, Four mornings and evenings will complete one day. Hence another way of
accommodation will arise, by numbering the days or years according to the fourth
part of the Two thousand and three hundred, and so the year will be 575. And if
the particular state and acts of Antichrist described in this Chapter, are in
this number circumscribed, the greatness of Hildebrand the Pope, and his
rising above the Emperor, beginning in 1075, as Calvisius declares, from
thence Five hundred seventy and five years will precisely run out before the
year 1650, which is the first year of the great Purgation os the Sanctuary,
according to the way of accommodation, as shall be showed upon Chap. 12.7, 11,
12.

The fourth Prophecy, Dan. 9, of the Seventy weeks.
The Controversal Part.
THis was revealed unto Daniel in the time of the evening-Oblation, v. 21; and
after that he had long and earnestly sought the Lord. The meaning also of this
Prophecy has been long sought, by sundry pious and learned Divines, and for
many hundred years: but it may be, that the unsealing of it is reserved to the
evening of the world, proportionately to the other Prophecies of Daniel, which
were to be sealed up until the time of the end, Dan. 8.26, 27. and 12.4, 10.

The general and received opinion has been, and is, that these weeks began at
the going forth of the Regal Edict for restoration of Jerusalem, after the
Babylonian Captivity. But the accommodation of this opinion and of the years
unto the thing, is exceeding various and divided by manifold opinions, and all
of them clogged (as I suppose) with inextricable difficulties. For some begin
these years at the fourth year of Zedekiah, as Nicolaus de lyra, and others.
Clement of Alexandria begins them at the first year of Cyrus. Origin, from the
first year of Darius the Mede. Julius Affricanus, from the twentieth year of
Longimanus. Tertullian as Origin, but in a strange Chronology. Origin again
elsewhere numbreth a day for Ten years, and so fetches them from Adam.
Another, from the sixth year of Darius Histaspes. Others, from the second of
Darius Nothus. Others, from the seventh of Artaxerxes Longimanus. See Pererius
on Daniel, Reinold. Junius.

Others, finding no soundness in these Opinions, flee to extremes. Master
Broughton and his followers denying the truth of Heathen Chronology,
constitute the years without ground. Doctor Reinolds on the other side,
allowing and maintaining the Heathen Chronology; and finding no way how to
accommodate these years unto it, affirms that no certain time is meant, but
an uncertain and undetermined duration, in allusion to the Seventy years of the
Babylonian Captivity.

To spend long time in examining and confuting all these Opinions, and sundry
others that might be brought, would be exceeding tedious both to the Writer and
the Reader, and unnecessary also; forasmuch as Doctor Reinolds, Pererius, and
other Authors, have worthily showed the unsoundnesse of other Opinions besides
their own, and their own impugned by one another. Graserus, whom Piscator
seems to follow, being overwhelmed with the difficulty, or rather
impossibility of accommodation, affirm that these years must begin at the Edict
of Cyrus: but how to apply them according to Chronology, they ingenuously
confess they cannot tell. All this I have alleged, especially for this end,
that by so monstrous variety of Opinions, and such inextricable difficulties in
every one of them, we may the more easily be brought to suspect at least, that
the truth is not yet found, and that not contenting our selves with that which
has been already said, we might be incited and encouraged to seek for further
light.

I purpose, after all these, the unworthiest of them, to add my mite for the
understanding of this Prophecy; not resolutely and peremptorily determining
what I shall say, but with submission to better Judgments, showing what may be
farther said, and upon what grounds of probability, to prepare an easier way
for the finding of the truth.

THis Prophecy seems not to be understood of the times between the
Babylonian Captivity and the Passion of our Lord, or destruction of Jerusalem,
for these Reasons.

1. Because in no place of the New Testament this Prophecy is used against the
Jews, to prove the Messiah already come.

2. If the restoration of the City, Verse. 25, is of the material Jerusalem,
after Nebuchad-nezzars Captivity, it must begin in the first of Cyrus; from
which time, Seventy weeks of years will fully expire long before the birth of
Christ.

3. The first Division of the Seventy weeks, is Seven weeks of years, Verse. 25,
the end whereof is expressly characterized by the setting up of a Messiah
Governor, which cannot be verified in the setting up of the first Governor of
the Jews after the Captivity, much less of Christ. For Zerubbabel was set up
in the beginning, and Christ long after the end of all. No other Governor can
be meant after the first, because the setting up of one, points at the first.
Therefore if the Seven weeks end not in the setting up of Zerubbabel or Christ,
as they cannot, then they cannot be verified in the material state of Jerusalem
after the Captivity of Babylon.

4. The cutting off of the Messiah here spoken of, is expressly joined with the
destruction of the City, in one week to be accomplished, the last Seven years,
Verse. 26, 27: whereas Christ suffered above Thirty years before the destruction
of material Jerusalem.

5. Those phrases, Verse. 24, To finish the transgression, To make an end of
sins, To purge iniquity, and To bring in everlasting righteousness, are
manifest characters of the time of the end, as shall be showed.

My Judgment is, that these Seventy weeks of years are cut out for the
restoration of the Spiritual Jerusalem, the Church of Christ, from the Babylon
and servitude of Antichrist; and must end in the full purgation thereof from
Antichristian defilements, and from the course of other moral transgressions.

1. Because the effects characterizing the end of these years, the consuming of
transgression, and the bringing in of everlasting righteousness, Verse. 24, are
effects to be accomplished in the Christian Church, at the fall of Antichrist,
Isal. 1.25, 26, 27, 28. and 27.9. Apoc. 21.27.

2. In the other Prophets, the restoration of the Christian Church from the
Babylon of Antichrist, is in like Types proportionably represented: Isai. 10,
and 11, and 13, and 14. Jer. 50 and 51. Apoe. 14.6, 7, 8. and 16.19. and 15.7.
and 18.2, 10, 21.

3. In all the other Prophecies of Daniel, the main subject of them is the
history of Antichrist, the Waldensian Saints and their successors, restored and
reduced out of Antichristian Captivity. See Chap. 7, and 2, and 8, and 10, 11,
12.

4. The parallel proportion of phrase, argues the anointed Prince, Verse. 25,
to be the Prince of the Covenant, Chap. 11.22, which there does signify the
Princes of the Waldenses, as shall be showed.

5. The streights of times, Verse. 25, and the destruction of the City, Verse.
26, does fitly agree to the Antichristian persecution. See Chap. 8.24, 11, 13.

6. The effects of the last weeks are parallel with the Antichristian
persecution described Apoc. 11. For as the Christian Church is in both places
signified by the holy City, Apoc. 11.2. with Dan. 9.26, and streights of time
said in both places to go before the last afflictions, Apoc. 11.5, 3, 7. with
Dan. 9.25: so the last afflictions are also proposed with mavelous agreement.
There, three years and half of tyranny over the conquered Saints, Apoc. 11.8,
9, in the end of persecution; here, half a week of years, that is, precisely
three and an half, out out for the same end. There, War immediately preceding
the foresaid triumph, Apoc. 11.7: here, in like manner.

7. From the beginning of the second half of the last week, or of the three
years and half, a Prince is said to cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease,
Verse. 27. A phrase attributed to Antichrist, Chap. 8.11. and 11.31, there said
to take away the daily Sacrifice.

8. In the same time the said Prince is said, Verse. 27, for the overspreading
of abominations, to make desolate. A phrase attributed to Antichrist, Chap.
8.12, 13. and 11.31, there said to set up the abominations making desolate.

9. It is added, Verse. 27, Until the consummation determined shall be poured on
the desolate. A phrase also applied to the restraining of the Antichristian
persecution, Chap. 11.36.

10. As the Seventy weeks, the division of the Seven from the Sixty two, and of
both from the one week, are unappliable to the material restoration out of
real Babylon: so they will exactly and precisely agree to the restoration out
of the Antichristian Babylon, as shall be showed.

Upon these grounds of probability, I will adventure to propose the
Interpretation following, with submission to the judgment of Brethren, and
evidence of clearer light.

The second Part. The Interpretation of the Prophecy of the Seventy weaks,
Dan. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.
SEventy weeks] A day for a year, Verse. 24.
as Genesis 6.3. Ezekiel. 4.6. Apoc. 11.3, 8. Levit. 25.8. Seventy weeks, are Seventy
weeks of years, that is, Four hundred and ninety years. Therefore unto this
kind of weeks are opposed three weeks of days by distinction, Chap. 10.2.

are determined] Heb. (...), cut out, Gras. in Dan. 9.
or accurately and precisely determined: so that by the end of the Seventy
weeks, the effects following shall be precisely fulfilled.

upon the people and upon the holy citie] That is, upon the true Christian
Church, within these Seventy weeks of years to be gathered out of the Spiritual
Babylon of Antichrist. See Apoc. 11.2. Now observe, that as Daniel was
confessing the sins of his people, entreating pardon and purgation of them,
Verse. 20; so accordingly the Angel is come to show, not only that sin should
be pardoned and purged, but also the time and year thereof. Therefore it
follows,

to make an end of transgression] (...) is the Antichristian defection or
apostacy, Dan. 8.12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. To make an end of it, is to cut off by
the Word and by the spirit of judgment and consuming affliction, the utmost
remnant of the honorable use of the very names of Antichristian Idols, from
among the holy people, Zech. 13.1, 2. Zeph. 1.4. Hos. 2.17. So signifies
(...), Dan. 12.7. Psalm. 59.14. Jer. 5.10, 18, etc.

and to consume sins] (...) is to consume by the word and judgment, Dan. 8.23.
Psalm. 104.35. and 101.8. and 46.6. And the external and greater acts of sin
against the moral Law, may be especially signified in distinction from the
Antichristian transgression.

and to purge iniquity] (...) is the iniquity in general, even the first
motions and original sin, Psalm. 51.5. (...) is to forgive, Psalm. 71.38, and
65.4. Jer. 18.23; and to purge or take away, Isai. 6.7. and 27.9. So to purge
iniquity, is to seal to the Saints the forgiveness of their iniquity, and also
to wash and purge it from them by the word and by the spirit of judgment and
burning. See Ezekiel. 20.37, 38. Isai. 1.2, 3, 25, 26. and 27.9.

and to bring in everlasting righteousnesse] That is, the righteousness of New
Jerusalem, whereunto an entrance shall be made at the end of these years. See
Apoc. 27.^1. Isai. 60.21, and especially Isai. 1.25, 26, 27, 28, a place
exactly parallel to this; and Dan. 8.14. and 12.12.

and to seal up the vision and prophet] To seal, is to put the last hand to the
writing, to make a full end and accomplishment thereof. The vision and prophet,
are the Visions and Prophecies in the Scripture that shall be fulfilled. See
Apoc. 10.6. For then the kingdom of the Saints shall be set up, foretold by all
the holy Prophets, Dan. 2.44.

and to anoint the most holy] Or, holy of holies. By the anointing of the holy
of holies, which was of the Altar for Sacrifice and Offerings, Exodus 29.36, 27,
may be signified, to bring in the perfect Worship in Spirit and in Truth, in
opposition to the couse of Antichrist, by whom the daily Sacrifice was removed,
Dan. 11.31, and the Oblation caused to cease, Chap. 9.27: the same which is
said Mal. 3.3, And he shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them at gold
and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.
Then he that shall be left in Zion, and he that shall remain in Jerusalem,
shall be called holy: every one shall be written among the living in Jerusalem.
When the Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughters of Zion, and purge
the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment and
by the spirit of burning, Isa. 4.3, 4.

The special Tractation of the Seventy weeks; their threefold division; Verse.
25, 26, 27.
KNow therefore and understand] Here is an invitation to understand this
Prophecy as a matter of great moment. A pondering consideration of it is
enjoined also, as being a matter of great difficulty. So our Lord speaking of
the Abomination of desolation, foretold by Daniel the Prophet, exhorts, Let
him that reads, consider, Matthew. 24.14.

From the going forth of the word] It is not (...), the commandment; but,
(...). And it may be the Word preached in the mouth of the Waldenses. It began
to go forth in the year 1160.

To bring again and to build Jerusalem] A Metaphor borrowed from the restoring
of a ruinated City. Jerusalem is the Christian Church. It had lain desolate and
ruined in the Antichristian Apostacy. To bring again and build it, is
spiritually to restore and reform it, by the Word of truth, which began to go
forth in the mouth of the Waldenses.

Unto a Messiah governour] (...) is all one with (...), Chap. 11.22, the Prince
of the Covenant, or the Political Governor, anointed as the Kings of Israel
and Judah, for the protection of the Church. Mark, it is not (...), or (...)
Christ the King or Governor, but without (...) restraining, as anointed
Governor, that is, a Civil Magistrate. Two kinds of Messiah are spoken of in
Scripture; the Priest, the King: and a third is said to be anointed, the
Prophet, 1 King. 29.16. Psalm. 105.15. The Priest is called (...), Levit. 4.5,
16, The priest the anointed. This with the Prophet, is the Messiah
Ecclesiastical. The Messiah Political is here called by Daniel (...), an
anointed governor.

Shall be seven weeks] Seven weeks of years are understood; that is, Forty and
nine years. This first division of years is cut out expressly for the setting up
of a political Messiah. And it is the end declared in the very Text: and
otherwise it cannot easily be seen why this first division of years should be
cut off or parted from the following divisions. Now a Messiah Ecclesiastical
was set up in the beginning of the years. For the Word went forth in the
Waldensian Pastors, for the Spiritual Restoration of mystical Jerusalem, the
Church of Christ, out of the captivity and desolation under Babylon
Antichristian, in the year 1160. But a Political Messiah did not openly and
professedly arise, for the defense and protection of the Waldensian Churches
against the violence of Antichrist, till Seven weeks or Forty nine years
after. And so the history does expressly show; to wit, that the Waldensian
Princes did professedly stand up in War against the Pope, in defense of the
Waldenses or Albingenses, in the year 1209: and from the former term 1160 to
1209, which is the later, are precisely Seven weeks or Forty nine years, not
one year superabundant or deficient. See Dan. 11.22. Now the Princes of the
Waldenses, in this War undertaken and for about Twenty years continued, though
they many times were worsted by the Antichristians, and especially in the
beginning; yet they defended the Reformed Churches, and by degrees prevailed;
until such time as the enemies, seeing little hope by force to bring them
under, turned to flatteries and lies, and so deceived them. Dun. 8.25. and
11.23, 24.

But here comes in a great Difficulty. For, the Waldensian Princes being at
last subdued by deceit, the Pope ascended to the fullness of his kingdom, and
continued in his strength, except only interruptions of Temporal calamities,
until the time of Wickliff, after which time his kingdom properly so called,
began to be darkened, and his strength Ecclesiastical or Spiritual to be shaken
effectually. Wherefore it is a very doubtful Question, and concerning which I
cannot possibly be resolved at the present; Whether the Restoration of the
Church out of Babylon Spiritual, here spoken of by Daniel, is not rather begun
from the time of Wickliff. Especially, seeing that from the time of Wickliff,
as well as from the time of Waldus, the first division of years, that is, the
Seven weeks or Forty nine years, will precisely run out in the erection of a
Political Messiah. For the Restoration by the Word and Doctrine, began from
the year 1370, at least according to the round number, and was continued in the
hand of Wickliff and his followers until the year 1419, when Zisca in Bohemia
was set up for a Political Messiah and Defender of the Churches reformed and
separated from Antichrist. After which time, though all the successors of Zisca
were not reformed, yet the reformed Churches lived under them defended and
protected against the violence of Antichrist, until the time of Luther, when
greater strength and security came in. Neither did Antichrist ever after
Wickliff so recover himself, as after Waldus he had done. Wherefore let this
second way of accommodation be equally considered, until the events of time
near approaching shall show which of the two ways before mentioned is rather to
be chosen.

The Second division of the Seventy weeks, being the Sixty and two weeks.
ANd Sixty and two weeks] The Sixty and two weeks of years added to the Seven
precedent, if the whole Seventy begin from 1160, will begin at the year 1209,
and so will end in the year 1642. But if the Seventy weeks begin from 1370,
then the Sixty two will begin from the rising up of Zisca, and will not end as
yet by the space of about Two hundred years. The like difficulty there is about
the years of Antichrist, as shall be showed hereafter. Now during the space of
the said Seven and Sixty two weeks, it is said, that the street shall be built,
and the wall; that is, of the Church restored and edified by the Ordinances of
Christ and Word of truth. Mark, it is not said, that the City and the House
shall be built; but, the street and the wall; to note a rude and unperfect
building in comparison with that to come at the end of these Seventy weeks of
years.

Even in the streit of times] Heb. (...), in the pressing or squeezing
affliction. See Job 36.16. Apoc. 7.14. Dan. 11.33, 34. Isai. 51.13. The meaning
is, that during these Seven and Sixty two weeks of years, the Reformed Churches
should be subject to great afflictions. Howbeit a limitation seems to be
added in the next word (...) the strait of times; that is, at certain periods
of times, by unconstant gusts of persecution, Dan. 11.32, 34. But alas, there
is a sorer time as yet to come, in the last week of years, expressed elsewhere,
by the last rising and triumph of the Beast the space of three days and an
half, Apoc. 11.7, 8: if at least we conceive an event about to come,
proportionable to the outward show of the Prophecy, or to the verbal
expressions thereof.

The third division of the Seventy weeks; the one and last week, Verse. 26, 27.
Verse. 26. And after Sixty two weeks shall the Messiah be cut off, and shall
have nothing] That is, it shall come to pass in the last week of the Seventy,
or in the last Seven years of the Four hundred and ninety before mentioned,
that some of the Princes of the Reformed Churches shall either cease from the
protection and defense of them against the violence of Antichrist; or the
Churches shall be plucked off from under their protection and government.

And the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary] The Prince that shall come, is Antichrist: and his people, that is,
the Papists and Antichristians, shall destroy the City and Sanctuary; that is,
some of the Church Evangelical, the City and Sanctuary of Christ, according to
the visible appearance thereof in public Worship and external Ordinances. So
much I conceive is held out unto us in the fall and lying dead of the Two
Witnesses, Revel. 11.8. But what slaughter of men shall be, it is not said
expressly: and only a suppressing of the publiek state of the Church, and of
the open exercise of Worship, and in some parts only, may happily be understood.
I fear to express what may be conceived; being only willing to write what
necessity compels, and what the manifest words of the Text do force unto.
And I wish and pray daily, that this event spoken of by Eglinus and others also
writing on the Revelation, may be discovered at last to have been foretold upon
ungrounded interpretation, if possibly it may stand with the Word and Will of
our heavenly Father. Surely I should not have written this, if conscience of
duty and desire to improve a Talent, had not moved me. But it is not in our
power, for desire of good unto the Church, to alter the Truth of God; neither
can it be faithfulness in us to violence or force upon the Word an unnatural
Interpretation: and besides, such presumption would be extremely prejudicial to
the honor of God, and to the welfare of his people. It is the love of God to
forewarn us of our afflictions, and our safety and strength to know before the
evil that shall come upon us. Wherefore our Savior says, when he had
described the afflictions impendent, Matthew. 24.25, Behold, I have told you all
before. But let us now proceed.

And his end shall be with a flood] That is, with the foresaid Inundation of
the Reformed Churches, shall the years of the Reign of Antichrist expire. For
the Four hundred and ninety years here spoken of, and the One thousand two
hundred and sixty years of the Reign of Antichrist, shall precisely end
together, whether we take them as beginning at the time of Waldus, or beginning
at the time of Wickliff; as shall be showed in the due place.

And unto the end of the War even determined, shall be desolations] So I
translate, referring (...) as Adjective unto (...). And the meaning is, that
unto the full end of the last week, shall continue the desolations of the
Churches, at least according to the visible frame and appearance of them in
public Worship.

Verse. 27. And he shall confirm a covenant to many for one week] He, that is,
Antichrist, the Prince immediately before spoken of. And in the last week, or
in the last Seven years of the Seventy weeks, shall confirm a Covenant with
many, that is, with many of his own people, as in the former Verse, Papists or
Antichristians, or favorers unto them; that by them he may destroy the City
and Sanctuary before spoken of. Happily also by sleights and subtle tricks he
shall bring in many others within the circuit of the Covenant; who having
unawares engaged themselves, shall be forced by their endeavors to promove the
ends of the Covenant. For the Hebrew word (...), is to cause a Covenant to
prevail over any: and so may import so much as has been said. Wherefore the
Jewish Rabbines referring these passages to the times of Vespasian, say the
meaning to be this, that Titas Vespasian should make a fraudulent Covenant with
many of the Jews, that by disjoyning them, he might the more easily prevail
against them.

And in the midst of the week, he shall cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to
cease] The Sacrifice and Oblation mystically signifies Christian Woship, Mal
^3.4, and the exercise of the Ordinances; which Antichrist shall cause to cease
in respect of the public and open solemnities thereof: howbeit he shall not
effect or accomplish this before the midst of the last week, to be continued to
the end thereof, the space precisely of three years and half, expressed
elsewhere by three days and half, Revel. 11.8, and here, by the later half of
the last week.

And for the overspreading of abominations, he shall make desolate] That is,
for this end, that he may spread, and diffuse, and set up in all places the
Worship of his Antichristian abominations, he shall make desolate the true
Church, by causing her true Worship or public solemnities to cease.

Even until the consummation, and that determined, be poured out upon the
desolate] It is said to be determined, because precisely cut out or limited, as
the Seventy weeks in general, Verse. 24, to be ended at the end of them. Until
this end, from the beginning of the One thousand two hundred and sixty days,
Dan. 11.36, and principally from the midst of the last week, the consumption
must be poured out upon the desolate. And so at the end of the Seventy weeks,
the Transgression or Antichristian Apostacy being made an end of, and sins
consumed, and iniquity purged, by the Spirit and Word, and by judgment or
affliction, everlasting and glorious righteousness must follow, and the
erection of the high kingdom of Saints, foretold in the Prophets and Visions of
the Old Testament, and the Unction of the mystical Altar for the bringing of
freewill-Offerings in righteousness, and pure and holy Worship in the beauties
of holiness. So Verse 24.

Now if the Seventy weeks begin from Waldus, that is, from the year 1106, then
this last and doleful week will begin precisely in 1643, and the midst of the
said week will be in 1646; from which year the three days and half of last
affliction will run down to be fully ended in the year 1649. Proportionately,
if the One thousand two hundred and sixty years of the reign of Antichrist
begin from the year 390, which is one way of accommodation, as shall be showed;
then they will precisely expire also in the said year 1649, and so will end
together with the Seventy weeks or Four hundred and ninety years.

But if the Seventy weeks begin from Wickliff, or from the year 1370, then the
last week cannot be expecteed, till Seven years immediately to come before the
year 1860, that is, above Two hundred years hence. And proportionately, if the
One thousand two hundred and sixty years of the reign of Antichrist begin from
the year 600, which is the second way of accommodation, as shall be showed;
then they will precisely expire also immediately before the said year 1860,
that is, precisely with the Seventy weeks according to their second
accommodation.

The probabilities of both ways are such, that I must profess I cannot judge
or determine which of the twain is to be followed. Howbeit I thought it needful
to declare my thoughts. Two or three years will determine the Controversy as
yet undetermined.

An Answer to an Objection.
BUt against all that has been said, it will be objected, that in this present
Prophecy, answer was given unto Daniel as he read the Prophecy of Jeremiah
speaking of the material restitution of the Jews after Seventy years Captivity,
and as he prayed for the accomplishment thereof; and therefore that the
restitution of Jerusalem here spoken of, must necessarily be understood of that
which went before the first coming of our Savior.

This Objection does not move my judgment at all; forasmuch as I am convinced
of the use and custom of the Prophets, who bring in types and figures
ordinarily, and touch them a little only, making way closely and hiddenly
thereby to speak of greater things shadowed thereby. See Isa. 7. and 37.30, 31.
Matthew. 24.2, 3. Hag. 2. Psalm. 72 and 89, etc. So Daniel here cast his thoughts
on the Restoration out of Babylon temporal; but closely under it he was by the
Spirit led to the Restoration out of Babylon spiritual. Besides, Jeremiah
himself speaking of the Restoration after Seventy years, does mystically
imply, and under figures describe the Restoration out of Babylon spiritual, as
the passages Jer. 29, and 33, and 50, and 51, do show, and the Apocalyptical
accommodations make evident: Daniel therefore enquiring into the Prophecy of
Jeremiah concerning the Restoration of the Church, enquired not only after
the Restoration of the Jews, but after the Restoration of the Church in
general, and glorious and spiritual, principally intended and desired of all
Saints; and therefore was led by the Spirit of God to the Restoration out of
Babylon spiritual, as suitable most unto his prayers and inquisitions.

Secondly, Daniel fasted and prayed afterward, as Chap. 10, so as here he is
described; and yet answers are given him at large concerning Antichrist and the
state of the Church in the last times, Matthew. 24.15.
Chap. 11; as appears evidently by the Abomination of desolation, Chap.
11.31, which was after the coming of Christ to be set up, and by sundry other
Arguments. There, not a word of the reduction of the Jews, but only of the
mystical people of Daniel out of the Babylon of Antichrist. So here.

The Fifth and great Prophecy, Dan. 10.11.12.
Dan. 10. DAniel being prepared by abstinence, humiliation, prayer, Verse. 1,
etc. a Vision is afterward presented unto him, first of Jesus Christ, under the
title of the man clothed in linen, Verse. 5. Secondly, of the Angel Gabriel,
under the title of one like the sons of men, Verse. 10, sent by Christ, to
dictate unto Daniel the Prophecy following. Thirdly, of two other, Chap. 12.5,
6.


The description of Christ or Michael, Verse. 5, etc.
First, he is called one man, in relation to the other that appeared after ward.

Glothed in linen] To note his righteousness, wherewith he clotheth his Saints
by imputation and sanctiflcation.

Whose loins were girded with fine gold of Uphaz] Apo. 3.18.
An emblem of the righteousness of his will and actions: For righteousness
is the girdle of his loins, Isa. 11.5. It is resembled by a girdle of fine
gold, to note the purity and worth thereof. See the parallel, Apoc. 1.

His body also was like the Crysolite] To note his power to purge the Church by
his Word, Spirit and Judgments, as by the water of the Sea. For the Crysolite
is of the color of the Sea. See Ezekiel. 1.4. Apoc. 10.1. and 4.3. and 15.2.

And his face as the appearance of lightning] To note his omnipresence,
terrible to sinners, suddenly discovering all sins, though never so remote,
Psalm. 90.8. Ezekiel. 1.13.

And his eyes as lamps of fire] To note his omniscience, discovering all
things, though never so dark and secret; and with wrath and intention of
revenge, Jer. 32.19.

And his arms and his feet like in color to polished Brasse] Dan. 2.39. Zech.
6.1. and 14.3, 4. Isai. 51.9.
To note his omnipotency in the execution of his wrath. The Brass is fine or
polished, to note the purity and evidence of his Judgments, appearing coming
before they come, or in coming, by glancing in the word and signs forerunning.

And the voice of his words as the voice of a multitude] To note the
threatenings and terrors appearing in the preparations and foreranners of the
Judgments irresistibly ensuing, Isai. 30.27, 28.

Thus far of the description of the Son of God, concerning which, see more
fully in that parallel description, Apoc. 1.

The description of the Angel Gabriel, Verse. 10, etc.
And behold, an hand touched me] That is, the hand of another from the first,
and of the Angel Gabriel, sent by Michael, who was Christ the man clothed in
linen, Chap. 12.1. Apoc. 12.7.

1. Because the former seems to be called One in relation to this other
following, Verse. 5.

2. It is the use of Christ to signify Prophecies by his Angel, Apoc. 1.1, 2;
and this Angel is accordingly strengthened by Michael, Chap. 10.21.

3. the former Angel is Christ or Michael, as appears by comparing the
description with that Apoc. 1: but this Angel is distinguished from Michael,
Verse 13, 21. Chap. 12.5, 6.

4. The former Angel is constantly styled by the man clothed in linen, Verse 5.
Chap. 12.5, 6, 7. This, by the title of one like the appearance of a man, Verse
16, 18.

5. The former stood upon the waters of the River, Verse 4. Chap. 12.6, 7.
This, upon the land, coming near and touching the Prophet with his hand, Verse
10.

6. If this Angel were the same with the former, it would be said his hand
touched, not a hand.

7. I prove that the Angel here spoken of is not the same with him before, but
another from the former; Christ the former, Gabriel the later. And this I prove
by a parallel description, Chap. 8. There, the voice of a man is heard upon the
River, saying, Gabriel, cause this man to understand, Chap. 1.16. So here,
Christ, the man clothed in linen, stands on the waters of the River, as
Governor of all Nations, Tongues and People, Apo. 17.2, 15, and from the water
speaks, Dan. 12.6, 7, and utters the voice of his words, Chap. 10.9: what
these words were, is not here expressed; but by comparing, they may be gathered
to be the same with those, Chap. 8.16, bidding Gabriel to draw near and speak
unto the Prophet. Hereupon an hand did touch him, that is, the hand of Gabriel
sent unto him. And proportionately Gabriel being bidden, Chap. 8.16, 17, 18,
19, came near, stood before him, in the form of a man, touched him, spoke unto
him, strengthened him. So here, he stood before him, Verse 16, and in the
similitude of a man, Verse 16, 18; touched him, Verse 10, 16, 18; spoke unto
him, and strengthened him, and showed him that he was strengthened by Michael,
for the revealing of the mysteries ensuing, Verse 21. This Michael is Christ,
as has been said, the same with the man clothed in linen, Verse 5, as whose
description there argues him to be by the parallel description, Apoc. 1: he is
Prince of the holy people, Chap. 12.1. and 8.11; one of the chief Princes,
Chap. 10.13. (...), of the highest ones, Chap. 7.22.

Daniel, in the representation of this Vision, seems to typifie the
Waldensian and Protestant Saints of the last time, the Witnesses of Truth, to
whom alone it was to be revealed in respect of meaning, as to Daniel in respect
of signs and words, Chap. 12.4, and whom in special it concerned, as
principally discovering the mystery of Antichrist.

1. Daniel, before the Vision is revealed unto him, for the space of three
weeks of days, that is, One and twenty days, mourns, and expresses mourning
by faring hardly and not anointing himself, Chap. 10.2, 3, 8. So the Witnesses
of Truth are described prophesying and clothed in sackcloth, as mourning for
the abominations of the Christian Church degenerated, Apoc. 11.3. Ezekiel. 9.4.
Observe that the three weeks of days are those One and twenty days mentioned by
the Angel, Verse 13, during which time he was restrained from coming unto
Daniel, as being employed about the Prince of Persia; at the end of which days,
Michael came and sent him unto Daniel, to signify this Vision unto him.

2. Daniel sees the Vision alone, not the men with him, Verse 7. Also the
faithful Witnesses of Truth only perceive the mystery of Antichrist; the rest
of the Christian profession are blinded, Isa. 6.10.

3. Christ speaking, a great fear falls on his companions, and they fled to
hide themselves, Verse. 7, which may signify a spiritual bondage in the part
unconverted, whose eye is not opened to see; which drives them not to
sufficient Repentance, but to hide themselves under the fig leaves of
superstitious and uneffectual remedies.

4. At the revealing of this Vision, Daniel has no strength left in him, his
vigor turned into corruption, retains no strength, falls into a deep
sleep, his face upon the ground, Verse. 8.9, 10; which seems to prefigure the
extreme and deadly condition, whereof the Church is sensible, upon the first
discovery of Antichristianism, Genesis 15.12.

5. Daniel is raised, not at once, but by four degrees. 1. He is set up on his
knees and palms of his hands, Verse. 10, an emblem of prayer. 2. He is caused
to stand upon his feet, though trembling and silent, Verse 11, 15. 3. His mouth
is opened to speak, though not without much weakness, fears and sorrows, Verse
17. 4. He is fully strengthened, Verse. 19. Accordingly the Witnesses of Truth
were raised. The first degree, in the Waldenses, from after the year 1160. The
second degree, in Wickliff, John Hus and Zisca, from about the year 1370 and
1400. The third degree, in Luther and Zuinglius and their followers, from after
the year 1517. The fourth degree is to be expected after the three days and
half, when the Witnesses of Truth shall be fully strengthened.

An Explication of Dan. 11. Verse. 1.
ALso I] Gabriel the Angel speaks, sent by the man clothed in linen, who is
Christ, Chap. 10.9, 10.

In the first year of Darius the Mede, even I stood to confirm him and to
strengthen him] Darius was the lesser horn, that rose first, at the fall of the
Monarchy of Babylon, Chap. 8.2, 3.

Sect. 1. The Persian Monarchy, Verse. 2.
ANd now I will show thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up three kings
in Persia] That is, after Darius the Mede, mentioned in the former Verse: and
these are Cyrus, Cambyses, and Darius son of Histaspes.

And the fourth] That is, Xerxes next following.

Shall be far richer then they all] For Xerxes, besides that which he gathered
himself, received also those unmeasurable riches which by his father Darius had
been gathered out of all the East, and prepared for the Grecian War.

And when he shall be strengthened by his riches, he shall stir up all against
the realm of Grecia] For by the sinews of his riches, he moved a great War
against the Grecians; and thereunto stirred up all the men of the East, of whom
he had about Four and twenty hundred thousand, besides the Attendants, that
would duplicate the number. These he stirred up himself and his successors, to
whom he left this War hereditary, until the ruin of the Persian Kingdom. The
other Persian Kings after Xerxes, are not here expressed, a transition
following to the Grecians, because in Xerxes the Persians fall began, and the
rising of the Grecians, toward the Monarchical succession.

Sect. 2. The Grecian kingdom, Verse. 3.
BUt a mighty king shall stand up] This is Alexander the Great, the founder of
the Grecian kingdom.

That shall rule with great dominion] For having conquered the Persians, he
proceeded further, and subdued also the Hircanians, Mardians, Parthians,
Indians, and so subjected to himself the whole East.

And shall do according to his will] Whereby is noted continuation of Victories
and power irresistible, and so it is applied to the Persian Monarchy, Chap.
8.4, to the Iron Roman Monarchy, Chap. 11.16, and to Antichrist, Chap. 11.36.

Verse. 4. And when he shall stand up] Whereby is noted the suddenness of his
fall. For as soon as ever he came to the highest, he died.

His kingdom shall be broken] Broken, before divided into four. For at first
twelve of Alexanders Princes promiscuously brake his kingdom into many pieces,
unill eleven years after his death, his kingdom became quadripartite.

And shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven] For then, toward the
South, Ptolomeus the son of Lagus reigned in Egypt. Toward the West, Philippus
Arideus brother to Alexander, in Macedonia. Toward the East, Seleucus Nicanor,
in Syria, Babylon, and the upper places. Toward the North, Antigonus, in Asia,
Pontus, and the other Provinces in that coast.

And not to his posterity] For all Alexanders Family was slain.

Nor according to his dominion which he ruled] For his successors were
inferior in extent and power, Chap. 8.22.

for his kingdom shall be plucked up] That is, dissolved, divided, by Alexanders
twelve Princes, at last to be settled upon four.

even for others also besides those] For others besides his posterity, the four
Successors, and for others also beside the four, the Romans; as it is declared
in the process of the Prophecy.

Sect. 3. The Exposition of Verse. 5, 6.
Verse. 5. And the King of the South] That is, the whole family, line, and race,
of the Lagidae in Egypt, whereof Ptolemaeus the son of Lagus was the first King.

shall be strong] Among the four Successors of Alexander shall be eminently
strong, as it appears by their power and victories described in the Chapter
following.

and one of his Princes] That is, one of Alexanders Princes shall also be
strong among the four: And this was the house and line of the Seleucidae in
Syria, of whom Seleucus Nicanor was the first.

and he shall be strong above him] That is, the house of the Seleucidae in
Syria shall be stronger then the house of the Lagidae in Egypt. Gras. de Antic.
p. 69.
For the Lagidae were commonly more weak and slothful: and the dominion also of
the Seleucidae was much larger, as it is in the words following.

and have dominion: his dominion shall be a great dominion.] For the Seleucidae
did possess Babylon, Syria, and part of Asia.

Verse. 6. And in the end of the years they shall be joined together] For after
long wars Ptolemaeus King of Egypt being weary, endeavored reconciliation.

for the Kings daughter of the South] Berenice the daughter of Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus.

shall come to the King of the North to make an agreement] That is, shall come
to Antiochus Theos King of Syria, to make agreement by marriage.

but she shall not retain the power of the arm] For quickly was Berenice
deprived of the state of a Queen, and of her life.

neither shall he continue] To wit, Antiochus Theos the husband of Berenice,
being cut off by the acts of Laodice.

nor his arm] Which may be the Prince, as yet a Boy, which he had by Berenice.
For after the death of Antiochus Theos, Seleucus Callinicus being Successor,
killed both Berenice and her son also.

and she shall be given up] To wit, Berenice.

and they that brought her] For Seleucus Callinicus slew Berenice together with
the company that was with her.

and he that begat her] For her father Ptolemaeus Philadelphus also died.

and he that strengthened her] Her husband Antiochus. Or happily it is an
adjunct of her father.

in these times.] So the reconciliation was dissolved.

Verse. 7. But out of a branch of her root shall one stand up in his estate]
That is, one of the stock of Berenice, which succeeded into the Kingdom of
Egypt after the death of Ptelomaus Philadelphus; to wit, Ptolemaeus Euergetes,
the third King of the family of the Lagidae.

which shall come with an army, and shall enter into the fortress of the King
of the North] For Ptolemaus Euergetes came with a great army into Syria against
Seleucus Callinicus then King of the North, to avenge the death of his sister
Berenice.

and shall deal against them, and prevail.] For he subdued Syria, took Cilicia,
and the upper parts beyond Euphrates, and almost all Asia. Jerome.

Verse. 8. And shall also carry captive into Egypt, their gods with their
Princes] (...) signifies their Princes, but according to another reading, as
if it were (...), it is translated, their molten Images.

with their precious vessels of silver and of gold] For Euergetes understanding
that sedition was moved in Egypt, spoiling the Kingdom of Seleucus, carried
away forty thousand Talents of silver and precious vessels, and two thousand
and five hundred Images of their gods.

and he shall continue more years then the King of the North] For the Kingdom
of the Seleucidae was subdued to the Romans, about thirty five years before the
Lagidae of the South did fall in Cleapatra.

Verse. 9. So the King of the South shall come into his kingdom, and shall
return into his own land.] That is, into Egypt, he himself obtaining Syria, and
delivering Cilicia to be governed by his friend Antiochus, and the Provinces
beyond Euphrates to Xantippus another Captain.

Verse. 10. But his sons] That is, the sons of Seleucus Callinicus, the King of
the North, which were Seleucus Cetaunus, and Antiochus Magnus.

shall be stirred up] By reason of Syria taken from their father.

and shall assemble a multitude of great forces] That is, seventy thousand
footmen and fifty thousand horsemen, Polyb. lib. 5.

and one shall certainly come] He says in the singular number, one shall come,
and not they, because in the very expedition, Ceraunus was slain by Nicanor: So
that Antiochus Magnus came alone with his army into Syria.

and shall overflow and pass thorow] By coming he shall come, overflow, pass
through, are phrases noting his celerity, diligence, industry, multitude, and
strength of forces, in his expedition. He came thus against Philopator the King
of the South, Son and Successor to Euergetes. He oppressed (says Justine)
many of Philopators Citles with a sudden war, so that he subdued Syria.

and he shall return] That is, into the Countries taken from his father.

and he shall be stirred up even to his fortresse] That is, even to the
fortress of Philopator; for Antiochus came down with his army, even to the
most fortified City Raphia, which lies (as Jerome says) in the entrances of
Egypt, and there encamped.

Verse. 11. And the King of the South shall be moved with choler] That is,
Philopator King of Egypt shall be incensed for the loss of Syria, and for the
present danger of losing Egypt.

and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the King of the North] That
is, with Antiochus Magnus at the City Raphia.

and he shall set forth a great multitude] For Philopator set forth sixty and
two thousand footmen and six thousand horsemen, Paus. l. 5.

and the multitude shall be given into his hand] That is, Antiochus his
multitude shall be given into the hands of Philopator; which being overthrown
and put to flight, Antiochus flying by the deserts, searce escaped with life.

Verse. 12. And the multitude shall be lifted up, and their heart exalted] So I
translate, see Verse. 12. Isai. 2.14. and 6.1. and 2.13, 14. (...) and (...) are
Synonyma. The sense is, that Philopator and his army should be proud of the
victory over Antiochus.

and he shall cast down thousands] That is, the great multitude of Antiochus.

but he shall not be strengthened thereby] For the King of Egypt did not make
use of this victory, to strengthen himself thereby. For Philopator (says
Justine) making peace greedily, took up the occasion of ease, falling back into
his luxury.

Verse. 13. And the King of the North shall return] For Antiochus after
Philopators death, restored wars against his Son, and Successor, Ptolemaeus
Epiphaues.

and shall set forth a multitude greater then the former] For he gathered an
uncredible army out of the upper parts of Babylon. Jerome. And not only so,
but in sundry expeditions.

and in the end of times and the yeers] A fatal period of years, as Verse. 6.
The times of the inundation of the Romans over Macedonia, and Asia, to the
mountain Taurus, and fatal declining of the Seleucidae.

by coming he shall come] That is, swiftly, suddenly, with hopes of overflowing.

with a great army, and with much riches] First, Antiochus overflowed into
Syria and Judea, then against the Romans also, with three hundred thousand
footmen, and so many more of horsemen. An army most rich in Gold, Silver,
Purple, Silks, Ivory, as Florus and Gellius do testify. Flor. lib cap. 8.
Gollius At. l. 5. c.
See a great army and much riches. It is only said, by coming he shall come
with these armies, no victory expressed: to note rather a threatening of
inundation, then success. His crackling fire of Thorns was soon extinguished.
The Macedonian Horn was cut off, and Asia by the Romans, even unto Taurus, in
this fatal end or period of times and years, as it is before expressed. And now
the Romans having subdued the North of the Greek Empire, must be the King of
the North in the Verses following.

And it is proprotionately convenient, that as the Persian Kings are not
mentioned after Xerxes, Verse. 2, 3. Because under him the Greek Empire began to
rise; so after Antiochus Magnus the Seleucidae should nor be described, because
under him the Roman power began to rise upon this Kingdom.

Sect. 4. Of the Roman Kingdom. The first and Heathen State thereof. From Verse
14. to the 20.
The controversal part.
THe common and received opinion is, That the Grecian Kings are not broken off
at the 14. Verse, but their History continued in the Verses following. And that
they are continued to Verse 36. all Authors that ever I saw, do with one
consent, without scruple affirm. And from the 36. Verse also to the end, some
extend their description: Others say, the Roman Emperors do there succeed;
others, the Pope of Rome. For the honor of Christ and of this Prophecy; for
the farther revelation of Antichrist, and confirmation of the Saints, I am
forced here to leave the common opinion: From which I have not wilfully and
rashly and unreasonably departed, but upon much study and weighing of Arguments.

And first I think, that the description of the Emperors of Rome begins at the
14. Verse, reaching to the 20. which I prove by these Arguments.

First, because Amiochus Magnus was immediately spoken of before, and his
History described: in whose time the Roman Kingdom overflowed to the Mountain
Taurus. Hence I frame an Argument by congruous proportion. For if Xerxes is the
last Persian King mentioned, Verse 3. because he occasioned the first entrance
to the rising of the next Monarchy, although sundry other Persian Kings came
after him. Why may not Antiochus Magnus be the last montioned of the Grecian
Kings of the North, because he occasioned the rising of the next Monarchy, even
to the overflowing of the Northern parts of the Kingdom of Graecia? And now the
Roman Captain having overflowed the North, and being now made by Conquests King
of the North, who but he in the next Verses following should be King of the
North? Besides there is no cause to pretend an abrupt introduction of a new
King of the North; for he is brought in with a fair transition thus: At that
time many shall stand up against the K. of the South, a time described to be
(...) the end of times, years: A phrase arguing a fatal time of change and
alteration, Verse 13.

Secondly, Because the passages in the Verses following, will not in any
propriety agree to the Lagidae and Seleucidae. And in particular it cannot be
showed according to Verse 14. how many stood up against the King of the South
in Antiochus the Great, otherwise then before. Some affirm it is so said,
because Philip King of Macedon made a Covenant with Antiochus: But he was not
able to defend himself against the Romans: And moreover the Prophet speaks of
such a standing up of many, as was successeful to the overthrowing of the
South, Judea first, and afterward of Egypt. Others affirm it is so said,
because the Jews did join themselves to the succor of Antiochus, Joseph. Anti.
lib. 12. cap. 3. But Josephus there affirms, that Judea was variously caught
up, sometimes for the one side sometimes for the other. Besides it is against
Judea, and against the Jews, and the Egyptians, against whom many are affirmed
to stand up, Verse 15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, How shall that be verified of the time of Antiochus the Great, that
the robbers of the Jews did stand up to establish the Vision, but fell? What
were these robbers? What is the Vision which they did establish? How did they
fall in the time of Antiochus? Some say, they were those that followed Onias
into Egypt to build a Temple there, Jos. Ant. l. 13. c. 6. de bello. Jud. l. 7.
c. 30.
to establish that Prophecy which is written, Isai. 19.19. But how were these
robbers? How was this done in the days of Antiochus Magnus, which Josephus
affirms to have been done in the days of Ptolemaeus Philometer after him
(...) And how did they fall in the time of Antiochus; forasmuch as this
wickedness of the Jews was not punished until two hundred and fifty years
after? Bulling. in Dan. 11.14.
Others say, that these robbers are those Jews which Antiochus took off. I
find no History showing such a kind of such Jews, as is here spoken off, and
at this time. Junius. Rolloc. Piscator.
But how to establish the Vision? That is, they say to verify this present
Vision, that prophecieth thereof. But so these words might have equally been
affixed to any other part of this or other Prophecies. For all are
indifferently written to be verified. Besides an end so common and general,
seems not needful to have been mentioned, especially in such a Prophecy so
admirably compacted of the chief heads of substantial events. Junius turns
the word (...) to another and strange sense: as if it should signify to make
the Vision to stand, that is, to hinder it. For which Interpretation of the
Hebrew phrase, I see no probability in respect of the circumstances of this
place.

Fourthly, I find not in History such a destruction of the Jews to have been
made by Antiochus Magnus, as is here imported in these words, but they shall
fall, Verse 14, and Verse 16. he shall stand in the pleasant land, which by his
hand shall be consumed. For this is the proper and ordinary sense of (...) as
appears Dan. 9.27. and 11.36. Besides, the Jews voluntarily yielded
themselves unto Antiochus, and therefore he prosecuted them with great favors
and liberty of Religion: Jos. Ant. fid. l. 12. c. 3.
So far was he from causing them to fall by utter ruin, as the word does
signify, Isai. 8.15. or from consuming them by utter destruction. Concerning
this Antiochus, Perer. in Dan. 8.
observe the words of Pererius, utterly overthrowing the foresaid Exposition.
Antiochus Magnus (says he) never hated or persecuted the Jews, never used them
uncourteously, afflicted them not with any destruction or calamity.

Fifthly, So great a preparation, such sieges, such hostile wars against the
Jews and Judea, as are described, Verse. 15, 16. are not appliable to Antiochus
Magnus, to whom the Jews did voluntarily yield themselves, as to a kind and
courteous Governor and Protector of them. Neither such a power is competible
unto him, as is altogether irresistible, proposed in such phrases, Verse 15,
16. as are given to irresistible Conquerours: As to Cyrus, Chap. 8.4. to
Alexander, Chap. 11.4. to Antichrist, Chap. 11.36. For Antiochus got and lost,
got and lost, by course: Neither like a flood did he overrun the Dominions of
the King of the South, but some parts only. The phrases here proposed, seem
greater and of an higher strain, then any formerly given to the greatest
Conquerours.

Sixthly, It is not sufficiently declared, how upright, or just, or favorable
men were with Antiochus, and for what end, and how he gave his daughter, to
destroy or corrupt her; how she was the daughter of women; how he took many in
the Isles of the Sea; how he so fell, that he was found no more; how the
remover of the oppressor came into his place. Verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. The
application of these passages to Antiochus, cannot but seem strained and
forced, to a tender, impartial, and advised judgment.

Seventhly, The passages here attributed to the King of the North, cannot
possibly but be directed to the Roman Empire. As that the Jews exalted or
lifted up themselves in Rebellion against it, thinking thereby to establish and
bring to effect the Vision of the Prophets: That they fell in utter and
consuming destruction, as the phrases do import. No other King of the North
besides the Romans, did after the time of Daniel, bring an utter desolation on
the Jews, and on their Land. All the other passages also in the Verses
following, will most congruously agree to the Roman Empire, as may be seen in
the Explication.

Eighthly, Antichrist or the Pope of Rome, is so plainly and so punctually
described from the 21 Verse downward, that it cannot be called into question by
him, that seriously and judiciously considers it. Now the course, order, and
succession of the changes of the world being showed here to Daniel, from the
Persian Monarchy to the last time: It was meet, and congruous, that before the
description of Antichrist, the Roman Empire should be described, as which
brought in the greatest and most famous changes that ever were before: And if
it be prefixed before Antichrist, then must it here begin at the 14. Verse, or
else I see not what place can possibly be found for it.

Ninthly, In the other Prophecies and Visions of Daniel, the Empire of Rome is
described, represented by the Iron legs, Chap. 2.40. And by the fourth Beast
with Iron teeth, Chap. 7.7, 8. As Iron breaking all in pieces, and devouring
the whole Earth. Now if in these Visions it is described, and as a most notable
part therein: How much more in this Vision, the greatest, largest, noblest of
all the rest? Besides in those other Prophecies, the Roman Empire is described,
immediately before Antichrist: And why not proportionably here also? Nay much
rather, as has been showed.

The second part, containing the Explication: From Verse 14. to 20.
VErse 14. And in those times] That is, the times following Antiochus.

many shall stand up against the King of the South] That is, many by
succession, Antiochus Epiphanes and his Successors: Then of the Romans, Pompey,
Gabinius, Crassus, Sosius, Herod, Aug. Caesar, Vespasian, Titus, Hadrian. By
the South is meant Judea and Egypt: as it is declared in the Verses following.

The conquest of Judea. Verse. 14.
ALso the robbers of thy people] Heb. (...), Violent, furious and desperate
murderers. See Isai. 35.9. Ezekiel. 18.10.

shall be exalted] In confidence of their strength and resolution. Such were
the Jews, especially after the crucifying of the Son of God. See Josephus.

to establish the Vision] That is, to set up the Kingdom of Israel, vainly
thinking to fulfill thereby the Prophecies of the Old Testament, concerning New
Jerusalem, to establish the Vision or Prophecies in all the Prophets, wherein
with one consent they all foretold this great calamity of the Jews.

but they shall fall.] Heb. stumble, as in a way that seemed safe, besides
expectation, Isai. 8.14, 15.

Verse. 15. So the King of the North shall come] First Pompey, then Herod,
afterward Vespasian, Titus, lastly Hadrian.

and shall cast up a mount, and take the most fenced city] Jerusalem and other
Cities, by casting up of Mounts, whereof read Josephus.

and the arms of the South] That is, the Captains of the Jews, Verse 31. Isai.
53.1. and 40.10. and 51.9.

shall not stand] That is, shall be utterly overthrown. See before Verse 6.

neither his chosen people,] That is, the common Soldiers. The Captains are
styled Arms, and the Soldiers chosen men for excellency; and yet they fell
before the Romans.

neither shall there be any strength to stand.] Whereby is signified an
exertion of all possible strength, and therein a sinking under a superior
power of their enemies? He that has heard of the History, needs no
Commentary on these words, they are so accurately fulfilled in the events.

Verse 16. And he that comes against him] Against him, that is, the South, the
Governors of Judea: And he that comes, is Vespasian Titus.

shall do according to his own will] That is, save, kill, burn, sell, enslave
at pleasure: So did Titus with the Jews, Judea, Jerusalem: Eleven hundred
thousand perished in the City, besides those without: and ninety seven thousand
sold to perpetual slavery: Judea sold, wasted.

and none shall stand before, him:] Every word has weight: And here a new
attempt of the Jews is signified under Trajan, and Hadrian: When again exerting
their utmost strength, proportionately they fell before the Romans. The ruin
by Titus was accomplished Anno 70. That under Trajan and Hadrian, between the
years one hundred and fourteen, and one hundred thirty and five.

and he shall stand in the pleasant land,] The pleasant Land is Judea, Ezekiel.
20.6. He, that is the Roman Emperor, as Hadrian, shall stand in it, with
intention of utter Conquest, Zach. 14.3, 4.

which by his hand shall be consumed.] So signifies the phrase, Jere. 5.10,
18. And this is true of the Jews, and of Judea.

Hadrian took by Severus, fifty fortified Castles, razed nine hundred and
eighty of their best Cities, slew five hundred and eighty thousand of the Jews:
But of them that perished otherwise, as by famine, pestilence, sword, the
number was innumerable, Judea utterly desolate.

The Conquest of Egypt. Verse 17.
EGypt in the South after Judea taken, and so it follows.

He shall also set his face to enter into the strength of the whole Kingdom] So
(...), as Verse 9. and 29. He, that is the Roman Captain, Pompey, and his
Successors shall set his face to enter, that is, by the flood of war, after
the Conquest of Judea, shall approach as ready and about to enter Egypt also:
Into the strength of his whole Kingdom, that is, Into the strong holds, and
fenced Cities, not only of Judea, but also of all the residue of the South,
even Egypt too.

and men of equity shall be with him,] So signifies (...) according to the
sense of (...), Verse 6. Men of equity, just and favorable dealers, not using
rigor and extremity. Pompey was such a one after the taking of Judea, such
were Gabinius and Julius Caesar.

and he shall do] By doing right as Verse 6. and dealing favorably.

and he shall give him] That is, to the King of the South, or house of the
Lagidae, as Verse 6.

the daughter of women,] That is, Cleopatra, the last of the house of the King
of the South in Egypt, called the daughter of women because incomparable among
women; for excellency of behavior, gesture, beauty, wit, speech, eloquence,
Plut. Anton. This woman, Julius Caesar of the Romans gave unto the King of the
South or house of the Lagidae, to reign, or to be Hereditary Successor in the
Egyptian Kingdom, according to equity and favorable moderation. But the issue
and event was not successeful: For this indulgence turned in the end, and by
Gods intention and direction, to the ruin of her, and of her Kingdom, and of
the whole house of the Lagidae. And therefore it follows

to the destroying of her] That is, in the event, and by Gods direction. Or the
Hebrew word may signify to the corrupting of her. For Julius Caesar corrupted
Gleopatra, and being taken with her love, indulged liberty to the Egyptians,
and the Kingdom to Cleopatra. Salian. An. M. 4007. N. 25, 26, 27, 28.

and she shall not stand] Being vanquished by Augustus Caesar.

neither shall she be unto him] For she stood not, nor her posterity, to hold
up and to continue the succession of the King of the South, or of the Lagidae:
But they and their Kingdom utterly perished in her.

The Conquest of the West.
Verse. 18. So much of the Conquest of the East and South, by Pompey and his
followers.

He] That is, the Roman state in Julius Caesar.

shall turn his face] Elegantly expressed. Because proceeding from East to
West, we turn the face.

to the Isles] That is, to the Countries on the Western Ocean, France, Germany,
Spain, Britany: For these are the Isles of Cittim, Iere. 2.10. and the Isles of
the Sea, Isai. 24.14. the Isles, the multitude of the Sea, Isai. 60.5, 9. whose
King is called a Dragon in the Sea, Isai. 17.1. and the Western part of the
Roman Empire, with the Country; adjoining, are called the Isles afar of, Isai.
44.4. and 49.1.

and shall take many.] As the Countries before mentioned, Towns and Cities,
with their people innumerable therein.

The fall of the Heathen state of the Roman Empire. Verse 18.
SO far of the Conquests, whereby the Roman Empire came to its height and
fullness. Now follows the fall thereof. And first of the Heathen state of it:
Then of the Empire universally.

but a Prince] That is, Constantine the Great, about three hundred years after
Christ.

shall cause his reproach] That is, whereby the Heathen Emperors of Rome did
reproach Christ and his Church for three hundred years, even to extreme cruelty
and persecution. So is (...) used Zeph. 2.8. Hos. 12.14. Psalm. 89, 50, 51, 52.
Ezekiel. 36.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. signifying actively, and with concurrence of cruel
persecution.

to cease from him] That is, shall cause it to cease from the Roman Heathen
Emperor; so that he shall persecute the Church no more by reproachful
insultations conjoined with merciless destructions.

besides his reproach which he shall render unto him again] See Annot. Piscat.
That is, Constantine shall not only cause the reproach, whereby the Heathen
Emperor reproached Christ, to cease from him, but also shall recompense his
reproach, by an utter overthrow. See Hos. 12.14. Nah. 1.9.

The universal fall of the Roman Empire. Verse 19.
ANd he shall turn his face to the forts of his own land] That is, to the
defense of his own Land, the Roman Empire, against hostile invasion. For after
the exaltation of Christians, by the overthrow of Heathens, through ease and
prosperity, they soon degenerated into error and superstition: Whereupon
enemies oppugning the Empire upon all sides, the Christian Emperor was wholly
busied in defense of the Roman Kingdom, especially from after the year 365. and
395.

but he shall stumble and fall, and shall not be found.] For being oppugned by
innumerable enemies, called the Northern Barbarians, he stumbled first from
after the year 337. to 410. then he fell from 410. to 576. and then and
afterward was found no more, the Barbariaus having then risen as a flood over
all the Western Empire.

Sect. 5. Concerning the Remover of the Oppressor. Verse 20.
The controversal part.
COncerning the next Successor of the Roman Emperor, described Verse 20. The
common opinion is, that he is Seleucus Philopator. In which accommodation, I
require satisfaction from the Authors in these particulars.

1. What reason or ground they can show, why the glory of the Kingdom should be
especially attributed unto him: Being rather meaner and baser, then his
Predecessors.

2. Why (...) should be translated a raiser of Taxes, especially without the
addition of (...) or the like.

3. If so: Why Seleucus Philopator should be the only raiser of Taxes
mentioned among the Kings of Syria.

4. How he was destroyed, or broken down, but neither in wrath, neither in
battle, but by the peaceable machinations and flatteries of his Successor: As
it is expressed in the next Verse.

Contrarily I affirm, That this Successor is Justinian with his followers.

1. Because these succeeded into the place of the Emperors of the West,
described immediately before.

2. Because they rose immediately before the public manifestation of
Antichrist, described in the Verse next following.

3. Because in them came in a succession in the glory of the Kingdom.

4. Because these were properly (...) the Removers of the Oppressor: Forasmuch
as they removed, expelled and subdued the Barbarians, which had invaded and
oppressed the Empire on all parts.

5. Because these were properly broken down, not fundamentally in wrath or in
battle, but by the peaceable Arts, machinations and flatteries of Antichrist.

6. Because by parallel proportion it was meet, That as these being the
swallowers up of the Barbarian flood, are prefixed immediately before
Antichrist in the Revelation: So also in Daniel, they should be proposed in
this Verse immediately before Antichrist, described in the next. Apoc. 12.13,
14, 15, 16, 17. and 13.1.

The second part containing the Explication. Verse 20.
THen shall stand in his place] That is, in the place of the Western Emperor.

the remover of the oppressour] So properly signifies (...). This phrase I
confess is commonly translated one that shall raise taxes. But I rather judge,
that the phrase does signify one that shall remove or take away the
oppressor. For if it were to be understood in the former sense, it would have
been thus expressed (...) or (...), one that causes the exactour to pass over
his land or people, as Zach. 9.5. For otherwise the Verb (...) and (...) being
absolutely used, as in this place; that is, without restraint or determination
unto any term, by or over which or unto which the passage is made, does
properly signify to pass away: And in Hiphil, to cause to pass away, that
is, to remove. I instance in these Scriptures, 1 King. 22.24. When went the
Spirit of the Lord from me? Cant. 2.11. For lo, the winter is past. Cant. 5.6.
My beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. Jere. 8.20. The harvest is past
and gone. Thus (...). Proportionately (...) the conjugation in which it is used
in this place, being likewise absolutely and indeterminately applied, does
properly signify to make or cause to pass away, or to remove. 2 Samuel 12.13.
God has put away or taken away thy sin. Zech. 3.4. Behold I have caused thy
iniquity to pass away from thee. Heb. (...) joined here with (...), that is, I
have removed. 2 Samuel 24.10. Take away my iniquity. Heb. (...). Esther 8.3.
Esther besought the King to out away the mischief of Haman. Heb. (...). Zech.
13.2. I will cause the unclean spirit to pass away out of the Land. See also
Psalm. 119.37, 39. Eccles. 11.10. 2 Chronicles. 15.8, etc.

As for (...), it signifies in a special use one that extorteth or exacteth
money or tribute, to the grievance of a person. 2 King. 23.35. Zech. 10.4. And
one that uses extremity in exacting debts. Deuteronomy. 15.2, 3. Isai. 58.3. Moreover
generally it is applied also to signify an oppressor, such as the
Taskmasters, Exodus 5.6, 10, 14. and 3.7. And such as the Babylonians and
Philistines were to Israel. 1 Samuel 13.6. and 14.24. Isai. 9.4. and 14.2. Job
3.17. Zech. 9.5. and such as the Jews were to Christ. Isa. 53.7. Wherefore I
conclude, that (...) does properly signify one that removes or causes such
in oppressor to pass away.

Now to return to the matter. The oppressor was the Barbarians, whereby the
Roman Empire was overthrown and oppressed, as in the former Verse. The remover
of this oppressor began in Justinian the Greek Emperor, who brake down the
Goths and Vandals, by the year 556. From which time forward the Empire stood
renewed and restored in some degree, until the time of Charles the Great, by
whom was brought in a second restoration more perfect, general, and lasting
then the former, from after the year 768.

in the glory of the Kingdom] That is, in the similitude of the ancient glory
of the Roman Empire, after it had been long and greatly defaced by the
Barbarians. Or he may be said to stand up in the glory of the Kingdom, in
opposition unto Antichrist, who at the same time stood up with him; but not as
yet in the glory of the Kingdom, as it follows in the next Verse.

but within few dayes] That is, in a short time, Apoc. 17.10.

he shall be broken down] That is, made subject and servile under the power of
another King.

but neither in wrath, nor in battle.] That is, by voluntary grant and donation
of his power and authority to another King; whereby he shall break down
himself, and not be broken down by violent extorsion: But this is especially to
be meant of the beginning and first entrance of his Successor, as it is
expressed in the next Verse.

The Successor was Antichrist the Pope of Rome whom Justinian first decreed to
be chief of Bishops; and afterward Phocas, willingly and without war or
compulsion, decreed in the year 606. that he should be Universal Bishop.

From which time forward, the Pope did so increase, that he became more
forcible and powerful not only in foreign Kingdoms, but also in Italy, then
the Emperor himself. Charles the Great after the second restoration, did the
like, and much more, whereby it came to pass that the remover of the
oppressor being in few days broken down by his own voluntary concession, the
Pope or Antichrist did peaceably and without wrath or battle, arise into his
place.

Sect. 6. That Antichrist is described from Verse 21. downward, and not
Antiochus Epiphanes.
The controversal part.
THe common opinion is, that the next Successor Verse. 21. is Antiochus
Epiphanes. In which accommodation I require satisfaction of the Authors
concerning these particulars.

1. How he was a vile person, that is, base and of low degree, to whom they
gave not the honor of a Kingdom, seeing he was the lawful son of Antiochus
Magnus: Who (to use the words of Graserus) was so great, even from his infancy,
that then in the world known unto us, there was scarce another to be compared
with him.

2. I require a sufficient reason, if this be Antiochus Epiphanes, why as many
or rather more words should be spent upon him, then were spent upon all the
Kings of Syria and Egypt before him: Whereof some were far more notable in
exploits then he. If any say, that it is so, because he was more notable in
afflicting of the Saints: I still demand, but why are so many words spent upon
these warlike exploits that concerned not the Church? Besides others before
afflicted the Jewish Church not a little, and yet their afflictions are not
here mentioned. If his persecutions did exceed, yet why should the description
thereof exceed so much being but short in duration, and not to be compared with
those of Nebuccadnezzar precedent, or those of the Romans in the time following?

But if it be said, the Reason is, because Antiochus is described as the type
of Antichrist: I answer again, That the type howsoever must be according to
truth, and the words of description answerable to the things contained therein.
The Holy Ghost would not represent Antichrist by a type excessively described
above the verity and proportion thereof.

3. I demand, how the greatness of the matter and exploits attributed to this
King can be exhausted in so slight acts, and so little momentose as those of
Antiochus Epiphanes. For he was in no war so happy, as that the phrases here
expressed might be proportionate unto him. He had little or nothing more then
the meaner sort of the Kings of Syria. Gras. de Antic. page 76, 77.
Two expeditions he made into Egypt: In both at last ignominiously repulsed.
Against the Jews he prevailed indeed at first: But afterward was shamefully
overthrown by Judas Macchabaeus. He advanced his Armies into Persia: But thence
also was dishonourably beaten back. Can it be said of such a King, that the
Arms of inundation are overflown from before him, and Princes of the Covenant?
Or that he does that which his fathers have not done, nor his Fathers Fathers?
Verse 24. For these words are uttered of him absolutely, and not as restrained
to his Egyptian exploits: And consequently in the simple nature and greatness
of devastations, he is superlatively compared with all Predecessors. And how
can this be verified of Antiochus Epiphanes? And as for his Egyptian exploits
(to use the words of Graserus) it is manifest, That his father Antiochus did
not less exploits against Egypt it self. Again I instance in Verse 25, 26.
where a mighty and extraordinary war is attributed to the King before
described, to the overflowing and breaking down of the Kingdom of the South;
How can this be applied to Antiochus Epiphanes in respect of Egypt? Into which
he entered twice, and with short and little momentose success: Being both times
at last ignominiously repulsed: The first time, by the Captains of Ptolemaeus;
the second time, by the only words and command of the Roman Ambassador
Popilius. And I instance in the phrase mentioned Verse 25. that the King of the
South did not stand by reason of him, that is, was overthrown and his Kingdom
dissolved, as the phrase is used, Verse 15, 16. Chap. 8.4. How will that also
be applied to him Verse 27. That his end should be at a time appointed? As if
his victorious overflowing continued until a certain period of times. How that
also Verse 28. that from the Conquest of the King of the South, he is said to
return with great substance, to do and return to note a continuation in
prosperous success, in going and returning without repulse. Again, that Verse
29. that his second expedition was not prosperous as the first: whereby is
signified that the last being unprosperous, the first was prosperous: whereas
in the former expedition of Antiochus he had a repulse by the Captains of
Ptolemy, as Nauclerus expresses, and in the latter he seems to have done
more then in the former. And if (...) be Ships Verse 30. shall the Ships of
Cittim come against him, because Popilius came Ambassador in a Ship? Wherefore
I conclude, that the greatness of the style and of the warlike exploits here
spoken off, cannot be exhausted in the petty wars of Antiochus Epiphanes:
Neither the circumstances of this Prophecy can be verified in the circumstances
of his exploits.

4. I demand, who is the Prince of the Covenant, Verse 22. called the Holy
Covenant Verse 28, 30, 32. which by this King is said to be overflown and
broken down: And how, and in whom it is applyable to Antiochus Epiphanes. Some
say, he is Seleucus Philopator King of Syria; Others, that it is Ptolemaeus
Philometor King of Egypt; called the Prince of the Covenant, by reason of the
Covenant which Antiochus made with them. But he cannot be Seleuens because
according to the Supposition of the adverse opinion, his reign and end was
dispatched in the 20 Verse precedent, and accordingly supposed broken down
without wrath or battle: Whereas such a Prince of the Covenant is here spoken
off, as existed after the King described Verse 20. and also opposed the vile
person his Successor, being overflown and broken down by him in wrath and
battle. Neither can he be Ptolemaeus Philometor: For how was he overflown and
broken down by Antiochus? How again could either he or Seleucus be called the
Prince of the Covenant: For this is not a phrase usual or suitable to signify
a confederate. Gras. in ^an. 9. page ^36. 239.
And if (says Graserus) the Prince of the Covenant did here signify the
Prince of the Confederacy, yet can it not be applied to Seleucus or any other,
in comparison with them that are joined in equal Covenant together: seeing a
Prince of such a Covenant, is properly such a Prince, which is the Author and
chief maintainer thereof, Add to this, that the Prince of the Covenant is not
here the Prince of a Confederacy, nor Confederate: But a Prince, that is a
defender and maintainer of the Holy Covenant, as it is expressed in the Verses
following: And therefore cannot agree unto Seleucus or Philopator, or any other
Heathen or Heretical Governor.

Graserus being convinced by these Arguments, to avoid the aforesaid
interpretation, declineth to another extremity. For (says he) (...) in this
place is adversary: And the meaning is, That the Arms shall be overflown by
him, and he shall also be an adversary of the Covenant. But not to speak of the
harshnesse of the context in such an Exposition, the word (...) is ever in
Scripture used in the signification of Prince or Governor, never of adversary:
And therefore this opinion needs no farther confutation.

Lastly, if it be said, that Antiochus overflowed the Prince of the Covenant,
in subduing and destroying of the Jews: I answer by demanding, Lyranus.
Who this Prince of the Covenant is among them? For not only the people of the
Holy Covenant are understood, but the Prince thereof in special manner. After
his tyranny against the Jews and their Sanctuary, Judas Macchabaeus arose
Prince of the Jews, and rather overflowed and brake down Antiochus, then was
broken down by him.

5. What should I speak of the great afflictions of the Church by sword, flame,
captivity, and spoil, and that for many days Verse 33. at certain gusts
succeeding after interruptions? The Church now and then rising and preyailing
Verse 32, 33, 34. and then at certain fatal revolutions set by God, exposed
again to fire and sword, Verse 35. How can these passages be exhausted in the
narrow and short persecutions of Antiochus?

6. The King here spoken of, is said to set up the abomination of desolation,
Verse 31. Which by our Savior is expressly referred to the times coming after
his first coming, Matthew. 24.15. and therefore he cannot be Antiochus Epiphanes.

7. The persecutions of this King are expressly said to last (...) to the time
of the end Verse 35. that is, to the last time, the time of the downfall of the
Turk, Verse 40. of Antichrist, Verse 45. The time approaching the Resurrection,
Chap. 12.1, 2, 3, 13. The time of the full Revelation of these Mysteries, Chap.
12.4. and 8.17, 19, 26. and 10.14. Therefore he cannot be Antiochus Epiphanes.

8. Antiochus cannot be spoken off Verse 36. and thence forward, as Graserus
and Brightman have demonstrated: Whence I conclude, that he cannot also be
Antiochus in these Verses immediately before. For all these Verses are joined
together in perfect uniformity, without any note or show of diversion or
transition to any other King: Whereas in passing to distinct Kings in kind,
transitions were before used, as Verse 20, 21. But besides Verse 36. Antichrist
is called (...), the King, as spoken of before, and with express reference to
a precedent part of his description: and therefore if it is Antichrist
described in that Verse, it is Antichrist described in these before, and not
Antiochus Epiphanes.

9. The King here spoken off from Verse 21. downward, arises into his Kingdom
manifestly and fully after the fall of the Roman Empire, as has been showed in
the precedent Verses: And therefore he cannot be Antiochus, who existed many
hundred years before. Wherefore neither can he be disposed and complicated with
Antichrist as the Type with the Antitype: Forasmuch as the words of a Prophecy
must be verified of the Type, as well as of the Antitype, to constitute a
ground of representation: And commonly in such kind of Prophecies, the Type is
more plainly and directly expressed, the Antitype closely involved in the
History of the Type; Whereas we have showed, that the main passages of this
Prophecy are unapplyable to Antiochus Epiphanes. Besides, Antichrist is not
closely involved, but is the direct and immediate subject of this Prophecy: as
may be cleared by the contrary application of the former Arguments. For,

First, he enters his Kingdom in public and manifest appearance, after the
fall of the Roman Empire, Verse 21. and after the rising of the Remover of the
Oppressor Verse 20, and 21. taking possession of his Throne, power, and
authority: therefore he is Antichrist.

Secondly, the manner and matter of this description, is exactly the same with
the description of the little Horn, who undoubtedly is Antichrist. This may
appear by comparing Chap. 8.9. with Chap. 7.7, 8. whereby it is manifest, that
the little Horn, Chap. 8. is the same with the little Horn, Chap. 7. which
arising in the fourth Kingdom, is questionless Antichrist. Then by comparing
in particular, Verse. 22. and 21. with Chapter 8.9. Chapter 11.35. with Chapter 8.17, 19.
Chapter 11.23, 24, 25, 33, 34. with Chapter 8.9, 10, 24, 25. Chapter 11.31, 32. with Chapter
8.11, 12.

Thirdly, because it is Antichrist, that persecuteth the Church, till the time
of the end, Verse 35. with Chapter 7.25. and 12.7.

Fourthly, because it is Antichrist that is spoken of Verse. 36. and he is the
same spoken off in these Verses going before, as being (...) the King, with
reference to the same that was spoken of before: and distinguished by no
particle or note of transition.

Fifthly and lastly, all the passages that cannot without forcing and straining
of the Text be applied to Antiochus or any other, will most properly agree to
Antichrist; such as these, to be a mean or low person, Verse 21. to enter into
his Kingdom by flatteries, to spoil and destroy more strangely then his
fathers, or fathers fathers, Verse 24. to overflow the Arms of inundation Verse
12. and the Prince of the Covenant: By a mighty army to break down the King of
the South, Verse 25. and by deceit the Professors of the Holy Covenant, Verse
23, 29, 33. to set up the abomination of desolation, Verse 31. to persecute the
Church for many years, and by successive gusts, and unto the end, Verse 32, 33,
34, 35. These and all the other circumstances, do most precisely agree unto
Antichrist, as may be seen in the particular Exposition.

The second part containing the Exposition.
Sect. 7. The Description of Antichrist in general.
VErse 21. And in his place] That is, in the place of the Remover of the
Oppressor, Justinian and his followers, and in their Throne at Rome.

shall stand up a vile person] That is, Antichrist, the Pope of Rome, Isai.
53.3. Psalm. 22.7.
called vile, that is, of low rank and reputation, as being indifferently and
promiscuously advanced out of ignoble parentage: As also in respect of the
meannesse of his primitive estate before Constantine, at which time he was
only a poor Minister having no Princely dignity, neither chosen or called
thereunto. He is also vile in respect of corrupt estate spiritual, Isal. 15.4.
in doctrine and manners.

and they shall not give unto him the glory of the Kingdom] For they gave him
indeed the Ecclesiastical Dominion, but as for (...) Verse 20. and (...) Verse.
21. the glory of the Kingdom, that is, the Secular Dominion, the Regal Majesty
and external splendor of the Empire, they refused to yield it unto him for a
long time. For the Emperor yielded not secular preeminency, till after the
time of Hildebrand.

and he shall come in peaceably] That is, without war, Verse 20. by a peaceable
donation of Ecclesiastical Dominion.

and he shall strengthen the Kingdom by flatteries] So (...) being entered
peaceably, he shall afterward aspire by flatteries unto the sublimity and
perfection of his Kingdom: Flatteries, Heb. (...) or (...) Verse 32. That is,
falsities smoothed over with fair pretense of verity, Isai. 30.10. called
(...), 2 These. 2.11. the effectual working of deception, denominating the
Antichristian false Prophets, (...), 2 Timothy 4.2. such as speak lies in
Hypocrifie, that is, lying doctrines covered over with shows of truth, with
intention to deceive. These were among the rest, That Christ had given all
power to Peter, Peter to the Pope; that therefore Emperors, and Princes, and
People, were bound in conscience to subject themselves to his infallible, and
uncontrollable decrees. By these and such like flatteries, he gradually and
insensibly wrought his authority into the minds of unskilful Christians, until
in Hildebrand he had subjected the secular powers, the Emperors and Princes of
the West.

Sect. 8. The Popes two wars in general. Verse 22, 23, 24.
ANtichrist coming to the mature state of his Kingdom in Hildebrand, his
special wars began about 20 years after. The first against the Turks and
Sarasins on this fide Euphrates: The second, against the Waldensian
Protestants: Both properly the wars of Antichrist, the one in the East, the
other in the West; both very great as ever any were; both like and equal in
quality and quantity, as Thuanus shows; both about the same time succeeding
one another, and presently following the maturity of Antichrist in Hildebrand,
proposed in the words immediately prefixed.

Verse 22. And the arms of inundation] That is, the Sultans of the Turks and
Sarasins, which about the time of Hildebrand had made an inundation over Asia,
Syria, Judea, most cruelly persecuting the Christians there inhabiting.

shall be overflown from before him] That is, by the Christian Princes and
People of the West at his decree, and in subjection to him.

and shall be broken down] For by these Western expeditions of the Christians,
a great part of the Turkish Kingdom on this side Euphrates was broken down,
many thousands of them slain, and Asia, part of Syria, and Judea recovered.

and also the Prince of the Covenant.] The Covenant is the the Holy Covenant of
the Gospel, Verse 28, 30, 32. This Prince of this Covenant, by an Enallage of
the number, are the Princes of the Waldenses, the defenders thereof.
Antichrists first war against the Turks and Sarasins began An. 1096. The
second, against the Princes of the Holy Covenant 1209. the former war yet
lasting: Wherein those also were overflown and broken down, but in manner as
follows. First, Antichrist prevailed against them by force and strength, from
An. 1209 to 1218. afterward perceiving, that he prevailed not thereby, he
turned to deceit, as in the next Verse.

Verse 23. And by reason of the joining of themselves unto him] That is, nearly
and strictly, and faithfully, as his Abbots, Legates, Bishops, depending on him
as their head.

he shall work deceit] To wit, by them. Or rather thus, By reason of the
joining of themselves unto him, that is, By reason that the Waldensian Princes
should put themselves into the company of Antichrist as his Instruments, upon
promise of fair treaty: Antichrist shall take advantage through deceit, and put
them under hatches, and so subdue them and their Countries. So it came to pass
as the History does show.

and shall come up and prevail by a small people] For a small people was
sufficient to take in the Waldensian Countries, by peaceable composition. See
Hist. Albin. page 2. b. 2. c. 7, 8. But when by deceit he had once brought them
under hatches, he persecuted them to utter destruction. I use not many words in
accommodation of the event, because of the admirable concordance of the
History. See Dan. 8.25.

Verse 24. He shall enter by peace] That is, by pretense of peaceable
composition as before. See Chapter 8.25. Psalm. 55.20.

both upon the fattest places of the Province,] Observe, the Waldensian
Countries are styled Provinces, not Kingdoms; and their Governors Princes, not
Kings, Verse 22. and so it was. The Province of Tolouze was theirs, and a few
others; and the Earl of Tolouze, the Earl of Beziers, the Earl of Foix, the
Earl of Coming and Prince of Berne were their Governors. Upon their Countries
Antichrist is said to enter; first the fat places, secondly the strong holds.
The fat places, to note his desire of spoil and prey.

and he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers fathers]
For the like havoc of lives and goods even in continuance, and time of peace
and cold blood, and in so narrow a circuit of place, was never known or heard
off in any age before.

he shall scatter among them] That is, among the Bishops and cruel Harpyes, the
Monks Inquisitours.

the prey, and spoil, and riches] For this end was so palpable in the managing
of this persecution, that for a man to have been rich, was enough to accuse him
for an Heretic. Hist. Wald. p. 1. b. 2. e. 1. and 2. p. 7, 8, 9.


and he shall also forecast his devices against the strong holds,] For he took
the strong holds, Castles, and fenced Towns, by deceit and pretense of peace,
Aist. Al^ing. c. 2. ^. 2. p. 120, ^30.
as also the History does expressly manifest.

even for a time] For the time of his power and indignation is set and
determined Verse 36. over a time, two times, and half, he shall not pass. See
Chap. 12.7. and before this, the gusts of his rage are limited, and there is a
time of respiration to the Church, and of staying the Oppressor, Chap. 11.32,
33, 34. and 9.25, 26.

And thus much of the Description of Antichrist and his wars in general; now
follows a more special and particular Description. See the like form of
proceeding Chap. 9.24.

Sect. 9. The particular description of the War of Antichrist against the Turks
and Sarasins.
VErse 25. And he shall stir up his power] Heb. (...) Awaken it. His power, was
the power of the Christian Princes and People of the West: His power being
mighty, but not in his own power, Chap. 8.24. He stirred up or awakened it, by
a most effectual oration made before them, first at Claremont, An. 1095.
Afterward by his Preachers in all the Countries of the West, whereby he did
incredibly inflame them to the war against the Turks and Sarasins, for the
recovery of the holy Land.

and his heart] That is, great affection.

shall be against the King of the South] That is, against the Sultans of the
Turks and Sarasins, who had overflown the South, Paul. Aemyl.
the holy Land, with a great army, Six hundred thousand Foot, and One hundred
thousand Horse. But being consumed by sword, famine, pestilence, they were
greatly diminished, beside the parting of the Army: And therefore the hostile
army is proposed in greater terms.

and the King of the South shall be stirred up to battle with a very great, and
mighty army] For Solomon Sultan of Asia, Paul. Aemyl. in vita Phil. f. 77.6.
first opposed with an incredible multitude: Then Cassianus and Corbanas in
Syria with an host innumerable: Lastly, the Caliph of Egypt with Three hundred
thousand. See Verse 22. Chap. 8.24,

but he shall not stand] For he was broken down by the armies of Antichrist:
The three Kings subdued: Solomon in Asia, Gassianus in Syria, the Egyptian
Caliph in Judea. The first, by passing to the South from Nicea, to Lycia,
Pamphilia, Cilicia: The second, to the East, even to Edessa: The third, to the
pleasant Land, Chap. 7.8. and 8.9, 10. But policy and treason opened the way to
these victories, as it follows.

for they shall forecast devices against him.] For the Christian Captains made
passage for their conquests by politic designs, plotted with the native and
domestic Christians of Asia and Syria, from Nicea forward: Without which they
had not conquered the enemy, as the History does accurately and expressly
show. See Paul. Aemyl. Jere. 49.30. Ezekiel. 38.10. Esth. 8.5, 3. and 9.25.

Verse 26. And eating of the portion of his meat, they shall break him down] So
I translate according to the Hebrew verity. And this was done at Antioch, where
the Christian army of Antichrist under pretense of truce and peaceable
commerce, and table-society, plotted designs against the Turk with
Hemirpherrus the Scribe of Cassianus, whereby they brake him down.

and his army shall overflow] Way being made by fore-casting of devices, from
Nicea forward, his army overflowed Asia. Afterward in Syria at Antioch, making
way by pretense of peaceable commerce, and table-society, the army forthwith
prevailing, overflowed into all parts, like a torrent running over.

and many shall fall down slain.] For of the army for Solomon in Asia were
slain forty thousand: of the army for Cassianus in Syria, above one hundred
thousand: of the army for the Egyptian Caliph, about the holy Land, above one
hundred thousand: besides ten thousand in Antioch, ten thousand in Jerusalem,
and many more in other times and places.

Verses 27. And both these Kings hearts] That is, the heart of Antichrist in
his Captains of the West, and the Turkish King with his people.

shall be to do mischief,] That is, to mischief one another, by what means they
can.

and they shall speak lies at one table] That is, pretend favor, and intend
mischief, in commerce of speech, and tablesociety.

This was done (as has been said) at Antioch, the head City of the East, the
main stay of hope and refuge to the Turks, on the taking or losing whereof the
issue of this war fundamentally depended. See Paul. Aemyl. There the Western
host, and the Turks within, being both brought to the last extremity, Paul.
Aemyl. f. 85.6.
made truce: During which, the Turks usually came into the camp of the
Christians, and again the Christians among the Turks, as it were in a faithful
commerce of peace, as the Historian speaks: In which kind of society, the
adverse parts usually eat and drink together. But in this commerce they spoke
lies, intending really to mischief one another. For Cassianus pretended this
truce as a pledge of yielding: But under this pretense, he sought the utter
ruin of the Christian army, by the expected host of Persians. Boemund also
with the Christians on the other side, under color of this friendship and
society, plotted designs of treason with Hemirpherrus, which also with
admirable opportunity he accomplished, taking Antioch before the coming of the
Persians. The army by this occasion prevailing, forthwith overflowed into all
parts. Or it may be another project is here signified after the taking of
Antioch. So the Communion of the Pope by his Legates may be understood that
which he had with the Egyptian Caliph, with whom they staying a certain time,
intended their own ends; and the Caliph also under pretense of a firm Covenant,
being altogether disposed to work mischief, took advantage thereby of catching
away Judea from before the Latins, and so of making frustrate so far as he
could, their hope of going forward after the taking of Antioch. Read Paul.
Aemyl. fol. 85.

but he shall not prosper; for yet the end shall be for the time appointed] For
Antioch was taken, and afterward that and all the Country lost again by the
Pope. Also the Egyptian Caliph being afterward overcome by the Latins, lost
Judea, Verse 40. And both Pope and Mahomet shall come to their full end at last.

Verse 28. Then shall he return into his Land] For after Conquest of Asia,
Syria, Judea, a great part of the Popes army joyfully returned.

with great riches] Got in the Tents of Corbanas, and from the Sarasins at
Askelon in Antioch, Jerusalem, as the History does show. Paul. Aemyl. l. 4. in
fine.
Caeteri preceres (says one) domum revertere, pleni gloria, and divitiis.

and his heart shall be against the Holy Covenant.] As his heart was against
the Turks abroad, Verse 25. so against the Holy Covenant at home. This is the
Gospel, and it comprehends all the Ordinances of Christ, Isai. 24.4, 5. Psalm.
25.10. and 44.18. And Antichrist here is said to be against the Covenant, by
laboring to subvert the Ordinances of Christ, and to set up his own
Antichristian devices and abominations Verse. 31. which now he wrought more
effectually then ever before, after the over flowing of the Turks, as the
History does show. For Paschal the second and Callistus so promoted the Kingdom
and Errors of Antichrist, that by the year 1122. he attained to his full and
perfect swinge, in the actual execution of his Antichristian devices. See Char.
Chron. Mist. Iniq. p. 280, etc. p. 289, 290.

and he shall do, and return to his own Land] That is, against the Turks and
Sarasins, as appears Verse 29. various expeditions of the armies of the Pope
are signified: Whose custom was to do and return, do and return, to their own
Land. Their doing short, sudden: their returning quick, hasty: both frequent
and various.

Verse 29. At the time appointed] Which I take to be the year 1146. and thence
forward, to 1291.

he shall return and come toward the South] Against the Turks and Sarasins by
various and potent Expeditions.

but it shall not be as the former, even so the latter] Or it shall not be as
at the first, even so at the last. See Deuteronomy. 13.9. Dan. 8.3. Isai. 24.2. Genesis
18.25. Deuteronomy. 1.17. and so it came to pass. From the foresaid time forward, God
blasted these latter Expeditions, even until the Kingdom of Jerusalem was lost,
and the Christian forces utterly expelled.

Sect. 10. The particular Description of the second War of Antichrist, against
the Waldenses and the Albingenses.
VErse 30. And the inhabitants of the waste places of Kittim] Kittim is Italy,
or rather more generally the Countries of Europe. Gras. de Antie. p. 457.
And (...) not (...) does never signify ships, but properly the Inhabitants of
waste, desert, or thirsty places, Isai. 13.21. and 34.14. with Luke 11.24.
Isal. 23.13. and the word is applied to the Saints, Psa. 72.9. and 74.13. These
are the Waldenses, that inhabited the waste and desert places, whereabout they
rose at first, and wherein they retired themselves to escape the rage of
Antichrist: The Alps and Pirenean Mountains were their habitation. They were
hidden also in the Wilderness spiritually, Apoc. Morn. Mist. Iniq. p. 327.328.
12.6, 14. and 17.3.

shall come against him] By the spiritnal sword, from the year 1160. by the
material sword also, from the year 1209.

therefore he shall be sore grieved] So signifies (...), from the root (...),
and it notes excess or an extreme degree of sorrow, such as vexes inwardly,
and bewrays it self by dejection of countenance, Psalm. 109.16. Prove. 15.13.
such as consumes the body, and causes the flesh to pine away, Prove. 17.22.
such as is desperate and intolerable, Prove. 18.14. And such was the sorrow of
Antichrist for the unprosperous success: and the greatness of his sorrow is
signified for two causes, his unprosperous success against the Turks and
Sarasins, Verse 29. and the rising of the Waldenses, Verse 30. Usser de sue
Eccles. page 261.
And for the former cause Pope Lucius and Urban died for grief, neither could
the latter less afflict him.

and shall return] That is, from the Turkish war; for he immediately converted
his forces from the Turks and Sarasins; upon the Waldenses: And the duplicity
of his war is employed in that he is said to do by course, going and returning
from the one unto the other.

and have indignation against the Holy Covenant] An indignation furious and
tending to destruction, so (...) Zeph. 3.8. Isa. 30.27. Cumres ex animi
sententia non succederet, Cont. 13. cap. 2. p. 12. l. 1.
(says one) Papa indignatus, alterum gladium pro suo more vibrat. First, his
heart was only against the Holy Covenant, Verse 28. The Waldenses arising in
defense thereof, his desire strikes down into deep sorrow, Verse 30. Lastly,
hope of victory coming on, his deep sorrow ascends upward into a furious
indignation: His indignation is vented on the Waldenses, by a destroying war,
but properly (as it is here said) against the Holy Covenant in them.

and he shall do and return] The manner of the war of his Soldiers of the
Cross is described, as before against the Turks: Their various and frequent
expeditions, with short dispatch and quick returnings. See Hist. Albin. page 2.
This war began in the year 1209. By sundry expeditions the holy people were
cruelly destroyed, until the year 1^18, when they recovered themselves, and
prevailed: Neither could the Pope any more by force prevail against them. At
length by deceitful and fraudulent devises, in the year 1229, he oppressed them
utterly, and scattered the remainders of them, and being scattered he
endeavored to consume them by persecutions. And this is the second means
whereby Antichrist came unto the perfection of his Kingdom, as it may be proved
by two Arguments. First, because of those three means Chap. 8.9, 10, 11. the
first of them whereby Antichrist grew up unto the Mahometans, is set
immediately before this Verse: But the third means whereby he grew up to the
Prince of the host of Heaven, by taking away the daily sacrifice, is set
immediately after, to wit Verse 31. and therefore the second of those means,
whereby he grew up to the army or host it self, to wit the Waldenses and
Albingenses, is put between. But it is necessary that it should be interposed
in this Verse 30. and expressed in the words before described, or else it must
needs be altogether omitted. The second reason is, because his indignation
arising against the holy Covenant, by the occasion of the Insurrection of the
Albingenses inhabiting the deserts, and declared by doing and returning, as
before it has been said in the description of the war against the Mahometans
Verse 28. must properly and naturally be expounded of the war and persecutions
intended against the Albingenses.

and he shall have respect to them that forsake the holy Covenant.] So (...) is
expounded with (...) following Verse 37. These that forsake the holy Covenant,
are the Antichristian apostates, the Princes and people of the West, as also
the Princes of the Albingenses, which had revaulted from their Faith: Whom
Antichrist (the Albingenses being now oppressed in the year 1229.) forced to
take utterly away the daily Sacrifice, to wit, by a fuller and more perfect
apostasy, as it is declared in the words following.

Verse 31. And arms shall stand for him,] That is, the Emperors, Kings and
Princes of the Christian world shall stand for Antichrist or on his side: at
his instigation falling into a more full and absolute apostasy.

and they shall pollute the sanctuary, the strong hold] That is, the Temples or
places of worship.

and they shall take away the daily sacrifice,] That is, the true doctrine, and
worship instituted by Christ.

and shall set up the abomination making desolate.] That is, Antichristian
idolatries and superstitions, corrupt doctrine and unlawful worship. The same
which was begun from the beginning of the 1290 days, Dan. 12.11. Now the
Albingenses being oppressed was brought unto perfection; as it is expressly
declared in the History of the Waldenses and Albingenses. Hist. Albing. boak 2.
chap. 7. at the year 1229.

Verse. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall he corrupt by
flatteries:] Or, he shall cause them to play the hypocrites, by reason of
flatteries, To wit, by reason of the deceiveablenesse of iniquity, 2 These.
2.10. Or, by the enticements of riches, pleasures and honors, and by the baits
of liberty and immunity, he shall draw them to hypocrisy, and unto consent in
Apostatical Religion.

but the people that do know their God, shall prevail and do great things.] For
the Waldenses themselves being scattered abroad, by little and little
increased, propagating the Gospel; and a little after, Wickcliff and his
followers arose, and the Hussites in Bohemia, restoring the doctrine of the
Waldenses, and both by the Word and War prevailing and doing great things.

Verse 33. And they that understand among the people, shall instruct many] By
converting many out of Antichristianism; which was done especially since the
standing up of Luther, to wit, in Germany, Helvetia, Swedeland, Denmark,
France, Low Countries, England and Scotland.

yet they shall fall by the sword, and by the flame, by captivity, and by spoil
for certain dayes] So (...) without (...) and so in most of the foresaid
Countries, the Saints oppressed for a time with short afflictions, did suddenly
arise triumphing into a state of liberty and security; which is so clear and
commonly known, that it has no need of farther Declaration out of History.

Verse 34. Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help]
That is, with a help little in its own nature, infirm and despicable in the eye
of flesh. So it came to pass in Germany, France, Flanders, England and
Scotland, as appears out of Histories. The Reformers in Germany helped by
weak means, arose at last in the year 1555. In England they arose in the year
1558. the next year in Scotland; and a little after in France, and the
Low Countries, they arose also from weak beginnings, and by mean strength,
after short gusts of persecution.

but many shall cleave to them by flatteries.] That is, many profane persons
and hypocrites, and many false brethren of the faction of Antichrist, shall
adjoyn themselves unto the reformed Saints coming out of the mystical Egypt and
spiritual Babylon: as a mixed company went forth with the Jews out of Egypt
temporal, Exodus 12.38. And as in the return out of Babylon temporal many were
adjoined, that married strange wives, whose children spoke partly the Language
of the Jews, and partly the Language of Ashdod; also many that had secret
intelligence with the enemies, and favored traitourously their designs. Now
by reason of the Conjunction of such persons, the Holy Ghost seems to
intimate, that the Reformed Church in its first and imperfect state should be
in part impure: So that the sound brethren should need purgation by affliction,
and the false brethren should come to be purged out and separated by judgment,
after that the Church should be overgrown with briars and thorns by reason of
the long continuance and prevailing of them, which is also expressly declared
in the next Verse.

Verse 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall, to refine among them,
and to purge, and to make white,] The end of their afflictions is signified,
the purification of them in manners and doctrine.

even to the time of the end, because it is yet for a time appointed.] The
affliction and fall of them, and their purgation thereby, has hit herto
continued by several kinds and degrees and gusts of persecution: The last part
thereof shall be the three days and half, and there withal shall expire the
one thousand two hundred and ninety days of Antichrist: And this is the time
of the end here spoken off. See Verse 40.

Sect. 11. The controversal part upon Verse 36. and downward.
The opinion of. Junius and others is oppugned, holding that it is Antiochus
Epiphanes, whose Description is continued from Verse 36. to the end.
GRaserus and Master Brightman confute this opinion by sundry Arguments. He
that desires a larger discourse, let him read Graserus himself. In the mean
time, from the said Author, I will transcribe these following Arguments, with
a little addition.

1. That phrase Verse. 36. he shall do what him lists, is usually applied to
irresistible and uncontrollable Monarchs, Verse 3, 16. Chap. 8.4. and cannot be
applied to Antiochus, over whom the Romans were so imperious, that at the
threatening look and command of the Ambassador Popilius, he was forced to
retire out of Egypt, and leave his prey. Add to this, that he was inwrapped
with many difficulties at home.

2. Neither will that phrase agree unto him, Verse 37. He shall not regard the
god of his fathers. For Antiochus did not only worship or seem at least to
worship Jupiter Olympius and Xenius, which were the gods of his fathers: but
also ordained games for the honor of Liber pater and Hercules himself, 2
Maccab. 6.1, 7. He endeavored also to thrust upon the Jews the Idols of
Grecia, and cruelly avenged their contempt. Piscater alleges on the
contrary, 1 Macc. 1.43. But there it is not said that he left his own gods, the
gods of his fathers: But rather the contrary, that he commanded other people,
together with himself, to worship the same gods of his fathers, which he
himself did.

3. Neither will that phrase agree unto him, Verse 37. neither shall he regard
the desire of women, women being here of the plural number: A disregard of the
desire of women in general is understood: which cannot agree to Antiochus, who
was an husband, had children, was careful of them, 1 Mac. 6.2. 2 Mac. 9.25.
Josephus, l. 12. c. 14. Piscator says, This phrase agrees to Antiochus,
because he would not permit his own Wives (whereof one served the god of
Israel) to worship any other god save Jupiter Olympius. But be it so: How is
this among the marvelous things, Verse 36* It is a more common note then that
it may serve to characterize him. It might have been as well said He did not
regard the desire of men, or the desire of his subjects. Again, If one of his
Wives did serve the god of Israel only, why is it said The desire of women in
the plural number? And why (...) of women, and not rather (...) of his wife?
And it is not likely, that the worship of Jupiter did cross the desire of his
heathen wives? Besides, what matter of moment was it to the Church, to know how
Antiochus did carry himself toward his wives? Lastly, it is women in general,
whose desire the King here spoken of, is said to disregard.

4. Neither will that agree unto him, verse. 37. Neither shall be regard any
god, but he shall magnify himself above all. How can this agree unto
Antiochus, who by one question and command of Popilius, was expelled out of
Egypt; whom also the Maccabees resisted unto his face, and brought unto despair.

5. Neither that, verse. 38. He shall honor a god, whom his Fathers knew not,
and a strange god, verse. 39. Junius will have this strange god to be the Idol
of the Samaritans, which Antiochus called Jupiter Xenius, 2 Mac. 6.2. But
Jupiter Xenius was indeed an Idol of strangers, but no strange god, Gras. de
Antic. p. 252. Joseph. Antiq. l. 12 c. 7. 2 Mac. 6.
being most known unto Antiochus his Fathers. For Seleucus Nicanor sacrificed
unto Jupiter, Paus. l. 1. And Antiochus himself promoted the worship of Jupiter
by all possible means, avenged the contempt and neglect of him.

6. How did he cause men to rule over many, and divide the land for gain? verse.
39. seeing he possessed little more then the Kingdom of Syria: and if he
possessed any other for a time, he was from thence cast out again; being
repulsed from Egypt, and likewise from Persia, and his men overthrown and cast
out of Judea by Judas Maccabeus and his brother. 1 Mac. 6.


7. So great, so formidable, and so victorious an expedition as is described,
verse. 40. cannot be attributed unto Antiochus Epiphanes; no History makes
mention thereof. The Patrons of this Opinion will have it to be the third
Expedition of Antiochus into Egypt; proving a third from verse. 29. but it shall
not be as the former, or as the latter: whereas there is nothing spoken of
Antiochus, as has been showed; and the Particle Vau is used only by a
Pleonasme, to this effect, That the latter Expedition should not be successful
as the former. So the phrase is used, Isa. 24.2. Genesis 18.25. Deuteronomy. 1.27. And
whereas Junius assigns this third Expedition to Antiochus, in the last year
of his Reign save one, against Ptolemaeus Philometor King of Egypt, it cannot
be for these Reasons.

First, because his ground is false; For because that Flor^s and Zonaras do
say, That Ptolemaeus expelled his brother Physcon; therefore Junius imagines,
that Antiochus favored Physcon, and thereupon took occasion of a third
Expedition into Egypt: whereas the foresaid Authors do mention no such thing.
And the consequence is not probable: for as much as the contrary would rather
follow thus, The Brethren in Egypt were at variance, therefore they feared not
Antiochus, as being employed otherwise. For Zonaras affirms, That in the
second Expedition of Antiochus, they perceiving his craft, were reconciled.

Secondly, Antiochus could not think of such a third Expedition, 1 Mac. 6. 2
Mac. 3.29.
in the last year of his Reign save one: By reason of the Rebellion of the
Jews, and Tumults beyond Euphrates, and his Treasury exhausted, and the danger
of provoking the Romans, by one question of whose Ambassador he had been lately
expelled out of Egypt.

Thirdly, if he in a third Expedition subdued Egypt, Lybia, Ethiopia, verse. 42,
43. by so strange and so victorious an inundation, as is here described; why
was he then so cast down in Babylon, at the hearing of the successes of the
Jews? 1 Mac. 6, 7, 8. The greatness of such fortune would have swallowed up so
small a discomfort.

Fourthly, 1 Mac. 3.32. 34, 39. and 4.35. Hist. An. p. 307, etc.
in the last year of his Reign save one, he went into Persia with half his
Forces: another part committed to Lysias, to oppose the Jews therewith, by whom
he was also overcome. Of his Egyptian affairs, not a word in History.

Fifthly, the Holy Ghost speaks here of the taking of Egypt, as in the way
and in the passage only.

Sixthly, the King of the South is first said to oppose the King of the North:
whereas Antiochus was not provoked by the King of Egypt, verse. 40.

Seventhly, Justine, l. 34. says, That Antiochus, after he was cast out of
Egypt by Popilius, in his second Expedition returning into his Kingdom, there
dyed, leaving a young Son behind him. Of a third Expedition neither speaks
Justine one word, but rather contradicts it, as in the words alleged.
Neither is a third mentioned by Josephus, Livy, Florus, the Authors of the
Books of Maecabees, who yet expressly name his second Expedition, 2 Mac. 5.1.
The description of Daniel argues a subduing of many and mighty Nations. Could
all these Historians omit so notable an Expedition in the History of Antiochus,
if any such had been?

Eighthly, it is not likely, that Daniel should end this prophecy in Antiochus;
seeing the calamities of the very Jewish Nation ended not with him. Neither can
the foresaid Expedition be attributed to the successors of Antiochus, being
meaner then he.

Ninthly, how did Antiochus subdue all other Nations and countries about Judea,
save only Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon? As if those
three were also his Enemies, whereas they were his helpers.

Tenthly, this being the greatest and most noble Prophecy in Daniel, it is
reason that it should comprehend as much as the former Visions did; which ended
in the Roman Empire and Antichrist: And therefore this cannot end in Antiochus
Epiphanes.

Lastly, it cannot end in Antiochus and the Grecian Empire, because it is
extended to the standing up of Christ in the last time, and the Resurrection of
the dead, cap. 12.1, 2, 3, 13.

Sect. 12. The second Exposition of the same part, from V. 36. downward,
according to the Opinion of Mr. Brightman.
Upon these grounds Gratserus and Mr. Brightman renouncing the former
exposition, turn themselves another way; Mr. Brightman by the King spoken of,
v. 36. understands the Roman Empire in general, including first the heathen
Emperors to v. 40. their actions about the Jewish Church, and in honor to the
true God. Then v. 40. he says, the ruin of the Empire is described; first, by
the wars of the Sarasins, under the title of King of the South; then by the
wars of the Turks, under the title of King of the North. Against which
Exposition I propound these difficulties following:

First, how did the Roman Empire before Antichrist, disregard the desire of
women? v. 37. Answer is made, Because the Emperors children were not made
Successors in the Empire, according to the desire of their mothers; Successors
being promiscuously chosen, according to the pleasure of the Soldiers. But it
is expressly said, that The King shall not regard the desire of women, v. 36,
37. which, if it be spoken of the Roman Empire, must especially respect the
Emperor thereof. But how can it be imagined, that the Roman Emperor should not
be willing, and desire to have his children Successors in the Empire? Though
the Soldiers did otherwise, what is this to the desire of the King? And why
should the preferment of children in the Kingdom, be called in so general and
remote a description, The desire of women? and why the desire of women rather
then the desire of men? and of the children themselves?

Secondly, whereas it is said, that He shall honor the god of strong holds,
and the god which his fathers knew not; it is thought, that in these words one
only God is signified, and this the true God of Israel: But the true God it
cannot be, because this King is said to honor this God; but contrarily, to
advance himself, and speak great things against the true God, which is the God
of gods, verse. 36. cap. 7.25. cap. 8.25.

Thirdly, if these victorious wars and conquests, described v. 40. should be
the Turkish wars, and no more said of the Roman Empire, then the Prophecy of
the Roman Empire should be begun and not ended, Antichrist not mentioned; the
end of the Turk proposed, not of the Roman Empire; and this Prophecy should be
unproportionable to all other which speak especially of Antichrist, and of his
end.

Sect. 13. That the King, whose Wars are described v. 40. is Antichrist, I
prove by these Arguments following.
1. BEcause the History of Antichrist being so largely set down before, it is
consonant that his end should also be set down, the causes, manner,
forerunners of it; which would not be, unless the Expeditions following
belonged unto Antichrist.

2. The Expeditions following, are in revenge of the push inferred by the King
of the South; and therefore they belong to him that was pushed at by him, which
is Antichrist, immediately spoken of before.

3. The Author of these Expeditions, is the King of the North; and the King of
the North before mentioned, is Antichrist, as appears by comparing v 15.20,
21, 25, 36. c. 8.9.

4. It is not probable, that it should be said, that the King of the South
should push at Antichrist, and no more added of his war, a diversion following
to the History of the Turks.

5. The Expeditions here spoken of, are in the time of the end, v. 40. when the
standing up of Michael is at hand, c. 12.11. and what are those famous wars in
the time of the end, those great and last attempts against the Church, v. 44,
etc. spoken of in other Prophecies, but those that are attributed to Antichrist?

6. The fall and last wars of Antichrist, are more notable and more needful to
be known, then the wars and downfall of any other King; and therefore it is not
likely that the last war and downfall of another King, should be here
described, and Antichrists pretermitted.

7. Daniel in all his other Visions and Prophecies, does exactly and accurately
set down the fall of Antichrist, c. 2. c. 7. c. 8. c. 9. and therefore it is
not likely, that in this Prophecy, being the largest and exactest of all the
rest, he would conceal it; which yet he should conceal, if these Expeditions
were not his.

8. His end, verse. 45. and the end of his wonders, c. 12.5. is at the end of a
time, two times and a half, c. 12.5, 7. which is the term of Antichrist his
reign, as appears, c. 7.25. with Apoc. 12.14. and 13.5, 6.

Sect. 14. The other part, containing the Exposition of v. 36. and downward, to
the end of the Chapter.
FRom v. 36. to v. 41. Graserus has expounded this Prophecy of Antichrist,
with whom I do consent for the greatest part. But afterward he turns to
Allegories, far fetched, remote and unnatural to this Prophecy of Daniel. For
in all the Prophecy foregoing no such course has been observed: But I
conceive, there will be no need to fly to such uncouth Interpretations, for
the clearing of the Prophecy; as shall appear in the Process of the Exposition.

Of the Characters of Antichrist.
Verse. 36. And the King] that is, Antichrist spoken of before.

shall do what him list] arrogating power above Law, contrary to Law, beyond
Law, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 3, 7. Dan. 7.25.

and shall exalt himself, and magnify himself] contrary to Christ, who humbled
himself, Phil. 2.7, 8.

above every god] that is, all that is called god, Kings and Magistrates, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Joh. 10.35. Psalm. 82.6.

and he shall speak] that is, Magistrally, Doctorally, as an independent
Lawmakers in things spiritual.

mavelous things] That is, Errors of an high nature, against the Offices and
Worship of the Son of God, with great pride and presumption, and in a
mavelous strain of Scholasticall profundity. See c. 7, 8, 25. c. 8.23, 24,
25. 2 Pet. 2.8. Jude 16. Apoc. 13.5. 1 Timothy 4.5.

against the God of Gods] Christ, Michael the Prince of Princes, c. 12.1. and
8.11, 25. Apoc. 1.5. and 17.14. Psa. 89.27. How this is done, is declared,
Verse 31, 37; 38, 39. c. 8.11, 12. and 7.25. by nullifying his offices,
removing his Laws, Worship, setting up his own devices and abominations.

and shall prosper] As c. 8.11, 12, 24. whereby is noted a continuation with
prosperous success, in this his insolent presumption.

until the indignation be accomplished] That is, until the end of Antichrist
his reign and persecution, Verse 30. with c. 12.7.

for an accurate determination is made.] To the end of a time, two times and
half, 1260. days, 42. months, c. 12.7, 11, 12. and 7.25. Apoc. 11.2. and 3.
and 12.6, 14. and 13.5, 6. See Isa. 10.22, 23. and 28.22. Dan. 9.27.

Verse 37. Neither shall he regard the God of his fathers] That is, he shall
not regard Christ, regarded by the Apostles, in the way of his Ordinances: but
he shall not regard him, that is, not deny him absolutely, but slight him, in
changing his Ordinances at his own plaesure.

nor the desire of women] Heb. (...) the lawful desire of women, that is,
marriage, which he regards not; that is, lightly esteems in all, forbids to
the Clergy, as it is foretold, 1 Timothy 4.3.

nor regard any god] For he advances himself above the Civil Magistrate,
despising Government, 2 Pet. 2.10.

For he shall magnify himself above all.] above all orders and kinds of
Government; First Ecclesiastical, for he shall not regard the god of his
fathers. Secondly, Oeconomicall, for he shall not regard the lawful desire of
women. Thirdly Political, for he shall not regard any god. And in all these he
regards not the god of his fathers, because his fathers the Apostles regarded
and preached the offices of Christ unto the world, Apoc. 1.5. the lawful use
of Marriage, Heb. 13.4. and obedience to the Magistrate, Romans 13.1.

Verse 38. But in his place] That is, the place of Christ.

he shall honor the god of Temples] so (...), as Verse. 31. that is, the
Saints, to whom the Temples are dedicated, and images set up therein. This god,
Antichrist is said to honor: which is a general word, comprehending all
degrees of religious worship, (...).

and a god whom his fathers knew not] That is, the grand Idol in the Mass, the
breaden god, a god not known or heard off, muchlesse acknowledged by his
Fathers the Apostles. Or else all the Idols of Antichrist in general are
signified hereby: for they were all unknown to his forefathers the Apostles.

shall he honour] bowing, kneeling, cringing, knocking of the breast before it,
yielding divine worship to it, and consecrating to it things of price, as in
the next words.

with gold, and silver, and precious stones, and pleasant things.] For with
these in offerings and ornaments, Antichrist honoreth both the god of Temples
and the breaden god, setting a great part of his divine honor in external
pomp and luster and earthly magnificence. His golden Images, guildings,
coverings of gold, pleasant paintings, consecrated vessels of gold and silver,
vestments and copes set with gold, silver, pearl, adorned with pleasant works,
are abundant witnesses hereof.

Verse 39. And he shall do in the munitions of Temples with a strange God] That
is, with the Idols before declared, which are kept and worshipped in those
muniments or strong holds, to wit, in those strong and stately edifices. The
particle (...) does sometimes signify as much as (...) or in, not only to or
for. But how in those strong holds or Temples he shall do with a strange god,
it seems to be clearly showed, Verse 31. to wit, by polluting the sanctuary
the strong hold, and by taking away out of it the daily sacrifice, and by
setting up therein; namely, In the said sanctuary the strong hold, the
abomination making desolate, which is the strange god here spoken off.

whom he shall acknowledge, he shall increase with glory, and he shall cause
them to rule over many.] That is, whom Antichrist shall see and acknowledge to
be faithful unto him, and defenders of his idolatries, he shall make them to
rule over many both in Church and Common weal. For (to use the words of
Bullinger) he creates and confirms Kings, constituteth Princes, ordains
Bishops, Doctors and Prelates of the Church, neither does he constitute any
other through the world, but such as swear to be for him and his Religion.
Whence, and happily more truly, the said Bullinger translateth the words after
this manner: which whosoever shall acknowledge, even as the Antichristian
Princes and Prelates do, those Antichrist shall increase with honors, and
shall cause them to rule over many.

and he shall divide the land for gain.] For as the same Author adds, lands
of all kinds, Collations, Offices, Prebends, Places of government, and most
ample riches in the Land, he bestows upon that kind of people only: But he
bestows the same as a reward of their faithful service, and yet not
altogether freely, but for gain also, receiving some part of the benefice
bestowed.

Sect. 15. A Repetition of the wars of Antichrist. v. 40.
BY reason of the description of Antichrist, repeated from Verse 36. his wars
here seem also to be repeated: And for this cause also, that by a certain order
and methodicall course, the Prophet might descend to the describing of his
utter destruction.

Verse 40. But in the time of the end, the King of the South shall push at him]
The time of the end in the larger sense is with Daniel that time when
Antichrist began to ascend to a notable increase of his power and Kingdom, as
from the times of Charles the Great, and more fully from the times of
Hildebrand, as it is expressly said, Chap. 8.17. Yet in a stricter sense, the
time of the end is that time wherein the years of Antichrist are finished,
Chap. 11.35.45. The King of the South by an Enallage of the number, signifies
the Mohammedan Kings and Princes, whether of the Sarasins or Turks. The Sarasins
first fought with Antichrist from the year 840, and by little and little, other
causes also together adjoined, inflicted on him his deadly plagues, whereof
mention is made, Ap. 13.3. Machiah. Flor. Hist. That plague or deadly wound was
by little and little healed, the Sarasins being cast out of Italy and Sicily,
and more yet by that expedition into Africa against them in the year 1087.
Sigon. and lastly more perfectly by that great expedition against the Turks and
Sarasins in the East, about the year 1097. The wound was also healed, in the
overthrow of all other enemies, through the successful achievements of Otho
the Great and his followers. Now by those expeditions, and especially by the
last against the Turks and Sarasins in the East, the King of the North, that
is, Antichrist, rushed against the Mahometans like a whirlewind, with Charets
and Horses, and with great fleets or with many ships, and overflowed flowed and
passed through. At length he came into the Holy Land (as they call) or into
Judea, called the pleasant land, many Countries falling under him. He came into
the Holyland, at the last term of his inundation: Seeing that he touched not
the land of Edom, nor the land of Moab, neither the beginning of the children
of Ammon, that is, not so much as the first or outmost borders of them.
Wherefore these, and not the other Countries adjoined, did Antichrist subdue.
Or happily the land of the children of Ammon is called (...) the beginning, in
relation to the land of Moab and the land of Edom: Because among those three
Countries, the land of Ammon did lie next unto the North, as a beginning of the
Countries, first obvious to the Latins coming from the North. So that although
the land of Ammon as a beginning of the other Countries, did first lie open
unto Antichrist, yet it is affirmed that it should escape out of his hands: The
Holy Land only subdued and taken out of the hands of the Infidels, which was
the main thing intended in this expedition:

Furthermore it is added, that Antichrist should not only subdue the Countries,
but also should stretch forth his hand upon them, and pillage them and carry
away the spoils of them, Verse 42, 43. and so indeed he did in the foresaid
expedition. And in this respect, as also in respect of overthrow and slaughter
the land of Egypt did not escape, Verse 42. For in the last proceedings of this
first expedition, to wit, at Ascalon, he had power over the treasures of gold
and silver, and over all the pleasant things of the Egyptians, and of the
Lybians and Ethiopians alse, which are wont to be joined with the Egyptians in
wars, 2 Chro. 12.2, 3. Ezekiel. 30.5. Ier. 40.9. I conceive, that first and great
expedition of Antichrist here only to be described, which was ended or
accomplished in the foresaid victory over the Egyptians. In that last victory
(says Paulus Aemylius) more then a hundred thousand of the Egyptians, and of
other Nations either subject to them or confederate with them, such as the
Lybians and Ethiopians are wont to be, as has been said, are reported to have
been slain. So great prey was taken there as was not taken before, though all
the battles in this war that went before were put together. So (says he) the
Turkish war being ended, the Egyptians being slain, a yoke being put upon the
East, the Nobles returned home full of glory and riches. So before to the same
effect, Verse 26.28.

Verse 44. But tidings shall trouble him from the East] when afterward the
Turks and Sarasins were loosed, having recovered themselves. So Verse 26.

and from the North.] By reason of the insurrection of the Waldenses and
Albingenses, Verse 30. Hence Antichrist grieved and troubled, went forth with
great wrath to destroy many, to wit, of the Waldenses, Verse 24, 30. Chap.
8.24, 25.

Verse. 45. And he shall plant the Tabernacles of his palace between the seas
in the glorious and holy mountain.] Not between two seas, but seas: because in
the Countries bordering on the Mediterranean and Ocean seas, where the Church
was seated, signified by the glorious and holy mountain, he erected his
Kingdom, oppressing the Waldenses, Verse 31, 32. But shortly he shall come to
his end, the years 1260 being expired.

CHAP. 12.
VErse 1. And at that time shall Michael stand up] That is, Christ, Apoc. 12.7.

and it shall be a time of trouble] the time of the sixth seal, seventh
trumpet, seventh vyall, Apoc. 16.18.

and at that time thy people shall be delivered.] For now shall be the Kingdom
of Saints, wherein they shall dwell in safety, their enemies rooted out in the
space of 45 years, Verse 12. and the elect remnant of them converted, Joel 2.32.

Verse 2. Many.] That is, all, Romans 5. or because then many shall rise to life,
and many to shame. Thus the general resurrection is compounded with the last
plague on Antichrist, Verse. 12, 13. Apoc. 11.18.

Sect. 16. Concerning the times or years set down, Apoc. 11. and 12. and 13.
Dan. 7. and 12. etc.
IN this business three things are to be orderly dispatched; First, we must
search out the Characters of the beginning and ending of these years. Secondly,
we must show, that it is possible, needful, yea, required that by the
Characters of their beginning and ending we should search out their
accommodation. Thirdly, I will endeavor to accommodate them by the direction
of their Characters according to the measure of knowledge wherewith the Lord
has hitherto been pleased to enlighten me.

The Characters of their beginning, are these. The beginning of the two
witnesses to prophecy in sackcloth, Apoc. 11.3. the beginning of giving up the
holy City into the hands of the Gentiles or Nations to be trodden under feet,
Apoc. 11.2. The beginning of removing the daily sacrifice; and of secting up
the abomination to make desolate, Dan. 12.11. The beginning of the working of
Antichrist, Apoc. 13.5, 6. Dan. 7.25. and of his rising among the ten horns,
Dan. 7.8. Apoc. 17.12. the fall or casting down of the heathen Dragon, and
beginning of the Dragons flood by way of revenge, and of the woman's being in the
wilderness, and the beginning of subversion of the Christian Emperors, Apoc.
12.5, 6, 8, 13, 14, 15. But in special I urge four Characters of the
beginning of these years, three whereof are set down together, Apoc. 12.13, 14,
15, 16. The first, the utter extinction of the Dragon in the heathen Emperors,
v. 13. The second, the flight of the woman, the Christian Church, into the
wilderness of spiritual and temporal desolation, v. 14. The third, the
rising of the Flood of the Northern Barbarians, v. 15. The fourth, the
beginning of Antichristian Idolatry.

The Characters of their ending, are these: To accomplish to scatter the power
of the holy people, Dan. 12.7. An end of Antichrists reign, in changing the
Laws, and wearing out the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7.25. Apoc. 13.5, 6.
The rising of the Church from under the persecutions of the beast Apoc. 11.3,
7, 11. The beginning of the Kingdom of the Saints, and of new Jerusalem, Dan.
7.25, 26. Apoc. 11.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. The ceasing of the conculcation of the
holy city, Ap. 11.2. The ceasing of the Two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth,
Apoc. 11.3. The ceasing of the desolation of the Church, Dan. 12.11. and of the
Woman's hiding in the wilderness, Apoc. 12.6, 14. The bringing in of
everlasting righteousness, defaecation and purgation of the Saints, Dan. 9.24.
And concerning the time of the end of forty five years after the foresaid
years, it is said, Dan. 12.13. But go thou thy way till the end be; for thou
shall rest, and stand up in thy lot at the end of the days.

I come now to the second point intended; to show that it is possible,
needful, yea required, that by these Characters we should search out the
accommodation of the years. But here a great difficulty does arise, which in
the first place must be removed. For our Savior in his answer to the Apostles,
asking the time of the restoring of Israel, says, that It was not for them to
know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own hands, Act.
1.6, 7. Whereby he seems to signify, that the exact time and year of the
restoring of Israel, that is, of the beginning of the Kingdom of the Saints,
and destruction of Antichrist, is hidden and unknown, and not to be made
manifest to man. If this be so, then either the foresaid years are not
determined for the bringing in of this effect, contrary to that which has been
showed: or else they are so at least proposed in Scripture, that yet they shall
never be searched out, nor known by man, until the end is fully come. Again,
Matthew 24.36. our Savior having spoken of the last time, wherein the Enemy
shall be destroyed, and the Kingdom of the Saints arise, verse 29, 33.
subjoyneth, But of that day and hour knows no man, no, not the Angels of
Heaven, but my Father only. Which is also farther amplified and confirmed by
that which follows, v. 37. For as the days of Noah, so shall also the coming
of the Son of man be: For as in the days before the Flood, they did eat and
drink, etc. and knew nothing, till the Flood came and swept them all away; so
shall also the coming of the Son of man be: Which the Apostle Paul confirms
also, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1, 2, 3. But of the times and seasons (Brethren) ye need not
that I write unto you: For you your selves know perfectly, that the day of the
Lord shall come as a thief in the night; For when they shall say Peace and
safety; then shall come upon them sudden destruction. Whereunto may be added
that which is said of the last afflictions of the Church, Psalm 74.9. We see
not our signs, there is not one Prophet more, nor any with us that knows how
long. Lastly, the uncertainty of the time is made by Christ an argument to stir
us up to watchfulness, Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of
man comes at an hour when ye think not. So Mark 13. verse 35. Watch ye
therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house comes, at Even, or at
Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or at the Morning, lest coming suddenly, he
find you sleeping. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, Watch. So Matthew
24.42. Wake therefore, for ye know not what hour your Master will come.

For answer unto these Scriptures, I say as follows; First to Act. 1.6, 7.
that it was not for the Apostles or any of that age, to know the time of the
restoring of Israel; yet nevertheless it is for them to know it that live in
the last age. The Father also has reserved it in his own power, howbeit in
respect only of superior ages, from which he purposed to conceal it; not in
respect of the last age, whereunto he purposed to reveal it. So in like manner,
it was not for Daniel to search and understand the time, two times and a half
at the end whereof the Kingdom must begin to be set up; howbeit these times are
to be unsealed to the last age, about the time of the end, as it is expressly
said, Dan. 12.7, 8, 9, 10. Unto that, Mat. 24.36. and the other passages
annexed, I answer two ways; First, as for the wicked, the day, the hour, the
time, the year, is to be hidden from their foreknowledge. And this our Savior
intends, when he compares the times of Noah, and when he says, that day
should come upon them as a snare, and the like. See 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Mat. 24.37,
39. 1 Thessalonians. 5.1, 2, 3. For Noah did foreknow the year of the Flood, though the
wicked did not, Genesis 6.3. and so in the last times the Saints shall understand,
when none of the wicked shall understand, Dan. 12.10. Secondly, as concerning
the Saints, our Savior does not simply and absolutely deny unto them the
foreknowledge of the time; for he knew that the time was to be revealed to his
Saints, near unto the end, Dan. 12.4, 10. But he denies it only to the Saints
present, and far distant from the end; to whom it was to be unknown, Dan. 12.4,
9, 10. And for this end, lest the long distance should cause security;
therefore our Savior does accordingly propose the time, as for the present
hidden, and makes use also of the end for which it was hidden, by dehorting
from security, and stirring up to watchfulness. But as for the Saints of the
last age, the foreknowledge of the end cannot occasion unto them security, to
whom it is not far off, but rather watchfulness, because it is near. And
therefore as in the time of Christ, the Saints were to be stirred up to
watchfulness, because the time of the end was unknown: so now they are to be
stirred up to watchfulness, because the time of the end is known. Being then
far off; and therefore if known, apt to hinder watchfulnes: Now near; and
therefore by knowledge apt to cause it.

Unto Psalm. 74.9. first it may be questioned, Of what time the Psalmist
speaks. Secondly, If he speaks of the last time; then either of those, unto
whom the light of the Prophesies has not yet fully shined: or in comparison
with precedent times, when they had Prophets extraordinarily and immediately
sent unto them: whereas now they should have none such, but only mediate and
ordinary teachers, delivering conjecturall interpretations of numbers
mystically involved. Thirdly, the complaint may be, not of the want of
knowledge simply, but of the loss and great slaughter of the teachers, by whom
knowledge of the times was manifested.

Lastly, although the uncertainty of the time is made by Christ an argument to
stir us up to watchfulness, yet this hinders not, but that the year of the
end or at least the propinquity may be known to the Saints in the last age. For
the time was absolutely uncertain to the present age wherein Christ spoke; and
therefore unto it, the absolute uncertainty of the end might and ought to be
applied, as a provocation and incentive unto watchfulness.

Sect. 17. Arguments to prove, that the foresaid years are possible and ought
to be searched.
FIrst, the foresaid years are possible and ought to be searched, because
revealed in the word Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, Romans 15.4. Whatsoever
things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through
patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.

Secondly, because those years are parts of that prophecy, and of those things
to come, which God the Father gave unto his Son, to send and show unto his
servants, Apoc. 1.1. Christ did not send to show the matter without the sense:
but that it should be understood: therefore we must search to understand.

Thirdly, because it is said of all the prophecy, and consequently of the
times therein contained, blessed is he that reads, and they that hear this
words of this prophecy, Apoc. 1.3. And it is not a livelesse reading and
hearing without understanding, which is here spoken of: For such a reading
makes not blessed, Acts 8.30. Besides, it is such a reading as may be the rule
of practice, and therefore it is added, and keep those things that are written
therein, and consequently it must be with understanding.

Fourthly, to come near, our Savior alleging the prophecy of Daniel,
concerning the abomination of desolation, whereby the foresaid times are
declared and characterized, Dan. 11.31. c. 12.11. adds with all (...), let
him that reads understand. The same speech is applied to the 70 weeks of
years, which determine the same events with the years above mentioned: know
therefore and understand, Dan. 9.24.

Fifthly, as the time of the end is nearer at hand, so the prophecy, and
consequently the times included are to be unsealed, Dan. 12.14. Apoc. 22.10.
and 1, 3.

Sixthly, I argue expressly from Dan. 12. where the time, two times and half
being proposed, Verse 7. and Daniel professing he understood not, Verse 8. an
answer is given, Verse 9. that the words were sealed up till the time of the
end, that is, until the last time immediately before the end, as the phrase is
used, Apoc. 11.7. Therefore in the time immediately before the end, those words
are to be unsealed, which is farther proved by Verse 10. Many shall be tried,
made white, and purified, but none of the wicked shall understand, but the wise
shall understand. And it is farther confirmed by the Verse following, where
what they should understand at that time in particular, is more fully signified
and from the time (says the Angel) that the daily sacrifice shall be taken
away, and the abomination making desolate set up, shall be 1290 days.

Seventhly, I argue from the end intended in setting down these years, which
was (as learned Napier speaks) to prevent security, and move unto repentance.
The knowledge of the end (says he) has been concealed from former ages, to
prevent security: but it is to be revealed to the last age, to move unto
repentance. For these ends then the foresaid years are now to be searched, and
understood, and to sustain us also in the time of the end, the foresaid years
are to be unsealed, Dan. 12.4. And so our Savior expressly subjoyneth, Mat.
24.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. behold I have told you all before. For to know that it
must be so in such a time, and how short the affliction shall be, will be a
stay and comfort to our faith, that it faint not, Mat. 24.22. Psalm. 74.9.

Sect. 18. The conclusion, Chap. 12. verse. 4.
VErse 4. But thou O Daniel, shut up these words and seal the book even to the
time of the end] Therefore these mysteries were to be hidden from the ages
before the time of the end, and in the time of the end only to be revealed.

many shall run to and fro and knowledge shall be increased.] That is, by
meditation searching to and fro to find out the mysteries: Or, by travailing to
and fro, as the Waldenses, to and learn propagate the truth, knowledge shall be
multiplied on the earth in the last time.

Verse 5. Behold two others.] These seem to be the types of the two witnesses,
asking of Christ, who is that man clothed with fine linen; the knowledge of
these mysteries in the last time to be revealed.

Verse 7. After a time, two times and half a time] a time is a year, Dan.
4.20. which in prophetical use contains 360. days: whence three times and
an half do contain thrice 360. days, and also one half part thereof, that is,
days or in use prophetical years, 1260. as it is expressly declared, Apoc.
12.6, 14.

and when he shall accomplish to scatter the power of the holy people, all these
things shall be finished.] This is, to show that the end of Antichristian
persecution shall be at the end of the 1260 years.

Verse 9. And he said, go thy way Daniel: for the words are closed up and
sealed till the time of the end.] Therefore the foresaid mysteries, especially
those about the times of Antichrist, God intended to conceal and hide for a
certain time, and only to reveal the same in the last time. And unto this place
our Savior seems to have respect when he says, That no man knows the day
and hour, not so much as the Angels of heaven, but the Father only, Mat. 24.15,
36. and when he says, It is not for you to know the times, which the Father
has put in his own power, Act. 1.7. wherefore Christ exhorted the present age,
that they would be watchful, because they knew not the time of the end:
forasmuch as it was to be hidden from the former ages, least the long distance
of the time being known, should hinder the duty of watchfulness. But in the
time of the end, whereof see Chap. 11.40. it seems that it is to be revealed:
Not unto the world, on whom the end shall come as a thief in the night,
especially the last part of the last time: but unto the Saints, which by the
propinquity of the time shall be stirred up to watchfulness. Napier says a
little otherwise, affirming that our Lord speaking of the hiding of the last
time, speaks of the day properly so called, not of the year, which he says
is to be revealed. But the Author of the key Apocalypticall, does insinuate
upon chap. 5. that the mystery of the times was not revealed to our Lord
himself as man, before his Ascension; and that therefore he spoke thereof, as
of a thing to be unknown: But he adds, that after his glorification he
received of the Father the knowledge of this mystery, and revealed it by his
servant John unto the Church. Let the Reader consider all, and hold that which
is most right.

Verse 10. Many shall be purified, made white and tried] to wit, many of the
witnesses of truth, by the persecutions of Antichrist, Chap. 11.35.

but the wicked shall do wickedly, and none of the wicked shall understand, but
the wise shall understand.] For they which have not received the truth with
love, shall think the Antichristian lies to be real truths, 2 These. 2. Dan.
11.32. and in the time of the end they shall be secure as in the days of Noah,
Mat. 24. but the witnesses of truth and the reformed Saints shall understand
the mystery of Antichrist, and the time of the end also.

Verse 11. And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and
the abomination of desolation set up.] That is, from the time when first the
true Doctrine and worship instituted by the Son of God shall begin to be
removed, and Heresle and Idolatry shall begin to be solemnly set up in the
Christian Church, making it desolate spiritually and temporally.

shall be 1290 days.] by 30 days this number exceeds the 1260. whereof,
Verse 7. and therefore they must begin 30 years before the same.

Verse 12. Blessed is he that waits and comes to the 1335 days.] In this
space of 45 years, there will be the spring of the glorious state of New-
Jerusalem: the Summer thereof shall follow after in the heavenly and immutable
condition. The resurrection of Daniel, and consequently of all the dead, is
described in the next verse. So v. 2. Apoc. 11.18. and 20.11, 12.

Sect. 19. Concerning the numbers of the years.
THere are two ways to accommodate the years. I will propose both, and leave
the Reader to determine.

The first way.
Either the very dark and weak beginning of the signs mentioned, do set the
term of beginning to the years: or else the more evident, open and perfect
state thereof. The weak and dark beginning of the signs, was before the year
400. the more evident, open and perfect state thereof, about the year 600. I
know no other way but these two. For the former way these Arguments do stand.

1. Immediately after the rising under Constantine, the persecution of the
Dragon forced the woman into her place in the Wilderness, which must especially
be the Arrian persecution, and she came to her place in the state of a
Wilderness Spiritual through Arrianisme, especially about the year 360. and
afterward through Antichristianisme, especially from about the year 390; and
therefore here we may six the beginning of the time, two times and half,
according to Apoc. 12.13, 14.

2. The years begun at the time, when the true Doctrine and Worship is solemnly
taken away, and Heresy and Idolatry making the Church a Wilderness set up,
Baron. ad an. 359. number. 110. and ad annum 360. number. 1.
Dan. 12.11. This was done by Arrianisme about the year 360. Baron. annal.
Gildas Hist. the seeds of Antichrist and Antichristianisme then also hiddenly
concurring. The Church was in the way of flight and separation gradually
before, but came not through Arrianisme to her place in the state of a
Wilderness until this time, as has been said: and therefore here may fitly be
the beginning of the greater Number, to wit, 1290. But about the year 390, the
Doctrine and Worship was solemnly corrupted by Antichrist, and
Antichristianisme set up, and Idolatry then and not before had its beginnings:
and therefore here may fitly be the beginning of the lesser Number, to wit, the
years 1260 or time, two times and half. Syricius seems to have bin the first
Antichrist, signified by the Star that fell from Heaven, Apoc. 8.10. from
whence (as it is most probable) the decretall Epistles first began, who
arrogated and made great way for Dominion over all Churches, Mornae. Mist. page
50, 51. Tit. cult. sanct. n. 7. and 10. p. 90, 93. Tit. Imago. p. 78.
and first established the Law of an unmarried estate among the Clergy, which
is the Character of Antichrist and Antichristianisme, Dan. 11.37. and brought
in the commemoration of Saints into the office of the Church after the manner
of the Heathen Worship, and thereby encouraged the invocation of Saints, which
together with other Idolatry, began to be in use between the year 380. and 400.
as Mr. Perkins in his Problems has clearly showed. Now if Idolatry came in
between 380. and 400. then about 390. And Syricius did all this about the year
390. I make little matter, that I cannot set down the precise year thereof
exactly, seeing Syricius began but about five years before to be in the seat of
the Pope, and the holy Ghost seems not so much to look at the niceties of
numbers as always to express the few broken pieces: but looks especially at
the perfect and round number, which is the number decadical, and so the number
390. may be set down for the beginning of that which happily in some degree
began three or four years before. See Corn. a Lap. upon Ezekiel. 29.12.

3. The years begin at the coming in of the Barbarians, which are the primitive
ten horns: And as Arrianisme came to its strength about the year 360. so the
Barbarians began at that time effectually and successively to break in upon the
Empire, judgment answering unto sin. The Persians made the first onset, and in
the issue took away five Provinces from the Roman Empire; and the bank being
thus broken down, Ammianus.
the whole flood of the Barbarians followed after, from about the year 364.
After the year 378. there followed a cessation of the Arrian Heresy and
Persecution, and therewithal a cessation of the irruptions of Barbarians for
about ten years; and then the Antichristian Heresy and Idolatry succeeding
from about the year 390. the inundation of the Barbarians came in afresh again,
with a new and stronger beginning: So that from this time forward it could be
no more interrupted, but continued and increased until the Empire of the West
was utterly dissolved. ^alvis. Cropl^ad ann. 89.
For the cruel Barbarians from the North came in irresistibly upon Britainy
from about the year 390. and horrible intestine wars following in the residue
of the Empire, and making way for these Barbarians, and also for the rest,
about five years after, namely, from about the year 395. the Goths and all the
other Barbarians followed, and entered into the whole Empire irresistibly. So
having divided the Empire into the ten Kingdoms, they corrupted the Church more
then before; and lastly, subjected their Kingdoms openly unto Antichrist and to
his Laws. So then the effectual irruption of the Barbarians, beginning at 360.
and again afresh at 390. do also from the former term set a beginning to the
years 1290. and from the latter term set a beginning to the years 1260. Now
that the years must begin at the coming in of the Barbarians, and dissipation
of the Empire, it may appear from these considerations:

1. It is very probable, That Antichrist arose in the coming in of the
Barbarians, and dissipation of the Empire. So expressly Serez the Author of the
French History, a man indifferent and impartial, and of whom we have no cause
to think that he looked at any other end in his Discourse, but only the
reality of the thing in it self, without respect to the Accommodation of the
years. And thus he writes, fol. 2. Damasas, Syricius, Anastasius Innocentius,
Sosimus and Bonifacius, Bishops of Rome, lived there one after the other,
amidst the confusions of the Empire, and even at Rome: whereas the Emperors
were seldom seen; so as the absence of the Emperors, troubled to withstand the
Barbarians, and the miserable state of the time, which forced Christians to
fly to their Bishop for counsel and comfort in their confused afflictions,
laid the foundation of their authority, then small, being tied to their
charges, and subject to the Emperors command: But it grew by degrees, until
it came to the height of this Sovereign and Absolute power, so as in the end
they have prescribed Laws to the Emperors, Kings, and Christian Princes. A
necessary Observation, both for the truth and order of this History, to
understand rightly both the time and means of their rising. In the first age,
the Bishops of Rome durst not show themselves, being persecuted, and
imprisoned, and martyred by the Emperors. Since Constantine the Great, their
authority began in the dissipation of the Empire, it increased especially under
Pipin and Charles the Great. Again at the year 514. thus the same Author
writes; The Pope of Rome thrust himself forward amidst these confusions and
ruins of the Empire, recovering that which the Emperors had lost.

2. Antichrist is the little horn, and he rose at the same time, together with
the ten horns, in low and dark beginnings, and the Primitive ten horns were the
Northern Barbarians, Dan. 7.8. It is true, he is said afterward, Verse 24. to
arise after the ten Horns: but this may be said in respect of the open and more
perfect degree of his Kingdom.

3. The Beast or Antichrist is said to receive his Kingdom at one hour,
together with the ten horns, Apoc. 17.12.

4. The flood of the Dragon, which does signify the inundation of the Northern
Barbarians, is expressly set after the woman's flight, and coming to her fixed
seat in the state of the Wilderness; wherein she is to sit down, and to be
hidden the space of all the foresaid years, the time, two times and half. So
therefore the flood of the Barbarians cannot precede the years, and can ascend
at most but unto a state of coexistende therewithal, as being in order ranked
after them, and begun in events in order of nature praeexistent, though not
happily of time.

5. The seventh head is Antichrist, and he arises into his Kingdom gradually,
as the sixth head falling under the Barbarians, gives way and place unto him.
See Apoc. 17.10. Thus the Emperors, the impediment of Antichrist, is gradually
removed, that Antichrist may gradually succeed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

According to this way, thus we may settle the terms of the years.

1290 Beginning at the year 360 do end together in the year 1649. 1260
Beginning at the year 390 do end together in the year 1649. 490 Beginning at
the year 1160 do end together in the year 1649. 575 Beginning at the year 1075
do end together in the year 1649. 390 Beginning at the year 1260 do end
together in the year 1649.
1. The 1290. Dan. 12.11. 2. The 1260. Dan. 12.7. Apoc. 12.6, 14. 3. The 490.
Dan. 9.24. 4. The 575. Dan. 8.14. There are numbered 2300.
of mornings and evenings.] But because in Scripture-use, there is a morning
and evening for the day time, and a morning and evening for the night time,
Exo. 29.41. and 30.8. Lev. 23.5. Number. 9.3, 5, 11.
Exodus 12.6. and 29.39. Psalm. 30.5, 6. Therefore it may be that four of those
2300. do concur to make up one day, and so 2300. mornings and evenings may make
up 575. full days, which in use Prophetical are 575. years. And so this
number may only comprehend the times of the most perfect reign of Antichrist,
described in that eighth chapter; beginning from the year 1075. when first
Hildebrand took occasion to exalt himself effectually above the Emperor, and
promulged effectual Decrees concerning the unmarryed estate of the Clergy, and
other Willworship; and Antichrist in him began of a little horn to become a
great horn, and presently thereupon exceeding great in the war against the
Turks and Albingenses; which estate of his, seeing it is only handled in the
foresaid chapter, no marvel if a number of years proportionate unto such a
state of Antichrist was cut out in the said place.

5. The years 390. according to the round number, or at large 391. and an hour,
Ap. 9.14. do appertain unto the solution of the Turks; which, by the
dissentions of the Latins, and movings of the Tartars, began to be loosed from
about the year 1260. and two years before in some degree: so that the hour may
be in 1258. the day, the year following, and the 390 from 1260. See Brov.
annal. Thus the Turks will cease to be loosed in the year 1649. and the next
year following may they begin to fall together with the Pope, if this former
way of Accommodation does hold. Although in respect of remiss degrees, the
Turk began to be loosed in Saladin about the year 1169. Calvis. and so his 390.
years will expire immediately before 1559. from which time the Turkish power and
Kingdom has continually decayed.

The second way of Accommodation of the years.
NOw that the Popes Kingdom, more properly so called, that is, the commanding,
and effectual and open state thereof, and the more perfect state of the
foresaid signs thereof, do set beginning to these years; the following
Arguments will plead on the other side.

1. The Beast or little horn, that is, the Pope, is said expressly to rise into
his Kingdom after the ten horns, being thenceforth about to reign the time, two
times and half, Dan. 7.24, 25. It will be answered, He rose with them in
respect of small beginnings, but after them in respect of open manifestation of
his Kingdom. See Apoc. 17.12. But howsoever, thus much may be gathered, That
according to this place, it will not be inconvenient or unreasonable to begin
the years of Antichrist after the rising of the ten horns, and from the
manifestation and open power of his Kingdom, but rather very connaturall unto
it.

2. The Beast is said expressly to rise into his Kingdom, after the Dragons
flood, and the drying up thereof, being about to reign 42. months, which
signify all the years of Antichrist, Apoc. 12.16, 17, 18. with cap. 13.1, 5,
6. Now the Dragons flood was the flood of the Northern Barbarians; forasmuch as
the waters cast out of his mouth, do properly signify Nations, Tongues and
People, Apoc. 17.15. flowing out upon the Church, at the mouth or suggestion of
the Devil. Their flood was dried up, partly when they were subdued by
Justinian, partly when they were united with the earthly part of Christendom in
Antichristian Religion. It may be answered, That after this time indeed the
Beast arose into the open state and power of his Kingdom, in appearance
according to the similitude of other Kingdoms: But in small and dark beginnings
that he began before; and that from those small beginnings his years are to be
numbered, howsoever they be set down under the open state thereof. Compare Apoc.
12.14. with cap. 13.5, 6. But this will be sufficient for our purpose, that it
will be very consonant and agrecable to this place, to begin the years of
Antichrist from his latter state, and not unnatural thereunto; howsoever we
cannot prove that certainly it is so.

3. Dan. 11.19 to, 21.
So expressly after the inundation of the Northern Barbarians, and after the
Restoration also by Justinian, Antichrist is brought in succeeding in the
Kingdom. But it may be answered as before, That then indeed began the glory of
his Kingdom, or some small degree of glory at the least: Although he had the
Kingdom before, even with Justinian, and before him also; yet without the glory
of the Kingdom: compare Dan. 11. v. 20. with v. 21. and both with v. 19. This
howsoever seems to follow from the words, that this second state or degree of
Antichrist his Kingdom may constitute a very natural and convenient beginning
for the duration of his reign; especially seeing in such accommodation of the
years all numbers will agree, and every one of them from very reasonable and
satisfactory terms of beginning.

According to this second way, we may set beginnings thus unto the years.
1290 From 570 end in the year 1859. 1260 From 600 end in the year 1859. 1150
From 710 end in the year 1859. 490 From 1370 end in the year 1859.
First, 1290. may begin in 570 according to the round number. For then upon the
coming of the Longebards into Italy, began the evident and open state of the
Popes Kingdom. So expressly Machiavel in his History of Florence, l. 1.
Caeperunt hec tempore pontifices Romani majori esse in dignitate quam antea
fuerant. Paulo post. Vix alia erat pontificum dignitas et aestimatio, prater
eam quam vitae sancti monia sibi paraverant et doctrina, ante aetatem.
Longobardorum. Rursum. Quum autem Longobardi jn Italiam jam venirent, et illa
in factiones plurimas scissa esset, adaugebatur pontificia potestas hoc eorum
adventu. Quum enim pontifex caput esset et princeps urbis Romanae, imperator
vero Constantinopoli preesset, itase tempori et praesenti rerum statui
accommodabant Longobardi ac Longinus, ut mediante pontifice populum Romanum
sibi devincirent, non ut subditus illorum esset, sed socius; et nunc horum,
nunc Grecorum arts sequentes pontifices, mirum quam adaugebant suam dignitatem.

Secondly, the 1260 years may fitly begin in the year 600. according to the
round number. Then began Gregory the Pope to deform the Church with rites and
superstitions. Alsted. Chron. Mist. iniq. And indeed the Historical use of
Images began about the year 400. but the solitary Images of Saints began not to
be set up in Temples before the year 600. Perk. yet the Pope approved not the
worship of them. Then began Gregory the Pope to command a litany for the
invocation of Saints to be sung publicly. Then (says Perkins) of a
commemoration of Saints was made an invocation of them. ^rkins. ^^, Ima^^,
Cas^der.
About the same year Gregory the Pope contended about the Primacy with the
Patriark of Constantinople. And about six years after the year 600. the Pope
was made by Phocas universal Bishop: and then first was the privilege
confirmed to the Church of Rome, to wit, of Primacy over all Churches; Alsted
lastly; from about this time the Pope began to send forth his emissaries, for
the subjecting of the ten horns and people of Christendom unto his papal
authority.

Thirdly, the 1150 years being the half of the 2300. Dan. 8.13, 14. by taking
only one morning and one evening for one full day, may begin most fitly at the
year 710. For then Antichrist began publicly and in open councels to authorize
the worshipping of Images, and to establish the same, and the invocation of
Saints, and to maintain the same by constant persecutions. Alsted Chronol. cap.
de conciliis. Sigon. de regno Ital. Centur. Magdebur. Then also began the Pope
to exercise power and dominion over Kings and Emperors. Sigon. Balgus. And
from this time forward he ceased not to pursue the Emperors of the East, in
favor of Idolatry, until such time as he had utterly cast them out of Italy,
and established his own Kingdom in the Empire of the Franks. Platina.
Onuphrius.

Fourthly, the 490 years or 70 weeks of years, may begin at the year 1370 as
has been said, from the time of Wickliffe. Of this I have already spoken. So
all the numbers in this second way, will precisely end in the year 1859. Now
let the Reader consider and judge.

Fifthly, the solution of the Turks, notwithstanding this second way may begin
in the foresaid year 1260. and continuing 390 years may end immediately before
1650: or else beginning from about 1300 may possibly run out 40 years after. Or
happily beginning in remiss degrees from about 1169 may be extended to 1559.
and so the end of the strength of the Turkish Kingdom may be determined by
these years, proportionably to the five months of the Kingdom of the Sarasins,
and not the absolute and perfect end thereof.

Concerning the 1000 years, Apoc. 20.3.
THe Dragon is not simply the Devil, but with seven heads and ten horns, Chap.
12.3. that is, the Devil in the Roman Empire. He in his heathen estate or in
the Heathen Emperors, had through all the Roman Empire seduced the Nations, C
12.9. to wit, with heathenisme and in the way of opposition to the Church. But
he was cast down out of his throne in the times of Constantine, Christ then
taking possession of the throne together with the Saints, Chap. 12.5, 10. But
he by the barbarous Nations as by many waters overflowing the Empire of the
West, and afterward stirring and raising up Antichrist, beginning openly to
reign and with the Barbarians to subjugate the Church about the year 600. even
now seemed about to obtain and to recover that amplitude of power and dominion,
for the seducing of the Nations in his second or Antichristian state, which
before he had obtained in his first or Ethnic state.

This greatness and efficacy of power that he might not yet obtain, he was
forthwith by the six first plagues of the Vials more and more to be bound and
imprisoned, as it were in a bottomless pit, for the space of a thousand years:
and those thousand years being ended, he is for a little space to be loosed in
Antichrist, to obtain that power, at least comparatively, which before he had
in his Heathen state. So then after these 1000 years he shall recover himself
out of all the former plagues of the Vials, and having subdued the withesses in
the West, he shall go forth without impediment to gather all Nations against
the holy City, and upon this occasion he shall come to an end by the seventh
Vial.

The Dragon in Antichrist and in the Antichristian horns, gradually ascending
to the height, the Saints or holy people began as it were to be beheaded, Apoc.
20.4. which phrase I. believe is here applied for mystical signification,
forasmuch as it was not usual or customary with Antichrist to kill the Saints
by such a kind of death properly understood, but mystically he beheaded them,
by the word and censures wrongfully applied: pronouncing them to be
schismatics and heretics, and so cut off from Christ as the body from the
head, and then prosecuting them as excommunicate and cut off from Christ, with
persecutions, first of lesser kind before the times of Waldus, and after unto
death.

The Saints in this estate arose in their own defense, and by the word and
censures did as it were behead the Antichristians, pronouncing them
excommunicate and cut off from Christ, and thereby exposed them unto the
judgment of the Vials. Now God approved the word and sentence in their mouths,
and thereupon followed it with plagues, whereby the Dragon in the
Antichristians shall be imprisoned and restrained a thousand years unto the end
of the sixth Vial: And then a short solution intervening for the gathering of
all Nations, shall afterward be utterly cut off by the seventh Vial. Thus then
the Saints did reign a thousand years, to wit, by the word and prophecy, as it
is also expressed, Apoc. 11.5, 6. and unto the foresaid last solution of the
Antichristians out of the bottomless pit, Apoc. 11.7. and they reigned by
bringing the Vialls in the way of prophecy, as it is affirmed in the same
place, Apoc. 11.6. Thus also they are said to reign as Priests of God and of
Christ. Apoc. 20.7. that is, by the word and prayer. For in this manner Priests
do use to reign: Therefore the Saints or Angels, which are the Ministers of the
seven Vials, are brought in clothed with fine linen, which was the habit of
the Priests, Ezekiel. 44. and coming as Priests out of the Temple, Apoc. 15.5, 6.
to pour them out by the word and prayer upon the Antichristians. And in this
sense they are said to be set on thrones, and to have judgment put into their
hands, Apoc. 20.4. which is the judgment of the seven Vials, Apocalypse 14.7.
and 15.4. and 16.7. Now whereas the Saints are said to smite the Antichristians
with ulcers and blood and fire, as in the four first Vials, and then to darken
the Kingdom of Antichrist, as in the fifth, and afterward to dry up the waters
of his Kingdom in the sixth: what is this, but at least to bind and restrain
the Dragon in the Antichristians? And we can also show, that these six Vials,
let the years of Antichrist be measured which way you will, must continue the
space of a 1000 years. And expressly after that these six Vials are ended, it is
said as after the end of the 1000 years, that the Dragon with the Beast is
loosed to gather all Nations together against the time of the last Vial.
Compare, Apoc. 16.13, 14, 15. with Apoc. 20.3, 8, 9.

These two places, namely, Apocalypse 11.5, 6, 7. and 16.13, 14. compared with,
Apocalypse 20.3, 8, 9. I suppose sufficient for the answering of any objections,
that may be opposed to our interpretation. Whereunto may be added that in
Daniel 9.24, 25, 26, 27. where the Church is brought in standing and
prevailing, that is, reigning all along from its first beginning until the
last week, which agrees with the time of the solution of the Dragon for a
little space, at the end of his 1000 years. For we must understand these
expressions, not in a sense absolute but comparative. And as the primitive
Saints, notwithstanding the ten successive Persecutions, are brought in
reigning and prevailing more and more against the Heathen Emperors, to wit, by
the word and prayer, the fight of faith and patience, accompanied with suitable
effects of the Gospel and of judgment, until they were utterly cast down in
the days of Constantine, Apocalypse 6.1.2. with 12.9, 10, 11, 12. so
notwithstanding several gusts of Antichristian persecution, the Saints being
many times hurt, Apocalypse 11.5. and many times beheaded as has been said,
Apocalypse 20.4. yet they rise continually and prevail and reign by the like
means, saving only for a little space at the loosing of the Dragon.

Let this be observed in conclusion, that we have not from necessity so
interpreted that phrase, beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, as has been
explicated: for we may say with Paraeus, that any manner of death is signified
thereby, and I add, any manner of punishment and affliction in general,
infflicted upon Saints as heretics and malefactors. Such was reproach and
lesser kinds of persecution before the times of the Waldenses, and afterward
the punishment of death. And notwithstanding all this, they are said to rise
and live and reign, partly in themselves and partly in their successors and
members of the same body spiritual, and by prophetical and priestly power to
bring the constant judgment of the Vials upon the Antichristians, to the
retarding and restraining of the Dragon in them, unto the end of the 1000 years.

But as concerning the Antichristians and the Dragon in them, it is said of
them that they should be so killed by the priestly power of the Saints, being
dead spiritually, and censured to be as dead by prophecy, and thereupon given
up to the plagues of judgment: that they, being the residue of the dead spoken
of, Apocalypse 20.5. should not live again, until the thousand years be
expired. Which is to be understood either of the more general conversion and
spiritual resurrection, whereby the remnant of Antichristians shall arise at
the end of the 1000 years and of the years of Antichrist: or of the
resurrection of the dead properly so called, which shall follow after the said
years, Apocalypse 20.8, 12. or of the Antichristians cut off and slain by the
constant plagues of the six former Vials, through the whole space of the 1000
years, and not arising perfectly or breathing out of them, until after the end
of the 1000 years; and for a little season. As concerning the opinion of many
Worthyes, affirming, that the reign of the Saints a 1000 years, is to be
expected in the glory of New- Jerusalem at the end of the years of Antichrist:
I cannot possibly bring my judgment to incline unto it. For this opinion is
encumbered with inextricable difficulties and uncouth assertions, as concerning
a partial resurrection from the dead before the general, and the like.
Moreover also it has not any ground from the place alleged in the Revelation,
as has been showed. And where New- Jorusalem is purposely described, there is
not the least intimation of such a time determined, as being to be in a
perpetual uniformity eternal, after that it comes to its height. And it is
clear from Daniel 12.1, 2, 11, 12, 13. and from Revelation 11.18. that the last
judgment or Vial upon Antichrist is to be compounded with the genetall
resurrection. For it is expressed to be the resurrection, and none other
follows, Daniel 12.2. wherein both Daniel and all that are wise and labor in
the work of conversion shall be glorified, Verse 3, 13. and wherein all both
small and great shall be rewarded, Apocalypse 11.18. Whereas it is objected,
that New- Jerusalem in the Prophets, is described after such a manner, as is
suitable to a temporal manner of reigning upon earth, according as the
Millenary reigning is supposed to be. I conceive answer may be given unto this
objection. For such expressions of temporal felicity, as do occur in the
description of New- Jerusalem, are either to be understood of its state of
incheation, as it is in motu; and especially from after the end of the years of
Antichrist through the space of 45 years, as Daniel expresses, Daniel 12.11,
12. or being applied to its state of heavenly perfection immediately ensuing,
they are to be understood in a mystical sense, according to the common way and
course of the holy Prophets. Who knows not, that New Jerusalem described by
Ezekiel, and from whom the Pictures of it are translated into the Revelation,
are all along mystical and figurative? And such as are the descriptions in one
prophet, such for the general must be the parallel descriptions in the rest.
There is Christ and the Church set forth by the building of a Temple, the
worship of the Church by sacrifices and festival solemnities, Christ as King
by the Prince or Princes of Israel, glorified Saints by trees with healing
leafes and fruits perpetual, and their glorious inheritance by the several
inheritances of the Sons of Israel in the land of Canaan. Now I do acknowledge
that these and the like places may have a general application to the whole
Kingdom of Christ, and more particularly to the first degrees of the
Reformation after Antichrist. But my purpose is not here to speak of this
larger acception. In a stricter sense; the foresaid passages are partly to be
fulfilled in the state of inchoation at the end of the reign of Antichrist, and
partly of the heavenly perfection. So in the state of inchoation the Ministers
as Angels, letting in the elect by conversion through the gates of particular
Churches, into the community of the whole Church of New- Jerusalem: shall
hereby be instruments of bringing them into the heavenly perfection, and shall
therein be glorified with their converts. And therefore in the state of
heavenly perfection, they are brought in under such representations as will
agree to the foresaid relation which they had unto their converts in the state
of inchoation, Apocalypse 21.12. In like manner the Kings of the earth are said
to bring their glory unto it, Apocalypse 21.24. according as in the parallel
Prophecy, Isaiah 60. partly because in its state of inchoation they shall come
unto it by conversion, subjecting themselves, their Kingdoms and glory
thereunto, in procuring the felicity thereof: and partly because they shall
stand in this frame of love unto Christ and his Church, through all eternities
in heavenly perfection. Rivers of water running, Hills dropping new wine,
Mountains flowing with milk, seven times increase of the light of the Sun,
abundance of Corn, and Feasts and Dancings, and joyful Solemnities, to be
expected when Jerusalem shall be restored out of Babylon, are clearly Types and
mystical Expressions of the spiritual glory of the Church in general, which
is the New Jerusalem, when it shall be reduced out of the Babylon of Antichrist
in the state of inchoation, and principally when it shall ascend unto the
height of heavenly felicity. The Church of converted Jews shall have their
portion in this Jerusalem: but to make it the only thing, properly intended in
Judah and Jerusalem thus described, and in respect of temporal estate, I
conceive is far beyond the intention of the Holy Ghost.

One passage in the Prophet Isaiah I will endeavor to clear, in stead of all
other, by reason of the difficulty thereof. This is Isaiah 65.17, etc. The
state of new Heavens and new Earth is there described, verse 17. This largely
taken, is the whole Kingdom of Christ, beginning at the times of the Apostles;
wherein is spiritually old age, in respect of Grace, and duration, and
prosperity, and security spiritual, Psalm. 1.3. and 92.12, 13, 14. But of this
sense I purposenet to speak now. In a stricter acception, it is the state of
new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21.1, 2. 2 Pet. 3.13. that begins in (...) at the end
of the years of Antichrist, and is consummate in celestial glory. Therein
shall be no weeping, crying, etc. v. 19. as Apocalypse 21.4. and there shall all
be as old men, and none shall dye as young men, verse 20. because there all
shall be lasting, and also wise as old men, and fully know the Lord, and none
shall be spiritual Infants any more. See Apoc. 4.4. 1 Cor. 14.20. For the
description of the Church is mystical, after the similitude of an earthly
Kingdom, glorious in temporal happiness, in which are no diseases, Famine or
Sword, to cut off the life before old age, and in which men build and plant,
and labor cheerfully and successively, enjoying the fruit of their labors
without molestation or interruption, and wherein no enemy or wild Beast makes
men afraid: So that by such temporal felicity of long life, spiritual old age
or wisdom is partly signified, and partly perpetual continuance in the Kingdom
of Heaven. And as the Saints and Ministers have builded spiritual houses, and
planted spiritual vineyards in their own conversion, and the conversion of
others, and in the setting up of Churches by the preaching of the Gospel, after
the similitude of those that in an earthly Kingdom do the same in temporal
respects, 1 Cor. 9.7. so shall they eat the fruit, or enjoy the comfort hereof
without interruption of any enemy, through all eternities. So verse 21, 22, 23.
And thus are the words following to be interpreted, verse 24. Before they call
I will hear: Because, although they may literally be expounded of the
inchoation of new Jerusalem, yet figuratively only of the heavenly perfection,
wherein God is said to hear before we call, after the similitude of temporal
security, to signify his continual protection of his people from the very
fears, or near approaches of any dangers. And whereas it is added, verse 25.
that The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the Serpent shall lick the
dust: Nothing else is signified, then an absolute and eternal exclusion of all
enemies offensive to the Church, partly by conversion begun upon the Earth, and
in Heaven continued, partly by perdition everlasting. Lastly, whereas in the
time of the new Heavens and Earth, Levites and Priests are said to continue,
Isaiah 66.21, 22. Ministers are understood in the state of inchoation: and both
in state of inchoation and perfection, all Saints shall be mystical Priests
and Levites for ever, And they shall go forth and see the carcases of the
wicked, that is, duly consider the end of the wicked, whose worm shall never
dye, and whose fire shall never go out, in the state of Hell then opposite unto
heavenly perfection. So chap. 66.24. compared with Mark 9.44. It is clear from
the Epistle to the Hebrews, that under the Type of the Land of Canaan, the Land
of Israel was Heaven signified: And if in these and such like expressions of
the Prophers, Heaven is not understood, then would it not be spoken of by them,
which would be utterly unreasonable to think.

Of the SEVEN VIALS.
IT remains to be showed when the one thousand years must begin and end. They
begin, as has been said, with the Seven Vials.

In the four first Vials, are only set down four degrees of Judgment, and in
the fourth degree coming to perfection: as appears by those four degrees of
judgment on the Roman Empire, expressed by the like Figures, Apoc. 8.7. And
these four first Vials are upon the Builders and Founders of Antichrist, as
appears by Apoc. 16.2. The Kingdom of Antichrist in propriety is not touched,
till the fifth Vial, as is expressed Verse 10.

There are two ways of Accommodation. I will propose them both briefly: and
the event will shortly show, which is to be chosen. For either I judge the four
first Vials are the four degrees of Mahumetan plagues upon Christendom in
general, together with other plagues adjoined, beginning from the year 620: or
else the four degrees of judgment upon the German-Roman-Empire, the chief
Founder of the Prelacy of Antichrist, beginning from the year 840. Sigon. If
the former way shall hold, the first Vial will be from 620, the second from
840, the third from 1160, the fourth from 1260, when the Turks effectually
being loosed, began to power out the Vial on the Sun, to the irrecoverable
darkning of Christendom. But if the second way shall hold, the first Vial will
be from 840, the second may be from 888, Sigon. the third after a restoration
as by Rivers, from 1160, the fourth from 1250, when Frederick the second dying,
See Cha^^on. Chron^^ in the li^^ of Frederick 2. Sigon. de^ reg. Hal. at the
year 1286.
the last maintainer in a manner of the German-Roman-Empire, and all
Christendom together, being in combustions, made way for the pouring of the
Vial on the Sun, to the darkning of the said Empire irrecoverably, and of the
Latin Kingdom in Jerusalem, and to the Laxation of the Turks upon Christendom
in general. Now the Popes Kingdom in propriety, though assailed for a little
season by the Waldenses, yet speedily did not only recover it self in the
foresaid times, but also took occasion by the Opposition to come unto its
fullness: wherein it also subsisted until the time of Wickcliff.

Wherefore, from the year 1370, the time of Wickcliff, began the fifth Vial to
be powered out upon the Throne and Kingdom of the Beast, in propriety so called.
The sixth followed from the time of Luther, whereby the waters of Euphrates,
the Rivers or Waters, that is, the Nations and Kingdoms of Babylon spiritual,
Apoc. 17.15. effectually began to be dried up: And the Protestant Princes
politic, or Protestant Saints in general, as spiritual Kings and Princes,
began openly and visibly to reign, set up by Christ the Sun of Righteousness
to shine upon the World, then sitting in a night of darkness; and therefore
they are said to come as it were from the rising of the Sun. So the phrase is
to be interpreted, Apoc. 7.2, 3. Ezekiel. 43.1, 2, 3. and frequently in
Prophecies. This sixth Vial runs out in the last Ascension of the Beast out
of the bottomless pit, Apoc. 11.17. and in the solution of the Dragon at the
end of the 1000 years, Apoc. 20.3. For in the issue of the sixth Vial, it is
expressly said in the same words for substance, that the Beast and Dragon went
forth to gather the Kings of the Earth and of the whole World, Apoc. 16.13.14.
That in their last prosperity for a little season, they might be prepared for
the last and great Vial, which shall expire and be compounded with the general
Resurrection and final Conclusion of all Judgment.

Now if the Vials begin from 620, then accordingly the sixth Vial will end, and
therewithal the 1000 years in 1620. From which time the Dragon shall gradually
be loosed, first with various success, as the fifth Seal, Apoc. 6.11. and the
Hail-stone, spotted Horses, Zech. 6.6. do insinuate, and then by three days
and half of final Triumph, his solution shall run out in the year 1649,
precisely together with the 2260 years of Antichrist, according to one of the
two ways of Accommodation.

But if the Vials begin from 840, then accordingly the sixth Vial will end, and
therewithal the 1000 years, the space of about 20 years before 1860; and so
the solution of the Beast and Dragon, which is to be at the end of the 1000
years, will precisely expire with the years of Antichrist, according to the
other way of Accommodation.

This is certain, that when these years shall have an end, immediately shall
follow the glorious time of New-Jerusalem, to the joy of all Saints: Whereof it
is said, Isai. 60.1. Arise O Jerusalem and shine, for thy light is come, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. It is also very evident unto me, That
this glory of New Jerusalem, beginning at the end of the years of Antichrist,
is consummated in Heavenly glory, as the utmost degree thereof: So that the
Heavenly Estate, according to the use of the holy Prophets, enters into the
composition of New Jerusalem, and of the state of new Heavens, and new Earth.
For the state of these new Heavens, and new Earth, promised in the Prophecy of
Isaiah, is such a state wherein all Saints do expect their share and portion
Universally, as the Apostle Peter does express, 2 Pet. 3. And therefore it
must necessarily be the state of Heavenly perfection, which is at least
inclusively spoken off by the Prophet Isaiah: For thus go the words of the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 3.13, 14. Nevertheless we, that is, we all, all Saints and
Christians, according to his promise, that is, as it is promised unto us in the
Prophecy of Isaiah (which we have a little before Interpreted) do look for new
Heavens, and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, that is, all
righteous people, and without defilement of sin and sinful society. It
follows Verse. 14. Wherefore Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be
diligent, that ye may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless.
Furthermore, the general Resurrection and last Judgment, are evidently brought
in Apo. 20.11, 12. as the Expressions declare; So clear indeed, that any place
of Scripture describing the last Judgment, may be detorted to another sense as
easily as this: And besides, the Parallel place of Dan. 12.2, 13, 14. does
confirm the same, where Daniel and all the wise, without Exception and
Distinction, are brought in partakers of the Resurrection, at the end of the
last plague upon Antichristians. Now the perfect state of New Jerusalem, is
expressly brought in after this general Resurrection and last Judgment, Apoc.
20.11. and 21.1. And therefore it is the state of heavenly perfection. As the
old Heavens and Earth, do gradually go away from after the end of the years of
Antichrist; that is, as the Antichristian Kingdoms do gradually depart, so the
new Heavens, and new Earth, or Kingdom of Christ, with the change of all
things, does gradually come in: Until at the end of 45 years, Dan. 12.12. the
old Heavens, and old Earth being perfectly departed in the last Judgment and
general Resurrection, Apoc. 20.11. the new Heavens, and the new Earth, come
into the place thereof, in the state of heavenly and immutable Perfections.
Apoc. 21.1, 2.

In the foresaid incoactive state of New Jerusalem, the Jews shall come in by
Conversion, according to the Prophecy, Romans 11. and shall be principal Members,
and extraordinarily gifted for the enlarging of the Kingdom of Christ, over all
the World. They began first to run as Cushi, but interrupted. The Gentile
Christians, like Ahimaaz, break over the Mountains of opposition, God making
all Hills as a plane unto them: And so they first bring in the tidings of the
fall of Antichrist. But the tidings are general and incomplete. Afterward, 2 Samuel 18.31.
the Jews that first began to run, shall come in last, and bring distinct and
perfect tidings of the fall of Antichrist, and all enemies universally. Now
when they have so done, then shall follow life from the dead, or the general
Resurrection, as the Apostle Paul expresses, Romans 11.15. So then the Jews
shall come in as Members of New Jerusalem: and New Jerusalem is to be the
Catholic Church, advanced to the state of glory, wherein there is no
distinction of Jew or Gentile, Grecian or Barbarian. And therefore in all the
Revelation, I find not any mention of Jewish Christians in distinction from
the rest. The Jews are the faithful in general, Apoc. 2.9. and so are the Jews
of Philadelphia, Apoc. 3.9. The twelve Tribes of the Children of Israel, are
all the parts of Christendom, out of which, the Saints are sealed, before the
glorious time of New Jerusalem, Apoc. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The Holy City or
Jerusalem is Christendom, Apoc. 11.2. And the Kings of the East, may be the
Protestants in general, as has been Expounded according to the course of Holy
Scripture. So is New Jerusalem the Catholic Church glorified, Apoc. 21. And it
is a name imposed on the Gentile Philadelphia, Apoc. 3.12. The true Church in
general is called the Jerusalem, Gal. 4.26. And all that is called Israel in
the Old Testament, unto whom the Promises are made, are not Israel according to
the flesh, but mystical Israel, the whole Church, Romans 9.6. Daniel also in all
his Prophecies, by his people, and by his holy people, understands Christians
in general, as has been showed before. See Dan. 9.24. and 11.45. and 12.1.
Accordingly in all the ancient Prophets, although the Prophecies are literally
to be understood of Israel and Judah, properly so called according to the Type,
yet according to the Antitype, and more fully, they appertain to the mystical
Israel, and mystical Judah, the Catholic Church of Christ, and especially as
rising out of the mystical Babylon of Antichrist, as the parallel places in the
Revelation do evidently declare. Revel. 14.8. and 18.2, 3, 12, 20, 21, 22. and
19.2.
But of this I purposed only at this time to give a hint, as also to touch a
few Reasons and Arguments by the way: And I have been much larger, then I
thought to be. Much more satisfaction may be given concerning these things, and
if necessity require, and strength, and opportunity make way, I hope I should
not be backward to do my best service herein to the Spouse of Christ. If any of
my Reverend Brethren, otherwise minded, can show unto me better light, I shall
count my self and the Church of God beholding unto them for it, and willingly
receive it at their hands. In the mean time, this is my judgment.

And to God, only wise in Christ Jesus, the Revealer of Secrets, be Glory and
Dominion, for ever and ever, Amen.
FINIS.

