THE MYSTERY OF THE VIALLS OPENED: Being a short Exposition upon the pouring
out of the four last VIALLS, mentioned in the 16 Chapter of the REVELATION:
Wherein diverse things relating to times present, past, and to come, are
discovered: As the ruin of ANTICHRIST, and the several degrees thereunto; And
the shadowing out these times wherein we live, are generally surveyed.

LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting at the Angel in Pope's Head Alley, 1651.

The Stationer to the Reader.
READER,
ALL that I have to say, is, That this brief Exposition of that Religious and
Learned Divine Mr. Robert Parker, upon the pouring out of the four last Vialls
mentioned in the sixteen chap. of the Revelations, has been for this many
years (before the Palatinat was reduced to a field of blood) in the custody of
Sir John Wray, to whose piety thou stand engaged for the publication: the
Author was esteemed pious and learned, a Nonconformist to the Bishops. Happily
he may differ in opinion from Mr. Brightman and other learned men, but that is
no wonder; for they could not agree among themselves: I have done my part, the
Copy was sent me to procure a passage into the Public, the which is
performed; and by the way, that as the worthy Gentleman that gave me the
Manuscript and the Imprimatur thought it worthy the printing; I cannot think
otherway but that it deserves the buying.

THE MYSTERY OF THE VIALLS OPENED.
REVEL. 16.8, 9. And the fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, and
power was given him to scorch men with fire.

And men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of God, which
has power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.


ALthough I am not worthy to be named with Mr. Brightman, yet I trust I may
crave leave under correction, to differ from him, in the Exposition of this
Vial. I prosecute his memory with all the benediction that is due to so great
a light in the Church of God, and hold himself (for clearing this Apocalypse)
the chief Angel of this Vial, in case it be meant of Protestant writers (as
he would have it) making the Scriptures as clear as the Sun, to the confounding
and tormenting of Papists; howbeit there be some reasons, that lead me to
interpret it rather of the wasting of some Protestant Princes or Lutheran State
not long hence to be accomplished, which I crave liberty to set down.

1. The confounding and tormenting of Papists by the Scripture, is not a
distinct particular event, as the event of this fourth Vial seems to be
Distinct it is not, but the same with the plague of the first Vial, whose
botch, what is it else but an ulcer of mind in Papists to see the growth of the
Gospel, and fall of Popery, especially here at home in England by the death of
Qu. Mary, and the succession of Qu. Eliz. to the crown? And again it is
general, whereas the Vial is poured on the Sun a particular star in heaven,
to note a plague on some special State of some true Church, or at least some
Church disunited from Popery.

2. The Sun being King amongst stars, Jer. 44.17. he fitly here defines some
King or State even as he does elsewhere, so Jacob (the most heroical man in
his days) is resembled by the Sun, Genesis 37. David, 2 Samuel 21.17. and Hezekiah
King of Israel, 2 King. 20.9, 10. Who is the Angel standing in the Sun? Apoc.
19.17. out of doubt some great man in power and place; forasmuch as the writing
of some bare Divines cannot so effectually draw People and Nations to join in
war against the Pope; What is that darkning of the Sun? Apoc. 6.12. the fall
of the persecuting Roman Empire, and the third part of the Sun smitten, Apoc.
8.12. is the wasting of Africa the third part of the world by the Vandalls.

3. In this fourth Vial the Sun himself is first plagued, which cannot be
meant of the Scripture, for the text does say as directly that the fourth
Angel does pour his Vial on the Sun, as the fifth does pour his Vial on the
throne of the beast, by which Romes ruin is foreshewed: Howbeit the Sun not
extinguished by this Vial but only distempered to scorch with heat, does seem
to employ that the plague of this Prince or State shall not cast them down so
much, as irritate and stir them up to a heat of revenge, laying waste the men
that did hurt them.

4. The men here plagued are not only Papists, for whereas it is added to them
in the first Vial by way of restraint, that the sore fell upon them which had
the mark of the beast and who worshipped his image; here is no such limitation;
it is only said in general, power was given to the Sun to torment men, viz.
men of the same heaven where the Sun shines, viz. men in that visible Church
where this Prince or State does govern: Nevertheless there is hope given that
the godly of this Church shall escape in that that being said of the plagued,
they gave not glory to God; there is probability that this judgment shall only
light on the Papists, or at the least, chiefly, and wicked men mingled with
this Estate and Church, who before had no care of Gods glory or the Gospels
good, but only sought their own glory, wealth and pleasures.

5. The plague here described is not only by heat, which yet were sufficient to
uphold the allusion of the Sun, but also by fire; this makes me conjecture
that this Prince or State shall lay desolate by fire and burning more then by
sword, God girding him or them with such power, as that they shall not need to
fight many battails; neither ought it to seem strange, that fire here meant
laying all things waste should literally be meant, seeing the Angel that has
power over this fire, Apoc. 14.18. is Cranmer triumphing in the fire of
Martyrdom; and the burning of the flesh of the Whore, is the sacking of Rome,
Apoc. 17.16. so the Angel of the Waters in the 5th. verse. going before,
resembles the States of the Low Germany seated in a watery Country.

6. The effect of this plague in the wicked is boiling in heat, and gnawing of
their tongues, and blaspheming the name of God, which contain more then an
inward rage of Papists, for the confounding of their Religion by the
Scriptures; they must needs show welneer such a ruin of State as the ruin of
Rome comes to: forasmuch as great a plague is described here as in the first
Vial, and that in the same terms and words, as appears by comparing the 9
verse. with the 11 following: add to this, that the plague of this Vial is
uttered in the plural number, they blasphemed the name of God over these
plagues, as if it contained many confusions in it; and this answers to the
justice of God, who begins judgment at his own house, and at them who make
profession to be of his household. By this Revelation the Pope shall be
destroyed before the Turk, because he professed Christianity, which the Turks
did not. In like manner before God destroy the Pope, he shall pour out his
Vial on some Protestant or Lutheran Church which made profession of the Gospel
against Popery, but obeyed it not: by this means it shall come to pass what
was done of old; then God afflicted Jewry his own Church, before he destroyed
the earthly Babylon; now he shall punish one of his own Churches, before he
proceed against Rome the spiritual Babylon.

7. I conjecture, that this Sun of the fourth Vial punishing a rebellious
Church, and the Angel of the fifth Vial sacking Rome, is all one and the
same: First, because the fifth Vial is immediately adjoined and expressed with
the very same terms, which probably induces to think that it shall be wrought
by the same means: this conjecture is helped by this, that the rebelling
against the Sun of the fourth Vial, shall be procured by the Pope and Papist,
which shall be in case that this Sun, so soon as he has subdued his
domestical enemies, shall address himself to an Expedition against Rome:
Secondly, the ruin of Rome arises from a wilderness, Apoc. 17.3. First, as I
conjecture, out of the same Country laid waste like a wilderness. This
Country must be the State wasted by the Sun of the fourth Vial, for we have
no Prophecy of any other State to be laid waste, immediately before Romes
sacking, but only of that: now that John's carrying into the wilderness to see
the ruin of Rome, does show that Romes ruin shall arise out of a land,
brought to a wilderness, may thus appear. Wherefore is John set on the sea
shore, Apoc. 12.18. when he is to see the rising of the Beast, but because of
the beasts rising out of the sea, ergo, in that John Apoc. 17.3. is placed in a
wilderness to see Romes ruin, it is a sign that Romes ruin shall rise out of
some Country reduced to a wilderness. So when John is to see the beauty of
the Jewish Church, he is carried to a great high mountain to see it. Apoc.
21.10. i. e. because his Church shall be set up on high like to a mountain,
Isa. 22.3. This is the description of him which sacketh Rome, Apoc. 18.1. I saw
a great Angel come down from heaven, having great power, so that the earth was
enlightened with his glory, which agrees with the Sun of this fourth Vial: he
comes down from heaven; First, suddenly beyond all expectation of man;
Secondly, the Sun of the fourth Vial arises suddenly out of his plague, when
the world thought he could never have recovered, he has great power given him,
this is the power of the Sun of the fourth Vial, both by glory of conquering,
and the wealth of the conquered, which he shall get into his hands: he has
light and brightness, which what is it else but the Sun of the fourth Vial
his light and brightness? Lastly, he replenisheth the earth with his glory;
which implies the great admiration of the world, and the astonishment of
Papists and earthly men; when they shall see the Sun of the fourth Vial arise
so extraordinarily out of his plague. Fourthly, and last of all, Apoc. 17.16.
it is said, that the ten horns shall sack Rome: and who shall the States of
Christendom sooner choose for their General or proclaim their Emperor
against Rome, then he that has been plagued by Papists, and enraged against
them, and furnished with greatest authority, power and wealth to subdue them?

Thus have I presumed to deliver my conjecture concerning this fourth Vial; I
say conjecture, because it cannot certainly be known, till it be executed:
Nevertheless, because the time thereof approaches it becomes every Christian
man to strive by prayer, meditation, study, and all other means for some
understanding of it, considering that he has not writ this prophecy only to
instruct us when it is past, but also to forewarn us even aforehand.

The Revealer of secrets that unsealed this book to John, open unto us the
mystery of it, that we may foresee the evil that is to come, and hide our
selves from it: as also keep our selves pure from offenses against our Sun,
lest we partake of the plagues which this Vial does denounce against all such
transgressions. To God only wise be honor and glory for ever, Amen.

Mr. Parker his Meditations of the Reign of ANTICHRIST, and of several degrees
thereunto. OR, A short and general Survey of the three last VIALLS, in all
probabilities no less plainly then admirably shadowing out these times wherein
we live, out of REVEL. 6.10.
THE extraordinary accidents that happen within the christian world in these
our days being without doubt pointed at in that prophetical history of the
Revelation, cannot but enforce a serious musing of the period of these
combustions, the truth of which the event will admirably discover, being though
somewhat darkly shadowed forth in this Chapter; The desire of the true meaning
whereof have made these thoughts legible. You have heard in the opening of the
fourth Vial, a preparation toward Romes ruin; the Vial poured upon the sun,
i. e. some sharp calamity and affliction falling upon some Protestant or
Lutheran Prince, assuredly some State disunited from Popery. This Sun
recovering himself from his plague, which may last for some years in all
probability, not above ten, shall make an expedition against his oppressors,
scorching the popelings with the heat of misery in the fury of anger. And thus
far goes the fourth Vial.

This Sun or Prince being recovered from his plague; thinks that not a
sufficient revenge to devour and burn the inferior members of the adverse
party, intends an expedition, prepares a war against the head, the
abettors and setters on of the inflictors of his plague, which is plainly
shadowed out by the fifth Vial, as you shall hear.

And the fifth Angel poured out his Vial on the throne of the Beast, and his
Kingdom was full of darkness.

Here is a more direct striking at the head, then in the former Vial, for in
other things there is a great resemblance betwixt these two Vialls, they both
exercise their extremity against men, they both cause blaspheming of God in
their adversaries, which does strongly confirm the conjecture that you heard of
in the former Vial, that the Sun of the fourth Vial, and the Angel of the
fifth Vial is all one and the same man, in a double warlike expedition; for
first, having the Vial poured upon himself, he lies for a certain time hidden
and obscured, as though his light and heat had been utterly darkened, and
cooled; and rising out of his misery, he shall scorch some petty Armies with
the heat of his anger, perhaps overcoming that Army, that before gave him the
foil, spoiling those neighbor territories that had made a prey of his, during
his darkness, and lying in his plague, which shall cause his adversaries to fret,
and curse, and ban, that a half dead man should thus strangely arise, and to
their everlasting shame and overthrow become potent: But now coming to a higher
pitch, attended with greater strength, shall cast his thoughts upon higher
things, the effecting of greater matters, even the overthrow of the head of
rebels, the Antichristian beast, the Romish whore. We see then who this fifth
Angel is: In all likelihood, some Prince or State an enemy to Popery,
recovering health after a long sickness, peace after many troubles, and
strength after great weakness, whereinto he was cast, by the cruel tyranny of
the beasts members. Having thus found out the party, let us look upon his work:
he pours says the text, his Vial upon the throne of the beast; the
preparatives thus far fitly concurring, viz. Romes destroyer, being set on his
feet, and made Master of his domestical enemies, he sends a defiance against
the head, and pours out his wrath upon the principal; And here I must crave
leave to differ again in my conjecture from the sun of this age Mr. Brightman,
as I shall do in all these three last Vialls, and that not without reason, as
in the opening of them shall appear. For whereas Mr. Brightman does put a full
period to Antichrist his reign in this fifth Vial; I cannot see how that can
be, forasmuch as there follows in the next Vial things which must necessarily
praecede Romes ruin. We may therefore with more reason, and no derogation of
praise due to so worthy a lamp, refer its desolation to the seventh Vial, and
make this a more near and clear preparative thereunto. This Angel then bearing
an inward hatred to the Whore, shall use all means to dethrone her from her
chair of State, to eclipse her glory, to darken her brightness; but not daring
as yet to meddle with the head and principal parts, he shall clip her wings
that she dare not sore too high, put bounds to her Dominions, dispossess her
of some parts of her Kingdoms, for in that it is said her Kingdom was
darkened, or did wax dark, not was overthrown; it is plain that this is only
an abridging her of her large morsells, obscuring her brightness, pulling some
fair feathers out of her proud train, making her to view her black legs, the
baseness of her rising, that she shall not dare to vaunt her self as the prime
darlings amongst the sons of the Children of Pride: This makes me conjecture
that this Angel, this Prince or State shall get some of the temporal
Kingdoms of Antichrist out of the claws of this Beast to himself; whereby the
extent of her rule shall be straightned: And if I should think that this
Angel of the fifth Vial (being that same afflicted Sun in the fourth Vial)
shall be elected the head of the ten horns that shall sack Rome, of whom we
will speak more in the next Vial; the resemblance that is between the probable
events of this election, and the effects of this Vial will warrant the
conjecture; for weigh them a little; First, if this Angel be chosen Head or
Emperor, in all likelihood, nay without all doubt he will scorn to receive
the Imperial Crown from the paw of the Beast, who is his mortal enemy; and is
not this a shroud darkness to the Beasts vainglorious authority; for without
controversy, the Romish Beast does glory in nothing more then this, that she
has power to set up, and to pull down, to inthrone and dethrone, to crown and
uncrown Emperors and Kings at her pleasure, which power all her Worshippers
and Flatterers do give her, as is plain in their writings to be seen: Now then
this juggling deceit of hers, or rather tyrannical usurpation of authority over
the Germane Emperors, being discovered and dispelled, neglected and contemned,
her esteem will be much diminished, her reputation blemished, her brightness
obscured, her vain threats, and childish thunderbolts of Excommunication
derided; and may not this loss of crowning Kings be well said to be a
darkning of her Kingdom?

Moreover, add hereunto a second degree of darkness: This Angel being chosen
Emperor and Head, shall in his own person, or be a means that he that is the
Head shall wring the whole German Empire out of this Beasts clutches; for there
is no likelihood, but that he that in despite of the Beast is recovered out of
his plague, shall to spite the Beast draw all his own subjects from the
obedience of this Antichristian tyrant, which thing being such a wide gap into
the Beasts power, may well be called a darkening of his Kingdom; and in these
two things especially the Emperors refusing to be crowned, or to receive his
Dominion from the Pope, and the wresting, or rather freeing of the whole
Germane Empire from Popish slavery, shall the working of the fifth Vial be
accomplished; for still remember, that this Angel at this time shall darken,
not overturn the Kingdom of the beast (which thing Mr. Brightman in part did
see) it being as clear as the sun, that the darkning of the Beasts Kingdom,
implies a declination, not a desolation, a falling a tanto, not a toto, an
eclipsing of her glorious luster, not an extinguishing of her whole body:
Neither need this to move any doubt; because the Vial is poured upon the seat
or throne of the Beast which is Rome, and therefore ought we to expect the
accomplishment of this Vial on that City. For I answer it is plain, and our
usual manner of speech to call the whole Kingdom the throne of the King, or
the seat of the Governor; and so the throne of Antichrist is every where,
where he is esteemed and worshipped; for though this Angel shall have a good
mind to be meddling with the Beasts person, and in all likelihood he, or some
of his shall be the seventh Angel that shall make an end of her, yet shall he
not in the time of this fifth Vial dare to attempt so high a design, but
shall for a while content himself to have freed himself and his Empire from
the slavish bondage of Romish tyranny, deferring his expedition against Rome,
and the Beast, until that potent, proper, and mighty upholder, of their
ruinous and tottering estate shall be broken and removed, which the sixth angel
shall ere long discover and take away, as in the opening of that shall appear.

You have seen this angel and his Vial; now let us look what follows upon
this, how the Beast and his followers take this blow, for surely such a great
blemish cannot but move them, at least to some passionate behavior against
their oppressor; now this effect is the same that followed the scorching of the
Sun in the fourth Vial, that differs only in degree, for the nearer the blow
comes to the head, and the more eminent that the expedition of this (not long
since forlorn man) is, the more is their pain, the greater is their rage; for
if they did blaspheme God when the Sun did but scorch the baser, and meanest
pillars in the Popes Church: What will they do now when he comes to take away
the main pillar whereupon the building of Popery hangs, and the corner stone in
their church? Why, the text shows, They gnawed their tongues for pains. These
are the Beasts attendants; before they vented their discontent against God in
more mild sort; but now they are even mad with rage, and like mad men they tear
their own flesh.

The Beasts friends and followers shall be so astonished at this wonderful
alteration, that because they shall want power to give their fury vent against
their enemies, they shall wreak that upon themselves, at the consideration of
this sudden and unexpected accident; and certainly this is more then probable,
that the popelings shall be in this raging fit of madness, at this so
extraordinary darkning of their Kingdom; for as they exulting over, and
trampling upon this Sun, this afflicted State in time of his plague did falsely
and fondly flatter themselves with dreams of perpetual rest, because the hater
of their tyrany was suppressed; even so, they seeing this worm (for so he was in
their conceits) lift up his head against his adversaries, shall be moved; but
when they see him confront their authority, enforce their swelling waves to
keep within their own channel; Oh then they shall be enraged. The darkning
of their Kingdom does much move them; but that it should be darkened by this
State, this beyond measure sets them on fire; here is blaspheming, cursing,
gnawing, What not? for assuredly, this so sudden, unlooked for, strange
increase of this angel, shall gall at the very heart all the swarms of Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, Cardinals, and the rest of the rabble of this Antichristian
crew: For this darkning of their Kingdom is such a pain and sore to them (for
these words the Holy Ghost gives it) as nothing can be greater, and well it
may when all the pains that they have taken in masking Antichrist, and covering
him under the veil of their Inventions shall be proved but smoke. But what,
does this discovery of their falsities, these pains drive them to the truth?
Nay says the Spirit, both in the former and in this Vial, they repented not,
etc. Whence I conjecture, that few or none, in respect of the generality of the
grand and head Papists, not many of the Beasts followers shall be drawn out of
their wilful blindness in the damnation of this Romish where, but shall
receive their reward at one hour, in one manner with the Beast.

Thus have we in spite of the Beast, and without his consent, enthroned this
angel in his place appointed, from which he shall never descend, till he has
executed against Rome the judgment that is written: for yet a little while and
their destruction shall come as an armed man; which cannot be, till that which
upholdeth her be taken out of the way, which the sixth angel with his Vial
will speedily do; Thus far the fifth Vial.

VER. 12. And the sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon the great River
Euphrates and the water thereof was dried up.


We mentioned in the former Vyall, a certain potent prop that did uphold the
Beast, and kept the fifth angel a while from bringing a final desolation to
the Romish Beast, which obstacle, both what it was, and the means of its
removal, we have here plainly discovered.

And here though I take Mr. Brightman to be under God a principal angel in
this Vyall also, in case it be meant of the conversion of the Jews as he would
have it, in that he has set the pens, tongues, and hearts of many on work, in
the opening of this opinion, which is so plainly and firmly grounded on the
Word of God, that I think it impossible to be infringed, and do also without
all question believe it shall be effected in its time; yet notwithstanding, I
neither do nor can think that this eminent work was aimed at any whit at all
in this verse; my reasons are these:

First, this drying up of Euphrates comes in the time of Romes declination, but
before her final desolation, but the man of Sin shall be utterly abolished,
at the brightness of Christ's coming to call the Jews.

Secondly, the end of this Rivers drying up, is to make a way for the Kings of
the East; implying, that these Kings shall come up all one way together, about
one business; and the original (...), the way, imports as much, which way was
barred up to all these Eastern Princes alike, by the current of this River: but
the Jews shall be converted from all the four winds; so that this River can
only hinder one part of them, What comfort can the Western Jews have from
hence?

Thirdly, the conversion of the Jews is described in whole Chapters afterward;
it is not likely then the Spirit of God would either include that so briefly
and darkly here, which in more words he does plainly open afterward, or that
he would insert it here in the midst of the Vialls, and after without any
method come back again: I rather think that from hence to the end of Revelation
is an orderly and methodicall description of things that shall happen to the
end of the world, some few digressions only excepted.

Fourthly, if the conversion of the Jews be here meant, then is the drying up
of Euphrates literally meant, which is not usual in this book, especially in
such passages of note and eminency; to say nothing of this, that the truth of
this miracle has no sure foundation I think in the Book of God, but only some
prophetical allusions, and the prophecy of the counterfeit Esdras in the
Apocrypha.

This interpretation therefore not holding water, we must see for some other;

I conjecture then by the drying up of Euphrates is understood the removal of
that obstacle which is an impediment to the Expedition of the fifth angel
against the Beast himself: Now what this impediment was, we shall find out, if
we seriously consider the thing it self under which it is shadowed.

What is then Euphrates? for this being once known, we shall the more easily
gather who shall be this angel that poures out his Vial upon Euphrates.

Euphrates then is a River (to say so much of it as concerns our purpose) in
Caldea that runs through that great City Babylon, and performs to that City a
double office, the one of maintenance, for upon that River is brought all kind
of merchandise, whereby the State of the City is upheld, the other of defense,
being as a wall to the City, and a sure safeguard to the Citizens, insomuch
that the inhabitants had a certain confidence (which for the sure belief
thereof some have termed a Prophecy) that they should never be overcome till
the River prove their enemy.

Now when Cyrus King of Persia came against the City, and besieged it a long
time, but in vain, he did by diverse new made channells divert the course of the
water, and through the old channel being now made dry, he entered the City,
and got Babylon; and so was their confidence or Prophecy made true, the River
became their enemy, and made a way for this Persian Prince.

Thus we see what Euphrates was, by which we may be warranted to think, that
by Euphrates here is meant some State or Kingdom, which is to Rome as
Euphrates was to Babylon, a supporter and defense: Now when I thought of all
the States and Princes in this Western world, I see none a greater supporter to
the seat of Antichrist, or more stands for him, then does the Catholic King
(as the Popelings call him) I conjecture therefore, that by Euphrates in this
verse is meant the Kingdom and State of the King of Spain, for do but weigh
them, and you shall see how fully they agree.

First, Euphrates is a great River in Caldea, and Spain is a great Kingdom in
Europa.

Secondly, Euphrates did convey maintenance to Babylon, and so did uphold the
City, and it is notoriously remarkable, that Spain is the sole nourisher and
upholder of the Popish Kingdom.

Thirdly, Euphrates was a defense to Babylon, and who knows not that the Beast
of Rome does acknowledge the Spanish forces to be the only supporters of his
credit, the bar that keeps his enemies from trampling his triple crown in the
dust.

Fourthly, Babylon could not be won, nor Cyrus have any way into that City,
till the water of this River was dried up, and may we not well think, that
the only cause that stays the fifth Angel, and other Eastern Princes from an
Expedition against Rome, is the power of Spain, for they shall stand waiting
till this current of supportation that runs from Spain to Rome be dried up,
and Spain enforced to bestow their strength elsewhere, perhaps in their own
defense.

But who shall be this sixth Angel that shall pour his Vial upon Euphrates?
Why surely I think this will give a great probability to my former conjecture;
To pour out the Vial, in all this Revelation, does signify to lay affliction
upon, and bring misery unto, and most usually the plague of War; some Prince
therefore, or State shall fall at odds with Spain, and hold her play at home,
that she shall not attend to succor her ancient friend, the Beast, and his
followers.

And if I should think that this State or sixth Angel shall be the Kingdom
of England, or the Low countries, or both jointly with their friends; one
peradventure would think it unlikely, and yet the next age, or perhaps this
will (it may he) make it appear, that they shall have a principal hand in
pouring out this sixth Vial.

But who are those Eastern Kings whose way by this means shall be prepared,
and what is this preparation of their way to do?

I answer, Even the same men, that are afterward called the Ten horns
prepared in a readiness to sack Rome, who are both here and there called
Kings; and yet chap. 17. are said to have no crowns, which in my conceit does
most admirably shadow out the German Princes, every of which is an absolute
Prince in his own territory, and therefore may well be called a King, yet are
not crowned; they have not the name of Kings, but have a head, as these horns
had, which bears the crown, the name over them all, even the Emperor, which at
this time shall be Angel of the fifth Vial; for these Princes and their head
is it, that this way is prepared; for they seeing that Romes Euphrates, her
supporter is dried up, shall presently join in an Expedition, which shall be
the final desolation of this purple Whore, we see now the meaning.

The sixth Angel poured out his Vial upon Euphrates, and the waters thereof
were dried up, that the ways of the Kings of the East, might be prepared, i.
e. England, or the Low countries, or some other Prince enemy to Spain, does
fall at odds with Spain, by which Spain is enforced to employ his forces for
his own defense, and suffers his aid, which he was used to send to Romes help
to be dried up; which occasion the Germane Princes, and their Head laying hold
upon, and finding their way fitly prepared, because Rome is now left destitute
of foreign help, execute that for which they were kept to be ready at a day or
an hour, when the Lord should call; where by the way we may note, how the Lord
makes all things admirably concur to his own ends. The Jars betwixt this sixth
Angel and Euphrates is for this end, to make a way open for the Germane
Princes to sack Rome; Whereupon I conjecture and verily think, that all the
troubles that shall happen in this Western world in these times, are only to
make way, for the ruin of Rome, upon whose head, and in whose ruin they shall
at the last all fall and end now: let us in a word look upon that which
follows.

And I saw three unclean spirits, etc. That which remains of this Vial in the
three next verses is only thus much: That the Pope perceiving his estate to
decline, his Kingdom and authority to totter, himself left destitute and
forsaken of his dearest and only son the King of Spain, his fierce enemies now,
sometimes his vassalls, plotting, imagining, affecting his overthrow, shall by
the instigation of the great dragon, the devil, and the persuasion of the
false Prophets his flattering crew of Cardinals, Friars, and the rest of that
Antichristian building, send forth his croaking Jesuits, who shall by their
crafty subtilnesse go forth unto the Kings of the earth, incite and stir them
up to take in hand the defense of their master Antichrist, whose ruin then is
coming, and shall fall unexspectedly and suddenly upon him, as by that sudden
digression and exclamation, Behold I come as a thief, etc. may be gathered;
when these frogs have gathered what Kings they can together, by whose strength
their master this beast expects a restoration, at least a prolongation of his
former glory, he shall unlooked for receive his fatal wound, which shall make
him irrecoverably expire; for then,

Verse. 17. The seventh Angel pours out his Vial upon the air, and a great
voice comes forth of the Temple, saying, It is done, etc. Here is the utter
desolation of Rome, and the tyranny thereof presaged, and not of
Constantinople, which shall come to his final period in the overthrow of Gog,
not now; In the mean space let us with our prayers cry mightily unto God, that
this Man of Sin may not long oppress;

Which God grant.
FINIS.

