Worse and worse NEVVES FROM IRELAND BEING THE COPY OF A Letter read in the
House of Parliament, the 14. of this instant Month of December, 1641.

Wherein is contained such unheard of Cruelties, committed by the Papists
against the Protestants, not sparing Age nor Sex, that it would make a
Christians heart to bleed.

LONDON, Printed for Nath: Butter. 1641.

A COPY OF A LETTER. Read in the House of Parliament, the 14. of this Instant
Month of December 1641.
SIR,
ALL I can tell you is the miserable estate we continue under, for the Rebels
daily increase in men and munition, in all parts, except the Province of
Munster, exercising all manner of cruelties, and striving who can be most
barbarously exquisite in tormenting the poor Protestants, wheresoever they
come; Cutting off their privy members, ears, fingers, and hands, plucking out
their eyes, boiling the heads of little Children before their Mothers faces,
and then ripping up their Mothers Bowels; stripping women naked, and standing
by them being naked, whilst they are in Travel, killing the Children as soon
as they are borne, and ripping up their Mothers bellies, as soon as they are
delivered; driving men, women, and children, by hundreds together upon Bridges,
and from thence cast them down into Rivers, such as drowned not, they knock
their brains out with Poles, or shoot them with Muskets, that endeavor to
escape by swimming out; ravishing wives before their husbands faces, and
Virgins before their Parents faces, after they have abused their bodies,
making them renounce their Religion, and then marry them to the basest of their
fellows:

Oh that the Lord, who has moved the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, to
send relief to these afflicted Protestants, would likewise stir them to
effect their undertaking, with all possible expedition, least it be too late.

Some of the persons particularly mentioned to have suffered, who are known
unto you, are, Master German, Minister of Brides, his Body mangled, and his
members cut off, Master Fullerton Minister of Lughall, Simon Hastings his ears
cut off, Master Blandry Minister, hanged, his flesh pulled off from his bones,
in the presence of his wife, in small pieces, he being hanged two days before
her, in the place where she is now prisoner. Abraham James of Newtowne, in the
Diocese of Clohor, cut in pieces, and it is reported that the Bishop of Clohor
is turned to the Rebels, thus moving pardon in presuming to trouble you at this
time in your public employments, do with humble remembrance of his best
respects to you, and your virtuous Lady, remain

November. 27. 1641. Your Servant to Command, THOMAS PARTINGTON.


THis Letter was read in the House of Commons, upon the 14. day of this Month,
and also read again before the Lords, at a Comittee of both Houses, and humbly
prayed to have the same entered in the Iournals of both Houses.

The said House of Commons likewise desired the Lords to join with them, to
petition his Majesty, to take off the reprieve from the seven condemned
Priests, and that they might be forthwith executed according to their
Judgment, and the Law


