PEACE and PLENTY coming unto us, If we be willing to entertain them and will
bid them welcome: Manifested in some Observations upon the Motion lately made
by certain persons sitting usually at Salters-H^ll in Bread-street London, and
there employed about raising of new Regiments of HORSE and FOOT:

Viz.

Written by one, who has heard and seen somewhat said and done, for and
against the same Motion, And desires that it may be more fully understood and
furthered, tending (as he conceives) so much unto the Public good.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothw^ll, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign
of the Sun in Paul's Church yard. May 19. MDCXLIII.

Peace and Plenty coming unto us, if we be willing to entertain them, and will
bid them welcome.
1. NOw Ireland, (from whence we formerly received much food) is so wasted,
that it must be supplied from England, or else be pined; and now so many parts
of England are also already, and the rest very likely without Gods great mercy,
before it belong to be in no better condition: this Motion like the I epers
news, 2 King. 7. brings the glad ti^ings of peace and plenty. If we as the
unbeleeving Lord th^re, will not reject it as impossible; but as the Samaritans
there make trial of it. Of peace; for as the Syrians there fled at the noise
of Chariots and Horses, so happily may our enemies shortly hearing of these
forces added unto the former, sent out against them, or else by the righteous
judgment of God fall in battle before them, Of plenty: For if London begin,
and England (except where the enemies Armies hinder) follow her example, and
abstain thus betime (as we may hope England, for so great a good will easily b^
persuaded to so small a thing) then will plenty also follow, if the Lord please.

2. If this Motion (in this particular design) succeed well, it may perhaps
show this to be the best way to furnish all the necessities of the State, and
move the Parliament, allowing only a part of the Moneys raised hereby unto
these new Regiments (who may levy the same in and within miles of London) to
extend this way of raising money and the Kingdom over; and if they find it to
yield a sufficient supply, ease themselves, and the people thereby, of, and
from all other payments And this (unto some that have seriously considered
thereof) seems not improbable. For if but the willing party would say unto
the Parliament; We will cheerfully abstain from one meal in a week, and give
you the value thereof, (yea from two if there be cause) so by an ordinance you
will compel the Malignants to do the like: who can doubt but that the
Parliament would readily answer; We will give power, if the Malignants refuse
to pay their part, to distrain them for three times as much as they shall be
assessed at, and also free you from all other payments, if we find these to be
sufficient, as in truth they will readily appear to be; if, what one meals meat
in all England comes unto, be but reckoned and cast up, at a very easy and
under rate.

3 By this a^stinence the rich men once in a week, may have the poor man's
pleasant appetite: which alas they lose or lessen by their continual plenteous
feeding, as Solomon shows, prove. 27. 7. The full soul loath them honeycomb,
but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is ^weet. The rich, what sauces are
they sain to sharpen their app^tites with? when by this a^stinence they may
find a delightful taste of every dish, yea, and withal have the favor of
God, and the love of their Countries. The poor (the poorer they are, even down
to the Almesman) in some respects have more reason to abstain, and cast in
their mites; for, poor souls, they are not able many other ways (as the rich
are) to express their love unto their Country: but this way they may, yea and
highly please God thereby (as the widow of Zarephath did, by making Elijah a
little cake first, of that handful of meal which was all that she had left, 1.
Kings 17.) and withal, either provoke the rich to follow their examples, or
shame them before God and men, if they will not. Again, famine first ^illeth
the poor and the poorest first of all: and according to the degree of their
poverty is plenty the greatest blessing unto them; therefore they have most
reason to strive most to avoid famine, and to procure plenty: wherefore let
them (for example sake) give even the fou^teenth farthing given to buy them
food, if for the present they can give it, and live; therein shall they do
wisely for themselves, for none of those that are more able (seeing them that
are so poor, to do this) will be so sh^melesse to refuse to do their parts, to
avoid famine and to procure plenty. Yea God will move others to enlarge
themselves, in relieving such poor, as they see (even of their nothing) yet to
give something to support the Comman-wealth.

4 If this be done universally, victual must needs be the fourteenth pen^ie
cheaper, and thereby one penn ewill be gained in every fourteen laid out for
victual, so that what one of Jacobs sons said, Genesis 42. 28. My money to
restored, and so, it us even in my sack: every one may as truly affirm of what
he thus spares and gives, that it is restored, for he shall pay so much the
less for another weeks provision, and the longer he gives it, still so much
the less, for it will be so much the more plentiful, and by consequence the
cheaper; which may move the covetous to contribute it, because it will be
gainful unto him: and much more if it shall (as if it be observed generally it
will) exempt him also from all other impositions. The money thus raised is
better unto England, then if Holland or any foreign State gave it: for it is
not only gained, but brings as (as it were in) all the victual which we
save thereby.

5 If two men in every Parish went with two Books, the one with a white book,
and the other with a black book: and recorded in the white book the names of
all that by this beneficence became been factors unto their Country, and in
the black book theirs that refused, to the perpetual honor of the one, and
infamy of the other and their posterities (as a witty Florentine in time of
famine advises to do) surely very few would be set down in the black book: for
the greatest Malignants beside the avoiding of such shame) would also fear left
the Parliament might impose more upon them, if they refused this, and thereby
showed the height of their malignancy, which moved them even with their own
damage, to endeavor the undoing of the Commonwealth: and that all their
neighbors would ready to leavie what they were assessed at with zeal enough.

6 In besieged Cities (for saving of victual) it has been usual to put out
innocent old men, women and children; yea, though they were exposed thereby
unto the pleasure of the enemy: how much more do such as refuse this abstinence
and contribution deserve to be thrust out, from eating up that which is brought
in to sustain this City? yea to be thrust not only out of the City but out of
the kingdom also, toward both which (doubtless) they can bear no good
affection, who shall refuse to do so little for their preservation and
happiness.

7 All that are religious and lovers of their Country, with all readiness and
alacrity will abstain from, and give the value of the best ordinary meal in
their families once every week, and not inconsiderately object that their
children and servants will ea% as much either before or after such abstinence,
as they spare by forbearing that meal. For if in a besieged City, the victual
can be, and usually is proportioned, so as it may hold out happily until the
siege be raised; how much easier may this be done by a man in his family, if he
be Master in his own house; and if in a siege, seven small meals in a week,
would be as so many feasts, and men and women be so well contented to feed more
sparingly many days, that they might rejoyee with their friends upon a feast
day: will they not now abstain from one meal in a week, to avoid war and
famine, and to procure peace, plenty, and many joyful feasts? If any
(unterrified by the judgments which fell upon Ananias and Saphirah) shall keep
back a part of the price, by estimating the families meal at too low a value
(beside their present baseness, manifested thereby unto all the Parish) the
Parliament if they please to exercise their power therein, can easily appoint
some of their neighbors, to give them a just and true reckoning what a meals
meat for so many mouths, as they have in their familes comes unto (which would
make but little for their credits) and if they refused to pay it, authorize
some to levy the same (as in the like cases they have done) by distress, and
sale of such Recusants goods and chattels.

8. If any be grieved, that for the cooking of dinners on the Lords days, some
of their family cannot be at Gods public worship in the morning; or that in
the afternoon in the like duties, they are too drousie and sleepy. Behold
hereby a remedy for both, They may take (instead of a dinner) only so much as
will keep them from fainting; and at supper (which though but ordinary, will
seem a feast) they may rejoice that more have been at Gods worship, and all
become fitter by this abstinence to worship him; and that no work (as some
perhaps, if this abstinence were on a working day would conceive) were hindered
thereby. And for doing of this, no man can doubt that his God will be offended,
unless his God be his belly, as the Apostle, Phil. 3. 19. shows some men's
are.

9. If we will do thus much for our selves, we shall also hereby show unto our
Brethren of Scotland, how without their own cost or ours, they also (if need
require) may do the like, and thereby raise and maintain their forces, and come
and help us: as we (reciprocally) shall be ready to do for them, whenever our
assistance may do them good.

10. Joseph an accused stranger, and prisoners advice being hearkened unto (when
no danger appeared, but by a dream) what good thereby was done for Pharaoh, and
all Egypt, the story shows. Now War has already wasted so far, that Famine
is also come within every man's conjecture: Let England be persuaded to remove
both these evils, and to procure Peace and Plenty at a cheaper rate then Egypt
did; for the Egyptians lives were saved indeed, but that cost them all that
they had, except their Idolatry, their Goods, Lands, and Liberties. But this
abstinence, beside the saving of our Lives (with the lords blessing) will also
preserve unto us our Goods, Lands, Laws, Liberties, and true Religion.
Arguments enough, if any be sufficient to persuade people, with so much ease
and accommodation to attain these four excellent aims or ends: 1. The
completing of these so necessary new Regiments of Horse and Foot for our own
safety. 2. The maintaining of the War (the only way to a good and godly
Peace.) 3. The prevention of Famine (which otherwise se^m^th unavoidable.) 4.
And lastly, the easing all men from their Contributions, which otherwise must
continue, yea, become more grievous, if this course be not taken.

11. The Spiritual and Temporal Watchmen, Magistrates and Ministers,
mentioned Ezekiel. 33. (except such as be contented God should require the soul,
and body blood of the unwarned people at their hands) will doubtless give the
people warning, and do what they can to move them to apply the reme^ies. And
Neb. 5. 7. presents them a prevalent president; when he could not otherwise
get the Usurers to remit their interest, he set a great Assembly against them,
to cry shame of them: though the belly (as the Proverb speaks) has no ears,
yet if almost a whole Parish cry out of one so brutish obedient unto his belly,
that would not thus abstain and give, doubtl^sse he would either hearken unto
them, and come in, or else fly upon such a hue and cry.

12. All good men now are as busy as Bees at this time of the year, exampling
and provoking one another unto good works, especially such as tend to the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom and his Churches deliverance, and now (as in
Isaiahs time, Chapter 37.) children are come to the birth, and there is no strength
to bring forth: will women (^o ready to assist one another in child bearing) do
nothing for Christ? (Has he showed no love unto them, or done nothing for
them;) y^s, to do them no wrong by silence, they have (above what men have
done) fasted and prayed, an^ to do still; and in this City, how did many a
Dorcus send lately, Shirts, Stockins, and other necessaries; yea, and meat and
drink unto Christ's poor Soldiers that fight against Antichrists, and shall
hear him at the last day say unto them, In as much as ye have done it unto the
least of these my Brethren, yea have done it unto me? Let them not be weary in
well doing, for Gal. 6. 9. i^ due season they shall reap, if they faint not.
The wise woman of Abel, 2 Samuel 20. was able to persuade the whole City for its
own safety: if women will study (as they do to obtain their own desires in
things concerning themselves) and make use of these and the like Arguments,
which of them is there not, but with prayer, endeavor, and the Lords blessing,
may prevail with all in their Families, to yield unto this abstinence and
contribution? And if any wife to obtain thus much, bestowed upon an unwil^ing
husband, some of those tears (if she had no more) which she uses to wash
Christ's feet withal, in the days of her humiliation: without all question,
the Lord Jesus would like it as well, as if she bestowed them more immediately
upon himself. Have not women generally the disposing of meats and drinks in
Families? Let them undertake (if they thus dispense) that God will so ^l^sse
the food of that Family (though it were but pulse and water, and so much less
of it) that all in the house (like Daniel and his fellows) shall look fairer
and fatter in flesh, then any other that do eat daily of any Kings dainties.
This work seems to be most proper for women, especially, now when men have so
many other employments. And a few of the wisest of them here in London,
(joining but together unanimously, and appointing some of their s^x, fittest
and most active in every Parish) might both ease the men of this labor, and
carry this good work through the City first, and Kingdom after ward, and be
honored for it both by God and men, in all Countries, and in all ages, and
give the Parliament cause (as in the like case once the Dames of Rome did that
Senate) to give them p^^^ike thanks for their love and care of the
Commonwealth.

FINIS.

