Queres to be considered of on the Kings much wished and hoped for arrival
toward the City of LONDON.
Quaere 1. Whether his Majesty's presence be not as much desired by the
Commons, as his absence by some great ones? and whether he will not be as
acceptable to the one, as rain to the thirsty ground, and to the other as the
sentence of death to the malefactor. Quaere 2. Whether we ought not to give
thanks to God and that in solemn manner, for carrying his Majesty on, in so
much health of body and cheerfulness of mind during this unnatural war, he
having such ample cause to be impaired in both? Quaere 3. Whether or no, the
Kings Majesty be any ways to be constrained to new Oaths, and involve
himself in new Covenants, since he protests to keep his Coronation Oath, the
very basis of our desire? Quaere 4. Whether the desires of the Army, are to be
looked upon only with a glance, and whether their motions can be waved by any
without an apparent danger to the whole Kingdom. Quaere 5. Whether or no, if a
second Civil War should be set on foot, the most weakest eye would not
discern that selfe-ends, the love of honor and gold, were the primary and
immediate cause that incited the opposers of the Armies just desires to take
the field again? Quaere 6. Whether the Committees or Excize-men are not now so
well fledged with borrowed feathers that they need not fear to fly abroad,
and whether the Commons will not fire their nest. Quere 7. Whether the hearts
of the Sectaries do not beat thicker then they were wont, fearing when the King
comes to them, their ringleaders will depart from them, and that Tubs shall
not be filled as before? Quere 8. Whether Britannicus does not repent, that he
made Hue and Cry after the King, and that whereas before he spelt his name
false, whether he wishes not he had not spelt it at all, and whether he
invoketh not Neptune to bear him safely to some foreign Land? Quere 9.
Whether Lilly and Booker will not alter the course of the stars, and at the
Kings arrival prognosticate his after-tranquillity, and force the malevolent
Planets to meet in conjunction for his good, and make predictions more mild
then before? Quere 10. Whether some Divines will not alter the Orisons at the
Kings arrival, mention his name more frequently: whether for his sake they
will not remember the Queen also: whether they will sing placebo in hope of
preferment or not, and whether they will not be willing to become Prebends,
Deans and Officialls, as ever before? Quere 11. Whether as the state of things
are at present, the Bishops government extirpated, and the Scotch form of
Presbytery opening a wider gap for tyranny then before, Independency be not
more to be tolerated, in (...)ard that then all parties may have content; those
that will admit of none but the old external form, and those whose
consciences are not yet satisfied? Quere 12. Whether the Sons of Ignorance do
not despair, that Learning shall again be respected, and that the Muses
sons shall once more rejoice, and that at the Kings arrival the Comic Sock
and Tragic Buskin shall again be worn? Quere 13. Whether there will not be a
strict inquiry made after the carriage of things formerly effected, whether
many will not want a satisfactory answer, and whether some will not be
enforced to make restitution of extorted gold? Quere 14. Whether the King will
not desire the Society of his Queen, and whether by God or man's Law he ought
to be withheld from her? Quere 15. Whether our Tradesmen at the Kings arrival
will not fear to exercise their talent in preaching, and whether they will not
choose rather to be Auditors then Instructors? Quaere 16. Whether some do not
fear that there will be a settled Government, and that at the Kings arrival, a
conformity will be pressed on all men, and that Schisms and factions shall be
suppressed. Quaere 17. Whether some illiterate or envious persons will not grudge
at these few Quaeres, and whether the Quaerist cares or no?
FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1647.


