A QVESTION ANSWERED: How Laws are to be understood, and obedience yielded?
Necessary for the present state of things, Touching the MILITIA.
Question. NOw in our extreme distractions, when foreign forces threaten,
and probably are invited, and a malignant and Popish party at home offended?
The Devil has cast a bone, and raised a contestation between the King and
Parliament touching the Militia* His Majesty claims the disposing of it to be
in him by right of Law; The Parliament says rebus sic stantibus, and nolenti
Rege, the Ordering of it is in them?

Answer. WHich Question, may receive its solution by this distinction. That
there is in Laws and equitable, and a litterall sense. His Majesty (let it be
granted) is entrusted by Law with the Militia, but it is for the good and
preservation of the Republique, against Foreign Invasions or domesticke
rebellions. For it cannot be supposed that the Parliament would ever by Law
entrust the King with the Militia against themselves, or the Commonwealth, that
intrusts them to provide for their weal, not for their woe. So that when there
is certain appearance or grounded suspicion, that the Letter of the Law shall
be improved against the equity of it (that is, the public good, whether of
the body real or representative) then the Commander going against its equity,
gives liberty to the Commanded to refuse obedience to the Letter: for the Law
taken abstract from its original reason and end, is made a shell without a
kernel, a shadow without a substance, and a body without a soul. It is the
execution of Laws according to their equity and reason, which (as I may say) is
the spirit that gives life to Authority, the Letter kills.

Nor need this equity be expressed in the Law, being so naturally employed and
supposed in all Laws that are not merely Imperial, from that analogy which
all bodies Politic hold with the Natural; whence all government and
Governors borrow a proportionable respect; And therefore when the Militia of an
Army is committed to the General, it is not with any express condition, that
he shall not turn the mouths of his Cannons against his own Soldiers, for that
is so naturally and necessarily employed, that its needless to be expressed,
insomuch as if he did attempt or command such a thing against the nature of his
trust and place, it did ipso facto estate the Army, in a right of disobedience,
except we think that obedience binds Men to cut their own throats, or at
least their companions.

And indeed if this distinction be not allowed, then the legal and mixed
Monarchy is the greatest Tyranny, for if Laws invest the King in an absolute
power, and the letter be not controled by the equity, then whereas other Kings
that are absolute Monarcks and rule by will, and not by Law, are Tyrants
perforce. Those that rule by Law and not by will, have hereby a Tyranny
conferred upon them legally, and so the very end of Laws, which is to give
bounds and limits to the exorbitant wills of Princes, is by the Laws
themselves disapointed, for they hereby give corrobaration (and much more
Justification to an arbitrary Tyranny, by making it legal, not assumed; which
Laws are ordained to cross not countenance: and therefore is the letter (where
it seems absolute) always to receive quallification from the equity, else the
foresaid absurdity must follow.

Printed for the good of the Commonweal*


