TRVE INTELLIGENCE FROM Lincolne-shire.

Discovered by a Letter to a private Gentleman.

Presented to the view and consideration of the peaceably minded.

LONDON, Printed for W. M. 1642. August 22.

TRUE INTELLIGENCE from Lincolne-shire, discovered in a Letter to a private
Gentleman.
Sir,
TO clear you from the misreports of our County of Lincoln, I send you this
as a true, and unpartiall relation of what has passed in it since the Kings
being here.

The greatest part of the considerable Gentry then grounding their Actions upon
the two Houses of Parliament, Voteing the necessity of putting the Kingdom
into Posture, and encourraged by their example, did subscribe to maintain some
Horses for three Months, to be in readiness for the defense of His Majesty's
just Prerogative, the Protestant Religion, the Liberty, and propriety of the
Subject, with the just Priveledges of Parliament, and peace of this County;
And have now sent those Horses to Lincoln (the Ceate of the Country) as a
guard for those parts, and fittest place to give relief to and present the
rest in peace, which (through Gods blessing) might be effected (were it not
for some strange insolences by men of despicable condition) with as great a
calm as can be wished, there having been nothing acted, or attempted by any of
the Commissioners of Array which can be construed a disturbance, but on the
contrary, they have declind the contention for the public Magazen, which has
been the first blown spark in other Counties. And I am confident their
future endavours will be only the preservation of peace within themselves, in
that they resolve (having thus far discharged their duties both to the King,
and the two Houses of Parliament) not to embarque further by sending any Forces
out of the County to aid either side, but as much as in them lies; to
endeavor Accommodation, This (being conversant with the professons of them
all) I am able knowingly to aver, and withal to give assurance that they
would not have drawn their Horses together but for these reasons, which I
collected at their debates.

I. That in so great a County, They would not exercise and make them fit for
Service, as in other places; where they meet with convenience of returning to
their houses when called to that duty.

II. For that some in this County have had Actual violences offered upon them,
by some of Sir John Hothams Soldiers; And others have been threatened to have
their Houses burnt by them: insomuch as the People of those Parts that lie
upon, and about Humber, are in continual Fears, and ready to leave their
dwellings; if they have not the countenance of some little Fort to defend them.

III. The reine of Government has been of slackned, as now it is cut in
pieces amongst us, many men of desperate Fortunes, and more wicked resolutions
live to geather, without the acknowledgment of any Law, so as no Legal press
can be attempted to be served upon them; But they resist it in a Warlike manner,
accumulating all manner of Insolences, by adding to their Rebelion, violences
upon men's Houses, goods, and Lands, Burning Stealing, and devastating of them,
so as the men of Fortunes had need serve them against such Spirits.

IIII. This being a Maritine County, and so exposed to the impressions of
Forces from a broad, as well as to dangerous consequences of Tumults, and
Insurrections from within, and not able suddenly to gather any power to resist
the one, or suppress the other (it being so large, and unpeopled a Country)
there seems a kind of necessity (in these times of distraction, and
threatening mischeifes) to have some in a continual readiness.

V. Most of the adjacent. Counties being full of Soldiers, they may attempt
such outrages upon us, as will call for a present rescue and help.

Upon all which the Gentlemen conceive themselves not only invited, but
necessiated, to what they have done, with a hope it will receive good
approbation from all others, that are not some way malignants either against
the King or Parliament, From which number I accquitt you, and (for my own
particular) do wish from my Soul, Reformation; or Ruin to him that is not
desirous (by all Just and Honorable ways,) to advance the Prosperity of both.
So concludes and rests,

Your Friend, and Servant, M. P.
August 15. 1642.
FINIS.

