THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT TO AN HONORABLE Lord, by Doctor Paske, Subdeane of
CANTERBVRY.

London printed, September 9. 1642.

THE COPY OF A Letter sent to an Honorable LORD.
My ever honored Lord,
DId it not conduce unto the Public, I should not presume to interrupt your
Lordships weighty affairs, but the long experience of your Lordships zeal for
Religion, and vigilance for your University of Cambridge, has assured me of
your Lordships Patronage of our whole Church in general, and (as the case now
stands) of this Mother Church in particular: We expected peace, but have found
much trouble from the Troopers sent among us: With what barbarousnesse they
have behaved themselves at Rochester, and in other parts of this County, I
leave to the Relation of others, and beg your Lordships patience only to be
informed what has happened here with us, and wherein I am more nearly concerned
by mine office in the absence of our Deane.

Colonel Sandis arriving here with his Troops on Friday night, presently
caused a strict Watch, and Sentinels to be set, both upon the Church, and upon
our several houses, to the great affright of all the Inhabitants. This done,
Sergeant Major Cockaine came to me, and in the name of the Parliament, demanded
to see the Arms of the Church, and the Store-powder of the County, which I
presently showed him, when he possessed himself of the Keys, and kept them in
his own custody. The next morning we were excluded the Church, and might not
be permitted to enter, for the performance of our Divine exercises, but about
8. of the Clock, Sir Michael Linesey, attended with many Soldiers, came unto
our Officers, and commanded them to deliver up the Keys of the Church to one
of their company, which they did, and thereupon he departed: When the Soldiers
entering the Church and Quire, Giant-like began a fight with God himself,
overthrew the Communion Table, toare the Velvet Cloth from before it, defaced
the goodly Skreen, or Tabernacle work, violated the Monuments of the dead,
spoiled the Organs, brake down the ancient Railes and Seats, with the brazen
Eagle that did support the Bible, forced open the Cupboords of the Singing men,
rent some of their Surplices, Gowns, and Bibles, and carried away others,
mangled all our Service-bookes, and Books of Common Prayer, bestrowing the
whole Pavement with the Leaves thereof; A miserable spectacle to all good eyes:
But as if all this had been too little to satisfy the fury of some indiscreete
Zealots among them (for many did abhor what was done already) they further
exercised their malice upon the Arras hangings in the Quire, representing the
whole Story of our Savior; wherein observing diverse figures of Christ (I
tremble to express their Blasphemies) One said, here is Christ, and swore that
he would stab him; another said, here is Christ, and swore that he would rip up
his bowels, which they did accordingly, so far as the Figures were capable
thereof, besides many other villainies: And not content therewith, finding
another Statue of Christ in the Frontispiece of the South-Gate, they discharged
against it, forty shot at the least, triumphing much when they did hit it in
the head or face, as if they were resolved to Crucify him again in his
Figure, whom they could not hurt in Truth.

Nor had their fury been thus stopped, threatening the ruin of the whole
Fabric, had not the Colonel, with some others come to the relief and rescue.

The Tumults appeased, they presently departed for Dover, from whence we expect
them this day, and are much afraid, that as they have already vilified our
Persons, and offered extreme indignity to one of our Brethren, so they will
plunder our houses at their return, unless the care of the Mayor, the
Colonel, and some Members of the House of Commons (Sir Edward Masters, and
Captain Nut now with us) who have promised to present their knowledge to that
Honorable House) do prevent the same.

YOur Lordship will be pleased to pardon my hasty expressions, which proceed
from a grieved heart, and I am confident the Honorable Houses of Parliament
being rightly informed herein, will provide against the like abuses and
impieties in other places; In the mean time we submit with patience to the
Providence of him who can and will bring good out of evil, which is the
earnest Prayer of

Your Lordships most obliged Servant.
Christ-Church Cant. Aug. 30. 1642.

