THE PARTICULARS of all the Late BLOODY FIGHT at Sea On Thursday and Friday
last. With A LIST of the Loss on both sides from the beginning to the end. The
horrid design of Van Trump to murder the ENGLISH. And an Account of the whole
Fight: Signified by a Letter from both the Generals at Sea, to his Excellency
THE Lord General CROMWELL.

June 6. 1653. Appointed to be Printed by special ORDER.

LONDON, Printed for R. Ibbitson dwelling in Smithfield near Hosier Lane. 1653.

A LETTER from the FLEET.
SIR,
WE have still large experience, that Gods time is best in all the issues of
his designs for his people; though (for so we hear) Van Trump, and some of the
Chief, after taking the Sacrament, had vowed to kill and slay the English to
his uttermost, and spare none; blessed be God the War is now brought to their
own doors, and we are still pursuing them, and doubt not but al Holland is
before this in a strong alarm: there are many ships of war taken, and many men
slain, and above a thousand prisoners taken of the Dutch, and our Fleet still
pursuing their Victory, the particulars at large you will shortly have, which
can be given now but brokenly.

Off of Ostend 4 June 1653.
A Letter from the Generals at Sea.
May it please your Excellency,
YOur Lordships of the second instant, with the enclosed Intelligence, we this
day received, and according to your Excellencies apprehensions thereon, we
have engaged the Dutch Fleet, a breife account of the first days action we have
already sent unto your Lordship. The next day being the third instant, we did
what we could to re-ingage them, and having the wind (which was but little)
about noon we came within shot, after four hours dispute with them, or
thereabouts, they endeavored what they could to get away from us; but having
then a pretty fresh gale of wind, we pressed so hard upon them, that we sunk
and took many of them (as by the enclosed List,) and do suppose we should have
destroyed most of them, but that it grew dark, and being off of Ostend amongst
the Sands we durst not be too bold, especially with the great ships, so that
it was thought fit we should Anchor all night, which we accordingly did about
ten of the clock. This morning some of our ships descried the Enemy again afar
off, steering toward the Willings, whereupon a Council of War being called,
it was resolved, we should forthwith set sail with the whole fleet toward the
Willings, so far as with safety we may, and so to range along the coast till we
come to the Texel (the better to improve the present victory the Lord has
given unto us) unless we shall see cause to divert our course. We shall not
further trouble your Lordship, but subscribe our selves,

Your Excellencies most humble Servants Geo. Monk. Rob. Blake.

From aboard the Resolution at Sea off of Ostend-Lenages North East June 4.
1653.
For his Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, These.
A brief Account of the success of the Fleet against the Dutch on Thursday 2
June, 1653.
1 Dutch Vice Adm. ship blown up. 4. Dutch men of war taken One of their Vice
Admirals slain. 100 of the Dutch slain. 500 of the Dutch taken prisoners.
Of the English.
Genesis Dean slain. 20 English more slain Never an English ship lost
A List of the particulars of the loss on both sides on Friday 3. June 1653.
6 Dutch Captains taken prisoners, 1344 Prisoners more. 11 Dutchmen of war
taken whereof two Vice Admirals and one Rear Admiral, A great quantity of
Ammunition taken. Two Hoyes that releeved them with fresh water, taken. Six
Dutch men of War sunk. Two Dutch men of War blown up. One Dutch man of War
sunk by those blown up. Near a thousand Dutch said to be lost in this fight.
The whole loss of the English.
One Captain of the English slain. 126 Slain 236 Wounded Not one English ship
lost.
FINIS.

