THE CVRE OF THE KINGDOM, An old fashioned Sermon

Treating of
Peace, Truth, and Loyalty.
A Discovery of the Diseases of the State, with a Direction to the true,
certain, and only means for the recovery of health to this distressed Nation.

BY R. P. (...), Coll: St. Jo. Cant.

2 KING. 20. 19. Is it not good that Peace and Truth be in my days.

Printed October 1. 1648.

The Cure of the KINGDOM.
2 KINGS. 20. 19. Is it not good that Peace and Truth be in my days?
THese are the last words, which the Penmen. of holy Scripture have left in
writing, as memorable in the History of Hezechiah, King of Judah, Successor to
David and Solomon in the Kingdom, and heir unto them both, of what was
excellent in them both.

The most commendable thing in David was his Integrity of heart, 1 King. 15. 3.
It is said of Abiah, His heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as the
heart of David his Father was.

The most memorable thing in Solomon, was his excellent wisdom, 1 King. 3. 12.
Lo I have given unto thee a wise and understanding heart, so that there was
none like thee before thee: neither after thee shall arise any like to thee:
Hezechiah was a follower of them both in these most excellent gifts

1. Of David in uprightness, 2 King. 18. 3. He did that which was right in the
sight of the Lord, according to all that David his Father did.

2. Of Solomon in wisdom; four whole Chapters of the Proverbs, 25, 6, 7, 8.
were copied out by the men of Hezechiah: probably at his appointment. What
things may we not expect to come from such an one, who proposed to himself
such worthy pattern?

It is yet to be remembered, that they were the last words which are upon
record, of this wise and upright King; verba novissima, verba notatissima: The
last words are commonly most memorable, most carefully observed, and most
commonly reported; Et dixit moriens; nothing makes a deeper print in the
memory of a man, then the last words of a dying friend.

Lastly, they were cygnae a cantio, his Swans song, after the terror of a
mighty Thunderclap, of an imminent judgment in the two former verses.

Verse. 17. Behold the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thy Fathers have laid up in store, unto this day, shall be carried into
Babylon: nothing shall be left, says the Lord.

Verse. 18. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shall
beget, shall they take away and make Eunuchs, in the Palace of the King of
Babylon.

In these distresses, the stay of his state, and the sum of his comfort, was,
that notwithstanding these Judgments were to come upon his Kingdom, yet Peace
and Truth should be in his days.

In this memorable speech, there are chiefly two things to be observed

1. The Manner. 2. The Matter.
1. The manner of speech is delivered by way of Interrogation. Is it not good?
2. The Matter is a Rejoicing for the continuation of these two blessings, Peace
and Truth.

I spare to run into any subdivisions, or to take notice of unnecessary
circumstances, or by-observations, the words hastening to so useful
application, that as Saint Bernard speaks of another text, Antequam panis
frangitur, ecce fragmenta: Me thinks every one should be ready to gather up the
fragments before the bread be broken; and to make some application of the text
unto himself, before I have made mine Analysis, or resolution of the words
into their several parts. First of the manner of speech by way of
Interrogation; Is it not good? The Rhetoricians make many kinds of
Interrogations, as being used many ways. We take notice only of three. 1.
(...), By way of Inquisition to get understanding, as Mat. 11. 3. The Disciples
of John said unto Christ, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another? 2. (...), By way of Temptation to get an advantage, Genesis 3. 1. Yea
has God indeed said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? 3. (...),
By way of Exaggeration, to get an unavoidable concession unto that which is
demanded, Luke 17. 17. Are there not ten cleansed, where are the nine?

This Interrogation may well suit to the last sense, viz. by way of
exaggeration, or vehement affirmation; when we ask of those things, whose
truth is known, and granted. In this case, an Interrogation is not a doubtful
question, but an earnest affirmation, or full resolution. Tremelius renders the
Text thus; Quod futura sit pax and stabilitas in diebus meis, bonum est; that
there shall be peace and stability in my days, it is good.

The Prophet Esaias in his repetition of this speech, makes it a resolute
Proposition, Esaias 39. 6. Moreover Hezechiah said, It is good if Peace and Truth
shall be in my days.

So then, it is resolved upon the question, that It is good that Peace, and
Truth be in our days. And this resolution does resolve it self into four
assertions, or asseverations.

First, That Peace is good.

Secondly, That Truth is good.

Thirdly, That it is good that Peace and Truth should go together, as they are
here coupled together by this Band, or copulative conjunction And, Peace and
Truth.

Fourthly, that it is good that this blessing of united Peace and Truth should
continue all our days.

Is it not good?

That which the Psalmist makes the common quere of all worldlings, Psalm. 44.
Who will show us any good? The same is common to all men in the world; all
enquire after good; every Art, Science, and endeavor of man (says the
Philosopher) has this aim, to attain to some presupposed good, Arist. Eth.
1. The name of Good is so attractive, as that it draws all men's hearts after
it, with incredible desires; this is the Lodestone of our affections, the
Pole Star which does direct the whole compass of all our actions; this is
summa summarum, the sum of all sums, in which are summed up all the
particulars of pleasure, profit, honor, health, wealth, life; and liberty; all
are cast up in this gross sum of Good. None are wise, but they that seek it.
None are happy, but they that find it. The Philosophers, who had their names
from the wisdom they sought, had many opinions touching Good: some placing
their chief Good in pleasure, some in riches, some in honor, against whom
Seneca argues most divinely thus; Aut ista bona non quae vocantur, aut homo
foelicior deo est; either those are not good things which are so called, or man
is more happy then God: He hoardeth up no riches, neither is he taken with the
delights of carnal pleasure, nor blown up with the vain titles of ambition.

The true wisdom teaches, that there is but one Good, Deus optimus maximus,
the good great God, he is sons boni, the Fountain of good. Neither is there
any good that is not from him, Ia. 1. 17. As he is the true wisdom, and that
one good, so is he Pax mundi, the peace of the world, Lux mundi, the Light of
the world, and vita mundi, the life of the world: He that is the Wisdom,
Peace, Light, and life of the world; he that is styled by Gregory, bonitas
nata, he has showed his servants what is good, and what is to be desired in
this world.

Is it not good that Peace, and Truth, etc.

First of Peace, which by Cassian is thus defined: Pax est concordantium in
bono animorum ordinata tranquilitas; peace is an ordinate quietness of minds,
that agree in the same good. Hence I infer, that there is no peace to the
wicked, Esaias 41. 1. And that for these reasons. 1. They intend no good. 2. They
consent not to good. 3. They order not themselves in the way to good.

Some make three kinds of peace
Internal. External. Eternal.
1. The Internal is grounded on faith, Romans 5. 1. Being therefore justified by
faith, we have peace with God.

2. The External is set upon Righteousness, Psalm. 72. 7. In his time
Righteousness shall flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Moon
endures. The Prophet Esaias calls it the work of Righteousness. Es. 32. 17.
S. James calls it the fruit of Righteousness: Iam: 3. The Psalmist says
Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. S. Augustins observation upon
the place is very good, Vultis pacem, amate justitiam; will you have Peace,
love Justice; Justice and Peace are two inseparable companions, they love one
another, they kiss one another: Therefore if you do not love Righteousness,
Peace will not love you, nor come at you; when Jehoram asked Jehu, Jehu is it
peace? Jehu answered, how can there be peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy
mother Jezabel, and her witchcrafts are so many in number. To conclude the
point, with that of Augustine, Fiat Iustitia, and habebis pacem, let justice be
done, and you shall have peace.

The third kind of peace is Eternal.

My text goes not so far, mounts not so high, yet it is the high way unto it,
and brings us within the sight of it, as Moses from Mount Nebo viewed the Land
of Canaan. S. Paul To: 14. 17. does thus chalk out the way, to this eternal
Peace, Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Righteteousnesse leads
to Peace, Peace to Joy in the Holy Ghost, this Joy is crowned with Glory. But
to confine my self within the limits of my text, and to go no further then
Pax temporis, the Peace of our days, and the praise thereof.

Peace (says Augustine) est serenitas mentis, tranquilitas animi, simplicitas
cordis, vinculum amoris, and consortium charitatis: Peace is the clearenesse of
the mind, the simplicity of the heart, the quietness of the soul, the band of
love, and the consort of charity. De verb. Dom. cap. 15. 8. Peace is so nearly
affianced to Heaven, as that it challenges her part and property in God, who
is Deus pacis, the God of Peace, Heb. 13. 12.

All the children of Peace, are filij dei, the children of God, Mat. 5. 9.
Blessed are the Peace makers for they shall be called the children of God. None
are in God, but such as are in Peace, 1 John 4. 8. None shall see God but such
as follow Peace, Heb. 12. 14. But Carendo quam fruendo, etc. good things are
most highly prized in the want. The sick man is most fit to extol the benefit
of health: The blind man (though he cannot judge of colors) is fittest to
praise the blessing of sight. Contraries being placed by contraries, do
appear in their proper colors. Let us then take a view of the ill of wars,
and then we shall see more clearly the good of peace; see the condition of
war, and as ye like of it, so judge of Peace.

War is the scourge of nations, the rod of Gods wrath, and the staff of his
Indignation; a devouring fire, that devoureth to destruction; war in the
Greek is called (...) and has these two Etymologies; (...) A bloody issue
(...) a common plague. The Pestilence is but a private plague in respect of
war; that takes away a part of a Family, or of a City; This disperseth over
a country, and destroys a Kingdom. This war that is amongst us, is
unhappy above all other, and that in three attributes, being Uncivil,
Unnatural, Unreasonable. First, uncivil, war is called Bellum, which in the
proper sense signifies good: But it has its name ex antiphrasi by the
contrary, quia minime bonum, because it is not good, nay the chief of evils;
So civil war has its name ex antiphrasi, because it is of all most
uncivil. Civil and intestine war, is most dangerous. A Kingdom divided
cannot stand. The Lord make up the breaches of this Kingdom, and join the
people together into one, that they may serve the Lord their God, and David
their King, whom he has raised over them, Ier. 3. 9. Secondly, this war has
been unnatural: This has broken the bands, even the streightest coujunctions
of nature, Friendship, and Religion. First of nature. A Father against a son,
vitam qui dedit adimit, unheard of cruelty; the son against the father, which
might make him justly to take up David's complaint, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Behold my
son, which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life. O Generation of
vipers, how shall ye escape the damnation of hell. Brothers like Cadmus brood,
sheathing their swords in each others sides. Secondly, the band of friendship
is broken. Two friends in whom there was according to Ariristotles definition
of true friendship (...) one soul in two bodies, or as it is said of Jonathan
and David, 2 Samuel 20. 17. They loved one another as their own souls. These
not only brake the League of love, but fell into bitter feude. The Husband and
the Wife, which are but one flesh, cannot agree to be of one mind, but fall
into that distance of opinion, that one Church cannot hold them both. Thirdly,
the band of Religion is broken. Two, that before did unanimously consent in all
points of Religion, by diversity of opinion about these wars, are grown into
a division of society, that as Paul and Barnabas upon their hot contention,
they cannot endure to walk together.

The third unhappy adjunct is unreasonable. The chief things that made these
differences (so far as they are presented to the public view) were, the
maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Privilege of Parliament, the
Liberty of the Subject, the Property of goods: All these, as they were
earnestly requested of the one party, so they were freely protested on the
other party: And yet for these we must fight, and waste our selves, and so
weaken and destroy a most flourishing Nation. You that have had a true sense of
all those evils that are come upon us, by reason of these uncivil, unnatural,
and unreasonable wars, I hope will be easily drawn to subscribe to the truth
of this first Assertion, that Peace is good. The second Assertion or
Asseveration, is that

Truth is good.

Man's excellency consists chiefly in two things, Ratione, and Oratione, in
Reason and Speech; one word in the Greek (...) does comprehend them both. And
one virtue in practice (Truth) does crown them both. The want of it in both
does make a total eclipse of man's glory.

For the first, take Truth away from the understanding, and Reason does wander
in darkness: and so a man becoms like a bruit beast, that has no
understanding. And for the other, take Truth away from Speech, and then it were
better for us to be as beasts, dumb, and could not speak at all: for so we
should not sin so often in word.

The want of truth in the one, makes us like the beasts. The want of truth in
the other, makes us like the Devil. Truth is lux mundi, the Light of the
world; and as he affirms of friendship; solemn e mundo tollere videntur, qui
amicitiam e vita tollunt, They take the Sun out of the world, that take
friendship from the life of man, may more truly be affirmed of truth; They take
the Sun out of the world, that take truth from the society of men. Without it
we groape in darkness, Esaias 59. 10. We see nothing, we know nothing, we can
do nothing without it, we can do nothing against it, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We can do
nothing against the truth, but for the truth. Which words are to be understood,
according to that Christian axiom; Quod quisque debet, id potest; Every man
must have a reguard, to what may be done, de jure, and not what is done de
facto; Presidents of fact, ought to be no leading cases in matter of right;
vivendum legibus, non exemplis; We must live after the Laws of God, not after
the examples of men; The Law is spiritual, men are carnal, sold under sin. If
we would have our ways well ordered, we must look unto what God has
commanded, and not what men have acted. Here what the Lord says, Zach. 8. 16.
These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth unto his
neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your Gates. And let none
of you imagine evil against his neighbor, and love no false oath, for these
are the things that I hate says the Lord.

A question is commonly moved, whether a man is always bound to speak the
truth, St. Paul orders the case aright, Ephesians. 4. 15. Speak ye the truth in
Love. Truth without Charity is malicious, Charity without Truth is blind. O how
happy should we be, if we had these two to go along with us in all our
ways, to order our conversation aright in the fear of God! But alas, both
these are gone from us, Truth mourns, for that what she feared is fallen upon
her, and that is to be hidden; And Charity is gone up to heaven, there to
complain, that she can find no entertainment here upon earth. And now that
Truth and Charity are departed, there are eome into their room, lying and
falsehood, hatred, and malice, and all uncharitableness. We may fitly condole
the condition of our times, in the words of Jeremyes complaint. Jer. 9. 1. O
that my head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I
might weep, day and night, for the slain of the daughter of my people. verse
3. They bend their tongues like bows for lies, but they are not valiant for
the truth upon earth. verse 4. Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and
trust not in any brother, for every brother will supplant, and every neighbor
will walk with slanders. verse 5. They will deceive every one his neighbor,
and will not speak the truth, they have taught their tongues to speak lies,
and bave taken great pains to do wickedly. And here we have a passage made
unto the praise of truth, by the consideration of the odious, and common
practice of lies, and untruth. As the world did sometimes groan under the
burden of Arianisme; So this Land may now groan under the burden of lying.
This Country is come now almost into the condition of Creete (...) all Liars.
Tit. 1. 12. In times past, we took notice only of three kinds of lies. They were

Jocosa Jests, Officiosa excuses, or Malitiosa Slanders.
But now the sin has taken such root, and the practice so far spread, that
it does dilate it self into many branches.

First Printed lies; I have known it has been said, this is true, I saw it in
Print but now, This is Printed, ergo suspected.

Secondly, There are Pulpit lies; when leaving the fathers, and ancient
expositors of Scripture, they stuff their Sermons with relations out of news
books, fraught with untruths, from the father of lies.

Thirdly, Propheticke lies; which are now in great price. Those that were in
times past, but three half penny liars, and after two penny liars, are now
come to be six penny liars. Surely their lies are more, or lies are of more
price, then in times of yoare.

Fourthly, Paliat or covered lies; and that is either when truth is thrust into
some dark corner by Equivocation, or led aside by a slye distinction.
Equivocation encites a man to make a lie to himself. A subtle distinction
does animate him to maintain a lie to another.

For Equivocation. There are some that have hid the truth, in the dark corners
of the Covenant, when unusquisque abundat suo sensu. But this is strange to be
observed in it. They that first made it a Solemn League and Covenant, have
since declared it to be but an Order transient, and like an Almanacke, to last
for a year, and is now out of date. Again, those that were most pressed, to
Plunder those that refuse to take it, were such, as did refuse to take it
themselves. They bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be borne, but they
themselves will not move them with one of their fingers, Mat. 23. 4. Christ the
truth, calls such Pharisees, I cannot see then but they may be called liars
that call them Saints. Again, as truth is hid by Equivocation, so it is led
aside, by a subtle distinction. Notwithstanding so bad, but some will think
to make it good: Nothing so false, but some will seek to make it true by
distinction. The Law says, Thou shall not kill. When we lament the slaughter
of thousands of our brethren, It is no butcherly slaughtering but in their
dialect brave execution. Again, the Law says, Thou shall not steal. When we
complain, that our horses, and goods are taken away by force and violence; It
is answered, This is no theft, but Plundering, and both these are maintained
good, by a distinction framed at the Jesuits forge. They say, they may do
these evils, in ordine ad spirituale bonum, In order to the spiritual good,
ours say, they may do these evils, in ordine ad commune bonum, In order to
the common good. And so St. Paul's mouth is stopped with a distinction, where he
says, We must not do evil, that good may come thereof, Romans 3. 8. Again,
the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, and honor the King. And the wise
man says, Eccles. 8. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power. But some
say where is the King? The King is to be considered according to a double
capacity,

Natural and Politic.
By the one he is in one place, by the other he is in another. Juglars seem to
have pretty tricks, at the first sight, but when they are discovered, they be
very bald, and we wonder that we could not find out they slight; So this
distinction at the first took many, but being well considered, was discovered
to be very poor and idle. Can a man be a King without a politic capacity?
No more then a King can be a man without a natural capacity. I believe where
the Sun goes, he carries all his rays about with him, though he may be
eclipsed, or obscured for a time. So the King has all his rays of Majesty
with him, though there be a curtain drawn between him and us that we cannot
now see the splendour of his glory. The union of these two capacities, are as
necessary ad esse Regis, to the essence of a King, as the union of soul and
body, ad esse hominis, to the essence of a man. So that upon the separation of
either both are lost. Take away the soul from the body, it is no more a body,
but a carcass, take away the body from the soul, it is no more a soul, but a
spirit. So, take away the Politic capacity, he is no more a King, as take
away the Natural capacity, he is no more a man. Besides these Paliat, and
covered lies, There are Public, and open lies. Some come scouting in with a
weekly Intelligence. A Lyurnall, great news, lie and all; But the Master piece
of all, is the new Century of lies. Had it come to have been made a Chiliad, by
adding as was intended the other nine Centuries to it, Lucian the great Liar,
with his verarum narrationum; and Jacobus de voragine, with his legenda aurea,
had been both outvyed, we had got the whetstone from them both: Theirs were
Monstrous, and Miraculous Lies, our Mischievous and Malicious. Eusebius
reports of Polycarpus, the Angel of the Church of Smirna, that when he heard
any thing, where was much offense, He usually burst forth into these words;
Deus bone, in quae temporareservasti me, ut haec audiam, Good God, unto what
times have thou reserved me, that I should hear such things. We have just
occasion to use the words of this complaint, Good God, unto what times have
thou reserved us, that we must hear so many lies, and can hear so little
truth. I hope the consideration of our miserable condition, by reason of lying,
will persuade with us to subscribe to this second assertion, that truth is
good. I come to the third assertion. It is good that Peace and truth be joined
together. That axiom in Philosophy, virtutes inter se concatenantur, virtues
are chained together, Is also true in divinity, There is a concatenation of
virtues, and graces in Religion. As the Disciples came to Christ by couples,
Andrew and Peter, James and John, Philip and Nathaniel: So the graces of his
spirit, are commended unto us coupled together. Juncta juvant, as First Wisdom
and Innocence, Math. 10. 16. Secondly, Faith and Love, 2 Timothy 1. 13. Thirdly,
Patience and Hope, Romans 12. 12. 4. Repentance and Obedience, Revelations. 3. 19.

So we have here Peace and Truth, Peace without Truth, is a fair building
without a sure foundation. Truth without Peace, is a good foundation, but
cannot be raised to any Glory, and comfortable perfection. All agree, that it
is good to have both, but they differ about the order of acquiring, whether
link they should first lay hold on, that the other may follow. Some say let us
have Truth, and Peace will follow. I answer, Peace may be the way to Truth, as
well as Truth the way to Peace. In a settled state, we first look upon truth,
then peace: But in a distracted State, we must first have Peace, or else we
shall never hear of truth: Inter arma silent leges, what truth can we hear,
so long as the beating of drums, the cluttering of Arms, and the roaring of
Guns do fill our ears. The wisdom of the Town-clerke, Act. 19. 35. is worthy
of our observation, and imitation, when the City of Ephesus was in an uproar,
he first appeased the people. then he persuaded them, if any were wronged how
to have redress. We have commonly the Crier of the Court to cry Peace, before
we can hear truth fully argued, cases rightly stated, and right truly
determined. So in this case first Peace, then Truth. They that hate Peace cry
out for Truth. And yet I think Pilates question to Christ, and what is Truth,
would have neither a sudden, nor sound resolution of them.

Veritas altercando amittitur, Truth is lost by jarring; it is a lamentable
state, when Truth must be commanded, not argued, and right measured, not by
statute, but by the sword. Lysander being chosen arbiter betwixt two
neighboring Nations, who fell into dissension about the territories of their
Dominions, drew his sword, and flourishing it about his head, used these words,
(...) He that can use this best is fittest to determine of right. God keep us
from Lysanders Law, that is Lesbia regula, a crooked rule, that will never
square with Peace and Truth. They are deceived, that think that wars will
produce Truth; we see the contrary. Ireneus who lived about the year 175.
wrote against thirty heresies, and Epiphanius who lived about the year 383.
wrote against 80. heresies; But in the time of these wars, the Author of the
Grangren observes 200. heresies, or there abouts, to have appeared in the
space of little more then four years. As the overflowing of Nilus, by
stirring up of the mud, does cause many strange Serpents to be bred out of the
slime: So the overflowing of these wars, have bred, and fostered, almost
innumerable and unheard of heresies, and strange opinions amongst us. Hezechiah
puts Peace before Truth: so must it be with us, or else I doubt it will
never come at us. Psalm. 85. 10. The Psalmist adds two linkes more to this
chain, viz. Righteousness and Mercy. Peace cannot stand without
Righteousness, as ye have heard, and Truth would not be willingly without
Mercy, Truth is bitter without Mercy, Mercy blind without Truth. Luke 10. 34.
Truth and Mercy are like the Samaritans wine, and oil; all wine is too much
fretting and smarting; all oil too suddenly, and slightly healing. All Truth
will require summum jus, right with rigor; all Mercy will regard nullum jus,
no right at all. If we could pull this whole chain to us, it would be of more
value then a chain of Diamonds. If we could lay hold on Righteousness, that
would draw Peace after it, Peace would draw Truth unto it, and Truth would draw
down the Mercy of God upon us, and open the bowels of Mercy one to another.
And this for the third Assertion, viz. It is good that Peace and Truth be
coupled together. So I come to the fourth Assertion, the continuance of the
blessing. In my days.

The Ancients reckoned the time of their lives, by days, to show the
shortness of the time, and frailty of life, Job 42. 1. Job died an old man,
full of days, Genesis 47. 9. Jacobs life a pilgrimage of a few evil days, Psalm.
90. 12. Moses prayer, Teach us to number our days. A day is a perfect model
of man's life: A day has a morn, a noone, and an evening; so has life, if it
be drawn out to the furthest period. My days, that is the time present, of my
now being; the days past are not my days, they are gone, they are not; the
days to come are not my days, they are not yet. There it is but a small interim
betwixt those two days, (...), Romans 8. 18. The Passions or Passages of a point
of time. This time of My days is of so small extension. It is an axiom of
Devotion, spiritual graces are to be asked without exception, because God has
made an absolute promise to give them: but temporal blessings with a
condition, and limitation, if it be his will, and for our times. So we ask
bread for the day, and Peace for our days. We need bread every day, and Peace
in our days. And who knows, but these wars, and troubles of these times,
are come upon us, for spurning at that holy suffrage of our Church? Give Peace
in our time O Lord. To conclude the point, let all those that are peaceable in
the Land, and have a true sense of the miseries of these days, and desire that
better days may come unto us; subscribe to the truth of this Assertion, and
take it into their prayers, in their best devotion, That Peace and Truth may be
in our days. And so I come to Application, which is the life of Preaching, and
chiefest thing that I propounded to my self, when I first purposed to treat
upon this text of Scripture. This text may be fitly compared to Eliahs cloud,
which was at the first sight, but as the breadth of a man's hand, but looking a
while upon it, it grew to that greatness, and extension, as that it covered
the whole Heavens.

So this text is a small sentence, if you look into the number of the words:
But if you shall take it into a serious consideration, you shall see it grow
into such a cloud of matter, as that it shall over shadow the whole hemisphere
of our conversation, and shower a blessing upon you, to comfort you in these
evil times sad condition. We look upon it, as appliable to all circumstances,
Time, Place, Persons, Matter and Manner. None of all these can have his due
praise, or true comfort without it.

For the three first circumstances, Time, Place, and Persons. In all places
there is a complaint of these times by all persons, excepting those that desire
to fish in troubled waters, and that make a gain of others sufferings. These
sacrifice to their nets, and burn incense to their drags, because by them
their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, Hab. 1. 16. These like the
Idolatrous silver-Smiths, Act. 19. 24. Cry up Diana's magnificence, because it
brought great advantage to their craft, and employment. But how many cry
against them? 1. The cry of an impoverished City, where trading failing,
Poverty comes like an armed man upon them. 2. The cry of the Country, which
is eaten up. With what a dejected countenance, and repining indignation shall
the Husbandman look upon his crop, when he shall think thus with himself,
Barbanus has segites? shall the stranger consume all my labors? After taxes,
and excises, and such like payments, then comes quartering like the Locusts
after the hail, and eats up all the residue of my increase. Have I not
ploughed all day, and brake the clods of the ground, and made it even, that I
might cast in my principal wheat, and Rye, and Barlie? Longi perit labor
irritus anni. Behold I have labored in vain, and spent my strength in vain,
and for nothing. Let us come to our Churches, we looked that a Reformation
would have swept all clean, but we see it far fouler then before. They
sought to sweep away Ceremonies, and superstition, and have fouled it with
sacrilege, and confusion. They pretend to pull down Popery, and have set up
heresy, and so while they thought to put the Pope out at the Fore-door, they
have let in the Devil at the Backdoor. We thought that text of Scripture
would have freed our Churches from annoyance, Luke 19. 24. Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. But see how far they are profaned: In
our entrance into it we may see the Font, sons regenerationis, where the spirit
of God moves upon the water for our sanctification, has been made a trough
to water horses, and broken down in many places, as if they desired to
renounce their Baptism. And to go a little further, and see for the other
Sacrament; we see no Shewbread upon the Holy Table. The Communion which was in
the Primitive Church administered commonly every Lords day, In many reformed
Churches received once every month, and upon Injunction of the highest powers,
to be administered thrice in the year at the least is now in some places scarce
named once in seven years. In some places they have it, it may be once or twice
in two or three year, and that in the country about Harvest, and that too
upon the grumbling threats of the Parishioners; why should he have his due, and
we cannot have ours: And so they justly cause the people to renew the Prophets
lamentable complaint, Lament. 4. 4. Pueri quaerunt panem, and non est qui
frangat eis; the children cry for bread, and there is none to break it to them.

To go a little further, and see how the Sanctuary is robbed of all her
ornaments, the two golden Candlesticks, the two Testaments are indeed there,
but the Candles are seldom lighted: We have had two Chapters read out of both
Testaments, but now it is well if there be one. But commonly (especially in
great Assemblies) a Psalm is sung of the new translation, and then the new
light is set up, whereby (as some have professed to their hearers) they can tell
them as much of the mind of God Almighty as the Prophets, or the Apostles, or
Christ himself could. And for the Arc of the Covenant, with the memorable
Monuments, the Tables, Aarons Rod, and the Pot of Manna, their Paralels, the
Commandments, the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, they are lost. So that our
Church, now traveling of this new birth of her now Reformation, may with
Phineas his wife cry out in her pains, and call her issue Johabod, that is,
where is the glory, for the glory is departed. Let us go from the defaced
Church, and look into the distressed world, and see how the cry goes there.
In every trade and calling there is a continual crying. Is it not now with us,
as Job observes in a great snow, signasti manus, thou have sealed up the hand
of every man? Job 37. 7. As the hand is to the body, so is money to every
trade and calling, (...) the instrument of instruments; what use or exercise
can we make of our trades, when the wars command a great part of our moneys,
and the Dearth a constant Waiter upon war, does claim a second part? I doubt
the third part will be little to trade withal. Lastly, for the two last
circumstances, Matter and Manner, All men are to desire Peace and Truth by all
means, and in all matters, how soever they be handled, whether they be matters
of Difference, or of Reference, or of Conference. First of Difference, and
reference. When a Difference is ended by reference, or Judgment without Peace
and Truth, there may finis causae, non querela, an end of the cause, but not of
the quarrel: So for Conference, if that be without Peace and Truth, we are in
some respect, in worse condition then the Devils, they though they lie to us,
yet they lie not one to another: though they divide us by wars, sects and
schisms, yet Satan is not divided against Satan. Should we not abhor to have
our conversation worse then an hell upon earth? the best means to repress
these evils, and to procure Peace and Truth in our days, after true
humiliation for sin, and earnest prayer unto God for mercy, to avert his
judgments from us, is to call the King home to his wonted houses of abode,
that he may sit on his Throne of Majesty, and rule his people under Christ,
with the Scepter of Righteousness, and move in his proper sphere of Princely
power. The King is Pater patriae, the Father of the country. When the Master
of the Family is long absent, and that his stay exceeds the expected time of
his return, it causes a dampe in his good servants, a disorder in the bad;
what fallings out will there be in the Family, what wishings amongst the
servants? O that our Master were once come home. Indeed the Masters absence is
a great cause of difference amongst the servants. We are loath to bear hard
commands from our fellow servants, but when the Master comes, he commands
all, and all are quiet.

Indeed were the Master a Tyrant, unjust, unquiet, harsh, and cruel, then the
servants might wish his absence. But for this our Master, he is wise, just,
meek, sober, honest; And I think I may safely say of him, as it is said of
Edward the third; He was such a King, as that none of the Kings before him had
more virtues, and fewer vices. This Kingdom for want of this King amongst us,
is fallen into many dangerous disorders, and distempers, as there was sometimes
when there was no King in Israel, Judge. 6. 6. This Kingdom is sick, and has
the symptoms of many diseases upon it, as

1. A bloody issue in war.

2. The falling sickness in the fits of the monthly taxes.

3. The Palsy in the Excise, which comes of the weakness of the sinews. All
the Land shakes.

4. The Ague, which either turns to a burning Fever, which causes a
Frenzy, or madness; or into an Hectic Fever, which consumes to
destruction. There is a greater evil in this Land then all these, and that is
the Kings evil. Let that be cured, and we shall easily find Physicians for all
the rest. All the rest are rooted, and grounded in this evil. Now none can
cure this, but the King only. Only his prayers, his presence, his stroakings,
nothing else can do it.

Why should we languish, when we may have health? let us desire his coming to
us, let us long for it, let us pray for it, let us endeavor it; which being
effected, the Son of Righteousness will come along with him, with healing in
his wings, to cure the distempers of this distressed Nation. This he grant, who
is our health, and our salvation, for his sons sake, who has borne our
infirmities, and cured our sicknesses, even by the precious Ointment of his
Holy Spirit; to whom, even God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Power, Praise, Might, Dominion, and thanksgiving, both now and for ever,

Amen.
FINIS.

