The Queen of England's PROPHECY CONCERNING Prince Charles.

AND Her Letter, Advice, and Proposals, to His Highness, touching the three
Crowns of England, Scotland, and Ireland. With a Narrative of his proceedings;
and the Declaration of the Low Country Soldiers.

Also, a Prophecy delivered to Lieut. General Crumwell, by a Yorkshire
Gentlewoman, and the particulars thereof, etc.

London Printed for R. W. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, April 30. 1649.

The Queens PROPHECY Concerning Prince CHARLES AND The three Crowns of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; With Her Letter, Advice, and Proposals, to His Highness
at the Hague in Holland.
Honored Sir.
THe Queen of England is much perplexed and sore troubled in mind, the Fountain
and Rise whereof, taking its first derivation from the present streams or head
of the Royal Offspring at the Hague; for having sent a Letter to her Son
Prince Charles, to advise him to a Treaty with her Majestys and to meet her at
Amians in France, but hearing that his affections had taken Center another way,
and that he could not meet her there, she resolved not to make any further
address unto him, but returned back to Paris, condoling much the loss of her
late endeared Sovereign, and the present proceedings of the Prince, in
reference to the work in hand touching his restoration: And after some few
days spent in serious meditations watering her Princely bed with tears of
sorrow, she desired a conserence with Mr. Henry Jermin, at which she declared,
That she had received several Diciate in a Dream, and that many things were
revealed to her thereby, by Apparitions and Visions, to wit;

First, that if her Son Prince Charles did any ways alienate his affections
from going to Ireland, and cast himself upon the Kingdom of Scotland, He was a
lost Prince, and that they would serve him as they had done his Father, to sell
him for a sum of money, and so deprive him of all Earthly felicity, which might
abundantly flow from his three Crowns and Kingdoms.

Secondly, That if his vigilance were not perspicuous to those in power, in
playing of his Game at Sea, that his Design would be soon frustrated, and all
hopes of restoration wholly expiated, etc. Having dictated unto him these
prophetical expressions, Her Majesty desired, that they might be forthwith
communicated unto his Highness, which was asserted to, and a messenger
immediately dispatched from thence to the Hague:

Leyden 26. April, 1649.

Another new Proyhfie.
A Yorkshire Gentlewoman coming out of Cleveland to present some things to the
House of Commons, delivered a paper to Lieut, Genesis Crumwell, containing matters
which she faith she had in command from God in a Vision, viz. 1 That the
Parliament reform the Clergy, and only settle such Ministers as promote
holiness and the glory of God. 2 To make the Laws of the Land plain and just,
grounded upon the Word of God. 3 To make speedy and effectual provision for
the poor. 4 That differences be composed at home, before the breaking out of
further distractions abroad. These things she says that she being as dead for
a time) were revealed to her by God, she beholding the glory of Heaven and the
Almighty Jehovah.

Sir, Our dependence here is, what his gracious Majesty will do, all desire his
coming hither, but the professed downright Royalists would have him come with
a force for there instituting him in his Right; the other party, such as real
for Presbytery, would also have him come with a new heart. We hear that the
vulgar sort of people do cry him up exceedingly; and say they must and will
have a King though it cost them never so much: here are daily risings in
several parts of the Country, the Marquess of Huntleys Son is again in arms
with 2000. Gourdons to revenge his Fathers death, they have declared for
Charles the second, and have set forth their Invitation for all persons to come
in to their assistance. Col. Car, and diverse other English Officers, are
likewse very active in raising or Forces, and have sent Letters of invitation
into Northumberland, Cumberland, and Wer^merlund, for others to come to them,
promising great matter of preferment, but it is more then they are able to
perform, for the well affected party are both vigilant and active in
suppressing of them.

BerWick 24 Arpil, 1649.

SIR,
THe Prince of Wales has had several conferences and disputations with his
grand Councillors at the Hague; they press hard for his going into Ireland,
but he seems very unwilling to give his assent thereto, and has delivered
several Reasons at the Council table (in the presence of the Lord Cottington,
and others) wherein he remonstrates the apparent danger that may befall his
Royal person, if once he should set footing in that Kingdom, by reason of the
falling off of his Subjects of Scotland, who are determined to act upon new
principles, if once he appears in the head of that Army.

And therefore, he was resolved to make that place his chiefest Center for some
certain time, having alienated his affections either from England, Scotland, or
Ireland, till he saw an opportunity, for the playing of his Game with more
facility and surety.

Montrosse (during this respire of time) seriously minding the dissenting
expressions of the Prince, arose from the table, and with an austeer
countenance, said, That if his Majesty (for so is he called at the Court) would
not hearken to the good Council now attending his Royal person, in all
probability, he might become the most deplorable Prince in Christendom, and in
stead of the enjoyment of the prerogative and felicity of three Kingdoms be
forced to contain himself within the bounds and limits of the Territories of
one Naiton.

The Prince replied, That one Crown firmly and universally set, upon his head,
might produce greater tranquillity and felicity to himself, and the rest of the
Royal Offspring, than three that should stand in a tottering and unstable
motion, etc: So that in all probability it is conjectured, that he will
decline his Center both from England and Ireland, and wholly cast himself upon
the Kingdom of Scotland; for he has declared, That he will cast off the Earl
of Montrosse, and all those who are conceived Enemies to peace and truth, and
apply himself to those particulars propounded from the Estates of Scotland,
which are conceived to be the voice of the people, and the advice of that
Kingdom.

He seems to make little preparation against England, in reference to Warlike
affairs, rather taking his late Fathers advice and admonition, to gain it by
the way of reconciliation and treaty, then by the power of the bloodthirsty
Sword.

But yet notwithstanding he is much pressed to the contrary, and the two
Extraodinary Ambassadors from the King of Denmark, and the Queen of Swethland,
has saluted his Highness, and at a conference condoled the death of his late
Father, intimating that they wonld use their utmost endeavors for the
reinvesting of him in his just Rights and Dignities, and restoring of him to
his Royal prerogative and Birth right; and to that end, have delivered their
Representation and Invitation to the most high and mighty Lords, the States of
the United Provinces, to join with them to assist, the said King to obtain his
Birthright; but it is said they have declared their resolution, to be offensive
nor defensive against either parties: So that it is verily believed, that the
States will act as Neutralists, and neither meddlewith one side, nor the other.
For they have declared, that nothing shall be wanting in them for the
preservation of a right understanding with the parliament of England, and that
they will endeavonr the union and peace thereof against all opposition
whatsoever.

Brill 20. April, 1649.

Postscript, Sir, Since the writing of my last, the two extraordinary
Ambassadors from Sweden and Denmark have had audience with the (...) King of
Scotland, representing the personal appearance of their Masters, and promising
him assistance for the obtaining of his Birthright. But truly we cannot
discern any visible Force as yet in Arms, and the Princes Propositions to the
old Soldiers of the United Provinces are much slighted and rejected, having
unanimously declared, that they will not any ways intermeddle with the affairs
of England, in relation to the erecting and setting up of Monarchy or any other
Government whatsoever. Here is a great demur happened, at Court, by reason of the
Parliaments Navy putting forth to Sea, which causes many who at first seemed
very forward to promote the Royal Design, to desert any further Engagement,
taking a president by the late headless members, who acted against the Common,
wealth of England.

Hague 25. April 1649.

FINIS.

