Questions Propounded, OR Quaeres, Concerning Remedies, and taking away of the
extreme and unnecessary charges, expenses, troubles, and long delays in just
causes and suits in Courts of EQUITY and others called ENGLISH-COURTS, and
abating those that may be for contention and trouble only, and the preservation
of many honest men from great losses, and others from undoing thereby, without
hindrance or prejudice to any but unnecessary and upstart Officers.

And how many hundred thousand pounds may be saved to the Commonwealth yearly,
by reducing proceedings in Law to the old and legal proceedings, and taking
away those that be unlawful and contrived by exacting Officers for their own
only gain.

Authorized to be printed and published for the good of the Commonwealth.

London, Printed by F. Leach, 1647.

Questions Propounded, OR Quaeres, concerning Remedies, etc.
First in particular, concerning Bills, Answers, etc. in Courts called
English-Courts.
WHereas it is and has been generally reported, that many contentious persons,
some being of great ability in wealth, and others otherwise very potent; have,
and for many years past usually do put into diverse Courts, called English
Courts, and Courts of Equity, diverse and sundry long bills of complaint, against
diverse and sundry poor honest men defendants in the same, and thereby have
usually put such defendants to unnecessary charges and trouble in taking copies
of the same, many times in putting and stuffing into the same more matter then
has been true (though the same matter had been pertinent if the same had been
true) whereby no remedy has been in such Courts had for such Defendants for or
concerning such charge or trouble after hearing, but in some bills only wherein
nothing material has been true. And whereas also it is and has been
generally reported, that diverse contentious and troublesome persons have, and
usually do put into such Courts, to Bills, diverse and sundry answers longer and
more tedious then is or has been pertinent or material stuffed with
impertinent matter purposely to put the plaintiffs in such Bills to unnecessary
charges and trouble.

1. Whether it be convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, that no
Defendant may be compelled to appear or answer to any such Bill till (after
some convenient time) after that a true paper Copy thereof gratis (that is to
say) without charge, be delivered to such Defendant, or left for him in the
office of the Court where such Bill is to be delivered in Parchment to be filed
or kept, and there the Defendant to have the same Paper-copy without charge,
upon some penalty against such as do or shall exact or demand any thing for the
same.

2. Whether it be convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, that if
there be more Defendants then one in any such Bill, that then each Defendant
that will not answer, together with some other of such Defendants in such Bills
may be compelled after a convenient time, after he shall receive a copy of such
Bill to deliver or send the same to, or leave the same for such other Defendant
or Defendants, as shall be named in such Bills according as such Defendants
shall be directed or required by such Plaintiffes, or on their behalf under
some penalty.

3. Whether it be convenient and beneficial for the Commonwealth, that such
or the like course may be taken concerning Replycations and Rejoynders, etc. in
such Courts to such Bills and Answers; and that if such Replycations or
Rejoynders shall be put in of course, as most have been (no new matter being
expressed in such Replycation or Rejoinder, etc. But only a confession,
traverse, or denial of such matters, as were or shall be in such Bills or
Answers) that then either party, Plaintiff or Defendant therein, or their
Clerks or Attorneys for them, may under some penalty be compelled within some
convenient time (after notice thereof to some of them) to reply and rejoyne
without further trouble or charges; and whether it be not convenient, and for
the benefit of the Commonwealth, that some or one of the most ancient Clerks
of best experience, who has used to practice as a Clerk, and take care and
charge of such suits there, may have and take the care and charge of the
keeping or filing such Bills, Answers, Replycations, Rejoynders, etc. and Books,
Notes, and Memorandums, to be used in such Courts in a good method; and have a
competent gains allowed him or them for so doing: And such Drones as can show
no legal ground for their beginning and continuance, who have taken and use to
take and exact excessive sums of money, and have usually done no good for
what they have taken, may be removed and abolished as burdensome members of
the Commonwealth: and whether those practicing Clerks experienced in such
Courts who usually have taken upon them the charge and managing of prosecuting
suits in such Courts, do not deserve to themselves the usual term Fees, which
usually have been paid to undeserving persons formerly concerning the same.

4. Whether that those Officers that have of late taken and use to take great
pretended Fees for copies of such Bills and Answers, Replycations, and
Rejoynders, etc. have any legal authority to exact the same if their beginning
be well examined.

5. Whether the ancient Clerks in Chancery that formerly were very learned and
expert drawers and penners of special Writs, anciently called Master-writs,
and special Actions, Petitions, Bills, Answers, etc. did in their times use to
take any more then was willingly given them by suitors in such Courts, for such
Bills, Answers, Replycations, and Rejoynders, etc. And whether proceedings in
such suits were not very short and speedily ended at a small charge in those
times: and whether upon searching Records they may not easily be found so to be?

6. Whether that after those ancient Clerks time expired, since about the time
of the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth of England, etc. those
persons who took upon them to officiate part of that which those ancient Clerks
formerly used to do, did not at their first beginning use to wait on the Master
of the Rols, in Blew-coats, and so continue diverse years after, and used to
take no more then what was given them, as aforesaid, without exacting any more:
and whether any fee at all (more then suitors will willingly give in such
cases) be due at all to any; and how they do or can lawfully challenge or
claim the same, or stay any man's proceedings for not paying such exactions.

7. Whether those Officers who now have and do take and exact such great
pretended fees, and suffer no person to proceed in their just and lawful
causes, without payment of such pretended fees, but hinder proceedings in the
same till payment thereof; do, or have deserved any thing at all for those
diverse thousand pounds, which they yearly have taken and usually exacted and do
exact yearly. And whether they know or take knowledge of any thing concerning
such suits, but only so exacting such pretended fees. And whether diverse of
them be not such men who be not capable of understanding the suits for which
they have exacted, and usually do exact such great sums of money: and whether
they be not burdensome members of the Commonwealth? And whether if such
members be suffered to continue, it will not be an occasion of more such like
to increase; and make men have a desire to bring in a confusion, and be weary,
and despise the laws of the Land which have formerly been accounted the best
in Europe?

8. Whether both Plaintiff and defendant may not have copies of such Bills,
Answers, Replycations, and Rejoynders, copied by those Clerks of those Courts,
who manage and understand the proceedings in such suits and matter thereof, and
take care and charge thereof: or by the Clerks of their Councelours, or by
their Solicitours at a cheap rate, and their suits better and more speedily
dispatched and done, and yet diverse thousand pounds yearly saved, if such
exactions before mentioned be taken away? And whether it were not better to
have such Courts reformed or reduced to their old proceedings only, then to
have them cried down by diverse people, being such Courts anciently have been
accounted beneficial to the Commonwealth; and a means of preservation of just
and honest dealings in the Commonwealth.

9. Whether such Clerks and Solicitors be not fittest to do such things (that
is to say) to make such copies, being such Clerks and Solicitors best
understand such proceedings? And whether by giving copies (without charge) as
aforesaid, by either party to the other, will not be an occasion of many
shorter Bills and Answers, then have been and usually be; and a cause of
abating and taking away many which have perplexed such Courts, and vexed the
suitors and Counsel in such suits?

10. Whether it be not better that deserving Clerks who have gained experience
by their study, labor, and practice in such Courts, be chosen for their
honesty, judgment, and experience only, to be Clerks in such Courts (to take a
competent gain only, without exacting any excessive charges for what they
shall do) then that such places should be sold for money to such that
understand nothing concerning the same, but only to exact money thereby, to the
hurt and prejudice of suitors there, by selling Under-clerks places for money
to diverse such Clerks as be experienced Clerks; and suffering none to come
into such places without money, or some other reward though they be never so
well experienced and able in such Courts? And yet, Quaere, whether such who
understand so little do not exact above four times so much of every one of his
Under-clerks (though they be many) as such Under-clerk takes for himself.

Other Quaeres writ above four years since, shortly after concerning the
multitude of Orders, and chargeablenesse thereof, and other proceedings in the
said Courts, are intended to be published. And afterward, other Quaeres
concerning exactions of Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Gaolers, and other such like
Officers; with diverse others after those if need be.

FINIS.

