TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth OF ENGLAND.
Christian Friends,
I Am moved of the Lord to present this Paper to you, it requires your speedy
consideration; and therefore as you love your own souls defer it not: the
crying sin of persecuting the righteous Seed of God, it now brought to your
door, and you must account for every days delay; arise, stand up and execute
Justice and Judgment, that you may be hid in the day of the Lords fierce
wrath, which is at hand.

I come not to you to clamor or complain, nor to petition any thing from you,
but to discharge my duty in obedience to the command of the Lord, in laying
before you the afflictions and sufferings of the innocent by the hands of your
Ministers and Servants, that so you may acquit your selves, lest the guilt fall
upon your own heads.

IN the Northen Parts of this Nation, God has raised and is raising up his own
Seed in many people, according to his promises; which has layen in bondage in
a strange Land for many generations, and is daily increasing their number to
the praise of his own name, which gathers their hearts out of all the worlds
Ways, Worships, Customs, Riches and Pleasures, to live with the Lord in
Spirit, and to be taught of him alone; Whereat the formal Professors of the
world, and the carnal-religious of these days are so much enraged, that in
every place, to the utmost of their power, they beat, wound, stone, imprison
and persecute them; as it was in all Generations, as the Scriptures witness, He
that is born after the Flesh, will persecute him that is after the Spirit.

And the reason why these People above all others are hated by all sorts of
men, is, because the righteous Spirit of God that rules in them, as it will not
comply or have fellowship with the wicked in their Pride, lusts, pleasures,
customs, Worships, fashions and unfruitful works of darkness, so will it not
wink at them, but reprove them where and in whomsoever they are; it spares not
a man because he has a flattering Title, nor passes by him that is rich or
decked with gay clothes, but reproves all, yea in the gate, without respect of
Persons; and therefore is it that snares are laid for them in every place to
make them offenders for a word; And as the wicked are thereby provoked, so are
their cruel minds encouraged by the Lamb-like dispositions of these people; for
having the same Spirit that was in Christ Jesus, they are like-minded, they do
not resist the evil, but like Sheep are led to the slaughter and open not their
mouths; being cursed they bless, he that takes their cloak, may take their
coat too; to him that smites one cheek, they offer also the other; And as they
save not themselves, but cast their care on the Lord, so they seek not for
relief to any man, but patiently wait on the Lord for his deliverance, bearing
stripes, wounds, Prisons, reproach and shame with joy, knowing that through
many tribulations they must enter the Kingdom; praying even for their
Persecutors, that their sin may not be laid to their charge. And being raised
up with Christ, and made partakers of the Life which is eternal, their hearts
burn with love to all Creatures; and therefore in the Spirit and Power of the
Lord they are carried into the public meetings of the world, to declare his
word, and to reason and dispute against their outside profession, to bring them
to repentance, that they may know the true God, whom they ignorantly worship,
which dwells not in Temples made with hands, but in the humble and contrite
hearts, that tremble at his word, as the manner and practice of Jesus Christ
and his Apostles was. And for these things did about 30 of them lie in Prison
when I came lately from thence, and I hear six more are since committed; those
that are set to do justice, being of the same nature and spirit with the rude
world, take part with them in their wickedness, encouraging their hands, and
laying the blame upon the innocent, calling them disturbers of the peace,
movers of Sedition, turbulent persons, when its only the man of sin they
disquiet; and all the uproars of the brutish people that live in wrath, anger,
and quarrels, are laid to their charge; as it was in all Generations.

A List of persons imprisoned in the Counties of York, Cumberland and
Westmerland, for the testimony of a good conscience, and for witnessing the
truth of the Lord; with the time of their commitments, and what offenses are
pretended against them.
Yorkshire.
Thomas Aldam committed the 15 of May 1652. for disturbing a Priest as is
pretended, though he spoke nothing till the Priest spoke to him. Eliza. Hooton
committed the 14 of June 1652. for the like. Mary Fisher committed the 2 of
Aug. 1652. for the like. Jane Holmes committed the 24 of Aug. 1652. as a
wanderer. Christop. Gilburn committed the 12 of November 1652. for several
misdemeanors, but nothing mentioned. John Harwood committed the 12 of November.
1652 as disordered persons living contrary to the Law, but nothing mentioned.
Mar. Lambert committed the 12 of November. 1652 as disordered persons living
contrary to the Law, but nothing mentioned. Thomas Townroe after three Months
imprisonment for speaking to a Priest, recommitted 19 July 1653. Because he
would not make submission to the Priest, and find sureties not to do so again.
Thom. Goodyear committed the 22 of July 1653. for refusing to find Sureties
for good behavior.
At the Assizes held after Lammas in the year 1652.
Thomas Aldam was called before the Judge of Assize, and for not putting off
his Hat, was fined -- 40 l. Eliz. Hooton Mary Fisher Jane Holmes
for speaking to the Judge, was fined each-200 l.
At the Assizes held after Candlemas in the beginning of the year 1653.
John Harwood were called before the Judge of Assize, and for not putting off
their Hats were fined each -- 5 l. Christop. Gilburn were called before the
Judge of Assize, and for not putting off theit Hats were fined each -- 5 l.
Mar. Lambert were called before the Judge of Assize, and for not putting off
their Hats were fined each -- 5 l. These are detained in prison for their
Fines.
Cumberland
George Fox committed 1 Aug. 1653. for saying he was the Son of God and other
words, which they say are blasphemy, and yet no one particular within the Act.
Westmerland.
Jo. Morland committed by the Judge of Assize at Apleby in August last, for
refusing to be sworn on a Jury, and fined. -- 5 l. Miles Halhead committed 14
Aug. 1653. for speaking in the Steeple-house after the Priest had done.
Margaret Gilpin committed the same day, for speaking in the Steeple-house
before the Priest had done. Tho. Casley committed the 21 of Aug. 1653. for
speaking in the Steeple-house when the Priest was silent. Henry Ward committed
he 28 of Aug. 1653. for speaking in the Steeple-house after all was ended.
Christop. Atkinson committed 4 Sept. 1653. for speaking in the Steeple-house
after the Priest had ended his prayer. John Array committed the same day for
going with him and saying nothing. Francis Howgill committed 4 of Sept. 1653.
for speaking in the Steeple-house after all was ended. Mary Collison committed
28 Aug. 1653. for saying (while the Priest was speaking) Tremble before the
Lord.
11 September 1653.
Margaret Smith committed for speaking to the Priest. Robert Newby for speaking
to the Mayor. Dorothy Waugh for speaking to the Priest. Agnes Wilkinson for
speaking to the Mayor. Mary Dodding for speaking to the Priest. Edmond
Adlington for speaking to the Priest.
A Maid in Lancashire, whose name I know not, committed at Lancaster for
speaking to a Priest.
Thomas Holm, 28 August 1653. Alice Wilson, 1 September 1653. Margaret Newby, 1
Septem. 1653. Jane Waugh, 4 September 1653. Mary Howgil, 4 September 1653.
Agnes Wilkinson 3 September. 1653. Dorothy Waugh, 6 September. 1653. Mabel Warriner
6 September. 1653. Anne Tompson 4 September 1653. Eliza. Levens, 4 September
1653. Eliza. Bateman, 4. September. 1653.

All these persons being moved to go to a Justice of Peace in Kendal, to speak
to him against his persecution and Tyranny, and to warn him of the evil to
come, were by him committed to Prison.

The words spoken by them severally to him, as also the substance of what the
others spoke in the Steeple Houses might have been set down, but this is not
intended as an accusation of any, nor to show forth their ignorance or weakness.

Oh ye Heads and Rulers of the people, raised up to do Righteousness and
Justice! Look upon these poor despised Creatures, what evil is found in them?
what wickedness have they committed? not one of six and thirty committed for a
vice; is it not time to appear for the innocent, and to save him from the seed
of evildoers? what are the offenses laid to their charge? they will not put
off their hats, no not to a Magistrate; are not men ashamed to call themselves
Christians, and pretend liberty for tender Consciences, and yet stand upon such
trifles, and to fine and imprison for it? is not obedience to the Magistrate,
and a cheerful ready performance of his just commands, his greatest honor?
that he may say to this man go, and he goes; and to another do this, and he
does it; but now the life of all Religion is placed in outside shadows and
formalities.

Some of them are punished because they were Strangers in the place where they
were apprehended; what would these men that punish them have done with Christ
that had not whereon to lay his head? and does not the Scripture require
respect to them above all others? were they chargeable to any but their friends
who entertaiend them with joy? but it seems the Capital Crime is to speak in
the public Assemblies of the People; and was it not the practice of Christ and
his Apostles to speak in the Synagogues, and where the people were met
together? I know it makes the Priests rage, because they are thereby detected;
and it is they that fill the world with uproars and tumults, and so they have
done in all Generations; what have they been doing all their lives, and their
Predecessors, that have still such brutish raging people to their flocks,
wolves and not Sheep? but they run and were never sent, therefore do they not
profit the people, and down shall the false Prophet and the Beast that holds
him up; his time is at hand, all the Powers of the earth shall not save him;
some say its not contrary to Law to speak after the Priest has done. Why then
are so many of these people in prison for it? but why is it an offense to speak
before he has done, there are intervalls between his several exercises? It is
answered, it breeds tumults and distraction among the people; Let the
Magistrate look to his duty to punish him that breaks the Peace, or offers
violence to any, and that will soon be prevented; are they Churches? then may
all prophecy, and if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the first
hold his peace; Are they assemblies of the world? then why does the Magistrate
interpose his Authority to hold up their false worship, and not suffer the
Messengers of the Lord to call people to the truth, and leave all men to
manifest the power of the spirit they speak from; For great is the truth, and
will prevail; and God neither needs nor requires the help of man to uphold or
spread his Gospel. The Priest many times speaks those things, to which, if a
present answer might be made, before the peoples minds and memories were
distracted with a multitude of vain Notions, the truth might be made manifest,
and things that differ discerned; And let all that fear the Lord consider, is
it any thing but a carnal humane invented story they tell, studied, and brought
forth by their own wit and learning? And is not the word of the Lord a more
divine thing? does not he that has his own time when to speak, what to say,
and when to be silent, stand in the will of man? be silent oh reason, thou
know not the mind of the Lord. Does not the Minister of God speak the word
of the Lord from his own mouth? When, where, and how the Lord please; For it is
not he that speaks, but the Holy Ghost that dwells in him; He that has his
words from his own wit and memory, may speak and be silent when he will; he
that has them from the Holy Ghost, must speak as he is moved, and as they are
brought to his remembrance by the spirit of truth? be careful how ye meddle in
these things! Oh ye powers of the Earth, men have long been taught one by
another, but now the Lord is come to teach his people himself; the Scriptures
abundantly witness, that in the last times shall be the greatest pourings out
of the Spirit; men shall not need to run to the broken Cisterns of Universities
and humane Studies, for all the people of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord;
if you say, yea, but it must be by means; I answer, by no other but his own
Spirit; whence have they their words that speak to you, which you think must be
the means? are they not from their own brains? but that wise eye by which they
search and find out what they preach, knows not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to it, and to it they are hid, and a mystery not
to be found out: Cease then from man, oh all ye people of the Earth, and
hearken to the voice of the Spirit of the Lord, which you may hear in your
consciences, rebuking and reproving you for sin and wickedness; and minding and
obeying that, it will bring you into the fear of the Lord, which is the
beginning of wisdom, and the fear of the Lord is to depart from all iniquity;
so will you come to know what a tender conscience means; and ye will then suffer
all manner of torments rather then defile your consciences by the pollutions
and vanities of the world; and the mystery of Faith is held in a pure
conscience, which worldly Religion knows not; and loving and obeying that
voice, and walking in the light that shows you sin and evil, you will be
brought to understand the Scriptures, and to have fellowship with God and Jesus
Christ, and with one another in the Spirit, and to have your minds purified,
and the holy Seed will be raised up, and the body of sin destroyed, and Christ
will reign and rule in you.

Many of these people are committed because they will not find Sureties to be
of the good behavior; and I hear some saying, Are they not accessory to their
own sufferings, that will not do it when they intend to be of good behavior? I
Answer, They are persons of no ill behavior, but are bound to good behavior
by the righteous law of God written in their hearts; and therefore, they may
not confess themselves guilty by submitting to a punishment; the Law intends
the restraint of evil doers; Again, they are required to find Sureties, either
because they have spoken in a Steeple-house, or to a Magistrate; who dare bind
himself not to obey the command of the Lord? shall Moses be bound not to go to
Pharaoh? Shall Tyrants trample on the Lords people, and shall not the Lord by
his Prophets reprove i^? shall the Lord have people in a Congregation, and
shall he not send his Messengers to call them out? men may imprison and
restrain the body, but they cannot stop the mouth, nor may the Saints stop
their own. How shall all the wickednesses of the earth be reproved, but by the
righteous spirit of the Lord in his people? By the Act of Queen Mary's, after
three months imprisonment, a submission must be made to the Priest, and
Sureties be given for good behavior; that is, not to offend so again. Oh ye
Members of the Parliament that fear the Lord! Consider, shall the righteous bow
to the wicked, or shall the seed of God be bound not to reprove the man of sin?
The great work of the Lord is not to throw down one man to set up another; But
to throw down the unrighteous seed, that the holy seed may be raised up, and
have dominion; If you restrain the Lord in his work, all the Armies in the
World shall not save you; all these witnesses are now raised up to show you
where the way is stopped, and the Lord has herein made it known to you; its
not the release of the Prisoners alone that he requires; but to make a free way
for the Sons of Zion; Here you are brought to a strait, look to it; For as you
deal in this matter, so shall you be established; Should I tell you in all
particulars how far the ignorant zeal of Judges, and Justices has transported
them beyond the bounds of Law, of reason; Nay, of humanity, you would wonder,
and say, these men are not fit to be Judges of things pertaining to the
Conscience; Should I Relate the Beatings, Woundings, Stonings, Baitings with
Mastiff Dogs, and Imprisonments, that these poor people have suffered in
Cities, Towns, Villages and Steeple Houses, I might fill a volumn; but I come
not to make complaints against any in particular, and therefore I have
concealed all the persecuters names. Be not affrighted by reports, were not the
best of men always accounted the worst, the offscouring of all things? they
are above all others (I know it) Innocent, harmless, peaceable; they dispute
not Authority with any man, nor question Forms of Government, nor trouble their
heads what becomes of the World, but as Strangers and Pilgrims they have their
conversation on the earth, wandering to and fro, seeking another City. Some of
them are committed for other things; one because he would not swear; Does not
Christ and his Apostle James positively forbid all swearing? and where do we
find any of the Saints swearing after the coming of Christ? Its not long till
a light will shine in this Nation, to show the deceits of this and many other
like things; I cannot herein say more to particulars, I have done my duty, the
sin lies at your door; Do what seems good to you; consider, scruples of
conscience are not obvious to every man's reason, if they were, no liberty need
be pleaded for tender consciences.

A Servant of the Truth, Anthony Pearson.
The month called October. 3. 1653.

