AN ELEGY ON THE Most Reverend and Learned JAMES USHER L. Archbishop of
Armagh, and Primate of Ireland; Who departed this life March 21. 1655.

Written by JOHN QUARLES.

April 29 LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Stafford, in the George-yard near
Fleet-bridge. 1656.

To the truly virtuous and Right Honorable, The Countess of Peterborough.
MADAM,
I Am sorry that the sadness of the occasion inforces me to the boldness of
presenting you with this elegious Poem; but, though I am confident the lines
cannot merit your respect, yet I am certain the subject of them will procure
your approbation. Madam, as you were favorably pleased to esteem him in his
life, so I am confident you will respect him in his death; and ( I hope) own
the mean endeavors of

Madam, Your true honourer John Quarles.

To the READER.
Reader,
I Need not tell thee what a loss we have lately received, for it is writ in
legible Characters of grief in every eye; but one thing I shall desire thee to
take notice of; which is, that as he was one of an hundred, so he was the last
of a hundred Archbishops of Armagh; and as he could not live in a worse age, so
he could not dye in a better time, to whose memory I have consecrated these few
lines, desiring thee to read seriously, and judge favorably:

Farewell.
AN ELEGY ON The most Reverend and Learned JAMES USHER L. Archbishop of
Armagh, and Primate of Ireland, who departed this life March 21. 1655.
THen weep no more; see how his peaceful breast
Rock't by the hand of Death, takes quiet rest.
Disturb him not; but let him sweetly take
A full repose, he has been long awake;
Tired with the toil of a most tedious day,
He sought refreshment; seeking, found the way,
The way to heaven, and being merry-hearted
Shook hands with flesh and blood, and so departed;
Nobly resolved; it is absolutely known
He left a Dunghill, to embrace a Throne.
Where now he sits, clothed with celestial pride.
Reader, it is worse than death, to say, he died:
He only slumbred from himself, and saw
'Twas late, (but ah too soon!) and that the Law
Of Nature urged, he thought it too much wrong
To his own good, to stay on earth too long;
Time, and the Grave, make equal every thing,
Here lies the Beggar, clothed like the King.
But stay my Muse, Is It possible the Sun
Can quit the firmament, unmiss'd, and run
Beyond our sight? If so, Armagh may be
Obliterated from posterity.
But is he fled? --
Then let the Nylus of each swelling eye
Ore flow our Egypt; stay, rash quill, but why?
Why should we woo forth tears? we had more need
To weep in blood; the Church begins to bleed,
And who can blame her? we must all confess
She had few Heads before, but now one less:
Alas poor Orphan! how is she oppressed
To lose so dear a friend, and see the rest
Lie drawing on; this sorrow sure will keep
Her eye-lyds open: let her, let her weep
Till Heaven shall please to contradict her fate,
A weeping Church portends a bleeding State.
What? are the Muses silent? are they all
Deluged with tears? shall their Moecenas fall
Without regard? I rather would believe
They Are now complotting jointly how to grieve
With most advantage: sorrow often swells
In tears, before it flows in words, and tells
Her melancholy story; they that know
The course of grief, will grant it to be so;
Silence is now a crime, and I had rather
(Like Heraclitus) weep and write together,
Than rest in silence, for I have a debt
Of gratitude to pay, which will not let
My fancy rest contented till I have
Laid down my grateful offering at his grave.
That little education I dare own
I had (I Am proud to say) from him alone;
His grave advice would oftentimes distill
Into my ears, and captivate my will:
The Example of his life did every day
Afford me Lectures, I dare boldly say,
Nay and affirm it with a joyful breath,
Saint like he lived in Heaven, although on earth:
I could believe that he had half forgot
There was a world, because he minded not
Inferior objects; nay, I dare say more
He had quite forgot it, only for the poor,
Who (whilst the fountain of his fortunes run)
Did daily feel his charitable sun
Refresh their wants; but when injurious fate
Had built a Cross upon his whole estate,
Then he, Heav'n-ravish'd soul, took speedy care
To wish their welfare, and relief by prayer;
I will not tire my Reader, to express
His many troubles, nor the great distress
He often knew; but this I Will say, that he
Was so acquainted with all misery,
That like the out-daring rock, no storm could move
His soul, being fenced (with heavens proof armor) Love.
As for his Learning, I must needs confess
It Is better known than I can well express;
Yet this I Will say, his unexampled life
Was a continual study void of strife:
He was a living Library, in whom
A man might read things past, and things to come.
What need we more? it is childish to repeat
Each virtue, when he had them in the great;
And they that wish to know him truly well
Let them ask Rome, for Rome can sadly tell;
Now Ireland weeps, England laments, but Rome
Cries out, a Heretic deserves no tomb.
Ye Prodigies of Faction, we can tell
He Is gone to Heaven with a miracle,
His soul's above your prayers; be this his glory,
He went to God, but missed your Purgatory;
Then cease your smiles, convert them into tears
For your own follyes, let your hearty prayers
More Heaven to pity, that at last ye may
Enjoy the comfort of a lasting day,
And so farewell --
-- Methinks I sadly hear
The Muses groan forth Elegies, and roar
Their shrill-tun'd voices, every high-bred strain
Does seem, if not a heart, to break a vein;
Oh blame them not, for even thus they cried
When their beloved, their great Moecenas died;
Great losses, cause great grief, yet let us say
(Though God was pleased to take Armagh away)
That he was just, because he did prolong
His well-spent days, and lend him us so long.
His mercy like the Phoenix, never dies,
One passes by, to let the other rise:
Thus having paid the tribute of my heart,
I must (although unwillingly) depart.
Farewell blessed soul, farewell, all I desire
Is to shake souls, not hands, and so retire.
His Epitaph.
REader, these narrow confines do contain
Romes envy, Irelands, loss, and Englands gain.
If true desert, a just reward might have,
The largest Continent should be his Grave;
But he is content, Reader, be this thy care,
Think on our loss, depart, but leave a tear.
The End.
Two Books lately printed for John Stafford in George-yard near Fleet-bridge.
1. A Collection of SERMONS: 1. The best Employment. 2. A Gift for God alone.
3. The true Penitent. 4. The best Act of Oblivion.


Together with NOTES upon JONAH. Thomas Fuller.

2. DIVINE MEDITATIONS upon several subjects, etc. John Quarles.


