STRANGE-PREDICTIONS RELATED at CATERICKE In the North of England: By one who
saw a vision, and told it himself to the Company with whom he was drinking
Healths; How he was struck, and an Angel appeared to him with a SWORD.

A Revelation made to him; and the whole Narrative of the same.

Certified by a Letter from an eminent person.



Printed at London by R.I. for A. H. 1648.

Strange Predictions related at Catericke, in the North of England, by one who
saw a Vision, and told it himself to the Company with whom he was drinking
healths.
Sir,
UPon receipt of yours, with the intimation of your desires to be satisfied
touching that current relation of what lately happened here at Catericke, upon
a more serious examination of every particular, I found the ground of that
story, so generally dispersed, and by credulous ears easily believed, to be
this.

A consort of Good-fellows, or to bestow on them their true stamp and style, a
knot of sociable Newtrals, (for really interested they were to no party) made
their set meeting, at this Town: where they drunk down care merrily? called
for their cups freely, and so bestowed most part of that day in repetition of
their youth full prankes with other offencel esse stories, cheerfully.

Till one of the company with veins as full of wine, as his brain was empty of
wit, began a health to the seven Planets, taking a deep oath that it should
go round. But two of those seven grew too hard for him to encounter withal: So
as, becoming Planet-strucke, he took council of his pillow, leaving the
remainder of those healths to the rest of his company.

Scarcely had this over-wrought Comrade laid an hour in this sort: till
through excess of liquor or some other occasional distemper, he discovered
upon his awaking all the symptoms of a feavor: and in that violent manner, as
the strength of two or three of the most activest spirits there could with much
difficulty hold him.

After some small inspiration, as one awaked out of a fearful slumber, looking
at the first perplextly about him, with a passionate sigh. He begun to tell the
standers by how a terrible apparition had presented it self to him: and by it
enjoined, as he tendered his future safety, seriously and ingenuously to
communicate what he had seen, and heard delivered to him in that vision, to
such substantial Inhabitants of the Town, as might not only retain it in
mind, and usefully make benefit of it, but impart it likewise to others of
their neighbors, who were equally interested in the relation which he was
charged to deliver unto them.

To give him satisfaction, diverse of the sufficientest inhabitants were sent
for upon whose repair, he addressed his speech unto them in this sort, after he
had raised himself a little upon his pillow.

You may perchance, my Masters, imagine that what I am here to discover to you,
proceeds from the distempers of an unsettled brain: which my late too liberal
and excessive company brought me to.

But I must tell you with a sense as recollected and clear as if it had been
never distempered: that the commands, nay, and comminations too (for both these
were enjoined me) shall be freely and really delivered to you, as they were
with much affrightment presented me: And in them strictly commaned to return
them to you.

Know then, my friends, that there appeared to me in my sleep a vision,
presented to me at the first sight in a terrible and sense-amaring posture;
brandishing over my head a sword all besmered with blood: which at first I
conceived to be justly unsheathed and menaced against me, for my excessive
abuse of time, and those precious benefits, which with such careless and
sensual freedom I had abused. This in humain reason (so much at least, as
society accompanied with a loathed saciety had left me) I might well apply to
my self and impute to my folly: having so long time resolved, to decline what
naturally I was addicted to: and to confine my loose and unbounded will, to a
more temperate command of my affections: and rational obedience to a diviner
Edict. This, I must confess, produced in me an unspeakable terror, in taking a
serious review of my own errors: and applying the use of this fearful
apparition to my self, and expecting every minut, when I should receive some
menacing Lecture from it. At last, and unexpectedly as if it had been
transformed to another mold, it appeared to me with a more cheerful and
pleasing presence, diverting the sword which it formerly brandished over me
toward your Town, expressing it self in this manner.

You Sir, who if you timely decline not your accustomed distemper, must not
expect a continued impunity to your abused liberty: If you sink thus in your
lees, and retain no sense of sin nor shame, the scourge of Scorpions will at
last bring your debaucht course to a sense of both; sin to condemn you, shame
to confound you. Reflect on your self in these, and after these attend my
charge.

Acquaint these too secure and regardlesse Inhabitants of this Town where thou
now remainest, and where thy late distempers have lodged thee. That their
ingratitude to God and Man will shortly sharpen the edge of his revenging sword
against them. His bow already is bent, his vials full of wrath ready to be
powered down on them. Would they know the cause? They have been seated in the
sat of the Land: A fruitful and fertle soil has made them senseless of
their condition, never fixing on him from whom they received this provision.
The fulness and variety of Gods benefits in their successive and seasonable
Harvests have made them forgetful of the chief Master of the Family. Do they
expect to receive, and never to return an acknowledgement of their homaage or
service to him, to whom they stand so highly obliged? What is it which they
have not received? And wherein is it that they have approved themselves
thankful receivers? And what greater or larger root of evil, seeing it dryes
up the spring of Gods mercy, imbitters the sweetest waters, by converting his
blessings into curses, through this dis-acknowledgement of his blessings?

The due consideration of those miseries inflicted upon others, and those their
door neighbors, might induce them to recollect Gods mercies to them, who
though conscious of higher sins, have not as yet partaked of the like
judgments. Let them but cast their compassionate eyes upon some of those near
bordering or adjacent fields, divided only by an hedge or strait limit from
their own, and they must necessarily acknowledge Gods inestimable mercy in
exempting them from so neighboring a misery. Have not some of their
fruitfullest fields been mill-dewed? Nay, have not Catterpillers and
Grasshoppers consumed their fruits; and made their Store-bouses groan through
scarcity? Let them reflect a little further, and they shall hear of
afflictions, nay terrible judgments, presented to their view in a more
remarkable and fearful manner For were not whole Corne-fields, that promised
as fair and free a crop, as the longing Husbandman could possibly expect,
wholly destroyed and consumed; by some occult means which all their endeavors
could never discover, till at last one of them desiring much to retreve the
cause thereof, chanced to catch a Fly, large in proportion, and vast extension
in its orifice, on whose wings variously and curiously speckled, were these two
words indented, and by no means, they could use to be razed: IRE DEI. This
memorable judgment they cannot choose but remember, and with the memory
thereof, be struck in terror!

But how were it possible, that they should show least semblance of thank
fullness to him, whom they never saw, though they have amply tasted of his
bounty, when they cannot retain a thought of grateful retribution to him, from
whom they daily derive their livelihood and subsistence; and of whose many
civilities toward them, before these distractions, they have received
sufficient experience. By his means, next under God, have they lived, and in
such plenteous manner, as the Farmer has reaped more benefit then the Owner.
All this while, what have they returned out of his revenues, on whom they
depended, and by whose leave they inhabited, but neglect, and insupportable
injuries? Now must not these indignities render heavy judgments.

Oh what an injurious and malignant thing is man, when he begins to degenerate
from himself, and unman that part in him which makes him most man? There is no
creature more savage then he who should be the civilest of all creatures, when
he suffers his thoughts to play the Serpents, and creep on the earth! This
their groundling dispositions have acted to life, by deserting him who gave
them competences for life; and exposing himself and family to want, for their
weal. Farmers contribute amply, as members of one society, to the Saints
necessity, and your Landlords necessitous quality, or expect a speedy alarm of
vengeance and fury to you, your family and posterity.

Upon which words, he fell into a violent passion, crying out, in a furious
and distempered manner, He comes, He comes, Have among you, The Devil, The
Devil.

At which strange alteration and uncouth passion, the standers by became much
astonished and affrighted: which was increased by this occasion. It chanced,
that the very same time, there was an interlude to be presented by some young
men near adjoining. But this terrible burly-burly coming from the next house,
where the Play was to be acted, quickly dissolved the Auditory, flocking
thither, purpofely to enquire the occasion of this clamor.

So generally despersed grew this rumor, as it occasioned, to the ease of the
Township, sundry Troopers to remove their quarters. It were to be wished, that
it might produce the like effect bereafter Amongst which one of the actors who
was to play the Devils part, run amongst them for company, attired in a
Devils habit, as terrible as a Countries property or invention could make him.
Upon whose entrance, those who were present in the house, calling to mind the
words which had been a little before uttered: He comes, He comes, Have among
you, The Devil, The Devil; without notice taken of his distemper who spoke
it, or of his person or habit, who so accidentally presented it; they were so
terrified with the approach of this poor Country Devil, as they run forth
into the streets like so many distracted furies, ever and anon crying out, We
will give all satisfaction, so the Devil will not take us. And to increase
their fear, the smell of brimstone and powder, which this interlude Devil had
raised with his squibs and crackers, did no less annoy them, then his
whistling habit did affright them. Neither did the issue of this strangely
occurring accident end thus. For a person of quality, and who by his
Commissionary power and place, might enquire, and by his commands repress all
inconvenient or disorderly assemblies, hearing a report hereof, took his
horse, that he might be an ocular witness, and punisher too, if occasion were,
of these incivilities. The Gentlmans house was not far distant from the Town,
so as, crossing over Swald, a pleasant river, delightfully streaming along in
those parts; he was no sooner com^ to the shore, then surprised with some
pannike fear, or some imaginary affright (probably derived from the
apprehension of this terrible accident, for so he conceited it) he verily
thought, that the horse he rid on, was surrounded with fire, endeavoring twice
or thrice to quench the flame, which he supposed hung dangling in his main. In
a word, he became so perplexed, and indeed wholly divided from himself, as
this imaginary phanaticke fire leading him through many blind bypath,
brakes, and bushes, caused him to spend most part of that unwelcome evening in
this wandering condition, without least knowledge of where he was, or whereto he
addressed his course; till at last by a Field-keeper he was happily conducted
home, since which time he has remained in a weak and languishing manner,
quite out of temper, yet insensible of his own indisposed humor. For his
meagre complexion and enfeebled constitution, presents him to those that
formerly knew him, a mere anatomized Skelleton. Daily he groundles away and
wastes all, crying out sometimes in his extremity: Oh how these Rams horns do
push me; for loves sake remove them from me.

We in these parts can do no less then wonder, that a person of such gravity
and serious employment, should without any apparent motive to such distempered
passions, fall into these extremes. But our best Physicians have lately given
some hope of his recovery; laboring daily to extract all such vicious or
corrupt humors (which as they positively and practically affirm) were
destructive to his intellective parts, and the origin or source of these
distempers.

The Gentleman whom we left with a worm in his brain, and a prophetical
vision in his sleep; after a good nights rest, perfectly recovered; but stands
still upon justification of that vision, which he had to the inhabitants
formerly related.

Give me leave here to annex one pleasant passage, to sweeten the bitterness
of the former: Alloes should have some sugar-pills to temper it. It chanced
that one of this deep drenched society at an unseasonable hour indenturing it
homeward, in the meeting of two ways, he might see, as he imagined, a Spirit
standing directly before him in a white sheet, where recollecting his
wool-gathering senses, he resolved whatsoever became of it to speak to it so
as with a shuddring shrug or two, at last he thus encountered it: If thou be
a good spirit, I know thou will do me no harm, for thou art of an honest
sociable temper; and if thou be the Devil himself, thou have no reason to
harm me, for I married thy sister; but this white shrouded spirit turned into
a white horse which freed him of fear, and lent him more courage to grapple
with his fury at home.

Now to be serious; you may expect some news touching our Northern march, and
what is intended by our Brethren there: shall I ingenuously unbosome my self
unto you there cannot be more different opinions amongst a College of Doctors,
then we retain touching this grand intendment: some say their own interests
will engage them: others that their divisions at home will detain them: some
that the Cavalry of England will join with them: others, that the Scots will
by no means admit them: some, that they will both join in the work, but march
several ways. There was a letter lately intercepted, being directed to a
constant Cavallier rending in those parts; the character was not found so
obscure, but it might be rendered, the effect thereof briefly thus:

My dearest Phil. may felicity to the accomplishment of all our wishes,
accompany your glorious design of loyalty. A clear beam is ever most cheerful
breaking through a cloud. A calm after a storm; our yoke has been heavy,
but it promises liberty; our seven years misery, hopes for a year of
Jubilee. Your march has been long reported, now daily expected.

Many hands and hearts go along with you; some to fight, others to pray for
you: Ride on with honor, and may seasonable weather, convenience of quarter,
and all victorious success smile on your loyal endeavor. This speedy
messenger will not permit me to enlarge my self any further. It is
sufficient, that you know the character of

Your real friend and servant, L. P.

A brief Relation of our present condition in the North; upon what grounds the
Cavalier party first advanced; with what hopes encouraged; what considerable
places have been by them either summoned or surprised: and of what number the
body of their Army consisted. With sundry other particulars of main
consequence, in a Letter from a Factor to his Master lately directed.
SIR,
SInce your pleasure to employ me in these parts, especially for your Factory
in Hull, and so occasionally to Newcastle: I have bestowed some time
(whenever your more important affairs gave way) to take some cursory
observations of such principal actions or designs, as carried the face of a
present undertaking here, or adjacent to these parts, where I have under your
commands received employment.

You have, without doubt, heard in a more particular relation, our passages
here about Barwick. A place sometimes considerable, in respect it was not only
fortified, and strongly garrisoned, but accounted an impregnable Barricado to
all invasive forces, that might labor to make their entrance or incursion that
way.

But of late, the place was of no such strength; for the intended nnion and
association of our two Kingdoms, had not only occasioned a remove of all such
Garrisons as were there formerly continued, but translated their Ordnance too,
by which the safety of that Port was preserved.

Truth is, the Cavalier party became possessed here with great facility: Forts
admit an easy surprise, where there appears no resistance: Neither could the
surpriser purchase any great booty by his entry: For Ammunition he could f(^nde
little or none. Being a Town since remove of the Garrison and other
dis-provision; accounted of an inconsiderable condition.

It was, indeed, formerly a place of strength, both in respect of the Site
naturally fortified, and those Out-workes artificially contrived, but these (as
I touched before) were wholly slieghted, that all appearances or prints of
hostility betwixt the Scottish Nation and us, might be utterly razed, and in
oblivion buried.

Nothing is so much wondered at here, as the breaking down of the Bridge at
Barwick, which bred different opinions in persons of approved judgments. For
some of these gathered, and not improbably neither, how it could not possibly
be expected that any forces should be raised by the Scots in defense of the
Cavaliers, having so strangely obstructed their passage by that breach, being
imagined rather an act to secure themselves upon their entry, by preventing the
incursion of a suspected enemy. Others collected from these premises, that the
demolition of this Bridge was a mere pretense to delude the opinions of such,
as positively held it an apparent argument of a dis-correspondence with them
and the Scots. For it was not intended (as these supposed) that any occasion
should proceed from hence of diverting the Scottish assistance or association
with the Cavaliers; for though their passage here were obstructed, yet had they
many other invasive ways, in they intended any such concurrence, and that in a
more fertile and plenteous march; and in their judgments more accommodate for
their purpose; concluding, that the breaking down of that Bridge, was but to
make our inhabitants (such I mean as are zealous for the cause) more secure
and free from fear, when the occasion was most imminent, rather then any other
prevertive design.

But shall I deliver my opinion, under favor, freely? Nor shall I only render
mine own, but as it holds weight in the balance of others judgments, on whom
I ingenuously depend more then mine own?

Such be the distractions, and those so irreconciliably increasing by strength
of faction, and the private interests of such powerful agents as stir in
them, as their oars be so employed at home, as they cannot for the present
address their designs for any employment but their own?

Their Divines too appear in it, and have so effectually labored to dissuade
them from any such enterprise, as some of those, who at the first professed
themselves most active in the pursuit of this Service, have fallen off and
offered reasons of disswasion to others upon some grounds, where with they were
persuaded. So as, this Expedition, as is here reported, and by remonstrances,
from persons of quality confirmed, has lately grown cooler then was expected;
whereby we may probably gather, that the security of the Cavalier, is not to
receive life nor subsistence from them: howsoever he seem confident of their
assistance. But affiance so politickly grounded, becomes an AegyptiM^n seed to
the party deluded.

Truth is, it is the opinion of the clearest and uninteressed judgments, that
the Cavalier party must support it self, to stand or fall; and that they
appeared too speedily to go on succesively.

Sundry affections there are indeed, in every County, which rather follow the
tide, by closing with the time, and that ^^^ible force which they see likeliest
to prevail, then either reason or conscientious zeal. But such as these, who
build their interests upon events, or approaching strength, are neither to be
much feared, nor their alliance much desired, for they turn their by as to
avoid rubs in the Alley; mean time, they encounter greater blocks, arising
generally either through pusillanimity of spirit, or inconstancy of judgment.
These that are most for those that come first, are for most part ruined by
those that come last.

We have Carlisle here likewise surprised, but a City more inconsiderable then
Barwicke: For it is a Town full of poverty, and inhabitants strangers to
industry. They report here, that their works lately slieghted should be
repaired.

The Site of the Town is only considerable, presenting a convenience of
defense, in respect it is seated upon the marches betwixt Scotland and us; and
by no means of their neighborhood in times of peace, with many commodities
furnished.

Very lately at Kirby Zonesdale, a Market-Towne near adjoining to the Barrony
of Kendall, the Cavalier party appeared in a body consisting of 7000. under the
command of Sir Thomas Glenam; but how their affections hold for that service, a
very short time will discover.

Colonel Lambert is marching speedily toward Skipton, intending as is
thought, to give him battle.

Lancashire stands in a posture of defense, holding mainly for the Presbyterian
government.

We find in these parts a great decrease of Trade; but in the composure of
these distractions, we are hopeful of improvement. An account of all such
particulars as your last commands lay on me, shall upon next return, be
expedited by

Your Worships most humble servant, P. M.
May 23. 1648.
Imprimatur,

Gilb. Mabbor.

FINIS.

