THE QUEENS LETTER To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY. Expressing her Royal
inclination to his sacred Majesty; and the peace of the Kingdoms committed to
his charge.

With her gracious Advice to his Majesty, concerning the Propositions,
delivered to his Majesty, at Hampton Court, Sept. 7. 1647. by the Commissioners
of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Commissioners of the
Kingdom of Scotland.

Translated out of the French Copy, and commanded to be Printed for public
satisfaction.

Printed in the Year 1647. September. 16.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
My dear Heart:
AS there could no occasion minister greater grief to my sorrowful heart,
th^n to hear of a short adjournement of these unnatural divisions between
you and your liege people; and presently to have the consuming flames of a new
War, suddenly break out afresh in your languishing Kingdoms, So there could
no welcomer news salute mine ear, then speedily to hear of a final period
to be put to these unhappy distractions; that so the sweet harmony of desired
peace and concord, (which produces most blessings) may reunite you and your
Subjects, and tie you fast each to other in the sacred bands of Love and Unity,
the only means under God, to support your Royal Estate with honor and plenty
at home, and with power and reputation abroad: Therefore I shall desire your
Majesty to grant your Parliament and people whatsoever with a good conscience
and honor, you may, for the further prevention of shedding of innocent blood,
and preservation of those committed to your charge. Sir, assure your self,
nothing shall be displeasing to me, that pleases you, my Lord; for I shall for
ever esteem your good, and the good of all your faithful Subjects, the only
business of all my actions, and shall be contented to share with you, and them
(not only in blessings) but even in the worst of calamities that can happen to
a disconsolate, and unjust banished wife: but Sir,

I from my heart forgive all the opprobrious tongues and pens, that have cast
their calumnies on my unspotted integrity, and shall pray to the King of Kings,
and to your sacred Majesty to do the like.

Concerning the Propositions tendered your Majesty, I humbly conceive; The
chief things to be considered, will be two, conscience and policy: For the
first, I know it never entered into your Royal thoughts to change the
government by Bishops, no^ only concurring with the most general opinion of
most Christians in all ages, as being the best; but considering you hold your
self bound by the Oath you took at your Coronation, not to alter the
Government of the Church, from what you found it. And for the Churches
Patrimony, you cannot suffer any diminution or alienation of it, without danger
to your conscience, or br^ach of your Coronation Oath; but for whatsoever shall
be offered for the rectifying abuses crept into the Church in government of
discipline, or for the ease of tender consciences. (endangering not the
foundation) I desire your Majesty to lend a speedy ear unto, and give your
gracious answer thereunto: For as it is your Majesty's duty to protect the
Church; so it is the Churches duty to assist your Majesty in maintaining your
just authority; for as your Predecessors have been always careful to keep
the dependency of the Clergy entirely upon the Crown, without which (as I
humbly conceive) it will scarcely sit fast upon your Royal head; therefore it
much behooves your Majesty to do nothing to change or lessen this so necessary
dependency.

The other maine Proposition will be concerning the Militia; next to conscience
certainly there is no fitter subject for a Kings quarrel, for without it your
Majesty's power is but a shadow, and therefore by no means to be quitted; but
to be maintained according to the known Laws of the Land: Yet for the speedy
attainment of this so long looked for and wished for peace, prayed for by all
good Christians, That your Majesty may be pleased to permit the City of London,
and all other strong Holds and Garrisons, with other military Forts, to reside
in the hands of the Parliaments Lord General, Sir Thomas Fait fax, until
Articles be performed and agreeed upon, to give such further Assurance for
performance of conditions, as your Majesty shall judge necessary for the
concluding a firm and lasting Peace; which being once settled, all things may
return, and run in their ancient channels.

I have received a Petition from diverse Earls, Lords, and Gentlemen, now
banished, and exempted from pardon, who desired that I would move your Majesty
to intercede between them and your Parliament, that the edge of so severe and
sharp a censure, as perpetual banishment may be abated by your great
clemency, candor, and goodness, and they rerestored into favor, and their
Sequestrations taken off when peace shall be firmly established, which I know
your Majesty's merciful disposition, will (when you shall see time) consider
of. Thus, dear Heart, understanding the Commissioners were arived at your
Court of Hampton with Propostions, I thought good to put you in mind, that you
have a care of your Honor, and that if you have a peace, it may be such as
may hold. Farewell, my dear Heart, I cannot write any more, but that I am
absolutely.

Yours*

FINIS.

