A true Copy of a Letter sent from a friend in Paris, to his friend in London,
with one enclosed, casually found near the Louvre in Paris.
SIR,
TO put it out of dispute that our passions are made use of by our enemies, and
that we have motives often by corrupt persons suggested for them to their
advantage, I have enclosed this Letter which was casually dropped by the
Cardinal in passing from his Coach to the Louvre, it being my fortune to be
that night at Court; and unobserved, to take it up.

Sir, I submit it to your judgment, either to conceal, or communicate it, and
rest,

Your humble servant, N.F.
Paris, 13. Jan. 1656.
Endorsed thus, For his Eminence, Card. Mazarine.

THe obligations and many instances of affection which I have received from
your Eminence, do engage me to make returns suitable and commensurat to your
merits; but although I have this set home upon my spirit, yet I may not (shall
I tell you I cannot) at this juncture of time, and as the face of my affairs
now stands, answer to your Call for Toleration; I say, I cannot as to a
public declaration of my sense in that point; although I believe that under
my Government your Eminence in the behalf of Catholics has less reason for
complaint, as to rigor upon men's consciences, then under the Parliament; For I
have of some, and those very many had compassion, making a difference. Truly I
have, and I may speak it with cheerfulness in the presence of God who is a
witness within me to that truth I affirm, made a difference, and as Jude
speaks, plucked many out of the fire, the raging fire of persecution, which did
tyrannize over their consciences, and encroacht by arbitrarinesse of power upon
their Estates: And herein it is my purpose, as soon as I can remove
impediments, and some weights that press me down, to make a further progress,
and to discharge my promise to your Eminence in relation to that.

And now I shall come to return your Eminence thanks for your judicious choice
of that person to whom you have entrusted our weightiest affair, an affair
wherein your Eminence is concerned, though not in equal degrees and measures
with my self. I must confess that I had some doubts of its success, till
Providence cleared them to me by the effects. I was not truly and to speak
ingenuously without doubtings, and shall not be ashamed to give your Eminence
the grounds I had for such doubtings; I did fear that Barkley would not have
been able to go through and carry on that work, if either the Duke had cooled
in his suit, or condescended to his Brother: I doubted also that those
instructions which I sent over by 290 were not clear enough as to expression;
some affairs here denying me leisure at that time to be so particular as to
some circumstances as I would.

If I am not mistaken, greatly mistaken in his character as I received it from
your Eminence, that fire which is kindled between them now will not ask bellows
to blow it, and to keep it burning; but what I think further necessary in this
matter I will send your Eminence by Lockart: and now I shall boast to your
Eminence my Security, upon a well-builded confidence in the Lord; for I
distrust not but if this breach be widened a little more, and this difference
fomented with some caution in respect of the persons to be added to it; I
distrust not but that party which is already forsaken of God (as to any outward
dispensations of mercies) and noisome to their Countrymen, will grow lower in
the opinions of all the world.

If I have troubled your Eminence too long in this, you may impute it to the
resentment of joy which I have for the issue of this affayre, and will conclude
with giving you assurance that I will never be backward in demonstrating as
becomes your Brother and Confederate, that I am

Your Servant, O. P.
December. 26. 1656.

