Men sowing and reaping; a man threshing and a woman sifting; a woman cooking
and a man drinking ale; a man gleaning and a woman sweeping. The Rebels hanging
a shepherd up by the thumbs.

The Rebels being drinking, each man slew his fellow.



stylized section of a tree

QVEENE ELIZABETH'S BISHOPS: OR, A BRIEF DECLARATION OF THE WICKEDNESS OF THE
GENErality of those Bishops of ENGLAND that lived in the purest times of King
EDWARD the sixth, and Queen EIIZABETH, and some things concerning ours.

WRIT OF PURPOSE TO KEEP THE KINGS GOOD SUBJECTS FROM BEing cheated of their
Loyalty, Honesty, Peace, Wealth, Religion, God and Salvation, all which they
had like to have lost of late.

LONDON, PRINTED 1642.

THe Work of the begun Reformation in K. Edward the Sixths days, was a
glorious Work of the All-glorious God, by the instrument of men; and such a
Work has crowned the names of the Instruments thereof with eternal honor:
but who were they? not those that pretended to be the only Fathers and
Builders of the House of God: the Bishops they had pulled it down, and laid
Jerusalem waft: and when the foundation of a true Church began to be laid, they
were against it might and maine: witness Martin Bucer in a Speech of his to
King Edward: Martin Bucer de regno Christi. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Your Majesty (says he) does see that this restoring again the Kingdom of
Christ which we require, yea which the salvation of us all requires, may in no
wife be expected to come of the Bishops, seeing there be so few among them,
which do understand the power and proper Offices of this Kingdom, and very
many of them by all means (which possibly they can and dare) either oppose
themselves against it, or defer and hinder it. And had not King Edward,
though young, set his heart for Reformation more than all, yea then the best of
the Bishops, it had never proceeded so far as it did: when Cranmer and Ridly
pressing him to permit his Sister the Lady Mary to have Mass in her house: the
King having heard what they could say, replied out of the Scriptures so fully,
that they were enforced to give place to his Replication, and grant the same to
be true: Then they after long debatings with his Majesty in this manner,
labored politiquely in another sort, and alleged what dangers the denying
thereof might bring to his grace, what breach of amity on the Emperors part,
what troubles, what unkindnesses, and what occasions sundry ways it would
enforce unto? whom the King answered, willing them to content themselves, for
he would he said, spend his life and all he had, rather than to agree, and
grant to that he knew to be against the truth: the which when the Bishops
heard, notwithstanding they urged him still to grant, and would by no means
have his nay: then the good King seeing their importunate suite: in the end his
tender heart bursting out into bitter weepings and sobbing, he desired them to
be content, whereat the Bishops wept as fast as he, and acknowledged the good
King had more divinity in his little finger than they had in all their bodies
Fox, Acts Mon. p. 653. Edit. 1631.

Almost all of the Bishops, all King Edwards Reign, even after Reformation,
were base dessembling Hipocrites, Popish, Athesticall fellows, for though they
made a show of true Religion, all while that good King was living, yet when
Queen Mary survived, they all turned bloody persecuting Papists, except
Hooker, Ridly, Frarrer, and Cranmer. The unholy men of that unholy Order of
Bishops were such inhumane, beastly-caniball-blood-sucking-persecutors of the
true professors of Christ's Gospel in Queen Mary's Time, that they made
themselves drunk with the blood of many of our great Grandfathers, and great
Grandmothers, which yet cries to God for vengeance, either upon the Bishops and
Papists, who were the spoilers of it, or else upon the Land for omitting in a
Parliamentary way the execution of it.

Thus you have seen what manner of creatures the Bishops in King Edward the
Sxiths time were. Now to declare what the Bishops of Queen Elizabeth's time of
Ever-blessed Memory were too: I thought good to cause to be Reprinted an
Epistle of many Reverend and learned Divines and Gentlemen of those times, viz.
Mr. Vdall, Mr. Penry, Mr. Cartwright, Mr King, Mr. Prudler, Mr. Pain, Mr.
Knightly, Mr. Wigston, and others, to the then Bishops of England verbatim to a
Copy I have by me in Print, Printed long ago, without adding or diminishing a
word, wherein they are notably set out to the Life.

TO THE SUPPOSED GOVERNORS Of the Church of ENGLAND, the Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Archdeacons, and the rest of that order.
MAny and most evident have our declarations been concerning the truth of that
government which Christ has prescribed in his Word for the ruling of the
Church, which we have manifested unto you, both by our writings and speeches,
as occasion has been offered: Never has any one of you taken in hand to say
any thing against it, but it has made his eyes to dazzle as the clearest
Sunshine, whereby he has been driven to wander hither and thither, groping for
evasions, and yet could not escape, but has fallen into infinite most
monstrous absurdities, and blasphemous assertions, (as by their writings yet
extant may appear) so forcible is the truth to amaze the gainsayers thereof,
and so pregnant is falsehood to beget and bring forth thousands of absurdities,
and every one worse then other. And will you still continue in your damnable,
and most devilish course? Have you sold your selves unto Satan, to fight for
him until you be damned in hell with him? Have you morgaged the salvation of
your souls and bodies, for the present fruition of your pomp and pleasure? is
it because you see not what you should do? It may be so, for many are so
blind, that they grope even at noon day. but me thinks it can hardly be so,
unless you be they that have eyes and see not, for the cause has been (by the
blessing of God) so managed, that many Ploughmen, Artisicers, and children do
see it, and know it, and are able by the Word of God to justify it, and
condemn you to be adversaries unto the Gospel in resisting it. But you think
that government not so needful, and your fault but small (if it be any) in
continuing your course begun. The necessity of the thing to many ways
apparent, both in that it has so plentiful warrant from Gods own Word, (as
the course of this book does evidently declare) and also in that the Gospel
can take no root, nor have any free passage for want of it: And the greatness
of your fault appears by this, that in so doing you are the cause of all the
Ignorance, Atheism, Schisms, Treasons, Popery and ungodliness that is to be
found in this Land, which we challenge to prove to your faces, if we may
indifferently be heard, and whereof in the mean while we will give you a
taste: For the first it is clear, that you are the causers of that damnable
ignorance, wherein the people are so generally wrapped, for that you have from
time to time stopped the streams of knowledge in those places where the Lord
in mercy bestowed the same, and instead of able and painful Ministers, have
pestered the Church, either with presumptuous proud persons, that are esteemed
learned, and take no pains to bring the people unto the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, or (which is the greatest number) such ignorant asses, and filthy
swine, as are not worthy to live in a well ordered Commonwealth: And that you
are the cause of all Atheism, it is plain, for one may (as indeed many do)
profess it, and you say nothing to him for it. If the most filthy liver will
fawn upon you, and bribe your servants, you will not only favor him, but
assist him against any godly Minister or other: but if any that fear God,
refuse to come under the least of your Popish ceremonies, he shall be molested,
till his purse be empty, or else by your traitorous dealing he have made
shipwreck of a good conscience. And are not you the cause of all Schisms,
that make a hotch-potch of true Religion and Popery, and so give some an
occasion to fall into this course, and others into that? And it is as clear,
that you are so far the cause of all Treasons, as without you they had not
been: For if every Church had had her government according to Christ's
institution, our young Gentlemen, and Students had not been (for want of
teaching and careful oversight) made a prey unto the seducers, and
consequently to those practices which have brought the bodies of so many unto
Tiburne, and their souls into hell: And who but you be the cause of Popery,
whilst you use them so well, let them do what they list, yea, and keep them
in office and authority under you, yea, (which more is) give them such offices
as none that is not Popish can execute: I speak not of the ignorance which by
your means reigns every where, which (as they confess) is the mother of
their devotion, and you are the wretched fathers of that filthy mother, whereby
you must needs be grandfathers (at the least) to all kind of Popery. Omnia cum
liceant, non licet esse bonum.
And who can (without blushing) deny you to be the cause of all ungodliness,
seeing your government is that which gives leave to a man to be any thing,
saving a sound Christian. For certainly it is more free in these days, to be a
Papist, Anabaptist, of the Family of love, yea, any most wicked one whatsoever,
then that which we should be, and I could live these twenty years any such in
England (yea, in a Bishops house it may be) and never be much molested for it:
so true is that which you are charged with, in a Dialogue lately come forth
against you, and since burned by you, that you care for nothing but the
maintenance of your dignities, be it to the damnation of your own souls, and
infinite millions more: Enter therefore now at the last into the serious
consid^ration of these things: remember that one day you must be presented
before the Tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, to be arraigned for all the souls
that have gone to hell (seeing you will needs be the rulers of the Church)
since the Gospel first appeared in this Land, then shall you not be excused
with this, the Queen and Council will have it so: nor with that, our State
cannot bear it. For it shall be said unto you, why do you not inform them
better of my will, why taught you them not to worship with trembling and fear,
and to kiss the Son lest he be angry? Why did you not tell them, that all
States must be ruled by my Word, and not my Word by them and their policies?
When these things shall be laid to your charge, your consciences shall answer,
that if you had done so, you should have lost your dignities, which you loved
and sought for especially: Then shall you wish that the Mountains would fall
upon you, and the hills cover you from the presence of the Lamb, and from the
presence of him that sits upon the Throne. And I am persuaded that you are
in league with hell, and have made a covenant with death: yea, you do persuade
your selves that there is no God, neither shall there be any such day of
account: or it were impossible that you should give your eyes any sleep, or
take any rest in your beds, until you had unto the Lord by repentance, and the
Church by confession, unburdened your souls of these hellish ways wherein you
have so long walked. Repent, repent, be not ashamed to amend, though others
have found you out the way, judge your selves while you have time, lest you be
made firebrands of hell beyond all time. Let our challenges that we have made
in the name of the Lord be hearkened unto: Let us be disputed with before
indifferent Judges, let the holy word of God be the touchstone to try our
dsiputaitons by, and then shall it easily appear who has the Lord on his
side, and who not. The truth will prevail in spite of your teeth, and all
other adversaries unto it, (for God disdaineth to be crossed by dust and
ashes.) Therefore be not obstinate so long, as until you be found fighters
with God, but prevent his wrath, lest it break forth against you like fire
that none can quench, because of the wickedness of your inventions. Venture
your Bishoprics upon a disputation, and we will venture our lives, take the
challenge if you dare: if the truth be on your side, you may hereby be restored
to your dignities, and be no more troubled by us: but if the truth be against
you, what shall it profit you to win the whol-world, and afterward lose your
own souls. If you refuse still our offer, then must you needs be guilty
either of this, that you know your cause will not abide the trial, or of this,
that you will take no pains to confute us that keep such a stir in the Church:
do not think that because you have humane authority on your side, therefore
you are safe, for he whose authority is on our side, is the greatest, to whose
voice all the devils in hell shall stoop, much more the silly arm of sinful
flesh. We have sought to advance this cause of God by humble suit to the
Parliament, by supplication to your Convocation house, by writing in defense of
it, and by challenging to dispute for it, seeing none of these means used by
us have prevailed: If it come in by that means, which will make all your
hearts to ache, blame your selves, for it must prevail, maugre the malice of
all that stand against it, or such a judgment must overtake this Land as shall
cause the ears that hear thereof to tingle, and make us be a byword to all
that pass by us. The Lord open your eyes, that you may see the confusions
whereof you are the cause, and give you true repentance, or confound you in all
your purposes that be against him and the regiment of his Son Jesus Christ. The
same Lord for the love he bears to his poor people, open the eyes of her
Majesty, and the honorable Counselors, that they may see your godless
practices, and in pity to Gods people, rid us from you, and turn away his
judgments, which the rejecting of his holy yoke has deserved, not punishing
them that mourn for the desolation of Sion, with those that spoil and make
havocke of the Lords Inheritance, Amen.

The end of the Epistle.

I shall here add some instances not mentioned in the former Epistle.
AT the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign the better half of the Protestant
Bishops were those that but a little before had been Popish Prelates in Queen
Mary's time: it seems they were very indifferent men for their Religion.

Bishop Bancraft licenced some Popish books, in one of which it is maintained,
that it was in the Popes power as a gift appropriate to Saint Peter's Chair, to
depose the Kings of England.

They made a great many ignorant, and lewd unpreaching, and some almost, or
altogether unread Priests, or Sir John's. And the Bishop of London made the
Porter of his Gate, when he was old and blind, and so unserviceable, the
Minister of Paddington.

The Bishop of Saint David's had two Wives living at once.

Many of them were common swearers, and one of them in print pleaded for the
lawfulness of swearing by his Faith, from Christ's words Verily, verily I say
unto you, which were said he, as much as By my faith, by my faith I say unto
you.

They made an Idol of the Common Prayer book, for the Bishop of Winchester in
a Sermon at Saint Mary Overies blasphemously said, that a man might as well
find fault with the Bible, as the Common Prayer book.

The same Bishop also in the 49. page of his Book against Martin-Marprelate,
said, that the Creed of the Apostles, Athanasius, and the Nicene contained in
them many palpable lies.

They silenced some hundreds of learned and godly preachers of Christ's Gospel,
outing them of their livings and livelihoods, to their undoing.

So much of Queen Elizabeth's Bishops.

THe Bishops are much more now the cause of all those forementioned evils of
Ignorance, Atheism, Schisms, Treasons, Popery, and ungodliness in the Land:
Yea more, they have been the cause of all these late commotions between England
and Scotland, as all men know by their laboring to bring in Popery, witness
the horrible superstition and Idolatry of our Bishops in their setting up
Altars and Images, and bowing to them, their practice of Will Worship, and
endeavoring that the like Superstition and Idolatry might be practiced all the
three Lands over, most cruelly persecuting all that should oppose them:
Witness Master Smart, Master Burton, Doctor Bastwicke, and Master Prinne, with
many hundreds more. Yea, travelers do say that the Pope, and the Popish
rabble in Rome are not so superstitious as they: and they are the men that have
thereby caused the State to be so much impoverished as it is, emptying the
Kings Treasury, [That he has many times wanted money to uphold his Majesty's
honor, and the honor of the Nation, whereas otherwise he would have been the
greatest monyed Prince in the Christian world] causing those unjust taxations
of Ship Money, (to the undoing of many) and the necessitated expense of all the
late Subsidies, and the Pole Money, to the great weakening and impoverishing of
the Commonwealth: Oh the Millions of money that they have caused to be drawn
out of this State within this three years: Nay farther, it will be maintained
that the Hierarchy of Bishops have been the cause of all that precious
Christian blood that has been spilt in Christendom for this many years, and
of the spoiling of that which runs down the Channels of Germany at this time,
so that they have made godly Master Tindall a Martyrs words true: Woe says he
is the Realm where they are of the Council, as profitable are they to the
Realm with their Council, as the Wolves unto the Sheep, or the Foxes unto the
Geese: Obed: of the Chri: man, page 116. 152.

Oh England, England, cast out the accursed thing which else will certainly
work thy ruin. O our Royal King CHARLES, do this one thing for God, purge
his House of this rabble of Officers which are none of his, that labor all
they can to keep the door shut upon Christ, and good men, so shall thou bring
a blessing upon thee and thy posterity to the worlds end. And O ye Worthies of
Israel, be strong and courageous in this work of the Lord, and all the
inhabitants of the Land, put to your helping hand, Ministers, preach them
down, all true Christians, good Protestants, pray them down: And let God
arise, and let his enemies be scatrered, let them be as chasse before the
wind, and as wax before the fire, that they may melt at the presence of the
Lord: Amen, Amen.

Certain questions resolved.
Quest. THen Sir it seems you would have us be without Church Government, and
then we shall have nothing but Sects and Divisions.

Answ. To be against the present government of Bishops, is not to be against
Church Government, but against Church-ruining, and spoiling, and against that
which is the only let and hinderance of good Government.

2. Where the false government of Bishops has been, there has been Sects and
Divisions in all Ages, but not so in any other Church where there are no such
Bishops.

Quest. But the name and office of a Bishop are set forth in the New Testament,
as good things.

Answ. It is not the name that is opposed (for every good Pastor of a
Congregation is a good Bishop) but it is that evil present government of
Diocesan Bishops which God never ordained, and yet is masked under that
honorable name of Bishop, like unto a Wolf in Sheep clothing, which we are
admonished by our Savior to take heed of.

Quest. What government would you have?

Answ. I wish, and continually pray to God to move his sacred Majesty, and the
honorable Parliament to labor to find out and establish the government of
Jesus Christ, even that government which shall be most consonant to the
Scripture, that so our Israel may be blessed with the glorious presence of
Christ, and freed from all those Sects, Divisions, and distempers which this
Land has been tormented with. *

FINIS.
MARK 9.34, 35. But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed
among themselves, who should be the greatest.

And he sat down, and called the twelve, and says unto them, if any man
desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of all.

MAT. 20.25, 26, 27. But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great,
exercise authority upon them.

But it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great among you, let
him be your Minister.

And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant.

1 PET. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to
the flock.

The 3. Epistle of S. John, ver. 9, 10. I wrote unto the Church, but
Diotrephes, who loves to have the pre-eminence among them, receives us not.

Wherefore if I come, I will remember his deeds which he does, prating against
us with malicious words, and not content therewith, neither does he himself
receive the brethren, and forbids them that would, and casts them out of
the Church.


