The Path way to Peace and Truth, with Holiness: Directed to all those who
love the Lord JESUS CHRIST in truth and sincerity.
John 13. 17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. GAL. 6.
16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy,
and upon the Israel of God. To the Friendly Reader.
FRiend, and Reader, if it be thy lot to view this small Piece, it may be thou
may make good use of it, and give God thanks; but if thou scoffingly style me
Independent, Separatist, or Anabaptist, thou art too rash, and wilt meet with a
modest reproof in the ninth of these Precepts. They all tend to holiness of
life, which is the first step to peace: For when a man's ways plea^e the Lord,
his enemies shall be at peace with him, says the Word. But, There is no peace
to the wicked, says the Lord.

PSALM. 119. 165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall
hurt them. PSALM. 119. 5. O that my ways were directed to keep thy Statutes.
(I.)
THE first thing that thou art to look unto in this business, is, to receive
Christ into thy heart when he knocks at the door thereof (as he does many
ways, but principally by his Word and Spirit.) For until then all the service
thou offerest him is abominable. Thou may take an example from thy self: For
when a Friend whom thou dearly love, knocks at thy door, thou first
openest unto him, and receivest him into thy house, causest him to sit down,
and then administrest unto him: But if thou offer him any thing at the door,
it is a sign he is a Beggar, and one whom thou rather hirest by thy gifts to
depart from thee, then invitest to abide with thee. And when Christ has once
possession in thy heart, he will purge it of all corruption and uncleanness;
This is that which David so much desired, Psam 51. 10. Create in me a clean
heart, O God: And then all other Christian duties will follow, as the thread
follows the needle, and Christ shall sweetly subject every part and faculty
both of soul and body, to a willing obedience of the Gospel. And as thou
entertainest him into thy house of clay; so will he entertain thee into his
Fathers House, wherein are many glorious Mansions, and there thou shall remain
with him and the rest of his blessed Saints and Angels in eternal joy for ever
and ever.

(II.)
The next thing thou art to endeavor, is, to become (if thou be not already) a
member of the true Church of Christ, of his spiritual Kingdom, which he has
chosen and purchased to himself with the price of his most precious blood, as
his peculiar inheritance, unto whom, and with whom he has made his covenant
and promise of love, presence, protection, preservation and blessing; and upon
whom he will multiply the graces of his holy Spirit abundantly. This is his
Vineyard, which his own right hand has planted in a fruitful land, with the
choicest vine, and fenced it about for safety, ( Isa. 5.) from the wild Boares
of the Forest, and from the little Foxes which destroy, Cant. 2. 15. This is
his Walled Sheep fold, in which are enclosed his tender lambs, which he leads
into pleasant pastures, and conducteth in the paths of righteousness, and
causes them to lie down in safety, Psalm. 23. himself being the good
Shepherd, John 10. 11. This is his watered Garden wherein he takes delight,
Cant. 4. 12. This is the City of the great God, wherein he is worshipped, and
his Name called upon, whereof thou art a Citizen. This is Gods House, of whose
Family thou art: which House and City are built upon a sure foundation: Of this
spiritual Kingdom Christ is the only King, Governor, and lawgiver: Take heed
therefore that thou submit not thy self unto any conscience-binding law of
Antichrist his enemy; bear not his mark neither on thy forehead, nor in thy
hand; if thou do, thou losest all the former privileges: for Christ will admit
no partner with him in his govrnment; the Ark of God and Dagon cannot stand
together, nor Christ and Belial. No Kingdom so safe as this, because the
Keeper thereof neither slumbreth nor sleeps; and all the Officers are
watchmen, watching over all the subjects ingenerall; and every subject also
watching over each other in particular.

(III.)
When God has thus honored thee, as to make thee a subject of his Kingdom,
see that thou yield obedience unto all his Laws, and subject thy self wholly
thereunto, and utterly renounce obedience unto the Laws of any King, or
Kingdom, that hold not correspondency with this; and let the grace of God
which thou have received teach thee to deny all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts; and to live righteously, and soberly in this present world, that thou
dishonor not the profession which thou have taken upon thee by thy ill
conversation: but let thy light so shine before men, that they seeing thy good
works may glorify thy father which is in heaven, and say of a truth, God is
in thee indeed, and so be induced to walk with thee in the ways of piety, and
godliness. For the reproach of a scandal in thee, reflecteth not so much upon
thy self, as upon thy profession; for the uncircumcised in heart will
frequently say, This is the religion of such a Church, such a people, and so
the Gospel of Christ is evil spoken off through thy bad conversation; and a
multitude of precious Saints may undergo rebuke as the Church of Corinth did
(1 Cor. 5.) for one man's offense, or else punishment, as many thousands did,
for one Achan; O that men would therefore fear the Lord, and depart from
iniquity, that it might go well with their souls.

(IV.)
Neither must thou rest thy self contented with these former graces, ( viz.)
that thou art Gods servant, and live uprightly and justly, doing no man
wrong; but thou must apply thy self to doing good: For many bruit beasts will
live amongst us all their lives, and never hurt either us, or any of their own
Species, or Kind; but thou who have obtained faith, and other graces from God,
must be active in doing good: For the Apostle ( James 1. 27) teaches a
religious man to visit the Fatherless and widow, as well as to keep himself
unspotted of the world. And David counsels us as well to do good, as eschew
evil, Psalm. 14. If thou be a Vine in Gods Vineyard, he expects grapes from
thee: If thou be a Tree in his Orchard, he expects fruit: for thou may bear
leaves abundantly, and yet be accursed. Imitate therefore blessed Job, be an
eye to the blind, a foot to the Lame, let the naked be clothed with the
fleeces of thy flocks, distribute thy bread unto the hungry, thy drink unto the
thirsty, visit those that are sick and in prison, and turn not thy face from
the poor, and remember that Divine saying of the Apostle, 1 John 3. 17.
Whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brotther in want, and shuts
up the bowels of his compassion against him, the love of God is not in him. For
if thou had all other virtues and graces, and want Charity, thou art nothing.

(V.)
And if thou can not live so holily as thou desire, and as the word of God
requires, yet thou must ardently endeavor it. For the holy desires of the
Saints have always been accepted of God as the deed; if in the mean time thou
labor to crucify the world, and through the Spirit to mortify the deeds of
the flesh. If therefore thou can not bring great offerings of devotion unto
God, as prayer, thanksgiving, alms, and the like, come unto him with that which
thou have, and offer it with good will and holy desires: For so much as thou
desire to offer unto God, so great does he esteem thy Sacrifice in his sight;
for he has given thee no more, and more then he has given thee, he will not
require at thy hand: And Christ shall fulfill thy lame and imperfect prayers
and sacrifices with his most absolute and perfect sacrifice. And then it cannot
be but God shall accept thine at thy hands, as acceptably as he did his Sons:
For herein he does, as it were, exchange Christ's merirs with thee for thy pious
desires; and for thy imperfect sacrifie, shall (out of the abundance of his
mercy, and not for, any merit of thine) give thee an eternal weight of glory
hereafter.

(VI.)
When thou find these former graces bestowed upon thee by the Lord, take
heed thou be not puffed up with spiritual pride, to say in thy heart as the
Pharisee did, Lord, I am not as other men; for unto this Satan will continually
provoke thee, laboring to destroy the image of God in thee, and to set up his
own; and so infecting thee with that sin for which he was cast out of heaven,
to bring thee into the same condition with him, and so deprive thee of all
spiritual comfort for ever. But remember thou the words of the Apostle, What
have thou that thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why
boastest thou as if thou had not received it? for God is the giver of every
good and perfect gift, the good thoughts of thy heart come only from him, he
like a rich Jeweller puts his treasures into what trunk or chest he
pleases, and at his pleasure removes them again. Serve thou the Lord with
fear, and endeavor to improve those gifts and graces which he has given unto
thee, lest he take them from thee, and bestow them upon others, who will bring
forth the fruits of them.

(VII.)
Whatsoever thou do in Gods worship and service, or in thy duty to thy
neighbor, let it be done in uprightness, and sincerity of heart, without
dismulation, or hypocrisy, and be not so stupid as to think the Lord sees
not, or knows not; for he that made the heart knows the inwards thereof, and
will judge thee according to the same; and he has given thee a conscience, who
within thee executes the office of a Clarke, writing up every word thou
speak, every deed thou do, and every thought thou think (so that it is
a folly to dissemble) he writes nothing more then he should, neither omitteth
any thing. And as he writes it for thee, so does he continually read it unto
thee, that thou can neither forget, or deny any the least part of it, and at
the bar of Gods judgment at the last day, thou shall have no other judge to
acquit or condemn thee. There shall be no defending or proving, nor need of any
other witness. Remember then the Council of holy David to his son Solomon, who
commands him in the first part of Gods worship, to serve him with an upright
heart, adding the reason: for the Lord, says he, searches all hearts, and
understands the secret imaginations of the thoughts; 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. so that
of all fools in the world, he that thinks to deceive the Lord, is the
greatest.

(VIII.)
Be not overcurious in prying into the faults of others, nor too rash in
censuring them: for though they have not proceeded so far as thy self in the
performance of external duties, yet they may suddenly be converted, and exceed
thee. And though they live in gross sins, condemn them not, but pity them
and pray for them, and be thankful to God who has called thee to some
obedience, who might have left thee in a worse estate then they are in, if his
grace had not prevented thee. It is oftentimes seen, no greater hypocrites, nor
unsound and hollow-hearted people, then these find-faults, whom our Savior
calls hypocrites, commanding them to cast the beam out of their own eye first,
that they may the clearer see the moat in another. For while thy mind is
wandering abroad to find fault with others, Satan in the mean time builds a nest
at home in thy heart, where he hatcheth these unclean birds of pride,
hypocrisy, self-love, disdain of others, etc. which devour the blessed fruits
of the Spirit, as humility, meekness, lowliness, brotherly love and
kindness; much hindering the growth of grace in thee, and diminishing
spiritual comfort, and will lie heavy upon thy conscience, when God shall
discover it unto thee. As therefore thou look unto others with one eye, look
into thy self with the other, lest thou fall under the reproof of our Savior
forementioned, Luke 6. 41. 42.

(IX.)
If thou would enjoy the blessings of God either spiritual or temporal with
comfort, labor for peace both in thy self and with others. For peace is unto
all Gods blessings as salt is to meat, which seasoneth it in such manner, that
it continues long both profitable and comfortable, without which it would soon
become unsavory and useless. Wherefore the Apostles frequently in their
Epistles wishing all good to the Churches of Christ, mention only grace and
peace, including all other blessings therein, (as 1 Pet. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 2. Gal.
1. 3.) yea, and sometimes no more but the word peace alone, as 1 Pet. 5. 14. The
want of this blessing has brought this Kingdom almost unto utter ruin, and
thousands of persons and families altogether to destruction both of their
bodies and estates. If therefore thou would enjoy this blessing, thou must
first make account to undergo much wrong at ^he hands of men, which although
it be displeasing to thy nature, yet it is well-pleasing to God, and agreeable
to the exhortation of Christ, and will bring much comfort to thy soul.
Secondly, give not liberty to thy tongue to revile when thou art reviled, nor
scoff when thou art scoffed; for these two vices are commonly the fomenting
instruments of all mischief amongst friends and neighbors, as the Apostle
speaks, Jam. 3. 6. And when thou see two striving to vanquish each other in
either of these, thou may boldly conclude, they contend who shall run
swiftest to Hell. Remember then that divine heavenly caveat of the Apostle,
Jam. 1. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's religion is in vain. And, Jam.
3. 2. If any man offend not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to rule the
whole body.

(X.)
The last exhortation which I give unto thee at this time, is, that thou
(through covetousnes) use no fraud, deceit, or guile in thy calling. This is a
sin as dangerous as common; and because it brings with it some worldly profit,
men are content to live in it, though to the hazard of their most precious
souls; yea, even many whom God has honored with rare and excellent gifts of
zeal and devotion; as, constant in hearing and reading the word, in prayer and
family duties, and full of heavenly exhortations: yet are as deeply guilty of
this sin, as those who are openly profane, and never think of answering at the
last day. And this is lamentable to consider. I wish all men therefore to
remember what Solomon says, Pro. 13. verse. 11. Wealth gotten by vanity shall
be diminished. And, Jer. 17. 11. He that gathers riches, and not by right,
shall leave them in the midst of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.
And, what shall it profit thee to win the whole world, and lose thy own soul? I
would dema^d of thee, if thou be co^scientious, what thou will do with money
falsely gotten? Will thou pray to God to bless it unto thee? Then thou make
him (what in thee lies) partner with thee in thy cheating and thievery,
according to Psalm. 50. 18. Will thou buy meat or drink with it? Thou may fear
it will either choke or poison thee. Will thou buy raiment therewith? Thou may
tremble in putting them on, fearing lest they should infect thee with some
loathsome disease. Will thou buy house or land therewith? It will never
continue to the third generation. Will thou give it the poor? It is no way
acceptable to God, because it is not thine own. Will thou put it among other
money lawfully gotten? It will be but as a coal of fire in a piece of wax, to
melt and consume it. Will thou cast it into the Treasury of the Church? It is
but as the hire of a Whore, or the price of a Dog, forbidden by Moses Law,
Deuteronomy. 23. 18. Will thou cast it away? That were a sin. What will thou then do
with it? Surely Zacheus resolution is the only way, viz. (Luk^. 19. 8.) to
restore it fourfold. But if thou know not how, or to whom to restore it,
then (in my judgment) it properly belongs to the poor. But, alas! those who
are once infected with this disease of Covetousness, may fitly be compared to
cloth, which once died black, is ever after incapable of any other color: so
those whom Satan has once lul'd asleep in this sin, seldom or never awake but
with the scorching flames of hell fire about their ears. From which the Lord
deliver us all. Amen.

ECCLES. 12. 13. 14. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear
God, and keep his Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man.

For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil.

Published according to Order.

Printed by J. C. 1646.


