A Quarterne of QUEARIES.
I.
WHether Prester John, or Jack Presbyter be not gone back whence he came (into
Scotland,) and as we have paid for his coming in, whether his going out will
be Scot-free, without further cost or molestation?

II.
Whether that all such valiant-talking Millitary Men, and Martial Women, as
will have no Peace, nor yet dare to fight (but by Deputies) to be placed in the
Front of an Army, and abide the Onset, Shock, and Brunt of a Battle, whereby
they might know the truth of the old Proverb? Dulce Bellum mexpertis.

III.
Whether (hereafter) spoiling and rifeling of Churches shall not be accounted
as execrable Sacrileidge? and whether breaking open Men's Houses, Plundering,
taking Men's Purses, and robbing on the Highways; may not be allowed their old
true Names, and ancient Titles again: and be truly called Burglarie,
Theiverie, Robbery, Stealing, etc.

IV.
Whether all such as be truly Honest, be not truly Wise?

V.
Whether Archye be of Cappacitie and Wit enough to be taken hereafter for the
only Court-Foole, the true Courtiers having more wit then they had, though
they have bought it, and paid too dear for it?

VI.
Whether the famous Company of KNAVES be lessened or diminished in number and
practice, being many Sub-Committee-Men, Excise-Men, with the two maine Pillars,
(or Cater-Pillers) Quarterman and Waterton, are annihillated, defunct, null,
void, and of no effect, without either force, strength, or virtue?

VII.
Whether all the Money and Plate, volluntarily lent to maintain War, was
wisely laid out? and whether it be not a high point of wisdom, (and the
wisest part of the twain) to get it in again?

VIII.
Whether to be daily drunk, be as great a sin as is was wont to be, by
reason it makes the Excise of Beer, and Ale, to come in the quicker?

IX.
Whether manly cutting of Throats may be accounted Murder, (as formerly,)
and whether to be hanged for being Honest, be not a sign of ill luck, or (at
the least) chance Medley?

X.
Whether any, or all sorts of Leacherie be punishable by the Law of Platonicall
Community? and whether it be not tolerable for Recreation, by the Conjunctive
aprobation of the Nicholaytans, and rules of Annarchie?

XI.
Whether Bishops Lands be not well bought and sold, and whether the Buyer or
the Seller have the better bargain?

XII.
Whether Physicians and Chyrurgions (for these seven years space) have thrived
or gained most, either by Pox, or Knocks?

XIII.
Whether Bullets may not be shot at the Body of a King, for the safety, of his
Person, and preservation of His Majesty's Life?

XIV.
Whether there be no Villains that would be glad to set their Country on Fire,
to warm their Hands in the Flame?

XV.
Whether knocking out of a Man's Brains be not a rude or hard Medicine to cure
the Toothache?

XVI.
Whether many wrangling Knaves would not be still troubling of our Waters of
Peace, that they might fish the more profit (unespide) in the mudde of
Mischief?

XVII.
Whether it be conducible to the Honor of a King to be libelled against in
Pamphlets, railed at in Pulpits, reviled by Black-mouthed Hell Hounds,
uncontrouled?

XVIII.
Whether Gracious, Religious, Merciful, and Just, do not deserve a more
mannerly name then Tirranous?

XIX.
Whether Banishment, or imprisonment, be the true Liberty of the Subject, and
whether a rich Man's estate cannot raise him to the promotion of the Title of a
Malignant, and newfound Style of Delinquent?

XX.
Whether some over-seene Citizens, or Haberdashers of small Wit, have not spun
a fine Thread, and brought their Hoggs to a fair Market?

XXI.
Whether an oppressing cheating Knave has a Soul, and whether his Conscience
be not a perpetual Earthly Devil to torment him, till the Hangman take order
for him?

XXII.
Whether Loyallty be not the best Lineing of an honest man's Dublet?

XXIII.
Whether Beggars are not in most Security?

XXIV.
Whether the Flux of Licevious Mouths and Venomous Tongues, may not be wiped
with a Hempen Wispe, and cured by the virtue of Gregory's Voyder.

XXV.
Whether all these former Quaeries, are pleasing to Some- Body, or Nobody?

Printed at London 1647.


