THE QUEENS MAJESTY'S PROPOSITIONS TO To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty.

WHEREIN IS DECLARED, Her Majesty's Gracious will and pleasure, concerning the
City of LONDON, and His EXCELLENCY Sir Thomas Fairfax, TOGETHER, With Her
Majesty's Desires, touching the Discipline of the Church of England, and ease
of tender Consciences.

Briefly intimated in Her Majesty's Gracious Message to the KING at
Hampton Court.

Die 22. September. 1647.

Printed at London, for E. Cotton, MDCXLVII.

THE QVEENES MAJESTY'S Gracious Message, to her Sovereign Lord the King of
Great Britain.
BY a Letter from the Kings Majesty's Court at Hampton, it is intimated, that
there has lately arrived a messenger from the Kingdom of France, with a
message from the queen of England to the King, a Copy whereof follows:

My dear Heart,
AS there could no occasion minister greater grief to my sorrowful heart,
then to hear of a short adjornment of these unnatural divisions between you
and your liege people, and presently to have the consuming flames of a new war
sudenly to break out afresh in your languishing kingdoms: so there could no
welcomer news salute mine ear, then speedily to hear of a small period to be
put to these unhappy distractions, that so the sweet harmony of desired peace
and concord may reunite you and your subjects, and tie you fast each to other
in the sacred bands of love and unity, and therefore I shall desire your
Majesty to grant your Parliament and people whatsoever with a good Conscience
and Honor you may, for the further prevention of shedding innocent blood, and
preservation of those committed to your charge. Sir, assure your self, nothing
shall be displeasing to me, that displeases you my Lord; for I shall for ever
esteem your good, and the good of all your faithful Subjects, the only
business of all my actions, and shall be contented to share with you and them
(not only in blessings, but) even in the worst of times that can happen to a
disconsolate and unjust banished wife. Sir, concerning the Propositions tendered
your Majesty, I humbly conceive, the chief things to be considered will be
two, Conscience and Policy. For the first, I know it never entered into your
Royal thoughts to change the Government by Bishops not only concurring with the
most general opinion of most Christians in all ages, as being the best; but
considering you hold your self bound by the Oath you took at your Coronation,
not to alter the Government of the Church from what you found it. And for the
Churches Patrimony, you cannot suffer any diminution or alienation of it,
without danger to your conscience, or breach of your Coronation Oath; but
whatsoever shall be offered for the certifying abuses crept into the Church in
Government or Discipline, or, for the ease of tender consciences, (indangering
not the foundation,) I desire your Majesty to lend a speedy ear unto, and give
your gracious answer. For as it is your Majesty's duty to protect the Church,
so it is the Churches duty to assist your Majesty in maintaining your just
authority; for as your Predecessors have always bin careful to keep the
dependency of the clergy entirely upon the Crown, without which (as I humbly
conceive) it will scarcely sit fast upon your Royal head; therefore it behooves
your Majesty to do nothing to change or lessen this so necessary dependency.
The other maine Proposition will be concerning the Militia: Next to conscience
(certainly) there is no fi^^r subject for a Kings quarrel; for without it,
your Majesty's power is but a shadow, and therefore by no means to be
quitted, but to be maintained according to the known Laws of the Land: yet for
the speedy attainment of this so long looked for and wished for peace, prayed
for by all good Christians, That your Majesty may be pleased to permit the City
of London, and all other strong Holds and Garrisons, with other Military Forts,
to reside in the hands of the Parliaments General Sir Thomas Fairfax, until
articles be performed and agreed upon, to give such further assurance for
performance of conditions, as your Majesty shall judge necessary for the
concluding of a firm and lasting peace; which being once settled, all things
may return, and run in their ancient channels.

Thus, Dear Heart, understanding that Commissioners were sent to you, from both
Houses of Parliament, with Propositions, I thought good to put you in mind that
you have a care of your honor; and that if you have a peace, it may be such as
may hold. Farewell, My dear Heart, I cannot write any more, but that I am
absolutely

Yours.


The Generals Declaration.
Whereas the great neglect of diverse persons within the City of London, has
occasioned too many delays in raising Money for supply of the Army, and other
Forces of the Kingdom; His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the
General-Councell of the Army, Does declare, That they take notice of the great
wants of the Soldiery, both of the Army, and other Forces, and Garrisons; as
also of the sufferings of the County, in respect of free quarter, which might
have been peevented, and a course taken for disbanding superfluous Forces, and
sending over of others for the relief of Ireland, and the supplying of those
that are there already, had it not been for neglect or delay of those on whom
the Parliament have depended in that particular, and they do especially take
notice of the delays made by the City in advancing of that sum, which the
Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares so long since
due from the City to the Army; upon which they do declare, and propound to
this effect.

1. That they cannot but consider the notorious readiness of the Court of
Aldermen, to the advancing of far greater sums for the raising of a new war,
and prosecution of the late mischievous practices and designs against the
Parliament and Army; and that as their predipitate forwardness therein, was
the occasion of the Armies coming into these parts, so their backwardness to
the raising or advancing of the money now required for the service of the
Parliament, and supply of the Army, has been and is the occasion of the armies
continuance hence: and therefore they cannot but offer it is, as what they
humbly conceive most just and reasonable.

That for what time their defauls or delays have occasioned, and shall further
occasion the Armies stay hereabouts, the charge thereof should some way be laid
upon them, and their adherents about the City.

That the Houses would be pleased speedily to consider of the Delinquencie of
those that had a hand in the Tumult, Desine, and Engagement of a new War, and
that such Fines may be upon them for the same, as shall be agreeable to
justice.

Lastly, since it is most evident, that for the speedy bringing in of the money
required upon the arrears, there wants not in the said Major, Aldermen, and
Common Council, either authority to levy it, or ability to advance it by way
of Loan till it can be levied, and it ir therefore offered,

That in case the Money be not brought in by the time limited, the Parliament
would be pleased to give leave to the General (with the advice and directions
of the Committee for the Army) for the levying of the said Arreares

All which they rather desire from grounds of reason and evidence from the
speeches of many in the City, and designs and hopes of the Parliament and
Armies Enemies to raise the Army into distempers, and the Country about them
into confusion.

This Declaration was agreed upon at the Headquarters at Putney, upon Thursday
last, there being a General Council of the Army appointed to be held every
Thursday. The General Council met in the Church, the General, many General
Officers, Field-Officers, inferior Officers, and Agitators met. A great part
of the time was spent in consideration, and debate of the Proposals of the
Army, and some few things agreed upon to be altered, and explained in them,
which no doubt will give much satisfaction to the Kingdom.

After the aforesaid Declaration was finished, it was, by the appointment of
his Excellency, and the Council of War, sent to the Right Honorable the
Commissioners of Lords and Commons residing with the Army, to be presented from
them to both Houses of Parliament, which according, with a Letter from the
General and Army, to this effect, vix. That they earnestly desired, some
speedy course might be taken for their pay, that so they might be enabled to
pay their quarters, was presented to both Houses of Parliament upon Satturday
last, and after reading thereof, ordered to be communicated to the Lord Major,
Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of London.

FINIS.

