A DISCREET AND JUDICIOUS DISCOVRSE BETWEEN VVISDOME AND PIETY, Two worthy
Members.

Wherein is declared the Power and Jurisdiction of Parliaments in their
proceedings, and in the alteration of Church Government.

Written by R. P.

Printed at London 1642.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE crest or blazon of the Knights of the Garter

A discreet and judicious Discourse, between WISDOM and PIETY, two worthy
Members.
Piety. SIr, I rejoice much at our so happy meeting in this place; I hope
leisure will now permit us to confer of these times, and the proceedings of
the High Court of Parliament, in settling the disorders in this State; and such
a form of government in the Church, as I hope will be congruent to the sense
and true meaning of the Word of God.


Wisdom. Sir, I joy as much as you for our meeting, and I hope we may spend a
little time in discourse of those things you have mentioned; I conceive it will
not be lost time, nor much hinderance to our other occasions. And under favor
Sir, pray what think you of the proceedings of the Parliament, concerning
Church Government, and Ecclesiastical discipline.


Piety. A Parliament, pray Sir, what mean you by the word, and what is the
signification thereof?


Wisdom. The word is compounded of, and derived from the French and Latin
words; as I conceive, Parle Mentis, which I understand signifies a speech of
the Mind, contracted Parliament or Parliament; and I mean thereby a Council
of grave and learned men, congregated and assembled by their Princes command
and authority, to consult and debate freely, speaking clearly what is their
mind and intentions; such things tending to the safety and prosperity of their
King and Country, and what form of Government is meetest to be used in the
Church, in the exercise of Religion.


Piety I conceive your definition of the word is good, but I desire to know
whether it be in the power of such a Council or Parliament, to alter the
Government of a Church, established and confirmed for several ages together
in a Kingdom, both by the Princes thereof successively, and a whole Council
of State gathered together, and assembled in Parliament.


Wisdom. To answer your request: I conceive it is in the power of a
Parliament, with their Princes consent, to alter the Government of the Church;
I can give you instances of the same: The Romish Religion was a long time in
this Kingdom practiced and professed, confirmed by several Kings and
Parliaments of this Land, until the 28. year of the reign of Henry 8. Then
did that Prince and his Parliament begin to alter the Government of the
Church, and in the 31. of his reign he perfected his intentions in a total
change of the Government thereof: Abolished and demolished all places of
worship, according to the doctrine and discipline of the Church of Rome, as
Abbeys, Monasteries, Priories, Nunneries, and the like: the lands and demeanes
appertaining to the same were given to the Crown; as also the worship it self.
This form of Government (attended only with some Ceremonies of the Church of
Rome) continued this Kings reign till Edward 6. in whose reign was a further
and more perfecter change in the Government of the Church then before. Now was
Bibles and other Divine books ordained by the King and his great Council to
be translated into the English tongue; a form of Common Prayer made and
confirmed by Parliament to be used in the English tongue; the administration
of the Eucharist, and the Sacrament of Baptism, used according as in the
Ancient and Primitive Church; which form of government and worship of God is
now called the Protestant Religion. This Government and Alteration continued
but a small time, till the reign of Queen Mary, who again reduced Popery to
its height in this Kingdom. This change continued till Queen Elizabeth of
blessed memory, who again set up the Protestant Church, which has ever since
till of late flourished in this Kingdom; and thus you plainly see a Parliament
may with the consent of their Prince, alter the Government of the Church, and
the discipline thereof, to that form which the Prince stands most affected too.


Piety. But pray Sir, if a Catholic Prince come to reign over a Kingdom,
wherein the Protestant Religion is altogether professed and established: Is it
then in the power of the Parliment, without the consent of the King, to make
Laws and Ordinances for the confirmation of their Religion, in the Government,
Doctrine, and Discipline thereof.


Wisdom. This question is difficult to be resolved, and I cannot punctually
determine thereof; but I conceive, if over such a State there be such a
Prince, that is not a native of that Kingdom, a Parliament of the whole State
assembled, may without his consent establish and confirm the ancient Laws and
Statutes of the Kingdom, for the Government of the Church and State. But
whether it be so, if a native Prince, I cannot certainly resolve.


Piety. I verily believe the Parliament has power and authority to change upon
occasion the Government of the Church in contrary Religions, as before is
inst^^ced; but I am not yet satisfied whether a Parliament, either with consent
of the Prince, or without, can alter a form of Government established in a
Kingdom, concerning one Religion, be it the Protestant or other.


Wisdom. To answer this, I conceive the Doctrine of the Church cannot be
altered, for then we do change our Religion, and are not of the same as
before, but of a new; but the Government and Discipline of a Church may be
changed, according as the wisdom and policy of the State shall find the same
convenient or inconvenient, hurtful or commodious for the same.


Piety. Nay, the Titles, Places and Offices of men of holy Order be at the
pleasure of a Parliament, changed, or quite taken away; being of such antiquity
in the Church, as Lord Bishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, De^^es, Prebends, and the
like.


Wisdom. I conceive their Titles may be changed, or taken away; as Lords
Bishops, Archdeacons, etc. for no such names are to be found in the Scripture,
or by the same warranted: Their places of both Temporal and spiritual
Jurisdiction (as they are made the only Governors of the Church and of the
State too) may if a State find them hurtful and prejudicial to the same, be
taken away and changed; but for their Spiritual functions and offices of
Bishops or Presbyters, I conceive the same cannot be changed or taken away
with-safety or security; But the sole power and jurisdiction in government of
the Church may be taken from particular persons, (and assistance of grave
Divines joined with them in the same) as the wisdom of the Parliament shall
see me meet.


Piety. But may a State Politic and Civil change the government of the
Church, and establish a new sonnic of government in the same, without advise of
a Council or Synod of Divines that are grave and learned, elected and chosen
out of every County of the Kingdom, and their consents to the change of
government in the Church?


Wisdom. I conceive the Parliament, as it is an Assembly of Lay men, and none
of them in holy Order, cannot of its self change the government of a Church,
without advise and consent of the Clergy: But I believe it is in the sole power
of Parliament to make choice of such Divines as shall inform them concerning
what Government and Discipline is most convenient for the Church, and what not.


Piety. Then cannot a Synod or Convocation of the Clergy be assembled without
authority of Parliament, and what Ordinances is made in the same by them are of
no validity, without confirmation by the King and Parliament.


Wisdom. No truly, I believe there cannot; and what is done by a Synod or
Convocation, without consent and confirmation of King and Parliament, is not
binding to the Subject. And now thanking you lovingly for your good discourse,
I must take my leave of you till another time; wishing all things may be done
in Parliament to the honor of God, firm establishment of true Religion, and
such a form of government in the Church, as may be agreeble to the Word of
God, and the settling of peace and unity in all his Majesty's Kingdoms.


Piety. Amen. God be with you Sir till out next meeting.


Wisdom. I thank you heartily.


FINIS.

