A Letter to Major General Brown, read in the Honorable House of Commons,
etc.
Honorable Sir,
THE last night I had intelligence the Enemy was dr^wne out of Oxford, and
gave out, that they ^id int^nd to plunder Newnham, wherefore I sent to Colonel
Betsworth, to desire him to draw his Horse toward Abingdon, which he did; but
e^rly this morning we had intelligence that six hundred Horse marched out of
Oxon through Conmer and Fifield; whereupon I Commanded forth our Horse and
Dragoones, and marched with Colonel Bettsworth after the Enemy, and it
pleased God to direct us, that we found them at Farringdon, and quartered in
the Towns thereabouts; We had gallant hunting them from place to place over
the Hills, and pursued them into Farringdon Town, and afterward we discovered
a good party of about two hundred, between the two Coxwells, who ran down
into a Meadow, and would have parlyed to surrender their Horse and Arms, but
our men fell on them, and took them all save very few that escaped: Afterward
we gleaned up diverse more in several places, so that I am confident, that
party is so broken, that the King will scarce be able to get such a body of
Horse again in the Kingdom; We took above three hundred Horse, and almost
as many prisoners, there was brought in this evening about two hundred and
fifty into Abingdon, the Major and most of the Officers of Sir William Comptons
Regiment belonging to Banburie are prisoners, it was esteemed the best Regiment
the King had, and the news of their engagement being reported at Oxon this
day, that they would come off with honor or be lost, they sadly replied, if
that Regiment were lost, they were all undone.

Sir, I desire your advice about sending up some of these and other Prisoners
formerly taken, many of them offer to take the Covenant, some would take up
arms here, others desire to go home into their own Country, I suppose if
your Honor think fit it will do well to send up three hundred of them. There
are some Irish men taken, which I do intend to hang up to morrow morning.

I shall take it for an expression of your love if I may receive some
satisfactory answer to my Letters formerly sent, and I shall make it my
endeavor to deserve your favor and remain.

Abington April. 3. 1646. Sir your most humble and faithful servant, Geo:
Pain.
There was but one man slain on our parts and not many of the enemies.



FINIS.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that this be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


