A LETTER FROM Colonel Pane Governor of Abbington, TO Major General Brown:
CONCERNING The gaining of Abbington by the Enemy, and its recovery by our
Forces. Withal the several passages in the taking and retaking of the same.

With an other Letter from an Officer of the said Gerrison to a worthy Friend.

Commanded to be forthwith printed and Published.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake. 1645.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis depiction of Irish harp
Honorable Sir,
I Had not an opportunity to send my Letters formorly written, and now God has
afforded an occasion to speed away this Messenger on purpose, to let you know,
that the last night the enemy drew out of Oxford with a strong party of 1000
horse, and all the strength they could make of foot, and notwithstanding all
our parties abroad, and our horse-guard, they came between Thrupp and Norcot
to Barton-house, and kept covert till daylight, and lay still after the Ravaly
was beaten, and our out-Centinels called in, and then suddenly arising out of
their Ambushment, taking the advantage our works (being caued out) at the
Spurr, and other places, forced our guards, beat them all from the works,
entered above 300 men, possessed themselves of Abby-guard, Spurr-guard,
Wayne-guard, and Barn, pressed hard toward the prison, where three of their
men were slain between M. Dues house and the prison; by which time we had well
taken the Alarm, and our men gotten together, made good the passage, and then
fearing least they should possess themselves of Bore-bridge and let in their
horse, (which they had in great numbers about our works) I commanded a party
toward the Bridge, and lodged them in the old Redoubt at Bore-lane end, which
was of very good use for us, for by keeping that we kept the Town. I sent
another party which did very good service at Wayneyard. In the mean time our
horse did gallantly, charged their foot, routed their Musketeers, and we had
doubtless taken most of them that were over the works, but that they were
preserved by a strong body of the enemies Pikes. Major Blundell and Colonel
Washburne came in good time, charged gallantly through the thickest of them,
which so terrified them, that being on all sides beset, they quit their ground,
tumbled over the works (besides them they carried away) we took 13 prison^rs.
There was slain on our party two common Soldiers; Capt. Tailor, Capt.
Maddocks, Quartermaster Cox dangerously wounded, Major Blundell sl^ightly
wounded with a Halb^rd on the thigh, Cap. Keeling shot in the hand, Col.
Washburne had his great bay horse slain under him Quartermaster Arnott, and
Major Blundels Cornets horses s^aine, many of our men sorely wounded, the
dispute was sharp for the time, but God gave our men such spirits, that
scorning death they resolved rather to lose their lives then the Town; our
horse-guard that lay without Ockbridge run all away, whether for fear of the
enemy, or for fear of being called to account for their neglect, I know not;
They were part of the Sussex Troop.

I desire you will be pleased to order the Officers of Colonel Rainsborowes
Regiment to come down to look to their charge, there being here but four of
ten Commanders.

I am informed that the King has sworn He will have Abingdon, and will fire
it, and that this night again we shall be assaulted with 2500 men. I doubt not
but to be better provided for them. Sir, I beseech you be pleased to hasten
down some money for the relief of our poor men, whose necessities are great,
and deserve encouragement.

Sir, I shall desire to the utmost of my power to approve my self your Honors
most humble servant,

GEO. PAIN.
Abbington, March 2. 1645.
SIR,
THe happy deliverance it has pleased God to give us from the cruel enemy, is
I am confident, the only news all Letters are now filled with, yet I Presume to
give you such an account as I take my self obliged to, that is The Enemy about
six of the clock this morning (as soon as the Ravally had beat) appeared in a
full body, both horse and foot, from Barton house, where it is conceived they
were long before lodged, and fire being given by our Centries at the Abbey
guard, they presently fell on, before our men could make any the least
resistance, and got over the works and drove our men from Abby-guard, and
Barton bulwark up to the maine guard, where Captain Bagnall commanded as
Captain of the watch, (Col. Rainsboroughes Regiment being upon duty that
night.) He upon their arrival made them draw up and brought the enemy to a
stand under the Abby-gate, where two of them were slain that endeavored to
break open the prison. The alarm being generally given and received, our horse
drew out, as also the foot. But by this time the enemy had possessed himself of
all the works and line from Barne-guard to the water side at the Abbey, as also
our magazine which I am confident they had fired h^d they not thought all their
own. Whereupon our foot made several charges upon them, sallying through the
houses in the street, and by the Abbey, and some of the Major Generals Regiment
threw themselves into the little old fort over against the Major Generals
quarters by the high way, and from thence played upon the enemy that were in
Barne-bulwarke and at Ty-harris: some they slew, and forced the rest off the
ground, in the mean time Major Blundell advanced with the horse, and the Enemy
drew themselves into a complete order, making good the pass, which was by a
ditch with a good stand of Pikes, and in the mean time their musketeers fired
from their flanks. Major Blundell endeavored to have forced them, but was
beat off three times, at the fourth, he Routed the whole party, who never came
in so fast as now they ran out: Three of our pieces they had turned upon us and
fired them, and then overthrew them, not having time either to cloy or nail
them. In the mean time our Officers did their parts. Major Blundell not only
being dry beaten and bruised, with the butt end of their muskets, but wounded in
the external part of the thigh with a Pike or Halberd something largely: our
Officers of the foot did for the most part gallantly, and not one Captain of
Major Generals own Regiment, but received a shot, though Captain Presson, and
Bagnall without danger. The field Officers did most gallantly. Of ours are
wounded Major Blundall, who notwithstanding never dismounted till he had
pursued the enemy within two miles of Oxford. Captain Tailor shot through the
body. Captain Kellings hand all torn, Captain Clerk shot in the side,
Captain Madox through the belly, three Lieutenants, two Quartermasters, and
some store of Soldiers. The enemy left within and upon the works eleven men
dead, besides what they carried off and what were wounded. The reason why they
had no greater loss, was our want of ammunition upon the guards, for though we
had store in the Town, there was scarce to be found three charges upon each
guard, which much dicouraged the poor Soldiers. We took 12 or 14 prisoners,
most of them wounded.

I should have told you that the enemies horse as Major Blandell came up, Began
to come through a breach they had made by the Barton-bulwarke, but by his
coming were timely prevented, as also, that had they bin so wise as to have
attempted the drawbridge they might easily have left in their horse, being a
great body attending without, for the Governors man as the alarm was giving,
came to open the port, and either for have or fear so left it: but it pleased
God to direct otherwise, to whom be all the glory and praise, had not our horse
charged so gallantly it is doubted by all what the success had bin.

There were of the enemy a thousand foot, 500 whereof entered the Town. Their
horse were about a thousand. The Townsmen came forth and resolutely assisted
the Soldiers, by which it appears that the National Covenant which they all
took, and the pains the Major General has taken among them wrought
effectually. It Is great pity these poor lads should have their courage abated
by delaying their necessary supplies,

I am Sir, Your humble servant. M. W.
Abingdon March. 2. 1645,

