A GUILD HALL ELEGY, Upon the FUNERALS of that Infernal Saint JOHN BRADSHAW
President of the High Court of Justice.
COme sour Melpomene and ill-look'd Clio,
Help me to grieve while that I fetch an hi ho
From th'very bottom of my droop^ng breech,
To solemnise the death of this Horse-Leech,
So full of blood that he even burst with anger,
To think that he could fuddle it no longer.
And now rehearse his virtues, O ye Muses
Whom no body (I Will warrant you) accuses.
And first his Justice, pictured like a Spinster
VVeighing of thread, was well known at Westminster,
Where he was President of that highest Court,
That had no Law neither Precedent for it.
What havoc did he make of Kings and Princes,
Just as a proud Stone-horse that kicks and winces
In his new tr^ppings, so he clothed in Scarlet
As all men say, seemed a most glorious Varlet.
His Justice was as blind as his Friend Milton,
Who slandered the Kings Book with an ill-tongue.
He was not partial, favored not the mighty,
Nor King, nor Duke, nor Earl, nor Lord, nor Knight a,
His Sword was keen, a very desperate cutter,
With it he durst against Olliver to mutter,
But Nol was wroth* (and would had heard the vogue,
Of all the People) swore he would hang the Rogue;
But then my Muse had been in such a dump,
As at this present is this dissolved Rump
His courag'es next, for in his own defense,
He was courageous ev^n to impudence,
A virtue lately deemed Cardinal,
Needful as Jacks are to a Harpsical;
He and his Needham, Peter's and John Can,
Wholy ingrost it --
His temperance next, sure he was no wencher
As I can bear, unless while he was Bencher
He kept a private Bordell in Grays Inn,
Who highly now may vapor of his raising,
Wine he difpis'd, blood was his pleasing drink,
He was a well-bred Scythian I think.
His charity succeeds, 'twas wisely great,
Since all his cunning Alms and Gifts did treat
For life, expecting every hour like Cain
By the next obvious person to be slain.
His Table free, the reason lies at door,
The Cook would poison him, but not the poor.
He was a zealous holy miscreant,
Either for Turk, or Jew, or Termagant.
A comprehensive, and capacious soul
Was all, yet nor Red Herring, Fish or Foul.
And now a Quill plucked from the Vulturs wing
That feeds upon Prometheus hither bring,
His mercy to emblazen, come you Furies
From the Stygian sooted River that impure is,
Your baleful dress put on that we may see
The true resemblance of his lenity,
Behold his pity and compassion yern
Like the jaws o'th Monster in the Fens of Learn
At all that came before him; see his bowels
Pricking within him, as they were spur-rowels.
How did he wrest and force the Law with Art,
I wot in favor and o'th Prisoners part!
He did not overruled both truth and reason,
With the Courts Nonsensical and surly Treason:
Not cruel he! his hands and heart did bleed
Continually, and did always need
A source, a sprinkling would not serve the turn,
No blood contented him, but in an Urne.
The Scythian Queen could only fill his wish,
That blood presented in a deep broad dish.
And now you are gone, the worst Caligula
That at one blow didd'st three Kingdoms slay!
Where shall I hide thee in perpetual night,
That neither Name nor fact may come to light;
The Center reels and staggers at thy dust,
As if some Ravishers it suffered lust,
Hell will not silent keep its chiefest crime.
The Grave will presently throw up thy slime,
Return then whence thou came to the Parliament,
That House of Darkness, thy encouragement;
And may a Bar be ever on those doors,
Till Vengeance come and pay thine and their Scores.
Sic hilariter luger. O. P.

