Die Martis 22. October. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That Master
Ashurst, and Master Gourdon, do from this House give thanks to Mr. Vines, for
the great pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day at the entreaty
of the Commons at St. Margarets, Westminster, it being a day especially set
apart for a public Humiliation, and to desire him to print his Sermon. And it
is Ordered that none shall presume to print his Sermon without being authorized
under the hand writing of the said Master Vines.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appo^^^ Abel Roper to print this Sermon.

Richard Vines.



THE NEW DISTEMPER.

WRITTEN By the AUTHOR of the Loyal Convert.

Hilar. de Trin. Lib. 4. Hoc habet proprium Ecclesia; dum persecutione^
patitur, floret; dum opprimitur, proficit; dum laeditur, vincit; dum arguitur,
intelligit; tunc stat quum superari videtur.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1645.

THE NEW DISTEMPER.
AS it is in a Principality, or in a Republique, The further it swerves from
the first Constitution, and Fundamental Principles, the faster it declines,
and hastens toward Ruin; So is it in the Church; The more she deviates, and
slips from her first Foundations, the more she grows into Distempers, and the
nearer she comes to Desolation.

It has been the wisdom of all Princes, and Free States, of former times, to
carry a watchful eye upon the growing Inconvenients of their Kingdoms and
Republiques; That, as evil manners daily breed diseases, so the continual
making, and execution of good laws should daily be prescribed as Remedies;
left, by too long neglect and sufferance, the Body of the Commonwealth should
grow so foul with superannuated evils, and the humors wax so prevalent, that
the desperateness of the disease might enforce them to as desperate a Remedy.

It is no less prudence and providence in those that are appointed by the
Supreme power (as under him) chief Governors and Overseers of the Church, to
be very circumspect; and, not only faithfully to exercise their Ministerial
Function, by due and careful preaching of the Gospel; but likewise, diligently
to discharge their office in governing, that is, in making wholesome Ordinances,
and duly executing them; That the Inconveniences that grow daily in the Church,
may be daily rectified, lest by too long forbearance they gather head, and so
become either incureable; or else, capable of Remedy, with too great a loss.

The natural Affection I so dearly owe to this my native Country, (to which my
soul always has, does, and will for ever, wish as much happiness as heaven
can please to give) permits me not to think our Church in so forlorn and
desperate a Case, but that it may be capable of a wholesome Cure; Yet Sense and
Reason (flying with the natural wings of Love and Duty) bids me fear, that
those unnatural Humors, Pride, Negligence, Superstition, Schism, and (that
Harbinger of Destruction) Security have so long been gathering, and now settled
in her, that she cannot, without long time, and much difficulty, (or else
especial providence and divine mercy) be restored; For the hastening whereof,
accursed be that unworthy Member that shall not apply the utmost of his
endeavor, and diligence; and, not return the best of those Abilities, he
sucked from her in health, to her advantage, in this her great and deplorable
extremity of Distemper.

The wearyed Physician, (after his many fruitless experiments upon a consuming
Body) advises his drooping Patient to the place of his birth, to draw that
Air, he was first bred in: The likelyest way to recover our languishing
Church, is to reduce her to her first Constitutions, that she may draw the
breath of her first Principles; from whence having made so long a journey, her
return must take the longer time.

The Physician requires not his crazie Patient to take his Progress thither in
a rumbling Coach, or a rude Wagon, (they are too full of motion for a
restless body) nor to ride Post, (the swiftness of the passage makes too
sudden an alteration of the Climate) but in an easie-going Litter, the
slownesse of whose pace might give him a graduall change of Air.

The safest way to reduce our languishing Church to her first Constitution, is
to avoid all unnatural Commotions, and violence in her passage; and carefully
to decline all sudden alterations, which cannot be without imminent danger, and
to use the peaceablest means that may be, that nothing in her journey may
interrupt her, and prove too prejudicial to her journyes end.

The disease of our distempered Church, (God be praised) has not as yet taken
her principal parts; Her doctrine of Faith is sound; The Distemper only lies
in her Discipline and Government; which has, these many years, been breeding,
and now, broken forth, to the great dishonor of (her Mystical Head) Christ
Jesus; to the unhappy interruption of her own Peace, (the Legacy of our
blessed Savior;) to the great disquiet of our gracious Sovereign, (her Faiths
Defender) to the sharp affliction of his loyal Subjects, (her faithful
servants) and to the utter ruin and destruction of this Kingdom, (the
peaceful Palace of her Glory.)

1. As for her Discipline; In the happy days of Edward the sixth, when all the
Romish Rubbish and Trumpery was scavengerd out of this (the new Reformed)
Church, and the wholesome doctrine of undubitable Truth was joyfully received
into her gates, (being for many years closed with Ignorance and Error) the
piety and providence of her newly chosen Governors, (whose spiritual
Ab^lities, and valor, were, after, characterd in their own blood) thought
good, in the first place, to make Gods Worship the subject of their holy
Consideration; To which end, they met, and (finding in the Scriptures no
express form of Evangelicall Discipline in each particular, and therefore
concluding, it was left as a thing indifferent, to be instituted according to
the Constitutions of every Kingdom where Religion should be established) they
advised, what Discipline might best conduce to the glory of God and the benefit
of his people; They, first, debated, and put to the question, Whether the old
Lyturgie should be corrected and purged, or whether a New should be contrived.

Cranmer, then Archbishop of Canterbury, a pious, moderate, and learned Father
of the Church, (and not long after a glorious Martyr) finding, that the old
Lyturgie had some things in it derived from the Primitive Church, (though in
many things corrupted) conceived it most fitting for the peace of the Church,
not to savor so much of the spirit of contradiction, as utterly to abolish it,
because the Papists used it; but, rather, inclined to have the old Garden
weeded, the Errors expunged; thereby, to gain some of the moderater sort of
that Religion to a Conformity: But Ridly Bishop of London, a man though very
pious, yet of a quicker spirit, and more violent, (and not many years after
suffering Martyrdom too) inclined to a contrary Opinion, rather wishing a
total abolition of the old Liturgy, and a new to be set up, lest the tender
Consciences of some should be offended.

The business being thus controverted, it was at length voted for the purging
of the old; to which service were appointed Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury. Doctor Goodrick Bishop of Ely. Doctor Skip Bishop of Hereford.
Doctor Thirlby Bishop of Westminster. Doctor Day Bishop of Chichester. Doctor
Holbeck Bishop of Lincoln. Doctor Ridley Bishop of Rochester.Martyr. after B.
of London. Doctor Cox King EDWARDS Almoner. Doctor Tailor Deane of Lincoln.
Martyr. Doctor Heynes Deane of Exceter. Doctor RedmanDeane of Westminster.
Master Robinson Archdeacon of Leycester.


Mense Maio 1549. Anno Regni Edwardi sexti tertie.

Whereof three were famous Martyrs; and the rest, men of unquestionable
sanctity, soundness, and learning; which, being done, was authorized by Act of
Parliament in that blessed Kings reign Edw. 6. and with a full Consent
received into the Church of England, confirmed by diverse Acts of Parl. in the
days of Qu. Eliz. King James, and King Charles, our now gracious Sovereign,
whom Almighty God long preserve.

But this established Discipline, had no sooner being, but enemies, (of which
sort the devil has always instruments to nip the Plants of Religion in the
Bud) whose number, daily since, increasing, grew hotter and hotter in
opposition, and stronger and stronger in faction, being too long, for peace
sake, connived at; and, at last, too unseasonably, and violently opposed,
insomuch that the disease, in these our late days, grew too powerful for the
Remedy; so that the Distemper of our Church, in that respect, is grown so
high, that I fear Phlebotomy will rather produce a further languishment (being
already come to Madness) then a Cure.

Nay, so far have the Enemies of this established Government and Discipline,
given way to their exorbitant and refractory Opinion, that they will neither
allow the Matter, nor the Form, nor the Authority and testimony of the
Composers.

1. Not the Matter; (though they cannot but acknowledge it, in the general, to
be very good, yet) because it was unsanctified by superstitious lips. 2. Not
the Form; because set, and composed by Humane Invention. 3. Not the Composers;
because Bishops, and so (though Martyrs for the Cause of God and his true
Religion) Members of Antichrist.
1. As for their Exceptions against the Matter; how ridiculous they are, let
Reason judge: Have not superstitious tongues, and eyes, viewed and read the
Scriptures in their very Original and purity? Shall therefore the Scriptures
be disallowed? Have not superstitious persons profaned our Churches with their
Popish Doctrines, Sacraments and Ceremonies? and shall our Churches therefore
be cried down, or shut against the Ordinances of God? because those Poets were
Heathenish, was S. Paul afraid to use their sayings? Was the Spirit of God too
blame, to endite them? Good things, abused, work evil effects upon the
abusers; but lose not their goodness by the Abuse.

2. As for their Exceptions against the Form, being set, and not conceived,
the Authority of the Scriptures I hope will answer.

God the Father warrants it: God the Son prescribes it: God the holy Ghost
allows it.

1. God the Father warrants it, in the Old Testament, at the time of the Law,
by his command to Moses, Numb. 6. 21. where he gives him a set form and words
to bless the people, The Lord bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his
face to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee.

2. God the Son prescribes it in the New Testament, in the time of the
Gospel: When S. John the Baptist had taught his Disciples to pray, the
Disciples of Jesus Christ (whose house was called the house of Prayer) humbly
requested the same boon from him, who prescribed them that Form which he had
formerly used in the end of his Sermon, Mat. 6. 9. which he intended not as a
Model, (as some would have it) but a very Prayer it self, to be used in those
very words, as they were delivered Luke. 11. 2. not, After this manner, but,
when ye pray, (...), say.

That he willed the same words to be used, is evident; For his Disciples would
be taught, as John taught his: And how were they taught? S. John taught them
the words only; he could not give them the Spirit to make an extemporary
descant upon them. So that being a direct Set Form, it warranted Set Forms,
which were used from the beginning of the Primitive Church; from whence, this
part of our Discipline had her original.

3. God the holy Spirit allows it: Who dare question, that the holy Spirit
inspired S. Paul in all his Epistles, written to the Churches? In all which
Epistles he concludes with this one Prayer, The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
etc.

3. As for their exceptions against the Composers of this Lyturgie, who were no
less then holy Martyrs, (and by Fire-light saw more Revelations then these
Objectors did by daylight) men of approved learning and true piety: though
some have impudence and spiritual pride enough, to think their own abilities
and inspirations to fly a higher pitch; and Ignorance enough, to acknowledge
greater knowledge in themselves, yet the most humble, able, and truly
sanctified minds, have always had Martyrdom in so high reverence, that they
conclude, that God that made their blood the seed of the Church, and gave them
the courage and honor to dye in the maintenance of the Truth, would not permit
that seed to bring forth such darnel of superstition; or them, to die guilty of
those Errors, they so resolutely cried down with their dying blood.

2. As for her government by Episcopacie, (the extirpation whereof being a great
addition to her Distemper) It has as much or more Ius Divinum to plead, then
that, which endeavors to demolish and succeed it, Presbytery; Both are but
mentioned in the Scripture, at large; but no particular Rules for the executing
the office of either; which, being left wholly as arbitrary, it rests in the
power of the Supreme Magistrate (whom God has constituted his Vicegerent) to
choose, and establish, which may best be found consistent with the
Constitutions of the Kingdom, and stand to most advantage with the civil
Government.

But admit the Civil Government will stand with either? When the Balances stand
eavenly poised, the least Grain turns it. In things indifferent, the smallest
circumstance casts it.

This Island of Britain (if we look back above 1400 years, being a long
Prescription) when she first received the Faith, was then governed by King
Lucius, whom God made a great Instrument for reducing of this Kingdom from
Paganism; who, sending to Rome, and accommodated from thence with two
Christian and learned Divines, by their labors, and Gods assistance upon them,
planted the Gospel: At the beginning of which plantation Arch-Flamins and
Flamins were put down, and in their room Archbishops and Bishops were
introduced; which Government successively continued, and flourisht through the
reigns of many wise Princes, confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, since the
Reformation; exercised and approved by holy Martyrs; and allowed of, as most
fitting, until the year of our Lord 1641. At which time, multitudes of the
lower sort of people, throughout this Kingdom, petitioned, and tumultuously
troubled the Parliament, so that some of the Members, perchance according to
their inclination, and others, for quietness sake, consented to the abolition
and extirpation of Episcopacy, the unadviz'd Contents of their clamorous
Petitions.

Now if these Governments Hierarchicall and Presbyteriall be indifferent; these
Circumstances, (First, of the time, when Episcopal Government began; Secondly,
of the unintermissive continuance, for so many Ages; Thirdly, the credit of the
persons confirming and approving it) me thinks, should cast such a kind of
necessity upon it, that the other (being an untried Government, and having no
consent or approbation from the Supreme Magistrate; and, being only cried in
by the Ignorant multitude, affected to novelties and change) should have no
wise friend to plead for it.

We read in the Scriptures of Elders (which are members of a Presbytery) as
it is written, Titus 1. 5. For this cause I left thee in Creete that thou
should set in order things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every
City, as I had appointed thee. Also, 1 Pet. 5. 1. The Elders which are among
you, I exhort, who am also an Elder. By which it appears, that Titus had
instructions to set up a Presbytery.

Titus the next verse following but one, you would have had Saint Paul's meaning
with his words, viz. ver. 7. For a Bishop must be blameless, as the steward of
God, not selfe-willed, etc. So that, it plainly appears, that Elders mentioned
in the 5. verse, are expounded Bishops in the 7. Or, had you compared Saint
Peter's first verse (before mentioned) with his fifth in the same Chapter, you
would have found Elders no positive, but a relative word; no Office, but a
degree of Age. Ver. 5. Likewise the younger submitting themselves to the elder;
the Apostle here showing, what the behavior of the Elder Ministers should be
toward God, and of the younger toward them. So that if either of them had set
up a Presbytery, it was suddenly pulled down again; and Episcopacie (which
you so much dislike) placed in the room.

disliking Bishops, that where there is one, we desire there were twenty; nay
that every Church in England and Ireland had a several Bishop; Diocesan
Bishops we dislike, Parochial we allow.

windmill fancies can make an alteration. Titus, c. 1. 5. had a command from S.
Paul to ordain Elders in every City, (which he interprets Bishops) not in every
Church or Parish; which Ordinance, the Church of England has punctually
observed from the Primitive times to this day. But you have refractory and
gainesaying spirits, spirits of contradiction, that understand not the
Scriptures, but by your own Interpretations; always stirring, but never
settled; hating order, despising Government, and resisting all Authority.

Episcopal Government had her original from Rome; and being poisoned in the
Root, it cannot be wholesome in the Branch.

mother of all Error. Your Chronology fails you: If you carefully search
Antiquities, you will find your Objection against it, a good Argument for it. I
confess Episcopacie had her Original partly from Rome; but, in those days,
when we conformed according to the Church of Rome, the Church of Rome conformed
according to the Word of God. Rome was, then, part of the Primitive Church, not
being above 187. years after Christ: The Bishops of Rome were so far then from
being Antichrists, that most of them were Martyrs, and dyed for Christ.

Revenues; whereby, they are occasioned to Riot, pomp, and glory.

Benefactors (whose bountiful Pieties thought nothing too much for Gods
Ambassadors, and therefore enlarged their Revenues so much) well knew their
places and callings required it; whose gates were to be open to all comers;
and bread to be given to all that wanted. Their Places owe relief to the
fatherless; comfort to the widow; supplies to the needy; and succor to all
that are afflicted; and hospitality to all strangers. No, their great Revenues
are greater Eye-sores then Inconveniences, if not abused.

decimated, and the Tenth part might have sufficiently maintained a preaching
Ministry, and the nine other parts might have been added to the Kings Revenues,
which would have made him the richest and most glorious King in Christendom,
and taken away the necessity of Subsidies from the Subject.

robbing Peter to pay Paul; beggering the Keys to enrich the Sword, and the
next way to bring a Curse upon the King, and all his people in general, by a
general guilt of Sacrilege. The Shewbread must not be eaten but upon more
necessity then (God be thanked) His Majesty was at that time put to. The holy
Oil must not be put unto a Civil use; But His Majesty's pious and resolute
refusal thereof has in one word, fully and fairly answered this Objection.

too absolute a power, which gives them occasion and opportunity to be
tyrannical, and to exercise an arbitrary Jurisdiction over their Brethren.

beginning, I confess, it was not so; neither stands it with wisdom or policy
to suffer it to be so: For the Government of the Church must have proportion
with the Government of the State: Government of several natures in one Nation,
breeds confusion; and that, ruin: We therefore being a mixed Monarchy,
necessarily require a mixture likewise in the Hierarchy; which excludes all
arbitrary power.

It is true, absolute Monarchy, and an unlimited Hierarchy are apt to fall into
the distemper of Tyranny; and Democracie and a parity in Government is as apt
to run into the disease of Tumult; but of the two evils, Tyranny is the least,
by how much it is the easier to be cured. A monster with one head is sooner
overcome then a Hidra with many. If our Hierarchy has slipped into this
irregularity, it is great wisdom and reason for a Parliament to rectify it.

sole Election of Bishops, and so much favoring them, will hardly consent to
the abridgement of their power and greatness; so that, being his Creatures,
their power will be upheld by him, to the end that upon any difference betwixt
him and his people, they may be the more able to uphold him, and ready to make
a strong party for him; so that the more their power is weakened, the less his
party will be prevalent, whereby, his Prerogative may want Advocates, and the
Liberty of the Subject no enemies.

Bill of taking away their Votes in Parliament, has given a sufficient Earnest
of a further Moderation of their power; and no question, was, and will be ready
to hearken to this or such like humble and reasonable Petitions (for the
extirpating this jelousie) viz. That when any Bishop dies, or is translated, he
would give liberty to the whole Clergy and Freeholders of those Diocesses to
choose, nominate and present four learned and religious Divines, most
unblameable in life and doctrine, able for government, and diligent in
preaching: Of which four, His Majesty to prick one, which may be consecrated
Bishop of the Dioces; By which means, both His Majesty and His People, having
an interest in him, he will be equally engaged; who, in cases of difference,
may become rather a Mediator then Partaker: and, receiving just power from the
King, may execute it as uprightly amongst his people.

But they are Lords, and lord it over Gods Inheritance: Whereas, 1 Pet. 5. 3.
forbids it, Be not Lords over Gods inheritance: and Christ, Luke 2^. 25. says,
The Kings of the earth exercise Lordship, but it shall not be so with you.

Peers of the Land, and as Peers, they had Votes in Parliament; which, being
taken away, they are no more, now, then what the dignity of their Calling and
their own Merits make them. As for that place in S. Peter, thus it is meant;
Ye shall not be Lords over Gods inheritance, that is, Tyrants; Lords and Rulers
being at that time none but Heathens and Persecutors, whose tyranny made the
very name of Lord, terrible, and odious: So that, in that place, by Lordship is
certainly meant Tyranny. Neither can this imply a Parity in our Church; for
without a Superiority, and Inferiority, there can be no Government: A Parity
cannot be considered in order of Government; but, only, in the work of the
Ministry. In this, all are fellow laborers; In the other, some command, and
some obey S. Paul and Timothy had an especial command and charge over other
Ministers. As for that place in S. Luke, which you all edge, The Disciples
striving who should be the greatest among them, our blessed Saviors answer was
to this effect, Let Kings exercise power and authority over their vassals, (as
indeed their tyranny made them little better) but it shall be otherwise with
you: You are all fellow servants to me, that am your chief Lord and Bishop of
your souls; whilst I am here, all superiority lies extinct: Christ was then
the only Governor, and the Root of Government was in him: But at his
departure, he gave some to be Apostles, some to be Pastors, etc. and yet all
those degrees were equal in respect of the work: He himself said, Ye call me
Lord, and so I am, and yet, Luke 22. 27. I am among you as he that serves:
whereby it manifestly appears, he intended a parity of the workers in respect
of the work, not a parity in the government in respect of the workers.

Religion, and to advance the Gospel, (as is pretended) and to encourage
Preaching as the ordinary means conducing thereunto) are so far from so doing,
that instead thereof, they silence godly Ministers, and put down weekly
Lectures, which were set up at the proper charges and the piety of the people;
and to the great establishment of true Religion.

Mystery; being the most crafty advantage the devilever took of popular piety.

Admit the piety of the honest hearted People was the first motive to these
weekly Lectures, how was that piety abused, by those weekly Lecturers? They
were chosen by the people; their maintenance (consisting most of Gratuities)
came from the people, which ebbed or flowed according as their Lunatic
doctrines wrought upon the people. Those Lecturers (whose whole subsistence
thus proceeded from the people) must for their own better lively hoods please
the people: And what more pleasing to the people then the preaching of Liberty?
and how should Liberty be enlarged, if not peeced with Prerogative? Then down
goes Authority, and up goes Privilege; Down goes the Book, and up goes the
Spirit; Down goes Learning, and up goes Revelation; who gaining credit in the
weak opinions of the vulgar, grew the Seminaries of all Ignorance, and the
nursing fathers of all Rebellion. These are those godly Lecturers that Bishops
put down, who never lost themselves so much, as in not setting up better and
more orthodox in their rooms, which had taken away the ground of this
Objection.

proud, idle, covetous, and Popishly affected, are therefore fit to be
extirpated.

humble, diligent, charitable, and enemies to Popery, perish? Shall they that
are bad, have more power to pull down a settled Government, then they that be
good, to keep it up? Did Moses, the man of God, extirpate the Government of
Priesthood because Aaron had a hand in the peoples Idolatry? Or, will you
undertake that the Elders in a Presbyteriall Government shall be all
faultlesse? Let the guilty receive their respective punishments, and let others
take their office: But the innocent to suffer with the guilty, is a point of
high injustice.

But admit this Government by Bishops, had nothing to plead for it, neither
prescription, nor continuance without Intermission, nor the Authority of
Parliaments in all Ages, yet considering it is, now, a Government, in Being, it
seems not consonant to Reason, or policy to extirpate it, or take it away,
before an other Government be pitched upon. To pull down one maine Pillar,
before another be made fit to supply the place, and to support the room, is
the next way to pull the Roof upon our heads: Has not Episcopacie been long
voted down? And is not the Assembly, at this time, divided and in
controversy, nay puzzled what Government to set up in the room of it? By
which means, occasion is administered to all disorder, Liberty lies open to all
Schisms, Sects, and Heresies, and Sectaries grow bold to vent their giddy
headed opinions without controlment, confirming themselves in their own
Errors, infecting others with their new fangled and itching doctrines, the
nature whereof is (like a Tetter) to run, till it overrun the whole Body.
(Have not our eyes beheld all this?) which if these unsettled times should long
continue, (as God forbid) would gather such head, and strengthen this our
confused Kingdom, that if her issue of blood were stopped in one place, it would
break forth in another; and, like Hercules his Monster, if one head were struck
off, another would arise, to the utter confusion of the true Protestant
Religion, which already begins to be the least part of this tottering Kingdoms
profession, and rather connived at, then exerciz'd by some. Are not complaints
preferred against Brownists and Separatists, See a book Entitled, ^hesumme of a
(...) at (...) in Essex, (...). 11. 1^43.
unheard? Nay, are not men afraid to complain against them for fear of
punishment? Have not professed Anabaptists challenged our Ministers to dispute
with them in their own open Churches? Have not their disputations been
permitted, nay, unadvisedly undertaken by some of our Ministers, (who
themselves are though little better) wherein they have made many Proselites,
and left many of the vulgar (who judge the victory to the most words)
indifferent? Have they not after their disputations retired into their Innes,
and private Iodgings, accompanied with many of their Auditors, and all joined
together in their extemporary prayers for a blessing upon their late Exercise?
How often has Bow-river (which they lately have baptized New Jordan) been
witness to their prophanations? How many daily make their private meetings,
and assemble in the City of London to exercise their Ministry? How many have
been convicted of Blasphemy, and yet unpunisht? How many times have their
witnesses been taken against some of our most learned and religious Ministers?
for which, some, are plundered, some sequestered, and some imprisoned: How many
of our Ministers whose severity proceeded formerly against Fornicators,
Adulterers, Drunkards, Swearers, and such like, are now undone upon their
revengefull witnesses and testimony, appearing now (for the better coloring of
their malice) well affected to the Cause? All which in time will so encourage
all Sects, Factions, Hypocrites, and make Heresy so bold, and strong in this
Kingdom, that the true Protestant Religion will be (under the detestable name
of Popery) even turned out of doors for company, or at least so little
favored, that it will be forced to s^rowd it self in corners, as those
Sectaries did, before these troubles were.

settled, and Justice done upon the Popish Faction, these Sectaries with their
Sects will vanish like the Mist before the mid day sun, and a true reformed
Religion will be established to us and our Posterity.

State Physician, and a mere novice in the curing of a disease of this nature.
In some cases, where the undisturbed humors keep their bounds, distempers are
quickly evaporated, and being scatterd through the whole body, every part
breathes out some, and Nature (being able to truckle with the disease) by her
own power, relieves her self; and, in a short time, rectifies the Body: But
upon a continual confluence, and gathering head of lawless humors, she is so
weakened; that she has no power to resist, and less heart to struggle with her
enemy, but is forced to yield: But the time you prefixe for the subduing of
these numerous Sects, is, first, when all things are settled, secondly, when the
Land is cleared of Papists.

1. For the first, It is all one as if you had said, When the body is in good
health, you will easily find a cure. A rare Physician! In the mean while, you
will connive at this continued confluence of humors, which makes it at length
incureable.

2. As for the second: Take heed while ye go about to cure a Fever, you run
not the Body Politic into a Dropsy, with too much Phlebotomie. But you will
first clear the Kingdom of Papists: And who be they? In your Account, all
such as stand for Episcopal Government, (a Government coetaneous with this our
almost out-dated Religion) All such as approve of the Book of Common Prayer, (a
Form established by many Acts of Protestant Parliaments) All such as are
passively obedient, and loyal to his Majesty (a duty commanded by Gods own
mouth.) Of the Clergy, all such as will not preach for blood, (although
Ministers of the Gospel of Peace.) All such as will not take the Covenant, to
suppress Bishops, (although they have formerly sworn canonical obedience to
their Ordinary) All such as will not encourage Subjects to resist the power of
their natural Prince, (although having taken the Oath of Allegiance, and the
late Protestation.) And to conclude, all that have not contributed willingly,
bountifully, and continually to this War; and in a word, that have any
considerable Estates to pick a hole in: If all Sects and Sectaries be not
suppressed till then, we are like to have a comfortable Reformation.

But in case, you only mean such Papists as own, and acknowledge the
doctrine of the Church of Rome; Tell me, what course would you take with them?

Either you must banish them, or disinherit them, or take away their lives.

1. If banish them; It must be done, either with the Kings consent, or against
it; If against it, you resist the power, and he that resists shall receive
damnation, Romans 13. If with it, you make the King guilty of perjury, who has
sworn to protect all his Subjects in his Coronation Oath.

2. If disinherit them; It must be done, either according to the known Laws of
the Kingdom, or against them; According to the Laws, ye cannot; for there is
no Law for it. If against them, you transgress what you pretend to maintain
in all your Declarations.

3. If take away their lives, It must be done, either for a Cause, or without a
Cause; If for a Cause, show it, that the world may be satisfied: If without a
Cause, you are guilty of murder.

Which course soever ye take, you have not Christ for your example, who quietly
suffered the two Caesar's, being Idolaters, not only to possess that Kingdom,
but to usurp it, because God permitted them, and permissively placed them
there: When the Disciples asked our blessed Savior, Did not thou sow good
wheat? Whence comes it that there be tares? His answer was, The evil one has
done it. His pleasure being demanded, whether they should weed them up? his
Reply was, No, Let them alone until the harvest, and then he would separate
them.

A good deed may be ill done, when either against command, or without warrant.

Though God has permitted the evil one to plant Papists among us, yet he has
not authorized us to root them up, nor yet to take the lives of any, until
their actions come within the danger and compass of the established Laws of
the Land.

rooting out of Idolaters in the Scriptures; which warrant us to do the like.

Law; at which time, God immediately commanded it; which kind of Warrants are
now ceased.

Again, In the time of the Law, some were accounted Strangers, And strangers
had not the privileges that brethren have* Usury was lawful to be taken of
strangers, not of brethren: Now, in the times of the Gospel, Christ has made
us all Brethren, and called us by his own name, Christians: and what was
lawful, then, to be done to strangers, is unwarrantable, now, to be done to
Christians. We are brethren.

consistent in one Kingdom, and Gods name may be harmelesly profaned with
Idolatry and superistition, in the same place, where it is truly and sincerely
worshipped.

protect his subjects; and an other to be partaker with them, or to allow of
their superstitions. Kings cannot enforce Consciences, though pitched upon a
false Religion: All that Magistrates can do against them (unless for Seducing,
which a particular Statute made Treason) is to punish their purses, for not
observing his Statutes respectively, or for exercising their Religion contrary
to his Laws, But well it were if such a necessity of Connivance had no such
subject to work upon.

How happy had it been for this unlucky kingdom, if his Majesty's most prudent
and pious offer, two year since, propounded to us, had been accepted in this
particular, That all the Children of his subjects of that Religion, should be
taken from them, and educated in the Religion of the Church of England? By
which means, the whole Kingdom, in a short space of time, would have been
peaceably reduced to an Unity in Doctrine; And, if the same course were taken
with oath Strectaryes, an Uniformity in Discipline also. But our Kingdom must
not expect an universal and through Reformation in all particulars, till
Catechismes be more strictly used, and the intercourse of Ambassadors (which
cannot simply be avoided) and Legers be restrained; and strict statutes made
and executed against sectaries.

But to return to our first matter. Admit Episcopacy were a Government,
accidentally inconvenient, and that a more fitting Government, were discovered,
prepared and made ready to be set up, It would be but a new untryed Government,
and not experimentally known what proportion it would bear without temporal
Constitutions. A horse may be well metled, and conditioned and every way
commendable for the saddle; yet not draw well in a Coach or Chariot: A great
part of our Common Law is bu^lt upon the Cases of Bishops, insomuch that if
that Government be changed, there must be a necessary alteration of many Laws
of the land; And what incovenience may arise from such an Alteration, I leave
to the Judgment of Lawyers, being not unworthy of some Consideration.

But let these things be accounted not Inconveniencyes, and that the
Hierarchicall Government is fit to be demolished, either for the abuse of it,
by some few exorbitant Prelates, or for the mischiefs that follow, in respect
of it self, in that it administers such occasion of offense, yet the too sudden
Execution of a business of so great aconsequence, and concernment, gives a
livelyer testimony of passion then discretion, (if polititions may have credit)
and savours of extremity, (which is opposite to all virtue,) and too much
rashness, the distemper of all serious and honorable undertakings: Too sudden
an Alteration in matters of small moment, passes not without some
inconvenience; but, in things of such a nature, as a Government, nay a Church
government too (the nursery of the whole kingdoms happiness or misery) it
cannot be without imminent danger; but the sudden alteration of a fundamental
government, of the Church (which necessarily carries the state with it)
threatens, nay brings no less then unavoydable ruin to both.

A Rashness, too much (we fear) relishing of private ends to demolish that
government in twelve months, which has been setting up and maintained by as
wise generations as ours, above foureteen hundred years.

How happy had it been for this (at that time prosperous, but now miserable)
kingdom, had we taken the advantage of (that greatest blessing, that ever
gracious Prince confered upon unthankful Subjects) the Trienniall Parliament,
wherein, we might every 3 years have inspected this new recoverd Kingdom, and
kept it always in a perfect Crisis, the approaching Terror whereof, would not
have afforded popular evils so long a time, or liberty to root themselves or
gather head against the peace and welfare of our happy Government; through the
benefit whereof we might have taken an advantageous leisure and mature
deliberation to ripen every Bill, and, by degrees, to rectify every nonag'd
Crievance, and indeed, what happiness was there, which we had not then an
offered opportunity to bring upon this (now) unhappy Land? The Government of the
State, as in many things, it was reduced into an excellent temper; so,
questionless, (had not this unnatural difference interposed) it had in all
things (by the continued goodness and favor of His Sacred Majesty) been
perfected, to the comfort of us, and the happiness of succeeding Generations.

The Government of the Church likewise might, by the virtue of the granted
Trienniall, been narrowly and exactly searched into; The Governors strictly
observed; The Bad turned out, and changed for better; They that deserved
punishment, punished according to their misdemeanors; Others, less offending
through some neglect, reproved and checked; and, upon no amendment, the next
Trienniall, proceeded against accordingly.

The Fig Tree was not presently cut down, Root and Branch, but suffered till
another year; And punishments before an Admonition are too rashly and severely
inflicted.

Thus by this graduall and Trienniall Course, Mercy and Justice would have
incorporated; the Government of the Church had been established; the peace of
this Kingdom had been secured; the bad Governors had been rectified, or
removed; the good, encouraged and honored; and Peace and Truth had kissed each
other.

But the multitudes of these our national sins were too great, to permit so
great a Blessing on this Nation, as the benefit of this Trienniall Parliament.
God suffered Abraham to see the holy Land, but for the transgressions of the
people, not to possess it: God showed us a glimpse of that mercy (which our
sins made us unworthy to enjoy) and snatched it from us. In which respect, we
are now left to our own ways, and governed by our own Inventions; and (what
is worse) we are neither penitent for our national sins, nor our own; nor
(what is worst of all) sensible of Gods Judgments, nor our own miseries.

How often have our Modern Ministers in their unmeditated prayers, before the
open Congregation, given God joyful thanks for these blessed times! Eccles. ^.
Whereas (if their hearts had not been hasty to utter any things before God)
they might have rather petitioned for a removal of these his terrible
judgments: How often have they prayed for the continuance of these happy
days! whereas, (...)
had not their mouths been rash, they might better have deprecated those
miseries. How often have they in their Sermons, blasphemously challenged God
(upon the forfeiture of his Justice) to crown their Cause with Victory! How
often, instead of wholesome doctrine, have they delivered such reports as their
Consciences knew Fables, and were before next Sabbath Lies upon Record? How
often have they preached down Subjection to Princes, and encouraged the Sword
to grow warm in the blood of Christians? How often have they Articled against
Orthodoxe, able, and learned Divines; and crowded themselves into their
Livings, who upon my certain knowledge (some of them) can neither make true
Latin, nor write good English; and then, lay their preferment upon the wisdom
of the Parliament? How many children above a year old (because their fathers
are suspected to be loyal to their Prince) continue unbaptiz'd? many parishes
can witness. How long time is it since the last Sacrament of the Lords Supper
was administered, let the people tell, if their memories be so good; and then,
the Elements deliverd in their own new devised words. These are now the
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Peace: These the Ministers of this blessed
Reformation: These the men that must pull down Antichrist out of his seat, and
set up Christ Jesus in his throne: Nay, rather, these are they that for filthy
lucre carry men about with diverse and strange doctrines: These are the men that
in former times separated themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. These
are they that despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities: These are such as
have gone the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward; and have perished in the gaine-saying of Core: Jud. 12.
These are spies in your feasts of charity, feeding themselves without fear;
clouds, that are without Water carried about with the wind; 13.
rageing waves of the Sea, fomeing out their own shame, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.

Is not this a blessed Priesthood? Are not these rare materials for a hopeful
Presbytery? Fit governors for the house of God?

Are not the two great Nurseryes of this kingdom like to flourish; when the
chief Plants are pulled up by the roots, and only these Crabstocks suffered
to prosper, and bear their own natural fruit? Our fathers have eaten the
Grapes, and their childrens teeth will be set on edge. They that have been the
Pillars of our Relion are hewn down, and our falling Church is shored up with
these inconsiderable spars. They that grappled with, and foyld the stoutest
Champions of the Church of Rome, are imprisoned; wanting both bread and
liberty; And such as neither did, nor could, nor durst appear in such a
quarrel, are crowned with their Reward: They whose learning and orthodox piety
made England the glory of nations, and the envy of foreign kingdoms, are now
disgraced and ruined; and those, that learning made not capable of a Degree,
advanced and honored to the great dishonor of this kingdom.

Nor can I hear forget, how much this staggering Church of England owes to her
pious and religious Nursing Father, and her faiths royal Defender, our
gracious Sovereign; whose wisdom, moderation and tender piety (amongst other
of his princely virtues) has so manifesty showed it self; in not following the
example of those, whom my heart bleeds to call his Enemies; and blazing the new
Ministry of this kingdom, as they have done the old? Had his provoked passion
published a Century to the eye of all the world, of those moral vices, hideous
blasphemies, infirmities and faylings of the Clergy of the one party, as they
did on the other, how would the Church of Rome, and all the Enemies of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, have hissed and derided our Religion? that, by the
general Confession both of Prince, and people, had such Monsters to adorn it?
How would foreign Christians have been frighted at the very name of the
Church of England? How would the style of Protestant have become the Obloquy,
and Byword of all Religions: It was not for want of matter: Report would have
coynd enough, besides that, which, perchance, would have made the truer history.

Nor was it scarcity of penmen, to paint their actions to the life: Oxford had
and yet has Pens, sharp enough, and Inck that wanted no Gall: Nor can I
conceive how such nimble, active, and such salik fancyes here could have
forborne it, had not the wisdom and providence of his Sacred Majesty laid upon
them his restraining power: By which it evidently appears to those that are
not obstinatly and malitionsly blinded with the darkness of resolved
Rebellion, that his Majesty's solemn Vows, and serious Protestations, for the
maintaining the honor of the true Protestant Religion, agree with his most
pious Intentions, and published Resolutions: Had his secret affections been
warpt, or the l^ast degree wavering from the Church of England, or any whit
inclineing to the Romish superstition; had the imaginations of his heart
intended secretly an introduction of the popish Religion, how could his new
design been better animated, then by an inward dislike of the Protestant
Religion, and how could that dislike have been better fomented and encouraged,
then by the Advantage, the just Advantage taken of the general corruption of
her Ministry?

But the wisdom and tenderness of his Piety stands silent, in this behalf;
and, in his singular prudence, has not so much as taken notice, or in any of
his Declarations once reproved the uncharitable impiety of that scandalous
Pamphlet, for fear of further blazing it, but rather suffering it to perish in
its own filthynes, and choosing rather to groan under the burden of his
faithful and abused Clergy, then by revengeing and painting forth the crimes
of the other party (far more guilty) to afflict Religion under the burden of
both.

Thus is the health of our languishing Church impaired; thus is the body of our
crazed Government distemperd; thus is the peace of our Saviors Spouse
disquieted; thus is the welfare of our English Sion determined; Her Dove-like
piety is turned to Serpentine policy; her Unity, to Division; her Uniformity,
to Disorder; her Sanctity to Profaneness; her Needle Work robes to a
parti-colored Coat; her honor into disgrace, her glory into disdain, and
her prosperity into destruction. Lam. 1 2.
She weepeth in the night, and her tears, are in her Cheeks. Among all her
Lovers there is none to comfort her; and all her friends have dealt
treacherously with her; ver. 9.
Her adversaries are the chief; and her enemies prosper; for the Lord has
afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: Her children are gone
into captivity before the Enemy, 2. 9.
and her gates are sunk into the Ground: Her King and Princes are among the
Gentiles; her law is no more, and her Prophets find no vision from the Lord:
ver. 10.
The Elders of the Daughter of Sion sit upon the ground, and keep silence, and
have girded themselves with sackcloth; The horn of her enemies is lifted up,
They spared not the persons of her Priests, they favored not her Elders, they
have laid wait for the breath of our Nostrils, Lam. 4. 20.
the Anointed of the Lord, and servants bear rule over us. Our Inheritance is
turned to strangers, Lam. 5. 4.
and our houses to Alyants: We drink our Water for money, Lam. 3. 4.
and our Woods are sold to us: We have sinned and have rebelled, therefore thou
have not spared: For this our hearts, our hearts faint, for these things our
eyes are dim; For these things I weep, mine eye, mine eye runs down with
water.

Where, O where are you, all you that are the wisdom and Governors of this
unhappy Island? Where, O where are you, the great Counsel and grave Senators
of this falling Kingdom? Where, O where are you, the great College of
political Physicians of this languishing Commonwealth? Are ye all fallen
asleep, while we perish? and is there none to awake you? Open your eyes, unlock
your ears, and mollify your hearts: Behold, behold the miseries of your land,
and if Compassion be not banished from the earth, pity, O pity the approaching
Ruins of this your groanning, this your native kingdom. Hear O harken to the
sad Complaints of your afflicted petitioners; and, if your hearts be not of
Adamant, relent, and let them not in vain petition for their lives: Let the
breath of this distempered kingdom, contracted into one extreme sigh, move you
to the speedy endeavors of a timely Cure. Inquire into her Constitution,
Examine her distempers, and reduce her to her first Principles: Try no
experiments upon a body so declined, and let not the Acuteness of her disease
persuade you to a desperate remedy, Look, O look back into the blessed days of
Queen Elizabeth: Observe what blessings we then had, both by Sea and Land;
What plenty; what success; what victories; what honor abroad; what unity at
home; and indeed what had we not that could make a kingdom happy? Reduce us, O
reduce us to that happy government; and let not the eagerness of a Reformation
be a means to want men to be Reformed, or matter for a Reformation: Remember, O
remember that great Reformer Christ Jesus; He was against all blood shed, but
his own; for that blood sake follow his Example: Or if the way must needs be
made by blood, let it light rather a little, upon many Generations, then all
upon one; the ruin whereof will deny us an other Generation: Let not the
children of your Mother sterve in the land of bread, and let not the
foundations of your natural kingdom be longer dabled in unnatural blood.
Turn, O turn your eyes upon her breaches, and let not strangers Lord it in her
Gates. For the mercyes of that God which has been merciful to you, be
merciful to millions of Christians, whose lives depend upon your Care; be
merciful to millions of children, that know not their right hands from their
left; be merciful to generations unborne; to whom, when deep Records shall
bring the Chronicles of your Actions, ages to come may magnify your Merits:
For his sake that is the Prince of peace, as you desire to meet peace upon your
Death beds, let this Sea of blood already spilt be thought sufficient: For the
whole body of Englands sake, who have trusted their power into your hands, that
have cast all their welfares upon your wisdoms; for their sakes that venture
their lives and fortunes upon your providence; for your own sakes; for your
tender wives and dear children sakes; for the God of mercyes sake, as you love
mercy; for Christ Jesus, the God of peace his sake, as you prize the peace of a
Good Conscience, hearken to, and ensue peace, while there is a possibility of
Peace.

Darken not that Religion with the black storms of contention, you profess to
glorify: Lessen not the glory of that Church, by partiality, which you have
promised to beautify: Draggle not that Gospel in the sinks of blood, which you
have protested to magnify: The sins of Nineveh were not too great for Gods
compassion, and shall the offenses of poor England be too great for yours?
Nineveh cried mightily to heaven, and they were spared; and shall the miseries
of three Kingdoms be hollowed in your ears, and not heard? Well, If Ruin, by
a foreign power come, Hest. 4. 13
(which the God of heaven and earth forbid) think not with your selves that you
shall escape the Fury more then all the rest: 14.
But if you altogether stop your ears, at such a time as this, then shall
Enlargement and Deliverance arise to England from another place, but you and
your houses shall be destroyed; And who knows whether you are sent to this
employment, for such a time as this?

O thou that art the great preserver of mankind, to thee, to thee we turn the
voice of our complaint: Thou, thou art gracious, and plentiful in Compassion,
but in man there is no help, Lam. 3. 24
nor mercy in the sons of men. Job 13. 15.
Thou art my portion O God, and I will trust in thee, Psalm. 146.
although thou kill me. I will not trust in my bow, Ps. 14. 1, 2.
it is not my shield that can save me, but it is thou alone, O God, that can
deliver us. Deliver us O God from the evil men, preserve us from the cruel
men, which imagine evil in their hearts, and make war continually. Have
mercy, O Lord, have mercy upon us, 123. 3.
for we have suffered too much contempt. Hear the mourning of the Prisoners,
102 20.
and deliver the children from death. 83. 5.
They have consulted together in heart, and have made a league against thee.
79. 4.
We are a reproach to our neighbors, even a scorn and derision to them that
are round about us. 74. 10.
O God, how long shall the Adversary reproach thee? Shall the enemy blaspheme
thy Name for ever? Remember the children of Edom O Lord in the day of
Jerusalem, 137. 7.
which said, Raze it, raze it, to the foundations thereof. 132. 9.
Let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints rejoice.
89. 46.
Lord, how long will thou hide thy self? for ever? Shall thy wrath burn like
fire? Will thou be angry with us for ever? 85. 5.
Will thou prolong thy wrath from generation to generation? 84. 9.
Behold, O God, our Shield; and look upon the face of thine Anointed. Let thine
hand be upon the man of thy right hand, whom thou have made so strong for thy
self. Give thy Judgments to the King, 80. 17.
and thy righteousness to the Kings son; that peace may be in his days, 72.
1.
and let his enemies lick the dust: Clothe his enemies with shame, but upon his
head let his Crown flourish. 132. 18.
How long shall the wicked, O Lord, how long shall the wicked triumph? 94. 3.
They prate and speak fiercely, and the workers of iniquity vaunt themselves.
They smite down thy people, O Lord, and trouble thine Inheritance. They slay
the widow and the stranger, 115. 10.
and murder the fatherless. O house of Aaron trust in the Lord, for he is our
help and our shield; He will bless the house of Israel, and he will bless the
house of Aaron. Praise ye the Lord ye house of Israel, 135. 19.
praise ye the Lord ye house of Aaron, praise ye the Lord ye house of Levi: Ye
that fear the Lord, praise the Lord.

PSALM. 122. 6, 7, 8, 9. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper
that love thee.

Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee.

Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good.

Hier. sup. Epist. ad Romans Quisquis corpus suum affligit, and concordiam
deserit, laudat Deum quidem in Tympano, sed non laudat in Chore.

The End.

