MEAN MEAN, TEKEL UPHARSIN.



THE Second Part of MEAN TEKEL: Treating Of the Year MDCLXXXIX.

And modestly showing what may probably be Conjectured to succeed in the
Affairs of Europe in General, and of England, Holland, Scotland, and France in
Particular; with something also about the Affairs of Ireland, and the French
King's Forces there.

To which is added, a Treasonable Paper dispersed among the Papists, by J.
Gadbury, with some Reflections thereon, and also on his Almanac for 1689.

By JOHN PARTRIDGE.

Licensed May 23, 1689. J. Fraser.

London, Printed for Awnsham Churchil at the Black-Swan in Ave-Mary-Lane,
MDCLXXXIX,

To the Honest Reader.
SInce Heaven and our good Stars have been so kind to give me an opportunity to
kiss your hand in this nature again in my Native Country, without danger of
being whipped or Jail'd for affronting Popery, etc. or being indicted for
Sedition for writing against it in my way; so I hope these Lines will find you
also in a better and a more satisfied Condition than formerly, and your
Jugulars more free and safe from Popish Knives and Halters, a Curse too common
within a few Months foregoing; but God be thanked, the case is altered, and to
our Advantage the Tables are turned, and the Nation is in a very fair way to
retrieve its ancient Peace and Grandeur again under his present Majesty. But
this by the way; the Errand of my Epistle is to acquaint you with three or four
things before I come to the thing in hand.

First then; It may perhaps seems strange to see a thing of this nature come
from me at this time, the Year being now half spent; and indeed for that reason
I did not intend to have wrote any thing this Year [my Almanac for 1690
excepted] it being not my custom at this Season to do it: But finding by
Reports from diverse of my Acquaintance that there was a very ill use made of my
Silence, not only by Papists and Tories, but also by true honest Englishmen,
Friends to the King and Government, who have reported and believed, because I
had not writ this Year as I use to do, that from thence they judged it was my
Opinion that the late Abdicated King would return again to his former Power and
Dignity in England; therefore to undeceive them, and let the World know it is
not my Opinion nor any thing like it, I have published these few Sheets
following.

Secondly; I have often been asked by my Friends since my Return to England, if
I had writ any thing, Prophecies being cried about the City and Country in my
Name, and many of them bought, and indeed I have heard them cried my self? This
therefore I will tell you ance for all, That I never did write any thing by the
name of Prophecy, nor never will; and therefore you may be sure if any such
thing shall be published at any time under the Notion of Prophecy, or any other
Title in a single Sheet in my Name, it is not mine; but an Abuse upon me, and a
Cheat upon you, done and managed by some of the little People that cheat by
Retail.

Thirdly; Perhaps it may seem a little rough and hard to some modest Readers
when they hear or consider what I have said of John Gadbury, especially he and
I having been very intimate formerly, and he one that pretends to have been my
Tutor in these Studies. It Is true the Man was civil to me when I began to
study, but I own no Master but Dr. Francis Wright. But to undeceive the Reader,
I must give a short account of the Affairs betwixt him and I.

We first came acquainted in 1665, and from thence as often as we had
opportunity we continued it in the usual ways of Conversation and Fellowship
till the Year 1680, at which time he took occasion to differ with me about
Popery, and then we began to be strange one to the other till I left England in
1685; and from our first Acquaintance to that time, I can speak it with a safe
Conscience in the Presence of God, that I never let fall an unseemly word
concerning him in any Company, for I had a respect for the Man because of our
long Acquaintance, neither was I willing to give any ground for a Quarrel. But
in the Year 1687, about the time that he went to Mass openly, and declared
himself a Papist, he wrote a Book against me, which he called a Reply, printed
by Not. Thompson, in which Treatise he abused me in such undecent and ungentile
Expressions, that it would have been a Scandal for any one to have used them at
Billingsgate it self, Rogue, Rascal, Traitor, Villain, and Renegado being the
Subject of his Book, and the lively Touches of his Pen, and all this without
any Cause or Occasion given to him on my side; and I challenge him to tell the
World if he can, when, or where I ever gave him the least occasion imaginable
for it.

So that now I leave it to the World to judge between us, and whether I am not
justly provoked to do what I have and shall do; for I do assure you I take no
delight in Controversies of this nature, neither is it a peevish passionate
Humor that moves me, but really to show the World how unjust and unsteady a
Man he is in his Morals and Divine Things, that has abused me; and also how
ignorant he is in his Profession, his principal Skill and Art being his Cant
and Hypocrisy: But let me tell him that this is but the beginning of our
Difference.

Fourthly; I find some peevish People are apt to exclaim against Astrology,
because the late King did not dye in October or November 1688, pretending that
I had said in Print he would then die, but I would very fain have them show it
to me where I have so said: Indeed I did think he would have died, and yet his
not dying is no Injury to Astrology, unless among those that are malicious and
something worse: However I shall say but two things in the case,

1. To those that understand Astrology, or pretend to it, [for I hear a
double-sighted Man has talked more than came to his share] what I predicted
was fully verified, for it happened within a Month of the time mentioned; and
now the thing is over, I will defy them to give any reason for it, that shall
have the same Effect in another Nativity, or something like it: Let them outdo
it if they can.

2. To those that know nothing of Astrology, there is no blame to be laid on
the Art, nor indeed I cannot see how they can blame me; for the Effect is so
like Death, that it does as well for the Deliverance of the Nation, and I hope
they cannot say but it happened at the same time I had predicted it too. It is
indeed a Civil Death, and to him I think worse than Death: however there are
some that would have quarrelled with it too if he had then died at the time
exactly, and said it was predicted by chance; so that I shall leave every Man
to think and judge as he pleases, being satisfied my self that theirs are no
Arguments against Astrology to ingenious Men, nor any but those who are as
ignorant and as idle as themselves, I could name them and their Vices, if I
pleased without Charge to their Purses, etc.

Thus Reader, I have done in as short words as I can, being unwilling to detain
thee longer: if I have trespassed, excuse the trouble, and it shall be an
Obligation to,

Your Humble Servant, JOHN PARTRIDGE.

The Fable of the Owls.
BEtween two Hills, by a sweet River stood
[Compos'd of well-spread Trees] a stately Wood;
Whose Boughs, by Night, to soaring Fowls gave rest,
And on the Earth beneath there lay the Beasts:
To this sweet Grove resorted diverse Fowls,
But the chief Dwellers there were Doves and Owls:
There did they breed, and likewise feed and prey,
The Owls by Night, but the poor Doves by Day.
The Doves were harmless, and had no defense,
The Owls ('it is true) had Claws, but little Sense.
But yet they governed, and were public Owls,
Such as that State thought fit to use for Tools.
Thus here they lived, and sometimes unopprest,
The Owls with Doves, the Doves with Owls converst:
'Till there at last, by a strange Fate arrived
A Ravenous Hawk that preyed on every side:
He knew no Limits, nothing escaped his Claws,
Nor were his Actions swayed or bound by Laws;
Pulled down all Order they could call their own,
And by his Lawless Will he set up none.
When he abroad had mist his daily Prey,
At Night he would fetch a Dove or Owl away:
Take here a Head, perhaps a Limb with it,
And their Heart-Blood too if he thought it fit.
Pull down their Nests, destroy their Breed, and when
They durst rebuild, he would pull 'em down again.
By Rage and Rape this was their Misery,
And his Attendance were as bad as he.
A Neighbor near seeing what spoil was made,
And feared both Doves and Owls would be destroyed
Drove thence the Tyrant Hawk: and by his Care,
Freed them at once from Danger, Death and Fear.
The Doves were glad to see such help arise,
And paid his Care with Thanks and Sacrifice:
But the dull Owls, cursed with their old Disease,
Had neither Sense to thank, nor know their Ease;
They sullen grew, and their Deliverance scorned,
Because themselves were not to Hawks transformed:
They growl'd, and swelled, and pouted as they flew,
And to complete their Crimes they murmured too;
They soon forgot their old preceding Curse,
And from their own cursed Bosoms formed a worse.
Under false Notions knavishly complain,
Spew up their Rage, then swallow it again.
They sought Advice amidst this Discontent,
And to the Juggling Rooks these Owls were sent:
There 'twas agreed, and by Debate 'twas swayed,
The Counsel given them must be obeyed.
So they agreed [observe these senseless Tools]
To show indeed they were no more but Owls.
Grave Owls (quoth they) be ruled and ask no more,
Since you our Counsel and Advice adore,
Return and dwell in Egypt as before.
Freedom's a Bubble, should you that once know,
Perhaps your Worships will remove us too.
So they obeyed, and all the Passive Throng
Took this Advice, from whence their Curses sprung:
Then 'twas resolved, and all in Crowds they came,
And in these Words they begged their Hawk again.
Dread Sir!
Above all Laws that ever yet were made,
Your Will's most just, and ought to be obeyed;
And who refuses, and will not comply,
Nay, or but questions it, he ought to dye.
Return and make us happy as before,
For what you have done was Justice and no more;
We now are Yours, and you our Sovereign Lord,
Bring all the Hawks the Forest will afford;
For we your humble Slaves before you bow,
Tendering our Heads, Hearts, Limbs, and all to you,
And when you please pray take 'em as your due.
Sic dixere Ululae. UPHARSIN, OR The second Part of MEAN TEKEL: Treating of The
Year MDCLXXXIX.
PTOLOMEY the great Master of Astrology has in diverse places of his
Quadripartite, and in the ninth Chapter of the second Book in particular, given
Direction to judge Mundane Affairs, by considering the Figures of the Sun's
Ingresses into the four Cardinal Points, together with the preventional and
postventional New and Full Moons, and the rather if any Eclipses happen then or
near them: by which Accident they are rendered the more Eminent and Remarkable,
which the Learned Placidus de Titis in his Ephemeris, Part 1. Chap. 5, 6, and
7, etc. has taken Pains to show the Reasons of the Author, and the thing he
commanded, and that there is no Method so consentaneous to Nature for a
Foundation of Judgment, as that which is laid down by the Great Ptolomy; and
according to this Method I shall endeavor to inquire into the Affairs and
Actions likely to be the Subject of this Year; and therefore I will begin with
the Sun's Entrance into the Sign Aries, according to the Caroline Tables, which
this Year is March the 9th, at 35 Minutes and 49 Seconds past 9 of the Clock in
the Evening, in the Meridian of London. And here let me entreat my pious good
Friend Mr. J. Gadbury, among the rest of his Popish Virtues, not to be angry
with me if I, or rather Mr. Street, differ from those Tables which that
Impostor falsely calls his: For the Author of the Felsinean Ephemeris makes the
Ingress of the Sun into Aries this Year 1689, to be at 38 minutes past Ten of
the Clock at Night; and his Ephemeris is deduced [he tells us] from the
Hypothesis of Lansberg, Bullialdus, Kepler, and Cassinus. Now this Gentleman
has been so generous to tell from whence he has wrought his Ephemeris, but
our Popish Impostor J. G. would not do so in his: I suppose he durst not for
fear of being hist at: but, according to our Caroline Tables, thus did the
Heavens behold the Earth at the time mentioned, as you may see by this Figure
following.

The Sun enters March the 9th at 35 min. 49 seconds after 9 at Night, 1689.

a ad

Sub. Lat. Land.



Lat. Planet.
2 14 No. 0 40 So. 0 27 So. 1 30 No. 3 10 No. 3 5 So.

Declin. Planet.
11 14 15 24 21 35 17 23 9 33 10 52 00 00

In this Figure we find no considerable Positions to give Wars and Confusions
as are now approaching; neither does the preventional Full Moon, nor the
postventional New Moon show any thing material; But if we please to consider
the time of the postventional Full Moon, we shall find as great an Eclipse of
the Moon as can be; for in the middle of the Eclipse the Center of the Moons
Body passes exactly almost through the Center of the Shadow, or that Point
vulgarly called the Dragons Tail; the middle of this Eclipse, or the greatest
Obscuration, happens in the twelfth House of Heaven, the House of Sorrow,
Imprisonment and Trouble; and the Sun, who is the real Significator of Kings
and great Men, is under the Earth in the sixth Angle of Heaven, lately
afflicted by the Mundane Parallel of Saturn, and so was the Moon too; also we
may observe that Saturn and Mars are both Angular and in Square; and the Moon
also at that time is in a Mundane Square of Mars, and he in Opposition to the
Mid-heaven, the Ascendent of Kings. And what is yet further to be observed,
both Sun and Moon are applying to the Zodiacal Parallels of Saturn; and Saturn
also in Square to the Mid-heaven, the House of Honor. And lastly, observe that
there are none Angular at the time of this Eclipse but Saturn, Jupiter and
Mars, and they in Square and Opposition to the places of the last great
Conjunction; all which considered are Arguments of Trouble and Mischief to
ensue after such a Position that is so near the vernal Figure, and so
aggravated, as you have here heard, by those many Malevolent Positions and
Configurations, which shall be in order discoursed and explained, what they
signify and when their Effects may be expected; for these Configurations will
not appear before the Solstitial Ingress.

As a Foundation to the rest, let us first consider that the great Conjunction
in the Year 1682, is now beginning to show its Effects in another nature and
way than what it has done yet; for upon every Aspect made by the Superiors
Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, to the place of that Conjunction, you will find
different kinds of Violence and Effects in the World, as you may observe by
what is past in this Conjunction, and those of former times. In 1686 Jupiter
came to the Square of that place, and what Inventions were from that time used
to build up a new Tyrannick Form of Government, I suppose most People remember:
And now Jupiter is come to the opposite Point, and Saturn to the Square of it;
which Aspects usually give Hurries and Confusions in the World, as you may see
it is now like to do; and it may be remembered that in 1639, Saturn came to the
opposite place of the Conjunction in the Year 1623.

The Eclipse of the Moon in March happened just upon her rising, and therefore
the Effects thence depending will begin soon after: The Eclipse falls in 15
degrees of Libra, an Aerie Equinoctial Sign, which Junctine says, gives Inter
Ecclesiasticos Schismata; and indeed Ptolomy says it concerns things sacred,
and the Mutations of such things as belong to those Persons and Places, Lib. 2.
Cap. vi. And Cardan seems to render a Reason for it when he says that the
Eclipses of the Luminaries operate more upon Cities, Provinces and Kingdoms
than upon Kings or particular Persons, because they signify the Multitude, Seg.
5. Aphor. 45. And in another place he says Eclipses in Aerie Signs move Sedition
in those Kingdoms concerned under the Effects of them. And that is very natural
to the eclipsed part of Heaven, because it falls in the twelfth House of
Heaven; for Eclipses that fall in the twelfth and eighth Houses of Heaven, says
Cardan, are far weaker than those that fall in the Angles; and there seems some
reason for it, because those parts of Heaven are dark and obscure, and bear no
manner of Ray to the Ascendant; from whence the Effects of this Eclipse will be
spent in whispering, suggesting, etc. such things as are to do Mischief rather
than Good.

Saturn is in the Ascendant Retrograde, and in Square to Mars, who is in
Opposition to the Tenth; This, according to the Opinion of Haly, gives
Discontent, and signifies People of a dissatisfied Principle. It likewise, says
he, gives a sort of Thieves and Robbers, or rather Out-lyers, that live on the
spoil of others, such as the Irish Tories, or the French Booted Apostles; and
something of the same Nature in England of late, known by the Name of
Regulators, or Destroyers of the Government; and the Effects according to its
Nature will work effectually, because they are both Angular, but yet these can
give no Action, but are Preparatives.

Another thing is the Sun and Moon hastening to the Zodaical Parallel of Saturn,
and both of them but just separated from his Mundane Parallel; which two
Positions will have as great a share in the Effects that attend this Moon's
Eclipse, and this Quarter also, as any in either Figure: And the rather,
because the Moon in the Vernal Figure it self is exactly in a Zodaical Parallel
with Saturn; these give various and different kinds of Remora's, grumbling and
dissatisfaction among all sorts, but especially the Common People, because the
Moon is most afflicted: And Bonatus advises in all Revolutions to consider the
Application of the Sun and Moon, for upon their Rays with the next Planet, does
depend much of the Affairs of that Quarter: So that the Moon being afflicted,
seems to usher in those kind of Effects given by Haly in these Words, Si Luna
jungitur cum Saturno, significat in rebus multos Labores, Tristitias and damna
quae accedent hominibus ratione Carcerum and similium, and depopulationem
Villarum and Civitatum a quibus decedent gentes, and ibant ad alia loca. If the
Moon (says he) is joined to Saturn, it shows great Sorrows, Labors, and loss
that shall happen to Mankind by reason of Prisons, etc. and Depopulation of
Cities and Towns, from which they shall depart and go to other Places. And how
much of this has been verified in this Quarter, I leave to all and any of
those that have read or heard what is of Truth reported, and I sear too many
have found true to their Cost and Sorrow: I do not intend to spend much time on
this Quarter, because it will so soon expire after the Publication of these few
Sheets, and because this Quarter and its Effects are but an Introduction to the
rest of the Year, the latter part of which will be the most remarkable. And so
I come to consider the Summer Quarter, which begins June the 10th at 52 min.
and 49 sec. after 10 of the Clock in the Evening, 1689, Ex Tab. Caeroli. And to
that time this Figure following is set.

Enters die 10. Junii hor. 10. min. 52. Scrup. 49. P. M. 1689. a vacuo ad...

Lat. Land.



Lat. Planet.
2 23 No. 1 2 So. 2 36 So. 1 17 So. 1 43 No. 4 12 No.

Declin. Planet.
9 16 12 00 2 19 22 10 24 13 23 32 19 27

If we look back to the Preventional New Moon, we shall find both the Sun and
Moon in Square to Mars, from the Signs Gemini and Pisces; Mars being in the
Ninth House, and the Sun and Moon in the Eleventh, and Saturn in the end of
Libra, in exact Opposition to the Tenth, the House of Honor, and what is
observable he is there almost Stationary on the Radical Place of the Sun in a
certain Persons Nativity, who is now in Tribulation.

At the Postventional Full Moon we find there the Moon to be separating from
the Square of Mars, and applying to the Body of the Sun, and next after that to
the Square of Saturn; the Sun is in Domo Octava, and the Moon in Secunda: and
she in that part of Heaven having (at the Full Moon) five degrees of South
Latitude, made her within Rays of the Square of Saturn: so that we may conclude
both the Preventional New, and Postventional Full Moons do exactly agree with
the Figure of the Ingress here before us, and do really agree in describing the
Circumstantial Adjuncts likely to attend this Quarter, which is indeed like to
be ushered in with Violence, and violent Actions; and therefore let those that
are like to suffer therein take care how they manage their ticklish Fortune,
for here is such Work approaching that is not to be dallied with; and he that
once plays and loses, seldom or never comes to his Stake again.

Having already said how the Preventional and Postventional New and Full Moon
agree with the Figure of the Ingress, I come now to insist on the Figure it
self, and the various Positions, Aspects, etc. therein contained. And the first
thing to be considered is, what is like to be the Effects of this Quarter in
the general, for here we find (as perhaps some will say) no Extraordinary
Positions to give Violence, because the Sun is in Trine to Jupiter and Saturn;
and the Moon in no evil Aspect, except by her Latitude in Opposition to
Jupiter, from the first and seventh houses. And now going to the Sextile of
Saturn and the Sun: all that is (may they say) is the Sun in square to Mars in
the Ascendent. Alas they that expect to find Causes in Mundane Ingresses to
predict or forshew Actions of that kind of quality that we must now expect, are
extremely deceived and cheated; for in all things of this Nature we must first
consider the Motion of the Superiors Saturn and Jupiter, for they are the Salt
or Leaven of the World, and from their Motion proceeds the variety of those
Causes which Mankind oftentimes so severely feels: and indeed it is that, and
that only (which is equal in another branch of this Study) to the primary
Directions, and these Ingresses are but like Revolutions that may either abate
or aggravate the Direction in its time and quality of Operation: but whether
the Revolution or Ingress concur or not, the Direction certainly works without
it, and therefore we are not beholden to the Figure of the Ingress for
discovering to us the Cause of Mutations, Wars, etc. but the time when God and
Nature think fit to obtrude them upon us.

Hence therefore be pleased to consider that there have been three Squares of
Saturn and Jupiter, and the last of them was last January, Saturn being then in
Square, and Jupiter in Opposition to the last Conjunction in in the year
1682/3: and this also on the place and square to it of the Conjunction of
Saturn and Mars in October preceding; and in the end of March last there was
also a Square of Saturn and Mars, the latter of which was then in Opposition to
the place of the last Conjunction, and to the Ecliptical place of the Moon in
this Figure: and you see that although matters and things have been working, yet
they have not produced any thing material more than preparation for Action and
Things of a greater Nature: and this not only in this part of Europe, but also
in Spain and Germany, and the parts adjacent. There are other things that are
to be considered in this Judgment, but because they will occasionally fall in
with other matters in this discourse, therefore I omit to mention them, for
these are the principal that I have already noted, and according to the Method
I, and all others that pretend to Astrology, do or ought to proceed in their
judging Mundane Revolutions concerning Wars, Plagues, Mutations of Government,
Abdication of Kings, Plenty, Famine, etc.

Therefore in the first place we shall confider what may be the Consequence of
this triple Square of Saturn and Jupiter, of which the two first were from
Libra and Capricorn, the one an Equinoctial, and the other a Tropical Sign, but
the last was from Scorpio and Aquary two fixed rough succedent Signs; from
whence I draw this Judgment, that the first two thirds of their Effects shall
be quick, noble, and glorious, mighty things soon dispatched and done, and the
reason is, because they were from Cardinal Signs; but the last part will be
slow, tedious and full of labor, apt to go sometimes backwards and sometimes
forward; and variety of success attend it. Now for a proof of this let us look
back to the Conjunction of the two Superiors in 1623 in Leo: and observe when
they made their Square which was but a single one, and that from the Ends of
Libra and Capricorn in the Month of February in the year 1629; and compare that
and its Effects then, with these three now, and the prospect of things likely
to attend us at this time, and then say whether like Causes have not like
Effects: for in 1629 the Hollanders took the Hertogenbosch stom the Spaniards,
and also many of their Ships; the Janissaries quarrel with the Grand Signior:
the Polanders make peace with the Sweeds: A Great Diet at Prague: the Kings of
England and France make peace, having together destroyed the poor Protestants
at Rochel; The French make great preparations of War against Italy: and in the
beginning of the Next year the King of Swedland did Invade the Empire, and took
Francfort upon Odor, and Lantsberg, etc. How England stood affected at that
time, and what the Designs of the then King were, your own Histories will
inform you; I have only given you those that were foreign. Thus you see the
same Kingdoms and Countries were concerned in Action at that time, as are now,
but the Quarrels and pretenses different; yet the Popish Crew then in Spain,
France and Germany were for rooting out the Protestants and the Protestant
Religion; and yet we, even we, are for succouring and defending them, tho I
thank God I am of another persuasion. These things considered, are sufficient
to prove the Position that I laid down before, that like Causes have like
Effects, and that the Motion of the Superior Stars are to be considered in the
public Affairs of the World, etc. But I must turn into my way again, this
discourse being not exactly pertinent to the Affairs in Hand.

Haly an old Arabian, and one well acquainted with this kind of Doctrine, tell
us, Significat quod existant rebels qui adversabuntur regie, and qui quaerunt
regnum; Etian significat Mutationes. and res multas in negotiis regis*
similiter and in Lege: says he, the Square of Saturn and Jupiter signifies that
people shall rise against their King, and endeavor to take the Kingdom; and
that it shows various and many Mutations in the King's Affairs, and also in the
Law. So that it seems in those Eastern Countries, even there too where their
Kings are really Arbitrary, such Accidents do use to happen upon such
Configurations, as well as in these Northern parts where Government is by
Compact and Agreement. His word Rebels, is a term used in those Countries as
well to those who regulate the abuses of Government, that prevent the
subversion of Kingdoms and the ruin of Religion, as to those that indeed are
so: and no doubt but that Man that calls himself King, or rather Tyrant of
France, would look upon it as a great Injury done to him, to be called to an
account for all his Villainies, Murders, Perjuries, breach of Oaths, Promises,
destroying of his Subjects, disturbing the peace of Europe, burning Towns
without any Cause, hanging his Subjects, sending others to the Galleys, while
others of them are starving in Jailes, and all for being Protestants: I say,
perhaps this Man would think himself injured, and would be apt to call them
Rebels that should do it, when indeed it would be a good Service, and a work
of merit to ease the groaning Slaves of their Burden, the Earth of a Tyrant,
and the Princes of Europe of a Perfidious and treacherous Neighbor.

This Square of Saturn and Jupiter was attended by a Conjunction of Saturn and
Mars in October last, of which Haly says thus, Si quando Mars Junctus fuerit
cum Saturno, struet qui liber alteri frauds and deceptiones, and erunt inter
homines percussiones and vulnera: that when Saturn and Mars shall be conjoined,
it shows much Fraud and Deceit, and that there shall be fighting and wounds,
especially if they meet in a humane Sign. And this Conjunction was succeeded by
a Square of them about the end of March, from the Signs of Scorpio and Aquary,
and also at the very time of that great Central Eclipse of the Moon in Libra,
which was near the place of Saturn at the time of the second Square of Saturn
and Jupiter in July, 1688. All Authors do agree, and indeed Experience can
plead for it, that such Crowds of Malignant Positions do naturally give
mischief and trouble to Mankind, Effusion of Blood, Destruction of Great and
Noble Men, Wars, Pestilence, and all Manner of Violence that attends such kind
of Affairs and Transactions, as you that please may read more at large in Guido
Bonatus, pars quart. cap. 57. and cap. 77. and also in Origanus de effectibus.
And thus much for those things that are passed by, and yet in force to produce
something to come. I come now to the Figure it self, and where I left off.

The Moon is at this Ingress upon the place of the last Conjunction, and in the
seventh House, and by her Latitude in Opposition to Jupiter. This shows the
Common sort not to be pleased with some things done by those that are signified
by that Star: but Jupiter is in trine to the Sun, he has secured himself from
what can appear from thence.

But here we also find the Sun and Mars in an exact Square from Aries and
Cancer, and this not only Zodiacal, but a Mundane Square likewise, and from two
of the most principal Signs in the whole Zodiac, and from Angles besides. This
can be construed to give nothing more proper to its Nature then Action and
Hostility both by Sea and Land; and therefore about the time of the Ingress we
may hear of some considerable Action performed by the Dutch or Germans, or
both, against the French Tyrant; and also about the same time expect the same
Success of the English and Dutch Fleets by Sea, against him and his wicked
Accomplices, that are endeavoring to dip the World in Blood, and also to make
Slavery and Tyranny hereditary. If you will believe our Friend J. Gadbury, he
tells us in his Almanac for 1689, that it promises Tempests and Hurricanes;
but the Fellow will so lie, especially since he turned Papist, that he is not
to be believed. However perhaps it may, by inverting his Notion, prove true, by
appearing in Hurricanes and Storms among the Papists, and that Cursed Faction,
of which he is believed to be a worthy Member to his Reputation, and their
Advantage.

We also find here that Mars is in the Ascendent, and of such a Position when
he is afflicted, as here Haly says, (speaking of Mankind before) Crescent inter
eas rixae, and discordiae, and se vulnerabunt, and percutient, and sanguinem
fundent, and propter hoc accident eis magnum damnum and malum. That there shall
be Quarrels and Discords, from whence shall arise Blows and Wounds, and the
Effusion of Blood; and for this reason there shall happen to them (meaning
Mankind) much damage and loss. A Planet Angular has indeed much more Power to
perform what he signifies by being in an Angle than in the other Houses, and of
the Angles the first and tenth is the chiefest, and therefore he may be allowed
by his Position there to give both speed and violence to his Effects.

If we consider the Moon, we shall really find her in the seventh House,
separated from the Sextile of the Sun, and applying to the Opposition of
Jupiter and the Sextile of Venus. The Moon is Lady of the fifth House the Angle
of Embassies, etc. and in the seventh the House of Wars and Contests. Jupiter
is Lord of the Tenth, and just turned Retrograde in his own House Pisces, and
is in a Zodiacal Parallel with Saturn likewise. This seems to show some new
thing on Foot, about making some League, or entering into, or upon some new
Project of War, which is at present wholly unknown: but the advantage in the
Consequence of it will be considerable, and it seems designed for the mighty
States of Holland and their Confederates; and this seems to be managed under
some other kind of pretenses then what is intended, perhaps it may be some
Affairs that may concern the King of Denmark: for the Moon here is on the
Radical place of his Jupiter; and Mars here on the Radical place of his Venus;
and both Sun and Venus here on the Cusp of his Radical Mid-heaven. But this I
am sure will be considerable, for so many Planets do not use to be Angular and
in Cardinal Signs for nothing, and especially when such Applications and
Positions attend them. And this brings me to the Consideration of what
Countries, and Nations, are like to be concerned in the Transactions of this
Year, and who are like to be the Sufferers thereby.

In the Figure we find this Square is from Aries and Cancer: under Aries are
England, France, Germany, Denmark, etc. under Cancer are Scotland, Holland,
Zealand, etc. and from these Kingdoms and Countries will be the first
appearance of the Action of this Summer; in Cancer we find the Sun in Trine to
Jupiter, in Sextile to the Moon, and in Conjunction with Venus; now all allow
that Scotland and Holland are under Cancer, then are their confederates very
well signified by Jupiter, Venus, and the Moon, who are all strong and in a
good Condition. Mars is in Aries the Ascendant of France, and there in friendly
Rays with none, but stands singly alone: this considered with the two
Oppositions of Saturn and Mars [of which more hereafter when I come to
particulars that happen within the Compass of this Quarter] do plainly show
that those that espouse the French Quarrel, are like to feel the fury of this
Year's Action with a Witness.

And so I come to consider the Sun's entrance into Libra, which is this Year on
September the 12th, at 25 minutes, and 25 seconds, Afternoon, per Tab. Carolin.

Sol in Libra Sep. 12. hor. 0. min. 23. sec. 25. P.M. 1689. Luna vacua.

Lat. Lord.



Lat. Planet.
2 40 No. 0 58 So. 4 22 So. 1 17 So. 0 59 No. 5 16 So.

Declin. Planet.
10 34 14 46 9 52 15 17 0 25 28 30 0 00

The Preventional New Moon is not much to be taken notice of at this Ingress,
although an Eclipse of the Sun at the same time, but the Postventional Full Moon
is remarkable, because attended with a Retrograde Opposition of Saturn and
Mars, and a Central Eclipse of the Moon at the same time in Aries, both which
will much influence the Affairs of this Quarter; for if we please to look back
we shall find that Saturn and Mars came to an Opposition from the beginning of
Taurus and Scorpio, in the beginning of August last, and this upon a New Moon,
and at such a time when the Sun and Moon were upon the place of the Last
Conjunction, going to the Opposition of Jupiter; and now Mars falling
Retrograde, comes to a second Opposition, upon the 20th of September, by the
Felsinean Ephemerides, and on the 19th by Argol: And they also make a third
Opposition by their direct Motion again from the same Signs in the Month of
January next; and of the three that will be the most pernicious, especially to
the Kingdom of Ireland [the Judgment of which I shall refer to my next Year's
Almanac, as the most proper place for it]: but these two to the now
unsuccessful Deputy Governor of it, they both being upon the place and
opposite place of his Radical Sun, and also in Square to his Radical Moon.

It has been the Custom, or rather the Fashion, of some of our Profession,
when they were to give a Judgment on such a Position, to pretend to give the
exact Time of the Conjunction or Opposition, and then set a Figure to that
Time, from whence they were used to give their Opinions of its Effects. But how
irrational and improbable this is, all Men know that understand Calculation,
and know the difference of Tables that give the Motions; and that it is
impossible to expect any two of them to agree to two or three hours in the
Motions of the Superiors: which if so, then it is a piece of folly to pretend
to set a Figure for the time of the Opposition, etc. Therefore I shall give my
Judgment of it from the Figures of the Lunations preceding, as the most
probable and rational way in my Opinion; and I am sure it is the certainest way
that can he propounded, and the rather because it is at the Time of the
Postventional full Moon, according to the Direction of the Great Ptolomy. Lib.
2. cap. 9. and his Authority is sufficient for me.

The time of the Lunation preceding this Opposition being calculated, happens
on September the 19th at 44 min. past 2 of the Clock in the morning; so that
any one that pleases to set the Figure, may make use of that Time without
further trouble, and it is the time also of a very great Eclipse of the Moon:
so that the Eclipse tells the World there are great things of Ruin and
Destruction to be done, and the Opposition of Mars and Saturn tells us where
and what.

The First thing I shall observe in the Figure, is, that all the Planets are
opposed; for Jupiter is in Opposition to Venus, Mars to Saturn, the Moon to the
Sun and Mercury, and Jupiter and Venus do both behold Saturn and Mars by a
Mundane Square. Hence you see the Superior Bodies and Motions seem to have
fitted out this Time for some strange Catastrophe in the Affairs of the World,
and to turn up by the Roots the Tyranny and Opression which the Son of
Perdition, by help of his dark Lanthorn Councils, and booted Apostles, has
endeavored to plant and propagate not only in his own Land, but in ours also,
by the help of his Friends: But blessed be God for their Disappointment, and
the Ruin of that Cutthroat Design, by which we must all have fell, or else
declared for that Villainous Lying Doctrine, which is blasphemously termed
Religion, Popery I mean.

The Eclipse falls in the eighth House, called the House of Death; it is an
obscure Angle, and has no Affinity with the Ascendent, and the place of it is
governed by Mars who is in the terms of Venus, and she Lady of the Angle
following the Eclipse, and upon the place of the great Conjunction in Leo: This
Eclipse falls in Aries an Equinoctial Sign, and its Governor is in Taurus an
earthly fixed Sign, in Opposition to Saturn, which makes its Effects rugged and
also durable, and will be managed according to the nature of Saturn and Mars.
Junctine says an Eclipse of the Moon in the first ten degrees of Aries, Febres
futuras, aedium ineendia, combustiones nemorum; ac aeris siccitatem ostendit;
that it gives Fevers, burning of Houses and Woods, and a great Drought.

But Ptolomy tells us, that it signifies the Change and Alteration of Religion
and Religious Customs. And it is my Opinion that the Effects of this Eclipse
will be spent chiefly on the Kingdom of France, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging; for all the Configurations of this Year have more or less to do in
the Nativity of that King, and he at this time under the Effects of a malicious
Revolution. But more of these things when I come to speak in particular to
Persons and Things under the Influence of these Motions.

At this Lunation all the Planets are Peregrine except Mercury, who is in his
own terms, and not one of them in an Angle, but all either in Cadent or
Succedent Houses, but Mars and Saturn in particular are Cadent in the ninth and
third Houses, si fuerit in nona, significat detrimentum Religiosorum, Largarum
Religionum, ut sunt Episcopi, Archiepiscopi Cardinales, and similia. Bonatus
speaks thus of a Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the ninth, and you may
expect the same from an Opposition with very little rebate.

Messahala, speaking of such an Affair, commands us to observe Saturn and Mars;
for, says he, if Mars applies to Saturn, and commits his Rays and Disposition
to him, it signifies that there shall be strange, grievous and durable
Afflictions upon the Earth and among Mankind. Multiplicabuntur Latrocinia and
Contentiones, etc. Cap. xxxvii. de Revolut. Annor. Mundi. The Intent of
Messahalah in that place, is to show that when Mars is applying to Saturn, they
being the only two Corrosive Stars, stir up a violent and an unusual Ferment
not only in the Minds and Passions of Men, but also in all things of Nature,
because Mars has the Power of acting or agitating in a peculiar manner on
those condensed, compact, and acid Principles of old Saturn; it is like the
Effect of Salts and Acids being put together, which cause a violent Ebulition,
and after that is over, it produces a Tertium Neutrum, something that is like
neither of them. The nature of Mars is well described by P. J. Faber, who
says, Mars veluti Sol alter Calorem summum rebus impertit, and suo
intestissimo Caloro vitali perficit, and maturat crudum omne and frigidum. So
that we are not to believe this kind of Effect that Messahalah speaks of, to
proceed from an empty Ignote Notion, but from a real and rational Philosophic
Principle and Quality; and then this Application, if we consider it, is by
Opposition the worst of Aspects; and by Retrograde Motion, which does much
increase the Malign Effects of the Aspect, the Application and whatsoever does
depend thereon, which are Devastations and Ruin of Countries, Pleets and
fighting by Sea Armies and Destruction by Land, Deceit and Treachery one with
another; and besides all this, private Murders when violent Aspects happen upon
Lunations, etc. But there is one thing more to be observed, and that is, the
Parts of Heaven that they are in, which are violent, for they both culminate
with violent fixed Stars [perhaps there may be some that may carp at the word
both culminate, and therefore let all such know it is a proper Expression, and
can be vindicated with a very little Labor and Trouble] and also in violent
Parallels: both which do aggravate and increase the Malignant Quality of these
two Superiors, Saturn and Mars; the one in Taurus culminates with the Jaw of
the Whale of the nature of Saturn, the Head of Medusa of the nature of Saturn
and Jupiter, and also the Pleiades; and the other with the Stars in the
beginning of the Scorpion, as the Lucida Corona, the Stellae Nebulosae, the
Lanx Australis and Borealis. And thus much in general for the malignant part of
the Effects of this Eclipse of the Moon in September.

As for the Benefick Influence thereof I can say very little to it, for the two
Fortunes from whom all the Balsam is expected to heal, and also corroborate,
are not only in Opposition one to another, and in a Mundane Square to Saturn
and Mars, but also upon the place and the Opposite Point of the last great
Triple Conjunction in Leo, in active parts of Heaven, and in violent Parallels
likewise: From whence, and all which considered together, I can see but little
Rebate from what the Opposition of Saturn and Mars in fixed Signs promises at
the time of this Eclipse.

I shall now speak a word or two to the Ingress it self, and so come to
Particulars, etc. But before I enter on that, you must give me leave to put you
in Mind of that Opposition of Saturn and Mars from the beginning of Taurus and
Scorpio by direct Motion in the beginning of August, the Sun and Moon at that
time being upon the place of the last Conjuction of Saturn and Jupiter. At the
time of this New Moon, which is the fifth so August, at 24 minutes past 3 of
the Clock in the Morning, the two Lights are appproaching the Horoscope in Leo,
and the two Malevolents in the tenth and fourth Houses, all Angular, and indeed
so are all the Planets except Venus. The Effects of this Opposition will have
the same tendency that the other before mentioned will have, and the one will
increase the Force and Vigor of the other, and therefore I have given my
Judgment on the second only, because at that time the force of both will be in
operation. And Bonatus in par. 4. cap. 87. speaking of a Conjunction of Saturn
and Mars in the tenth, says, Si fuerit in decima significat detrimentum Regum
and Magnarum and Destructionem esses eorum and Mortem Magni Regis; if, says he,
it was in the tenth, it signifies the Detriment of Kings and Great Men, and
their Destruction, and also the Death of a great King. And it is certain that
as the Affairs of Europe now appear, these things are probable to happen in
diverse Countries and Kingdoms of Europe. And tho our Author speaks of a
Conjunction in that part of Heaven; yet we shall find that this Opposition will
be attended with such like Effects ad unguem. And therefore you shall hear what
the same Author says of Mars unfortunately placed in the tenth House, as we
have in the 85 Cap. Et si fuerit in decima significat Tribulationem venturam
Rusticis, atque popularibus ex part Regis, and Divitum ac Potentum; and
significat vulnera and percussiones gladiorum atque flagella and Angustiam ex
eis, atque Carcerem and penuriam seu indigentiam victualiam, and significat
Bella, and Contentiones de rebus quae non sunt^ illorum qui petunt eas, nec
pertinent ad eos: if (says he) it is in the tenth, as here, it signifies Sorrow
and Tribulation shall come to the common People by reason of their King and
great Men; and it also signifies Wars and Contentions for things that are not
theirs, neither do belong to them. So that we see it is not only from the Rays
those two there are conjoined, but from Mars also in that Angle ill placed, or
rather purely malefick; for Mars cannot be worse placed then in Opposition to
Saturn, and both of them Peregrine, and neither of them in Signs really
agreeable to their own Natures.

But besides all this, Mars does more immediately signify some King or other
(or at leastwise one that thinks himself to be so) because he is Lord of the
tenth House, the Horoscope of Kings and great Men in general; and in the
Genethliacal Part of Astrology it is observed that Mars in the Ascendent
Peregrine and afflicted, always signifies a Man that is bold, angry, quarelsom,
and yet a Coward, and with these Qualifications he is generally poor and needy.
And so I have done with the Oppositions of Saturn and Mars in general; only
observe,

First, That all the Effects of these two Oppositions, and also the third, will
wholly be directed and guided by the same Rule, and to the same End as the
Conjunction of them in November 1688 was intended; and upon every remarkable
Aspect in these Signs, or Leo and Aquary, which are in the same Quadrangle, you
will see or hear something remarkable done or acted in order to the great Work
till it is over and ended, which will not be quickly.

Secondly, Observe, That it was after a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in
Leo, Anno 1623, that the Papists used all their Endeavors to bring in that
most abominable Persuasion into England under the Notion of Religion, and to
set it up by the Power of Law, upon which Endeavors of theirs, there began and
continued so cruel a War in this Nation between two Parties, the one to bring
in Popery, and the other to keep it out, that the like had not been known in
many Ages; and now under such a Conjunction as that was, we have the like thing
attempted over again, and it had succeeded too had not the Almighty appeared
for us in a wonderful manner.

Twit us no more about your Forty One;
For they that twitted us, have us outdone.
Again, observe, that when Saturn and Mars came to a Conjunction in Aquary in
1640, in Opposition to the place of that Conjunction in 1623, [there was indeed
three Conjunctions of Saturn and Mars then, as now three Oppositions]
immediately after the next Opposition that most horrid Murder of the
Protestants in Ireland was acted, which began on the 23d of October 1641, and
lasted a Month; in which Action the Bloody Papists used such Barbarities, that
one would think it could not enter into the Heart or Mind of Mankind to think
or contrive; but it is such a Religion, that if the Priest says they must
murder their Fathers, Mothers, Brothers or Sisters, being Protestants, they
think their disobeying him will incur Damnation, such is the Ignorance and
Folly of those who are Bigots to Priests. I say in this Massacre they ripped up
Women with Child, and cruely murdered the Infants; set Men up to the Neck in
Earth, and played Bowls at their Heads, and when they had done, leave them to
die at leisure; strip Men and Women and drive them naked into the Field being
Winter, and there let them starve with Hunger and Cold; take fat Men and kill
them, and with their Fat make Candles to say Mass by; murder the Parents before
the Children to terrify them, and the Children before the Parents to do the
like: go into Cities and commit all the Villainies and Outrages imaginable, and
then take with them what number of both Sexs they pleased to hang, murder,
torture, or otherwise to use them, as they according their Irish Sense,
Discretion and Mercy thought convenient; and in this Condition were the poor
Protestants in that Kingdom at that time for the space of a Month and more,
till they had murdered about two hundred thousand. And this is the Condition
that poor Nation is now in again at this time, being fallen into the Hands of a
merciless Enemy, full of Rage, Barbarity and Revenge, till God in his Mercy and
good time will deliver them, I hope by the same Hand that he has delivered us.
And assure your selves that if ever you permit Popery to enter into this Nation
again [for I see some are whining after it] you must expect no other Favor,
Mercy nor Kindness from their Priests and Governors [bind them never so secure
by Oaths and Promises] but Fire, Faggot, Gibbet, and all other kind of Tortures,
Ruins, Dragooning, and whatever the Irish Papists gave the Protestants in 1641:
so that if you like it on those terms, you may as soon as you please submit,
fetter your selves, and lay your Throats to the Knife, for that must be the
Effect and Consequence of bringing in Popery, a Popish Government and Papists
into England; tho perhaps many may believe that they can bring it in so far as
they please and no farther; but let none trust to that, for we have of late
seen a large and almost a dear-bought Experiment.

I come now to the Revolution and Ingress of the Sun into Libra, to speak
something to that, and so hasten to what I have promised and designed. In that
Figure we may observe that the Moon is separated from the Square of the Sun and
Mercury, and Sextile of Saturn and Trine of Mars, and is now by her Latitude in
exact Mundane Square to Saturn and Mars: which shows the Position to be
violent, and something agreeable to the other Figures that we have before
considered, and Jupiter upon the opposite place of the last great Conjunction
in 1682, and in this Figure in an exact Mundane Parallel both with Saturn and
Mars; and in Opposition to Mars, who is on the Cusp of the second in a certain
Persons Nativity, and the Sun here in Opposition also to his Part of Fortune;
hence we may judge,

First, The Breach of some private Treaty, because Saturn and Mars are in the
Houses of Embassies, Leagues, and Ambassadors; the Sun and Mercury in the ninth
House the Angle of Journeys, and the Moon on the Cusp of the second in
Capricorn, a Moveable, Tropical, Cardinal Sign; it also may as probably be the
discovery of some Traitorous Design that has been going on for some time: but
this I dare assert, that about the time of the Ingress, or a little after it,
you will certainly hear of the Dissolution of some Treaty, or the end of some
Debate without Effect, that was carrying on in order to some great Affairs: or
else some Treachery and Villainy discovered about the Affairs of Ireland, that
has been long in Agitation and contriving, and now at last proves Abortive and
of no Service to them that did endeavor and attempt the effecting of that
precious Work; and all this seems the rather probable, because the Moon did
last of all separate from Mars in the fifth House Retrograde and afflicted.
Besides, this will divide the Councils and confound the Projects of an evil
sort of People, that are restless and contriving the Ruin of all those that are
not of their wicked Persuasion, and this seems to attend them as a Curse
intailed on their Endeavors and Attempts in general, and is like to continue;
for the Sun, who is here in a particular way a Significator of them, is in
Conjunction with Mercury, and they both going to a Zodiacal Parallel with
Saturn and Mars.

Secondly, We may judge that a certain Prince his Affairs go on very evil, his
Treasure very low, and his Friends grow fewer than ever; for Saturn in the
eleventh House has Signification of the Treasury an Exchequer of Princes,
their Council and Assistants, Supplies of Money, and those Noble Men that attend
their Courts; now Saturn is here their Significator and in a very ill
Condition, for he is Perigrine in Opposition of Mars and Square to the Moon;
these Positions show as ill things to attend him as possible can be; for it
does not only show him poor, but also like to continue in that Capacity and
Condition; it makes their Councils treacherous and divided, and what is worse,
the best of their Councils and Advice will be in the general frustrate and
fruitless, and diverse of those Noble Men and Gentlemen about the time of the
Ingress, or soon after, will either desert and leave them, or else forbear to
act as they had done before; in short, the Effects of this Revolution will
frown on their Affairs, and the Conclusion of all will be sharp and fatal,
notwithstanding there may be much Blood spilt, and a great deal of Confusion,
Destruction and Ruin; but let this be our Comfort, that it will be the Ruin of
those that began it, and the Destruction that they intended will fall upon
themselves, and the Snare they laid will catch their own Feet.

Thirdly, We may observe that Mars is just before the Ingress turned Retrograde
in Taurus his Detriment: this shows that the Arms and Warlike Affairs of some
Prince or other are grown scandalous by their ill Success and the Fate that
attends them, their Reputation declines, and themselves grow diffident of their
own Courage and Conduct; and yet this is but the beginning of it to the
purpose, we shall hear more hereafter.

In the Figure we find the Moon in exact Trine to the tenth House, a popular
Position, and will be of good Consequence in whose Nativity it shall have a
proportional one like it: But for the rest of the Positions I see none good,
they all being according to the principal Motion; inclined to what is violent
and troublesome. I might have spoke of the Square of Mars and Venus in the
Zodiac, the Mundane Parallel of Jupiter and Mars, the Mundane Square of the
Moon and Mars, and the Moon and Saturn, but the Effects of them being couched
in the Judgment of the other Rays and Motions* it would have been but so much
time protracted in my Writing, and your Reading, and therefore omitted as
needless and inconvenient.

Honest J. Gadbury in his Judgment of the Scheam of this Ingress [which is
indeed very short.] gives the same Judgment as he did of this Summer Quarter
before it, that it will be attended with very bad weather. I doubt his head was
full of Vapors when he wrote that, and that he had the sound of the Confusion
of Popery in his Cranium, which it seems he mistook and thought it had been
nothing more but the Concussion of the Elements, and a fit of an Ague in the
Air. Ah John, what pity it was that your Catholic Soul should be thus
deceived, what Penance must you undergo for it? why really I think instead of
keeping one Whore as you used to do formerly, for this offense you ought to
keep half a dozen; remember the Nosegay.

The whole considered together and applied to particulars of Men and Things,
etc.
IN the preceding discourse I have given you the General of their Effects
according to the Order and Course of Nature that may be expected in those
Countries where the God of Nature has designed them to spend their Power and
Influence; this perhaps might suffice, it being the Common Method that is used
by those who call themselves Astrologers: but I will endeavor to come nearer
to the Agent and Patient, and give it more particular as to Countries, Princes,
People and Things, where these Effects before mentioned may probably terminate,
and who they are that are like to be passive under them.

The Eclipse of the Moon which was in March, was celebrated in the 16 degree of
Libra: under that Sign is some part of Germany, and also some parts of Turkey,
which may expect to feel some of its Effects; but it more immediately concerns
the Kings of Spain and Denmark, for it falls in the Mid-heaven of the King of
Spains Nativity, and Saturn at the same time on his Radical Horoscope, in
Square to his Mid-heaven, these Positions will give some Disturbance either to
his Health or Government, perhaps both. In the King of Denmarks Nativity this
Eclipse falls in his Horoscope, and Saturn at the same time in Opposition, and
Mars in Square to his Radical Sun, this shows rather Injury to his Subjects,
and Commotion in some of his Territories than Sickness to his Person, because
neither Sun nor Horoscope are Givers of Life in his Radical Figure. But it will
certainly give some Commotion in the Dominions of the Grand Signior, for,
according to Ptolomy's Doctrine, part of his Dominons are under Venus and
Libra, and more also of those Eastern Countries: the Eclipse also particularly
concerns the late King for Evil and not for Good, for Saturn is there on the
place of his Radical Sun, and also the Moon is in Opposition to his Mid-heaven
and Hileg.

At the Solstitial Ingress we find the Sun and Mars in Square, from the
beginning of Aries and Cancer: under these two Signs are England, Holland,
Scotland, France, and also some parts of Germany. These Countries according to
their General Capacities and Qualifications for War, seem to approach toward
Action, and that considerably too, the English, French and Dutch for Sea
Action, the Germans and Scots for Land. At the New Moon preceding the Ingress
the Sun was in the Eleventh, in a Western Sign, and in a South-East part of
Heaven, Mars was in a South-West quarter; this shows some Action by Sea, West
or South-West from England, and this about the time of the Ingress, and also
about the middle of July when the Sun comes to the Square of Saturn, so
likewise in the South-West part of Germany by land, about those times; neither
will the Kingdom of Scotland be idle: This Aspect happening from Cardinal Signs
will make the Action and Effects the more famous and considerable, and the
rather because the Sun and Mars are Essentially strong; Mars in his own House,
and the Sun in Cancer, in reception with the Moon in Leo: and to show it will
be something of Violence, the Moon at the same Time is on the Ecliptical place
of the last Conjunction 1682, etc. and for an Argument of the French Tyrant
being concerned, be pleased to consider that Mars is in Conjunction with the
Sun in his Revolution, and Saturn exactly on the place of his pars fortunae,
and now stationary on the place of his Sun by Direction; at the time of this
Square the Sun is on the King of Denmarks Mid-heaven, and Mars on his seventh
House in a Mundane and Zodiacal Square, which may also give him some Action
either by Sea or Land, or both. On July the 12th the Sun comes to a Square of
Saturn from the beginning of Leo and Scorpio; this does particularly Affect the
late King, and gives disturbance to his Mind as well as Opposition, and want of
Success in his Affairs, because Saturn is on the Radical place of his Sun, and
the Sun on the Radical place of his Moon in the Ecliptic.

In the beginning of August there is an Opposition of Saturn and Mars from the
beginning of Taurus and Scorpio, the Sun, at the same time, in Opposition to
Jupiter from Leo and Aquary: This does particularly concern that King last
mentioned, now in Ireland; for Saturn is on the place of his Radical Sun, and
Mars in Opposition to it; this gives all the disadvantage to his Honor that
can be; Disappointment in his Expectation Loss in his Affairs, and all Things
that depend either upon his Courage, Conduct, or Council go on at this Time but
ill and untoward: but if we mind the two Malevolents, they are both in Square
to his Radical Moon, and in Parallel to his pars Fortunae, this gives illness
of Body, so far as to be crazy, and out of order, perhaps really Sick; it gives
loss by Enemies, and that to some consideration; it also gives Disturbance to
the Brain and Mind, with Disorder of that Nature; and whatever is signified now
will be with Violence, because of the Sun on the place of the last Conjunction
of Opposition to Jupiter, and the Sun on his Radical Mars his place. This, if I
make a right Judgment, signifies Crosses and want of Success: And now expect to
hear of some brisk Engagement.

About the end of September the two Malevolents come to another Opposition by
the Retrograde Motion of Mars, and this at the time of the great Lunar Eclipse
in the Sign Aries, in the seventh degree thereof; This Eclipse falls exactly on
the place of his Radical pars Fortunae, which gives loss of Health and Estate;
the Opposition gives all the trouble that Loss, Discontent and want of Success
can give. Jupiter is here in Opposition to his Radical Mars, as if some thar
were formerly his Friends, signified by Jupiter, did now turn Tail and prove
his Enemies. But this Opposition seems also directly to point at the French
Tyrant, for it falls in exact Square to his Moon and Venus, this gives
Disappointment and Loss in his public and foreign Affairs; treachery in his
Councils, and perhaps a return of his old fulsom Disease in Ano; and that the
rather, because Mars is in the fourth House of his Radix, and Saturn of late
Stationary on the place of the Sun by direction, and this considered with his
Revolution; The Eclipse also will have some Influence on his Country, and
People, as well as England: in a word, this Month of September, and also
October, seem to be times of great Action, and also of great Destruction among
Men and Things; neither will August be free therefrom.

In October we have an Opposition of the Sun and Mars, and a Conjunction of the
Sun and Saturn, from the aforesaid Signs and Places; but that which makes it
remarkable is, that it falls just upon the Suns return to his own place, in
that Gentleman's Nativity we mentioned before; that is, it falls at the
beginning of his next Years Revolution, which is like to give a very pleasant
Year to one in his Condition, to say the Truth, a worse Revolution cannot be,
for all sorts of Mischief, except Life: because the one falls just before the
Revolutional Point, and the other after it, and both so near, that the Sun is
afflicted by each of them to a great degree; neither is the Moon and Radical
part of Fortune free at the same time from the Affliction of the Malevolents;
which considered together, do not only promise a ba^ end of this Year, but a
very evil beginning and continuance of the next; and who ever they are that
expect his Return, build their Hopes and Wishes on very bad Grounds and
Foundations; for if we consider his directions that he is now under, together
with his Revolutions and Transits, he is so far from returning, that they will
still heap up more Plagues, Crosses, and Vexations on his perishing Fortune,
than they have yet done: or to speak more plainly, they will still increase and
multiply the Misfortunes he is now under: And therefore let all honest Men be
encouraged to use their endeavors, both by Counsel and Arms, to defend their
Laws, Lives, and Liberties against the Tyranny of France, Rome, and those
Confederated with them, to destroy all that stand in their way; for the Heavens
favor their Undertaking with Success, and have given an Opportunity to them to
make themselves a free and a happy People; and therefore if they are not so, it
is their own faults; for God is not bound to save them against their will. The
season is approaching, let every Man set his Hand to the Plough, and the Work
will be easy, and we are in more Danger from an unworthy Generation in the
midst of us, that endeavor our Ruin, than of the Abdicated King, who you have
little or no reason to fear; and therefore expect him no more.

But I find there are some discontented Spirits abroad that desire to have
their Popish King again, and others that encourage them to expect his Return,
and that by Force of Arms. First then consider what People these are that wish
it; for when he was made King, and swore to the People to maintain their Laws,
Liberties and Religion, Did he not break through all, and invade every Man's
Propriety therein concerned? and do ye believe he is grown more Just now? did
he not raise and impose upon you a Cutthroat Army, who threatened daily to
Ruin, Destroy and Dragoon ye, according to the French Method? and do ye think
he is grown more Merciful now? Did he not bring in Sholes of Priests, prefer
all those persons that would turn Papists, encourage Popish Chapels all the
Nation over? and did his endeavor to give you all to understand that he was
taking the best and most speedy way to bring in Popery, and when that was
settled, to destroy the Protestants [for Popery and that can by no means dwell
together, witness France:] and do you think he is now grown less a Bigot to his
Religion, and more free from the Government of his Irish and his Priests than
he was before? Did not the Papists over the whole Nation threaten you what they
would do, how they would use you, who they would Hang and Jaile, etc. when
their King had settled Popery, and given them the power [which you saw was very
near, doing?] and do ye believe, that he, or they either are grown
better-natured people now than they were before, or that they will use you more
kindly? No, No, never cheat your selves to believe Papists will be any more
kind to you now, then they have been to the Protestants formerly in Piedmont,
at Rochel in France, at Paris, in Ireland, and many other places where they
murdered them by thousands, and hundreds of thousands: and of late under that
Tyrannical Monster in France, where the Jailes, Gibbets and Galleys were their
Doom, and the merciful Censures they received from the Papists their Protectors
and Defenders, and this for no other Reason, but because they would not be
Roman Catholics, and change their Religion. And assure your selves, if ever
you suffer the Abdicated King to return again, he will use Rehoboam's
Expression, that he did indeed chastise you before with Whips, but now he will
do it with Scorpions? he only persuaded you then, but now he will Compel you?
Before he sent out among you his Apostatical whining Regulators, but now he
will Court you by his Dragoons, etc. Before he gave you your selves leave to
look after your Estates, but now he will take Care of them himself, left you
should do your selves an Injury, buy Arms, and offend the good Catholics, and
so come to be Hanged for Rebels: Before he desired and entreated you to take
off the Penal Laws and Test, but now he will take them off himself; and make
such too in their rooms, as shall [according to the French Manner] make your
Hearts ache and your Estates too: in his Brothers time he delivered you over to
the Devil, and Dr. P -- ld, to be buffeted, but when he was on the Throne
himself he stopped all that, to show you that he was a good-natured Gentleman,
but now he will pay you for the New and the Old; and really I should think it
would be a Comfort to any one to be brought before half a dozen fine grave old
Men sitting in their Jesuitical Formalities, and receive Sentence, to be sent,
either to the Galleys or to Tyburn.

In short, if you desire him again, you must take him with Thanks to him for
all the Oppression, Trouble, Ruin, and Destruction that he has brought upon
the whole Nation in general, and every Man in particular; and lay your Necks at
his Feet, and beg of him to make you Slaves of what Quality and Degree he
pleases; to set up what Religion he likes best, to protect you according to
the Irish and French Modes, and to destroy all your ancient Laws, Rights, and
Privileges: For I hope you have more Sense, with your Experience, than to
believe he is to be bound by Laws, Oaths, or Obligations. Yet this is not all,
for we must expect to have our Oppressions and Chains wrought upon the French
Anvil; for you see plainly now, by the Affairs in Ireland, that the French King
is his Tutor and Master, and that he is wholly under his Guide and Management;
and therefore at the same time you take James for your King, you must take the
French Tyrant for your Governor, and expect all the Oppression and Tyranny
that the poor Protestants in France have suffered, and endured, these last six
or seven Years. I say, under these Considerations, what People must these be
that desire or wish him here again, or hinder and obstruct the Regular Ways and
Methods, taken for the Safety and Settling of the Nation upon its ancient Basis
of Peace and Liberty? Why it is soon answered, Let their Circumstances be what
they will, and let them be under what Character soever of Distinction, either
of Laity or Clergy, they will in the end prove very dangerous to the
Government. As for the Papists we know what their End is, in all they
endeavor; and therefore there is nothing expected from them but our Ruin, if
they carry their Point, which is to establish Mother Church.

As for the Dissatisfied Party, they are a sort of People, many of them, that
care neither for Nation nor Religion; if they can but turn the Penny they will
overturn both, or either, according as they are hired; or at least-ways do
their endeavor for it: as we have seen in our Time, when there was a large
Crew of Pensioners paid to pervert the Nation, etc. and made no Scruple of it.
These People, at this Time, are not Guiny-men, nor such as deal with Angels,
but they are Pistol-Proof; they are equipt of the French Mode, and so well
learned in that Language, that they can write an Acquittance, without mistaking
either Method or Matter; they are a sort of Catterpillers with soft Skins, and
in curious Colors, but their Work and Nature, is to destroy the Fruits of the
honest Country-Man's Labor, and are a Curse to any Kingdom where they are
sent, and come; they are excellent Casuists, that never want Arguments, which
perhaps sometimes may seem against themselves, but like the Serpent in the
Fable, that last no longer than they have an Opportunity to show their
Endeavors barefaced; in short, they are like Watermen, that look one way and
row another, and will be very angry too if you will not take them for honest
Men; they are Serviceable to all Governments, and their Pay prevails before
their Conscience, and like a Spaniel they will be wrigling their Tails till
they get into Business.

Now you may know this sort of unhappy and Disaffected Men by their Language
and Carriage, for they always either talk in favor of their Abdicated King,
drink Healths to their old Master, thank God they had no Hand in driving him
out, nor bringing in his present Majesty, do all they can to shelter Papists
and ill Men from Justice; or else when any thing is to be done, they raise
doubts and difficulties, lay Bears and Lions in the way if it is for the
Service of his Present Majesty, but remove Mountains if it be for the other
side. Others cry out, For the Lords sake take Care of the Church, Oh the Church
will be destryed! when there is not the least Ground to suspect it; for, God be
thanked, we have a King that is a Gentleman, and will not break his Word and
Oaths, as others have done before him, he his one that has promised, and also
sworn to defend the Church of England, and to maintain it as by Law
established, and we have no reason to doubt it; and therefore this Noise is but
to amuse the Ignorant, and disturb the Waters, that the Juggling Authors
thereof, may with the more ease catch the Silly Gudgeons. So that if these kind
of Symptoms appear, you may be sure they are not Men that wish well to the
Settlement of our Religion, the Peace and Honor of the Nation, nor the Good
and Welfare of their Majesty's, the Savers of our Nation and Religion; but are
in the French Interest, and by his Pistols purchased to poison the Nation,
raise Differences, hinder Business of the greatest Consequence, alienate the
Hearts of their Majesty's Subjects; and if possible to put the Nation into a
flame, that their Master may the better accomplish his ends now on Foot:

Secondly consider that these very People, that now use all their endeavors to
divide the Nation, were the only People most possessed with Fear and Terror,
about 10 or 12 Months ago; and with Passion used to say as the Jailor in the
Acts did, what shall we do to be Saved? when will the Prince of Orange come? Oh
why does he delay so long, will he let us be a Prey to our Enemies? Pray God
send an East Wind, that we may be delivered: and more such Expressions to this
purpose they often used. And now they are delivered, the Note is changed, and
they Cry, Why do they not prove the Child an Impostor? why do they not prove
the Earl of Essex his Murder? and why do they not prove that Charles the Second
was poisoned, etc? Why what is this to us, whether they do or not? Suppose they
cannot prove any one of these, what must we revert into Popery, and put our
Lives into our Enemies hands again, to give them an Opportunity to try their
good Nature, and see whether they will Cut our Throats or not? possibly it may
pass upon, and among, Passive-Obedience-Men, but never upon me, and I hope many
more. However I doubt not but these Things will be proved when it is
convenient. In the mean Time, God bless them that take care to secure the
Nation against Popery and Tyranny; and assure yourselves they that will not
believe the pretended Prince of Wales to be Supposititious before it is proved,
will as much doubt it then, and so of the rest; for they are certainly Favorers
of that pious Cause. These were good humble People before, and then the Prince
of Orange was an Angel to them; but now I hear that they talk so unreasonable
as if they seemed to long to be sent to Prison and Secured; and indeed they do
not stick to say the Government dares not meddle with them. But I shall say no
more to these ungrateful Persons but this, that their present Majesty's are our
Lawful King and Queen, that they are Protestants, and have promised, and sworn,
to defend our Liberties, and Religion; and all that are Protestants, are bound
by the Laws of God, and Nature, to stand by, and defend, them to the utmost of
their power; and he that is not of this Opinion, neither deserves their
Protection nor their Permission to live in their Dominions, but like Cain to be
driven forth, and be a Vagabond on the Earth as he was.

Now the God of Heaven preserve King William and Queen Mary, our Lawful
Sovereigns, and give them plentifully of his Spiritual Wisdom, that they may
govern us according to his Will; let them live long and happy, and become a
Terror to all their and our Enemies; and as God has given a signal Testimony
to us by them, and the great Miracle they have wrought in our Deliverance, so
let us always sincerely implore the Throne of Grace to defend them all their
days, and when this Life shall end, to make them partakers of his Eternal Bliss
for ever and ever.

So wishes J. P.

A Copy of a Malicious Paper given forth among the Papists, by that grand
Impostor and Apostate, J. Gadbury, a litele before the Prince landed, in these
words following.
1. THe Prince of Orange has an Effeminate Geniture, and therefore can never
prove a Conqueror.

2. He is under a most malicious Revolution at the present, as having a Square
of Mars and Mercury therein as in his Radix, denoting much Treachery to be
acted, not only by but against him. I conceive the Dutch are weary of him, and
also of the English Renegado Rebels, and therefore make use of him as the
Munkey did of the Cats Foot, viz. at once to disembogue themselves of the said
Rebels, whose Company renders them obnoxious to so great a Prince as the King
of England, and likewise to be totally rid of Him without Dewitting him.

3. His Hylegical Directions are pernicious, he has lately passed M. C. to the
Square of the Moon, a Direction of fixed Malice, but could not work his Ruin,
because the Moon delights in Taurus the place of the Direction: But he is under
at present his Horoscope to the Square of Jupiter and the Sun, of a violent
Influence and Import in earnest, as happening in Opposition to the Pleiades a
turbulent and violent Constellation.

4. At this very time when his Maritine Busse and Preparation is at the
greatest, the Moon (his own and Nations Planet) is eclipsed in Aries, an
Equinoctial Sign and the Horoscope of England, viz. under the Dominion of
England's Sovereign.

5. And if he go on Shipboard on Monday next, the Moon will be in Taurus in
Opposition to the Sun and Jupiter in his own Geniture, and this among the
Pleiades also, and likewise in Opposition to a powerful Mars in Scorpio, in a
Figure of Heaven that greatly favors England, and all its present Affairs:
which seriously considered, with the Revolutions, Directions, and Eclipses
before noted, is an absolute Prodromus of his Ruin, according to natural
Causes, and in little time (in case of Invasion) we shall hear of his and his
Party's total Overthrow and Destruction. Probably some of his great ones [and
perhaps Himself] will be brought against their Will to make Speeches at
Tower Hill and at Tyburn, etc.

6. England was invaded by the Spaniard in 1588, but what did they get by it?
their Armado was ruined, and this Noble Nation was quickly rid of its
pestiferous Enemies; and so I doubt not, by God's Blessing, but 'twill be so
again in 1688: the English Nation is wise, tho stubborn, and will sooner submit
to a merciful pious Prince they know, than come under the Yoke of a Conqueror.

Some short Animadversions thereon.
HIS first Paragraph is needless, for the Prince (now our King) did not come to
Conquer, but to Deliver the Nation from Popery and Tyranny, and also to
preserve the Peoples Throats from being cut.

In his second, the King is mightily beholden to him for his modest Simily of
comparing him to the Cats Foot; do but observe the Malice of the Fellow in what
scandalous Terms he uses one of the greatest Princes in Europe, and how he
licks the Popish Fops up with Oil of Fool: for the Dutch were not [as he calls
it, obnoxious] afraid of the then King of England, and the reason was because
they knew him better than to fear him: But pray you John why the Cats Foot? is
it a Popish Witticism, or has the Cat deserved ill of Mother Church? for I see
you use it out of Contempt, because you gave it to the then Prince of Orange,
and I suppose you thought by giving the Prince ill Names, your then Client the
Popish Lady, to whom you gave that Lying Paper, would more willingly part with
her Money; but this is no News, for it shows you to be Honest John Gadbury
still; let what Religion will come, thou will be sure to be on the rising side.
You know at that time you could give no Protestant a good word, and I wonder
you used the Prince so kindly: and you know John when it was the fashion to
whip honester Men than your self for less Crimes than this.

His third Paragraph shows not only his Malice, but his Ignorance also in
Astrology; for the first Direction he speaks of has been over this 20 Years;
and the second will not come up these 20 Years yet to come; but suppose it were
true, where is the violent Effect he so idly talks of? This is like his Story
of Sir Frechvil Holles, and just as true; for he promised him he should live 20
Years, and he was killed within six Months after: Ah Jack, thy Astrology is as
true as thy Religion! thou art an Infallible Tool.

In his fourth he has strained his Nonsense to a Miracle; for none but J. Gad.
did ever give that Judgment of an Eclipse in Aries, as you may read in Cardan.
Seg. 5. Aphor. 45. where he tells us that it signifies the Multitude, i. e.
that Captain Tom should do the Nation Justice upon Popish Offenders; was it so
or not John? Lying is an inherent Faculty, and thou can not leave it.

But in his fifth there he has showed himself to a hair; for first he falsely
imagines a Cause to build his malicious and bloody Prediction upon without
Cause, and what was this for? why it was to support and encourage his
treasonable Party and Popish Crew in their further Attempts to destroy the
Protestants and Protestant Religion: And pray observe how confidently the
Fellow tells his Party, that in case of Invasion [for he and they too knew
there was no danger without that] they should certainly hear of the Prince and
the rest of the Peers and Gentlemen being beaten, taken, and brought to make
Speeches at Towerhill and Tyburn; this was not spoke by Chance, or in
Discourse, but with premeditated Malice against his Majesty and the
Protestants, and with his earnest Hopes desires and wishes to see it
accomplished, for in all Times, and under all Governments, he is certainly a
Villain to the height, and always of the same Religion that the chief of the
Government are of: And do you but count how many Changes there have been in the
English Government, in point of Worship especially, since the Year 1645, or 6,
and just so often has honest John changed his Persuasion in Religion, and once
more, that was when he turned Ranter; and should the Great Turk come he would
take up his old Topic, i.e. That God always sends a King of that Religion
which he expects the People should be of. Now the Question is, whether John
Gadbury, the Parson of Putney, and Harry Hills ever intend to dye Martyrs?
These are three special Fellows. But now John, suppose his Majesty should turn
the Tables, and as you have doomed him to make a Speech at Towerhill, he should
send you to make a Speech at Tyburn; or what is according to your late Mode,
let you walk from Aldgate to Tyburn, having a Man go behind you to brush the
Dust and the Flies off from your Back on your way; and this I am sure you
deserve, if not for that, yet for your now preaching up Sedition to amuse his
Majesty's Subjects, and carry on the Popish Cause; for there are diverse Ladies
that I have spoke with, that say they have heard you tell it confidently that
the Abdicated King would be here by Midsummer, and you advised the Papists to
use their Interest accordingly; nay, I have heard the same from some Papists
also, and I can bring them to your Face, but they are People of more Honor
than to turn Evidences; you know who you have told it to, tho perhaps not how
many: Ah John! thou art not only an Ill, Perfidious, Traitorous, Sycophantizing
Scorpionist, but a notorious Liar also, thy very Nativity bespeaks thee to be
all this, and from your own Rules too: But prithee John why Towerhill and
Tyburn, you see your cursed Crew are not so dealt with, tho you deserve it far
more, but indeed Whipping-posts, Jailes and Gibbets were the common Favors you
Papists did use to bestow on the Protestants at that time, and we know it will
be the same again, if ever they get the Power, and for that reason John I am
for your having a taste of it now to try the Experiment.

In the last Paragraph he draws a Parallel between the Invasion in 1588, and
1688, and tells you he doubts not but to see the last prove as the first did.
Now John are you not ashamed? how can you look any Gentleman in the Face
without blushing after all this Trick, Cheat, and Lying? But prithee John
consider, that the Invasion of 1588, was to bring in Popery, and this of 1688,
was to kick it out; in both which you see the Judgment of an angry God against
their Idolatry and Lying, which you blasphemously call Religion. Again John,
prithee how did you look when you called James your King a merciful, pious
Prince? I confess Cabinet Jones gave him that Character when he wrote to us at
Amsterdam, but no body believed him, because we knew him better. Honest John,
thou have sufficiently showed to the World that thy whole Life has been a
continued course of Villainy and Knavery: And this little Paper, had thou
never been guilty, would have made thee suspicious, but now it is a
Confirmation of all the rest, and helps to make thee a complete --. And this
leads me to consider thy Almanac this Year, in which thou have been
extravagantly idle and impudent, which I refer to every ones Judgment in the
reading what follows.

IN Page 7. speaking of the Spring Quarter, he says, it speaks better things to
Great Britain than the English Libelling Renegado's in Holland dream of: Query,
whether he means the Abdicated Lords and Bishop now at Amsterdam or not? for I
know no Renegado's else in Holland: there are diverse besides in France and
Ireland.

In January, in his Rhyme doggerel over the Month, he begs the place to be the
Prince of Wales his Vassal: Thus you see there can never be a good place vacant
but one Knave or another is always ready to beg it. Well, let him take it, and
pray take care that Honest John may be entered down in the Book of Honor for
the Prince of Wales his Slave. There is a pair of them [like Master like Man.]
In this Month he has taken a great deal of care to put down King Char. the
Martyr; but if you observe November he has quite forgot Gunpowder-Treason, and
yet a very good Protestant; why really he did tell me long since that there
never was any such thing, and that it was only a Trick of King James the First;
this gave me the first suspicion of his being a Papist.

In the Month of April he tells us that Dr. Oats was to stand in the Pillory
at Tyburn on the 24th day, and so to do every Year on that day as long as he
lives; Query, who saw it, and whether Jack was not mistaken in the Point as he
used to be? risum teneatis.

But in May he makes a long Harangue about his unjust Trial, and tells us that
on those days there mentioned, he was to be punished, and afterward to remain
in Prison during his Life: But Honest John has lived to see himself proved a
Liar, and the unjust Judges to see their unjust Sentence and Judgment called in
Question by their Superiors. Was there ever such a base and barbarous Sentence
given before? no, nor would now by any but Dispensing Judges, nor none but a
Traitorous Scorpionist would so triumph over a poor Gentleman's Sufferings.

In August and September John has impudently repeated his former Folly, and
tells us that Dr. Oats is to stand in the Pillory again on those several days,
and so to do as long as he lives. What way could this Fellow have taken better
than this, to let the World know his Malice, Impudence and Folly? Now I will
venture a Wager of five to one with John Gadbury, that there is not a word of
this will prove true; if so our Popish Oracle is quite out of biass, and his
Cant of this kind quite out of date. Now the Question is, Whether John can find
a Salvo for this Mistake? for if he had known that Popery would have kicked up
its heels, I dare say he would not have declared himself a Papist so soon, nor
when he did, nor have wrote so much fulsome stuff about his Master, the
supposed Prince of Wales, which is nauscous to every Man's Palate, nor yet have
writ this about Dr. Oats, as a Record of his Folly and Ignorance: Besides,
this calls his pretended Skill in Astrology extramely in question, and is an
assured proof that Honest John knows no more of the Mystery lodged in the Stars
than his Master the Prince of Wales knows, or the Ancient and famous Tom. Thum.
However so long as he can coin new Aphorisms, impose Palladiums of Cities on
those that will believe him, and tell the World that the Cardinal Signs upon
the Angles of a Nativity signify great things, it is enough to give some ground
to the Ignorant to believe his canting Bounces that he yearly prints under the
Notion of Astrology, when I dare assure you he is very little acquainted with
it, as you shall see further proved upon him when I come to examine his several
impertinent Treatises that he has imposed on the Worsd. But suppose any one
should go to those places on those days he speaks of to see whether it be so or
not, for John is of a Religion that can work Miracles, why truly it will but
add so much pains to your credulous Folly; for now the Fellow believes himself
to be a Liar, and they say a Liar is worse than a Thief, but he knows best
whether he is or no; yet a Remnant must be saved. Ah John!

In November he tells us when Father Petre was sworn of the King's Council and
took his place; I wonder the Fellow is not ashamed to let the World know what a
Crew of Traitors that King caused to be sworn of his Council, as Butler and
diverse others which you may read in his Observations; yet the grand obnoxious
Person Jefferies he has omitted, I doubt he had forgot him, for he was a
Privy-Councellor also: What can this show but that he was and is a Papist, and
did approve all their Actions; and if you question his being a Papist, look but
into December, where he endeavors to justify the Lord Stafford, and brings in
this Expression; Say Anti-Catholick is not the Truth discovered, etc. by this
he challenged all that were not Papists, himself being out of the number, and
yet I hear he has already had the Impudence to say, by Heavens I am not a
Papist! I wonder People should say so! By which we may see he can change his
Religion when he pleases, and finds occasion.

In the Page before his Advertisements he calls all those perjured that were
concerned in the Popish Plot as Evidences. Now there is no Man but can see
through this Villainy of his, for we have all lived to see what they swore and
did endeavor to prevent upon us, and a great deal more: I perceive this
zealous Gentleman would have these Perjuries understood only against those that
died Papists, yet not a word of those wretched Persons that swore many honest
Protestants out of their Lives: Nay I my self was offered by a Papist when I
was in trouble, that if I would hang half a dozen Fanatics [for so they termed
them] I should have my Pardon, and I promised to do it, thereby to get an
opportunity to make my Escape; and this Man was an Intimate of Honest John
Gadbury's. Now what think you of Perjury, for they never asked me if I knew any
thing of them, but if I would hang them.

In his Advertisments he tells us of a Full Reply to a Treasonable Almanac
printed in Holland; in which he gives me such base Language, and so much of it,
that it is a shame to mention it, his common Complement being Rogue, Rascal and
Traitor, with more such stuff; but that which I would remind him of is, to tell
us by the next where it is to be bought, for Honest Not is gone to Purgatory,
and the Book is very much wanted. And so I have for this bout done with my old
Friend John Gadbury, James the Second's Jugler, and Astrologer in ordinary to
the next Popish Plot, where I shall leave him in a very fair way to be --; and
conclude with these few wise and zealous Sayings of this pious Proselyte.

This is the Gentleman that in my hearing said in 1685, that now the true
Religion was coming in again, having been long excluded.

This is that Person that said, the first time he was at Mass, there were also
twelve English Peers at Mass at the same time.

This is the Proselyte that told Mr. C. (meeting him as he came from Mass) that
Popery was the only true Religion, and right way to Heaven.

This is Honest Jack that said, no Man should be preferred but Roman
Catholics, and such as would be So when the King pleased.

This is he that carried Mr. B. to several Papists to be converted, and when
they could not prevail upon him, he said he must be forced to have him to
Father Petre, and Father Ellis.

This is that Impudent Fellow that said it would never be well till the King
[that was James] laid by Parliaments, and ruled by his Absolute Power.

This was that corrupt Fellow that persuaded Dangerfield to murder Charles the
Second.

And this is that Villain that said, he hoped to see the Prince of Orange [now
our King, whom God preserve] brought Prisoner to London, and to make a Speech
at Tower Hill or Tyburn.

FINIS.
I Am ordered to acquaint the World, That there will be shortly a most
Excellent Treatise published, wherein it is proved, by Mathematical
Demonstration, how many Minutes a Candle of sixteen to the Pound will burn;
together with diverse Rules of good Husbrandy: Collected for the good of all
frugal Men, by a Person of Quality in his late Travels.


