A Present for YOVTH, AND Example for the AGED. OR, THE REMAINS OF DAMARIS
PEARSE.

Containing her Speech after she kept her bed.

And a Copy of a Written Paper, of her own Composing, which she left as her
last Lagacy to her Brothers and Sisters; and was the last thing that ever she
wrote.

And also several pious Expressions, occasionally uttered in her last Sickness,
worth minding.

Together with her Funeral-Sermon, preached by a Reverend Minister of the
Gospel.

Howbeit certain men -- believed -- and a Woman named Damaris, Acts 17.34. --
And by it -- being dead, yet speaks, Heb. 11.4. lat. London: Printed for Tho.
Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheap Side, near Mercers Chapel.
1683.

To the Book.
GO, little Book, abroad, and tell mankind,
What graces lodged in a Virgins mind.
Declare the glorious wisdom, power and love,
Which did her infant-years to Virtue move;
And fit for Heaven, when her childish days,
Rather invited her to harmless plays.
Urge youth to make her their Exemplar, till,
By Graces steps they mount to Glories hill.
Shame lazy Christians, who are grown in years;
Yet not like-working in their hearts appears.
Heaven's bless thy errand, and make sharp thy Words,
To pierce the Sinners heart, like Spears or Swords.
If they reject thee in a scornful heat,
Tell them thou wilt meet them at Gods Judgment Seat.
D. C.

To the Reader.
IT is said in Holy Writ, That of making many Books there is no end; which was
never more verified than in this our scribbling age.

This following Collection, which is now exposed to public view, was not at
first so intended, but collected and composed for private use, which after a
while coming to the view, and passing through so many private hands, not only of
Relations and Acquaintance, but also of some that were strangers, who (all of
them, as if by one consent) earnestly desired it might be Printed, and some
were restless therein; and one threatened, that if I, to whom it did most
properly pertain to set it forth, did refuse, and would not do it, it should be
done without me by a strange hand; which indeed was the great prevailing
argument that did extort it forth: for tho it discover weakness enough (as now
it is); yet if it had been done by a stranger, in likelihood it might have
contained somewhat that is worse than weakness. Now you may be assured you have
the very truth; and by what is herein contained, you have a taste of the frame
and temper of Spirit, and likewise of the endowments and qualifications of A
young woman of so plain education, of whom the following Collection gives you
her Character, but only in a taste: This considered, it was the soonet yielded
unto, to set it forth: for had it been of some learned Minister, or yet of some
aged and experienced Christian man, it had never seen the light; tho the like
Piety, Grace and Zeal for God, and to do good to others, is not always
manifested in such.
a young Woman, who was several years very much afflicted with great distempers
in her body; and lay in a torturing pain several weeks before she departed;
some very grievous spiritual conflicts she had, and in great Agonies: yet after
a while, a comfortable deliverance, and a most eminent conquest; and tho she
had but little cessation of her bodily pain, yet she had most sweet inward
refreshings in her Soul and Spirit, and at last went triumphantly to Heaven;
and by strength and the stedfastness of her faith, did (as it were) trample
upon the very neck of Satan himself.

I am sensible what is here written, will not suit the palates of this Ages
learned Rabbis; it being not calculated to please the humors of worldly wise
men.

Neither will it find esteem among the vulgar sort of loose Christians. But
however, some have seriously professed they have received great benefit by it
already; and who can tell, but it may benefit others? The Scripture says, that
out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, the Lord has ordained strength; and
God (it is said), has chosen foolish and weak things, to confound the wise,
and things that are mighty; and has chosen things that are base, and despised,
to bring to naught things that are (highly esteemed.)

Tho the person that gave the occasion hereof, was one of the weaker Sex, and
but young, and of very plain and ordinary education, (only taught fine
needle work, wherein she was ingenious) and little experienced in the World,
and the affairs thereof; yet she was so very a Christian, so earnest in taking
hold of time and opportunity, helps, and means; and made so great proficiency
in knowledge and grace, after she devoted her self to God; and was so careful to
prepare for Death and Eternity, and so restlestly longing to have others do the
like, that in fine she became so much experienced in the things of God, whereof
you have so ample testimony hereafter given; that I question not, but her works
will praise her in the gates, and may administer occasion unto others to bless
and praise God for her, and these her Remains.

She is gone beyond the reach of envy, and beyond our praises: She has left a
sweet savor behind her; and the Scripture says, The memory of the just is
blessed. That the Lord would bless this unto all those, into whose hands it
shall come, and make it succesful in doing some spiritual good to others, is
and shall be the prayer of him, who greatly rejoices to be serviceable to
Souls.

On Mrs. Damaris Pearse; An Anagram.
Pass Rare Maid!
Pass on Rare Maid! unto thine home above,
The World is no meet object for thy love.
Untouched, pass through its crowd of Tempters; be
Deaf to their charming importunity.
Thine Husband's Christ; Espouse besides him none:
Lose not thy Nuptials, nor thy glorious Crown.
When thou have won the point, and got secure,
Let Us know what thou enjoy'st, and did endure.
That with those comforts wherewith thou were fed,
Surviving friends may here be comforted.
D. C.

A Present for Youth, and Example for the Aged.
NOT to detain the Reader with a tedious Preamble, in brief thus: The Whole of
what follows, was occasioned by the Piety and Zeal of a young Woman, who may
therein be an encouragement for imitation to others of her Sex; and indeed
(besides the extolling of Gods Free Grace and Goodness toward her) that is the
only design here aimed at: Her Name was Damaris Pearse; she was born at
Dunsford in the County of Devon the 8th of October in the year 1659. She lived
the most of her time in Ermington, and there departed this life the 6th of
December in the year 1679. So that the whole of her temporal life, was but
twenty years and a few weeks; she was sick near 4 years; and so weak for more
than twenty weeks before she kept her bed, that she was not able to walk about
the Chamber alone, without the help of another, and after all this, she kept
her bed (being in torturing pain) full seven weeks: The first day whereof (in
the Morning) she delivered this following Speech,

The foregoing night had been very trouble some with her; she having had little
o no rest, very much sickness, whereupon she had a desire to see her Parents
faces once more together; they being called came forthwith into her Chamber;
her Brothers and Sisters, after a little while came in likewise. Her Father
asked her; how she did? She answered, I have had this Night, many sweats and
colds, and have been very weak, and in much pain, but yet it has been a very
good night with me, for therein I have had many comfortable refreshing
thoughts. Her Father replied, that in Heaven there are no sweats or colds; no
sickness, or weakness.

Whereupon she began to speak at first very sparingly, with long stops, and
pauses, through weakness of body, and stoppage of breath; but after a little
while, she spoke wonderfully quick, and fast; faster than ordinarily when in
health.

Thus she began. When Shimei cursed Dovid, some that were nigh would have gone
and taken off his life; but David replied, let him curse; the Lord has bid
him. David was a great and noble person, and Shimei was a wicked man, and
should David (so noble a Person) take it so patiently, as to say, let him
curse: And I am a little piece of dust, not so much as this (pointing at her
singers end) yea not so much as this (holding up the utmost corner of a linen
cloth) yea, I am nothing, nothing, nothing to thee, Lord! and shall the Lord
from himself thus visit me! and shall not I bear it patiently, that have
deserved infinitely, infinitely, infinitely more! Let the Lord do to me, and
with me, what pleases him.

Here a little stop: afterward thus; My Dear Parents, you must not suffer your
inferior part (meaning the Flesh, corruption, and Carnal Affections) (as
afterward she expressed her self) you must not suffer your inferior part to
rise up and prevail over the higher and spiritual part.

You must not murmur or repine, whatsoever befalls me: Know that there is
nothing comes to pass by Fortune or Chance: Gods will cannot be altered, or
changed in the least: His Will is Holy, Just, and Good; and howsoever it be
with me, it is according to the Good Will of God.

Then she called for some cordial, and her Father stepped a little out of her
presence; When he was come again, she thus spoke; Have you been with the
Father? There has been, and there is one with the Father (meaning Jesus Christ
our Intercessor, as afterward she expressed her self) for me; and tho I am
filthy dust, yet the Goodness of the Father has followed me all the days of my
life, and it is the Lords mercy that you, and I, and all others, are not
consumed. I see that his compassions fail not: The Lord does not grieve, or
afflict the Children of men willingly; and tho he afflict, yet he will not cast
off, and the Lord is breathing in more breath, to make me ready a living Soul
for himself.

I have lived twenty years (as I take it from your selves) but I have been a
sinful piece of dust, yet there is enough in him to make me white again: I am
in a weak house, but I wait for a house in Heaven, whose Builder and Maker is
God.

I desire (my dear Parents, and dear Sisters) that my words may be in
sincerity, and may take deep root in you, through the Spirit of God.

Then she took a little Liquor, after which, she proceeded thus:

I desire that the words I speak, may be with a sanctified Spirit, and pure
conscience. I have lived in the world, and have been so Tho she thus speak of
her self, yet she was a very lowly and humble maid.
high: I would not be contented with this, and that; but did still look higher;
but that was vanity: Now I see it is better to live in the Courts of the Lord,
than in the Tents of wickedness, tho it were ten thousand years.

Now I desire you, my dear Parents and Sisters; (I do not know how long I shall
live; neither does any man know his time; but) if you live to see such a time,
that this my weak Tabernacle lie before you, you would not be moved at it, but
say good is the will of the Lord in all his doings,

I am sorry that I should bestow so much of the breath that the Lord has given
me, in vain words; but there is enough in Jesus Christ to make it up again.

I rejoice to see you my dear Parents, and Sisters, but I should rejoice more
to see you in our Fathers house: If we do well here, it will be well with us in
our Fathers house; and howsoever it be with me now, I hope it will be well with
me, when this Tabernable is dissolved.

I have desired sometimes to live in some Town or City; but the Lord in his
Providence hindered it; and it was to fit me for his heavenly City.

I am sorry for nothing that ever I have done, but what has not been agreeing
to the good will of God.

Concerning my being, next to God, who was the first Author and chief Giver
thereof, I received it from you my Parents, and I do return hearty thanks to
God, and also to you; and as for my being, so for my maintenance, I give thanks
to God, and to you, unfeigned thanks.

I am sorry for the dishonor, the great, great, great dishonor I have done
against the Great God; and next, for the dishonor to you.

My Sisters, I desire you to mind the things of the eternal Spirit; if you
neglect now, while here, you will lose it for ever; and if you do not find your
selves striving against sin now, you will not find the benefit hereafter.

Here a little pause, afterward thus: This Night has been a painful one, but
yet a sweet night to me, the sweetest that ever I have enjoyed: I have had many
sweet inward refreshings in it.

I have sometime thought to speak of spiritual things, but could not, the flesh
has hindered; but now I will keep the flesh under. I have heard my Savior say,
you must not think what you shall speak; and now I find it so: He (Christ) is
my Savior.

You were talking last night of Mr. A Godly Ministor who departed this life a
little before this i am.
Whiddon, and I think (as I believed) that he was a good man: I have some time
grieved, and stranged at it, that God takes away such He being as to his age,
in the best of his time.
men; but then I thought, as men gather their fruit: and as you that have but a
little, do by your It being the time of Gathering in such fruit.
apples; you gather them in for store and use hereafter; and you take some
delight therein, and you may do so; so the Father when he has made his
servants ripe, then he gathers them to himself for store; for eternity: and he
delights therein: but I am not yet ripe, but I desire I may be fitted for his
great storehouse.

When I look upon my self, I find my self filthy, and altogether polluted; then
I left my self; but not hopeless, but gave my self to God, and he took me; but
I should have said, that God made me pure, and I polluted my self; then I gave
my self to God, and he cleanfed me, and he will take me to himself, and I shall
never be filthy more.

Here we are like little children, just like so many little children, when they
are out in the dirt to play, their Mother calls them to come in to be dressed and
made handsome and fine, for their Fathers and Friends to look upon them, and
they out of their childishness run away the further into the dirt, and will not
come when called.

So it is with us; our heavenly Father calls us, and we out of childishness run
away from him in the Wilderness, to sin and follow vanity, rather than be dressed
for Eternity, by our Heavenly Father.

It is with us here, as if a Noble Person should make a feast, and invite many
guests, and he invites them into his inner Room, his best Parlour; but they run
away, or stay in some outer Room, in some filthy, nasty Place: So it is with
God the Father; He makes a great Feast, and invites the Children of men to
come; some come in the inner Room, into the best Parlour, but the most stay in
the worst Room, without: O this is sad! and will be so for ever.

I have heard my Savior say, That wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; and strait is the
gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find
it. My dear Brothers and Sisters, If you live after my departure, have a care
to enter in at the strait gate, do not spend time vainly, and make fair
promises, and afterward be idle, and vain; be careful to please God, and his
Spirit, and do not please the flesh, that has been too much, therefore do not
please your selves, and mispend time, as in looking in glasses, and the like,
but look more into the Glass of the Word of God.

This night has been a comfortable night to me: Here one asked, if much
speaking would not do her hurt? She replied, The Lord gives in more Strength,
and proceeded thus: Improve all friends and interests for your souls good;
whatsoever you do for God, it shall not lose its reward; my desires were for
spiritual things, and so I desire you my Parents, Brothers and Sisters, that
your aims and ends may be for spiritual things.

I have had much affliction, but the greatest were those that troubled my
spirit. This night has been quick, and it made me mind mortality the more;
time runs away quick; we know not our own time: I believe it will be a
considerable time before the day of general Judgment; but we know not how near
the day of our partlcnlar Judgment is; therefore strive to prepare for that
day. Have our Savior rooted fast in you. Those thar are in Christ, shall be
received into Abraham's, Isaacs and Jacobs Bosoms, and be with the Twelve
Apostles, and with all other gracious persons that are departed: as She knew,
and had heard Mr. Vincent preach, and had desired him to recommend her case to
God.
Mr. Tho. Vincent, and Mr. Whiddon and others. The hearing some, and reading
the books of others, has made me very joyful: As Mr. Joseph Alleins, and
others.

And you have joyed me heretofore; O that I might be an Instrument to give in a
little comfort to you.

Our Savior says, Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of
God, and he shall go no more out; and I will give him a new name, Rev. 3.

Again, my Savior says, Rejoice, not that the spirits are subject to you; but
rather rejoice that your names are written in Heaven.

I have cause to rejoice all that I can, (which is but little) that my name is
writren in Heaven; for who so is not, shall be cast out into outer darkness:
let that be stamped upon your consciences; but for me, I desire to praise him
that made me.

Again, my Savior faith, My Sheep hear my voice, and they follow me, and I
give unto them eternal life, and none shall pluck them out of mine hand.

I have exceedingly grieved to think how many shall go into the lake of eternal
fire, but mostly fearing lest any of these present should; over, and over, and
over have I grieved for them; O now think upon it while time lasts: this is a
precious day; this is a good day, a day of salvation. It is said, To him that
overcomes, I will give a white stone, and in the stone a new name, which no
man knows, but he that receives it.

Here she hreathed a little: afterward thus: There was never a covetous person
more desired riches, or a drunkard his cups, or a gluttonous person to fill his
appetite, or an unclean person to satisfy his lust, or an ambitious man
honor, or a sick person a physician, or a hungry man, meat, or a thirsty
person, drink, never any that is naked, or cold, more desired clothes, or heat,
or a sorrowful person ever more desired to be comforted, or an indebted person
more desired a surety, never a weak person more desired to be strengthened,
never any of those persons has more desired any of those things, than I have
desired the grace of the eternal spirit. None of them has been more desirous
of any thing, than I have been, even with longing for Christ and the Graces of
the Spirit. The Graces of the Spirit, are love of God, faith in Jesus Christ,
hatred of sin, hungring after righteousness, long-ruffering, etc. all these,
and many more, I have exceedingly longed for.

And now (my Parents) tho I cannot cast your natural bread, yer I trust I am
full of the bread of life, and shall be so for evermore. There is a fullness of
fat things in the house not made with hands, in Heaven; There God and Christ
sit on the Throne, and the Saints shall; (...) where too, for they shall judge
the world. O that we would judge our selves now.

I gave my self to God; and when I have been weak, and sick, he has strengthed
me through Grace. The Lord will not be limited.

If here be any that have done me any wrong or offense, (I (...) not) I do
heartily forgive you, and all the World. I bear no enmity to any person or
thing in the world, but against sin: Whether you forgive me or not, for the
wrongs I have done you, I know not; but if the eternal God forgive me, it will
be well with me; and then if any should kill me, I reckon no more of it than of
a flea on my hand.

The Lord is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope and trust in him.
Blessed are all those that trust in him.

The last Psalm that ever I heard, was the fifteenth, the description of a
Citizen of Zion: And the last Hymn that ever I heard, was that entitled (Trust
in Gods Providence) it was very good: There it is said, The righteous shall not
be forsaken, or his seed beg their bread. A righteous man may have a wicked
child, as David had an Absalom; but the righteous-children of the righteous,
shall not want their bread: The eternal Spirit shall be their comfort. Should I
live a long time in the world, I should not want, for I know the Eternal God
will supply me: The words I speak, I know not in what order they are, but they
are as the Spirit directs, and helps me.

The Lord is good to his servants, to all that trust in him. I hope I shall be
ashamed of nothing, but for the works of the flesh.

The Lord is the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever: He is Alpha and Omega,
the first, and the last, and my times are in Gods hand.

My dear Father, so long as you trust in the Lord, you have your reward with
the Father which is in Heaven. Father you must be patient with your little
Daughter in the flesh. I have been in heats and colds, but the Lord is able to
raise me up, as well as to cast me down.

I desire when my departure is at hand, that I may lie down in peace: The Grave
is a sweet bed: I never found such a sweet bed, as that bed (the Grave) is to
me, in all my life. This flesh is laid down in dishonor, but it shall be
raised in Glory.

About a year ago, I was (you know where) For certainty sake, one asked her,
saying, where do you mean? To which another that stood by, said, I think she
means at Morton, was it not? She replied, yea, it was. There I heard a good
man, I believe he is so, he spoke from the spirit, I believe he did: But when I
went unto him (once and again) hoping to receive some comfort from him, in
private: He was to me strange and filent, and his silence at first much
troubled me; but since, I trust my Father which is in Heaven, his mind was to
teach me himself: (that was, by my close studying of good books, and earnest
prayer, thereby he would teach me himself) His mind, in that which I went to a
man, to be resolved in, and thereby he comforted me, and it was that himself
might have all the Glory.

My dear Brothers and Sisters, I love you so well, that I could give you my
heart: I have many good books, and I made many She privately earned some small
matter with her needle (when able) and it was to bestow it in books, as she did
every envy thereof.
shifts (that is according to the flesh) to get them: but never wronged any
person in the least for them.

And I have one paper, written when in much pain, which I shall leave with you.
Think upon that, but mostly think upon the Glorious God, and upon the
preciousness of your own immortal souls, they are more worth than ten thousand
worlds.

I have been much troubled, and I have gone to God, and have received much
comfort, but never had so much joy and comfort in all my life, as when I was (I
think) you know where: Here one asked where? To which another near her said, I
think she means, when she was at Mr. Serles at the Lords Supper. Then she
said, yea it was so: O the joy and comfort that I then received! It was such as
I never had in all my life: I cannot express it: When many others stayed in the
outer rooms and outer Courts (as hinted before) through their cowardliness, and
childishness: with such it is sad: But had I breath for ever, I could not do
enough for my Savior.

I return praises to the, Eternal God, for himself, and for my Savior, and for
the Holy Ghost.

The Lord will cease a little, and refresh me before I go hence, and shall be
here no more. Tho I have but a little breath, yet the Lord can give in more: if
I had none, he can raise me up again. The will of the Lord be done.

Here she breathed a little, and afterward, with an austere countenance, and
her voice altered: she thus proceeded: A Backslider in heart shall be filled
with his own ways: Backsliding is a filthy thing, but a good man shall be
satisfied from within himself, in his heart and conscience, by the Spirit of
God.

God made all things at first, very good, but the best was the living Soul; but
we all sinned, and were good for nothing, but to lie with Devils; then God sent
his Son to redeem his Elect: And I trust I am one of them, but I cannot (as
yet) assure my self; my hope is in the Lord for ever, and ever, I trust in him,
I trust in him, I commit my self to him for ever, and ever, and ever, Amen.

The Lord will give in more Grace, I wait for him, and for him alone.

All that I am, and all that I enjoy, is the Lords.

Hitherto one wrote in shorthand, but not all that she spoke, -- lack
abundance. Here she stopped, whereupon the writer ceased.

A little while after, she spoke again much more, but the pen being laid aside,
and she spoke so fast, and all in short sentences, that none thereof was
written.

Next a Copy of the written Paper aforementioned, of her own composing, which
she had delivered, as her last legacy to her Brothers and Sisters, whom she
obliged by promise to improve to the Glory of God, and the good of their own
souls, and was the last thing that ever she wrote.

But before you have an account thereof, give me leave to premise this request
to the Reader, That in reading he would mind by whom written, (viz:) that he
would mind her sex, age and education: A maid, young and plain: And likewise,
that he would mind for whom designed and intended, (viz.) for her Brothers and
Sisters, of whom there were double the number younger, to those that were elder
than her self; all young.

Considering this, and the intention of her affection toward them, so; let
none naustate at the plainness of the style, or phrase, or if now and then he
find repeated and used the same matter, words, or Texts of Scripture, or
somewhat borrowed from others. Such to whom this plain fare is beneath, may
leave it: Such to whom it affords any savoury relish, let them feed on it, and
improve it.

A Copy of the last things written by Damaris Pearse.
O that I could but win Souls to Christ!

Prove. 11.30.
ALL men by nature are under the power of their sins, Psalm. 51.5. They are
naturally bent to do evil, their hearts are bent after sin and iniquity, and it
is by the convincing, awakening, and sanctifying power of Gods Spirit, that the
hearts of any are changed; And except a man be converted, and born again, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. and Mat. 18.3. Except ye be
converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And become as little children, that is, we must be kind, and loving one to
another, and tender hearted, and we should be humble and lowly in heart; have
mean and low thoughts of our selves; and forget injuries, and pass by wrong
done to us by others: we should forgive our enemies, as we hope for forgiveness
from God: Now we should examine our own hearts, Psalm. 4.4. Commune with your
own heart upon your bed, 1 Cor. 11.28. Whether ever there has been a real
change wrought upon your souls, or no? If the bent of your souls be after sin,
and the pleasing of your flesh, more than for the pleasing of God.

If your hearts be set upon carnal things, to gratify self, and to fulfill the
lust of your flesh, and to love this world more than to love God; then your
case is very sad; but if your great care be to please God, and to eschew evil,
to avoid sin, and to save your souls: then you are the people of God: Do you
study so to walk, as to approve your hearts to God? is your great comfort in
God? is he your portion and treasure? and if your greatest comfort be in the
enjoyment of God, then you are his peculiar people. It is not the forsaking of
some sins, that does make the change in the heart: There are many that do
forsake some sins, such as may disgrace them before men, but they love all sin
in their hearts; why they are as wicked as any; neither is the forsaking of sin
in time of affliction only, the changing of the heart, but the hating of all
sin; the least sin, the most secret sin, the striving against it, and the
forsaking of it, is a sign that there is a change wrought in the Soul.

We should consider the great love of the Great Almighty God toward us poor
miserable sinners, that when we were in a lost condition, and could no way help
our selves; then he sent his beloved Son into the world to deliver us from our
sins, and to give unto us eternal life. John 3.16. and we should consider the
great love of the Lord Jesus Christ toward us: He came down from Heaven, from
the Glory of his Father, and took upon him the nature of man; he satisfied Gods
Justice, in his suffering for our sins, he suffered a most shameful, painful,
and cursed death, even the death of the cross, for sinners, all that should
believe in his name. O now that people would but lay hold on the Lord Jesus
Christ for life and for salvation. He is the only way, the truth and the life;
Joh. 14.6. They that have an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, shall have
eternal life; And then as for all such, if they are sure of nothing here in
this world, yet they are richer than if they had all this world to their
command without him: What shall it profit any man if he shall gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul? Mat. 16.26.

O it is the great desire of my Soul, that people would but turn from their
sins, and give up themselves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and receive him by
faith into their Souls; there was never one Soul that came unto him, and
steadfastly believed on him, that ever he cast away, but they have all eternal
life, it does grieve his heart when sinners will not come unto him that they
may have life, John 5.40.

We may see how he was greived because of the people of Jerusalem, that they
had outlived the day of their visitation, Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come
near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou had known, even
thou, at least, in this thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace! but now
they are hid from thine eyes. We should take care that our hearts be not
hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, Heb. 3.13. We should pray to God that
he would keep us from a seared conscience, and from a hardened heart, and that
he would make us truly sensible of our sins, that we may be humbled, and that
our hearts may be broken for sin, that we may have a godly sorrow upon our
hearts such as works repentance unto salvation never to be repented of, 2
Cor. 7.10.

It does greatly concern us to know whether we are of the number of those that
shall be saved: We know not how soon we shall dye, and depart out of this
world; and if we dye without an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ, it will be
miserable with us to all eternity: we have all of us precious and immortal
souls within our bodies, which must be either saved or damned, must go either
to Heaven, and be glorified with God to all eternity, or go to Hell, and be
tormented with Devils to all eternity.

There is none can express the delight and comfort that the Saints in Heaven do
enjoy, they shall have everlasting rest and peace, Isa. 57.2. and continual joy
in the Lord, Mat. 25.21. They shall have a kingdom, Luke 12.32. and a Crown of
life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him, Jam. 1.12. None here
can tell their blessed state, as it is written; Eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neitherr have entered into the heart of man, the things which God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9. They shall be glorified with God
and Christ to all eternity.

And then on the other way, there is none of us that does know, nor can
conceive, what it is to be damned: O what a dreadful thing damnation is; it is
to be banished for ever from the presence of the glorious God, and to be
tormented with Devils to all eternity, 2 These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power; It is eternal banishment and separation from God, Christ, Angels,
Saints, Heaven: This is the punishment of loss, and the worst of Hell, Mat.
25.41. Then shall he say unto them on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. O terrible,
terrible, to be doomed and sentenced to lie under the wrath and hatred of the
insinitely great and dreadful God for ever and ever, so long as God shall live,
whose being is to eternity; so long as there is a Devil to torment, or to be
tormented, shall their plagues last.

O that people would consider, now while they are here in this world, and
prepare for death: To one of these two places their souls must for ever be: O
that the thoughts of Heaven, and the Torments of Hell, would cause people to
consider and prepare, that they might come safe to this Heaven, and escape this
Hell.

Oh it does greatly grieve me when I do seriously think of it, of the great
number of those which shall be damned, and the small company (in comparison of
them) that shall be saved, Mat. 7.13, 14.

I am a poor weak Creature, and it has pleased the great God to cause
distempers, and weakness, and sickness, to light on my body: These two years
and This was written at least a year and half before she died; and she sickly
two years and a quarter before she wrote it.
quarter; I never having a days health in this time, but very much distemper
and infirmity on my body. Many times I have thought that the Lord had sent the
Messenger of Death, to take me at that time out of this present life, but by
his good hand my life is lengthened unto this present hour. Beside all this, I
have had great trouble and perplexity in Spirit, and mind, which none but God
does know of, which I could never have stood under, had not the Lord
wonderfully supported me, and born me up under it, by his mighty hand.

Now I desire not so much the restoring of my body; for I do think I shall
never have the enjoyment of health more in this world: (tho it is not
impossible with God) But if it were the Lords Will that I should have health
again, I do hope by his help and assistance, to improve it to his praise, and
glory. Tho I have a sinful and corrupt heart within me, yet the Lord is mighty
to save, and help, and succor those that trust, that put their trust in him.
Now the Will of the Lord must be done; and I desire that the Lord would lay no
more on me, than he would enable me to bear with patience, and that he would
comfort me under his afflicting hand, and that all sin, and guilt cleaving to
me, may be fully expiated, and discharged through the blood of Christ, and that
the Lord would give me assurance of his love through Jesus Christ, tho I am a
sinful creature; That I may have true and saving faith to lay hold on the Lord
Jesus Christ for Salvation, that I may never fall away from him. If the Lord
should leave me to my self, then I shall perish eternally; but I trust in the
Lord, and hope that he will pour down his rich and precious mercies on me for
Jesus Christ's sake, that my soul may be truly and perfectly sanctified by his
holy Spirit; and that I may never be lead aside by the devices of Satan, and
the corruption of my heart, and the deceitfulness of this world; but that my
soul may be stablished in righteousness, and confirmed in the end, that I may
be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus Christ; that I may have a sure
interest in the Lord Jesus, then I shall be happy to all eternity. O my desire
is, that however the Lord be pleased to deal with my body, that it may go well
with my Soul to eternity, and that I may have the enjoyment of God through
Christ, for there is nothing else can give real comfort to any Soul. I hope
that the Lord has begun a good work in me, and that he will make it perfect in
the end, and that he will sanctify his dealings toward me, that it may be for
his glory, and my eternal comfort; and I desire that my will may be thoroughly
resigned up into the will of God either for life, or death; and that I may have
much of Gods presence with me, and may always have good thoughts of him, and of
his dealings toward me, in all that he does or shall lay upon me, and that I
may improve all his mercies for his glory, and my eternal comfort; and that
when he is pleased to put an end to this temporal life, that my Soul may be
fitted for Spiritual and eternal life in Jesus Christ.

O now that people would seriously think what shall become of their Souls,
considering how great the multitude is, that go in the broad way that leads
to destruction, and how few there be that enter in at the strait gate that
leads unto life, as Mat. 7.13, 14. We have but a little time to live here in
this world; and that is of very great concernment, that we should make a good
improvement of it; eternity does depend upon it; as we live here, so it will be
with us to eternity: we are now brought upon the Stage of this world, here to
act our parts for a whole eternity; if we make not a wise choice now, we are
undone for ever: What our present choice is, such must our everlasting
condition be, Luke 10.42. Luke 16.25.

Now is your time to repent of your sins, and to make peace with God, it cannot
be done after death; now is the time that Christ is offered unto you; and if
you will not receive him now, you shall never have any part in him hereafter;
now is the day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the time you may be accepted of
by God; and therefore do not stop the mouth of Conscience; for if you do, it
will be the greatest Witness against you hereafter, then it will tare and lash
you, and be a continual torment; For their worm shall not die, neither shall
their fire be quenched, Isa 66.24. If you now refuse the calls of God, your
conscience will continually accuse you hereafter; therefore have a care, do not
refuse to hearken to Gods call, for it you refuse now, you shall never have any
calls nor invitations from God hereafter.

Have you any business, any concern of greater importance to you, than the
concern of your souls and eternity? If you are to appear before some earthly
Judge, especially if it be about a matter that concerns your life: O how
thoughtful are you to have all things ready, and in order, in reference
thereunto: and should not you be as thoughtful and as careful to make all
ready, and to set all right, in order to your appearing before the Judge of all
the earth? and that about a matter which concerns the life of your souls, about
a matter of eternal life, or death? Well, what shall I say? Will you set about
this great business, this great concern? Or is it all one with you, whether you
live or die, are saved or damned to all eternity?

Oh that people would consider how near they are to eternity! How near we are
to our everlasting habitation! You are all going down amain the stream of time,
into the great ocean, and you will shortly come thither.

There is not a step, you step, nor a breath you draw, nor a word you speak,
nor a moment of time you live, but has an influence upon eternity. Oh now that
unconverted sinners would set about this great work to prepare for their souls
and eternity, before they go hence, and be no more in this world! Sinners! will
you set about this great business? Your work is wholly yet to do, tho it may
be, your day far spent, your glass is almost run, your sun near setting, and
all your work to do.

Oh it is high time for you to awake out of your sleep; unless you mean to sleep
the sleep of eternal death.

These golden sands running, will quickly be gone; a short race will soon be
run: O what a nothing is our life! as one may say, a span, a dream, a wind, a
shadow, a vapor, a post, swifter than a post, Job 7.6. You are all going to
your long and last home, to the house of eternity: Every man goes to his long
home, Eccles. 12.5. How does he go? He goes swiftly, always in motion, night
and day, sleeping and waking, laboring, or loitering; this post hastens; time
and tide stays not: Man does not discern, or perceive how his precious time
does fly from him: And we know not how soon all our precious time will be gone
from us; we know not how soon our souls shall be separated from our bodies; We
know not how soon we shall pass into eternity.

And Oh that people would consider which of the two eternities they are going
toward! Oh that they would deeply and seriously consider, that there is one
place for the sheep, and another for the goats, one place for the righteous,
and another for the ungodly; one place for believers, and another for
unbelievers: An eternal night, or eternal day; eternal pains, or eternal
pleasure; eternal happiness, or eternal misery; eternal life, or eternal death;
eternal Heaven, or eternal Hell.

Oh that my dear Brethren and Sisters would truly and sincerely seek after the
welfare of their precious and immortal Souls, now while it is time!

My dear Brethren and Sisters, I have many times had great fears and cares
about your precious Souls; as you are nearest related to me, so you are nearest
to my heart: I could desire that all men would turn from their sins and believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and close with him, that so they may have life and
salvation by him; but my greatest desire is for you, my hearts desire and
prayer to God for you, is, that you might be saved.

My dear Brothers and Sisters, great is the misery of an unregenerate estate;
without regeneration, repentance, conversion and holiness, none can be saved,
and see God, as in John 3.3, 5. and Luke 13.3, 5. Except ye repent ye shall all
likewise perish. And Heb. 12.14. Without holiness there is none shall see the
Lord: and a carnale state, is an estate of death, Romans 8.6. And if ye live
after the flesh ye shall die, ver. 13. And the Apostle says love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world; for if any man love the world,
the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. Know ye not that the
friendship of the world, is enmity with God? Whoseever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is the enemy of God, Jam. 4.4.

Now if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are past away,
behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 15.17. and as many as are led by the
Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14.

Oh that you would consider and meditate upon these, and such like Texts of
Scripture; and try your selves thereby how it is with you. Mr. Joseph Alleins
book of conversion might prove a great help with the Lords assistance and
blessing; and there are many other good books that might prove a help to you
herein, which the Lord direct you unto; and that you may read and consider, and
lay it to heart; and that you would search narrowly into your own hearts, and
the Lord of Heaven grant that his heavenly and spiritual blessing may rest upon
you all.

I have many times desired the Lord for you, that he would cause you to see the
great evil of sin, and to close savingly with Christ, and receive him upon his
own terms, and that you may be regenerated, and born again; that you may be
truly converted unto God, that you may receive forgiveness of sins, and that
your souls may be truly sanctified, that you may all be redeemed by the Blood
of Christ, and may be justified by faith in him, and that the Lord would
sanctify his dealings toward you, that it may be for his glory, and your
good; and that you may live to the praise and glory of God; and be comforted in
him to all eternity.

Oh now that you would give up your selves to God, resign up your selves in
Covenant to him, through Jesus Christ, for ever to be his, to walk in his
ways, to be guided by his laws, to be ruled and directed by him at all times,
that you might never depart from him.

Oh, that you would truly prepare for death and eternity: Make a true
preparation for death, and then you will be in a well set way to live; for till
people are prepared for death, they are not well fit to live.

Oh now you should give up your selves to God by prayer, pray heartily to God,
that he would come in with converting and sanctifying Grace into your souls:
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you, Jam. 4.8 The Lord is very near
to them that call upon him intruth, and will never leave nor forsake such as
put their trust in him. He that neglects prayer, is an unsanctified sinner;
they that neglect prayer, cannot expect the blessing of God, on either soul or
body. All they that are the adopted children of God, they have the spirit of
prayer in them; whosoever is born of God, can in some measure express himself
to God, and cry unto him for pardon of sin, for grace, for peace of conscience,
with earnestness and confidence in God, Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father.

Now this spirit of bondage, and fear, it is the Spirit of God; there is a
spirit of bondage once in all they that are the true people of God, working
fear in them, and afterward it does become a spirit of adoption unto them.
First the Spirit of God does convince people of their sins, it shows them the
evil of sin, and so brings them in fear and bondage, about their sins, and
afterward the Spirit of God does comfort their Souls; people must be convinced
before they be converted; they must be sensible of their sins, and pricked to
the heart, before they will ask what they must do to be saved, Act. 2.37.

And then afterward the Spirit of God does come in with comfort to their
souls; then the Spirit of God causes them to cry Abba Father, that is, to make
their request to God as to a Father. Prayer is a duty that does lie upon all
people, and God does accept weak prayers from his children, if they be sincere:
There are many Hypocrites that can make better prayers, (that can express
themselves in prayer better) than many of Gods chosen ones, but God does reject
them, because they are not sincere, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination to the Lord: but the prayer of the upright is his delight.

We must pray with fervency, and with reverence and confidence: with fervency,
that is, with the earnest defires of our hearts, crying Abba Father: with
reverence, that is, we must reverence and honor God in our hearts, Mal. 1.6.
and Psalm. 89.7. And with considence, that is, we must trust wholly in God
through Christ, Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of faith. Mar. 11.24. We must desire the Lord that he would enable
and help and assist us, to pray aright, and acceptably unto him. Romans 8.26. The
Spirit helps our infirmities, for we cannot pray as we ought. It is against
the light of nature, against reason, for people to neglect to pray unto the God
that made them, and that gives them all their good things. If you cannot well
pray of your selves, the Lord will help you to do it, if you be earnest and
willing; if you be sensible of your sins you will not want words in confession;
if you be sensible of your wants, you will not lack expressions to make them
known: The Scriptures will furnish you with expressions and matter, if you
read, and study, and mind them; if you can groan and cry for Christ and Grace,
the Lord will hear and help you: We have all great need to pray to God for
pardon of our sins; for we are often defiled with sin; and we have often need
to pray to God for the pardon and purging away of our sins, and for the
sanctifying of our Souls; and it is a great privilege that we have a God and
Father to pray unto; and that will hear us when we call upon him.

Now we should lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset
us, Heb. 12.1. Sin will quickly beset us, if we have not a special care to
resist and strive against it.

And we must resolve upon sufferings for Christ, if called thereunto: He that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved, Mat. 24.13. All that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution; and tho affliction be heavy,
yet it will work a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. Rev. 3.21. Joh. 16.33. Romans 8.17, 18. If we suffer with him, we shall be
glorified with him.

And we must persevere, and hold out in the ways of God, unto our lives end: we
must be steadfast and unmovable, and ever abounding in the work of the Lord,
knowing that our labor is not in vain in the Lord.

I would have enlarged more, but am prevented for want of It being on a single
sheet, thick and close, written on both sides.
space.

My dear Brothers and Sisters, I commend you to God; and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to convert and build you up, and give you an inheritance
among them that are sanctified. Now the God of peace, that brought again from
the dead our Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of
the everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be Glory for ever, and ever, Amen. Heb. 13.20, 21.

I desire that what I have here written, may tend to the Glory of God, and your
souls good and comfort.

Your Affectionate Sister, Damaris Pearse.
1678.
Some of her expressions in her last Sickness.
Some of the pious expressions of Damaris Pearse occasionally uttered after she
was confined to her bed; many of them spoken when she was in so very great pain
that it was difficult for her to speak intelligibly; with some observations on
them, and concerning her, worth minding.
FOR some few days, after she kept her bed, she would often breathe out, O
spare me a little before I go hence, and be no more.

The two first days, she had two or three extreme sharp Paroxisms.
fits or agonies so sharp that the like were never seen by any then present:
She had some sense of their approach; for immediately before they came, she
would have all in the room to pray to God for her, that, that bitter crp might
pass; and so again, and again, every time: after the first Paroxisme
fit was past, she said, This is not the last, I shall have more, but none so
bad, as that, that is past; and so it was, and these Paroxisms
fits on her, continued just so long, as there was (then It may be Satan (the
grand enemy of prayer) was permitted then more than at other times, to have
some agency therein, to make disturbance, and to shorten that exercise, and to
dissuade and discourage from the like afterward.
) praying for her.

And in regard she used one phrase every time, she would have others pray for
her; which was, that that bitter cup might pass; one that stood by, asked her,
what she meant thereby; she replied, The Cup of Gods Wrath, which in that
agony, she apprehended and felt in her Soul.

And a few days after, she again declared, that it was not to be expressed,
what therein she suffered, that she felt the very wrath of God; but even
therein the Lord (said she) upheld me; and since has given me a Prospest, and
a view of the Glory of Heaven.

And some time after she kept her bed; speaking of the many experiences that
she had had; sometimes, how sad it had been with her when under apprehension of
Gods displeasure for sin; but within a short while after, God did refresh and
comfort her, even with unspeakeable joy; but never so much at any one time, as
since confined to her bed.

She would often advise those that visited her, and those that watched by her,
in their health to mind their latter end, and to prapare for it, and eternity;
which they were (as she said) hastening and nigh unto; and sent such messages to
some others that had enquired for her; whom she had not seen a long time; as by
a near M. C.
Relation, to those at her home; go (said she) tell all the wicked ones in your
house, that they prepared for a long eternity, often repeating it, and
chargingher so to do.

The like she charged another I. P.
neighbor then present to tell a near V. T. P.
Relation and his Family.

And the same charge she gave a M. W.
third, to tell another V. I. W.
Relation and his family; yea she charged all (almost) that came into her
presence to mind eternity, and to keep good consciences, and to consider how
time was hastening away making improvement of every thing she saw or heard, and
desired others to do the like, and all to stir up to prepare for eternity. She
would be speaking either some sentence of Scripture, or some other good words,
that were very suitable to such as were present, or suitable to what was
mentioned occasionally in her hearing; urging to do good, to repent and to
prepare for death.

To one that is a rich Heiress, she spoke somewhat long unto: Thus; Those that
are rich (said she) have a great privilege for the advantage of there Souls, and
to do good, before others that are poor: but yet (said she) the poorest person
that is, tho he have not clothes to his back, if he have Grace, is in a
thousand times better condition, than the richest man that lives; for God has
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, Heirs of the Kingdom; whereas you
know that the rich man (in the Gospel) when his goods increased, he enlarged
his barns, and he thought he had laid up for many years; and thereupon bid his
Soul take its ease, saying, eat, drink, and be merry; but God said unto him,
Thou fool, This night thy Soul shall be required of thee; then whose shall
these things be which thou have provided? He thought himself rich, but God
accounted him a miserable fool.

O that such would remember what Christ said, when he beheld Jerusalem and wept
over it, O that thou had known, even thou, at least in this day, the things
which belong unto thy peace! O that such would mind this, before peace be hid
from their eyes! For then it will be sad with them, notwithstanding all their
riches; with much more, spoken then to the like purpose.

To F. P.
one that visited her; at her farewell, she spoke thus, Remember you must
shortly appear before the Great Judge of all the world.

Once when several young I and V. A and T. O and I. VV
folk (that were related) visited her: After some little discourse, she held up
her arm, (which was then very lean and small, her flesh being much wasted:)
This (said she) was once full and prosperous; look upon it, and while your
bones are full of marrow, and you have strength, improve it for God, and
prepare for eternity. Much more she spoke unto them.

To others (she said) There is a pretty little Text, thus she often called it,
before she expressed it; afterward she said, It is this; Take ye heed, watch and
pray, for ye know not when the time is; Is it not a very good one? and will you
remember it?

Concerning her improving of what she heard and saw: Once hearing a little
Sister sent down on an errand, and bid make haste; said she, Why so hasty with
the little one? but yet remember, not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord: chiefly mind this latter, and yet forget not the former.

Another time hearing one of the little ones, in a morning, mentioning meat,
and bread, O said she,

The living bread is he on high,
That down from Heaven came,
And he shall live, and never die
That eats of the same.
Next of her improvement of the shining of the Sun, and its Shadow, passing
round the Bed-post, in the forenoon on one side, in the afternoon on the other
side thereof; O said she, look and consider how the shadow, that a few hours
since, was on that side the bed, now is on this side; it should mind you how
time hastens away; So by the motion of the Clock (although the striking weight was
taken off many months before she kept her bed, she not being able to bear the
noise thereof) every motion thereof (said she) should mind us how time passes;
yea every breath you draw, you have one breath less to draw, and one breath
nearer eternity than before. O mind these things, and learn thereby to prepare
for eternity.

And so concerning her own sickness and pain, some weeks after she kept bed,
she would often speak it with abundance of confidence, when in extremity of
pain, that it was not for her own sake, that she was continued so long in such
torturing pain; but for your sakes (said she) to those then present, and for
the sake of all that visit me, and all round about that know me, or that shall
hereafter hear of me, and of my sickness, that you and they all may by me be
warned to make preparation for eternity, while in your health and strength,
before sickness and pain seize on you; for then it is no sit time or case to
prepare for death and eternity; how unsit am I now to prepare for death and
eternity, were it not done before? Of such like improvements made by her, you
may have more anon.

Being heard often say, I hope in God, and I trust in God, and the Lord is my
Portion, says my Soul, therefore will I hope in him; and sometimes the same as
in the Hymn, Thus,

The Lords my Portion says my Soul,
Therefore my hopes on him shall roll.
Whereupon one asked her, if she knew how long since it was, that she set her
heart wholly to seek, and serve the Lord? There was no reply then from her, she
not being able to speak (for so it was with her sometimes, near a whole day
together) but a while after, tho with much difficulty, she spoke, saying, As
near as I can remember, it was about four years and half since that I really
and heartily in a solemn Covenant gave my self to God, and about three quarters
of a year afterward, I renewed and confirmed it before many others, meaning at
the Lords Supper, as she afterward more fully expressed her self.

She would much bemoan, and lament her unserviceableness to God, when sick on
her bed; after this manner, Here I lie, idle, and can do nothing for God, I
cannot pray, or read, or do any thing for God, but (said she) as it was said to
Samuel, when sent to anoint one of Jesses sons; Man looks on the outward
appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart; and the Lord says, My Son give
me thy heart: The heart the Lord requires, and the heart the Lord accepts,
and I have given up my heart wholly to the Lord, and to him only, and the Lord
has accepted of it.

Concerning her endowments, and seize, besides her great shill in, and
her ingenious dexterity, ready invention, quick dispatch, and curious putting
out of hand, the choicest sort of needleworks and most other kinds of fine
works, such as young women often are exercised in; whether with silk, thread,
or other materials, so great variety, and plenty, and so excellently done, as
is scarce credible of one so young, as when by her made, and finished; and as
in these, so she was skilled in writing (right spelling) reading, and of good
understanding, and all learnt by little instruction.

But besides all these, Of her Gifts and Graces.
she was richly endowed with choice gifts, and graces, as to instance in some,

She was endowed with an excellent retentive Memory, 1. Of her Memory.
as appeared not only by the many score Chapters and Psalms, both reading and
singing, and spiritual Hymns, (and other Verses) that she had read, and heard,
and retained in her memory; but chiefly in this, while in health, it was for
several years her constant practice Lords days to hear, but not write; and tho
three miles distant from where she lived, and she still walked it when very
young, which made her weary at night, yet next day she did in a very legible
hand write most part of both Sermons, that she had heard the day before, both
matter, and method as delivered, of which there are great multitudes left.

From this store house of her Memory, as strength permitted, and occasion was
offered, she spoke many choice sentences of Scripture, and now and then, a
verse or two of Psalms, or Hymns, in which while in health, she much delighted,
and did even abound in; but after on her bed, not able to speak, passing one or
two at a time: She would often breathe forth this,

'Farewel vain world as thou have been to me:
'Dust and a Shadow, those I leave with thee.
She likewise spoke these following, at several times.

'Muse often upon thy latter end,
'The thoughts of death will make thee mend.
'Account'st thou death a dreadful thing,
'Which has by Christ now lost its sting.
'Glad are the Saints, dissolved to be,
'To live with Christ, his face to see.
'Vanquished death I wish were nigh,
'It ends a Christians misery.
'Exceeding welcome death's to me,
'Death will I meet, I will not flee.
'Quiet thy self, thy day of death
'Excels that hour thou first tookst breath.
'That deadly foe, last foe of all,
'At last shall have a deadly fall.
Presently after she spoke this verse, she smiled, and said, It shortly shall
be so with reference to me. Another time thus,

'Each morning brings a fresh record,
'Great is thy faithfulness, O Lord.
'Rouze up thy sluggish Soul O man,
'When first awake thou art,
'O then let God, and his concerns,
'Be next unto thy heart.
Great noise was a great disturbance to her, which yet was her lot many times
to hear, and suffer; and O that it might not be laid to the charge of those
that wilfully caused it: Once upon such an occasion, she ceased from what she
was speaking, I shall omit the circumstances, which made that which she
forthwith said, the more suitable; it was thus,

'He well may quake, and fear to die,
'That in his filthy sins does lie.
Once speaking of the misery of mankind by nature, and of the blessedness of
those, whose sin is pardoned; she said thus,

'I do confess that I received
'My very shape in sin,
'In it my mother me conceived,
'And brought me forth therein.
'O blessed is the man to whom
'Are freely pardoned,
'All the transgressions he has done,
'Whose Sin is covered.
To some that stood by, she said,

'Think upon God, and thy poor soul,
'And Christ's appearance, when
'The Graves must open, dead must rise,
'And whose shall thou be then?
Yea to every word she heard, or action she saw, she would have either a verse
or sentence of Scripture suitable. Once being troubled at the idle talk of one
present, that after many requests would not desist; she thus said, He that
being often reproved, hardneth his heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without remedy.

Another time, when a person of quality visited her, her head-clothes not
having been righted for some time, because of her weakness, some of her hair
was come out, whereupon as she was able with her hand, she said it aside, but
(said she) God has not respect to the outward dress, and adorning, but to that
which is on the hidden man of the heart.

She had great Zeal for God, Of her hatred of sin.
and hatred against sin, as appeared by several expressions.

One time hearing a little sister cry out, (O Lord) she was exceedingly grieved
that Gods name was taken in vain. Another time the binder of her Issue being
loosed on a Lords day evening; as soon as it was known, one that was with her,
righted and new bound it, but was longer about it than she was willing,
whereupon she was much troubled, that being so near eterniey, any part of the *
Not that she was against the works of mercy on the Lords day, but she then
apprehended her self at the very point of her departure, and did so wholly fix
her thoughts on God and Christ, that she wouldnvt therein be interrupteed; yet
she a little revived again, and lived a few weehs afterward.
Lords day (tho it was then almost gone) should be spent about her flesh; and
(said she) I repent it heartily, and do you pray that God would pardon it.

She would often beg of her sisters, and mostly of her that most attended her,
to take heed of sin, and of evil company, and would have her promise no more to
keep company with such an one (naming one) for (said she) she has been, and I
fear yet is exceedingly wicked; therefore beware of her company: And likewise
take heed of some others that you know, for as Paul said, Grievous wolves shall
enter in among you, not sparing the stock; so now of and from among your
selves, (that is of those that are near you) shall some arise, speaking
perverse things, to draw away others after them: therefore watch.

Another time hearing of some great disorder of others; and indeed it was so
bad, as is not fit to be mentioned among Christians: O (said she) I am grieved,
and troubled for them, at my very heart, because of their sin, and wickedness
and provocation of the holy God; Mine eyes are ready to run down rivers of
tears, because men keep not thy law; but I can do them no good.

At another time thus, O it grieveth, it exceedingly grieveth me to think how
many souls will be damned, how many will be turned on the left hand among the
goats, that now will not be reclaimed; but I must quiet my self, for I am not
in a capacity to help them.

Before she was sick, she had a great detestation of sin, and would much grieve
for such as she saw and heard of; but much more afterward.

Concerning her knowledge in Scripture, and in the things of God, it was much
for one of her sex, so young; and yet her self-denial, humility, and
self-abasement, was even wonderful.

As for her knowledge, Of her Knowledge.
it is evident by what may be collected from the whole of what she spoke and
wrote, that it was great, both in Scripture, and by experience, not only in the
letter, and text of Scripture, but also in the sense thereof. When she had any
ease, she would run over (continuing the space of two or three hours together)
either the History of some whole book in the Bible, or some eminent story or
transaction contained therein, and hint at some notable observations by the
way: Once she talked. long concerning the Israelites bondage in Egypt, and
miraculous deliverance from thence, and their passage through the Red Sea, and
preservation, and supportment in the wilderness, and safe conduct into Canaan:
As she proceeded, besides other hints, she made some observation on Aarons
making the Molten Calf, both condemning the sin, and likewise showing how
people now living should improve it, that it should teach all to be watchful
against sin, not only inferiors, but also those in high place and dignity:
Considering what Aaron was, and yet how grievously he sinned: Likewise she then
spoke several things concerning Moses his Zeal for God, his indignation against
their sin, in his breaking the Tables of Stone, tho the Law was newly engraven
thereon by God himself, and in his burning and breaking the Calf which they had
made, and likewise she spoke concerning his earnest intercession and request to
God for the people.

Sometimes she ran over some of the Psalms, and said such a Psalm or such a
Text (last night) was much in her thoughts, and that she could rehearse much of
her meditation thereon; but (said she) 'I want strength to speak. One morning
she instanced in the 73. Psalm, and gave an account of most verses in it, with
some short hints on several of them, with reference mostly to her self,
concerning her sickness and her resting and trusting in God, and waiting for
him, etc.

Sometimes she would speak, either on some grace or other, or on some point or
head in Divinity; as once concerning the Love of God, breaking out into
admiration thereof, even of Gods love to makind in general, as in Gods sparing,
and forbearing them, in and after so much sinning and provocation, and in Gods
bounty toward them, in affording and continuing such plenty of outward
blessings of this world, and abundantly more to some, to wit, the offers of
Christ in the Gospel.

This was (said she) Gods general love, his love of good will, as she
distinguished and expressed it; and herein said she) God is wonderful, and I
cannot but admire it: But then as for Gods love of delight, that is only in and
through Christ, to his Elect. O (said she) I cannot speak or think thereof, but
with ravishing admiration, saying, it was an infinite, inexpressible matchless
love.

Indeed all that was done or spoken by her, did manifest her great knowledge.

Then concerning her Humility, Of her Humility.
and self-abasement, she would be much, and often speaking (both while on her
legs, and after she kept her bed) what a poor worm, and what a little clod of
dust she was, and that she was vile, and unworthy of the least mercy, less than
nothing, yea I am nothing, nothing, nothing to the Lord.

Her modesty and bashfulness made her very spare in speaking before others
(while in health) but after sick on her bed, she acknowledged it had been her
fault, But now (said she) when my pain does a little cease, and as my breath
does continue, I shall not forbear to speak, tho it were in the presence of the
greatest, and the learned men that are; for I am sull, but I want strength,
yet had I more, I could not do enough for my God.

Concerning some other Graces, Of some other Graces in her.
(to wit) her Faith, Love, Hope, Patience, and some others that she was endowed
with; it was observable, that these were in her before, but they were very
remarkably increased and strengthened after she kept her bed.

For, 1. Of her Faith.
first Concerning her Faith, She (would often say (as hinted before) I trust in
God, I trust, I trust, (often repeating it, and then add), and that is pretty
much for such a poor worm as I am; but it was a long while before she spoke any
thing of her assurance, which made some that were often present, the more
longing to hear somewhat from her of that nature: At last she spoke freely of
her confident assurance of Gods love, and of her own Salvation.

Whereupon one asked her, (saying) Have you that assurance? She replied with a
stern countenance, Do you think I speak by rote, and at random, or that I would
say it, if it were not so, and will you not believe me?

Another time being grieved that so many were sinning away their Souls to
destruction, but (said she) tho there be so many go to Hell, yet there are many
thousands that shall go to Heaven notwithstanding: Yea the multitude thereof
shall be so great as no man can number; read the 7th of Revelations (said she)
to one present and when she heard of the many thousands that were sealed, and
afterward of that innumerable multitude that stood before the Lamb in White
Robes, etc. She with much confidence and rejoicing said, And I shall go there
too, and be one of them. And this shall rest in hope, pointing with her finger
at her flesh.

Her love was carried out into a restless longing after God, 2d. Of her Love,
and 3d. of her Hope.
and Christ, and her hope into an earnest expectation manifested by such
expressions, as proceeded from, and do testify she had assurance; as these and
the like. Sometimes she would often breathe forth, how exceedingly she did long
for the General The guilty cannot desire the coming of the Judge.
Judgment. At other times, thus, I long, I long, I exceedingly long, I cannot
express how much I long for the appearance of Jesus Christ. And once she said
the whole verse of Psalm. 42.2. and often would breathe out the latter part;
thus, when shall I come and appear before God?

Her Patience was wonderful, 4th. Of her Patience.
and admired by all that were present in her sickness: for tho there had not a
day past for some years, in which she suffered not much pain; she was very
sick, and full of pain for more than twenty weeks before she kept her bed; and
afterward in extremity of pain; and before she died, in continuance during the
space of more than seven days and nights, she was as if tortured upon a Rack,
and her flesh, and bones, and bowels had been torn asunder, as she thought, and
sometime asked, if it were not torn? yet never an impatient word in all, but
would often say, Yet God is good, and I have deserved many times more, and
worse; and that the worst thereof was not so bad as Hell: And once in the
highest extremity of pain, she said, Though the Lord tare me in small pieces,
yet will I trust in him. And often thus, Though I have deserved more, yet I
know it is not for mine own sake I thus suffer, but that others hereby may
learn in health to prepare for Death.

Her joy and rejoicing in the Lord, 5th. Of her Joy.
was no less-observable: she would sometimes (when in much pain) smile, and
once she laughed; it being asked her, What is the matter? O (said she) Satan
shall be trod underfoot shortly, and shall never more have any thing to say, or
do against me: and I cannot but rejoice at the thoughts thereof.

Her Thankfulness both to God, and Man, 6th. Of her Thankfulness.
she would be much in expressing. Often thanking God for her Being, Life, and
Livelihood; from whom primarily she received it: but mostly for himself, his
Christ, and Grace to her. At other times thanking her Parents, acknowledging,
that next to God, she derived her Being from them; she thanked them also for
her Maintenance; she thanked those that Watched with, and attended her. And
once when a Reverend Minister visited her, (whom she often heard, and from whom
she sometimes received the Lord's Supper, when able to go) though at this time
very weak, and much faultered in her speech; yet when she saw him, she stirred
up her self with much difficulty, and forcing her self to speak, said, I
heartily, heartily, heartily thank you; and I thank God for you, for all the
good I have received by your means: With many other good words she spoke to
him. She was restless in desiring the Prayers of godly Ministers and People:
And if at any time she felt the least abatement of her pain, she would
forthwith say to those present, 'Go praise God for this.

Her Holy Care for the Spiritual and Soulgood, Of her Holy Care.
both of Relations, and others, she much evidenced; Partly in her speech on her
bed, (of which before) and in her Written Paper, she had delivered to her
Brothers and Sisters, with a charge given by her, and taking a promise from
them (they jointly receiving it) of making improvement thereof to the Glory of
God, and the good of their own Souls. And partly, in her suitable distribution
of some choice Books that she had; with the same charge given to, and promise
taken from those that were present: and some Books she gave to others at a
remote distance; whom she willed might have the like charge when the Books were
delivered them. And (said she) tell such an one, (naming one) that I thought
she had had more care of her Soul before of late, when she and I were some days
and nights in one house together: but then I observed, that which since has
made me afraid of her, and have shed many tears in seeking God for her.

The like she said she had done for one of her Brothers, with hopes that God
would hear her prayers for him. And partly, in her constant minding others to
prepare for Death and Eternity, as has somewhat been hinted before, and
likewise several other instances thereof might be given.

Two days before she died, she charged one of her near M. W.
Relation; and one of her Sisters that was present, to be witness, and to mind
her of it, (though very badly able to speak) That Christ came to Redeem
sinners; and to seek and save that which was lost. Will you remember it, and
believe it? and cost your self upon him, for Salvation? many other good words,
worth observing were spoken by her.

For some days before she died, she would often say, I had wont to say, (since
on my bed) O spare me a little before I go hence, etc. but now I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. And O when shall I appear before God? and yet
not because of my pain, but I long to know more of the affairs of the Kingdom
of Heaven: for I know very little thereof while here. At another time Thus: O
what an astonishing admiration will it be at first, when I come to Heaven, to
be in the immediate presence of God, and Christ, and of such an innumerable
company of Blessed Angels, and Glorified Saints!

Once she spoke somewhat long, what her Persuasion was concerning the
Nonconforming Ministers; which I shall here omit.

For more than Six weeks after she first kept her bed, she took nothing within
her Lips, but now and then a spoonful of Sack, which gave her occasion thus to
speak; Here I take a little Wine to do me good; but woe to them that drink up
whole Bowls thereof, and that follow strong drink until night, till Wine
inflame them.

She would often be speaking of God's Presence with her, and admiring God's
goodness in providing for her; saying, I see God and his goodness every day
present in this Room; yea, within these Curtains: I see his holy Angels here
present (round about me) for my good; they are Ministering Spirits for me, and
are always present, for God takes care for me, and sends them to be helpful to
me, in bringing every drop of Liquor I receive; and in helping me to receive
it, and in every breath I draw: O the goodness of the great God, in coming down
to help such a poor worm as I am!

On a time when she had often repeated a Verse of Scripture, one that was
present, asked whether she did intend, and desire that it should be Preached
upon after her Death? No (said she) it matters not to me, whether there be any
Preaching upon that occasion, or not: but my desire is, that it may be Preached
home here (pointing toward her heart) on mine, and your hearts.

After my departure, said she, then say, No sighs nor groans from her do come,
But Everlasting Joys are in the room.


Another time thus, Coffin this Corpse, and lay't in Grave,
A Glorious Rising it shall have.


She would often say some one (or part of one) of Barton's Hymns; but mostly,
Hymn the 49th. against love of the World; and the 69th. concerning Redeeming of
Time; both of the first Cent. Some Verse of a Psalm, or Hymn, or
Scripture-sentence she would say, when able to speak.

About the middle of the time of her keeping Bed (having a little ease) one
present was hoping she might Recover again; and that shortly she should see her
up again in that Chair, pointing to one in the Room.

O no, (she replied) I am pressing on toward the Mark, etc. and that would be
a drawing back; and I would rather go on to be with Christ, than go back, if it
were to enjoy thousands of Gold and Silver: therefore do not you tell me of
that which will draw back, now I am so earnestly pressing on.

Once seeing one whom she dearly affected, pensive and sorrowful: said she,
Those that depart from Iniquity, shall undergo many Reproaches: it being the
very case of the Person to whom it was spoken.

Toward the latter end of her Sickness, she would often breathe forth, Saying,
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: and O how I long to be with thee, that I may
know how it is there!

And in her last Night, and but a little while before she Departed, when her
Speech was almost gone, it was very little, and low, and could hardly be
understood; she said,

O Lord God, King of Heaven and Earth, how dearly do I love thee! I love thee,
I love thee, I love thee: often repeating it; those that watched, think it was
more than twenty times.

She gave a Solemn farewell to her Parents, Brothers, Sisters, and Friends, and
Acquaintance, and to those that Watched, and to several others that visited her.

These were some, and but some of the Gracious Speeches uttered by her, after
she kept her Bed.

And though there has been this Collection thereof, (before mentioned) yet
they are not here set down in that order, as to time, in which they were by her
spoken.

She spoke them as occasion was offered, and she able to speak: but here many
of them are placed under several Heads, to bring them into some order.

Now concerning the whole, it may be said: These are the fragments that remain;
had there been that provident care (as enjoined in another case) to gather up
all, that nothing thereof had been lost, the Collection would have been much
greater and better: such as it is, the Lord bless to the Spiritual advantage of
all those that shall peruse it.

PSALM. 42.1, 2. 1. As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my
Soul after thee, O God.

2. My Soul thirsts for God for the living God; when shall I come and appear
before God?


THE Words that I have now read unto you, were often in the mouth, and repeated
by our deceased Friend (and now Blessed Saint in Heaven) in the time of her
sickness: And I was desired by her dear Relation to treat on them at this time,
which is the occasion of my turning aside from my former Subject.

This Psalm, as is conceived by Commentators, was penned by David, (tho it has
not his inscription upon it, as many others have not) when he was driven from
the Sanctuary, and public Worship of God, by Absaloms Rebellion, or which is
more probable, by Saul's Persecution, who hunted him from place to place, and
pursued him as a Partridg upon the Mountains, as he himself does complain, 1 Samuel 26.20.

The Title of the Psalm is Maschil, commending the Doctrine of the Psalm as
useful and necessary to instruct the Godly how to carry themselves under his
grievous cross of banishment from the ordinances.

In the first Verse, we have David's earnest longing and ardent desires after
God, set forth by the similitude of an Heart or Stag, As the Heart pants after
the Waterbrooks, so panieth my soul after thee, O God.

In the second Verse here is a repetition of the same, desires under other
expressions which amount to the same. It Is usual with those that have their
affections set upon any thing in an importunate way, as the thing is in their
hearts and thoughts, so in their mouths: Thus it was with David here, My soul
thirsts for God, for the living God; when shall I come and appear before God?

Tho these verses may assord us many useful instructions if we should take
abroad the Words in the Particulars; but because I shall not have time to
insist on them, I shall comprehend all in this point, which is the main of the
Verses.

Doct. That the affections, and longings, and desires of the people of God
after God, are very vehement, ardent, and importunate: As the Heart pants
after the Waterbrooks, so pants my soul after God, and so in other places,
as Psalm. 84.2. My soul longs, yea faints for the Courts of the Lord: My
heart and my flesh cries out for the Living God, Psalm 86.4. Rejoice the soul
of thy servant, for unto thee, (O Lord) do I lift up my soul, Psalm. 119.20. My
soul breaks for the longing that it has unto thy judgments at all times,
Psalm. 143.6. I stretch forth my hand unto thee, my soul thirsts after thee,
as a thirsty land, so the Church Isa. 26.8. The desire of our soul is to thy
name. This is the temper and disposition of Gods people, to long after God.

In the prosecution of this point, I shall observe this method, 1. To show the
Qualities or Conditions of these longings and desires that the people of God
have after God. 2. The Reasons why their affections and desires are so carried
out after God. 3. Wherein they chiefly long after God, and pant to appear
before him.

1. The Qualities of these longings in the people of God after God, are
vehement and earnest: We say that hunger and thirst, are the strongest of
natural appetites, for by them our nature puts out all her strength for
preservation, when it is extremely straightened: Thus the people of God desire God
vehemently, their desires are not flat, languid, cold wishes, but high, strong
and fervent: As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks; Nothing can satisfy
him but water: So Gods people are vehemently carried out after God, With my
whole Heart have I sought thee, Psalm. 119.10.

2. The desires of the people of God after God are constant, which are not
taken away till satisfied, as you know thirst is; and it must needs be so that
Gods people do continually thirst after God, because they never fully enjoy God
in this life: They taste of God here, and are made partakers of some sweetness
in him, and this does the more enlarge their spirits after him: The desires of
Gods people after God are fixed, settled, constant, they will and do continue
until they come fully to enjoy God.

3. There is an holy impatiency in these longings and desires. We read Exodus
17.2, 3. that the people of Israel thirsted for water, and they murmured and
said to Moses, Wherefore is this, that thou have brought us forth out of the
land of Egypt to kill us, and our children, and our cattle with thirst? Gods
people cannot well bear the absence of God: They say as Rachel Genesis 30.1. Give
me children, or else I die; Oh, give us thy favor, or else we cannot live, thy
favor is life, yea better than life, Psalm. 63.3.

4. The desires of Gods people after God, are accompanied with diligent
endeavors: You know that in thirst there are diligent endeavors: The man that
is athirst cries out for drink, and runs for water, Jer. 14.3. The Nobles sent
their little ones to the waters, they came to the pits, and found no water. He
that is a thirst runs up and down, digs in one place, and tries in another,
that he may find water to refresh him; so it is with the people of God in their
desires after God: They are complaining, and acting, and laboring, and trying
at every pit, at every well, at every ordinance; They will pray, and hear, and
read, they are at every pool, they are in every way of God, if so be at length
they may meet with and enjoy God, Cant. 3.1, 2. Says the spouse, I sought him
whom my soul loves, I sought him, but I found him not, I will rise now, and go
about the city in the streets, and in the broad ways: I will seek him whom my
soul loves.

The second thing to be spoken to, is the reason why the affections and desires
of Gods people are thus carried out after God; and the reason is this, because
God has given them wisdom to understand, and believe that their happiness
consists in the enjoyment of God: Every one has a strong propensity toward
that in which he places his felicity, whether supposed or real: Gods people
know, that it can never be well with them, till they have a right and interest
in God, and enjoy communion with him: They know that God is first an
all-sufficient good, that can secure them against all evil, therefore compared
to such things as shelter persons in danger, as to a shield, Genesis 15.1. Wall of
fire, Zech. 2.5. And that he can fill them with all good, being the God of all
grace, and in whom are all the treasures of Heaven and Earth, and infinitely
more, the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. the God of peace, that fills with all
joy, Romans 15.13. 2. They know further, that God is a proportionable, suitable
good: They know that nothing can give true comfort but that which has a
relation, and bears a proportion to their souls, and to all the exigences of
it: Now God is the only suitable good: He is suitable to all their wants and
necessities, he is an object every way for kind and quality suitable and
commensurate to all their cases and conditions. A man that is thirsty, finds
his stomach craving, the veins do suck and pull, and draw for cooling and
moistning; now give this person Company, Music, Silver, Gold, yet here is no
sati action, for these are not suitable to his condition, still he thirsts; but
give him drink, and then it is well with him; so it is with the souls of Gods
people, they are full of cravings and longings, give them the profits and
pleasures of the world, these do not abate their desires, for these do not
answer the souls nature, and therefore cannot answer its necessities; but let
them enjoy God, this is a proportionable suitable good, and this satisfies, and
therefore it is that Gods people do so long after God. 3. They know God is a
permanent good, and therefore that he alone can make them happy: The soul can
enjoy no perfection of happiness, if it be not commensurate to its own
duration: Gods people understand this, and believe this, that God only is an
indeficient, a never-failing good, a fountain that can never be drawn dry, a
treasure never to be emptied, one whose perfections never leave himself, and
one who never leaves any that ever truly enjoyed him. 4. They know, that though
God be never so perfect, suitable and sure good, yet it is no comfort to them,
unless they have an Interest in him. That which must make them truly happy,
must be a propriety in God, that they may be able to say with the Church, Psalm.
48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever. And Psalm. 67.6. God, even our own
God, shall bless us. They know that this Pronoun our is as much worth to their
Souls as the boundless God; all is wrapped up in this Propriety. Luther has a
saying, Much Religion lies in Pronouns: Truly, all the Consolation of Saints
lies in this Pronoun, our God; the all of Believers depend on this; therefore
it is observable, How David does roll this as a lump of Sugar under his Tongue,
as one loath to lose the sweet savor of it too soon, Psalm. 18.1, 2. I love
thee O Lord my strength. The Lord is my rock and my fortress, and my deliverer,
my God, and my strength, my buckler, the horn of my salvation, and my high
tower. This Pronoun My and Our, is the door at which the King of Saints enters
into our hearts with his whole train of delights and comforts: and therefore it
is, that the desires of God's people are so much carried out after God. Before
I speak to the third Particular in my proposed Method, I shall make some
Improvement of what already has been spoken.

Use 1. If this be the Character of God's People, thus earnestly to long after
God; Hence we may see the difference that is between Gods People, and the Men
of the world; They (as you have heard) have vehement ardent longings after God;
But these have their affections, thoughts, longings, desires after the thing of
the World; Ease, Pleasure, Wealth, Honors and the like: There is nothing that
they desire, and which they think worthy the pursuing of, but only these
things, God is not in all their thoughts, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 10.4.
They are thirsty for worldly things; they cry out, as Psalm. 4.6. Who will show
us any good? The way to be rich and great in the world. Whence is this? I
conceive upon a double account. 1. The men of the world know no other good than
that which the world affords: It is as true, as a common observation, Ignoti
nulla cupido, The good which is not known, is not desired: before any thing
raises the Affection, it must first touch the apprehension, it must begin
there: Now the apprehension of the most are very low, and confined in this
particular. They think there is no other happiness than the enjoyment of these
outward things; and therefore they desire, and endeavor no other. Solomon has
expressed it well to us, speaking (as it is conceived) in the person of an
Epicure, and worldly man, Eccles. 2.24. There is nothing better for a man, than
that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in
his labor; and Eccles. 8.15. Nothing better under the sun, than to eat, drink,
and be merry: Here is the heaven of a Worldly person; and because he knows no
other, therefore he desires no other: if thou knowect the gift of God, and who
it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him,
and he would have given thee living water, says our Savior to the Woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4.10. Therefore she did not ask for it, because she knew it not;
and so it is likewise with all others besides. They knew no better than Carnal
things and therefore desire no other. 2. As it proceeds from want of knowledge
of God, so it likewise proceeds from want of relish and savor of the things of
God: though some may in some general confused manner apprehend, that the
enjoyment of God is the best happiness, yet they have not any Spiritual relish
of the sweet streams of Grace that flow from him, from whence they might desire
him. They have no such Principles in them, as to close and comply with God. The
Apostle speaking of himself, and all believers, says, 1 Cor. 2.12. We have not
received the spirit of the World, but the spirit which is of God; that we might
know the things that are freely given to us of God. You see here, it is for the
Spirit of God; and this Spirit received by us, and in us, that we know the
things of God, and this is opposite to the spirit of the world which savours
only the things of the world. This is a sure rule, that men's desires do
partake of their dispositions; look what the men themselves are, such are the
desires that issues from them; as our Savior speaks to the Jews, Joh. 8.23. Ye
are from beneath, I am from above; ye are of this world, I am not of this
world: And what does he infer from it? even this, that therefore there were
different and contrary desires in them from himself; because they were of the
World, therefore they minded only Worldly Matters, and things from below. And
so it is with all others besides: they have Worldly, Earthly, Unsavory
dispositions in them; and therefore they desire no other things than such as
may be suitable to them: Oh that people would bethink themselves, and lay to
heart their notorious folly in letting out their affections upon such poor mean
things of the world, a little airy honor, an empty pleasure, beggarly
treasures, things of naught, Amos 6.12. A Fashion, 1 Cor. 7.31. A Fancy, Act.
25.23. Vanities, Eccles. 1.2. Uncertain perishing things; all the enjoyments
and comforts of the world, they are but as liquor in a brittle glass, soon
cracked, and soon lost. A Great Man (a Bishop) once boasted of three things that
he could not lose, his Riches, Learning, the Kings Favor; but a while after in
seeking a blessing on his meat, he could not speak sense, was forced to beg
relief, and before he died professed he was sure the King did care more for the
worst of his dogs than for him: Oh take off your affections from all worldly
things, study God, his insmite perfections, that he is an all-sufficient good,
a suitable, permanent, everlasting good, and that you can never be truly happy,
till you have an interest in him. Oh let out your affections after him.

Use 2. Of Exhortation. Consider your selves, look into your selves, where are
your desires; which way, and to what coast do these winds of your souls drive
you? Is it toward God, or toward the world? You crave, and thirst, and long,
and desire, something there is, which you would have, and cannot be satisfied
till you have it; now what is it? Is it the husks of this world, or is it
bread? Do you pant after the dust of the earth, according to the Prophets
Phrase, Amos 2.7. Or with the Church, The desire of our souls is to thy name,
and to the remembrance of thee, Isa. 26.8. You are hungry and thirsty, unquiet
and unsatisfied, what is the matter? Do you like the dry earth, gape and cleave
for showers to bring forth Corn and wine? Is the voice of your hearts, Who will
show us any good? or is it, Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us?
Physicians judge of the state of their Patients bodies by their appetites; they
who long for trash, speak their stomach foul; they who hunger afer wholesome
food, are esteemed to be in health; so ye may judge of the estate of your souls
by your desires, if you chiefly desire the trash of the world, your spiritual
state is not right: But if you can say with David, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee, and here is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
Blessed are you of the Lord, you are in a safe condition; but here have a care
that your desires be qualified, as I spoke of before, that they be constant
desires, not occasional desires, as it is with some when at a Sermon, or in
time of danger and fear of death, O then such cry out, O for an interest in
God, for a reconciled God; but after a while these desires are off again, which
argues them not to be a thirst, which still holds on and increases;
changeable desires are false desires; and look to it, that your desires be
ardent desires, vehement, not low, flat, weak, indifferent, as it is with many,
they pray as if they prayed not, seek as if they seek not, not pressing, not
wrestling, striving with God: Spiritual thirsts are not lazy wishes, nor
indifferent, formal, lukewarm requests; there is always an edg upon that
spiritual appetite which we call thirsting, Oh I beseech you consider your
selves, and know that this is your great interest, to have ardent, fervent
desires after God, and that you cannot be contented without an interest in his
favor.

The third thing to be spoken to, is, Wherein the people of God chiefly long
after God, and pant to appear before him: To this I shall say, They do
according to the exhibitions and conveyances that God makes of himself to his
people: Now know that God does convey himself to his people, 1. Here on earth
in the way of his Ordinances. 2. in Heaven by the immediate communication of
himself: And in both these respects, they vehemently desire after God. To speak
to these two a little.

1. Gods people desire God in ordinances, thus it was with David here in this
Psalm, this was his great desire and longing, he was debarrred of the
ordinances, and now he longs and thirsts after God with a great deal of
vehemence and intention. Now his soul thirsts for God: It appears that he
desired after God in ordinances, by that which is said in the 4th verse; When I
remember how I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of
God, with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude, that kept holy day; He
minds the happiness of his former condition, I had gone with the multitude, I
went to the house of God; and we may see what impression this made upon his
spirit; when he compared his former condition with his present, his very soul
was grieved; says he, When I remember these things; I pour out my soul in me;
and this made him to break out in these words, Oh, when shall I appear before
God? and Psalm. 63.1, 2. When he was in the Wilderness of Judah, My soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land, where
no water is, to see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in thy
sanctuary: He desires to be restored to the public ordinances, and to his
former enjoyments of them; he would have communion with God in his Ordinances,
and he would have that communion which he had formerly, so Psalm. 84.1, 2, How
amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea even
faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and my flesh cries out for the
living God, Yea, he envieth the bird, the sparrow, and the swallow, who might
come near the Altars, when he was thrust from them, and cries out, Blessed are
they that dwell in the house of God, ver. 3, 4. and Psalm. 27.4. One thing have
I desired of the Lord, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of
the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to
enquire in his Temple. His desire to enjoy God in ordinances, had the chief
place in his heart above all earthly desires, and delights whatsoever; one
thing have I desired, this only thing, that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord; so again, Psalm. 119.20. My soul breaks for the longing it has unto thy
judgments at all times: my soul breaks -- What ardent strong desires were in
the heart of David after the ordinance! No question but David had communion
with God in prvate in his closet, in his own heart he was not neglective of
private duties, but frequent in them; a gracious soul carries always a Temple
with him, but this did not satisfy and content this holy man; no, he must
enjoy the ordinances of God in the meetings of his people: The Reason why it
was thus with David, and so with all the people of God is, because ordinance
are the institutions of God, and in and through these, does God impart himself
to his people, and therefore they desire here to meet God. God has appointed
them as necessary helps in the way to Heaven, and they are not able to want
them, till they come to Heaven: As God fed the Israelites with Manna all the
time they were in the Wilderness, till he brought them to Canaan, but when they
came thither it ceased; so it is with Gods people in regard of ordinances, they
are such helps as God affords to them, so long as they are in the world, and
they may not expect to subsist without them, till they come to Heaven. The
exigences of Gods people are such as do indeed call for them, they have many
temptations to resist, many corruptions to subdue, and many graces to
strengthen, and much work to perform, and can they do any of these without
helps? Without doubt they cannot: They that think to live without ordinances,
the life of grace, they may as well think to live without meat and drink the
life of nature, and they shall do the one, as well as the other: True it is,
that God in the necessary want or restraint of public ordinances, is able to
make it up another way, if he pleases; God promised his people, Ezekiel. 11.16.
That tho they were cast far off among the heathen, and scattered among the
countries, yet he would be to them as a little sanctuary in the countries,
where they shall come: God can make a Wilderness, a Prison, a sick chamber or
bed, to be a sanctuary, if he please, by bringing to our remembrance those
truths which formerly we have heard, and by his own more immediate application
of himself to us: As God can sustain our natural life if he please in the want
of food, as he did Moses; so he can if he please sustain our spiritual in the
want of ordinances: God can suggest good thoughts, stir up gracious and holy
desires, shed abroad his love in our hearts, and become all in all unto us, as
in Heaven; but ordinances are the ordinary helps, and the powerful helps,
according to that in Psalm. 63.2. That I may see thy power, and thy glory, as I
have seen in the Sanctuary. There is a power in ordinances, as to instance,

1. In the preaching of the Word, 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of our warfare, are
not carnal, but mighty through God to the casting down of imaginations, and
every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ: The preaching
of the word is powerful to convince, 1 Cor. 14.24. To convert, Romans 10.14. To
comfort, Isa. 66.11. Here God stays his people with flagons, and comforts them
with apples, Cant. 2.5. It is powerful also for the flourishing, and the growth
of Gods people in grace, Psalm. 92.13.

2. In the Ordinance of the Lords Supper there is strength and efficacy to
comfort, to revive, to seal up assurance, as this servant of God, now departed,
had experience of to the wonderful comfort of her spirit.

3. In the ordinance of prayer, there is power from God, and a power with God;
a power from him, whereby he does enable us to perform it, and a power with
him, whereby we do prevail with him, as it is said of Jacob, Genesis 32.28.
compared with Hos. 12.3, 4. That he had power with God, and prevailed: the same
has every true Israelite, he has a special power, whereby he gains upon God
in his approaches to him; Oh, but what power is prayer, when there are bands of
prayer, vollies of prayer; single prayers are as a single hair of Sampsons head
there is a power in it; but conjunct prayers, are as his whole bush of hair:
When Gods people meet together, when they twist their prayers, and with one
consent stir up themselves to take hold of God, and hang upon him, wonderful
then are Gods condescentions to his people: All this may show, why Gods people
do so desire after God in ordinances. To make a little improvement of this
before I pass to the next particular.

Use 1. Do Gods people desire after Ordinances, and God in ordinances; this
then meets with the practice of many people, who are far from such desires as
these. As instance,

1. Such as do not lay it to heart, nor are grieved when God threatens the
removal of ordinances; such has been our barrenness under ordinances, our
lukewarmness, that God may justly remove our candlestick, but how few are
affected with this! There have been some that could, for the want of their
Idolatries, grieve as Micah, taking on for the loss of his God and Priest,
Judge. 18.23, 24. Women weeping for Tammuz, Ezekiel. 8.14. There are that that have
grieved, for the want of their merry-meeting; it is said in Isa. 24.11. There
is crying for wine in the streets, all joy is darkened, the mirth of the land is
darkened, mirth is gone with the liquor: There are that mourn for the want of
trading; It Is said of Babylon, Rev. 18.11. The Merchants of the earth shall
weep and mourn over her, for no man hayeth her Merchandise any more: I might
instance in other things; and what no mourning for the loss of the Ordinances
of God? Can people be grieved for the want of those things that gratify only
their corrupt flesh, and not be troubled at the removal of Ordinances which are
of so great importance, and of so high concernment as to the everlasting
welfare of their precious Souls?

2. There are others, that though God be so indulgent, as to afford Ordinances
and Liberty for the enjoyment of them; yet do not value it, they have no
affections for these things. There have been some that have said, that they are
above Ordinances, and so what need they care whether they have them or no? But
there are too too many, that are below them, and have no heart fitted to them,
and therefore are not sensible at all of the advantage of them; they would not
be at a Sermon or a Sacrament from one end of the year to the other, were it
not example and custom, and the common practice put them upon it; for their
parts they could be contented to be without these Ordinances all their lives;
these are far from the temper of David, and all the people of God. There are
others that withdraw from the Ordinances of God, forsake the Assemblies of Gods
people; they think they can get as much good at home, as they can to hear a
faithful Minister; or when they join in the meetings of Gods people; such as
these never found the sweetness and benefit of Ordinances; they are such as
would be wiser than God, who has appointed such helps as these, and so by
taking a preposterous course, do bring mischief upon their own Souls; God
blasts and curses those single performances, which take from his more public
Ordinances. This is like the Manna which the Israelits gathered unseasonably,
it putrified and stank, and worms bred in it; so are those duties which are
performed singly, and solitarily, and unseasonably, when the Meetings and
Assemblies of Gods people are neglected. There are others who are soon wearied
and cloyed with Ordinances; they have soon enough of such things as these;
instead of saying here with David, When shall we come and appear before God?
they say, When shall we be gone and depart from him? like those in Mal. 1.13.
Ye have said, what a weariness is it? and Amos 8.5. When will the new moon and
the sabbath be gone? There are some, who are never more uneasy, than when they
are at Ordinances. Oh, how many carnal persons, and formalists are there, who
have only an outside of Religion, and scarce so much, who look upon the Worship
of God as a matter of course and fashion, and so accordingly come to it.

Use 2. Let it be a word of Exhortation; long after delight in, and bless God
for Ordinances: It is the greatest happiness that we are capable of here in
this life; that whiles we cannot see God face to face, as we shall one day in
Heaven; yet we may now see him in the glass of his Ordinances, in his Word, in
his Sacraments, and by prayer converse with him. That which carnal men, and
worldly spirits, count a burden and tediousness to them, let us look upon as a
very high privilege, and reckon it as our greatest advantage, and rejoice in
it: and to quicken and enlarge our desires, Muse upon the excellency of
Ordinances; for excellency apprehended, is that which will move desires;
discern that these things are good, and good and necessary for us; by partaking
of these, we shall get our corruptions mortified, our graces strengthened, our
spiritual decays supplied, more ability gained to serve God in our whole
conversation, and more evidence and assurance of Gods love in Jesus Christ
obtained.

And remember, when you come to Ordinances, resolve to put hard for it, to
enjoy such sensible Communion with God in them, that you may come off in a
better and more spiritual frame of heart, than you came on; resolve with the
Father, Nunquam a te absque recidam, When I come before the Lord, I will never
go away without him: The reason why there is no more good got by ordinances, is
because we do not meet God in them; and the reason why we do not meet God, is
because we do not so earnestly desire and look for him; whenever therefore you
appear before God in ordinances, make it your business to see God, to taste of
Gods, to get down something of God upon your hearts, some impressions (of God)
upon your spirits.

2 Secondly, Gods people do long and pant after the immediate fruition and
presence of God in Heaven: Here they enjoy God by faith, not by sight; here in
a mediate, dark and imperfect manner through providence and ordinances, as
through a glass darkly, but there face to face we shall know as we are known,
as the Apost. 1 Cor. 13.12

Now Gods people long after God in this way, The spirit and the bride, says
come, Rev. 22.17. They daily pray that Gods Kingdom may come, that the number
of the Elect may be accomplished, and Christ may come to judgment; They wait
for the adoption, the redemption of the body, Romans 8.23. They love the
appearing of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 9.28. They look for that blessed hope,
and glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; Tit.
2.13.

The Reason why Gods people do long after the immediate fruition and presence
of God in heaven is, because they believe, they shall be perfectly delivered
from all those evils that they are liable to, while they are here in this
world, and that they shall be made perfectly blessed.

1. They count upon this, they shall be freed, from all evils they are subject
to in this life. As, 1. From the evil of sin: Oh this is the great evil that
Gods people complain of with so much sadness; here the flesh turns against
the spirit; there shall be no such thing hereafter, there shall be no blindness
in the mind, nor perverseness in the will, nor disorder in the affections, no
pride nor slothfulness, no carnal-mindedness, no fleshliness, no coldness and
deadness of heart and affection, no uneven walking, no grieving the spirit of
God, or the spirits of their Brethren; no unholy thought, word or action. 2.
They shall be freed from the evil of temptation: this world is a place of
snares, and valley of temptations; what abundance of temptations are we
assaulted with here continually from the Devil, the world and our corrupt
natures; but there shall be none of these in heaven: In paradise there was a
tempter, but none in heaven; Satan's walk and rendezvous is on the earth, Job
1.7. but he never came into Heaven, since he was cast out. 3. From the injuries
and molestation of evil men; no place on earth is exempted from molestation by
the Devil and his instruments, but heaven is a place where such shall never
enter; there the children of wickedness, and sons of violence shall not afflict
any more; there is no Mesech, nor tents of Kedar to be complained of, nor false
brethren, unfaithful, unsound, hypocritical persons, that are secret enemies to
truth and piety, now discouraging, no destroying company in heaven. 4. They
shall be freed from all divisions: The divisions, and differences and
dissentions, even among the godly which this state of imperfection on earth is
liable to, and lamentably cumbred with, do create much trouble; and many
disquietments are multiplied thereby but in heaven, there is but one mind, one
mouth, as there is but one truth; not so much as a different apprehension among
all the thousands and millions of Saints there. 5. They shall be freed from all
bodily ailes, pains, weakness, infirmities, all afflictions whatsoever; no sin
therefore, no sorrow in heaven; all tears shall be wiped away, no more of these
tears that arise from the various Trials of this weary life; such as are Wants,
Straits, Losses, Crosses in Name, or Estates, Relations, Enjoyments; nothing
but Love in Heaven, God will never knit his Brow, nor chide nor strike, never
hide his face there, but they shall live under the smiles of his Face, and
light of his Countenance without interruption.


2. The people of God do believe, and hope for a perfect enjoyment of all good:
It is not a mere negative happiness, that the Saints in Heaven partake of; a
not being miserable, an absence from evil; but also the positive presence and
enjoyment of all good, according to that of the Psalm. 16.11. In the presence of
God is fullness of joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
Under this, are comprehended those great and glorious things that make up and
complete the positive happiness of the Saints. 1. As to their Souls. 2. As to
their Bodies. 3. As to their Company.

1. As to their Souls. Their understanding being enlarged and widened, shall
have a right knowledge of all things, a clear sight and vision of God; Now we
know but in part, (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13.12.) but then shall we know,
even as also we are known. The will shall be perfected with an absolute
indefective holiness, with an exact conformity to the Will of God, and perfect
Freedom from all servitude of Sin. The affections shall be set right by an
unalterable regularity; there shall be a constant cleaving to God, a constant
loving him without satiety or weariness. The Soul shall enjoy a full imediate
uninterrupted Communion with God, and fruition of him; While we are here, we
are absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Here our comforts are in and through
Ordinances, but there God will be all in all immediately, 2 Cor. 15.28.

2. As to their Bodies, There shall be glory upon them; they shall be made like
the glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. What that is, was in some glimpse of
it seen in Christ's transfiguration, Matt. 17.2. His face did shine as the sun,
and his raiment was white as the light; that was a little glimpse and specimen
of the future visible glory of Christ; and the Saints shall be like him, they
shall shine forth as the Sun, Matt. 13.43. Their Bodies shall be endued with
new and glorious qualities, as incorruption, immortality, strength and power,
activity, nimbleness: Their Bodies shall be spiritual, not that the Body shall
be turned into a Spirit; but the Body shall then live as Spirits and Angels do,
without Meat, Drink, Sleep, and such like bodily Supports, and shall be
perfectly conformable, and obedient, and subservient to the Operations of the
Spirit, the ready Instrument of the Soul.

3. As to their Company, They shall be blessed: oh the blessed Company that is
in the new Jerusalem, God, Christ, Angels, Saints. -- And that which Crowns
all, the Saints shall have the perpetual enjoyment of all this blessedness
secured to them, without any fear of losing it, or being deprived of it. The
Saints shall never put of their glorious Robes, after they have once put them
on; their State is a sure eternal State of actual delights. Upon these accounts
the people of God do long and pant after the immediate fruition and presence of
God in Heaven.

Use. Let us consider our selves by this property; Have we desires after God
thus? Truly it is to be feared, that abundance that do live under the preaching
of the Word, from whence are held forth such glorious things to be conveyed by
God in the immediate fruition of him; do not believe, or at least do not desire
the same, but they are well contented with their Portion here on Earth; like
that Cardinal of Burbon, who professed that he would not give his part in Paris
for his part in paradise. There are they that are of this mind, they would
think themselves well a paid, if there were no other Heaven, nor no change of
their estates that they have here in this world. But I beseech you see to it,
that you be of another temper and disposition, that ye are panting after God in
Heaven. To this purpose practice these counsels.

1. Endeavor after a settled and well-grounded assurance, that you have an
interest in Gods special love and favor, and that you are of the number of
those that shall one day be admitted into the immediate presence of God, that
you may be able to say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know, that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens. Labor after this, pray much
for this. It is our Saviors own direction, Joh. 16.24. Ask, that your joy may
be full; O sweet consideration, that it is the Mind and Will of Christ, that we
should seek for full joy and peace in believing. And take this for an evidence,
that you shall be admitted to the immediate presence of God, if you seek and
and enjoy Communion with God in his Ordinances; if you do behold him in the
beauties of holiness through these glasses. I say, this is a pledge, a
beginning, and so an evidence of that full Communion you shall have with him in
Heaven, and of your seeing him there face to face. Are your Sabbath Days, days
of Communion with God? that is a sweet evidence that you shall keep an
everlasting Sabbath with him in glory; but if strangers to God, and
profane-hearted on Sabbaths, you cannot be for Heaven.

2. Be in an actual preparation of your selves for it. Spouses and Brides that
wish and look for their beloved, prepare for their coming to them, and prepare
for their going to them; so do you prepare your selves for the enjoyment of God
in Heaven. To this purpose observe these Rules.

1. Labor after the mortifying and subduing of sin; especially your most
beloved sin. Your own iniquity, as David calls it, Psalm. 18.23. While that
prevails, that darkens the sincerity and efficacy of grace in the Soul, breaks
the peace thereof, grieves the holy Spirit; therefore remember what the Apostle
says, 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope of seeing God, purifieth himself as
he is pure: Hence when the Apostle would raise up people to an heavenly frame,
he calls on them to mortify their special corruption, Col. 3.1, 5. We find
these joined together, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13, 14.

2. Be loosned from the World; for while staked down and fixed here, you are
unfit and unready to remove to Heaven. It is he that is a stranger and pilgrim
on the Earth, and that dwells in Tents here; ready on a short warning to pluck
up stakes and be gone, that is a faithful seeker of that better country, and a
traveller toward it, Heb. 11.9, 10, 13, 14. You cannot have two homes, nor two
rests, nor two portions; if you take up your home and rest in the World, you
are not prepared nor principled for Heaven, nor fit to go thither. Be loosning
and drawing off your hearts every day from the World; expect not either a
perpetual, nor yet a long abode here. Be sensible of the vanity and emptiness
of things here; be often thinking of, and expecting and waiting for your
removal from hence into another World.

3. Be finishing of your work, and to that end continually doing your present
work with all your might; do what God has appointed and called you to; is
there any work that lies upon your hand, that conscience tells you should be
done without delay, as to get your selves settled in the assurance of Gods love
through Christ, to clear up your evidences, to get down your rebellious
corruptions: or in your place, family, commonwealth, is there any service to
be done? foreflow it not but finish, dispatch it; while our work is not done,
we are not ready.

4. Be often thinking of your future blessedness, this will set an edg upon
your affections; what is the reason that people are so much in love with the
world? It is because their minds do run out upon it; and they promise
themselves great matters from it, they have enlarging fancies; and therefore
they have enlarged desires answerable therewith. The same would also be with us
as to heavenly matters, if our mind were more upon them, it would then make us
impatient till we were in the full fruition of them.

Touching the present occasion, tho I know that Funeral-Panegyricks, and the
promiscuous commendation of the dead, does abundance of mischief, for hereby
the godly are justly grieved and offended, and the wicked hardened and heartned
in their evil courses; the ministry disgraced. Yet as the death of Gods people
is precious in his sight, so it should be glorious in the eyes of men; I could
wish therefore that the just praises, and true sincerity of every child of God,
were published, even by some Seraphical tongue, that both the glory of his
grace might shine bright to posterity, and that such a fire of Zeal for
imitation might be inkindled to the heaters, that they passing through the same
course of holiness, might at length be made partakers of the same happiness
with the Saints of God; let this be an apology for what I shall say touching
this gracious person whose Funeral we now solemnize; as one said of an honest
man, that he was decalogus explicatus, so I may say of this our Friend
deceased: This Sermon was exemplified in and by her; she longed after God, she
desired after God in ordinances, when she had health diligently attending on
them, fruitfully partook of them; God had blessed her with a good memory, as
appeared by the many hymns, and various texts of Scripture, which she repeated
in her sickness. Her custom was, that tho she penned nothing of the Sermons in
the hearing of them, yet the next day she would write them out in a very
methodical way, not only the general heads, but the particulars, with the
inlargements, the which I have seen: She desired God in ordinances, and
communion with him in the same; and she was very careful to improve sabbaths,
which is an evidence that she has now immediate communion with God in heaven,
and is entered into everlasting rest: It pleased God to visit her with pains for
a long time together; and for some days before her departure, she was as upon
a rack, her flesh and bones and bowels under much torture, yet exceeding
patient under the hand of God, and would still say, Yet God is good, and tho
God break me in pieces, yet will I trust in God: As she longed for God in
Ordinances; so likewise for the immediate fruition of God, which proceeded from
a full assurance of her interest in him, which God was pleased to give in unto
her; she would say, I did heretofore cry out with the Psalmist, O spare me a
little before I go hence, and shall be no more. Oh, but now with the Apostle, I
desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and often would she breathe out
these words of the Text, Oh, when shall I appear before God!

She was observed to smile under her pains; and being asked the reason of it, O
said she, Satan shall be trod under foot shortly, and I cannot but rejoice at
the thoughts of it: She gave good counsel to her brothers, and sisters, and to
those that did watch with her, to take heed of sin, and of evil company, and
that they should redeem their time, and provide for a blessed eternity. All
understanding, serious Christians that were acquainted with her, could not but
observe the graces of Gods spirit, sparkling forth in her; and I remember one
said, I could give all that I have that it were thus with my children: Many
other things might be added, but I shall say no more, she is at rest as to her
soul, and as she would say, her flesh does rest in hope; and now that she is at
rest, let none disquiet her Relations by any false reports, it is a most
disingenious thing: The Poet could say, Pascitur in vivos liber, post fata
quiescit, When men are living, they are maligned and reproacht, but this ceases
when they are dead. If any should be so wicked, let them know, that God may
reckon with them here for the same, but assuredly hereafter, Jude 15. God will
convince of hard sayings: he that will not pass by an idle word, will surely
call to an account for bitter sarcasms, venomous taunts, and devillike
reproaches.

I have but two words more. 1. One to the Parents of this servant of God, that
they grieve not immoderately for the death of their dear relation. Oh remember
the evidences that she gave of her interest in the special favor of God, of
her effectual calling out of the world into the kingdom and fellowship of the
blessed God! Graceless relations dying with the marks of their unregeneracy
upon them, do even scorch the hearts of their gracious surviving Relations,
with the sense of those flames which they suffer: This is supposed by some, the
reason of that lamentable ingemination of David, 2 Samuel 18. and last verse, O
my Son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my son, my son: as if he had said, Absalom died in rebellion, I fear
he is fallen into a worser hand than Joab's: Oh that my death might have
prevented so dreadful a miscarriage: O Absalom, would God I had died for thee:
But now when your Relation gave you such testimonies and evidences of her
gracious estate, I may say as Christ to Mary, -- Why weep ye? While you are
mourning on earth, she is rejoicing in Heaven: while you are clothed with
black, she is clothed in white, even the long robes of Christ's righteousness,
therefore do not profane your Scripture-hope with an unscriptural mourning,
but let your moderation be seen.

2. The other word is to young persons: here is an instance, besides thousands
of others, of the frailty and mortality of youth; a young Woman in the flower
of her age, she is gone down to the grave: O you that are young then, remember
your Creator in the days of your youth, as this young woman's counsel was;
provide for an happy death, and a blessed eternity. Oh, consecrate your first
time to God, it may be, for any one knows, your only time, you may die and
never come to old age: It is storied of a youth that came to a Jewish Rabbi to
learn him the law of God; the Rabbi asked him, what age he was; he told his
age; Why, says he, thou art too young yet, thou must stay eight years longer; O
Sir (says the youth) I have gone through the burying-place, and have seen little
graves, as well as long, and I may be dead before I am so old, therefore pray
teach me the Law of God. O Young People think of it, begin now to be religious,
because your youthful time may be all your time. Let me hint a few things more
by way of argument.

1. Consider your youthful time is Gods time, the first fruits of your time is
the Lords; he required the first fruits as his due; you rob God, if you do not
give up your selves to him betimes.

2. Consider, your youthful time is the best time; now you are most active,
vigorous, quick, as you are now more capable to understand any trade of life,
so to take in the principles of Religion, if you would give your minds to it;
Religion will be more facile, and easy to you; you are not possessed with such
evil notions, and corrupt principles, as you may be if you come to age; you
will then be more indisposed, you will be habituated in sin, and the devil will
have a stronger claim and interest in you, who will not be so easily put off; O
then, mind Religion while you are young; it will be a great deal more
delightful, and easy, and comfortable, if you begin betimes.

3. Consider, this timely beginning will prevent a great deal of guilt and
trouble in your souls; when a man in a journey sets forth early, he goes on
with comfort; but if he neglects the morning, and sets out late, he must run,
and ride, and that in the dark: O they that set forth for Religion in the
morning of their time, prevent a great deal of trouble and sin.

4. Consider, by this means you will be very desirable, grateful, delightful,
acceptable to God and good men; O! to see an holy, humble, gracious spirit in
young people, to hear them speak of the things of Christ, and find them pliable
to the ways of God; O what a pleasant sight is this? What delight do such to
the Lord? Such have a principal share of Christ's love, who seek him betimes,
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find
me: It Is spoken by way of Emphasis and addition, those that seek me early shall
be sure to find me; the Lord takes special notice of the love of his people in
their youthful time, Jer. 2.2. I remember the kindness of thy youth; O what a
lovely fight! it delights God and Saints to see young souls, humble, holy,
serious, savoury, heavenly, full of knowledge, full of zeal. O what a beauty is
a young Samuel, a young Abijah, a young Jeremiah, a young Timothy? What
honorable mention is made of these in Scripture! And it was the honor of
Andronicus and Junia, that they were in Christ betimes, Romans 16.7. Oh if you
give up your selves to Religion betimes, you will be exceeding acceptable to
God, and good men.

5. Begin betimes to be religious, for hereby you will attain to a greater
growth in Christianity, and settlement in the truth and ways of Godliness; you
shall bring more glory to God, be more serviceable to your generation, and lay
up a greater and more sure foundation for glory; yea, the more eminent and
abundant you have been in grace, the greater Crown of Glory will be set on your
head in Heaven. O now you young people, bestir your selves, labor after
knowledge, set apart time to read the Scripture and other good books, and be
earnest with God to give you an heart, to know, and an eye to see the
excellency of Jesus Christ; fly the lusts of youth, endeavor what you can to
be under a faithful Ministry; and get into acquaintance and communion with good
people, and cast off all vain company: O there is a great deal of advantage, by
being in good company, they will instruct, counsel, comfort, and encourage you
in your course of godliness. Consider what I have said, and the Lord bless
these good counsels unto you.

FINIS.

