AN ANSWER TO Dr. BVRGES HIS WORD BY WAY OF POSTSCRIPT. In Vindication of No
Necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine of the Church of England.

By John PEARSON D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nathaniel Brook At the Angel in Cornhill. 1660.

AN ANSWER TO Dr. BVRGES.
SIR,
YOu are pleased to begin with me thus, Although your Tract be of another
Subject, which wise and learned men hold unworthy of Answer; yet finding a
little waste Paper at the end of this Treatise, I am content to fill it up with
a few words touching your No Necessity, etc. to save further labor about it in
another way. You are pleased (under the guise of a Brotherly temper and
Christian Moderation) to make sport with the Authors of the Reasons of a
Necessity of Reformation of the Public Doctrine, etc. wherein you set up
Shawfowles of your own (calling them ours) and then shoot at them as you list,
which you call Answers to Us. But, he that judiciously compares both, cannot
but hold him a weak man that shall foul so much Paper, as to give a particular
Reply to all your out-leaps, and fictions, which deserve neglect, rather than
punctual Replications. Therefore, at present, take these Generals, till you
more rationally make out your Particulars.

To which I answer, that I am resolved to proceed with a Brotherly temper, and
Christian Moderation, as being not at all discouraged with any
misinterpretation of such real inclinations; and lest I should seem to set up
Shawfowles of my own, (as I am accused, how deservedly let the Reader judge,) I
shall represent your words as they lie in your Postscript, and so subjoyn my
Answer to them.

Your Reply you return by way of Generals, the first of which ^s thus printed.

1. We place not the Necessity of Reformation, in the not establishing the
Doctrine of our Church, by Law; but, our work is to show, 1. that there is no
necessity of subscription, by virtue of the act of 13. Eliz. 12. because that,
thereby, those Articles now urged, do not appear to be by that Law established.
2. That as they now stand, and as now worded, they ought not to be established,
until they be reformed. But, you make us speak that we never so much as dreamt
of, nor ever mentioned in our Reasons: and so, you fight only with your own
shadow. Let them part you, that have a mind to it: we have other business to
do.

To the first words of this Paragraph, We place not the Necessity of
Reformation in the not establishing the Doctrine of our Church by Law; I
answer, it is well you do not: it seems my Treatise has prevailed something
with you; for in your former Book you did place the Necessity of Reformation of
the Public Doctrine of the Church in the Non-establishment by Law. The truth,
of which thus I prove. In what you did place the Doubtfulnesse of the Articles,
in that you did place the Necessity of Reformation. This is a clear Proportion.
For having first propounded REASONS SHOWING the Necessity of Reformation of
Doctrine, you argue thus. The Doctrine is said to be contained in the 39.
Articles; but those Articles are both Doubtful and Defective. Therefore you
did place the Necessity of Reformation in the Doubtfulness of the Articles.
Neither can you with any reason deny you did so, because in the next Paragraph
of thisPostscript, your own words are these. We argue a Necessity of
Reformation, 1. from the Doubtfulness, 2. from the Defect of the 39. Articles.
Now I subsume, In the Non-establishment by Law you did place the Doubtfulnesse
of the Articles. This also is a clear Proposition; for thus you proceeded in
your Argument, 1. Doubtful, because it appears not that they were all or any
of them confirmed by Parliament in the 13. Eliz. From these two Propositions,
as Premises, necessarily follows this conclusion, In the Non-establishment
by Law, you did place the Necessity of Reformation. Since therefore my
Treatise, you profess not to place the Necessity of Reformation in that in
which before you placed it; and before I have done treating of this Subject, I
shall not despair of persuading you to place the Necefssity of this
Reformation no where.

To the next words of this Paragraph, But our work is to show, First, that
there is no necessity of subscription by virtue of the Act of 13. Eliz. 12.
because that thereby those Articles now urged do not appear to be by that Law
established. I answer, Your proposal was, There is a Necessity of Reformation,
your work, you say, is to show that there is no Necessity of Subscription;
therefore your proposal is one thing, and your work is another. Whereas one
would imagine that the work of him which writes should be to show that which he
professes to write of. You pretend to give Reasons of Necessity of
Reformation, and you labor to prove there is no necessity of subseription. And
yet the Reason you render of no Necessity of Subscription is, because the
Articles do not appear to be established by Law, while you say your self you
do not place the Necessity of Reformation in their Non-establishment by Law.
What agreement is this?

To the next words of the same Paragraph, As they now stand, and as now worded,
they ought not to be estabjshed until they be reformed, I answer first, that
this present standing and wording of the Articles is new language not heard of
in your former Discourse; by which it appears that you have a mind to alter
your way of reasoning against them, as you had need; your first having so ill
success. Secondly, that the present standing and wording of the Articles I
look upon as that which is no way subjet to reprehension, for that very
standing and wording, which you particularly oppose, show the Articles to be
the same which were agreed upon in the Convocation 1562. to which the
subscription was required and enacted by a Law, as I have already proved.
Thirdly, whereas you say they ought not to be established, if you mean any new
establishment, they need it not, because they are established by an Act of
Parliament in full force, according to an agreement made by a full and legal
Convocation, and a greater establishment then this is not to be had in this
Church or Kingdom: if you mean a continuation of establishment, that they
ought no longer to stand established; you do in some sense oppose your self to
the whole Clergy; for as Sir Edward Coke writes, in his 4. Inst. cap. 74. In
domo Convocationis, the whole Clergy of either Province are either present in
person or representation; and not only to the Clergy, but the whole Realm:
for as the same Learned Lord Chief Justice teaches us in his 4. Inst, cap. 1.
The Court of Parliament consists of the Kings Majesty sitting there as in his
Royal politic capacity, and of the three Estates of the Realm, one of which
he says represents all the Commons of the whole Realm.

As for the remainder of the Paragraph, I deny that I make you speak any thing
which you never mentioned in your Reasons: and whenever you shall produce any
such particular, I will make my denial good.

Your Second General is this. We argue a Necessity of Reformation; I. From the
Doubtfulness; 2. From the Defect of the 39. Articles. But you will needs have
us to speak in a sense contrary to our meaning. We doubt not of the Doctrines
themselves, rightly explained; but of the Words wherein they are set forth.
For, the Words (which should be clear) being ambiguous, are capaple of more
senses, then one; and so, may be, and are wrested to patronize Errors.
Therefore they ought to be reformed by such an Orthodox explanation, as may
distinctly and positively express the true sense of the Church; and not left
so homonymous and equivocal, as to countenance those Errors which we believe
the Church of England disclaimeth.

To the first part of which Paragraph I answer; that you did so argue I
confess, that you made good any Argument I deny: and that I would have you
speak in a sense contrary to your meaning I also deny, if you mean what you
say. To urge a Necessity of Reformation of Doctrine, in regard of the
Doubtfulnest, and at the same time to say, We doubt not of the Doctrines;
seems to me very strange: no^ ^o doubt of that which we declare doubtful, or
to declare that doubtful of which we doubt nor, being equally unreasonable.

As for your way of salving this Contradidion, We doubt not of the Doctrines
themselves, rightly explained; but of the Words wherein they are set forth, I
shall earnestly contend and evidently show that it will no way salve it; for if
you doubt of the Words, wherein the Dodrine is set forth, you must doubt what
is the Doctrine which is set forth in the Words: and the Reason is plain,
because the Doctrine which is set forth in the Words is nothing else but the
meaning of the Words in which it is set forth. When you say you doubt of the
Words, it is not a doubt whether such words be in the Article or no, but
whether the Words have this or that sense as they stand in the Article. If this
or that sense make no variation in the Doctrine, then the Doubt of the sense is
no way Material; if this or that sense make a variation in the Doctrine, then
a doubt of the sense must be a doubt of the Doctrine. In vain therefore do you
pretend, not to doubt of the Doctrines themselves rightly explained, while you
profess to doubt of the Words wherein they are set forth, because while you
doubt of the true meaning of the Words, you must also doubt whether they be
rightly explained: for the true meaning of the words and the right explaining
is the same thing. Either therefore say you doubt not of the Doctrines, and
doubt not of the Words, or else say you doubt of the Words, and doubt what are
the Doctrines: for to say you doubt of the one and doubt not of the other is a
Contradiction; except you could find in the Articles Doctrines without words.

The next words of the Paragraph are very far from any truth in their
Assertion, and farther (if it be possible) in their Collection. For the first,
you say the Words are very ambiguous, and capable of more senses then one, and
I say it is to be believed that there are not so many Words in any so many
Doctrinall Assertions in the world, which are not as ambiguous and capable of
as many senses as they are. For the second, you say the Words may be and are
wrested to patronize Errors; and I say, so are the words of the Scripture, or
else the Apostle speaks not truth.

But when follow with your earnestness of Reformation, you clearly discover the
weakness of your Argumentation in these words, Therefore they ought to be
reformed by such an Orthodox explanation; for there may be an explanation of
that (and that explanation Orthodox) which cannot be reformed. I hope you think
not of Reforming the Scriptures, and yet I hope if you have an occasion to
explain them, you will do it Orthodoxly. If therefore you have occasion to give
an Orthodox explication of an Article, do not imagine that you have Necessity to
reform it. The possibility of being wrested to patronize Errors touches no
more the Words of the Articles then the Word of God, which we are assured the
ignorant and unstable may wrest, and we are not assured that any other can
wrest the Words of the Articles, but such as can wrest the Word of God.

As for the last words of this Paragraph, touching Errors which you believe
the Church of England disclaimeth, I confess I know not how well to answer
them, for this reason, and no other, because I know not what you believe.
Neither can I imagine that you will believe either Church or Parliament, when
you deny any Sacrilege of things not required by God by express command, or
given by his special warrant, in your address to this Parliament, which has
unanimously declared Sacrilege in the taking away the Utensils of the Church,
which you can never prove were expressly commanded by God, or given by his
special warrant.

Your third General, if I may so call it, is this. In our particular instances
of Defects in the 39. Articles, we deny not any truths contained in them; but
only show what mis-constructions are, or may be made of them, as now they be
worded. Therefore our purpose is not to press the rejecting of them, as to the
matter, but only as to the expressions, which we desire may be reformed by
amending of them.

To which I answer, that as often as I read this Paragraph, I might question my
self whether I understand any thing of this Controversy or no. When I consider
the matter of it, I am so kind to my self as to imagine I understand it; when I
consider the Author, I am so kind to you, as to suspect my self to be mistaken;
for if I be not, there is not only, no truth, but no sense in it. For, what do
these words signify, In our particular instances of Defects in the 39.
Articles, we deny not any truths contained in them? Is it possible to deny any
truths contained in the Articles by any particular instances of defects in the
Articles Is a Defect any thing else then a Negation of something which you
conceive should be in them, and can a supposed Negation; of that which should
be in them, cause a falsity of that which is really in them? In brief, I
absolutely deny that by any particular instances Defects, you have or can show
any misconstructions in the Articles, as now they be worded. And if by such
Defects you: cannot show such misconstructions, you cannot with any reason upon
the same Defects, press the rejecting of the Articles, as to the expressions.
For example, you say the Articles contain nothing of the Doctrine of the
Creation, and this you urge as a Defect. Now I ask, What misconstruction can:
you show in any Article by virtue of this supposed defect? or what expression
can therefore render any Article fit to be rejected, for this reason only
because it contains nothing of the Creation? If there be no other
misconstructions in the Articles then what arise from that which is not in the
Articles, if there be no other expressions as now they are worded to be
rejected, but such as are not contained, we may safely pronounce the Articles
in and of themselves to be in no great danger of misconstructions, and to
contain in them no rejectable expressions.

Your fourth General is this, Whereas we assert that many necessary Doctrines
are wanting in those 39. Articles, we intend not therefore to reject, any of
the Articles themselves (so far as they concur with the holy Scriptures:) but,
the Reformation we desire this particular, is only an Addition of those
necessary Truths, duly set forth and explained, as may make the Public
Doctrine of our Church complete, before Subscription to those few, as if they
were all which our Church, will own. Here, we say again, that a necessary
Addition is properly a Reformation of that which is defective, to make it
perfect.

To which I answer, that while you say, you intend not to reject any of the
Articles ( so far as they concur with the holy Scriptures,) you might have,
said as much of other things, no way so much concerning as the Public
Doctrine; the Question is, whether you do believe the Articles do condur with
the holy Scriptures, and when you give your unfeigned assent, you are supposed
to so much; you know what was resolved by all the Judges of England, that he
which subscribed the 39. Articles, with this Addition, ( so far as the same are
agreeable to the Word of God) might by his own private opinion take some of
them to be against the Word of God. While therefore you make that profession
only, that you intend not to reject them with that limitation, ye may at the
same time intend to reject any of them; because you may at the same time
believe that they concur not with the Scriptures.

The Reformation you desire is only an Addition, and I say, that whatsoever is
only an Addition, is not a Reformation: For wheresoever there is a
Reformation, something must be reformed. But where there is only an Addition,
there is nothing reformed. For if any thing were thereby reformed, it must
either be that which is added, or that to which it is added: but neither that
which is added is at all reformed by only being added, neither is that to which
it is added at all reformed by the sole adding of something to it; which has
no other operation on it, to which it is added.

Whereas you speak of making the Public Doctrine of our Church complete,
before Subscription to those few, as if they were all which our Church will
own. So far as I understand your words (for to say the truth, what coherence
you intend those words [before Subscription to those few] I do not apprehend)
you seem to mistake the Subject of the Question, that is, the Nature of the
Book of Articles, and the design of the Church in agreeing upon, them, and
subscribing to them. For the Book of Articles is not, nor is pretended to be, a
complete Body of Divinity, or a Comprehension and Explication of all Christian
Doctrines necessary to be taught; but an Enumeration of some Truths, which upon
and since the Reformation have been denied by some persons, who upon their deny
all are thought unfit to have any cure of souls in this Church or Realm,
because they might by their opinions, either infect their flock, with error, or
else disturb the Church with schism; or the Realm with sedition. This
appears by the Title of the first Articles agreed upon in the year 1552. for
the avoiding of Controversy in opinions, and the establishment of a godly
Concord, in certain matters of Religion. If therefore some Necessary Doctrine
of Religion in which all agree, or some other Doctrine in which an explicit
consent or agreement in all the Pastors of the Church is not necessary, be not
contained in the Articles; it does render them no way defective, because they
cannot be said thereby to want any thing for which they were intended. When
therefore you say again, that a Necessary Addition is properly a Reformation,
first I deny your Addition to be necessary, and then I say again, that such an
Addition to the Articles would be no more a Reformation of the Articles, then
the Book of Exodus is a Reformation of Genesis, then Joshuah a Reformation of
the Books of Moses, then the addition of the Judges was a Reformation of Moses,
or the addition of St. John's Gospel, the Reformation of St. Matthew's.

Your fifth General followed) thus, Whereas you struggle to prove that the 39.
Articles do include many, if not all of those Doctrines which we hold needful
to be added; We admit that some of them are touched upon by name, but not
explained as the nature of the things requires; and, as those points be, which
are the subjects of the 39. Articles. If then, the naming them, on the by, be
enough to prove that there is no need of more; then the bare naming of the
Titles of the 39. Articles, had been sufficient, without the body of the
Articles themselves: or else, those other Doctrines which are but named, ought
to be explained as well as the other: Or, no subseription to be urged, but
only to the holy Scriptures themselves, which are infallible, and contain all
Doctrines necessary to salvation. To what purpose then, is that assertion, that
the Creed being mentioned in the Articles, there is no need of adding more
Articles, because they are comprehended within the Creed; or, named in the 39.
Articles?

To which I answer, that, when you say, you admit that some of the Doctrines
are touched upon by name, and not explained as the Nature of the things
requires; you deny that which is true, and admit that which is false. For
those Doctrines which I instanced in, saying and proving that it was not true
which you asserted of them, (viz. that the Articles contain nothing of them)
are not touched upon by name, but expressed in the Nature of them. The first
Article I affirmed to contain something of the Creation, but it does not touch
upon the name. The 17. Article I affirmed to contain something of Effectual
calling, in which the name is not mentioned, but the nature of it delivered.
The 35. Article I affirmed to contain something of Faith and Repentance, which
does not so much as touch upon the name of either, but confirms the Homilies
which treats fully of the nature of each. Whereas you say, they are touched
upon by name, but not explained, as those Points be which are the Subjects of
the 39. Articles, this is also untrue in the Doctrine of Sin; for that which I
alleged was the very subject of three Articles, 9.15.16. and one Homily; and
as untrue in the Doctrine of the Law, for that which I alleged, was not the
name of the Law, but the whole subject of the 7. Article. All your discourse,
therefore which follows being grounded upon the bare naming of those
Doctrines, must necessarily prove inconsequentiall, because the bare naming of
them, upon which it was grounded, is a fiction.

To the latter part of the Paragraph, where you ask that Question, To what
purpose is that Assertion, that the Creed being mentioned in the Articles,
there is no need of adding more Articles? I answer, it is far more proper for
me to ask, to what purpose is that Question? for there was no such Assertion
delivered by me. All which I spoke was only to show the inconsequence of your
discourse, who undertaking to prove that the Articles contain nothing of 20.
necessary Doctrines, argued them all to be necessary, because most of them were
comprised in the Creed (which you know is certainly false)und from thence and
upon no other ground endeavored to infer your Conclusion, that the Articles
contained nothing of those Doctrines, when you know that they contain the
Creed. You cannot therefore justly charge me with any such Assertion, when of
that discourse I only said, that it seemed to me a very strange Objection, and
so I may say it seems still. Make not therefore any Assertions for me; but
free your own Argumentation first from those untruths with which I charged it;
endeavor to show that the most part of the 20. Doctrines mentioned by you are
comprised in the Creed; which I absolutely deny: Prove if your can that,
because some of them are comprised in the Creed, therefore for that reason (for
no other is mentioned) all the rest must be acknowledged to be necessary; which
I also deny: Show that being comprised in the Creed, the Articles comprehending
the Creed, and the Expositions of the Creed contain nothing of them, which I
thirdly deny: and when you have proved them, I will give you leave to fix what
Assertion you please upon me.

Your sixth General follows, As for your many Quibbles and Retortions, (all
built upon these sandy foundations) I shall value them no more then you value
us. Only that mistake of the Homily in point of Title, may be pardoned, when
your self confess the words themselves: We were far from our Books, and so
might mistake the Title of the Homily. But, so long as we have not falsified
the matter, which you dare not to justify, but acknowledge not to be proper
(and which we affirm to be absurd and false;) we leave it to all to judge,
whether that be a godly and wholesome Doctrine, necessary for these times. And
if it be not; then whether there be not a necessity of Reforming that 35 th.
Article, as to that point of the Homilies.

For my Quibbles, and those many, I shall not desire you to value them, but I
entreat you to show them. I beseech you be plain with me; declarewhat they are,
and shame me with them. For the Retortions, if you mean by them my Answers, I
could wish you would value them so far as to give them a civil reply;
howsoever I am resolved so far to value you and your writings. The mistake of
the Homily in point of Title is easily pardoned, the rather, because it is the
least of your mistakes; for, even in this particular, though you have not
falsified the matter; that is, the words produced, yet you have mistaken the
Argument; and though I have plainly showed your mistake, you refuse to rectify
it. I did clearly distingnish between the Doctrines delivered in the Articles,
and the Illustrations of them; I did show that the 35. Article did bind us to
the acknowledgment of the one, and does not require us to maintain the other; I
did make it appear that your Objections did no way touch the Doctrine of the
Homilies, but were only against some expressions in the Illustrations or
accumulated authothorities: when I had shown all this, you vouchsafe no answer
to it all, but leave it to all to judge, and I make no Question but the
judgment is easy; for it is no more then this, That the people ought to read
the Scriptures is a godly and wholesome Doctrine: This is the only Doctrine of
one of the Homilies accused. That it is profitable for a wan to exercise
himself in Almesdeeds, is a godly and wholesome Doctrine; this is the only
Doctrine of the other Homily accused. The Articles speak of nothing else but
the Doctrine of the Homilies: therefore there appeared no necessity of
reforming the 35th. Article, as to that part of the Homilies.

Your seventh General is this, As touching the Regal Supremacy we own and will
assert it as far as you do, or dare. Only we had reason to take notice of the
improper Expression in the 37. Article, that the Queens Majesty has the
Supreme Power. For, if the Declaration fathered on the late King, and prefixed
to the Articles, had so much power with his Printer, that he durst net to alter
the word Queen, into King, even in the year 1642. and, those Articles must be
read verbatim, without alteration or explanation; then, we say again, there is
a necessity, of reforming that Article in the expression of it: and not to talk
at random what was indeed the meaning, unless we may have leave, when we read
it, (Regia Declaratione non obstante) to declare the sense; which the
Declaration allows us not to do.

Your Resolution to assert the Regal Supremacy, I am glad to hear; but how the
Expression in the 37. Article should be improper, I cannot understand. The
Article was made in the year 1562. the Subscription is required to the Article
made in that year, by the Act of the 13. Eliz. The Expression which you call
improper is, the Queens Majesty has the Supreme Power; and is this improper in
an Article acknowledged to be made in that year? was there not then a Queen
which had the Supreme Power; that is to say, a Queen Regnant?

As for your expression of the Declaration fathered on the late King, it
seems to me much more improper. I believe you cannot prove but that
Declaration was His own, as much as any other Declaration was His or any
King's. And for a Subject to speak so of His King, or to judge and declare what
Declaration is His, and what is not, is certainly at least very improper. That
pious King and blessed Martyr, was too often thus used; but never that I know
by any that professed themselves so daring to assert His Regal Supremacy as you
do. His Declarations were denied to be His; though asserted, framed, pend by
himself; His Book denied to be His, though none could pen it but himself: He
was denied to have declared what He did constantly profess, to have written
what He wrote, to have spoken what He spoke; and at last sure some will deny
Him to have suffered what He endured.

But as to that conceit of yours, that this Declaration had so much power with
the Printer, that he durst not to alter the word Queen into King even in the
year 1642. it seems to me so strange, that I cannot imagine that you ever
considered it when you wrote it: you are so angry with the Declaration, that it
must be guilty of every thing. The Articles were several times Printed after
the death of Queen Elizabeth, and before the Declaration of Charles I. and in
them you will find the word Queen not turned into the word King; and I pray
you, what power hid the Kings Declaration with the Printers then? They were
printed by Robert Norton 1612. by Bonham Norton and John Bill 1624. both
Editions have the words as they were in the Queens time, and yet there was no
Declaration then to enforce them not to alter the words. Do you imagine that the
Printers had any power to alter the words of the Articles of the Church, if
there were no Declaration to preserve them entire? Assure your self, it was not
the Power of the Kings Declaration, but the duty of the Printer which caused
him not to vary from his Copy: from which none of the Printers from die death
of the Queen did ever vary, and that for the same cause. I beseeeh you
therefore, Sir, acknowledge the Declaration to be the Kings, as Mr. Burton did,
and say not that it was fathered upon that blessed Martyr, which Mr. Burton
himself would not endure; and when you have acknowledged that the Declaration
was the Kings, acknowledge also that it was not the cause of the continuation
of the words of the Articles, because those words were constantly continued
without that Declaration; and which is more, the Declaration it self gives not
any command expressly for the words, but only for the Literal and Grammatical
sense.

And now the Printer has done his part to print the Queens Majesty, according
to his Copy; The Incumbent, without any other Act of Parliament for alteration
of those words, or without an annulling of the Kings Declaration, may read the
Kings Majesty, and not thereby be in danger of any Law; and the reason is
clear, because the Kings Majesty and the Queens Majesty (speaking of a Queen
regnant, as the Article speaks) is the same thing in the Law. For you may be
pleased to take notice what was declared by the second Parliament, 1 Mariae
cap. 1. Be it declared and enacted by the Authority of this preesnt Parliament,
That the Laws of this Realm is and ever has bin and ought to be understand,
that the Kingly or Regal Office of this Realm, and all Dignities, Prerogative,
Royal Power, Preheumencer, Privileges, Authorities and Jurisdictions thereunto
annexed, united or belonging, being invested either in Male or Female, are, and
be, and ought to be, as fully, wholly, absolutely and entirely deemed, judged,
accepted, invested and taken in the one as in the other, etc. And therefore Sir
Edward Coke in his Commentaries upon the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. de
Proditionibus, making it Treason to imagine the death of our Lord the King,
says, that a Queen Regnant is within these words [Nostre Seignior le Roy for
she has the Office of a King: and whereas the same Statute makes it Treason
to imagine the death of the Kings eldest Son and Heir, he says, that the
eldest Son and Heir of a Queen Regnant is within this Law. Being then the Law
makes no distinction between a King and a Queen Regnant, being it looks not
upon the Sex, which may be different, but upon the Office which is wholly the
same in either Sex, being the Doctrine of the Church is wholly agreeable with
the Law of the Land in this particular; therefore there needs no reformation
in this case, because whatsoever assertion is set forth concerning the
Sovereign power, if it be spoken in the life of a Queen and in the Title of a
Queen, it may be also spoken in the life of a King, in the title of a King: if
it be asserted in the life time of a King under the Title of a King, it may be
spoken in the life of a Queen under the Title of a Queen, and that without fear
of the breach of any Law of the Land or Doctrine of the Church. Assure your
self therefore, that notwithstanding the Act of the 13. of Eliz. and
notwithstanding the Declaration of Charles I. you may yet read in the Articles,
the Kings Majesty, and there is no necessity of an Act of Parliament to make or
justify that alteration.

Your last Paragraph is this, As concerning the Law- part, though you strain
hard, yet I hold it not worth one line of Reply, till you have answered the
four Queries propounded in page 61. and 62. of our Book. Not that I would wave
ought which deserves Answer; but, to spare labor where it would be, in the
judgment of wise men, ridiculous to bestow it. This is spoken in love to the
truth, and to your self also, by

Your Servant (and Brother, if you please) C. BVRGES.

To which I answer First, that till you Answer that Law-part, I shall take it
to be unanswerable, as, to use your language, many wise and learned men do. 2.
The condition required by you is very strange, that you will not answer my
Discourse till I have answered those four Queries, when one of the four has no
kind of Relation to the Articles, and the Ground of another concerns them not.
But, that, (if it be possible) I may obtain a serious Reply from you, to what I
nave delivered concerning the Legal Confirmation of our Public Doctrine, I
will here punctually answer to the Queries so far as they concern the Articles,
which are now in question; and do further promise that I will answer the rest
of the same Queries, so far as they concern any other subject, when I come to
treat of that subject which they concern.

Your first Quere (as to the Articles,) runs thus page 61. Whither, if there be
anything of substance altered in or added to the Articles, and those
Alterations not expressly mentioned and confirmed by Parliament; this does not
make those Articles to be void in Law, if pleaded in Law? The Ground of this
Quere is the Act of the 13. Eliz. This is the Quere and the ground; but how
that Act should be produced as the Ground of that Quere, I cannot see. The Act
relates to the Subscription of the Articles, the Ground of the Quere is a
supposed alteration of the Articles; (for if the Articles were not altered, to
what purpose is the Quere?) and certainly Alteration and Subscription are two
several things. It is required by the Law, that every person admitted to a
Benefice with cure do declare his assent unto all the Articles comprised in a
Book imprinted with a certain Title; if those Articles so comprised be pleaded
in Law, they can be no way voided in Law, if any other1 Articles should be
pleaded in the place of them, such Articles so pleaded, I conceive, might be
voided; but that would be little to your purpose, because the true Articles
meant by the Law, might still be pleaded. If a man should read the old true
Articles, and should be accused for not reading Articles set forth since with
additions or substantial alterations, I make no question but the plea would be
void. But if he should be required without Law to read a Book with-alterations,
and should omit to read a Book which has no substantial alteration, and is
required by Law; I suppose, the Statute would be of force against him. But
howsoever, I do absolutety deny that there is any substantial alteration of,
or addirion to those Articles mentioned in the Act of 13. Eliz. and do assert
that, the Articles, to which the late Kings Declaration was affixed, are the
same with them in number, nature, substance, words; as I am assured having my
self diligently collated them with an Edition of the Articles printed by
Richard Jugge, and John Cawood, Printers to the Queens Majesty in Anno Domini
1571. Being therefore the Articles enjoined to be read by a Law, have received
no alteration; I answer your Quere, that they cannot be voided in Law if
pleaded in Law.

The second Quere having only reference in it self to the Alterations which I
have denied, and having no reference in the Ground to the Articles at all, can
require no further answer here, where the Articles, only are concerned.

The third Quere is this, If any man be indicted or sued at Law upon the
Statute of 13. Eliz. for not reading the Articles of 1562. and the Defendant
plead Not guilty, and deny these Articles to be those confirmed by that Law,
till the Plaintiff prove them to be of Record; whether is not the Plaintiff
bound to prove that, and in the mean time the Defendant not punishable by that
Statute. The Grounds of this Quere are, first; that there are no Records of
these to be found; secondly, the Book has been several times altered since
that Act; and thirdly, many punished upon the said Acts, because that Book has
been generally received and used as established by Law. There are so many
mistakes in this Quere, and these several Grounds, that it will be very
difficult to show them all; first, the supposition of the Quere is incongruous,
as implying that which is contrary to the proceedings in this case; for if any
Person inducted into a Benefice do neglect or refuse to read his Articles
according to the Statute of 13. Eliz. I conceive he is not to be indicted or
sued at Law, and so as a Defendant to plead Not guilty, but upon proof made in
the Ecclesiastical Court that he has not read those Articles, he must be
forthwith deprived according to that Statute, which says, that he shall be
upon that default ipso facto immediately deprived. That this is to be done by
sentence Declaratory before the Bishop of the Diocese, and that this is the
ordinary proceeding in case of an Offender against that Statute, appeared from
the proceedings against John Durston, mentioned in 6. part of Sir Edward Coke's
Reports, page 29. in Greenes case, whole words are these. Le Seignior Pawlet 6.
Aprilis 1574. Present al dit esglise un John Durston, que a ceo fuit admit
institute and induct, and ne lia les Articles solonque lestatute de 13. Eliz.
cap. 12. Per quel cause 10. Martii 1583. al suit del dit Thomas Seignior
Pawlet, il fuit deprive per sentence Declaratory devant Levesque. Being
therefore the Nature of the Statute is such, that the proof is not put on the
Plaintiff but on the Defendant, who is bound to read the Articles enjoined by
the Statute, and if he be accused for not reading, is bound to prove that he
has read them, and consequently to produce the Articles which he has read as
those intended in the Statute; it is easily answered to your Quere, that it
supposes something wholly inconsistent with the Proceedings in the Case, and
puts that upon the Plaintiff which belongs to the Defendant, and therefore
the Quere may be wholly denied in every part of it.

Again, as the Quere is inconsistent to it self, so the Grounds arc either
false in themselves, or at least no way concerning the intent of the Quere. The
first Ground I have already refuted, showing that the Record, that is, the
Original of the Articles is to be found, and if it were not, the Articles
comprised in a Book imprinted commanded by the Law to be read, are to be found,
which is enough to evacuate the Quere: because it cannot be necessary to find
any more then the Act expresses. And if any man read those Articles which are
to be found, it must lie upon the Plaintiff to prove that such Articles so
read, were not the Articles intended in the Statute.

As for the second Ground, that the Book of Articles has been several times
altered since the Act of 13. of Eliz. It is so far from truth, that I can
aver, as I have done before, that the Articles now in force are the same with
the Articles comprised in a Book imprinted when the Act was made, without any
the least alteration; and whosoever reads either those of 1571. or any
Edition printed since the Kings Declaration, and gives his full assent to the
same, shall never be in danger of a Declaratory sentence of Deprivation upon
that Statute.

The third Ground of your Quere, the more of truth it has in it, has the less
of reason to Ground the Quere; for the more have been punished upon the said
Act, because the Book has been generally received as established by Law the
less is it probable that it should not be so established. The Articles are as
much enrolled now, as they were when any persons were punished for not reading
them; and it is to be presumed that they were as desirous and careful to
preserve themselves in those Benefice into which they instituted and inducted,
as others are now, and that the Learned of the Law did as well understand how
to avoid the sentence of the Statute as now they do, and therefore the constant
practice to the contrary, is enough to persuade any man that your new plea, if
there were any such to be admitted, would prove invalid.

Your fourth Quere concerns the Canons only made by the Convocation and
ratified by the King, and therefore requires no present reply in this
discourse confined to the Justification of the 39. Articles.

Thus far have I stepped out of my way in answer to your Queres, hoping thereby
to invite you to a ferious reply to the Law-part, at the least, of my
Discourse. And though I have omitted that part of your Queres which concern the
Common Prayer and the Canons, it is not at all as if I thought them
unanswerable, but only because I think it not proper to confound the Subjects
of which I intend to treat. I do therefore but reserve that part of the Queres
which concerns the Common Prayer unto my answer to the matter of Worship, and
that of the Canons, unto the part which follows; assuring you that by the
assistance of God, I shall very suddenly show that there is no such Necessity
of a Reformation of the Public Worship of the Church of England as you
pretend; neither will it be long before I demonstrate the same concerning the
Ceremonies and the Discipline.

Being near the Conclusion of my Answer to your Postscript, there fell
accidentally into my hands a more civil Address written by William Hamilton
Gent. who undertakes to be an Interpreter to you and the Ministers of sundry
Counties, and to defend your Book by altering the State of the Question, and
the Conclusion to be proved. I conceive it reason at the present not to answer
that Treatise, because I am sure he has much mistaken the meaning of my words,
and therefore it is very probable that he may have as much mistaken yours; and
I shall not oblige my self to answer any other meaning then your own.

Howsoever in this your Postscript I have waved nothing, except your bad
language, which 1 shall ever wave assuring you that no provocations shall ever
tempt me to break my resolution of writing with a Brotherly temper, and
Christian Moderation: in love to which, as well as to the truth, I subscribe my
self,

Your Servant and Brother, J. PEARSON.

FINIS.

