QUAERE'S, SEASONABLE, TO BE humbly presented to King Charles, at Holmby, and
others, for his Parliament at Westminster: With a few to be taken to heart, by
the Common people of England, communicated:

By PHILANACTODEMUS.

Whereunto is added a Prologue and an Epilogue, for the better Illustration of
the thing to the different Reader.

April: 15th. London. Printed in the Year 1647.

The Prologue.
Malignant,
I Know I shall be censured by thee, I would feign court thee into a true and
good opinion of me, and it shall be in a Dramaticke way. I know thou love
Plays, as an old Protestant, yet it is a great wonder to me, that Papists
should join with thee, as well as they did to fight for Protestant Religion,
to go and see them in Lent, which is the principal time of their devotion.
Then imagine thou see act in these Quaeres, The Emperor, King of Spain,
French King, King of Denmark, Bohemia, Hollander, Rocheller, German Princes,
Scots, Pope, Jesuit, Bloody Irish, nay, the Devil himself; and how to make
this a Tragicomedy, will require a good Artist; sure none, but Heaven, can do
it. I forgot to name thee amongst the Speakers, but if thou do not find
one, as like thy self as can be, in the heat of the Play, I am much mistaken.
There is one, I am sure on it, that fought a great while for the liberty of the
Subject in England, and when he would not find it here, he went over into
France for it: There, there are brave Parliaments, ten for one, at least. After
that he has quarrelled with his Affronter, and his Host, and had half the
time of experiment of them, as of this tedious English Parliament, he will
satisfy, and comfort himself for all the losses, and dangers, he has exposed
himself, and his friends to, here. Well Malignant, see the Play, and when
thou have done, give me thy opinion of it.

Quaeres to be humbly presented to his Majesty's Remembrance, in the
Consideration, and his Resolution in the Answer.
1. WHether the non prosecution of the Palatinate War, begun with so many
Protestations by King James, that he would never sheath his sword, till by
Gods grace, it were recovered; and thereby diverse German Protestants were
engaged, was not a weakening to the cause there, and consequently to your
Majesty's dishonor?

2. Whether the deserting of that War, and contracting of great debts, and
pawning of the Crown Jewels, to the misdirecting of a fleet to Cales, against
the advice of your then Parliament, were not a spoiling of your credit with the
Hollander, and a blasting the bud of your reputation in War, with all Princes
in Christendom?

3. Whether the engaging the King of Denmark against the Emperor, and then
deserting him, and your Brother Palatine, to make the French King your Enemy
(as if the Emperor and King of Spain had not been big enough) at the self
same time when you would not be advised, nor agree with your Parliament, and to
embroyle the Rochellers in a war against the French King, after you had lent
your Ships to the beating of them, whereby the French were taught the better
use of Navigation, were not a shaking to the Basis of the Protestant Religion,
and the welfare of your Kingdoms, and the taking away all hopes of recovering
any of your right in France?

4. Whether the not ayding of the Swede upon Oxesterne his Embassy, were not
the loss again of the Palatinate, and a great party in Germany, to their very
regrett at this Day?

5. Whether the raising of ship money upon pretense of necesssitie, and setting
out of fleetes to sea to noe use, were not a great oppression of your people,
and another blasting of your reputation in War with all Foreign Princes?

6. Whether the sending of the Earl of Arundell Ambassador into Germany, when
at the Diet at Ratisbone he was to be a spectator of the King of Hungary being
made King of the Romans, and the Duke of Bavaria invested in the Palatinate,
was not a confirmation of your Majesty's consent to both, and no intention of
relief to the Palsgrave?

7. What motives had your Majesty to breed such a jealousy with your people
(though it was not then known by the awe of your evil Council over them a
long time) as the sending of several Agents to Rome, and receiving several
Nuncios from thence, just at the time when you deceived your Subjects of their
expectation, to fight abroad, for which to do you honor and service, they
were contented with illegality, but you must needs turn your sword into your
own bowels, As if the affronts, and disgraces, you had made your self, not
only with your enemies, but your friends, and kindred, must be revenged upon
that flock, you were ordained to preserve? Your Majesty had the Goats, the
Sheep by Gods blessing are safe, yet they desire you to be their Shepherd if
you please.

8. Whether your Majesty's raising of Arms against the Kingdom of Scotland,
when you engaged your whole Nobility, and much Gentry of England, in a design
of War, with an oath to fight for what your Majesty was contented to pacify
upon the first Treaty, was either honor or advantage to your Majesty, or your
Kingdom of England? Were not both Armies (though the English advance did
impair many an estate) suddenly disbanded? and your Majesty no sooner come to
London, but presently a paper of the Treaty, found in a Noble man's custody,
must be burnt by the hand of the Hangman; and a new War must be proclaimed, and
a new General nominated, almost a year before you were ready, though your
Majesty called a Parliament, contrary to your promise to your Lord Keeper, for
which you broke his heart, to advance the design with a pretextuous letter, Au
Roy: And the Parliament, though you would never have agreed with them before,
would have assisted in that blinded understanding, but that your Evil Council
would have all present money, and give no reason for it, and therefore did not
your Majesty dissolve that Parliament?

9. Was it your necessity against the income of Scots, or your own design, to
bring them in, for you may easily practice what you will (upon your English
people) or the providence of Heaven, to unite us both, that your Majesty called
this Parliament; was not this Parliament begun in trouble, and combustion, when
two Armies were ready to fight, and both invited to destroy this? Were not your
Majesty's evil Counselors of greatest esteem, accused by a just complaint,
of which your Majesty's ears should be most open, to your three Kingdoms?
What charge, and what danger, to the Kingdoms, was the keeping of those Armies
on foot? What delay of justice? When the Armies we^e disbanded, what haste into
Scotland? What attempts there? How your Majesty, and your people were there
agreed, was beyond a then English Imagination, if we had had that constancy,
to what Principles, belong to us, more then them, your Majesty's Cavaliers had
never given such a common name to Englishmen, but we had gone the way to desire
your Majesty, to know your friends here, as they did in Scotland.

10. Why your Majesty should ask us at your return from thence, why we were
not a contented people, as they were, is beyond any reason you gave us then for
it, and against it since, you convinced or passed most Delinquents; you
displaced diverse men, that were commanded to do their duty against the Earl
of Strafford? you gave us a perpetual Parliament, which an assuredness of
your good Acts, would have made short, and business easy, but such a
Laberinth have you brought it, and this Kingdom to, by your absence from it,
and refusing to do those things, which must secure your Majesty, and the
Members in it, that there must be a Counsel from Heaven, to which you must
join in prayer, with your people, for the making of your self glorious, and
them happy by it.

11. Why your Majesty should offer such treaties, and still provide for Arms,
keep your Agencies with so many several Princes, to bring strangers upon your
own people (a principal judgment of God cited by the Prophet) why you should
declare against Papists, and receive them not only into favor, but into Major
Generals Commands, is against the sense of any true Protestant? Why you should
engage, and spill so much blood (as if blood would require no vengeance,
especially when it is between Brother and Brother) for the denying your self,
and disabling so many of your Subjects of so many Paradices, as your Kingdoms
afforded you, and them, deserves repentance, and regret.

12. Why after the Rebellion in Ireland, that War was so slackned, till your
Majesty desired to go your self, merely to get a life guard of 2000. men
here first, which by the consequent may very well be supposed, was intended
against your English People; for if you attempted this war with a fourth part
of the number, and was able with that volant party, to seize upon so many
Magazines, provided for the defenses of several Counties, and offer at Hull it
self, though you washed the Lord Digbies intercepted Letter to the Queen, to
advise you to retreat into a strong place, with the vain fears, and
jealousies of your Parliament, what could you have done with a greater force?

13. Why your Majesty pretended so much the prosecution of that war, and after
took away the materials belonging to those, that were engaged in it, but to
show you desired a cessation there, to make your war stronger with those false
men here, though it was a strange hazard of State, to leave that Kingdom so
slenderly guarded, and that poor remainder of Protestants unmassacred, to the
mercy of such barbarous Rebels; who we may justly conjecture, had they not had
some further assurance from your Ma. of a settlement by Law, to the ruin of
Protestants with them, would not have left unattempted the murder of the rest,
is against any understanding, but of deeper capacities?

14. Why should your Ma. send Glamorgan to make a peace with the Rebels, when
you could not procure Ormo^d to do it, and then Digby to accuse Glamorgan, for
so doing, both whom have been Agents for your Ma. there since, does as much
stumble us?

15. Did your Majesty ever read that any English Prince was ever fortunate,
that was averse to Parliaments, and have you read of Edward the first, that
fought so long in defense of his Father, against Parliaments, loved Parliaments
best afterward, and prooved the most Victorious Prince of his time?

16. Was not the sending Prince Charles into France, against the sense of your
Majesty, after you had passed it your self? Was not the hazard of making you
resign your Title to that Crown, before you should be released (if taken)
then inculcated to you? Was there any necessity of so doing, after he had been
so kindly invited to the Parliament?

17. Was your Majesty's request to your Parliament for the sending you so many
Anticovenanting Priests either reasonable or seasonable, as if you had forgot
what you had done with your Scots, or never considered what you did there, was
agreeable with the most universal practice, of the Protestant Religion
throughout Christendom? Were not Francis the first, and Henry the fourth your
Majesty's Father in Law (the most valiant and powerful Princes of their time)
the greatest favorers of Presbyteriall Government, though they could not
establish it by reason the Papacy was so inveterately settled, and their
Reformation so young, as it wanted strength.

18 Whether their example is not a sufficient precedent for your Actions, as
well as your profession of following your Father King James in his care of the
Commonwealth? Which we see evidenced otherwise, for he renownced Episcopacy
in Scotland, and probably would have done it here, if he had been so desired
by his Parliament, took the Covenant, and never denied Justice, against any
favorite, or Councellers whatsoever, whenever his Parliament asked it?

19. Was the obtruding of the Common Prayer, and book of Cannons, agreeable
with your Majesty's Oath, taken at your Coronation at Edenborough? If nor, how
could that Oath be dispensed withal, more then the Oath taken at the
Coronation at Westminster? Was that Oath at Westminster taken according to the
sense of the giver, or the receiver? are either, or both Oaths, obligatory to
maintain old Laws, and Ceremonies obnoxious to the necessity of the season?
If I? How came so much Reformation of Law, and Religion, by your Majesty's
Predecessors, and in what state of souls health, do you conceive them that
did so, to be?

May it please your Majesty: No good Shepherd will separate his sheep, when
he can keep them together, nor lodge them in three folds, when one will serve:
and when your Majesty by your own experience has cured one flock, by a
known Medicine, will you deny that approoved balsome to the other two? Unity
was the thing that Christ left us to practice upon earth, when he went up into
Heaven, and there he exercises it himself, for the three Persons to our
understanding, acted rather here beneath. God has made your Majesty our head
to be a Pattern to us of unity.

Nay, if we straggle, God has given your Majesty the rod, and the shepherds
staff, to coerce us into the fold. We desire then your Majesty to bring us all
into one practice of serving God, and obeying your Majesty; that your Majesty
will encourage these our hopes by taking our Covenant, and take off the
imputation which by the persuasion of those false Prophets, and Mountebancks of
State (that have this long time kept your Majesty from your Parliament) you
have taken upon your self, and lay it justly upon those Locusts and
Caterpillars, that by the serene countenance of your Majesty over your people,
they may be destroyed from the face of the earth, that your Justice may shine
like the Sun, and the same of your Majesty ring through the world, to the
terror of your enemies, and the comfort of all your good people.

Quaeres to be humbly proponed to the Lords, and Commons assembled in
Parliament at Westminster.
1. Whether you can secure this Kingdom (as none other can or ought to do
it) without settling your own houses, in a certain knowledge of your Members,
to be true Members thereof?

2. Whether the enquiry into that knowledge, will not be too tedious by having
those businesses examined by a Committee at Westminster?

3. Whether the charge of that inquiry, being for the Public good, is not
fit to be borne by the Public purse?

4. Whether the charge of that enquiry will not be less, by sending a
Commission into the Country, by Lords and Commons, for the trial of the
truth, and the certainty more then by having the Counties and Corporations
attending at Westminster?

5. Whether such a Commission be not more agreeable to the practice of the
Laws, by Circuits, within this Kingdom, then any other way, and whether not
of equal ease to the people?

6. Whether it is probable, that when the sword, and the purse, and all other
coercive power has been in the Soldier, Committee me^, and their inferior
Officers hands, and still remains so; That a Parliament Committee at
Westminster should have a true information of the affairs of the Countries?

7. Whether it will not be a great engaging of the Country peoples loves, to
have their grievances visited at their own doors, to the staggering of all
sorts of Malignant Parties, and confirming the people in a true sense of the
Parliaments intentions, in the Reformation of the Church and State?

8. Whether such a Commission may not have a relation to the Sewres of the
Kingdom, that because the horses are wasted, and will be for many years
wanting, there may be carriage had by water, and that the Wears, and Mills
belonging to Malignants, being taken away, in places proper, those that belong
to the well affected, be bought out with the Public purse, for making the
Rivers of England navigable?

9. Whether such a Commission may not extend to the relieving of the well
affected, in the several Counties, against the malice of the constantly
Malignant, the most worldly, and griping men, who by Suits in Law, Arests, etc.
may ruin many a well affected man, that has lost and spent his estate in the
Parliament service? Is it not a strange Paradox of State, that a Cane shall
secure a man more then a sword? and a Committee of Complaints be erected to
relieve Malignants, and none for those that have fought for the Parliament? As
if defending of Garrisons against the Command of King and Parliament severally,
were greater reason of protection, then the constant defending of the true
Cause?

10. Whether it is possible, that except money be brought down to six per
Cent. the particular debts of the Kingdom can be paid, or Land yield that
value, as to satisfy the Public?

May it please your Lordships.

Quaeres considerable by the Common people of Engl^nd.
First for the Soldiery.
1. Whether the Law of Arm^s be agreeable with the Laws of Christiani^y? I
so, whether a soldier employed in Arms, may preach in Church, or privately, to
the dividing of the frame of Ecclesiastical Law, in the government of the
Church?

2. Whether the Civil Magistrate may not punish such a Soldier, that does so
offend?

3. Whether it can agree with the essence of a true Christian, who ought to be
Christ's Soldier, as a Member of the Church Militant to converse with, allow,
or tolerate; nay rather is he not bound to fight against the Turk, Jew,
Atheist, Pap^st, or any other false worshipper, prophaner, or renter of the
seamlesse garment of Jesus Christ, in the behalf, and for the cause of Christ
Jesus?

For the City.
4. Whether the City of London is not bound as well in policy, as conscience,
to assist their Brethren of the Country, and they reciprocally them, in the
joint maintaining of the liberty of the Subject, which has been so gloriously
vindicated, by the constancy of the two Nations of England and Scotland, in
their Parliaments? was not that always the Physician of the Law, whenever
any ulcers broke out? and why should it be declined, much less reviled?

5. Whether is not this City, and indeed all other, that have held for the
Parliament, in much better condition, now and at all times of this war, then
those where the Royal Q^^rters were kept? could there any thing be expected
but the plunder of the City of London, if entered by the rattleheaded party? was
not so much publicly professed by them? and yet will people wish for them
again?

For the Country.
I^ it possible to preserve a new Acquest without charge, and hazard, viz. the
just liberty of the Subject? and shall we then gsumble at the Parliaments
ordering the Quartering of a necessary Army, for the preserving of our peace,
especially when it shall consist of such men, as shall give no scandal to
Church or State, nor do any thing then secure the Country?

My advice to all is, to be content with the government which God has more
expressly favored this Island withal, more then any other Nation, that is, of
this Parliament, that as the King never dies in Law, so the privilege of the
Subject should not neither: and this being so difficultly brought on, and
miraculously kept, it is against the sense of Earth, and I am confident against
the will of Heaven, it should be attempted to be dissolved. We read the
Patriarchs used to evidence their serving of God with sacrifice, and though God
did afterward appoint his chosen people to serve him that way; yet to one of
the best of his servants he says, Obedience is better: That Obedience which
produces awe and unity, fear, love, and security. I desire the people of
England to join in to the glory of God, the honor of the King, the privilege
of Parliaments, and the settling of a firm peace and true Religion, among all
good Christians.

THE EPILOGUE, Discourst by the Dramatist Semi Prelaticall Protestant, Papist,
and Independent.
Dramatist. NOw Sir, what do you thing of this inlightment? do you Master
Protestant know, what you have fought for all this while? were not you of the
same opinion with me, at the instant of those misguidances demonstrated now
unto you? did you not observe the practice of the latter Prelates, to be quite
contrary to what was used in Queen Elizabeth, and King James' times? could you
believe the profession of the Archbishop of Canterbury at his death, before
your own eye sight, in your own experience in his life time? Are you bound to
let the worship, and glory of God, to be dishonored by your suffering, when by
your sword you may preserve it? Does the Church Militant consist merely in
suffering? is God called the Lord of Hosts, because his people must submit
rather then defend his true Religion? Js the Arbitration in Government of a
Prince (though never so pious) more convincible to the reason of obeyers, then
these laws, made for the necessities, and requests of those that are to be
governed?


Semi-Prelat. I must confess, I was of your opinion, but I have been in a
dream a great while; I got by chance to Oxford, where I was so plied with
College beer, and lewd Sack, and so followed by the Scholars, with drink,
and sophistry, that I lost all my former remembrance, till I came home, where
when J had considered a little, and began to waver in my opinion, my wife comes
in, and posts me back to Oxford, to bring home some honor, and she added
further, that besides the saving of my own life and my estate, the King might
bestow such a round-headed neighbors house and land upon me (for the King
would surely hang all the Roundheads) upon this I returned, and raised what
forces J could, but I did not find the King so bountiful as I expected, and
the widows of some that had raised troops, and ventred their lives, but dyed
by sickness were as hardly used for the wardships of their Children. I cannot
blame the King for this, in all, (though he be close enough) but must lay it
upon some Courtiers and some of the favorites of the two German Princes, who if
we had the command of any Garrisons and did not pay our constant contributions
extraordinary to them we were suddenly displaced and made Reformadoes, to
prevent which we did plunder the Country sufficiently, and yet did not thrive
in our Arms, and if there were any boon to be gotten, some of the forenamed
crept between us, and it. We are now undone, saving the grace of the
Parliament, which is extraordinary to us; (we are sure we should not have used
them so if we had had the better,) and you have so dissolved our late taken up
principles, that we must desire, you to Petition the Parliament, that no more
of us, may be suffered to go over into France, for diverse of us desire to go
thither, upon great hopes the Queen will bring us back again with a poulder.
But a Gentleman whom J dare trust, came from thence lately, who says we are
infinitely slighted there, and the Prince himself meanly Courted, and allowed
his followers wretchedly. And for the Religion we professed at Oxford, there is
no toleration for it there, but in Henry Jermyns Chapel and that is so nigh
the Queens that it smells to much of Popery. If we should go to Charenton we
must turn Presbyteriall, and then loose that slight Alimony we have from the
Queen, and all further hopes from the King. We humbly desire you will entreat
the Parliament that staying here we may make use of a wood for the hearing of
the Common Prayer, as the Independents exercised in their way; if not, and that
you will force us to be Presbyterians, you will banish the Papists and
Independents, and let us have but one settled form of Religion.


Papist. Sir Dramatist, I pray forbear to request our banishment, as Master
Protestant would have it; for either the French or Spanish or Italian
Catholics would make such a prey of us as we had better pay all statute
payments in England then endure their laws, or adventure at their charity; we
had no Agents at Rome before, but were lustily maintained from hence, and yet
great gratuities went to the Popes favorites, for the allowing of us to venture
our lives, and estates, against the laws of our Country, and our Priests and
Jesuits made as strong hazard, by oath, and our purses, as all. But Sir if an
ingenuous confession will move with you I will make it. There be as many Sects
of us, as of Jndependents; and if the Inquisition had not been set up to the
awing of all, there would have been more. We English Catholics had been rent
in the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign by our own divisions; but when
Bancroft came to be Archbishop, we had opportunity to plaster up a rent in a
Gunpowder treason. And when that could take no effect nor we do any thing more
during the life of Crooke-back Cicill, though the then Northampton was our
friend, we ventred on King James his weakness in his favorite, Somerset and
more in Buckingham; we had then one of our own Religion, that governed
favorite and King, and we brought in a principal instrument of Spain,
Gundamore, to take of the maine agent of the English designs against the
Catholic and Spanish advance and to our own shame, be it spoken, we got that
Agents head to be stricken off.How we pursued the rest of that design, when we
desired one Queen Mary, and got another, though our design went on more
cleaverly, then it could have done by the first, is beyond my knowledge of the
secrets of State; but you may resemble it to this; the King held at once the
Primate of Ireland, John of York, Doctor Prideaux, and Doctor Holsworth in
disgrace, they were the great Puritants of the then times; The Spanish match
was in the same relish with the people of England. The King when he was to
engage his Protestant Subjects in a war, and had banished all Catholics from
his Court, only with an explanation, that he expected their horses, and Arms,
to set Protestant Riders on, found that Canterbury or Wren or any other
Arminian faction could not advance any Protestant considerable party toward
him, makes use of the first univesally, the other in Wales, third in
Worstershire and Oxford the fourth in Cambridge and London to the following of
their steps in the Kings affairs. It Is true we laughed all this while at their
indiscretion, in promoting our designs; for we knew well our Generalissimo was
coming that did as much for the time, as we could expect, but then they
preached our projects, and gave an outside to the Kings cause when we had
caemented the Junto within: we have labored other Nations to, but the
interesse of Franceover Spain was so great that rather then lose their hold
here, the French deferred us; the Hollander was jealous of the English match,
the Dane embroyled by the Sweeds; the Loraynet had such a long march by land,
and distrusted by the way he could not come at us; Only the Irish that begun
our cause and would have continued it, but that they could not have our
conditions by the dissimulation of Ormond; They have offered to relieve us if
we may trust them, though I as English Papist expect as little favor from
them as from French, Italian or Spaniard, or rather murder for my Nations
sake; My request is Sir, that you would prevail with the Parliament, that we
may stay in England without a Priest, that our Children may be educated
according to their direction, and if there be any Schools fit for the Aged of
us (we have used to kneel to our Priest though much younger then our selves)
or other degrees we desire we may go thither, and if any Treason against God
the King, or the Parliament be found, let us suffer according to that Law they
have made, or shall make, for their own security, and our dissolution.


Independ. I pay spare our banishment too, for if we should travile into
Holland, our train would be so numerous (so many of us having bin Militant)
that we should breed a new jealousy there, if into France, the Presbyterians
would defy us, and the Papists, and all the Queens party, when they are out
of hope of having any more good by us, an we stay not in England, to keep a
division in the Parliaments party, will hate us more, then ever they complied
with us; If we go to New England, we hear so much of their uniting, in the
practice of Religion, and the Government of the Church, that we fear, we
shall be worse put to it, there, then at home; We desire therefore that Master
Protestant would be satisfied with a wood, we can spare him two, or three, and
a River too, in hope that they may Baptize anew; for Master Protestant is very
flexible in his Religion, saving that he takes Edward the Sixts Tradition for
as good, and obligatory as Scripture, and in that, and his willingness to
submit to absolute Monarchy he is only positive; If we should be banished,
he would long for Bishops again, though the last courtesy they did him, when
they were in their power, was to chasten him in all their Courts. You may see
what ill humors the want of Discipline breeds to those men that used to be
whipped; if they delight in it, I pray let them have it, and let us alone, we
can be contented without several exercises in a Parlor or an upper Room. Nay
for the edifying, and making of Proselytes, we can find vacant Churches
enough. And for the further promulgation of our cause, we dare adventure into
a possessed Pulpit; only the other day one of our Brethren was much forsaken
of the Spirit, when he questioned a Minister for speaking against Bellarmine;
for he asked him whether he could prove it by Scripture, that Bellarmine fayd
so; and an other being expounding, and being contraried by his Brethren, it was
made appear, that the pocket Bible he had, though it was of the Amsterdam
size, yet it was of the Remish translation; We thought very well of that
Brother, that he was sanctified, and could not Sin, but certainly he did fall
in that exercise. Sir we request all our errors may be attributed to the desire
of knowledge in an excessive manner, (though some of us that are of the higher
form, think they have enough because they have more then their Brethren) yet
Sir, now I consider that the excessive desire of knowledge was the occasion of
Adams fall, and the consequent of more Ignorance, and all other evil and
mischief to his posterity, J think it may be a good warning to us, to sit
content with the mercy of Heaven, in that Peace, and Unity which it has
pleased God to provide for us. There wants nothing but a handsome Authority,
over us, to bring us into the universal fold, which I hope you will speak to
the Parliament for. Now I think of the Communion Christ left us, I think also
of his practice, before, and at it, and after it, nay and after his
Resurrection, for what greater Communion, then among sheep yet the last
command, he gave his Apostles was, to feed his sheep, so that for my part I
am convinced of my Separation, and I shall submit to what prudentiall
government of the Church the power that it set over me, shall provide for me,
and J shall be gladder, if it be that, which agrees with our other reformed
Brethren abroad,and I shall labor to bring in as many stray sheep as I shall
find, in the Wilderness, I will quit Parlor, and upper Room, for the serving
of God in his true congregation, so that I hope there will be no need of my
banishment.


Dramat. Now I find you all so pliable, J will tell you more of your
happiness then ever you heard before. If you turn truly you shall be called
Roundheads, a name as much above a Cavalier as Heaven is above Earth. This you
may consider by your own knowledge in the Arts, that the Heaven is Round, in
the whole, and in its singularities. The Sun constantly, the Moon that is the
Mistress of what man can do (without Gods other order) round in her
perfection; they have both faces, probably heads. Why you should make this a
name of scorn, is against the sense of Heaven. And if you contemplate below,
and were as you offer a right Cavalier (the best name upon Earth) when you
shall study and travail the Earth, you shall find that Earth round too, that
Earth were you made off; and if you have a head made of Earth, certainly that
must be round:Being thus constituted from the nature of Heaven and Earth, J
can tell you what a true sense of your former franticknesse will bring you too;
and as every sick man if he be strong enough to endure Physic, is to have
his Malignant humors purged, except he will venture a Fever at his heart, at
least an Ague in his bones, you being already purged are now to receive a
Cordial against the venom that has so long interlined your understanding,
and if you do it willingly, the Physic will work the better. I have known
many a sick Lady much comforted in her good opinion of her Doctor; what
Medicine our great Physician prescribes (though it may destroy some, yet if it
preserve many) we must not dispute. You may easily see what cures the
Parliament have done already. Lewis the Eleventh when he had corrupted Edward
the Fourths Counselors of War, and patcht up his Peace with a Tribute of
50000 Crowns a Year to be paid in the Tower of London, when he had foold
Charles the hardy into a War against the Swisses, (a People then more
contemptible then ever the Scots were esteemed by the haughtiness of the
Cavaliering party,) When he had possessed himself of the Duchy of Britain,
and made every old Payrage of France his own, he then dissolved all
Assemblies of State, which is just the same with English Parliaments, and then
bragged that he had brought the Realm of France, horse du Paga, that is, out
of Wardship. If now wicked Counsel has advised His Majesty, to practice upon
His People, when He was secure to all the World, and upon the example of Lewis
the Eleventh's prosperity against Parliaments, to adventure at doing the like
here, which was professed by Proclamation Royal; and yet by the providence of
Heaven one was brought on, and that one by the same providence, to do such
Miracles, and contrary to the Callers intention, to bring this Kingdom out of
Wardship, I could advise such evil Council, for their souls health
hereafter, and preserving the Laws better, here to offer themselves up as
Martyrs to the Justice of the Kingdomeso much abused by them, and that those
that are under the Parliaments obedience will think no adventure of their
Lives and Fortunes too hard for the securing of the Public.


FINIS.

