BERACHAH, OR, Englands Memento TO THANKEFVLNESSE, BEING An Hymn or Spiritual
Song setting forth the Praises of God, and extolling the wondrous works which
He has wrought for the Church of England a late, drawn forth from the
Scriptures, especially those Songs made upon the like occasion, and composed
together, to draw out our hearts the more in Praises.
PSALM. 66. 2. 3. Sing forth the honor of his name, make his praise glorious.
Say unto God, How terrible are thou in thy works? through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.
JER. 10. 16. The portion of Jacob is not like them, for he is the former of
all things, and Israel is the Rod of his Inheritance, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name.
Robert Earl of Essex his Exellence Lord General of the Parlimts: Army etc:

The most Exellent S Thomas Fairfax Captin General of the Armies etc:



Hallelujah.
Exodus 15. 1. etc.
COme, let us sing unto the Lord, for gloriously has he
Triumphed, horse and rider both thrown down together be.
The Lord has been our strength, and he therefore shall be our Song.
He has become still unto us, salvation all along.
He is our God, haste to prepare
Our Fathers God, Come let us then exalt him every one;
The Lord he is a man of war, Jehovah is his name.
Psalm. 68. 17.
His Charets twenty thousand are and he amidst the same,
Exodus 15. 6. etc.
Thy right hand Lord has shown it self in power gloriously,
In pieces Lord thy right hand has dashed the Enemy,
And in the greatness of thine own excelling ex'lency,
Thou have orethrowne, against thee, who themselves did magnify.
Thou did send forth thy wrath, and it consumed them suddenly,
Like as the fire does consume the stubble that is dry.
Dan. 4. 37. so confessed that great Monarch.
Who walk in pride, thou able art full low for to abase:
And such who are despised can raise,
And set up in their place.
Let all thy people unto thee
O God our God give praise,
Let every one speak well of thee
and bless thy name always.
Exodus 15. 11.
O Lord among the mighty ones what one is like to thee?
Psalm. 89. 6.
Or who in earth, or in the heavens with thee compared may be?
Who is like thee so glorious in holiness, and in
Praises so fearful, wonders great still every day doing?
Psalm. 92. 5.
O Lord how glorious are thy works! thy thoughts are very deep:
Psalm. 77. 13. In the Sanctuary some refer it to heaven, in the Sanct: ( i.
e) high and excellent above our apprehension; or in the Sanct: ( i. e.) hidden
from the eyes of the world, etc.
Thy way is in the holy place thou secret it do keep.
Psalm. 92. 7.
For when the wicked sprang as grass,
The workers of iniquity, together did they fall. Selah.
Job 20. 5.
Gods enemies triumphing's short, when like the Cedars tall,
They spread and lift aloft their head, as dung they perish all.
Exodus 15. 9. This especially was the insulting language and carriage of the
enemy after the taking of Bristoll, Bolton, Lecester, etc.
The Enemy said, I will pursue, them overtake will I,
I will divide the spoil, on them my Just will satisfy:
I will my sword draw, and my hand at once them now shall slay,
Thou did but speak the word and they forthwith were swept away. Selah.
Judge. 5. 41.
Thy foes which are implacable so perish in thy sight,
But who thee love be as the Sun when marching in his might.
Let all thy people unto thee
O God our God, etc.
Psalm. 68. 20.
Our God he is the God to whom salvations do belong,
Of life and death he does dispose his enemies among.
Mounts of prey, or the Mountains of the Lions and the Leopards ( i. e.) the
Kingdoms of this world which are full of rapine and extortion, and make prey
and spoil one of another like wild beasts, but the Lamb on Mount Sion excels
them all in power and gl^ry.
Glorious art thou, more excellent then all the mounts of prey:
The stout in heart are spoiled, have slept their sleep, their hands have they
Not found, who are the men of might, O thou art to be feared,
Even thou, for who could stand before Thine anger when it appeared?
Job 12 21.
Thou powr'st contempt on Princes high, and weak the strength do make
Of mighty ones, and in their crafts
Job 12. 13.
the subtle ones do take. Higgai^n Selah.
Their close and hidden purposes thou do defeat likewise,
So that their hands cannot perform that which their heads devi'd.
1 Samuel 2. 2. 3.
There is none holy as the Lord, besides him there is none,
Nor rock unto the Lord our God like is there any one.
Let not the enemy then talk so high, nor be so stout,
Neither let arrogance still forth of their mouths come out.
For why? the Lord he is a God of knowledge, and does try
Men's actions, and the hidden things of darkness does descry. Selah.
Let all thy people, etc.
Psalm. 148. 13
Let us exalt his name, his name alone is excellent,
His glory is above the earth above the firmament.
O who is like to Sions God who dwells so on high,
Psalm. 113. 5. 6.
That in beholding things in heaven himself humbles thereby.
Neh. 9. 5. His Fame is more glorious then tongue of men and Angels can
express.
Come let us bless the Lord this God for ever more always:
And blessed be his glorious name which is above all praise.
Psalm. 76. 12. Iun. Vindemia^: gathers as grapes, The destruction of the
mightiest to him is but as the nipping of a bunch of grapes with men, etc.
The spirit even of Princes he cuts off at once, yea he
Is terrible to Kings on high or great so e're they be.
1 Samuel 2. 8. etc.
The Pillars of the earth they are the Lords, and he has set
This world upon them, he will save his Saints, and who shall let?
The adversaries of the Lord in picaes shall be broke.
And those who will not stoop to Christ but still resist his yoke,
In darkness they shall silent be, their hearts for fear shall fail:
For there is none that shall by strength of potency prevail.
Psalm. 116. 12. Genesis 32 10.
What shall we render to the Lord? or what can render we,
For all his benefits, our selves, less than the least who be?
Let all thy people, etc.
(i. e.) The Lord is there Ezekiel. 48. 35.
Jehovah Shammah, Taunton we Selah
Iohovah nissi, Gloucester, ( i e.) The Lord my banner Exodus 17. 15. So was he
the banner of that place and people, in a most glorious, gracious, wonderful
and never to be forgotten manner: in inabling such an unlikely place, but an
handful in comparrison, to stand it out so long, when no relief could be had,
against such a potent and numerous Army, who having taken Bristoll were so
flush, that they thought presently to have swallowed up all before them, etc.
But unto God the Lord belong the Issues from death.

( i. e.) The Lord will see or provide, as it is said, to t^ is day, even to
this day, our days, in the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen: yea the Lord
has often been seen in the Mount of late, we might call many other places so, he
has still made his peoples extremity, his opportunity. And he appears in the
mount, that so he might be seen, and his people take notice the more of his
glorious wo^kings for them. But especially he appeared in the behalf of a
despised army at Nazeby; O that never to be forgotten victory there! How sad
had our condition been? What had become of the associated Counties had not the
Lord appealed in that nicke of time? Pride there being a highest forthwith
fell, and could never since recover it self again. Halleluiah.
Iohavah Iareth, Nazeby. said we likewise well may call.
For there in the mount the Lord appeared, and lofty ones did fall. Selah.
Let them confess then, greater than all gods, the Lords to be.
Exodus 18. 11.
For wherein they dealt proudly, him above them they might see.
Psalm 93. 3, 4.
The floods did there lift up their waves, the waters high did roar.
But they forthwith began to ebb, and could prevail no more. Selah.
And now the wondrous works O God since done for us by thee,
Psalm. 40. 5.
So many are, in order none
Psalm. 145. 5
The generation yet to come thy works shall celebrate.
And eke declare the mighty acts which thou have wrought alate.
Psalm. 34. 3.
Come let us magnify the Lord, and let us every one
Exalt his Name together, and for ever call upon
Psalm. 45. 19.
His Name, for he has not unto the Seed of Jacob said,
Seek ye my face in vain; but has full good his promise made.
berachah (i. e) Blessing and Praise. 2 Chronicles. 20. 26. (...) our heart breath
our months yea our whole lives speak nothing but praise and thanksfulnesse,
that so we may show forth, yea ^use to (...) forth the praises, the praises of
Him, who has so abundantly and apparently sh^wen forth his salvation for us:
Let the Churches name in England be called the Church of Berachah, Blessing and
praise to all generations. 2 Chronicles. 20. 26.
Berachah to the Lord our God both hearts and mouths now be,
Yea, our whole lives, Berachah, yea Berachah, wholly we. Halleluiah.
Unto thee O God do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks for that thy
Name is near, thy wondrous works have declared. Psalm. 75. 1.
Praise ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises unto our God: for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely. The Lord builds up Jerusalem, etc. Psalm.
147. 1, 2.
(1) As often before, so especially more eminently, and frequently, since this
Parliament began. Nov. 3. 1640. first in making way for it, yea in commanding
it again even beyond our expectations, after it was once dissolved, and the Sun
of our hopes as isntrumental seemed to be set, and in removing, what might
impede the continuance of it for the future. Secondly, in preserving
Parliament, City, and Kingdom, from utter ruin ever since: notwithstanding
all the hostill power, Machiavilian policy, Achitophelian counsel abroad, and
secret plots, and subtle and crafty underminings at home. Look back to the
demanding of the five honorable Members after an hostile manner, etc. Jan. 4.
1641. The preserving of Hull, and that notwithstaning Sir John Hothams since
proving treacherous, etc. The great victory at Edgehill, October. 22. 1643.
Nowberry, Nampwich, where Byron with that bloody, barbarous, and cruel enemy,
had a very great defeat, and was utterly touted, and where besides other
remarkable passages, there were taken an hundred and twenty Irish women with
long Skeans. And so I might pass on, but for a more exact relation of these
and others, see that List lately printed of the many victories under his
Excellency the Earl of Essex, etc. and his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

(2) When God is rebuilding our houses, then we should hasten especially to
build his house Hag. 1. 4. Those many and great victories vouchsafed of late
call for, yea impose this charge on those especially, it most concerns, so
much the more to hasten the preparing and finishing his habitation, Ezra 1, 2.
The more he does for the Kingdom, the more should be done in and for his
Church, etc.

(3) A man of war, Hebr. ish milchama, vir belli, Nomen viri hic cum
adjectione nihil, aliud significat quam praestantiam virtutis qua Deo
tribuitur, and vicem habet adjectivi quasi, quis diceret, bellator fortis,
animosus, praestantissimus aut magnanimus, a most excellent warrior.

(4) Fearful in praises, Hebr. Nora tehilloth, terribilis laudibus, terrible
in praises, Jun. reverendus, quasi maxima reverentia landandus: we should fear
when we praise him, because we cannot praise him as is meet, His glorious name
is exalted above all praise and blessing. Neh. 9. 5. or, who by thy excellent
and famous works causest thy self to be feared.

(5) Several times, and in several places, as at Edgehill, Namptwich,
Marston Moore near York, but especially at Naseby. Tolluntur in altum ut
lapsu graviore cadant. And how suddenly did that blazing Comet in the North,
which seemed to portend such direful things, when at highest, fall down to the
earth, and was trodden under foot? I mean Montrosse and his Confederates, O how
mavelous, how seasonable, how sudden, was that turn of things, Sept. 16.
1645. a time never to be forgotten, in which our Brethren had as it were a
resurrection from the dead, Micah 7. 8. rejoice not, etc. and ver. 10, etc.

(6) Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death, or goings out from death.
How often have our brethren in several parts of this Kingdom of late been in
the very valley of the shadow of death, and there seemed to be no issue, nor
passage out, nor escaping, yet the God who keeps all the ways and passages,
that lead out from death, has opened them, let them out thereat, and delivered
them. We might see the truth of this wonderfully confirmed formely in 88, when
the enemy had (as it were) environed this Island with (as they called it) an
invincible Armado. In the fifth of November remember, who could then have let
us out of death, had not the Lord himself unto whom belong the issues from
death, etc. So more lately and most especially, at the Town of Lyme so long
besieged, and as it were surrounded: and that by such a formidable Army,
stormed twelve several times, and much of the Towneburnt, and yet let out from
death. So likewise at Taunton, Gloucester, Marston Moore, etc. it was apparently
seen, that unto God the Lord alone, and not to our enemies belong the issues
from death.

(7) Neither power, nor policy, neither strength, nor stratagems, nor all the
wisdom and craftiness of man, can stand before the Wisdom, and Power of
God, Prove. 21. 30. He breaks their power, and takes them in their craftiness,
yea he turns their crafts and politic counsels against themselves; He
destroys them not only in their, counsels, but by their counsels; makes their
own weapons wound them. This has been a visible truth, and frequently obvious
in these our days, so that he who runs may read it in the Book of Gods
wonderful providence of late. Thus the Lord comes to be known by the
judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, Higgaion Selah, rem meditandam sum, Jun: Mark and meditate, Psalm. 9.
6.

(8) How many hidden things of darkness in these few years has the God of
glory been pleased to bring to light, and those horrid designs which lay so
low under ground, and were carried on in such a clandestine way, has he
discovered and made visible before the Sun, and manifest in the eyes of all:
(To give you only one hint) the discovery of the plot, contrived by Waller,
Tompkins, Challener, etc. The surprising that Cabinet of letters at Naseby, and
many other letters intercepted both before and since. The Irish Cabinet taken
in the carriages of the Archbishop of Tuam, etc. Job 12. 22. He discovers
deep things out of darkness, and brings out to light the shadow of death.
Jun: rem abstrusissimam, That which is most secret and seems to be buried in
eternal ignorance, Hallelujah.

(*) Who shall let? This in a special manner appeared at Lyme; The Lord
preserving that poor people there against Prince Maurice, and all that
formidable Army, notwithstanding so long a siege, and storming the same at
least 12. several times and burning much of the town: yet after all they could
do, this potent and formidable Army being, mouldred (as it were) quite away
was forced to raise their fiege, and to return with shame of face, as once
Senacherib, 2 Chronicles. 32. 21. Here the bower of the mighty men were broken. And
they that stumbled were girt with strength, 1 Samuel 2. 4. Halle lujah.

(9) In the glory of his power, goodness, and mercy in inabling such a poor
people to withstand so many long Sieges, and fierce assaults of a potent enemy,
and in sending them relief several times still so seasonably, and raising the
siege when in extremest distress. How has the Lord there, as also at Lyme,
Gloucester, Naseby, etc. showed his people the power of his works, He sent
redemption to his people: He has made his wonderful works so honorable and
glorious for ever to be remembered: The Lord is gracious and full of compassion,
Hallelujah. Psalm. 111. 4. 6. etc.

(10) Where after the surrendering of Bristol. His Majesty in Person with all
his formidable Army drawn off from thence, and other garrisons, did lie in
siege at least a month, and yet could not prevail, but upon his Excellency
the Earl of Essex with the City forces approach withdrew, and after had a very
great defeat at Newberry never to be forgotten: where the City brigade did
most honorable and gallant service. By strength shall no man prevail: O for
ever let it be remembered what our condition was at the surrendering of Bristoll,
and how gloriously and graciously the Lord then wrought for us when no Army in
the field. We have seen the goings, even the going, of thee our God, and our
King: Thy wonderful gracious providence in inabling that garrison so long to
hold out at such a time abroad, and in preserving the City and other places at
home. Digitus hic Dei. Hallelujah.

(11) See a List lately printed of the victories obtained under the Command of
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, containing 120, besides a list before that
of the victories obtained under the Command of his Excellency the Earl of
Essex containing 175. in all 295. These are most worthy our reading, due
observing, as also ever reserving by us, Psalm. 40. 5. Many are the wonderful
works O Lord our God which thou have done etc. Our meditation of thee shall be
sweet, we will be glad in the Lord, Psalm. 104. 34.

(12) Take only one instance, and that long ago, to omit later which are very
many, which my self observed, when our forces lay in siege before York, 1644
and Prince Ruperts, and the Marquess of Newcastles Armies, with all the scumme
of Lancashire, both Atheists and Papists, were combined and gathered together,
and ready to engage with our forces. That week their was extraordinary seeking
to God by fasting and prayer in the City. There were at least four days set
apart in public. And at the closure of the last, which was kept in
Milke-streete being Friday, came joyful news of that wonderful overthrow
given to that cruel and bloodthirsty enemy at Maston Moore, which was so much
the more welcome news, because our hearts were sadded a little before at the
report of our siege being raised before York. But God turned all for the b^st:
and indeed there were many remarkable passages in that victory, (as there
have been likewise in others) which deserve to be written with a pen of iron,
and with the point of a diamond, and to be graved upon the table of our hearts,
and that one was none of the least remarkable, that it being the counsel of
many of their chief Commanders to have marched into the associated Counties, it
pleased the Lord (unto whom for ever be the praise) to frustrate that counsel;
because he had a purpose of bring evil upon that Popish Arm: there being
slain there of them on the place 4500. and taken 1500. 2 Samuel 17. 14. And
Absalom and all the men of Israel said. The counsel of Hushai the A^chite is
better then the counsel of A chirophell: for the Lord had appointed to defeat
the good counsel of Achitophell, (wicked in it self) but good ( i. e. wise
and effectual for the attaining Absoloms end) to the intent that the Lord
might bring evil upon Absalom. Psalm. 65. 1, 2. Praise waits for thee O God
in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be performed. O thou that bear prayer,
unto thee shall all flesh come. Exodus 17. 11. And it came to pass, that when
Moses held up his hand that Israel prevailed.

By R. P. Minister of Gods Word.
Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

London Printed by M. S. for John Hancocke in Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

FINIS.

