Aqua Genitalis: A DISCOURSE CONCERNING BAPTISM.

First delivered in a Sermon at Alhallows Lumbardstreet, OCTB. 4. 1658. and now
a little enlarged.

Into which is since inserted, a brief Discourse to persuade to a Confirmation
of the BAPTISMAL VOVV.

By SIMON PATRICK, B.D. Minister of the Gospel at Buttersea.

(...). ROMANS 2.29. Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in
the letter.

LONDON, Printed by R White, for Francis Tyton at the three Daggers in
Fleet Street, 1659.

Be pleased to correct these faults that have escaped the care of the Printer.
IN the Epistle, page 2. line 13. read sent. In the Preface, p. 3. l. 4. r.
(...). p. 10. l. 5. t. notice. p. ^4. marg. r. (...). p. 16. l. 17. t.
Obedience. V^on. l. 21. of it; we may. In the Treatise. p. 21. l. 9. r. (...)
Ib. (...) p. 22. l. 6 r. And. p. 34. l 27. r. Dilherrus. p 35. l. 8. r.
Grabern. p. 38. l. 20. r. as for. p. 40. marg. r. L. 1. p. 41. l. 26. r. we
are. p. 47. l. 12. r. will ^ well. p. 75. l. 7. r. strengthner. l. ult. 1. for
me. p. 79. l. 19. r. creditable. p. 88. l. 8. r. all the Gospel. p. 91. l. 9.
marg. r. (...).

Reader,
IT is not needful to detain thee with many words about the Matter or Author
of this Treatise: The Matter I am sure will commend it self to thee, if thou will be pleased seriously and impartially to read, and consider it. And as for
the Author, I must not without displeasing him, say any thing of him, but only
give thee the true reason of the Publication of this Discourse: which I dare
affirm on my credit is not from any itching desire to appear in print, and I
believe none that know him, but will bear witness with me in this behalf. The
substance of it was at my earnest entreaty first preached, and afterward for
mine, and the satisfaction of some other friends, transcribed, and because I
would not give him the trouble of transcribing so many Copies as were desired,
and he not judging it safe to give liberty to other Copies that were not writ
by himself, and I, together with others, judging it of singular use for the
begetting of right apprehensions of Baptism in these days of so much contest; I
made it my further request it might be printed, and with his leave have now set
it abroad, which I could not in civility do without this acknowledgement of the
high honor he has done me herein, which I doubt not but will prove as real a
service to thee, and the Truth. Whatever advantage thou shall reap from it,
ascribe the praise to God, and look upon thy self as concerned to pray for the
Author, and let him also have a share in thy prayers, who has been an occasion
of so great a good unto thee, and is

Thy Servant in the Lord, E. V.

THE PREFACE.
ALL things coming world above, and these corporeal things are but pictures
(though pale indeed and dull,) of things spiritual, as the Tabernacle of God
among his ancient people may inform us. For as some modern Philosophers call
the Londstone a Terrella, or little Earth which draws similar bodies into its
Embraces; so Philo some where calls the Tabernacle a little World, a small
image of the whole Universe, (the most holy resembling the highest Heavens, the
holy place, the upper Regions where the Lights of the world are placed, and
where God has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, and the outward court, the lower
parts and skirts, as we call them of this world,) whereby God would show that
he could not dwell in houses made with hands, but that the whole world was his
Temple, the souls of men his Altars, Love his holy fire, and all men his
sacrifices. And so the Apostle calls it Heb. 9.1.
(...), a worldly sanctuary, perhaps in this sense that I have mentioned. Now
the same Apostle afterward tells us, verse. 23, 24. That this Tabernacle and
Appurtenances were (...) and (...), Patterns, and Figures, or Copies of things
in the Heavens; and so does the whole Scripture draw representations and images
of the other world and things to come, from the Sun, the Stars, the Light, the
Feasts, and such like things that are in this, wherein we inhabit.

Man is made by God (...), Fibula utriusque mundl.
the knot as it were that ties them both together, or the Button that fastens
then one to the other. He lives in the confines of each, and with his mind is
capable to look into the world of souls and spirits, and with his body he
converses with these material images. God therefore has thought fit to teach
his mind the things of the one, by the Ministry of his bodily senses which have
acquaintance only with the other. And besides, the whole book of the Creatures
(every letter of which is full of God,) he has always given man some special
lessons and documents by outward Characters, which he has more industriously
cut and engraven to impress his mind with spiritual notions. For though man be
(...), as I said, in the confines of both worlds, yet he is bred up among
sensible Creatures, and contracts acquaintance here, before his soul is grown
so high as to take any notice of things above; and therefore he being most
affected with the bodies companions, it is the singular care and providence of
God to teach him by such things as are most familiar to him, which he has done
in all ages of the world. It was a custom among the Ancients, (as they
report,) before the knowledge of Letters and Writings to sing their Laws, lest
they should forget them, which was in use among some people near to Scythia in
the days of Aristotle. And this is one reason why the Psalms are in verse,
because they would be the better remembered, and more safely reposited, being a
Magazine of spiritual Learning. They knew well enough that what affects the
senses, and runs smoothly, is most regarded, and we our selves still
experience, that Rithms which make a pretty noise or gingle, are sooner fixed
in peoples minds then words in prose: Seeing then that outward things do so
notably teach us, and the more any thing solicits any of our senses, the more
acceptable it is unto us, God has been pleased so to deal with man, that he
shall not want such lessons.

This manner of Discipline may be deduced from the first Adam to the Second.
For God placed the first man in a Paradise, a fair and beautiful Garden,
abounding with all manner of fruits, etc. which was but a Type of the
celestial paradise above, that is watered with streams of Light from the face
of God, and rivers of pleasures from his heart, in the midst of which the Son
of God is the tree of life. An image I say God gave him of Heaven, but none as
yet of Hell, because man was made to be happy. So God likewise gave him a
Commandment (the matter of which was outward and sensible) of abstaining from
one tree in the Garden, which was but a document of the subjection he did ow to
his Creator, and of the tenure whereby he held all his enjoyments. After his
disobedience men were some way or other directed by him to make offerings to
God of their beasts and fruits, as acknowledgements of their dependence and
homage, and adumbrations of the Sacrifice of that seed that was newly promised.
In process of time, when obedience grew cold, and their thoughts (its like) of
another life but dull, God took Enoch to himself when he was but 365. years
old, to teach them by themselves, as well as other things, that there was
another life, and a reward that remained for those that walked with God, which
was hetter then the longest term of years in these earthly possessions. But
wickedness still increasing, God destroyed the world by a Deluge of waters,
which was but a shadow of the dreadful showers of wrath, the streams of fire
and brimstone that should fall upon the heads of the wicked in the other life,
whereby God would terrify the new planters of the world, and give them an
image of Hell, as he had done before of Heaven. But this was not a lasting
visible monument of Gods anger, and therefore in aftertimes, Sodom and
Gomorrah, Jude 7.
and Cities about them were set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance
of an eternal fire; which places lay just in the view, and under the eye of
that people whom God made peculiar to himself, and served as continual marks of
his dipleasure, and instances of his wrath, to make them for ever to beware.
That peculiar people God separated to himself by the sign of Circumcision, the
seal of the Covenant that he made with them. This mark was most properly made
in that part of their flesh, because the great promise to Abrah. was, that he
would multiply his seed as the stars of Heaven, Genesis 17.
and that in his seed all the Nations of the world should be blessed, and it
aptly represent (besides other things) that they were to be an holy seed unto
the Lord. After this God did by two persons, Jacob and Esau, shadow forth unto
them that his favors are at his own disposal, and that they are not conferred
by nature, but by grace.

In the line of Jacob, besides that, there were many mystical and secret
significations of his Will, which God made by sundry persons and actions, there
were also many outward manifest images given of heavenly things. In the Law
that Moses delivered to them, their several washings, their meats, their
sacrifices (to name nothing else) were all signs of all sorts of purity and
obedience, too many now to be particularly related. Their offerings, and some
of their sacrifices represented the obedience and services of particular
Christians, who are made Priests unto God, but the chiefest of them represented
the offering and sacrifice of the high Priest of our profession, which was
Christ himself.

And (that I may not be tedious) when God would show the greatest favor to the
world, and open most of Heaven, and things above, he comes and dwells amongst us
in the person of his Son, and in an outward shape manifests himself to our eyes
and ears: For in the very humanity of Christ so much of Divinity appeared, and
the Majesty, Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God so rayed forth, that he says to
Philip, He that has seen me, Joh. 14.9.
has seen the Father also. Yea, When God would give a Testimony of Jesus to be
his Son, he does it by the visible descent of the holy Ghost, which he saw
coming down upon him like a Dove; as if he would tell us, that his own Son
shall likewise be taught by these outward signs and resemblances, he being in
all things to be conformed unto men.



Treatise will sufficiently show you. For the present it may suffice to say,
that water (of all things that are easy to be got, and are at hand) was the
most fit thing that can be thought on to be chosen to make an Emblem of the
spiritual Generation. For we naturally come out of a liquid, moist substance,
out of a slimy water, or in Jobs phrase, We are poured out like milk, and then
curdled in the womb like cheese, Job 10.10. It is not unusual in the Scripture
to speak of our natural procreation under the Metaphor of Water, as may be
discerned by consulting but these two places, Prove. 5.15, 16, etc. Prove. 9.17.
And it is well known that while we lie in the womb, we swim in a sweet liquor,
and hang by the Navel in the midst of a watery nourishment. Osiris and Isis (if
we may believe Plutarch) were nothing in the Egyptian Muthology, but the river
Nile and the earth, between which two all things were begotten.

So the Scholiast upon the first verse of Pindar, (...).
thinks that therefore water is to be reputed the best of things, because out
of it the other three Elements are begotten; out of the subtle part of it, the
air is begotten; out of the grosser, being curdled and compacted, the Earth;
and out of the more aetherial and spiritous part, the Fire. But perhaps I do
not well to pursue this notion so far, and our Savior might not have respect
to such things as these. Yet this we are sure of, John 3.5.
that we must be born again of water and the Spirit, and that our spiritual
nourishment after Christ is conceived with in us, is compared unto water also,
as you may see, John 4.14. And I cannot but likewise think, that he had some
regard in appointing Baptism to the cleansing and cooling quality that is in
water; and that it excellently represents unto us, the Spirit of God to be
poured forth to the purifying and washing us from the filth of sin, and the
blood of Christ to the extinguishing our guilt, and quenching the heat of Gods
anger, that might justly burn in our souls when we did remember that we were
sinners.

But there have so many several

The great Controversies that have arose about the persons that should be
baptized, have so tossed and agitated men's thoughts, that I doubt few have any
calm and settled apprehensions of the nature and end of Baptism it self. Most
books that treat of this subject are so concerned in the quarrel of Infants,
that the use which men ought seriously to make of it, is much forgotten. If men
thought more of its true ends, they would lay aside their Disputes, or not
manage them so roughly, and they would soon see, that we are all baptized into
the same Spirit, and made of the same body, and entered by it into the same
society and community of holy and peaceable Ones. What more cool then water?
What sooner puts out all our fires? If the waters of Baptism (next to the blood
of Christ) were sprinkled upon our intemperate heats, they would assuage our
boiling passions, and we should contain our selves within the due bounds of a
loving and gentle Zeal.

But as I said, it is but little thought of, for what Christ did institute this
holy Rite. Some look upon it but as a cold Ceremony; and many speak of it as a
thing that must be done, because Christ has commanded, but cannot tell to what
purpose; and others glory in it as a privilege, but little understand any
thing of duty that it requires of them.

L. 31. c. 2.
Pliny tells of a water in Cilicia which is called (he says) (...), or Mind,
because it will make their senses that drink it subtle and apprehensive. Suidas
on the contrary says, that it is called (...), or want Wit, because it makes
people foolish, and takes away their understanding. Such a different esteem do
men seem to have of these waters of Baptism, while some who seem wise, despise
them as of no efficacy, and use them only in compliance with simple people; and
others make them such heavenly waters, that they doubt not at all, but being
baptized, they are wise enough unto salvation; but both of them are agreed in
this, to understand no Engagement that is laid upon us by them, and to expect
that what they can do, should be wrought alone by them, without any help or
assistance from our selves. And we find the greatest multitude of that sort,
who do glory in Baptism, as the Jews did boast of Circumcision, who say in
effect, what Julian (its like falsely) makes Constantius say, In his (...), etc.
That our Religion requires nothing of the greatest sinners, but only this,
Wash, and thou art clean from all thy foul crimes; and if thou commit them
again, do but knock thy breast, and beat thy head, and all is well. But Justin
Martyr might have answered him, and gives us all another lesson in his Dialogue
with the Jew; (...), etc.
where he says, What good does that Baptism that scours the skin only, and
makes the body white? Baptize your selves from anger, and from covetousness,
from envy and hatred, and then behold your body is clean.

It is a sign and seal of Gods great blessings, and so it is of our promise to
him of Obedience, upon condition then that we own this Covenant when we
understand it, and keep our selves strictly and religiously to the terms of it.
We may say of these waters, as Euripides of the sea (upon the accasion of
Plato's recovery by the salt waters in Egypt) (...). They wash away and heal
all the evil diseases of men. Vitruvi. L. 8. cap. 3.
But otherwise they will be like some waters in Thrace, in which whosoever
washes, he certainly dies.

I have therefore adventured to perspicuous and profitable discourses: and I
dare not so much as flatter my self, that I am able to lead the way to any of
them; if I may provoke them to do better, I think my labor well bestowed. I am
sensible that the images of truth make but a weak and waterish impression upon
my mind, but they may draw more lively pictures of themselves upon other souls,
and let them give us a Copy of their conceptions.



Thereby men will ascend from Water unto Wine; from a weak estate, to a more
strong and manly constitution: and God will not only sprinkle clean water upon
their faces, but even lay his hands upon their heads, thereby taking more firm
hold of them, and apprehending them for his own, and conferring his blessings
more abundantly on them, now that they put themselves into his hands, to be
directed and ruled in all things by him, as those that are wholly in his power.

I dare not keep you any longer in the entry, for fear you grow weary, and loath
to step over the Threshold of the next leaf, and look into the main Building.
And there I shall not stay your eyes long, for my furniture being little, it
was not wisdom to make the house too wide and spacious.

S. P.

ACTS 16.33. ult. And was baptized, he and all his, straightway.


CHrist having given a Command to his Apostles to go and teach (or disciple,)
all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. We find in this
story of their Acts, (wherein some of their travels are related,) that as soon
as they had persuaded any persons to be Christians, immediately they received
them into their fellowship, by this Ceremony of washing them with water. A
Truth which among all the Disputes about Baptism, one would think should never
have been quarrelled; yet there have been those busy phansies in the world
that have called this into Question, August. de haeres. 46. and 59.
and would persuade us that our Savior in those words intended not any such
washing with water, and no other Baptism is to be owned, but that of the Spirit.

But so men may say, if they please, that when Philip and the Eunuch went into
the water, Act. 8.38.
he baptized him with fire. If the Apostles could understand our Saviors
meaning, those men are sufficiently refuted by their practice; for though our
Savior Baptized none that we read of, but with the Spirit; (and the Papists
will have a hard task to obtain this pre-eminence for Peter, that he received
the Baptism of water at Christ's hands:) yet it will be needless pains to prove
that his Apostles and their Successors after them did initiate, and admit
Disciples in that manner.

But notwithstanding this, there are others that (left the world should be
quiet,) do start a new Question, Whether that Command of our Lords extended any
further, then to the first proselyting of the Nations, or ought now to be
followed among Christian people? who might have spared the labor of making
such a doubt, unless they could give us some ground to think, that that part of
their Commission was after revoked, or then limited to such a time, and likewise
solidly expound those following words, I am with you always to the end of the
world, and show us why the work of the new birth (which the Apostle makes the
signification of Baptism,) is not now as well as then to be shadowed and
represented, Yet others will not let their wits be at rest, but make a further
inquiry, Whether the words of our Savior include in them a Command, or only a
Permission, because he says only Baptizing, not Baptize? (...)
Though the constant practice of the Apostles in this Book related, and of the
Church afterward, might well have been sufficient to have silenced these
thoughts without any further dispute; and the following words likewise Teaching
them, (...). verse 20.
etc. would have told such men that their inquiry was needless, unless it can
be thought, that because he does not say, Go teach, we may choose whether we
will give any further instruction to our people.

Taking it therefore for granted, (without engaging my self in such questions,)
that the words now read, do speak of Baptism by water still to be retained in
the Church of God; you may observe in them these three things.

1. A Rite or Ceremony used, and that is Baptism, or washing with Water.

2. The persons baptized, The Jailer, and all his.

3. The time of its Administration, (...), straightway, instantly, at that
hour of the night that the foregoing story was acted, without any further delay.

From which I am invited to treat of three things; First, Of the Use and
Intention of Baptism. Secondly, Of the qualities or dispositions of those that
receive it. Thirdly, Of the time that is required to render them persons fitly
qualified to receive it.

For the Explication of the first, we need find no fault with the common
language, that says, Baptism in its general notion is an outward visible sign
and seal of some inward and invisible grace and favor conveyed, and made over
thereby unto us. But to difference it from the other Sacrament, we must enquire
what that grace, favor and privilege is, and show how it does signify, and
seal it between God and us. And upon due consideration, I believe we shall
find, that to be Baptized, expresses something on our part, and something on
Gods, both which put together, make it a foederal Rite, whereby we and God
enter into a Covenant and Agreement together, and mutually engage to the
performance of several things, which are all to our behoof and benefit.

1. As we present our selves to the Minister of this Sacrament, and receive it,
so it expresses something done by us; and then 2. As the Minister (Gods Deputy
or Ambassador,) does receive us, and wash us with this water, by the
Authority, and into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; so it
expresses something done by God. Both which it concerns us for the securing of
our duty, and our comfort also, to be acquainted withal; and therefore I shall
show you,

1. What is the true meaning and intent of it on the part of the person
baptized who offers himself, or is offered to receive it: which I will lay
before you in these particulars.

First, In the general notion of it, it is a profession of a Religion whereinto
we enter, and to which we engage to be faithful and constant Disciples. It is
a Ceremony whereby Proselytes are made, and all that use it do thereby come
into a new way and state, forsaking all their old persuasions, practices and
relations wherein they were born and bred, that are contrary to, and
inconsistent with these new Engagements. It is well observed by St. August. In
nullum nomen rel^gionis, seu v^r^m, s^u f^lsum co^g^tari p^ssant h^^in^s, ni^^
al quo Signaculorum seu Sacramentorum visib lium Cono^t^o ^oll g^atur. adv.
Faust. l. 19. cap. 11.
That men can be associated together in no Religion, whether true or false,
unless they be combined by the common tie of some visible signs and Sacraments
of their profession. Which the world has found by so long experience to be
true, that I need not be careful to prove it. The Jews it is manifest were
differenced from others by Circumcision, and (as their Doctors tell us,) entered
into Covenant with God, not only by it, but by Baptism also, together with a
sacrifice unto him. And when a Heathen would become a Jew, and undertake their
Religion, See Puxtorf. Lex. Rab. vocab. (...)
and so repose himself (as their phrase is,) under the wings of the divine
Majesty, he was to be circumcised, baptized, and offer Sacrifice; for which
Maimon (as sundry Learned men observe out of him, De prohibito congressu.
) brings no other proof, but that Number. 15.15. As ye are, so shall the stranger
be; so supposing as a thing well known, that by those three the Jews submitted
themselves to the yoke of the Law. And it is as commonly known that they say
their mothers entered into Covenant only by Baptism and Sacrifice, and so did
some Proselytes by those (without Circumcision,) engage to worship the one God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and forsaking all Idols, to observe him only; as
that passage of R. Joshuahs clearly shows, (which is cited by Raymundus,) He is
baptized, Pug. Fidei Part. 3. Did. 3. cap. 11.
and not circumcised, Behold this is a stranger converted, for lo we find of
our mothers, (viz. Sarah, Rebecca, etc.) that they were baptized, but not
circumcised.

Baptism now has no different signification, but only we lay this Engagement
upon our selves, to worship the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and to
come to him through his Son, and to embrace that religion which he teaches us
from God, which is that whereby we are distinguished from Jews, Mahometans, and
all other people in the world, who go not to God through this Mediator, nor own
that blessed Gospel that he has delivered unto us.

If any should ask me, why by Baptism we should make this Profession rather
then any other Rite; The answer methinks is easy, if what has been said he
considered, together with the partiticulars that I shall mention after I have
dispatched this general notion of it. And besides, it seems considerable to me,
that Moses the Mediator of the Old Covenant did receive the people into it by
Baptism, and not by Circumcision. For it is not only said, Exodus 19.10. That
they should sanctify themselves, and wash their clothes; but it is likewise
plain from Joshuah 5.5. That none were circumcised while they were in the
wilderness, and they are not all the while reproved or rebuked for it, and were
notwithstanding within the Covenant, which was sure by some Ceremony or other;
and the Apostle also says, 1 Cor. 10.2. That they were all baptized into Moses
in the cloud, and in the sea. God by the covering of the cloud, took them under
his wings and protection, owning them for his people, and they passing through
the heart of the sea, the waters enclosing them round about, did profess to
trust in God, and there to drown all the thoughts of Egypt which sometimes
they feared, and sometimes they loved overmuch. Now as only Baptism and not
Circumcision was used, when God conducted his people by the visible ministry of
Angels, (who marched with them in the cloud,) and delivered them from the
slavery and bondage of Egypt by the hand of Moses; so God thought fit to use
no other way of making Disciples when he sent his own Son to work a greater
salvation for us, and to be the Mediator of a better Covenant with us, of which
the ancient Jews do not seem to have been altogether ignorant, when they say,
that there shall be such a multitude of Proselytes in the days of the Messiah,
Vid. Grot. in Mat. 3.6.
that they shall be admitted by Baptism only without any Circumcision. It may
not be unfit to add, that all nations used Washings so much, that there could
not be invented (one would think,) a Rite more likely to be readily received
then this. The Jews it is plain, not only when they admitted persons into
Covenant, but afterward also in case of legal pollutions used diverse Washings,
as the Apostles phrase is, Heb. 9.10. Three sorts of which I find observed by a
learned man; Gaulmyn not. in vit. Moses. l. 1. cap. 11.
First, There were their (...), Mr. Pocock has largely shown that (...) and
(...) do not signify among them always the Washing of the whole body, which
is to be observed against those that make it now necessary. Not. Misc^l. cap. 9.
their daily washings which were introduced by the Pharisees. Secondly, There
were their Baptisms or Immersions of the whole body into water, which all the
Jews were bound unto in their confessions. And thirdly, The bathings of their
women which they were tied unto seven weeks after their delivery of a child.
Unto which I may likewise add, that Washing was used as a token of innocence
and freedom from such guilt as might be thought to cleave to a person; which
the Psalmist supposes in that phrase, Psalm 26.6. and the book of Deuteronomy
plainly expresses, 21. 6, 7. They shall wash their hands, and say, Our hands
have not shed this blood, etc. which perhaps Pilate would imitate, (having to
do with the Jews,) when he had condemned our Savior, Mat. 27.24. For he washed
his hands before the multitude, and said, I am innocent of the blood of this
just man, see ye to it; as if it had been but an accidental murder, or that
which he could no more help, then if a man had been killed by chance. Certain
it is the Gentiles likewise used Washings very much, not only after murders,
but likewise in case of other crimes, and also in their admissions of persons
into the secrets of some of their Religions; for which see De Baptis cap. 5.
and de Praescrip. cap. 40.
Tertullian. And if there were nothing else to make us believe the Jews used
this Ceremony in these cases, this might make it very probable, for the
Gentiles were but their Apes, and the Devil (as (...), etc. Apolog. 2.
Just. Martyr observes in this very case of Baptism,) took divine Rites, and
made them do service in his hellish Mysteries; They hearing (says he,) the
saying of the Prophet, Isa. 1. Wash you, make you clean, etc. would have their
Worshippers sprinkled with water when they went into their Temples to make an
offering, yea and be washed all over before they came thither. All which being
true, our blessed Lord might think it fit to innovate as little as he could,
and so to accommodate this significant and innocent Ceremony to his purposes,
and translate it from the Jews to be a Rite whereby to profess inward purity of
body and soul, just as he did in the other Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
wherein he has made use not only of the bread and wine, but as diverse have
observed, of the accustomed words which the Jews then used at the Paschal
Supper. For so his Wisdom judged it meet to make former Rites serve his own
ends, rather then introduce strange and unheard of things which had not been
known in former times. His design was not novelty, but truth, not his own
glory, but the good of men, and so he conformed himself in this to their
practice, which (that I may speak more particularly,) is to be considered.

Secondly, As a profession of Repentance from dead works, a relinquishing of
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, so as never more to be friends with them.
This is taught us not only by the Baptism of John which was administered with
confession of sin, and is called the Baptism of Repentance, Mat. 3.6, 8. Mar.
1.4.
and likewise accompanied with an Exhortation to bring forth fruits meet for
Repentance, and in refusing of which the Pharisees are said to have rejected
the counsel of God against themselves; Luke 7.30.
but also by the exhortation of the Apostle to the new Converts. Act. 2.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you, etc. i. e. make profession of your
Repentance by Baptism to the remission of your sins, the sense of which had
pricked them in their hearts. And it is further manifest from all the
circumstances of Baptism. For they put off their old clothes, and stripped
themselves of their Garments; then they were immersed all over, and buried in
the water, which notably signified the putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, (as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2.11.
) and their entering into a state of death or mortification after the similitude
of Christ; according to the same Apostles language elsewhere, We art baptized
into his death, Romans 6.3, 4, 6.
we are buried with him in Baptism, knowing that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we might not
serve sin. All which was rendered still more significant by the Ancients, who
baptized only on the last day of the week at night, i.e. on the even of two
Lords days in the year, (called therefore by Chrysostom (...),) Because
Christ then say in the grave, and was about to rise again. In conformity to
whom, they by this Rite did profess themselves to be dead, and (coming out of
the water,) there to leave all their sins drowned and buried in that grave,
never to revive again. There is one thing more (not to be forgotten,) which
makes it more clear, that it was intended for a profession of Repentance, and
that is the Renunciation which they made to the Devil, the world, and the
flesh; or the open declaration upon the question propounded which they made
against all Gods enemies, the form of which so many ancient Authors do record,
that it is vain to cite any; but the sense of it was this, Do you renounce, or
do you forsake the world, and all the vanities, follies and wickedness thereof?
I do forsake them, said the person to be baptized. Do you forsake the Devil,
will you have never any thing to do with his works? I do forsake him, and abhor
them all, etc. unto which the Apostle is thought to have reference, 1 Pet.
3.21. when he speaks of the answer of a good conscience, as the Baptism which
saves us, and not the outward washing, or putting away of the filth of the
flesh. This (...), this question, What shall I do to be saved? and consequently
the hearty answer to all that is proposed as requisite to salvation, is that
which makes Baptism to be valid, and of force unto us. The Jews say in their
tradition, that Adam stood a whole week up to the neck in water, begging of God
to accept of his Repentance for what he had committed. Whatsoever he did, I am
sure this Washing with water does most fitly represent both our
acknowledgements that we are worthy to die, and be swallowed up in the water,
and our profession that we will forsake all our filthiness, if we may but be
accepted unto life.

Thirdly, It is a Profession of faith in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. For we
are baptized into their name, and so it signifies, either first that we
heartily accept of the Father for our God and happiness, to love him above all;
and of the Son, for our Lord and Savior, as the way unto the Father; and of
the Holy Ghost for our Sanctifier, Guide and Conductor to the Son; or secondly
(which comes to the same,) that we embrace that Doctrine for our Rule which is
delivered unto us from the Father, through the hands of his Son, by the Power
of the Holy Spirit, to fear all his threatenings, to rely upon all his
Promises, and to yield obedience to all his Commands as long as we live. That
this profession of Faith was made in Baptism is plain, not only from Acts 8.37.
where Philip says to the Eunuch, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou
may be baptized, and he answers, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God; but likewise from this, that the word Baptism is put for the whole
Doctrine which he preached, who did baptize, as you may see, Acts 18.25.
(knowing only the Baptism of John,) Acts 19.3. [ Into what were you baptized?
and they said, into John's Baptism:] By which it appears, that being baptized
into such a name, though one should speak nothing, expresses a consent to
embrace that word which he preaches and declares to be the Will of God. Yea,
Baptism is an open profession and Declaration to all, that we are of such a
faith, for it is not enough that we are persuaded of the Truth of Christ's
Religion, but we ought also publicly to own it, and manifest to the world our
belief of it, which seems to me to be the meaning of that place, Mark 16.16. He
that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: i. e. He that owns the faith of
Christ in Truth, and makes a profession of his belief by receiving this mark of
the Christian Religion, he shall be accepted of God to life. For that was
required by our Savior of his Disciples, that they should not be ashamed of
him before men, nor be afraid to let the world know that they were his
disciples, by using all those things whereby they were distinguished from the
rest of men.

4. It is a profession of holiness and obedience, and an engagement we thereby
lay upon our selves to maintain all purity in body and soul, which is the
immediate consequent of the two former, and seems to be alluded unto by the
Apostle, when he says, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but you are washed,
but you are sanctified, etc. i. e. you have betaken your selves by receiving of
Baptism to a holy and pure Conversation: And it is more plainly expressed by
him, Gal. 3.27. As many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. In token of which, and that they intended all Purity, (like those in
the Reavelation, who are said to follow the Lamb in white,) they were presently
clothed with white Garments when they came out of the water. From whence that
day was called White Sunday, which was one of the principle times when the
Ancients did admit persons to Baptism; and they all professed hereby, that they
hated the grament spotted with the flesh, and would never return again to the
dirty pleasures of the world wherein they had wallowed. An ancient Christian
Poet does excellently express it.

Fulgentes animas vestis quoque candita signat Lactantius Firm.

El groge de niveo gaudia pastor habet.
A bright garment was cast over shining and glistering souls, and the Great
Shepherd took no small pleasure in his milk-white Lambs, whose outward luster
did but signify that they were become the Children of the Light, and of the
day, and would have no more fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness,
Ephesians. 5. 8, Filesacus. l. 1. select. cap. 3.
10. Which place some would interpret of Baptism, called therefore by the
Ancients (...), or Illumination, of which those splendid Garments was a fit
signification. Georg. Fhelavius annot. ad Christoph. Angel.
The Greeks at this day put such a Robe upon the Child immediately after
Baptism, saying, Receive this lucid and immaculate Clothing, and bring it
before the Tribunal of our Lord Jesus without spot, and thou shall have eternal
life, Amen. Certain it is, that all true Christians have ever accounted this
the great intent of this outward Rite of Baptism, to be an Engagement to
Holiness; (...) is the sense of them all. Be clean, not only by the washing of
thy body, but the purgation of thy mind. Bath and steep thy soul in holy
truths, till they have fetched out all thy filth. For even a Jew can say, Qui
baptizatur sine intention, perinde est ac si non baptizatur; Joseph. de
Voysin, de Lege div. cap. 7.
He that does not intend that which is meant by Baptism, is as if he were
unbaptized; for it is not dirt (says he,) and excrementious adherencies that a
man washes away, but there is a Resemblance herein of the cleansing of the
soul from all filthiness, i. e. from those perverse thoughts, and evil habits
which he professes to forsake by bringing his soul to the waters of Virtue and
Knowledge, as Ezekiel says, chap. 36.25. Thus Maimon. And therefore they well
said, He that comes from among the Gentiles unto us (...) for the sake of any
worldly vanity, Buxtorf. in vocab. (...)
he is not a Proselyte of Justice; for which cause they used to examine him,
whether for the hope of gain, or honor, or compelled with fear, he betook
himself to their profession, and to search whether there were any young man, or
woman of Israel that the party made love unto, because they would have them
only out of holy ends undertake their Religion. And indeed their rising again,
and coming out of the water, did likewise signify this, that they had left
their filthiness behind, and were made new men, hence-forward to serve God in
Righteousness and Holiness all the days of their life.

5. It is a Profession of self-denial, and taking up the Cross if we meet with
it in our Christian course. For Waters signify in Scripture Afflictions and
Tribulations, which sometimes go over our heads and overwhelm us. And
accordingly our Savior speaking of his sufferings, Luke 12.50. Mat. 20.22.
says, I have a Baptism to be baptized with, etc. And are you able to be
baptized with the Baptism that I am baptized with? i. e. to take part with me
in my sufferings and indurances here in the world for Gods sake? and
immediately it follows, You shall indeed be baptized with my Baptism, you shall
be wet in blood, and baptized in your own tears and sweat. Whosoever puts on
Christ, takes upon him his sufferings, and renounces (as you have heard,) to
all those things, though never so dear, that would divest him of his dearer
Savior, or make him false to that Covevant into which he does enter. So the
Samanaeans among the Indians (as Porphiry tells us, L. 4. (...).
) as soon as they were chosen to be of the society of those Divines, and had
that Title, they shaved their body, and received a Stole or long Robe, after
which they renounced (...) to all their Estates, never thinking of returning to
Wife, Children, or any other thing, making no account of them; but wholly
employing themselves in the things of God, (as his words are,) they lived
(...), without wives, or Possessions, or their former Enjoyments. Such a white
Garment I told you the Christians sometime received in token of their putting
on Christ Jesus the Lord; with that they put on new relations, and espoused
another Interest, and did profess to forsake Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
Houses, Lands, and all things else for his names sake, and to call nothing
theirs, but only Christ. Which likewise we cannot deny, they did very anciently
represent, by signing them with the sign of the Cross, (innocently enough it is
likely, till Superstition did abuse it,) in token of the crucified, afflicted
condition into which they must be willing to enter, if Christ should call them
to it. And so we may interpret that place, 1 Timothy 6.12. Fight the good fight of
Faith, lay hold on Eternal life, whereunto thou art also called, and have
professed a good profession before many witnesses, i.e. endure sufferings for
Christ's sake, for thou art called unto it, and have professed in Baptism thou
would be his faithful Soldier before many witnesses, i.e. (says Hierom,)
before the people of God and his holy Angels thou did renounce to the world,
and all the softnesses and vanities thereof, and gave up thy self to endure
hardship, (as it is in another place, 2 Timothy 2.3.) Like a good Sculdier of
Jesus Christ. For this cause it was perhaps that their Baptisteria, V. D^^^rum
disp. d^ ^ntiq. (...) funer.
or Fonts used to he made where some Martyrs had suffered, that so they might
be put in mind they entered into a War-fare, wherein they must resist unto
blood, striving against sin. Our very first Incorporation into Christ, is in
effect an Expiration to the world; and then we begin to die, when we begin to
live. As soon as ever we declare for Christ, and are listed into his Mil^tia,
the Devil raises all his forces against us, and we must not expect to march
quietly to Heaven. You shall read of nothing but sufferings after our Saviors
Baptism, and most of the rest of his life before, for thirty years (which we
may suppose had less trouble in it,) the Holy Ghost passes over; as if he would
tell us, that when by Baptism we give our selves to him, and become his
Children, we enter upon a state of sufferings, Rev. 7.14.
and perhaps must wash our Garments again in the blood of the Lamb.

And having thus showed the greatest Engagement that it can lay upon us, which
is to lay down our lives for Christ's sake if he require it; I shall pass to the
next part of this discourse, which is to show what the meaning and intent of it
is on Gods part, and what blessings are thereby conveyed back again to us, who
thus give up our selves to him.

2. God by his Minister (that does in his name, and by his Authority baptize,)
does receive the persons so washed into the Enjoyment of some privileges and
benefits that otherwise are not ordinarily to be enjoyed. For what is done by
his Minister, is as if the hand of God should do it. So it is said, John 3.23.
That Jesus came into Judea, and baptized; and verse 26. The Jews say to John,
He to whom thou bear witness, behold the same baptizeth: and again, cap.
4.1. It is said, That Jesus made and baptized more Disciples then John; yet
verse 2. We are told, That Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples. That
which Officers and Servants do by Commission and Authority of their Master, is
accounted to be his Action; And so,

First, God receives us hereby into his family, to be numbered among his
people, of whom he will have a special care. ^o Chrysostom. speaks to the newly
baptized, (...).
It is the seal (as it were,) of God upon us, his Mark and Caracter whereby he
owns us for his sheep, and knows us from all other, so as to have a more
particular inspection over us then the rest of the world that make not this
profession, and to indow us with certain peculiar favors, even before we are
able to perform any part of our Duty unto him. It is the door whereby we enter
into the Church, the Gate that lets us into Christ's fold, and the first step to
fellowship with God and with his people. Whence it was the Font you know used
to be placed at the door or entrance of the Church, V. August. l. 2. de. Catec.
rud. cap. 1.
to signify that by this we come into the Congregation of Christ's Disciples,
but yet that by Baptism we are brought but to the beginning of Religion, and
must make a further progress to perfection, till we come to the holy place, and
into a nearer communion with God. The Minister likewise used to take the
Infants into his arms, to signify I suppose, Gods receiving and embracing of
them with a loving affection. Yea, he used to kiss them, either to signify
that love of God to them, or that they were now of that community and body,
whom the Apostle bid to salute one another with a holy Kiss. And all this is
supposed in the word Proselytes, or Comers unto God, which clearly argues some
relative Action of his, which is receiving and entertaining them graciously as
those he will have in his favor. But more particularly.

Secondly, Hereby God receives us into a state of pardon and forgiveness. He
assures us that Adams sin shall not undo us, and that every sin of our own
shall not exclude us out of Heaven, but that we shall have the benefit of
Repentance, and an allowance to retract our follies, yea, and Grace so to do,
if we will make use of it. He admits us into that Covenant of Grace which
accepts of Repentance in stead of Innocence, and Amendment in stead of an
unerring Obedience. This is one of the special favors of the Gospel, (which by
Baptism is consigned unto us,) that former Iniquities shall not be remembered,
and that every breach of our Covenant, if there be a real chan^^ wrought in us,
shall not void it, and make it null, and ineffectuall unto us. So in Mark 1.4.
John is said to preach the Baptism of Repentance for Remission of sin. And
Ananias says, ( Acts 22.16.) Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins.
And the Greek Church after Baptism, sings those words three times, Georg.
Fhelavius Ib.
Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven. As those who came to the Baptism of
John, did thereby receive a distinguishing mark and character that they should
not be-destroyed in the ruin of the Nation, (in so much that he says to the
Pharisees that desired Baptism, Mat. 3.7.
Who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come?) So they that are baptized
into Christ, do thereby receive a pledge, that no sin which they stand guilty
of shall bring the anger of God upon their heads if they will keep his
Covenant; but all shall be crossed out which they are charged with, and be like
words writ in the water, that are obliterated and vanished, nowhere any more to
be found.

Thirdly, We receive hereby the Promise of the Spirit, the Effusion of which,
Joh. 3.5.
is likened to the pouring out of water; and so is in Baptism most aptly
signified and represented. I will pour (says the Prophet,) waters on him that
is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground, (i. e. upon the Gentiles who were
as a wilderness. Isa. 44* 3, 4, 5.
) I will pour my Spirit on thy seed, and my blessing upon thy Offspring, and
they shall spring up as among the grass, etc. In which place, that there may be
a Prediction of Baptism, it is very probable, for thus much some of the Jews do
acknowledge, that the Prophet speaks of Gentiles that should be Proselytes, and
called by the name of Israel; and we Christians know that we are Abraham's seed,
and that this Promise has a respect to the times of the Gospel. Rasi out of R.
Nathan thus glosses upon the fifth verse: There are four sorts of Converts here
spoken of, one shall say, I am the Lords, (...)
these are they that are Proselytes of Justice, or the most perfect Converts;
And another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, (...)
these are the little Ones of the ungodly; And another shall subscribe with his
hand to the Lord, (...)
these are the Penitents, or the men that repent, and surname himself by the
name of Israel, (...)
these are the strangers, i. e. those that observed the Precepts of the sons of
Noah, and particularly renounced Idolatry; and therefore this part of the verse
is by another rendered (...) they that fear God. Where observe, V. Raimund. pug.
fidei. par. 2. cap. 14.
that he calls one sort of these Converts (...) the little ones, who were not
thought (it seems,) to be unmeet to be made members of a Church, and were not
judged by their fathers admission to be received, but were distinctly admitted
by themselves by the decree (as they tell us,) of the house of Judgment. And
observe likewise that all these Proselytes being said to spring as it were out
of the water, So Chrysostom calls the new baptized persons (...), etc. Orat.
prima and secunda de Resurrect.
these words may well be a Prophecy of Christian Baptism, to which a promise
of the Spirit is annexed, which is very well signified by water; for as that
cleanses and purifies from filth, so the Spirit of God, (called upon this
account the Holy Ghost,) is the Sanctifier of Gods people, purging and
cleansing their hearts from all impurities. This being therefore the great work
of the Spirit so well represented by water, we must conclude, that when the
Minister washes us in Gods name, God thereby promises that he will be
assistant to us by the holy Ghost, and that he will send upon us his Grace,
Tit. 8.5.
that we may be saved through the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of
the H. Ghost. According to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.11. the place before
mentioned, But you are washed, but ye are sanctified, but you are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God. Where as those words [In
the name of the Lord Jesus] refers to being justified; so those words [By the
Spirit of God,] refers to their being washed and sanctified. So in that place
of Ezekiel, cap. 36.25. After he had said, That he would sprinkle them with
clean water; it follows as an explication of it, verse. 26, 27: A new heart will
I also give you, and a new spirit will I put into you, etc. And I will put my
Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes. All which does
sufficiently show that in this Washing with water, the Lord ingages to give the
Spirit. (...). Chrysostom. orat. 1. de resur. (...).


Fourthly, We receive hereby a Promise of Resurrection unto life: Though we by
going into the water profess that we are willing to take up the Cross, and dye
for Christ's sake; yet on Gods parts, this action of going into, and coming out
of the water again, did signify that he would bring such persons to live
again, That he would not leave their soul in grave, nor suffer his holy one to
see corruption. And this according to Chrysostom, (a very judicious
Interpreter, who was so full of the Spirit of Saint Paul, that he dreamt
sometime that he appeared to him,) is the meaning of that difficult place, 1
Cor. 15.29. Else what shall they do that are baptized for the dead? etc. i. e.
for their dead bodies. Why do they profess in Baptism, that they believe the
Article of the Resurrection of the dead, among the rest of the Articles of
Christian faith? Why are they baptized into the hope and expectation of it, of
which (says he) the Minister gives them a sign or symbol, (...), by the
things themselves that he does, putting them in, and taking them out of the
water, which is a sign of their descending into the state of the dead, and
their ascending up from thence. Now what good do they receive by Baptism, if
they shall not rise again, but remain always in the grave? If any think it
harsh to render these words, For their dead bodies, by these, For the
resurrection of their dead bodies, (which in Baptism we profess to believe,) it
is only for want of skill in the short manner of speaking, which the Hebrews
use. And methinks they may otherwise be interpreted to the same sense more
plainly after this manner, Why are they baptized for their dead bodies, i. e.
for the benefit and profit of their dead bodies? for (...) denotes the end,
which an Agent intends in an action. (as Gal. 1.4. who gave himself (...),
(...), (...), some have it, which is of the same force.
for to take away our sins,) and there can be no end upon our dead bodies which
we can have, but that they may live again; therefore for this end we are
baptized, that they may rise from the dead, which if they should not, we should
lose (says the Apostle,) the great benefit which in Baptism was consigned; and
to what purpose should we use that Rite? It may be replied, that I have already
mentioned many other purposes which render it sufficiently beneficial. But if
it be considered how near sin and death are one to the other, we shall conclude
that so must remission of sin, and the resurrection from the dead go together,
and that if the one be not believed, we may easily doubt of the other, or at
the best, we shall make forgiveness lame and very imperfect while this great
punishment of sin, viz. Death remains unremoved. Luther indeed in his version
of the Bible gives another interpretation of this place, but suitable to my
present discourse, which is grounded Dilheirus thinks upon that practice I
mentioned of Baptizing in the places where the Martyrs were nterred. The sense
whereof is this, (as one that understands the language, interprets it to me,)
What mean they to be baptized [Uber Den Toden,] over the dead? To strengthen
(says Luther in his gloss upon the words,) or confirm the Resurrection; they
used to baptize Christians [Vber den Toden grahern,] over the graves of the
dead, the intention whereof was to show that the same, the very self same
person should rise again. But I doubt we shall not find that custom so ancient
as St. Paul's days, wherein there had been but few Martyrs; and therefore I wave
it, thinking the other more clear and proper. If any one like it, then from
both me may conclude, that the wa^^rs of Baptism are like the waters of heaven,
which falling upon the dry earth, and the dead roots of plants, makes them
spring forth, and live again. It gives us assurance, that we shall not always
sleep in our dust, but shall spring up and flourish in a better soil, even the
Garden of God, never to die, or wither any more. And Circumcision seems not to
have been without this signification neither, for they used to cast the
foreskin cut off into a vessel full of dust, to signify it is like, that the
circumcised person did renounce the Devil and his lusts, by whose impulse, Adam
sinned, and so died, and was turned again into dust; V. Joseph. de Voysin de
leg. Div. cap. 7.
and that he did cast away all that evil concupiscence, by which death came
into the world, hoping that that being buried, he should attain the
Resurrection of the body, and live again. To which purpose a very ancient book
(the Zohar) applies a place in Job, which shows, though not the sense of the
Scripture, yet their sense of Circumcision, Job 19.26. In my flesh I shall see
God, i. e. by Circumcision (which was the Covenant of God in their flesh,) come
to immortal life. And a tradition they have to this purpose, That when a man is
signed with this holy mark, he is made worthy of the vision of God.

Fifthly, Baptism is not improperly called by Divines a seal of all these
things, i. e. a Rite whereby the Covenant between God and us is confirmed,
whereby we assure God of our fidelity, and he assures us that as certainly as
our bodies are washed with water, so certainly will he give us of his Grace,
and if we perform our undertaking, continually assist us with the holy Spirit,
pardon our sins, deliver us from the power of the Devil, save our souls, and at
last raise our bodies out of the grave, and make them spiritual and immortal,
and unite both body and soul together i^ ^^ernal Glory. That conditional
Covenant of Grace and Mercy that was sealed before indefinitely by Christ's
blood, is now sealed by Baptism to this particular person which receives it.
Therefore,

Sixthly, The sum of all is that hereby we are regenerated and born again. It
is the Sacrament of the new birth, by which we are put into a new state, and
change all our relations, so that whereas before we were only the Children of
Adam, we are now taken to be the Children of God; such of whom he will have a
fatherly care, and be indulgent and merciful unto. We have now a relation
likewise to Christ as our Head, and to the holy Ghost as the Giver of life and
grace. Yea, herein he grants remission of sin, and we are sanctified, and set
apart to his uses. We being hereby given to him, and he accepting of us, do
become his possession and proper goods, and cannot without being guilty of the
foulest Robbery sin against God. We are made hereby the Temples of the Holy
Ghost, the place where he, and nothing else is to inhabit; and being by this
consecrated to him ^^e likewise then enters upon his possession, and we are
said thereby to receive the holy Ghost; so that if we run into sin, we defile
his house, and commit the greatest profaness and impiety, and may be said very
truly to do despite to the Spirit of God whereby we were sanctified. Socrates
in Plato well says, that every man is by his birth, In Phaedon^.
(...), One of Gods freeholds, and therefore concludes it is as unlawful for a
man to kill himself, as a servant to run away from his Master, seeing he is not
his own goods, nor can dispose of his life according to his pleasure. In this
second birth God is seized again of us, he owns us in a special manner for his
Children, and we may not without committing a double murder sin against him,
and may be called twice dead if we do, because in Baptism are the beginnings of
a new life, and the Spirit of life takes hold of us, and as far as is agreeable
to our age and condition we are renewed by the Holy Ghost. For Baptism being a
beginning of our performance of our duty, God does likewise in it begin
proportionably to make good his promise. We may call it therefore with Cyprian,
Genetalis unda, aqua salutaris, etc. the Laver of Regeneration; seeing as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body,
etc. whereby he intimates that the Spirit of God does accompany this water, and
therefore we must be in a sort made other Creatures. I see no cause to leave
this ancient language which may have a very good sense, and none I suppose will
deny but that at least a Relative change is herein made, and so much Grace and
Favor is conferred, Apolog. 2. (...).
that we stand upon better terms then mere nature did instate us in. Justin
Martyr relating the manner how Christians were made, (that the Heathens might
not he offended so much at their Religion,) speaks of this matter. When men are
persuaded of the thing: that we teach, and promise to live accordingly, they
fast, and pray, and beg of God remission of sin, and then we bring them to the
water, and so they are born again after the same manner that we were
regenerated: to this he applies that place, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born
again, etc. All things seem to grow out of water, and it was not unfitly made
by one of the ancient wise men, the first Principle of all, so that it may well
signify another birth, a new plantation in a better soil, which is watered by
daily dews and showers of Gods heavenly Grace; and in, it we may be said to
have changed our Patents, and all our relations, so as after a manner to become
new Creatures. Li. paedag. cap. 7.
If Clemens Alex. his reading of that place, Mat. 3.17. be right one would
think that Christ was by Baptism admitted to his office, and had a kind of a
new birth in it, Thou art my beloved Son, this day have I begotten thee. i.e.
now have I appointed thee to thy office, now of the Son of Joseph as thou art
esteemed, I declare thee the Son of God, and make thee my Vicegerent. That
which was perfectly done at the Resurrection (to which those words, This day
have I begotten thee are applied, Act. 13.33.) was begun and done in sign at
Baptism, when the Holy Ghost likewise descended upon him, and anointed him unto
his office. And so in after times they used to anoint the baptized person with
oil, to represent, I suppose, that God took him to be his Son, and did bestow
upon him the Holy Spirit. But because Clemens must be thought to have expressed
rather the sense, then the very words that were spoken, let us consider only
what succeeded our Saviors Baptism, and it will tell us thus much, that at
that time it was that God first owned him openly for his Son, and it may well
teach us that in Baptism God takes us to be his Children, (...).
we are received under his shadow, are, and shall be endued with this Holy
Spirit, according as it follows in him; Christ was our (...), Exemplar or
Pattern; and being baptized, are illuminated; and being illuminated, we are
made sons; and being made sons, we are completed; and being completed, we are
made immortal. There is nothing wanting after we are baptized to the enjoying
the whole of this, but that we be faithful in Gods Covenant, and follow the
conduct of Gods illuminating and holy Spirit, till we be made Possessors of
that Immortality, unto which in Baptism we have a Title given us. The ancient
Christians speak of high Illuminations, wherewithal God pleased then to grace
Baptism; I make no question but they speak as they felt, and that they talk not
of a strange change then wrought which never was; but if any say, that those
great Communications of the Holy Ghost were proper to that time when Christ did
most notably attest to the Truth of his own Institutions for the conviction of
Unbelievers, I think so also: for young plantations needed larger effusions of
the heavenly dews to water and cherish them. But yet we may conceive that there
may be still some operations of that spirit in men's hearts at Baptism, though
secret and insensible unto us; and I profess my self one of those that labor
to believe very highly of Christ's presence with all his own ordinances; though
if any cannot savor this, I will not contend, nor fight in the dark, but
desire the other things may be entertained which are certain, and then there
will be sufficient ground to think that it is not indifferent, whether we be
baptized or no; and that it is not a naked Ceremony that neither does good not
harm, as some men seem to speak against the constant sense of the people of
God. And thus much may suffice concerning my thoughts of the first particular,
wherein you have had a short account of the intent, use and benefit of Baptism.
It remains that speak a few words of the other two particulars in the text, and
show in the second place,

2. Who are the persons to be baptized?

The Text will not let us doubt but all those who are willing to embrace Jesus
as the Christ, and the Son of the living God, and to give themselves up to his
instruction and teaching, are thus to be initiated and entered into his
Religion. Only it is scrupled, whether those that cannot express such a
willingness, nor make any signs of it are so to be admitted, and therefore all
Infants are by some excluded from these waters, as subjects incapable, either
to make any such profession and engagement, or receive from God any such
benefit.

This point has been so sifted even to the very bran, that I cannot think mine
eyes so acute as to discern any little Argument to lie still neglected that I
should be able to boult out. The custom of the Church has been pleaded, which
is accounted the best Interpreter of a doubtful law; And the Scriptures have
been searched in these late times (more I think then ever,) by many learned
Authors in every ones hands, and to such excellent purpose, that if I were able
to plead the Infants title strongly, my defense might be spared.

I will therefore briefly dismiss this head with these four considerations.

First, That if there were any Infants in this persons family, it is certain
they were baptized, for he was baptized, he, and all his. It is doubtful
indeed, whether there were any or no; yet it is considerable (especially in
conjunction with other Arguments,) that neither here, nor any where else in the
whole Scripture are they excepted, (and it is scarce to be thought that all of
the families baptized were without Infants,) nor is there one word that tends
to the excluding of them from Baptism. But,

Secondly, I consider that Infants are capable to be engaged and professed, and
likewise to be received into the Grace and favor of God.

Baptism may be looked on either as a sign of what we are to be in our future
course, and what God has done, and will do for us, and so all must grant that
Infants are as capable as others to receive it; or secondly, As a seal of the
truth of God, under which notion we ordinarily conceive it, and then they are
as capable likewise as grown men to have any thing conveyed and sealed unto
them, upon such conditions afterward to be performed; or thirdly, As an
Obligation whereby we are tied to perform those conditions; and fourthly, As a
privilege whereby we are actually instated into some Favors and Enjoyments;
and if any affirm that in these two regards they are incapable, let them
remember that Children may be bound by deeds drawn up and sealed between two
persons before they understand any thing at all, and that a Child may be
crowned in the Cradle, and it will stand good to all purposes. A Parent may
contract with God on his child's behalf, no otherwise then a Guardian does in
the behalf of a minor or one under age, which he cannot afterward retract when
he is out of his Pupillage without injustice, and being liable to the Law, if
the contract be judged to be to his behoof and benefit. As in the
Interpretation of Law that is an Act of the Pupil, or child, which is done in
its name, and for its good by his Tutor or Guardian; so may God be pleased
graciously and favorably to accept of this Act of the Parent laying such an
Obligation upon the child, and interpret it for the child's own Act and Deed, so
conferring his graces upon it, and expecting performance of Faith and
Obedience, and looking upon it as so engaged, that it shall be properly said to
break a Vow and Covenant, if it sin against him. And this will still be clearer
from a third consideration.

Thirdly, That Children are in the power of the Parent, and they have a Jus or
Right unto them, so as they have to any other things that are their proper
goods. They may therefore make an offering of them to God, and dedicate them to
his uses, as well as Land or Money and there is no question but God will accept
of them as of any thing else that they consecrate to him, and take them for his
portion, so that it shall be a sacrilegious Act for these Infants hereafter to
alienate themselves from him, and convert themselves to the uses and service of
any other.

This the Denyers of Infant Baptism cannot deny, that it is very fit Parents
should by solemn prayers and profession devote and consecrate their children to
God and make an open oblation of them before all to his service, only they
would not have it done by washing with water, which is as much as to grant that
they would have the thing done, but not the Ceremony or Rite used, and that
they are capable of the thing signified, but not of the sign, of the greater
matter, but not of the less; and as it seems to me they make a Controversy
where there need be none; for if they are to be devoted to God, Baptism being
the way wherein we devote our selves to him and being so significant of our
Duty, it is the fittest way wherein to devote our Children to his use.

Fourthly, Christ may well be conceived to include them when he bids his
Disciples Go and baptize all Nations in the name of the Father, Mat. 28.
etc. for that was no more then a commission to go and make Proselytes, and
engage them by Baptism in Christ's Religion. Now I intimated before that there
were young strangers admitted by the Jews, i. e. Infants or little Children
were made Proselytes to their way of Worship, and it is plain that all were
baptized into Moses in the sea and in the cloud; both old and young, the
Infants as well as the grown men passed through the water, and were all covered
with the cloud, and likewise Favo^es sunt ampliandi, where none are excepted,
favors and benefits are to be enlarged unto all; and to spare further labor
of a long discourse, let me only remember you how Moses did take the Children
into Covenant with God, as well as the rest, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. You stand
this day all of you before the Lord your God your Captains of your Tribes, your
Elders, and your Officers, with all the men of Israel, your little Ones, your
wives, etc. that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and
into his oath which the Lord thy God makes with thee this day. Why should we
not then think that the Mediator of the new Covenant did include these little
Ones, as well as others in that universal expression, and that he would have
them enter into Covenant with God? If any ask why our Savior did not then
expressly mention them? the Answer will be easy, That there was no need for him
to express every particular subject of Baptism, seeing it was so well known
before by the common practice of the Jews, and by the former Covenant, and
therefore his chief intent in those words was to tell them in what manner and
form they should now baptize, viz. in the name of the Father, Son and H. Ghost,
which had not been yet used, but now was to be every where practiced. I have no
mind to add more, but beseech the Lord, that all those who dispute against
Infant Baptism, may behave themselves like men baptized, and remember that
humility, modesty and peaceableness of spirit are great Doctrines in the
Christian school; and that if so many good and learned men have erred (as they
think,) then so may they.

A few words concerning the third general Head of our discourse, may perhaps
lend a little further light to this business, and manifest that there is not so
much required as some imagine, to qualify and capacitate a person for Baptism.
For,

3. It is said here, that (...), straight way, immediately, without any further
proof he was baptized. If you look back, you shall find that Paul and Silas
being close Prisoners at Philippi, there was about midnight a great
Earthquake, that made both the Prison and the Jailer also shake, and opened
both the doors of the Prison, and of the heart of the Keeper; for this strange
trembling of the earth, it is very likely caused him to apprehend that these
were divine persons, for whom such a wonder was wrought, and so to come
trembling before them, and inquire what he must do to be saved? They told him,
Verse. 29, 3.
that he must believe on the Lord Jesus, and accordingly spoke to him the Word
of the Lord, Verse. 31, 32.
i.e. proved to him that Jesus was the Son of God, and taught men the true
Religion, and way to life. The very same hour he took them, and washed their
stripes, and then was washed himself in the name of Christ.

By this it will appear, that though a Profession of Faith be required, yet not
a distinct belief of every thing in Christ's Religion, for that could not in the
space of an hour be comprehended; He therefore having a general knowledge that
Jesus was the Son of God, and a Teacher sent from Heaven to do men great good,
and professing a readiness to be taught by him, was received by Baptism into
Christ's school to learn of him. That such a knowledge, together with a
repentance of their fore-past evil life, did sufficiently qualify for Baptism;
you may see by consulting these places, Acts 2. All the Sermon of the Apostle
tends to no other purpose, but to prove that Jesus whom they crucified, was the
promised seed, which he demonstrates from his resurrection, and the effects of
it, that abundantly declared he was made Lord and Christ. Verse 36. When this
was cleared to them, their hearts were pricked, to think what they had done,
and he exhorts them to repent of it, and receive Baptism, which three thousand
of them immediately did, as you read verse 41. And continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine. Verse 42. i.e. learning of that Religion, to which they saw
so much reason to addict themselves. So Acts 8.35. We find that Philip preached
Jesus to the Eunuch, and required only this profession of him. Verse 37. That
he believe with all his heart, that Jesus is the Son of God, and then he went
down into the water with him, and baptized him. And again, cap. 18.5. Paul was
pressed in spirit, and testified to the Jews, that Jesus was Christ; and then
verse 8. Crispus believed on the Lord, with his whole house, and many of the
Corinthians hearing, believed, and were baptized. So in all other places, you
will find there was so little space between their preaching and baptizing. that
they could not well be taught more then this, that he was the Messiah, or
Christ that was expected, and that all must be obedient to him. So that this
washing did admit them, and engage them to be his Disciples, to be taught, and
instructed by him, and to learn the way of God perfectly, which they could not
but believe he would acquaint them withal, being a messenger sent by God unto
them. And this is most plainly intimated in the words of that commission Christ
delivered unto them. Mat. 28.19, 20. Go and teach, or disciple all Nations,
etc. Where there are two teachings, the one before, the other after Baptism,
the first can be no more then a persuasion of them to become the Disciples of
Christ, and put themselves into his school, because he was the Son of God; and
then after they were baptized, follows a more accurate and full instruction of
them in all the parts of their Duty, which is meant by those words, (...), etc.
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. Where the
word for teaching is different from that in the former verse, ((...),) and
signifies a larger knowledge of Christ's Doctrine which they had engaged
themselves to observe, being assured the Son of God could teach them nothing
but the Truth.

And this I take to be the reason why so many fell off again from this
profession, when the displeasing Doctrines of Christ came to be practiced. They
had not considered what it would cost them to be Christians, but only as I
said, were in general convinced, that he was Gods Son, and that they must be
his Disciples, and so they liked no longer to be his followers, when their
carnal Interests came to be touched, and when they saw that he was such a
Master as would not let them have their own will, nor enjoy this present world,
nor (in one word,) serve two Masters, God and their Mammon too. Though they did
in gross (as I said,) profess to forsake their sins, and lead a holy life, yet
when they came to be informed in the particulars of self-denial, and such hard
lessons, they returned rather with the dog to the vomit, 2 Pet. 2.22.
and the washed sow to the wallowing in the mire.

That I may put an end to this Discourse, let me show you a little how it will
be useful to you, and have an Influence upon practice, and if you be
believing, and obedient, I shall be confident I have not made you mispend an
hour in perusing what I have represented.

Use 1.
TAke notice of the great Wisdom of our Lord, that though he have left us an
outward Ceremony still in his Church, yet it is such an one, that signifies not
one thing, but the whole Religion, and not only signifies, but ingages us unto
our duty. You have seen that Baptism expresses the whole Covenant of Grace
between God and us, and whereas the Jews had several Rites and usages, to set
forth and represent several duties, Christ has left us only this, (together
with the Bread and Wine in the other Sacrament,) which are such as are easy to
be had, and to be practiced, and are simple, plain, and easy to be understood,
and do also show us our whole Duty, and likewise lay Engagements upon us to
perform it; so that we cannot use either of them, but thereby we are bound to
be wholly Gods, and entirely devoted to his service. And therefore,

Use 2.
SEcondly, Let me strongly plead with you in the behalf of God, to take heed to
your selves, and your ways according to his Word. You are all baptized into
Christ, and thereby you have put on Christ, you have solemnly engaged your
selves to live righteously, soberly, and godlily in this present evil world;
Gal. 5.3.
and as the Apostle says of Circumcision, so I say to you, I testify to every
man that is baptized, that he is a Debtor to observe the whole Gospel. What
then have you to do with the Devil whom you have renounced? Why are you so in
love with the world, which you have forsaken, and from which you are divorced?
Why are you so tender of the interests of the flesh, which you promised to
mortify, and crucify together with Christ? What is the reason that you
renounce Christ in your lives, as if you were ashamed of his profession?

Is Baptism but a cold Ceremony? or do you think the washing of the flesh will
save you? Not only the Apostle confutes you, 1 Pet. 3.21. but you shall hear
your selves put to silence out of the mouth of a very Jew, He that believes
not as he ought (says the Author of the book, Nitzachon,) his Circumcision
does not make him a Jew; but he that does believe aright, V. Joseph. de Voysin
de leg. Div. cap. 44.
is a Jew, though he be not circumcised. One would not expect such language
from them that glory in Circumcision: but God hereby shames such outward
Professors that glory in Baptism, as they did in Circumcision, though they be
not the followers of faithful Abraham. As long as their ears, and tongue, Exo.
6.12. Jer. 6.10. Jer. 9.26.
and heart were uncircumcised, (for of all those we read,) their foreskin
remained, and as long as our thoughts, and words, and ways are impure, we are
in effect unbaptized.

If then outward Baptism will not save, why do you not cleanse your selves from
all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of
God? Do you not at all value the Promises of God? Is it no favor to be his
Children, to have forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among those that are
sanctified through faith? Or is there any other way wherein these can be
attained? Can you find a shorter cut to heaven by some other passage? Assure
your selves, that there is no other Covenant whereby to partake of these
promises, but that Covenant which is consigned by Baptism, whereby we stand
engaged to the performance of such Duties as our Savior does require. We shall
miserably flatter and abuse our selves, if we imagine to come to Heaven any
other way then through the Covenant of Baptism, wherein we promise to forsake
all the enemies of God, and to adhere and cleave to him faithfully and loyally
against all the persuasion: and temptations of the devil, world and flesh; and
therefore unless we can show a new Gospel, and be baptized over again by the
appointment of God, and obtain some easier, and more pleasing conditions, let
us arm our selves against, and bid defiance unto them, and resolve that no lust
shall escape with its life. What, art thou a Christian, and as fond of the
pleasures of the world as a Pagan? as loath to displease the flesh, as if thou
had been initiated in the impure Mysteries of the heathen; as covetous, as if
thou wast an Idolater, and did worship a god of Gold? as sensual, beastly,
devilish in thy affections, passions and conversation, as if thou wast some
black African, and had never been enlightened? Oh! Do not live as if thou
had been baptized in the Devils name, and had sworn to be his bondsman, and
entered a Pro^^stution against God and Christ, and all communion with Heaven. O
live not I beseech you, as if it were your Religion for to sin; as if you had
been baptized in a ditch, and washed with puddle water, and had professed to be
as dirtily and basely employed, as ever you were able. Did your Baptism
signify that you should be drowned in drink, that you should be buried vilely
and covetously in the earth; that you should rise and lift up your head against
heaven; that you should fill the air with oaths and blasphemies, and noysom
speeches, and that you should defy God, and all above? No, the Devil himself
durst not urge a Witch to make such a Covenant with him; and therefore his Art
and Subtilty is to make men live after this profane sort, though they make not
such a profession: and he labors to baptize and drench their souls in this
belief, that the Covenant of Grace signifies all on Gods part, nnd nothing at
all on theirs. They are even swallowed up in these conceits, that they shall
enjoy pardon, grace and salvation, and be privileged from wrath to come; and
in the mean time, take care only to do as they please, to live (...), (as the
Heathens phrase is,) a moist, soft and delicate life, and to swim to Heaven in
rivers of pleasure, and carnal delights. What swarms and herds of followers
should a man have that went about, and preached such a Baptism for the
commission of sins? but there is no need any one should do the Devil that
service; for the Baptism of Christ is made one of his mysteries, and all our
preaching cannot root out this belief, that Christ will be the Author of
eternal salvation to them that do not obey him. But it is as clear as the Light,
that a Covenant is between two persons, and both are engaged to some
performances; and that God is no otherwise bound in this baptismal Covenant,
then we are bound also: and that he gives pardon upon no other conditions but
these, that we forsake the Devil, the World, and all the lusts of the flesh. If
we therefore renounce this part, then we discharge him of all that he has
promised. And the truth is, it is very ridiculous to imagine, that God should
wash us there clean, that ever after we might be as soul as we please. As if a
Muscovian Christian, who spits upon the ground withindignation, when he
renounces the Devil in Baptism should presently fall down, and lick it up
again. Or, as if one should put on a Garment of light, be clad with a white
robe, that he might sweep chimnies, and rake in kennels, or lead dung-carts
about the streets. If we be the Children of the Light, then we must have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, nor bemire our selves in the
filth and dirt of the world. If we be Christ's Disciples, we must not only make
a face, and spit when we hear the Devil named, but we must abhor his works, and
defy all his filthy lusts, and have our very stomach rise at all that comes
from hell. And so men would, were they not jugled into a belief that they defy
the Devil, while he embraces them in his arms. I remember a story in the life
of a Romish Religious, S^or Maria Ma^dalena de Patsi.
how that she should see one day in a vision the soul of a sinner dragged to
hell, and beyond the mercy of purgatory, for not having in account the
spiritual treasures of the Church, but despising both indulgences, and all
other graces which she grants her Children. So does the Devil labor to nurse
in men's hearts a persuasion that outward things can save them, and that he can
do them no harm, if they be baptized, keep the Church, say their prayers, and
receive the Ministers blessing, which is all they think that Baptism ingages
them unto; and they make the same use of Christ, that others do of the Pope,
thinking to buy a pardon (if they have not one already,) by the profession of
such a holiness, as the Devil, if he were incarnate, need not be afraid of, but
might swear he would maintain. O, what pity is it, that Christ should be thus
abused, and his institutions perverted, and souls undone, when it is so plain,
what he would have us to do that we may be saved!

But will not some little sprinklings of holiness serve the turn, may some say?
May we not allow some place for self-pleasing, and gratify our own desires
sometimes, seeing we wallow not always in filthiness? No, Baptism, though only
upon the face, signifies the washing of the whole man from spiritual
pollutions, and though only once administered, puts us into a state of purity,
which must not willingly admit of any defilement. And let those men know that
have their good moods, their cold fits of Repentance, and their hot fits of
zeal, that use Religion as the Papists do holy water, when they are entering
into the Church, and going to perform some devotion; that Christ owns no such
Disciples. They were not baptized in lukewarm water, but were engaged in a
state of mortification, and entered into Christ's death, and he expects a
constant performance of obedience. Aelian. l. 4. var. hist. cap. 1.
There were a people in Illyricum, that were washed but three times in all
their lives, at their birth, at their marriage, and at their death. And they
may be a picture of most Christians amongst us, who in their Infancy are washed
in Christ's nam; and then perhaps against some solemn time, when the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper is near, they begin to put away their sins, and perhaps
baptize themselves in tears, and deck up themselves, as though they would meet
the Bridegroom, and be married unto him; and of this you shall hear no more,
(unless at such a time as that,) till death tell them that he can stay no
longer, and some sickness arrests them, then they begin to slubber and cry, to
sigh and groan, as if by tears they could wash away their guilt, and by a few
sighs and good wishes, blow away the black cloud of wrath that hangs over their
heads. They make Religion to be a few strong pang^ of devotion at certain times
of their life, and Christ to be pleased with any thing, glad of any company,
and heaven to be an empty void place that wants Inhabitants, much like to the
new found world, whither we send the most rascal people. But Christ will
shortly appear to all the world, to confute all such men, and he will drench
them in seas of fire, the floods of his wrath shall overwhelm them, and they
shall never rise again.

But is there such great danger then, may some say? Will not God be something
more favorable to us then other men, and will not the waters of Baptism a
little quench and cool the flames?

Cool them? No, they will be like water upon lime, which will make it burn the
hotter. Even this will be pleaded against you, that you were baptized. If a
Soldier sworn to Caesar should forsake his Camp, and fly to the Turks, would
he not be punished more then a stranger when he was taken, and suffer as a
false and treacherous fellow, as a Run-agate, and a perjured person? Who would
admit of such a plea from his mouth? I am no forsworn Wretch, I never denied
Caesar, nor renounced my Allegiance to him; no man ever heard me speak a word
against him: Might it not easily be returned to him, but thou did deny him in
thy Actions, thou have more then forsworn him, for thou have fought against
him, yea, thou have joined with a Tyrant, with the greatest enemy the Emperor
has, and the sworn foe of all Christians; if such a Fellow should live, who
should die? What is the Ax and the Gibbet made for, if not for such traiterous
Villains? The Gallows would think much, if thou should be reprieved. Thou
read thy own case, O Christian, if thou live in sin, and fidest with the
Devil, and take thy share with the world, whom thou have renounced in word,
but not in deed. What though thou do not call the Lord Christ a Deceiver?
What though thou do not revile the holy name whereby we are called? thou do
a great deal worse, thou bendest all thy forces thou have against him, as if he
were a thief and a Robber, thou labourest to destroy his Kingdom, thou
tramplest under foot the blood of the Covenant, and make Christ unto thee of
none effect. Which is the worst enemy, he that speaks thee fair, and with a
kiss stabs thee to the heart? or he that bids thee stand upon thy guard, and
declares himself resolved against thy life? I will assure you Turks are not
such enemies to Christ, as those that pretend to him, and yet do him all the
despite they can in their lives. Better had it been for them that some band of
soldiers had ravished them from their mothers breasts, and listed them under
Mahomets banners; better had it been for them to have been Janissaries, then to
own and acknowledge the Christian Profession, and live so profanely without
God in the world.

Heathens may sin at a cheaper rate then we, because they never made any such
Promise unto God. They may do evil with a better front, and more confident
countenance, that never received any such mark in their forehead. But a
Christian face which is besprinkled with clean water in the name of Christ,
should blush (methinks,) at any impurity; and the mark of Christ that is upon
him should make him more modest then to sin. But if he will besmear himself
again, and have the impudence to outface Christ, he shall pay dearly for it.
For he breaks his vow to God, and thereby comes under the curse which is
annexed to the Covenant, as well as the Promise. And all these terrible
threatning^ of Christ which in baptism he promised to believe, as well as any
other Word of God, shall all fall upon his head, and he shall be cast into a
lake indeed but it is a lake burning with fire and brimstone. Rev. ^^.8.
Better had it been for such an one, if he had been drowned in the font, or
entered into the gates of death, when he entered into the gates of the Church, it
had been better for him, if he had been branded with a hot iron in his
forehead, or scalding oil had been poured upon his face, when it was washed
with water in the name of Christ. The flames of hell shall eternally burn and
consume without any consumption that filthy soul, whose dirt the waters of
Baptism, and the fires of the holy Ghost could not fetched out, and scour away.
And if any complain of their weakness*

Use 3.
THirdly, Here is matter of comfort to us. We are in a Covenant of Grace, there
is a Redemption for us if we have a mind to be delivered; we have assurance of
the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and if we be sincerely watchful and
diligent, he will not, because of our failings, take away his Holy Spirit from
us. Through the Spirit of Christ we shall be able to do valiantly, nothing
shall be too hard to overcome, but we shall tread all our enemies under our
feet.

Let us march out therefore as the Soldiers of Christ, carrying his Cross in
our Banners; let us profess, and declare that we are crucified to the world,
that we are buried with Christ in Baptism, R(...). 6
and reckon our selves to be dead indeed unto sin, But alive unto God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that
you should obey it in the lusts thereof; neither yield ye your members as
Instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of
Righteousness unto God. For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are
not under the Law, but under Grace. It is a shame now to be overcome, when you
serve under such a Captain, and have Heaven on your side, and have received the
promise of the holy Ghost Is there no power in the Spirit of God? or is not God
as good as his word? Will not he give us what he has promised, to make us to
vanquish all his enemies? O do not speak such evil things of God by doing any
evil. Do not disgrace your profession, nor bring a dishonor upon your Lord, by
letting every temptation use you at its pleasure. Do not suffer every lust to
foil and worst you, as if you were Turks and Infidels, and had none of the mark
or badge of God upon you, and as if your Baptism was of no more avail to you,
then the washing of your hands. But first resolve that all these lusts of the
flesh must be overcome, and then conclude that they may. Persuade your selves
that God is with you, and that he has appointed no ineffectual Rites, no bare
shadows, no beggarly Ceremonies, and cold Formalities in the Religion of
Christ; but that if you use your Diligence, and pray continually, you shall
find the holy Ghost to accompany you, and that you are born again, not of water
only, but of the Spirit, and shall finally inherit eternal life.

4. That you may receive greater supplies of the spirit promised, and be more
engaged to your duty, labor fully to understand your vow and Covenant, and
then come, and openly own it, professing you will be faithful to it, that so
you may be admitted to nearer familiarity with God. Let me prevail with all
young persons who are yet in the gate of the Church, and have proceeded no
further then to be baptized in their Infancy, and perhaps to be catechized in
the principles of Religion, to spend a few thoughts upon this which I propound.
For though outward Baptism, which is the visible sign and seal of the Covenant,
1 Pet. 3.21.
is not to be renewed, yet the Answer of a good conscience, wherein the inward
Baptism does consist, may, and ought to be re-iterated by a personal resumption
and ratification of that vow which was made for us in our infant years. And no
man is to be reputed a complete member of the Church, until he do own his
Engagements, and openly profess that he will stand to the conditions of the
Covenant, and be a Disciple of Christ. If Baptism did at first admit us into
the enjoyment of many privileges, surely we shall receive more of the
blessings of it, when we do seriously reflect upon it, and engage our hearts by
our own free consent to God, because then we begin more solemnly to perform the
conditions that God requires of us. When I first entered upon a charge of
souls, I could think of no course so anciently attested unto, so reasonable in
it self, and so likely to be effectual for men's good, so free likewise from the
just exceptions of any party, as to propose this to my people, that all those
who had not yet been communicated, should freely and heartily in the presence
of those who were assembled at any time to partake of the Lords Supper, profess
to be sincere and constant in their baptismal Covenant, and declare themselves
enemies to the Devil, the world, and the flesh. And I will take occasion here
to profess, that I am heartily glad that Mr. Hanmer has proposed this; and Mr.
Baxter so earnestly pressed it upon the whole Nation; after whose pious and
learned endeavors, let me contribute my little Mite to the urging those, into
whose hands this small Treatise shall come, that they would not refuse it. This
Christian Duty has long passed under the name of Confirmation, which is a word
full, and significant of the thing that I. would express, and consists of two
parts. First, That a person do undertake in his own name every part of the vow
made by others for him in Baptism, and so personally consent unto Christ to be
wholly his, according to that agreement. And so it is an Act of Confirmation on
our part, because we do hereby further ratify and establish that contract
which is between God and us, and by confessing of it to be valid and good, bind
our selves faster still to him, whose we were before. The second part of it is;
A receiving of Gods Blessing and Grace by the Ministers hands, and holy
prayers, to strengthen us to perform our Engagement, and make good our word and
faith which we have plighted unto God; which many have taken to be the meaning
of that place, Beside sundry of the Ancients, Calvin, Beza, Piscator, H^nnius,
I^yricus, Tossanus, G ynaeus, do so expound it. See also Hyperius and Bu^ling.
In loc. who wish for the restoring of it in those Churches from which it had
been banished.
Heb. 6.4. Where after Baptism, follows, laying on of hands, which the Jews
used in their blessings. And so it is an Act of Confirmation of the person on
the part of God, who confers a new grace to strengthen, and confirm in him
these holy Principles, and that good resolution, of which he has made a
faithful profession, and to enable him to keep and persist in it. As in
Baptism, the Holy Ghost was conveyed as a Sanctifier, so herein as a Comforter
and Strengthner now, that the person is entering upon a great contest and
conflict with himself, the world, and principalites, and powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places. The necessity of this is not now in this age of
the world, as a new thing to be learned; there never could be a well
constituted Church without it, nor can we tell that men are not Heathens, and
have not revoked their word, unless they will tell us they understand what they
then did, and will not stir from it. But if it be visible souls are not like in
any great numbers to be saved without some such course, (so many attending upon
Sermons many years that understand little or nothing,) it will not be disputed
by sober men, whether it be necessary or no; and for proof of this, I refer to
the better works of him that labors more abundantly then us all; Mr. Baxter.
thinking it sufficient for one to persuade, what abler men do prove. Let me
only produce the testimony of a very great and learned person lately in this
Church, and add it to the words of the R. and learned D. Hammond, which you
find at the end of Mr. Baxters book. For all such as have been baptized in
their Infancy, the personal Resumption and Ratification of that Vow which their
fathers and mothers in God did make for them at the sacred Laver, Dr. Jackson.
l. 10. upon the Creed. Cap. 50. To which add the words of another more ancient,
annexed at the end of this Treatise, and because of its length, not here
inserted.
is to be exacted of them Oretenus, in some public congregation, before they
can lawfully be admitted to be public Communicants of Christ's body and blood.
And though he can find no default in the Doctrine, or Laws of our Church, yet
(he says,) he dare not avouch so much for justifying the men, to whom the
execution of those Laws is commended, whether they be of lower, of higher, or
of the highest rank. It having been scarce in his observation, that any
presentiments were made in visitations, of the parents, for not bringing persons
to; or of Ministers, for not preparing them for confirmation, much less against
Diocesans themselves for not executing their Office in this great service of
the Church. And he concludes in these remarkable words, Whether the solemn
baptizing of all Infants, which are the Children of presumed Christian parents
throughout this Kingdom, without solemn Astipulation, that they shall at years
of Discretion personall^ ratify their vow in Baptism in public, in such
manner as the Church requires, be not rather more lawful, or tolerable, then
expedient, I leave with all submission to the consideration of higher powers.
And he blesses God that he was in a convenient age, in a happy time and place,
presented to ratify his vow made for him by his sureties, etc. which sure he
would not have done, if he had not found it very beneficial unto his spiritual
good and welfare.

The same Author has these words in a Treatise published in his life time,
Treatise of Faith sect. 3. cap. 22. pa^^g.
He that sets his hand unto the sacred plough, should first begin to sound the
depth of that rule, What it is to deny our selves, and forsake all we have, for
in this furrow must the seed of life be sown. Here Novices in Religion commonly
begin to balk, and no wonder, seeing so few are called to any strict personal
account of that which others have undertaken for them at their first admission
into the Bed-roll of Christians. But if that treble vow Which w^ made in
Baptism.
were distinctly and fully unfolded unto us, as soon as we had any knowledge of
good and evil; and all the several branches of Gods Covenant, with as great
care and solemnity inculcated, as Moses commanded the Law should be to the
Israelites Children: And lastly, The Vow it self confirmed and ratified by our
personal protestation in the sight of the Congregation; the fear as well of
God, as of shame before men, in whose presence we made this profession, would
bind many of us to more Christian behavior, then the best of us, as the world
goes, dare make show of; as also restrain us from many deadly Enormities, which
now admonished of, we will not account any sins. Thus prepared to receive it,
it would be overmuch infidelity to distrust the plentiful Infusion of inherent
sanctifying Grace at our solemnities of Confirmation; were these first
sanctified with public prayers, or performed with such Christian care and
diligence as they ought. A religious Duty in the Christian Church, which it
were to be wished, might be performed more often, more solemnly, and more
religiously then it uses to be.

And indeed who sees not that great benefits would hence flow, See the
testimony annexed at the end of this Treatise.
both to particular persons, and to the Church of God? It would be a means to
make men more knowing in the things of their salvation, to tie them more
strictly to mind the affairs of their souls, to work in them a deeper sense of
the great business of being a Christian. It would make men more afraid to
commit a sin against which they had so solemnly and publicly protested. It
would bring Religion to be a thing credible and more in fashion then it is,
when men did so openly appear for it, and engage themselves unto it. It is at
once acceptable to God, and safe to our selves, and so will be accompanied with
his Grace, and in its own nature cut off many inticements of the world. It will
bid us stand upon our Reputation in the pursuit of Religion, and not run the
hazard of being perjured persons. Wicked men will not have the confidence to
ask us to sin, when we have so publicly disowned them. You complain of evil
company, of friends and acquaintance that engage you; do but let them know that
you intend to be religious, and they will let you alone. The Philosophers
openly professed a severe and unusnal life, that all men might let them live
philosophically, and not be a disturbance unto them; Let but us do so, and be
professedly religious, and solemnly tell all men that we mean to keep our vows,
and they will have the less boldness for to trouble us. Our work is half done,
when we are heartily resolved; and more then half, when we profess these
resolutions. It will bring us to man's estate, that we may feed at the Table of
the Lord, whereby we may increase in strength, and have more near communion
with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Though I will not say, that till this be
done, men are members of the Church imperfectly, yet I must needs think, that
they are but imperfect members, they are but babes and infants in Christ, and
not to be admitted (in the Judgment of all ages,) to taste of the meat of men,
till they show themselves to be men, by speaking for themselves. In short, it
will be a great security and defense against temptations, and we shall recoil
upon our selves, when we are assaulted, saying, How shall we do this
wi^kedness, and break our vows, and scandalize the Church, and bring the guilt
of perjury upon our own souls?

It is observed by Jos. de Voysin out of the Author of the book Ikkarim, that
the elevation of the hands of the Priest in the old Law at the blessing of the
people, was imposition of hands; and this blessing the Author of Tzeror Hammor
calls the Weapons and Armor of Israel, the Artilery (as it were,) and the
Bulwarks of his people. I will assure you that this solemn Engagement, together
with Gods Grace and blessing that will descend upon you, will be your great
guard and defense, your sword and buckler to beat off temptations that are apt
most strongly to assault your younger years, before you have had experience of
the worlds vanity. Therefore he that would not be without a shield in the midst
of fiery darts, he that would not be weak and feeble among strong enemies, that
would not be a prey to the Devil and the World, let him come, and put himself
under the wings of the divine Majesty, by his own actual consent, let him give
up himself into the hands of God, to be kept by his Power through faith unto
salvation.

There is nothing can hinder any man from embracing this motion, but that which
will hinder men from being thorough Christians, and living godly in Christ
Jesus: And we may be confident, that none are fit to receive the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, that are not willing to submit unto it. For he that
hungers after the sweeter tastes of Christ's love, that desires to unite his
heart more closely to him, and to engage himself more firmly in the Covenant of
God by receiving the remembrances of his love, will not refuse to do that in
word, which he intends to do in deed. If he really mean to be a Professor of
Christ's Religion, and to testify to the world, that the deeds thereof are
evil, and contradict their manners in his conversation, then he will not stick
to condemn them in his words, and renounce them solemnly by his mouth, which is
the far easier matter.

Will any man be ashamed to make such a profession, and to tread in the way of
Christ's Church, because it has been of late disused, or turned into another
thing? Why should thou blush to own holiness, to say before Christ's Church,
thou art resolved to lead a Christian life, and renounce the Devil, and all the
ways of wickedness? Why should thou be ashamed of thy Religion, as though it
were fit to be professed only in a private corner, where none should hear thee?
Why should it be accounted a strange thing to protest love to God? It is an
honor and glory to us, that we may be Christians, and so we should esteem it.
We should be glad, if we can do our Savior so much honor as to confess him
openly before men, that so he may confess us before all his H. Angels. We may
be confident, that we shall never in a time of persecution confess him, (of
Which these places in the margent speak, Mat. 12.32. Mar. 8.38. Romans 10.8, 9,
10.
) if we cannot be persuaded to do it among the Children of Peace? Will any one
be ashamed that it should be told by the Minister, that such an one declared
himself a Christian, and has to me avowed his Religion, and solemnly said,
that he will by the Grace of God make good his baptismal promise? Will any one
be loath it should be publicly said, that he is a Christian? Why then should
he not say so himself? Suppose you were not yet baptized, or had lived in the
first times, and heard Christ preached, would you be unwilling to come, and
prosess that you renounced the Devil, the World, and their lusts? Shall none
own the Religion of Christ publicly, but Infants that cannot understand it?
The more we know, shall we be the more loath to declare our liking of his ways?
Are you unwilling to represent the child's person, and profess publicly for it
in the congregation? Why should you not do that for your selves which you are
willing to do for others? Cannot he that comes in the name of a child, and
says, I believe, etc. I renounce, etc. come, and do the same in his own name?
I do really think, that they that are unwilling to undertake Christ's Profession
by an open promise, would not be baptized if it had not been done in their
Infant years, they would remain rather Heathens and Infidels, then be received
into the Church of God, for upon no lower conditions then these are, could they
ever have been admitted to any Christian privileges. Unless therefore you will
show your selves to want all understanding, and not fit to be treated as men of
common reason, put not away from you so many Entreaties. If you think your
Baptism to be worth your owning, if you would not really be without it, and
take your selves to be the better for it, renew solemnly that League and
Promise with God, and do not persuade your selves and others, that you prize
the Baptism, while you are unwilling unto this, for if that were not done, you
would certainly omit it as a needless Ceremony, as well as this which always
accompanied it in the Church of Christ. Anton. de Dom. de Repub. Eccles.
Seeing nothing can reasonably be thought to make you unwilling, but a lothness
to be good, and engaged to live well; do not by refusing, cast an Aspersion
upon your selves of having renounced Christ, and secretly entered into a
confoederacy with the Devil to destroy his Kingdom, and trample under foot his
blood as an unholy thing.

When this confirmation was looked upon by the multitude as a means only to
receive some thing from God, but not as laying any obligation upon men; it was
a wonder (I should have said no wonder,) to see what flocks and herds of people
came unto it. In Queen Mary's days, (as Saunders tell us. De Schism.
) when this custom by a provincial decree of Card. Pooles was renewed after
long neglect, the people were so zealous to receive the Bishops blessing, There
were Decrees long before to enforce it, as that of Archb. Peckham. An. 1271.
Wherein he calls the disuse of it, Damnable Negligence.
(which was all they went for,) that in some places the Church could not
contain the people that resorted to him, and he was fain to confirm in the
Churchyard, and to be defended by armed men from the press of the multitude.

Why should not men come now in as great Crowds, when another renewall in a
more solemn manner is proposed? Why should not the young people assemble
themselves together, and say, Come, Let us go to the house of the Lord, let us
own Christ to be our Lord and Savior, but only because men are loath to be
engaged to fear God, and do love a Christ of their own making that shall do all
for them, and require them to do nothing for him? If God will have men as they
are, they can be content to afford him their company; but if he expect any
amendment, they desire to be excused from making him any promise of it, and
hope that they shall find him so kind in the conclusion, as not to exact it.
May not he be well satisfied without any bond from us, when (in men's account)
he will never demand the Debt? Why should we pass our word for that which will
never be required? seeing God can bear with men's rebellions, why should his
Ministers be so rigid, as to exact an Oath of Allegiance? These are the
thoughts of men's hearts, that God will cross all scores at the last, and then
to what purpose is it to make any such serious Engagements? If we had a window
into men's breasts, we should see this Principle engraven on their hearts, That
the Gospel is Promises, and all their work is to believe them to be true, and
so there need not so much be done, as to make an open profession of this belief.

If Popery should again prevail in England, and such a decree should be again
revived, what would these men do? Would they be so backward as now they are to
present themselves before the Congregation of God? It is most likely that fear
or fancy might make those men receive their Ointment in the forehead, and box
on the ear, (as the manner is in their confirmation,) who now will not for the
love of God profess they hate sin, and intend to lead a holy life. So
constantly it falls out, that what has difficulty in it is refused, and all
that requires our serious attention, upon some account or other is rejected,
and men would go to Heaven they know not how, and be saved from hell, but not
from their sins. Yea, some are so ignorant, as to call this a popish Ceremony,
when it is very plain, that if it were, they would not speak against it. If
only their Children were to be blessed that understand nothing, we might easily
persuade them to send them, when as they will rather themselves remain
Children, then make any solemn Covenant with God by their own mouths. If a
Character (as they speak,) was to be impressed, and the benefit to arise ex
opere operato out of the mere doing of the work, they would willingly be so
sealed for Heaven, but if they must set their own seal to any Engagements, they
withdraw their hands, and will presume upon some other way of conveyance, and
making over Gods great Blessings to them. If they can be saved by sprinkling
water on their face, and the woman can carry them in her arms to Heaven, as she
does unto the Font; they are content, it costs them no trouble at all. But if
it were to do again, if it must cost them Repentance, a holy life, and a hearty
profession of it, they would scorn that Baptism wherein now they trust so much,
and they would rather venture to be as they were born, then be washed from
their pollutions on such conditions. O that men would take these things at
least so far into their thoughts, as to pass a serious Judgment upon them,
whether they be true or false! Do not read these lines without a little pause.
And then go on, and consider with thy self, how unlikely it is, that they, who
even break their brains with study to do men good, and sigh till their heart
ache after men's salvation, should be the greatest enemies of men, the troublers
of their Peace, and that love to persuade them needless or indifferent things,
that may as well be left undone.

Let some honest Heathens (for a conclusion) be admitted for to plead the cause
of this truth, and perhaps they may make those faces blush who look on these
lines, but are loath to show themselves in any public presence to profess
their Religion. When the Persian youth were out of their minority, and came to
men's estate. They gave them an Oath which they solemnly took in this form,
Isidor. Peleus. l. 4. Epist. 198.
I swear that I will despise all filthy lucre, bodily ploasures, and vain
glory; that I will rather be aemulous of virtue, and worship God, reverence my
Parents, speaking Truth, and doing good, neither will I ever wittingly and
willingly violate any of these things. Sure these old Heathens would not have
refused to do what is now desired, had they embraced our Religion, who thus
amply protested, and took their oath that they would be good.

Julius Pollux likewise relates the like custom among the Greeks in the
Commonwealth of Athens. L. 8. cap. 9. and likewise Stobaei sermon. 41.
When their young men were twenty years of age, their names were inscribed in
the City-rolls, (...), etc.
and they swore in the open air, (as if they would have all the world to hear
them,) I will never disgrace my arms, nor forsake my fellow-souldier in his
danger; I will fight both alone, and with others for God and my Country, I will
sail to any Region of the world whither I am commanded, and will neither
disturb, nor betray my Country, I will observe the perpetual solemnities, and
obey the received customs, and all that shall be hereafter made; I will
defend, and ever have in reverence (...).
the Religion in which I was born; (...), The Gods are witnesses of these
things. Will not you Christians then promise thus much to your Lord, now that
you are of age, to fight against all his enemies, to be true to God, and to
him, and that you will never dishonor your profession, nor forsake the
communion of Saints, nor deny him any service that he commands, nor neglect the
Solemnities that he has appointed? Then may the Persians and Athenians rise up
in the Judgment against you, and condemn you.

Do men refuse the oath of Allegiance to their Prince, whose natural Subjects
they are, and under whose Protection they have been born and bred? Would you
deny to acknowledge in open Court an Instrument for your Act and Deed, which
was signed in your name in Infancy, and conveighs great benefits unto you? Let
the King of Heaven then have so much right done him. Let your own souls be the
greatest part of your care, and let it not be said, that a rational creature
will do that for an acre of Land, which he will not do to obtain Heaven, and
all the territories above. What joy would it cause in Heaven and Earth to see
men coming to desire communion on these conditions, to behold men crowding into
the Kingdom of Heaven, as they do into a Church, and longing after the food of
the faithful, as they do for meat and drink? Rejoice I beseech you the heart
of God, refresh the souls of his servants, and add to the sweetness of the
table of the Lord, by letting us have more good company at so joyful a Feast.
But if all Entreaties cannot prevail,

I think the Higher Powers had best enact a Law, That none shall be married,
till they be instructed and confirmed, and that will do it. For those that care
not whether they receive the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, or no, will
not live without this Sacrament, (as in a large sense it may be called,) though
they understand the ends and duties of it no more then of the other. And this
must be acknowledged to have been a great cause of our Disorders, that men
enter into these relations before they know the duties of them, and beget, and
bring forth Children, before they cease to be children themselves, or know how
to bring them up as they should. Therefore our Reformers, it is plain, intended
men should not marry before they were well catechized, and had taken their
Baptismal vow upon themselves, knowing, that those were unfit to make a
Covenant with each other, who knew not the Covenant of their God. For they
prescribe in the last Rubric of the office of Matrimony, that the persons new
married, must that day receive the Communion; and in the last Rubric about
Confirmation, say in express words. That none shall be admitted to the holy
Communion until such time as they can say the Catechism, and be confirmed. Let
me speak to the very senses of vulgar people. Do you not remember the font
stood at the lower end of the Church, and the Communion Table at the higher?
Could you come from the one to the other but by the Pulpit which stands in the
middle between both? This teaches you (if you will learn,) that you are only
entered into the Church, and are but in the beginnings of Religion by Baptism,
and that you must advance higher by being instructed and taught in the faith of
Christ, and can no otherwise be admitted from the lower to the highest forms of
Christians. Come therefore, and be instructed, and then profess you like this
Doctrine, and will be obedient to it; so shall you come to be men in Christ,
and taste of all his dainties, and be satisfied with the fat things of his
house. Quod totu^ sciri non potest, ne omittatur totum, siquidem scientia
partis melior est ignorantia totius.
If all will not be granted that is here requested, yet do not deny all, but at
lest profess to the Minister your hearty Repentance, and your belief in Christ,
and the willingness to submit unto him, and to be saved by him, that he may
declare it to all others. And really show that you are come to an adult estate,
by putting away childish things, and living the life of men. A Child (as one
says,) looks only to things present, a man looks to things to come: A
child attends only to pastime and pleasure, a man has also profit in his
consideration. A child is ready to sell his Inheritance for a trifle or babble,
of which a man makes a greater account. His carriage and behavior likewise
distinguishes him, and so does his confidence against vulgar bug-bears and
affrightments.

If therefore after you are confirmed, you find your selves to think less of
things present, and more of things to come; less of this world, and more of the
eternal rewards of Godliness, and the everlasting punishments of sin; if you
scorn to sell your heavenly inheritance for the trifles of this world that
present themselves unto you; if you be more attentive to your spiritual profit
in knowledge and mortification, and not only taken with the sweetnesses and
ravishments of Religion; if your conversation toward God and the world be more
serious, grave and discreet, and you are not so easily amazed with the fears of
sufferings and difficulties in your Christian course; it is a sign that you
have not received the Grace of God in vain, and the Lord will deliver you from
every evil work, and preserve you to his everlasting Kingdom. Faithful is he
that calls you, who also will do it.

5. Lastly, Let me beseech all the people of God to live in love and peace
together. Let us nor quarrel about every little thing, nor make every petty
difference a cause of trouble and contention. For as the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into one body. We are all by this made
of the same corporation, and taken by Baptism into the same Brotherhood, and
therefore should not make them the waters of strife, and so provoke the Lord to
anger against us. We are not baptized into this or that particular Opinion, nor
received into a particular Church, but into the belief of the Gospel, and into
the Church of God in general, and therefore should love all the Disciples and
followers of our Lord, and embrace all of every persuasion that live godlily in
Christ Jesus. You were not baptized (says the Apostle) into the name of Paul,
therefore do not say, I am of Paul, I adhere to this man or that, for whosoever
did baptize you, it was not into the particular love of him and his opinions,
but into the Communion of the whole Church of Christ, who hold the Catholic
Faith. Though an Heretic in ancient times had baptized any man, yet did not
the Christians therefore baptize him over again when he left those men's
company, because being baptized into the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, he
was not received into the profession of their particular opinions, but of the
Truth of Christ universally believed by all good Christians.

And therefore let us live with them all as our Confederates, as those that are
tied together in the same bonds, and united in the same Covenant, and engaged
in the same cause against the common enemies, the Devil, the World, and the
Flesh, and let us never give these enemies so much cause to rejoice, as an
unhandsome word against any sincere Christian might administer. But let us
endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, for as the
Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of All, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all.

(...).
APPENDIX.
THE late King Charles was confirmed on EASTER monday, In the Chapel at
White Hall.
1613. (which was the thirteenth year of his age,) after a long and strict
Examination by the A.B. of Canterbury, and the B. of Bath and Wells, as Dr.
George Hackwell, ear-witness of the satisfaction he gave, assures us; who in a
little Tractate, be upon that occasion wrote on this Subject, to justify the
ancient and good practice of this sacramental Rite, (as Bucer calls it,) thus
speaks.

Cap. 1.
Confirmation is an ancient Ecclesiastical custom of the Church, used after
Baptism, consisting in Examination and Imposition of hands, with effectual
prayer for the Ilumination of Gods most holy Spirit, to confirm and perfect
that which the Grace of the same Spirit has already begun in Baptism.

The benefits of this Confirmation are diverse; whereof the first is, That men
expecting Examination and trial from their spiritual Fathers, they might more
willingly acquaint, and carefully season themselves with the grounds of
Christian Religion, before malice and corrupt examples depraved their minds,
etc.

Secondly, It serves, that when they come to years of Discretion, they should
publicly make confession of that faith themselves which others had promised
for them in Baptism, to the discharge of their sureties, and the good examples
of others.

Thirdly, That by such confession they might make profession of difference from
all Jews, Turks and Infidels out of the Church; Heretics, Schismatics, and
profane persons in the Church.

Fourthly, That then especially when they first come to the use of Reason,
beginning to fall into sundry kinds of sin, and being least able to resist, for
want of experience, by Imposition of hands and prayer they might receive
strength and defense against the temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil.

Fifthly, That the Prelates and chief Guides of Gods family to whom the cure of
souls belongs, finding upon due Examination some part of their own heavy
burden discharged, might from thence reap Comfort in beholding those fair
Foundations already laid, and glorify God, Whose praise they found in the
mouths of Infants.

This kind of Confirmation (were there no Authority to countenance it,) is in
my Judgment so useful in the Church of God, that upon good reason it might be
entertained among Christians: But for further confirmation of it, we are
encompassed with a cloud of witnesses, and that so plentifully out of all
Antiquity, as it might seem a kind of Ambition, or lost labor to quote their
names. Wherefore I will only allege the soundest of those, who since the
Reformation of Religion and clearer Light of the Gospel, in their several
Writings have approved, and highly commended this ancient custom. And bringing
in Bucer, Melancton, Zuinglius, Chemnitius, and others to speak to this Truth,
he cites Mr. Calvin among the rest in these words. John Calvin in his fourth
Book of Institut^on in the Vpshot of the chapter of Confirmation, Cap 19. Para.
13.
not only commends the ancient use of it, but the abuse being removed,
heartily wishes it restored. And because his Authority is (not without desert)
of great weight, I will set down his words as I find them.

Would to God (says he) we retained that custom which I have already declared
to have been in use among the Ancients, before that abortive Vizard of a
Sacrament was put upon it. And a little after. If this part of Discipline were
now a days in force, the slackness of many Parents would be much quickened,
who pass over the Institution (or Instruction) of their Children, as a business
nothing pertaining to them; which then without some public disgrace they
could not omit: Besides, There would be less Ignorance, and more concord in
Articles of Faith among Christian people, neither would they so easily be
carried away with new and strange Opinions.

FINIS.

