A few Words To all JUDGES, JUSTICES, and MINISTERS of the LAW in ENGLAND.
From ANTHONY PEARSON.
TO the Judges of life and death, and Judges of Nisi prius, as they call it,
who give oaths to Justices, Juries and witnesses, and Justices that give
oaths to Constables and others. To the light which Christ Jesus has
enlightened you withal, I speak, that with it you may see you are out of the
doctrine of Christ, who says, Swear not at all, in all your communications let
your yea be yea, and your nay be nay; whatsoever is more, is evil. So you that
swear are in the evil, and with the light of Christ Jesus, you may see that you
be out of the doctrine of the Apostle, who said, my brethren; swear not at all,
not by heaven, nor by earth, nor any other oath, lest you fall into
condemnation of the devil; so you that swear are fallen into the condemnation
of the devil; and you that cause others to swear, or compel them, or imprison
them, or fine them if they will not, you are out of the doctrine of Christ and
the Apostle your selves, and seek to bring others out of his doctrine, into the
same condemnation of the devil where you are. Praised be God, with the light
which comes from Christ, you are seen to be no brethren of Christ, who are out
of his doctrine, and does not do his will. I am the light of the world, and
does enlighten every one that comes into the world says Christ; now every one
loving this light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal; it will bring
you to do his will, and know his doctrine; and then in all your communications
you will be kept to yea and nay, and never an oath shall be heard in the land,
for the land mournes because of oaths. Now you that hate this light which
Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal; you swear, and compel others to
swear; and with this light you are to be condemned, who are out of his
doctrine. To the light in all your consciences I speak, which shall witness me
eternally, and condemn all you that hate it, and is the light of Christ, which
shows your sin and evil deeds.

From him who is a lover of your souls and your eternal good, that with the
light you may see the way to salvation, to Christ, from whence the light comes.

Concerning oaths.
The word of the Lord the living God to all you who be out of the doctrine of
Christ, swearing, and do swear, and compel others to swear, when Christ says
swear not at all: and the Apostle says, swear not at all, by any oath, least
you fall into condemnation of the Devil: so ye that swear and compel others
to swear are fallen into the condemnation of the Devil. And seek to bring
others into the same condemnation of the Devil, and Christ says, whatsoever
comes above yea and nay, comes of evil: who says, swear not at all: and you
that swear and compel to swear are in the evil; now if ye alleadg Jacob
swear, Joseph swear; Christ Jesus reigns over the house of Jacob and Joseph,
who says, swear not at all, this is the Son of God, hear him, who teaches
true doctrine and they that teach men another doctrine or gospel to swear,
they all be accursed: yea, if an Angel from heaven. Now if you allege that
Abraham swear, who saw the days of the Son and rejoiced, and if you allege
that Moses swear who wrote of Christ, who said, God would raise up a Prophet
like unto him, him should the people hear, Christ Jesus the Son of God, who
says swear not at all; here the Son of God is come, whom Abraham saw, Moses
wrote of; who says swear not at all; whom ye must hear Acts 7. and him you
do not hear that swears, the Son of God: but with the light you are
condemned which comes from the Son of God, who says, swear not at all. Now
you that say Solomon swear, and the Priests swear under the Law: and the
Prophets swear, My answer is: Christ Jesus the Son of God, who is the end of
the Law and the Prophets, and a greater then Solomon, the unchangeable Priest,
says, swear not at all: but in all your communications let your yea be yea,
and your nay be nay, for whatsoever is more is evil. Now if you allege that
men in strife swear, and the oath was the end of controversies and strife among
men, which the Apostle brought as a figure: as God swearing by himself, who
could not find a greater; who says, verily men swear by the greater: My
answer is this; where men are in strife in that nature, they be out of the
doctrine of Christ, and are evil, and do not hear Christ's doctrine who says,
swear not at all. Now if you allege the Angel swear in the Revelation, My
answer is this: I bring my first begotten into the world says the Lord, let
all the Angels worship him: the Son of God, who says swear not at all, but
in all your communication let your yea be yea and your nay be nay, for what is
more is evil: and this son of God is above Angels and men that are in
strife, and the end of the Prophets, and the end of the Law, and the first
covenant and Priest in it, and this Son of God reigns over the house of
Jacob and Joseph, a greater then Solomon or David who swore, for he called him
Lord, whom Abraham saw, the Son of God, who says swear not at all, This is
he who brings peace on the earth and good will toward men, and the sword in
the earth: he that has ears to hear let him hear.

Moved of the Lord from the Spirit of the Lord, a lover of your souls and your
eternal good, for the establishing of righteousness and the doctrine of
Christ, and cleansing the Land of evil doers, and for establishing the
Gospel: and a lover of the Creation.

Concerning Vagabonds.
THE word of the Lord to you powers of the earth, Judges and Justices, who have
called them and given them the names of Vagabonds, which the Lord has sent
forth to declare his word, who has forsaken their outward habitations as the
Prophets and Apostles many of them did, which went to speak the word of the
Lord freely, and did abide in his commands, these were no vagabonds. Cain was
the vagabond who did not obey the command of God; for says the Lord to him, if
thou do well, shall not thou be accepted? He did not well disobeyed the command
of God, he was wroth, his countenance fell, he was a vagabond and a fugitive,
and was not accepted. So all you that turn from the commands of God, and are
wroth, whose countenance fall, which does not well, you are not accepted of
God. You have no habitation in the Lord; Caines way is your way. Certain
vagabond fellows rise against the Apostle, and bound themselves with an oath to
put him to death, these had no habitation in the Lord, these did not abide in
his commands, these were the vagabonds in the way of Caine, though they might
have habitations outward. The Apostle was no vagabond nor fugitive who had no
certain dwelling place, which went reasoning and disputing in the Synagogues
daily, Schools, and Markets; he was persecuted by such as were vagabonds, who
did not obey the commands of God, who did not well; such you prison now who are
moved of the Lord to go into your Synagogues, Markets, and other places, as
peace-breakers or vagabonds; here let the life of the Scriptures judge you all
to be ignorant of the letter, and without understanding. The Son of man was
no vagabond, which had no place to lay his head; you that are turned from the
commands of God as Caine did, and are in envy and wrath, and does not well,
whose countenance falls; though you may have great habitations in the earth,
you are the vagabonds and the fugitives which does not obey the commands of the
Lord, and have no habitation in the Lord; who obey the commands of the Lord are
no vagabonds nor fugitives, though they have no certain dwelling place, as the
Prophets and the Apostles, and Son of man had not.

To the Judges of life and death, to take heed how you put man or woman to
death for cattle, or money, or any earthly creature, or earthly thing, he that
sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; the law that was received
from God according to that of God in the conscience, said, that they should be
sold for their theft, if they had not wherewith to make restitution fourfold or
sevenfold: To the light in your consciences I speak, that with it you may be
brought unto the fear of God, to receive the law from God, which is according
to that in every man's conscience. And if you act contrary to it, the law of God
will hew you down among the evil doers; which is a terror to the evil doers,
and to the praise of them that do well, and to you this is the word of God.

And to you that are Judges amongst men about earthly things, to the light in
your consciences I speak, that with it you may be guided to do justice
according to the light in the conscience, that the light in every man's
conscience may witness you to do justice, and that which is just and equity;
else the light of Christ in every ones conscience, will witness and cry against
you, which is according to the law of God which is just; that none be
burdened, no persons respected; if there be, you that do, are convinced with
the light in your consciences, to be transgressors of the law of God, which is
perfect according to that of God in every man's conscience, which light will
witness the law of God which is perfect. And to you this is the word of God,
to the light of Christ in you all I speak, that with it your consciences may be
exercised toward God, and toward man; and if you are contrary to it, with it
you are to be condemned, this is the condemnation of the world, the light, Joh.
3.

Concerning Tithes.
And you that do give the Priests Tithes with your Law, and imprison men if
they will not give the Priests tithes with your Law, and make them pay treble
damages, and strain the goods, or cattle, bedding, pewter or brass of such
that does witness the unchangeable priesthood, Christ Jesus, and the new
Testament, and the new Covenant, and the Gospel, and the everlasting
priesthood; and sees the change (...) the first priesthood that received
tithes, and of the law also: It is not for the earth sending it they do not pay
the priests tithes; for the earth is the Lords and the fullness of it.

Now if you say, that Christ says, These things ought you to have done, and
not to have left the other undone, concerning tithes: That was a time before
Christ Jesus was sacrificed up: but when he was sacrificed, and the
unchangeable priesthood preached, the changeable was denied, as you may read
Hebrews the 7th: and they witnessed the unchangeable priest, and suffered the
spoiling of their goods joyfully, as we do now for Christ's sake; and are the
gazing stock of the world, as they were who witnessed the unchangeable priest
as they did; and deny the changeable, as the Apostle and they did. Now if you
will give your priests tithes, to oppress the people, and hold up a figure of
your own making; if you will act according to the priesthood in the law of God,
and the Scriptures, you must let your priests have a Storehouse, (as you read
in Malachi and Moses his Writings, and the tithes to be put into the
Storehouse* and the priests minister it forth to the Widows, to the strangers
and the fatherless, and they all satisfied within his gates, that no beggar
may be in England, as no beggar was to be in Israel: If you should do so, then
you might not own Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, nor own the
resurrection of Christ, nor believe it; but are haling people before Benches
for tithes for Priests and others, burthening them and vexing of them.

So all you that take tithes, and give tithes, and compel people to give
Tithes, you are under the condemnation, and the ministry of condemnation, and
do not own the Apostles Doctrine, who says, the priesthood was changed, and
the law was changed also, Hebrews 7. So never a one that gives tithes to the
Priests, or compels to give tithes, does own the Gospel and the unchangeable
Priest, but are acting things, and compelling people to act contrary to the
first Priesthood and the Scriptures, who do not act with their tithes as the
first Priesthood did: with the life and practice of the first Peiesthood you
are judged out of their practice: and who witnesses the second priesthood,
denies the first, and you both. With the light which comes from Christ, which
comprehends the world with it. you are seen, which light is the worlds
condemnation, John. 3. which light brings us to witness Christ the
unchangeable Priest, and to deny the changeable that takes tithes. For your
souls good is this given forth: To the light of Christ in you I speak, that
with it you may see the ministration of the first priesthood, which is for
condemnation, and the second priesthood Christ Jesus. To you this is the word
of the Lord, and for your souls good.

HE that rules over men should be just, for God is just for whom he should
rule, and the law of God is just by which he should rule. Man when he turned
from God, and transgressed the command of God, the law took hold upon him, and
cut down him that transgressed: The law was not made for the righteous, for
against such there is no law, but for the sinner: and the law of God which is
against the transgressour is just and equal, according to the transgression:
which law need not be fetched from beyond the Seas, nor from above, nor from
beneath; for all have the work of this law (even the heathen) written in the
heart, which is witnessed by the light that shines in the conscience. He that
walks according to the law in his Conscience* he is excused; He that
transgresses the law in his conscience* he is accused and condemned; and so
in every man's heart the work of the law being written, in every man's conscience
God has a witness that the Law is just and good, and that the punishment is
just and equal: Here every transgressour becomes guilty before God, and every
man's punishment being just, every man's mouth comes to be stopped, and the
righteous law of God in every man's conscience justified. The Law of God is
perfect, and endures for ever, and changes not; which is the same against all
Nations, Languages, Kindreds and People, which is witnessed by the Conscience,
which is the same in all Nations, Languages, Kindreds and people.

The Law of God respects no man's person, but is the same against every one that
transgresses, whether King, Noble or beggar: that in the conscience is the
same in King. Noble and Beggar, and shows that of one mould and one blood God
has made all Nations of the earth, the King, the Noble, and the beggar; here
God is just, who respects no man's person; the law of God is just which respects
no man's person, and that in the conscience is just, which witnesses the law,
which respects no man's person; here is the ground of justice, the law of God;
here is the ground of true judgment, that in the conscience, which leaves
witness to the law in every one, and as is the transgression, so is the law,
every transgression is judged by the law; so is every transgression condemned
by that in the conscience; the law of God was and is the same, and has
continued in all ages, and does endure for ever, that in the conscience is the
same in all ages and changes not, but does endure for ever; he that sins
against the law, that in the conscience bears witness to the law, and by that
in the conscience he is accused and condemned, and so his mouth is stopped, and
here all the world becomes guilty before God.

The law of God is made already, which was added because of transgression, and
changes not: he that acts according to the Law, is justified by the Law, and
ever was, and through the law he becomes dead to the law, and is excused by
that in his conscience, and ever shall be; here God is judge and Law giver to
all whose judgments are just and righteous, who has placed a witness in all,
who will judge every one according to their works, out of the book written in
the conscience: he that makes laws, with the Law of God which is made already,
he is judged, and with that in his conscience which bears witness for God he
is condemned; he that turns from the law of God, to obey the law of man, had
rather serve man then God, and so with the law of God, and that in his
conscience he is judged and condemned from God.

He that is a Minister of God, ordained by God, executes the law of God which
is perfect, which is witnessed by that of God in every man's conscience, and to
him the soul is subject for conscience sake; but he that makes and executes a
law which is not the law of God, has no witness in the conscience for God
that his law is just, that his punishment is equal, and so they who witness
only the law of God, witness against him and his law, and cannot obey him for
conscience sake; he that is the Minister of God and executes the law of God, is
a servant to God, and judges for God, sets not up himself in the place of God,
but gives all honor to God whose judgments are just, and by turning his sword
against all unrighteousness, declares the righteousness of God. and is a
terror to evil doers, and without respect of persons executes the law upon him
that does evil, and here he is witnessed by that which is of God in every ones
conscience, to be just, and the punishment received as from God whose law he
executes, who is just, and so every man being condemned in himself, his mouth
is stopped, no envy against the person raised, but the righteous God the judge
and lawgiver of the world in his righteousness, cleared and exalted. The law
of God is perfect, and endures for ever, and changes not, that in the
conscience is perfect and endures for ever, and changes not. All laws which
are not perfect, which endure not for ever, and do change, are temporal and
carnal, and with the law of God which is spiritual, are judged, and their
makers condemned. The law of God respects no man's person; all laws which do
respect persons, and are not against all sorts of persons alike, are contrary
to the law of God, and they that make them, and they that execute them are in
the law condemned and convinced as transgressors.

The law of God is witnessed by that in the conscience; all laws which have not
their witness in the conscience, are made by the will of man, which is
contrary to the law of God, and cannot be obeyed for conscience sake by them
who witness the law of God.

The law of God is just and equal, life for life, a tooth for a tooth, an eye
for an eye; that law which is not equal and just is against the law of God, and
dishonours God whose ways are the ways of righteousness, and all who inflict
punishments that are not according to the offense, set up their own wills
against the law of God, he that takes away life for the creatures is a
murderer, and the blood shall be upon his head.

The law of God is equal and that in the conscience cries for equity according
to the law of God, that law whose ground and foundation is not equity, but
needs a court of equity to mitigate its cruelty, is tyranny, and is witnessed
against by that in the conscience to be contrary to God, and against the
righteous law of God, which is holy and just, and must be thrown down, and all
that go about to uphold it. To do unto others, as they would have them do unto
thee, this is (...), this is equal and equity, and herein is fulfilled the
whole law. He that executes a law made (...) ^he will of man, to which that in
the conscience does not bear witness that (...) according to the law of God,
is not the Minister of God, but is condemned by the law of God, and that in his
own conscience to act his own will. He that makes laws which have not a
witness in the conscience that they are according to the law of God; and he
that executes those laws are the enemies of God who would not have him to
reign, and against such have the servants of God been sent always to declare,
and against such has the wrath of the Lord always been revealed, overturning
nations and kingdoms that his own law might be set up.

He that makes laws, and they that execute those laws which are not the law of
God, to which that in the conscience bears witness, set themselves in the
place of God to overthrow the law of God, to set up their own wills; these are
heathens in what nation soever they dwell, and these shall answer for all the
injuries, wrongs, and false judgments that are executed and inflicted. And now
is the righteous lawgiver the judge of the whole earth arising in his wrath to
be avenged of all his enemies who will not have him to rule and reign, of
whose kingdom and dominion there shall be no end.

He that makes a law against that in the conscience which is pure and holy,
makes a law against God, and he that exe^^^seth that law for gifts and rewards,
his heart is in the earth for self ends, and in the same carnal nature with
the Priests who preach for hire, and with the light which is free, which is the
gift of God not to be bought and sold for money, he is to be condemned, and
with the life of all the judges and holy men of God he is eternally judged.

A. P.

FINIS.
London. Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, 1654.


