THE RIGHT RELIGION, Reviewed and enlarged

By L. P. Gent.

John. 24. No man comes to the Father, but by Me.

Ezekiel. 13. Woe be to foolish prophets, that follow their own spirit; they
see nothing but vain things, and divine lies, saying, The Lord: whereas the
Lord has not sent them.

Printed at PARIS, M.DC.LVIII.

TO THE CATHOLICS OF ENGLAND.
THe old saying, Truth purchases hatred, is verified at this time, wherein
Truth is grown so loathsome and hateful, that whosoever goes about to tell it,
indangers displeasure. It is strange, that any can take distaste at that all
desire; which is to know the truth; Truth being the natural pleasing object of
the understanding. Nevertheless such is the perverseness and vanity of some,
that they despise and malign what ought most of all to be cherisht and loved:
of whom it is said, They preferred darkness before light, Joh.

3. Having then undertaken in this small Treatise to declare Gods revealed
Truth, I should be wanting to my self in so dangerous an enterprise, if I did
make choice of any other Patronage than yours (Renowned Catholics) whose many
and glorious sufferings for the said Truth have rankt you in the number of the
best and greatest Conquerors: Others hold dependence of Fortun, you of Grace;
they surmount force and strength common to beasts, you, Reason and Will proper
to men: They overcome vanquished men, you, conquerors themselves; their
conquest is of others only, yours of others and your selves too. In a word,
all the addition that is to be made to your greatness is a continuance of
patience and constancy: And this God has in store, and will give,
conditionally that you ask it heartily; He that has begun a good work in you,
desires no better than to perfect the same. What need you fear? your enemies
may hurt themselves, but want power to wrong you, unless you will: Nay, their
worst is your best: taking away your estates, your good names, bereaving you of
your Liberties, your lives (those bruta fulmina, which render them so
formidable) begets you a richer and surer possession, Heaven and Eternity. All
the pudder they keep in vexing you is but sowing your seed for you; which
undoubtedly will grow up to an hundred fold increase. Let them hammer, cut, hew
you, till they are weary; they do no more than carve and fit you for the walls
of Heaven. And who can justly say he is a loser, that changes for better? gets
much with the loss of little? Take a serious view of the B. Saints, that
passed, as you do, through a sea of calamites and troubles, and are now at rest
with God; and amongst them all you will not discover one complaining. The
richness and magnificence of their reward has so fully recompensed their
forrows and losses, that they wonder at the unwillingnesse and repining of some
to part with; and at the greediness and injustice of others to wrest from,
that which neither can long keep. For the covenant betwixt birth and death
stands firm and inviolable; as that gives all things, this must return all bare
and naked. This, I know, is mere folly to hardened Libertines, that look not
beyond the fading pleasures of this life; but not to melting Christians, who
believe, and are assured, that Heaven is a Reward, a Gole, a Crown; which are
not to be achieved by sitting still, by leading a licentious and inordinate
life, but by flying evil, overcoming temptations, doing good and virtuous
acts. Take heart therefore, (brave Champions) and be not daunted: for your
greater comfort and encouragement, rest assured that God is with you, yea,
marshalls the very field you fight in; and when he sees it for your spiritual
advantage, he will either cause a retreat to sound, that you may have a time of
breathing in this world; or crown you with victory, that he may have just cause
to reward you in the next. Then your persecutors will be at a stand, have no
more to say to you, and your troubles will be at an end, your mourning out,
your cries and sighs cease, your grievances heard and redressed, your tears
dried up, the sweat of your brows wiped away; and finding your excessive gain,
unspeakeable joy will seize your hearts, and make you glad, that you had the
grace and courage, to suffer for so good and gracious a God. For my part, I
shall ever acknowledge your greatness, admire your glory, and from your
goodness raise to my self a hope, that you will dart a ray, to quicken and
cherish these my endeavors, whereby you will add an obligation to my being.

Your devoted Friend and Servant, L. P.

To the Reader.
Good Reader,
OF many Religions professed in this land, several Writers (men of approved
integrity and profound learning) have so clearly demonstrated, that there is
only one true, and that the Roman is it; that I cannot but impute the
ungenerall acknowledging of the same to prejudice, or impatience of labor: To
prejudice, in them that have read their works, and yet do not believe
accordingly: To impatience of labor in others, that will not bestow the pains
to turn over great volumes. The best remedy for that sort of men is, to implore
the Divine Goodness for clean and unbiased hearts; without which it is not
possible to behold the radiancy of Truth: For this, J have endeavored to draw
Catholic Belief into a narrow room, as a vast world into a small Map; to the
end, that with a little travails much may be discovered. Jn pursuance whereof J
show in the first place the end of man; in the next, the will of God, and the
means which he has appointed to attain to this end. Then I evince the weakness
and vanity of such pretenses as diverse make to this and other means. Lastly the
true Church appears in her right colors. And for as much as Truth shines
brighter by opposition, after the manne^ of contraries, the mainest Objections
of Adversaries are propose^ and solved. By all which, if Go^ prove to be
glorified, and you rea^ benefit, I shall have the return (...) desire and wish,
my aim being (...) other than Gods Glory, and you^ good.

THE Right Religion reveiw'd, etc.
CHAP. 1. Of happiness.
1 THE several knowledges of things within and above the reach of Reason, are
sufficient. Evidences, that there is a natural, and a supernatural state; in
both which, God is the beginning and end of all.

2. In the natural: for who is so short-sighted, that does not see that what
has been, and is at this present existent and visible, was not always so?
That then it could not produce it self out of the void state of nothing; and
by consequence that it needed an active Beginning, that never was nothing, and
ever something, whereby to bring nothing to existence and being. And who so
stupid, that does not feel want, or satiety in the possession of whatsoever is
created or made? Honors expose as Cedars on Hills, to the boisterous storms of
Envy and malice: lift up high to make the fall greater: Riches occasion
dangers; beget, dropsie-like, new longings; rack the thoughts day and night
with care of keeping, apprehension of losing. Pleasures if they stay, glut:
gone, leave behind them sadness and remorse. Health is beset on all sides;
contraries lying perpetually beating, and knocking at the four humors, to let
in distemper. Strength, be it never so vigorous, is at length weakened, and
jaded by motion and labor. Beauty fades away; Age (the canker-worme of
mortality) gnawerh her sleek smoothness into roughness and wrinkles. The
faculties and habites live in dependence of action; and action it self is not
quite free, being penned up and imprisoned within us. All under God has a
mixture of ill; carries in its honey a certain sting, that none draw near,
but they meet with displeasure. A forcible argument that the end of creatures
abide out of themselves; where all perfections abounding, sweet conten and rest
is to be found: and that is God.

3 In the supernatural: by reason here is greater lack of aid; more might and
power required: the effects being greater, and of a far nobler Kind. And if
God was so charie and sparing of his honor, as not to let pass the ordaining
of nature to himself; much more grace. Whence it is clear, all flow from God,
as streams from the sea; and are endowed with an innate or ingrafted
Propension, to return back to him again. Now the happiness of every thing
consisting in content, and rest, and content and rest, in the enjoying of its
end; it follows in man that there is a capacity of double happiness, natural
and supernatural: he being capable of enjoying God as he is the Author and end
of nature, wherein consists natural happiness; and as he is the Author and
end of grace, wherein consists supernatural happiness.

4 But as nothing would have remained without Being, Except God had stretched
forth his omnipotent hand to bestow it; so possessed of Being, its bent and
inclination must take effect by his gracious leave and appointment: in regard,
he is to prescribe the means to an end, that is the Author and cause of the
desire thereof, wherefore, whosoever desires to arrive safely at the blessed
port of happiness, must banish far all self-conceit; and steer by no other
Compass, than that God has touchd'; so may they sail right; else their course
will be evermore crooked and desperate; until they do run themselves upon the
Rocks and Shelves of utter perdition.

CHAP. 2. Of the will of God.
PHilosophers assure it for a very truth that the first of every kind, is the
rule of the rest in the same kind, and they are strongly backed by reason; for
the nearer a thing draws in likeness to its first, the more perfect it is, and
so held to be. Whence may be easily gathered that the known Will of God is the
rule Paramount of all kinds, as well natural and humane as supernatural,
because it was (as has been proved) before them all as Author and causer
thereof. I said known, in regard knowledge is so necessary and requisite to the
completing of a Rule, that wanting, it has not right to challenge compliance.
Now this knowledge coming from Propension, instinct, reason, tradition, or
revelation, Property of speech will yield proof sufficient that Propension and
instinct are the light of natural things, reason of humane, tradition of
revelation, and revelation of supernatural, forasmuch as none, meaning to be
understood will deliver themselves, that the Elements hold their several
places by instinct, that Beasts prosecute their ends by discourse, that men
attain to what is past, and to be believed without tradition and revelation:
Undoubtedly had not Christ revealed a consistencie of Trinity with Unity, a
possibility of Hypostaticall Union, and tradition brought this revelation down
to us, these Mysteries would have been as terra incognita, not so much as ever
dreamed of, Quis cognovit sensum Domini? Romans 11. so as to speak intelligibly
and with truth, the will of God becomes known in things void of sense by
propension, insensible by instinct, inhumane, as to present action, by reason,
as to action past by tradition, in belief by revelation. Always provided,
concerning reason, that it be clear of passion, and strong, for in case of byas
and weakness, every one is to submit to the wise and perfect, it being but meet
that they that see should have the Guidance of those who are in darkensse,
least the blind leading the blind both fall into disorder. It only remains
there being an ordinary and an extraordinary Will, to determine how they are
to be observed. In short thus, if they agree, obedience ought to be yielded to
both, if not, the extraordinary must take place; Christ commanding the same
with his father was equally to be obeyed, the Israelites according to the
extraordinary will immediately revealed unto them, might lawfully destroy the
Cananites, all others were bound to observe the ordinary will of love and
peace, because God only having the obsolute sovereignty can command at
pleasure lives and fortunes.

CHAP. 3. Of the way to happiness.
1 Since God has manifested his power by creating Man, and his goodness by
willing him a double happiness; doubtless he has not been backward to show
likewise his wisdom in contriving the means to bring it to pass, and his
providence in making the means discernable: otherwise he had willed an
impossibility and in vain: for an end is not possible without a means; and a
means is to no purpose, unless it may be known. Now the means to an end
requiting proportion and fitness to the end it is ordained to; as the end of
man is twofold, natural and supernatural, the means whereby he is to attain
to these ends must be so to.

2. Suitable unto which, God has appointed the means to man's natural
happiness to be acts of his understanding and will, for by them he may seek
and find out God, as he is the author and end of nature; by these cleave and
unite, and so enjoy him. To man's supernatural happiness, to be a conformity
of faith to the Church; a conformity of hope to our Lords Prayer; and a
conformity of Charity to the Commandments. A conformity of faith: without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. He that believes shall be
saved; He that believes not shall be condemned, Mar. 16. To the Church. Going,
teach ye all nations; he that hears you hears me, Math. 16. He that hears
not the Church, let him be as a Heathen and a Publican. A conformity of hope.
Hope in our. Lord, Psalm. 43. Blessed is the man who hopes in him, Psalm. 2. To
our Lords Prayer. When you pray let it be our Father etc. Matthew. 6. Thus shall
you pray, Our Father, etc. Luke. 11. A conformity of Charity. If I give all to
the poor, and have not charity, it profits nothing, 1 Ioh. 3. To the
Commandments. This is the charity of God, that we, keep his Commandments,
Ioh. 14. If ye love me, keep my commandments, Ioh. 15,

3. By the first conformity Man comes to the knowledge of God, as he is the
Author and end of Grace; by the second relies upon his mercy and goodness,
that in due time he will grant and give those good things, which Christ has
taught us to ask in his prayer: in the last he is taken with the beauty of his
divine perfections, and so in joys him in a higher, and more eminent manner.
Both Happinesses in this life are imperfect, by reason of the glimmering light
Man only has of God, during the same, they will be completed and perfected
in the next; When Man, after a willing compliance with Gods grace in this,
shall see him, not as in a looking glass, 1 Cor. 13. but face to face, as he
is in himself.

CHAP. 4. Of the diversities of faiths, hopes, and charities:
1 IT is demonstrable, that there are diverse sorts of Faiths, Hopes, and
Charities; as habitual and Actual Divine, Habitual and Actual Humane: for
some believe, hope for, and love supernatural things, with the same, if not
more eagerness and fervency, than natural; which Actions suppose, (as effects
their proper and proportioned causes) supernatutall qualities: natural not
being able, (in respect of their meaner extract on and dignity) to give such
noble births. Those are called divine, because infused by Gods extraordinary
power: these humane; for that they are acquired by the strength of nature.

2. The Habitual divine are the supernatural qualities themselves; The
Actual divine are acts of the will of understanding, as raised and enabled to
a higher pitch by those supernatural qualities: The Habitual humane are the
acquired qualities themselves, the Actual humane are acts of the will and
understanding, as inclined and fitted for act on by those acquired qualities.
The Habitual and Actual divine differ further from the Habitual and Actual
humane in their material and formal objects; as also in the Means, whereby
those several objects come to knowledge; the material of Habitual and
actual divine being revealed Truths; the formal, Revelation: the material of
habitual and actual humane, unrevealed Truths; the formal the light of
Reason, private reading or information. The means of habitual and actual
Divine, the Tradition of the Church, of Habitual and actual humane the light
of Reason, private reading or information.

3. Now forasmuch as Christianity is a supernatural building, contrived and
framed by the wisdom of God, to last for ever, of which Faith is the
foundation; Hope the walls, and Charity the Roof and perfection: The
conformities expressed in the precedent Chapter are to be understood of divine
Faith, Hope and Charity, and not of humane; because all nature joined and
gathered in one, is not able to make a Being above Nature. And these are the
virtues called Theological, as having God immediately for object; the harmonious
Sisters, three in number, but one in affection: none desiring that which
displeases other. Greatness is their essential attribute, yet Charity
excells. St. Paul 1 Cor. 13. compares them together, extolls them all, but in
the close gives unto Charity the pre-eminence. And not undeservedly, for she is
the enlivening soul of Faith, and Hope, and all the moral virtues: both they
and these being (out of her company) as dead bodies, without life or motion, as
to heaven and Eternity.

CHAP. 5. Of the Churches power and infallibility in matters of Faith.
1 SUpposing it for granted' that Christ's knowledge of Gods reaveled truth, and
his power to convey the same to belief, raised his preaching and teaching to
the full height and perfection of a Rule of belief to the first Christians; it
cannot in reason be denied, he having communicated his said knowledge and power
to the Apostles, and in them to the succeeding Churches, (as appears by his own
words. All I have learnt of my father, I have made known unto you, Joh. 15. As
my father sent me, so I send you, Joh. 20.) but she may challeng a like
interest and right in respect of after-Christians: whence it follows, that
all matters of Belief (as well other points as scripture) are to be taken upon
her account and ciedit, and that whatsoever comes upon any other score, is to
be reputed Apocryphal, and no way appertaining to the Obligation of Belief.

2. St Paul declares this truth unto the Ephesians, assuring them, that they
are builded upon no other foundation than the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.
likewise to the Thessalonians, 2. These. 2. and Timothy, 1 Timothy: 6. bidding them
hold the traditions, and keep the depositum: and, again, if an Angel from
heaven shall Evangelize any other, than what I have Evangelized to you, let him
be accursed. Gal. 7. The reason is clear; because the Rule of Belief, is the
Measure of belief, beyond which there is not any conformity, or obedience due
from Belief.

3. The usual color for believing more or less than the Church allows of,
grounded upon her pretended subjection to Error, is vain; inasmuch, as that
very Christ that stored her with knowledge of Gods revealed truth, and with
power to convey the same, has also endowed her with inerrability, whereby to
convey it safely, and without danger of miscarrying, by arming her proof aginst
all the enemies of truth: against ignorance, Mat. 13. To you it is given to
know the mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven: against darkness, Mat. 6. you are
the light of the world: against Error and falsehood; Joh. 14. I will send unto
you the spirit of truth, to remain with you for ever. Jsaah 62. thou shall no
more be called forsaken: against Weakness, 1. Tim. 3. she is the Pillar and
ground of truth. Mat. 16. Hell gates shall not prevail against her. To make
which good, and the work sure, Christ called his eternal father to his aid,
prayed him, and was heard for his reverence, Heb. 5. And to prevent and cut off
all occasions of imagining; that these favors bestowed on the Church were not
to survive the Apostles, for a continuance in the succeeding Church, Christ
adds, Behold I am with you all days to the end of the world Mat. 28. so as it
must be said; that either Christ was not of power to keep his Church from
straying, or that he wanted fidelity to make good his word.

4. The certanity divine faith requires to build on, is a further Evidence of
the Churches infallibility, for how is it possible, Faith can be certain, if
the Church that is to ascertain it, be uncertain and fallible? look on the
Churches composure and nature, and her strength will appear yet more, by reason
she is framed and made up of men, dispersed and spread over the world, who by
this means, being of several Nations, different tempers and interests,
neither could, nor can meet or conspire to Cheat themselves and posterity with
a lie. That men of themselves are apt to mistake and deceive is from the
purpose. So the evangelists might have fallen short of performing their task.
But as God holding their hands, and guiding their pens, his holy word was
truly and infallibly coucht on the sacred leaves of the Bible; so assisting and
strengthening his Church, she becomes in all matters concerning faith powerful
and infallible.

God is not tied to this or the other; he is free to work his wonders; where when
and to whom he pleases. Neither is there any disproportion betwixt men thus
assisted and infallibility; it being not necessary for the production of a
supernatural effect, that every part of the total cause be supernatural; for
it is visible to the eye that God frequently makes use of secondary causes, in
the production of supernatural effects: in that of faith, Romans 10. of hearing
and preaching; in that of Grace, Mat. 18, 19, of Elements and words, in that of
the blind man. Jo. 6. of spittle and earth.

CHAP. 6. Of the possibility of keeping the Commandments.
1 NOt only that it is possible to keep the Commandments, but also that
diverse have kept them, is a truth so clearly delivered, both in the old and new
Testament, that there is cause to wonder, any can make question thereof. In the
old, Moses speaking of the Commandments says, Deuteronomy. 30. They are not above but
very near us in our Mouths, in our hearts to do them. Noe Ezekias, Josias,
Josaphat, Asa, Genesis 6. 4 Kings 18. 2 Paral. 30. 4 Kings 22. 1 Paral. 15 2
Paral. 20. Tob. 2. Job 1.17. 2 Kings 7. 3 Kings 9. Luke. 2. Mat. 11.21. Luke. 1.
Joacham, Tobias, Job, kept them. In the New, Christ is no less plain, My yoke
is sweet, my burden light. Simeon, St John the Baptist, Zacharias, Elizabeth,
the B. Virgin kept them. Gods conditional promises to David and his Posterity
could be termed no better than Jeers, unless the commandments were possible.
To what purpose so much persuasion in Books and Pulpits to live well, if the
Commandments be impossible? is living well any other than keeping of the
Commandments? It is assuredly as rid culous as impious to term him a good
liver that steals, murders, and commits adultery, etc. The justness of laws,
that inflict severe punishments upon the breakers of the Commandments, are not
at all consistent with the impossibility of keeping them. Necessity is a good
and forcible excuse against the strongest charge. The very light of Reason
gives testimony to the Commandments possibility, they being all grounded
upon Reason, and suited to her bent and inclination: The wickedest man alive
cannot say with truth that he breaks any Commandment without some secret
check of conscience.

2. To allege, that God only requires man's endeavor, is repugnant to Christ's
express words, which are not, Mat. 19. If thou will come to heaven, endeavor
to keep, but keep the Commandments. Many a good endeavor, as many a good
purpose, burns in Hell. Heaven being the reward of doing, not of endeavoring.
Besides it is equally unnatural to endeavor impossibilityes, and to desire
things unknown. Who could Choose but smile, to see one leap and skip, as aiming
to soar and fly in the Air, knowing it to be possible only for Birds that are
fitted with wings and feathers for the purpose? Indeed to point at any
particular, that does keep the Commandments is hard; no man knowing. Eccles.
9. whether he be worthy of love or hatred: But that all in general may keep
them, Christ himself assures it, 2. Tim 2. Willing all to be saved. God wills
nothing impossible, and he that wills the end wills the means.

3. True it is, neither Men nor Angels can love God as he is loveable, that is
a perfection God only is capable of; nevertheless it is in the power both of
Angels and Men, to love God so far forth as the capacity of their condition
reaches, which, though it be a perfection of a lower degree, ye^ it is
sufficient to denominate, and render the subject it is in perfect And even this
I confess, is a^ effect which Gods grace hath^ chief hand in; but that is no
Ba^ for Man having his share to Grace and Nature are not inconsistent; yea,
Grace supporteth, nay, bettereth Nature: they may then join and endeavor
together, as two of unequal strength drawing a boat, one draws more, but yet
both draw. The part Grace acts in the working of salvation is to enlighten the
understanding, move and enable the Will: The part Man acts is to comply with
Grace, Cor. 6.1. to yield and consent to her good Motions, Apocj. 3.20.
Wherefore salvation is the work not of Grace alone, nor of man alone, but of
Grace and Man joining hand and heart together. St Austin ( Tom. 10. Sermon. 15.
de verb. Apost. post. med.) speaks truth, He that made you without you, will
not justify you without you.

CHAP. 7. Of Religion.
1 SUch is the dread of Gods awful Majesty imprinted in Man, that the most
bararous people, deem it a duty to set apart some time to worship him in; the
light of reason teaching, that a certain return of honor and veneration is due
from the effect to its cause, whereby to express subjection, gratitude and
thankfullness: and albeit impiety wants not Proselites, that rejecting the
Deity refuse to do him homage; their folly is to be imputed to lack of grace,
and not o^ the said light, as appears by readiness (observeable in them) to
suffer for their opinion. If the other world yield no Punisher, n^ Rewarder, no
Hell, nor Heaven, it is madness to fear, and vain prodigality to give away
life, the chief good, and best flower of natures garden.

2. This natural propension to praise and magnify God begets religious acts,
and Religious acts, that great moral virtue called Religion: but Religion in a
more common acception consists in Belief, not humane, grounded upon Reason,
but divine, relying on the Churches Authority, and the assistance of the holy
Ghost. It is the doctrine of Christ delivered by himself in plain and express
terms. Mar. 16. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth, go ye
therefore and preach the Gospel unto all nations; he that believes shall be
saved, he that believes not shall be condemned. Jo. 14. I will send unto you
the holy Ghost, who shall teach you all Truth. Christ here speaks to the
Apostles the Church; gives power to preach the Gospel to the Apostles the
Church, promises salvation to Believers of the Apostles the Church, threatens
damnation to unbelievers of the Apostles the Church: lastly (that there may be
no pretense for disobedience) he assures to the Apostles the Church a peculiar
assistance of the holy Ghost, whose proper effect is to keep power from excess
and failing.

3. Not a word of or to Reason; what color then for attributing so much to
Reason, and so little to the Church, as to deny Christ to have entrusted her
with his Truth? as if the Gospel were not Christ's truth, or Christ's impowering
the Church to preach the Gospel, meant any other thing, than to entrust her
with his truth. Had Reason the pre-eminence of Belief, St Paul would not have
subjected Reason unto Belief, bidding all captivate the understanding to the
obedience of Faith, 2. Cor. 10. Indeed to give Reason the guidance of Belief,
were to make the blind lead the blind, Mat. 15, For as much as Reason is at a
loss in the object of Belief, and in Belief it self: the hottest zealots of
Reason, having come short of the one and the other, witness the Manichees, and
other Heretics. The Reason is, because both are above Reason, as being high
mysteries, and revealed so long since. But Christianity is not against Reason,
and he is to be reputed silly and light, that hasteneth upon a truth, Eccl. 19.
however proposed, without examination of its credibility and consistence with
Nature, which must be the work of Reason; very true, nay more, Belief is
beholding to Reason, even for discerning and finding out her guide, the true
Church. But this only amounts to an evidence, that Reason helps and
contributes to belief, so does preaching, reading; hearing, etc.

4 To be the guide of Belief requires further ability and skill, to lay open
immediately to Belief Gods revealed Truth, a Prerogative belongs to the Church,
and no other; as to whom alone revelation was made. Whence it follows, that
the Religion of Sectaryes is deficient and vain, their belief being grounded
upon some humane respect, and not upon the authority of the Church: and
assistance of the Holy Ghost. And consequently that for them to deserve the
name of true Chrstians, and to be styled of the right Religion, their only way
is to level at a perfection, that takes its rise from an absolute resignation
of their wills to the will of God, in order to the Church; which according to
Christ is to become spiritually little ones, Mat. 18. in resemblance to
natural Children, who are at best, when they most follow and obey their
Parents directions and commands. Hilar. in Mat.

CHAP. 8 Of the Unity of Religion.
1 IT is an undoubted Maxim amongst all that have any insight in nature, that
Being and Unity are inseparably together; insomuch, that where Being is, there
Unity cannot be wanting. If then there be any such thing as Religion, appointed
by God for the salvation of souls, without all peradventure, it is one: Christ
himself cleares the difficulty, saying, One sheepfold and one Pastor, Jo. 10.
St Paul. declares no less to the Ephesians, willing them to affect unity, to
the end that they may be as one Body, one Spirit, one Faith, one Baptism, as
God is one, Ephe. 4. And again, He gave some etc. Until we all meet in the
unity of Belief?

2. Now experience shows, that this unity of Religion, is an effect of
acknowledging the Church for the Rule of Belief, it being visible to the eye,
that all that square their Belief to the Church, are one in Religion; whereas
they that take to themselves other rules dissent and jarre; of which no other
reason can be given, but that the Church is all ways constant and certain in
her proceedings, and clear in her expressions; other Rules, subject to
uncertainty, change, and obscurity. The fixedness of the several Centers of
fire and water inclines that to a constant ascension, and this to a like
descension. That Pilot were guilty of much ingratitude and injurious to the
Polars, that should not yield the guidance of the Ocean to the regularness of
their motion. Contrariwise it is a plain demonstration, that the inequality of
days and nights relates wholly to the wavering progress of the Sun: for every
cause giveing that it has, and no more; as certain effects of one and the same
kind hold dependence of constant and certain causes, so uncertain effects of
many and diverse kinds, must needs belong to unconstant and various causes.

3. True it is, that Scripture in it self, that is, as it is the word of God,
dictated by the holy Ghost, is certain and infallible; but to us, to wit, as it
is liable to this and the other private interpretation, it is as uncertain and
fallible, as man. Witness the many contrary interpretations we se daily made of
Scripture, which cannot possibly be all true: wherefore the conclusion issues
abundantly, that the Church is the only fit Principle to unite Christians
together, and consequently, that those may despair of ever wearing the Badg and
Ornament of true Chrstianity, viz. unity, who dare with Core and the rest of
that rebellious Crew, bid defyance to the Church: Number. 16. Jude. 11.

CHAP. 9. Of the goodness of the Roman Cotholique Religion.
1 IF Excellency of nature and sweetness of disposition be ground enough to
term a thing good, the Roman Catholic Religion may not unjustly claym that
appellation. For first in her nature she is made up of Excellencies,
acknowledging a God Eternal, Almighty, Provident, Wise, Good, Just, Maker and
Govern our of heaven and Earth, One in nature, three in persons, Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, the Son to have taken humane flesh, whereby to converse with
man, to instruct and free him from the Bondage of Hell and sin, to have
instituted seven Sacraments to supply the necessityes of his spiritual life:
Baptism that he might be regenerate, Confirmation that he might grow strong
and able to profess his Faith before his enemies; the Eucharist that he might
be fed with divine grace, Penance that his Maladies and sores of sin might be
cured and healed, Extreme unction, that he might be comforted in his last Agony
against the usual assaults of the Devil, Holy Order, that he might be
provided of spiritual teachers and Guides, Matrimony that he might be
multiplied in a holy and sacramental way: that he has an endless store of
bliss and happiness to reward the good, and a like of pain and misery to punish
the bad, that he has chosen and established some to propose and apply all those
good things to others: Now for her disposition it is also good, teaching to
love God above all, our Neighbors as our selves, to make an hearty and ready
expression of both; of the former, by laying down wealth, honor, liberty, yea,
life it self rather than offend him, by building Churches and Oratories to
praise and serve him in, by adorning and enriching them for the better stirring
up of devotion and reverence, by retaining and holding dear things appertaning
to him or his, by setting a part days to remember his favors and benefits, by
worshipping him for his own sake with supreme, his servants and beloved for his
sake with inferior honor, by abhorring all manner of Idolatry: of the latter
by bearing in juries, leaving revenge to God, by forbearing even the least
wrong, and if any be done, by making full reparation and amends, by persuading
not forcing Religion, by relieving the poor and needy with foundations of
Hospitalls, Almshouses, Colleges etc. by keeping faith with all, especially
Magistrates be they Catholics, or Sectaries, Christians or Infidells, good or
bad, and that for very Conscience sake. These are the Roman Catholics tenets,
and howbeit they admit of more, yet none being (what ever ignorance or malice
has noised to the contrary) inconsistent with these, and consequently
agreeable to all sorts of Governments; that State or Commonwealth that refuses
to protect and defend them from violence, and oppression appears clearly
wanting to its interest in not complying with Prudence and Iuffice, which bid
to love and cherish all safe and fast subjects. O but Catholics have a
dependence on the Pope, who is a foreign Prince, they have so, but not as he
is a temporal Prince, for so he is confined within certain territories of
Italy and France, their relation to him is only as he is their common
spiritual Father, whose office being to keep off Rebellion, and to teach
obedience, cannot endanger the least. St Peter and the rest of the Apostles
were foreigners to several Provinces, the interest of Christ brought them to,
yet in regard their power was spiritual, the Civil Magistrate had no cause to
fear, but rather to rejoice, as at a Good drawing toward them. God having
given the spiritual power as the soul to the body for comfort and support, not
for hurt or anoyance: what say you then to the practice of several Popes: I
say that Popes may prevaricate and exceed their Commission, and in case they
do that, they are to stand by themselves: I, and strange cases are maintained,
by some which seem to induce to murder, theft, lying, cases appertain not to
religion but to action, whose rule is reason, and not revelation, for God has
not revealed all belonging to charity, as he has in relation to Faith Now
reason being in most men weak and by ast by passion or interest, what cause is
there so much to wonder at the strangeness of conclusions resulting thereof;
the worst can be inferred hence is that sectaries seem void of reason, that
make reason the rule of their belief, which is so defective and uncertain in
the reach, even of natural, and moral truths. Then the stews are allowed in
several places. A clear mistake, they are only permitted, that is not hindered
or punished, for no Catholic approves of Whoredom, as an act well done, which
is the proper signification of allowing: now not to hinder or not to punish
some kind of sin, at least wise in certain causes is not ill, or if it be,
how can God be good, who permitts all manner of sin? Nay, the forbearance to
is but from violence, there being all the sweet and charitable means used to
take off of that lewd way, as pious exhortations, godly sermons, offers of
entertainment in Religious houses founded of purpose for such as repent, lastly
an assurance of an unchristian like burial to those that Dye impenitent.
Further the Inquisition admits of no persuasion but her own. The Inquisition
has less relation to religion, than cases, being a mere piece of State
Policy, as is apparent in France and Germany, where Catholic Religion bearing
the sway, the Inquisition is not at all owned, Protestants enjoying in both
places as much freedom of Conscience as Catholics themselves; At least wise
it is not to be denied, that the Romish Religion allows of Breaking of faith
with sectaries, upon which account outrages have been committed. Most false!
she abhominates all such doctrine as destructive to fidelity, which she
magnifies as the ground of Justice, Whence then this Monster? Marry from ill
composure, weak understanding, depraved will: crooked nature prompts to ill,
weak understanding conceives amiss, depraved will receiving erroneous judgment
for good and current, musters her forces, stirs up Anger and hatred, which
heightened, trample under foot all regard of Religion and virtue, and transports
to disorder and mischief; so that ill composure, weak understanding, depraved
will, wild passions and not Religion were the guilty, let them suffer and not
those who in order to their Religion hate all barbarousness in opinion, keep
under and curb unruly and naughty passions. It were a strange piece of Justice
to punish equally flyers and followers of Theft and Murder, Scripture is
express for every one to abide the shame of his own sin: wherefore the
concurrence seems general to free and keep inocency from molestation and
trouble.

CHAP. 10 Of the truth of the Roman Catholic Religion.
1 I Strange at the Partiality and inconsequence of those who Justify the
Enemies of the Roman Catholic Religion, whiles they are in a readiness to
condemn of folly and perverseness; such as should go about to call in question
the conquest of England by William the Conqueror. I say I strange at it, in as
much as the evidence of the conquest comes far short of the evidence of the
Roman Catholic Religion, that amounting only to an attestation from the oral
tradition and history of England, whereas this, besides the oral tradition and
history of England, has the like testimony of France, Spain, Italy, Germany,
Greece, Asia, and Africa, all unanimously witnessing that the Roman Catholic
Religion was first taught and delivered by Christ, as may appear to any that
will lay aside prejudice, and make a through enquiry of the truth. Whence
resulteth, that if it be ridiculous and absurd to question the conquest, much
more is it repugnant to reason to doubt of the Roman Catholic Religion.
Notwithstanding the Conquest is preferred by some as more evident, in regard it
was never questioned, the Roman Catholic Religion often. What then?
questioning is no mark of falsehood, The Trinity, the Incarnation, the
Scriptures have been all questioned, and yet are confessedly true: questioning
argue rather ignorance and malice in the Questioner, than want of truth in the
thing questioned: whereto add that the Roman Catholic Religion was sometime
unquestioned, yea acknowledged for true even by them that afterward questioned
its truth. Others will oppose that the Pope bearing great sway in the world
might and did first bring in the Roman Catholic Religion; Christ bore
greater, why not he? now that Christ and not the Pope did first teach and
deliver the Roman Catholic Religion, Tradition both oral, and historical
give testimony, here is the proper proof of a thing done so many Ages past,
their only surmise and saying; can there be any Comparison in the desert of
credit? but to show further even an impossibility in these opposers assertion,
I must observe unto them that the Rule of the Catholic Church is not the
Popes pleasure; as they fondly imagine, but (as St Paul calls it) the depositum
which importing to hold what was delivered, and to recieve no other for divine
truth, could not but defeat this pretended Pope of all possibility of bringing
in a Religion of his own coining, for either he kept to the Rule of the
Catholic Church, or he did not, if he kept to the Rule of the Catholic
Church, what he taught was delivered to him, and consequently not invented by
him, if he did not, the generality of Christians could not follow his example;
because the universality of contingent causes is unchangeable, and because
Christ's iterated promises of the holy Ghosts assistance would not suffer it.
Now the Roman Catholic Religion having been generally received for a divine
truth, makes it altogether impossible for any Pope to be or to have been the
first Contriver of it. What is further alleged in opposition of Religion from
persuasion, power and custom makes against other Religions which depend upon
fancy (showing that nimblenesse of wit and volubility of tongue may gain belief
of such power grown terrible fright into a profession of the same, and custom
give a good likeing and zeal of both; So Luther and Calvin persuaded their
Novelties, Queen Elizabeth forced a profession of them, and custom rendered
them to most seeming good, and true) and not against the Roman Catholic
Religion that has its relyance upon the certain universality of Tradition, and
Christ's never failing assurance of the holy Ghosts assistance, and which by
reason of its austerity and strictness of its profoundness and
incomprehensibility, of its restless aiming at proficiency and growth in virtue
and perfection, had to enter the lists and encounter with them all, with flesh
and blood; as to which suffering and pain would be troublesome, and
displeasing; with reason as to which heavenly mysteries would seem strange and
mazefull; with power as to which new endeavors would be suspectfull and
provoking: to Custom; as to which Change would be repugnant and destructive.
To say truth, it is a clear demonstration of truth in the Roman Catholic
Religion, that having to struggle with flesh and blood, with the bloody
crueltyes of the fiercest Tyrants, it should be able maugre all their
oppositions by means of a few contemplible men to prevail, so as to gain, and
keep the Dominion and mastery of the chiefest and largest part of the Earth.

CHAP. 11. Of set Prayer.
EXtravagancies being simpton's and tokens of distemper, it is a plain case,
that the traducers of set Prayer are not well at ease. For what more
extravagant than to level and strike at the very Acts of Christ and his Church
as these do, scripture declaring expressly, that as well the one as the other
have made and imposed set prayer; mark well the words. When ye pray Mat. 6. let
it be Our father: loset prayer made and imposed by Christ. Have ye a form of
sound words. 2. Tim. 1. Observe them that walk, so as you have our form: sing
unto our Lord in Psalms, hymns and Canticles, Phil. 3 Here the Church in St
Paul makes and imposes set Prayer; and as for their power in doing it, Christ
says first for himself; All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth.
John. 14. next for the Church, Mat. 16. he that hears you hears me, neither
grant is limited or restrained, and the end of both is to instruct in all
Chrstian duty, therefore must needs reach prayer as a chief part thereof: I
quarrel not with extemporary prayer in gifted persons, if all ought to improve
their talents, why should any be debarred the use which is the means to
improvement? All I contend is, that Christians are to have a regard of decency
and order, for that Christ (who is the God of order and not of confusion) came
not to bestow the beautiful and precious jewel of Christianity upon a
confused and hell-like multitude, but upon a well ordered company, consisting
of a perfect subordination of inferiors to superiors, amongst whom as there
is a commanding power, so there is a duty to obey a power, being to small
purpose; unless it can challenge observance. Nevertheless superiors having not
tied up all inferiors actions, but left some loose and free as extemporary
power etc, inferiors may pray at pleasure of their private store, so as they
do not pass their bounds to find fault and clash with superiors; it is not
at all misbecoming a householder to order his family after his own mode, if it
be done without opposition to, or contempt of the laws; but should the sun it
self in its natural motion resist or thwart the common motion of the heavens,
it must undoubtedly discompose and mar the melodiousness of their harmony.
The Exception against set prayer that it hinders attention and elevation, has
not the least ground, because extemporary prayer requiring study is rather apt
to distract and beat down, whiles it seeks and dives to find out what to say,
whereas set prayer, being made to our hands, needs no study, and consequently
brings no such inconvenience.

CHAP. 12. Of the means to reconciliation with God.
HAving thus endeavored to set forth a sound and good Christian, handsomeness
of order requires to declare next a Remedy for such as are diseased and ill, in
compliance wherewith I shall say, that Christ has appointed repentance, as the
only safe and sure means to reconciliation, and doubtless so it is, for
diseases as well spiritual as corporal are properly to be cured by
contraries, and the Spiritual disease of an ill Christian in pride and malice,
whose contraries are faith, humility, fear, Love, sorrow hope, purpose of
amendment, confession and satisfaction, all which are the essentialls of
Repentance; and being so, argue desperateness in those that dare hazard their
reconciliation upon confidence of forgiveness, which rather sides with than
opposes their disease, as will appear by stating the case betwixt man and man
thus; a Master bearing affection to his servant bestows on him favors and
benefits, this servant instead of deserving grows savage and insolent,
insomuch that he reviles and abuses his good Master, afterward reflecting upon
his ingratitude, calls to mind, his Masters worth, and thence raises to
himself a confidence that he has forgiven him. Clearly this proceeding is so
far from lessening, that it increases this servants offense, as adding thereto
presumption. Now Gods friendship surpassing man's imperfection, the breach of it
must be worse, and consequently a greater and more exact reparation is
necessary. It behooveth then every Christan desirous of spiritual health to
beware of this impertinent and pernicious confidence, and when Conscience
accuses of sin, to take Christ's Remedy as follows: in the first place by
way of Preparative, crave Gods assistance, then stir up an Act of humility by
acknowledging your unworthiness, an act of faith by considering Gods
omnipotence and veracitie, an Act of fear by considering his severity in
punnishing sin, an Act of love by considering his goodness in creating,
preserving, redeeming and adopting you to be his Child, an Act of sorrow by
considering his displeasure and your loss, an Act of hope by considering his
promises of mercy, which done make a firm purpose to do so no more, confess
your fault; and take upon you some Penance of Prayer, fasting or Almsdeeds in
part of satisfaction for the injury offered. This way may benefit Christians of
all persuasions, but can hurt none, because Religion, though it be above, yet
it is not against reason, and prudence allows you, encourages the trial of
safe and harmless means: great affairs seldom complain of too much care and
diligence, there being in good no danger of excess. And here it will not be
unseasonable to observe the unjustness of sectaries, who impute easiness to
Catholics, avouching that according to their Religion, a bare confession of
sins to a Priest pacifies and appeases God, whereas besides confession, (not
to speak of its horridness and a verseness to nature) they hold as necessary
all the other above mentioned Acts, that if any one be wanting, their
confessions become invalid and sacrilegious. Above all their strangeness
breaks out in their complaint of uneveness in their way, as though it were
such a matter to believe Christ's merits who is the source and fountain of all
worth, or to have a confidence in God whose goodness trascends all that can be
sin, and yet this is the very quintessence of their requisites to
reconciliation with God, albeit their sins should swell to drown in loudness
the cries of Sodom and Gomorrha.

CHAP. 13. Of the Spirit of Spiritists.
1. THe spirit of God in God is as God, every where; I fill heaven and earth
Jer. 23. So as in this sense none can be absent from his essence, presence, nor
virtue. But the question runs of the effects thereof, which depending upon his
will, are confined within narrower limits. This truth appears bright in St
John, where he forbids to give credit to every spirit, Jo. 1.4. To deny that
the spirit of God is active and fruitful in some, were to fall into another
extreme, and in effect to call Gods goodness and mercy in question; to know and
discern who they be, the only way is to see their warrant, and examine their
works. If their warrant prove that of Miracles, and their works good,
doubtless they have the favor of Gods spirit; if otherwise, they are at the
best but pretense makers, and ushers of innovation.

2. This way must needs be true and sure, because Christ and Saint Paul taught
it, and it stands with right reason; for bare sayings without proof are sounds
of want and emptiness; and the capacity of every Agent being to produce effects
like it self, it is as impossible for the spirit of God (that is all goodness)
to be the author of ill, as for a reasonable creature to beget an unreasonable,
or heat to cause cold. Whence it is plain, that the spirit of Spiritists is a
false imposture, a mere figment and delusion, in as much as it is destitute of
Miracles, and induces to ill; it persuading a disloyal defection from our
Lords Prayer, the Commandments and Church; Bucer in Mat. 6. Calvin. in Mat. 6.
Luther. de Moyse. Zuinglius in explan. art. 16. Tindal in Fox his acts pa. 140.
edit An. 1610.
in the consonancy and dissonancy to which consist the goodness and badness of
all Actions. All actions being good or bad, according as they are conform or
difforme to Gods known will, which is apparently manifested in the aforesaid.
Hereto add, that the spirit of Spiritists prompteth things contrary and
imconsistent each with other; Lutherans assert the reallity of Christs' body,
Zuinglians maintain a bare figure, Calvinists differ from both, which cannot
befall the spirit of God; for so the spirit of truth might become the spirit of
Error and falsehood.

3. To say that God is no excepter of persons, that his spirit being free, may
breath on whom he pleases, is out of the matter in hand; here being no dispute
of Gods power, what he may do, but of his will, what he does. Their other
ground for inspiration upon the assurance of Conscience, St Paul. and St Austin
convinced long since of weakness and cozenage. St Paul, when for yielding to
Conscience in persecuting the primitive Christians, he acknowledged himself
unworthy of the name of an Apostle 1, Cor. 15. St Austin, when he sharpened his
pen against Manichisme, which before in obedience to Conscience he upheld and
defended. Conscience can have no greater certainty than the understanding that
gave it being; and the understanding, experience teaches to be so bad an
aymer, that in the search of truth, it oftener misses than hits.

CHAP. 14. Of the Spiritists Rule of faith.
1 THe Rule of faith may be considered in it self, or in respect of us; in it
self it is Gods revealed truth; in respect of us, it is the same truth
expressed to us. Thus far Catholics and Spiritists agree, their difference is
about the expression. These holding, that it is that of their private spirit
joined to that of Scripture only; Those, that it is that of the Church,
Scripture bearing witness of her truth. This latter is clear, by what has been
already said in the third Chapter, and will appear yet more by disproving the
former. Which for the first part, that it is false and spurious, Saint Peter
gives evidence pointblank, 2. Pet. 1. No interpretation of Scripture by private
spirit. Saint Paul speaks to the same effect, where he wishes (2. Cor. 10.)
to captivate the understanding to the obedience of faith. And our Savior
confirms both testimonies, obliging all under pain of damnation, Mat. 18.17. to
believe the Church. If the Church be to sway, every private spirit must stoop
and obey; for none can serve two Masters, Luke. 16.

2. For the second, that it is deficient Scripture attesteth, referring to the
Church, and reason makes it good. For as much as the expression Faith requires,
ought to be as full and ample, as the duty of Faith; that is, it must be able
to inform the understanding in all it stands bound to give assent unto;
wherein the expression of Scripture alone is defective; it not declaring sundry
points Christians acknowledge themselves bound to believe. To wit, that those
books of Scripture, which are received for Canonical, are so indeed. That
some are Canonical, other some Apocryphal. That they are determinately these
or others. That the Jews Sabbath is to be neglected and laid aside, and the
Sunday solemnized. That the Creed is authenticke, and truly the Apostles. That
it is lawful to eat stra^gled meats and blood. But these men please
themselves with only talk of Scripture; for were Scripture (as they pretend)
the Rule of their belief, though it contains diverse truths; yet those truths
meeting and becoming one in Revelation, they would all perfectly agree, not
only Lutherans among themselves, Calvinists among themselves, but likewise
Lutherans with Zuinglians, and Calvinists with both; it being the property of
unity to unite and make one all that conform to the same: Whereas happening
quite contrary, it is a manifest sign, that fancy, under specious pretenses of
Scripture and the Spirit, is the great Idol they do homage to; Lutherans to
Luthers, Zuinglians to Zuinglius, and Calvinists to Calvin.

CHAP. 15. Of the Protestant Church.
Protestants cast a fairer shine than the Spiritists, and certes were their
Church as true as it is seeming, they could not be justly taxed. But all is not
gold that glisters, Satan is apt to transform himself into an Angel of
light, 2. Cor. 11. Falsehood it self is not seldom seen in the habiliments of
truth; and therefore this Chapter pretends to lay open the many shapes
Protestants put their Church in, to make her pass for true.

1
The first is, Protestants are a company of Christans under the government of
Bishops and Pastors, that have power and authority from Christ and his Apostles
to administer the Sacraments, and preach the word of God: But such a company is
the true Church, therefore Protestants are the true Church.

ANSWER
1 Neither Christ nor the Apostles ever conferred any power or Authority on
Protestant Bishops and Pastors; they were dead and gone, long before these had
any being. To give Power and Authority of this nature, requires presence of
the Giver: so was God present to Moses, Exodus: 3. Christ to his disciples, Mat.
6.28. Neither is their any Testament or Monument extant to show that the power
or Authority Christ bequeathed, should lie obscure and dead for such a tract of
time, and then be brought to light and revived when Protestant Bishops and
Pastors sprang up, or that it was for them.

2. It will be said, Christ and the Apostles shared their power to Protestant
Bishops mediately, immediately to those lived in their days; and those to
others down to these.

Repl. By this is employed a continuation of succession in the Protestant
Bishops and Pastors, ever since Christ and the Apostles; it is not concievable
any other way, how power could be transmitted from one hand to another, as is
averred; as also a visibilite of the same; for as much as it was their parts
to preach the word of God, and administer the Sacraments; if visible, they may
be produced, they ought to be produced: they may, because that power is vain
and fictitious, that is not reducible to act, Math. 5. They ought, because
Bishops and Pastors in case of Controversy, are to give an account of their
calling, Luke. 7. as well to settle the wavering, as to bend and make supple
the stifness of stubborn misbelievers. 1 Peter. 3.

3. How necessary this is, Tertullian admirably well urged, Lib de praescrip.
Iren. adver. Here Is. Hieron. in Lucifer. Optat. lib. 2. contra Parmen.
when he bad the Sectaries of his time let him see the beginning of their
Bishops and Pastors. Likewise Optatus, the Origin of your Chair, shows ye,
that needs will challenge to your selves the holy Church: St. Austin came not
behind these in pressing the necessity of succession and derivation, Augustine
de utilit. credend. Epist. cont. Faustum Manich.
where he ingenuously acknowledges them to be of force to hold and keep him in
the bosom of the Church. There keeps me, said that great Saint, in the
Church, the succession of Priests from the very sitting of St. Peter, to whom
our Lord after his Resurrection committed the feeding of his sheep, even to
this present Bishop. And well did it become the Pious zeal of those ornaments
and lights of Gods Church, to show earnestness and vehemence in this behalf,
inasmuch as derivation of succession is so proper to the true Church, that it
cannot agree to any false, as, St. Hierom (in Micam. 1.) observes, assuring
Sectaries to have no such riches as come to men, by plain inheritance from
their fathers: and as is evident in it self; by reason the true Church was
planted and established, before any false began: The Parable of the good man,
sowing first good seed, and the enemy over-sowing Cockle, evince no less, Mat.
13. Therefore must needs be a non plus ultra, a stopp and bar, betwixt
whatsoever Counterfeit Church and Christ, to keep off the like continuation of
succession.

4. It will be said, if derivation of succession be a sure Mark of the true
Church, Arians and Turks may claim the true Church, Arians deriving themselves
without interruption from Arius, and the Turks from Mahomet.

Repl: Arian and Turk derivation climb not so high as Christ, it reaches no
further than Arius and Mahomet, who grew up long after Christ: the Argument
from succession is not grounded upon any succession, but upon derivation of
succession from the Apostles and Christ; and that holds good: because Christ
was not only man, but God also: and therefore had power to constitute a true
Church; Arius and Mahomet were no more than men, who may not assume any such
prerogative. So that derivation of succession from them only demonstrates them
to have been the Founders and beginners of Arianisme and Turcisme:

5. It will be said, diverse Sectaries were contemporary with Christ; therefore
that argues Antiquity only not Truth.

Repl. It may be several Sectaries had the honor to see some part of the time
Christ lived in, but not his institution, that was a special favor reserved
for, and only granted to his dear spouse the Church. Sectaryes crept in
after, as opposers of Christ's institution.

6. It will be said, There have been named in several ages the Albigenses, the
Apostolici, Osiand. Epitom. AEn. Sylvius de gest. Bohem. Guide Carmel in
Albigens. Antoninus Luxemberg. in paup. de Lugdun. Vspergens chron. 212. Caesar.
Cistert. dial. 5. Vincent. speculum hist Prateolus. Sandeus.
Wickliffe, Hus. Repl. None of these were Protestants, they holding not in all
points with them, nor yet with themselves, asis to be seen in Osiander, Aeneas
Sylvius, and other approved Historians. Besides there was a great distance
between them and the Apostles, in which they could not be mentioned; for as
much as they were not begun, or were quite extinct.

2
Another shape is, Luther descended from Catholics, Catholics from the
Apostles; therefore Protestants had their original from the Apostles; they
deriving themselves uninterruptedly from Luther.

ANSWER
1. Protestants derivation from Luther is frivolous, and of no weight; Luther
wanting Episcopal Authority, without which all Ordinations are null and
frustrate; by the confessions of the chief Protestants themselves: See Saravia,
Sutcliffe, Bilson, Andrews, White, Mason, Mountague, Hall and others.

2. It will be said, Luther received Episcopal power immediately from God.
Repl. Such a power being extraordinary, is always accompained with that of
Miracles, as appeared in Moses, Exodus 3. and the Apostles, Act. 2.14. Luther
never wrought Miracle; neither did he ever pretend to any such gift, the season
of Miracles (as some of his Disciples avouch) being than past. And for his
wonders alleged in drawing so many after him, maugre the Pope, Emperor, and
other Potentates, it shows only a strange itching in men after Novelties, and
proneness to Libertinage. Arius in a shorter space lead away far more, and
greater ones, (that to use Saint Hieroms words, cont. Lucifer.) the world did
groan again, to see it self on a sudden become Arian. But this could be no
Miracle; for Miracles are done for the asserting of truths, and it was most
untrue, that Christ was not God, that he was not equal to his eternal father,
as Arius contended.

3. It will be said, it was Miraculous in the Apostles, to convert thousands to
the faith of Christ, in a time of greatest opposition and resistance. Repl. In
them it was, it being a work of too high a nature for the undertaking of poor
illiterate men, to persuade a Religion so contrary to flesh and blood, as
mortification of Wills, Fasting, Chastity, etc. Luther was a man of learning
and parts, who had only to instill a doctrine acceptable and pleasing to the
depravedness of nature; to perform which needed not abilities other than
natural.

3
A third shape is, Protestants received their Mission from Catholic Bishops in
Queen Elizabeth's days and since.

ANSWER.
1. If some did, which is to be proved, Nay the contrary seems demonstrated by
Doctor Champney, it is evident the greater part did not; and what a Church must
that company make, of which most are judged fit to preach the word of God, and
administer the Sacraments without authority? But admit the calling of
Protestant Bishops and Pastors were right in all of them, it would not follow
that the Protestant Church is true, so long as she advances Protestanisme,
contrary to the meaning of the Catholic Bishops, who never empowered any, but
in relation to the setting up, and upholding of Catholic Religion.

2. Furthermore, Communion with the true Church being as necessary a requisite
to the making up of a true Church, as union of parts to the completing of a
natural body; what color for truth in the Protestant Church, that is at
variance with the Catholic, of whom she gloryeth to have her power, and which
she confesses to be a true Church: whereto add, that Protestants derivation
from Catholics, is not proof for a personal succession of Bishops, and
Pastors agreeing in all points with Protestants, which ought to be the scope
and aim of that derivation: it being not required of Protestants to deduce a
succession from Christ and his Apostles of men merely sent, but withal
professing the doctrine maintained in the Church of England. For although
doctrine be no mark of the true Church (as shall be shown hereafter)
nevertheless it is her inseparable Mate; insomuch that where true Doctrine is
wanting, there the true Church cannot be; Christ having entrusted her with his
truth, and ordained her keeper and preserver thereof.

3. It will be said, such a succession may be shown, but mingled pale-male with
Catholics, as corn with chafe, good fish with bad, conformably to Scripture;
comparing the Church to a barnfloor, where there is corn and chafe together,
Math. 3. to a Net replenished with all sorts of fish, Math. 13. Repl. This
mixture must have been either of Protestant and Catholic doctrine in the same
company of men, making profession of both, or in several companies; one
professing one, another the other: It could not be the former, because that
would be a clear argument that the Church has erred; contrary to what was
proved in the fifth Chapter. Besides the name of Protestant to this company
would be very improper, holding a Doctrine inconsistent with the Protestant.
Surely, whosoever over and above the Protestant Doctine, should profess the
Arian, or Nestorian, would deem himself jeered and laughed at, to hear himself
styled by the name of Protestant: Doctrine being in nature much like unto
number, the least addition or diminution altering its kind, and grounding a new
denomination. Nor the latter, in as much as there is no agreement betwixt the
Temple of God and Idols, no concord with Christ and Belial. 2. Cor. 6. The Ark of God and Dagon may not stand together, 1. Kings. 5. It were a strange
example, if the Church, unparaleld for love to her spouse, that professes so
much to truth, and strictly forbids ill company (as dangerous to her
Children) should receive into her company Liars and Innovatours. This would
leave a stain upon her reputation, make her sincerity be suspected, her
Doctrine contemned and despised. But she who is, all fair. Cant. 6. Without
spot or wrinkle. Epes. 5. is free from any such guilt; Sectaries being as
hideous and hateful in her sight, as their suggestions are full of poison and
destructive to souls.

4. It will be said, Protestant Bishops and Pastors, were not so near mingled
with Catholics, as either to believe or profess their Doctrine; they only
concealed and covered their own, for fear of the formidable rigor of
Catholics. Repl. such Bishops and Pastors could neither be true, nor make a
saving Church. Not true, because the Mission of true Bishops and Pastors being
founded upon persecution and suffering ( Lo, I send you as sheep among Wolves.
Math. 10. Luke. 11.) it is proper for them to fear no colors: Cruelty in her
gastliest hue is not able to fright or daunt them from preaching the word of
God, and administering the Sacraments. The Apostles gave testimony to this
truth, when commanded by higher powers to forbear mentioning Christ or his
actions, they bravely and with stoutness reported that they could not choose,
but declare, What they had seen and heard; yea, even outraged and ill entreated
for this behalf, they went away glad and rejoicing, to be thought worthy to
suffer for the name of Jesus. Acts. 5. All the glorious Martyrs and Confessors
confirm the same, by their profession of faith amidst the loathsome stenches of
close Prisons; and horrible torments of bloody persecutours.

5. Nor make up a saving Church; by reason profession of Faith is necessary to
salvation, Romans 10. In heart it is believed to justice, by mouth profession is
made unto Salvation. Mat. 10. He that denies me to men: I will deny him before
my father etc. The Comparisons are meant of private men for matter of manners,
and not of any mixture of true and false Doctrine, Orthodoxall and Heretical
Bishops and Pastors together.

6.
A fourth shape is, in all ages since Christ and his Apostles there have been
Protestant Bishops and Pastors, but through the negligence of men, and hard
fate of times, their names have miscarried and perished. And as it is no
argument, many famous Romans and Graecians are not named, therefore never were
any such men; so it is no less falls a sequel, Protestant Bishops and Pastors
are not mentioned all the way from Christ and the Apostles, therefore they were
sometimes wanting.

ANSWER.
1. It is not the same of private men, and of Bishops and Pastors: These have
Christ's Warrant and assurance for a Continuance of visibility, so have not
those, Math. 28. Bishops and Pastors are, as Aqueduces and Limbecks, through
which the vivifying waters of Christ's holy Doctrine are derived into our ears,
and distilled into our souls, so are not private men: should they be at any
time clouded, and in obscurity Christ would be worse than his word, his
Doctrine fall short, and not come home to us.

2. It will be said, visibility is a badge private men wear as well as Bishops
and Doctors; therefore it cannot be inferred more of the one than of the
other. Repl. Visibility is not peculiar to Bishop and Pastors, but necessity
of visibility is; private men in this way of visibility, being only
contingently visible: So that though this inference be not right, they are
visible men, therefore they are Bishops and Rastours; no more than that there
are white foul, therefore they are swans, whiteness belonging as well to
Geese, Ducks Pigeons etc. Yet there are Bishops and Pastors, therefore they
are visible, holds good; as there are swans, therefore they are white fowl; in
as much as visibility agrees necessarily to Bishops and Pastors, as whiteness
does to swans.

3. It will be said, Diverse Bishops and Pastors have been, whose names are not
extant; therefore Bishops and Pastors have no stricter relation to visibility
than private men; Repl. Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible, either
indeterminately, or determinately: indeterminately all; for some are necessary
to make a visible Church; determinately so many, without which there could not
be a sufficient number to make a true visible Church: Even as Ships in respect
of passing the Sea, all are necessary either indeterminately or determinately;
indeterminately all, some being necessary to pass with, determinately so many,
without which the Sea is not to be passed. Wherefore as the Antecedent is true,
the Sequel is false; Bishops and Pastors having either indeterminately or
determinately a necessary Reference to this sort of visibility; private men
only an accidental.

4 It will be said, Bishops and Pastors are necessarily visible, whilst they
live; dead, that necessity cease; Repl. Such a visibility would be to no
purpose, it not providing the Church of means to defend and make good her right
in case of opposition; for the question of lawfulness in Bishops and Pastors,
and of their truth in point of Doctrine, soaring as high as Christ, commonly be
satisfied by a showing of equal rise; which supposes a visibility reaching
from Christ to the end of the World as power to the Act. The question of the
Churches Right is to be decided, not unlike that of two great men, laying claim
to a Principality, by virtue of some pretended descent from a certain Prince,
or to that of (...) River, whether it has its of^^ring from such a Hill or
Mountain: For as to Evidence, this the surest way will be to derive their
Pedigree, and to trace the River up to the Head; so to clear that, no means
more effectual, than to take a view of the ages gliding betwixt Christ and us.
If Bishops and Pastors be found succeeding each other without intermission, it
is Evident they are true and Catholic; if otherwise, they may not escape the
brand of usurpation and intrusion.

5. The Truth of Doctrine is discernable much after the same manner, If it be
found to have no way varied, but to have kept its own from Christ and the
Apostles, doubtless it is Orthodox, if not, most certainly it is new and false.
In short, by the good help of this visibility, the Bishops and Pastors of Gods
Church, together with his Doctrine, shine so bright throughout all ages since
Christ, that who will open their eyes to see, and their mouths to ask, may
with ease find whom to obey, and what to believe; for want of this visibility,
Sectaries, boast they never so much of Antiquity, prove but of late creation,
and their Doctrines fond devises of unsettled and wavering minds.

5.
The last shape is, That Church is true and Catholic, which professes the
Apostles Doctrine, clearly delivered in Scripture; but the Protestants Church
does this, therefore, etc.

ANSWER.
1. TRue Doctrine is no mark of a true Church, it being to be seen among
Schismatics, who for want of Communion are not able to make a true Church;
Besides Doctrine is as diverse, as there are diverse seeming Churches, and so not
affording any determinate motion draws in opposition of a mark of truth; to
which add that Doctrine supposes Bishops and Pastors, as the means whereby
it is conveyed unto us; For Doctrine comes not in the air, or by infusion, but
by preaching and teaching of men, not only sent inwardly by inspiration, but
likewise outwardly by ordination or imposition of hands, of such as have power,
as the Priests in the old Law, the Apostles and their successors in the new
were Exodus 3. Levit. 8. Math. 28. therefore it imports as much to name
Bishops and Pastors before way be given to the mentioning of Doctrine as it is
necessary passing from one extreme to another; to touch first the middle. It
is no less untrue that Protestants maintain the Apostles Doctrine delivered in
Scripture, inasmuch as they cleave to a sense which the words neither do, nor
can bear without wresting and forcing, as Dr. Smith (late Bishop of Chalcedon)
has clearly shown in his Collation; to which I must remit you for avoiding of
tedious quotations, as opposite to my professed brevity.

To be of the Apostle, belief, requires a full and entire admission of what
they believed; For if belief of some points only were enough to make two of one
belief; Catholics and Protestants, Turks and Jews might crack of unity in
Religion, because though they differ in some points, yet in other some they
consent and agree. Now Heaven being a reward only intended and promised where
there is a full performance of Duty; belief of part of the Apostle Belief is as
ineffectuall to Salvation as perseverance for a time; which moved St Athan to
say that he that did not hold the Catholic Faith entirely should for ever
perish: And it is agreeable to reason, in regard punishment is the reward of
contempt offered to Gods Majesty, which may be done as by transgressing any
one Commandment, so by disbelieving any one point; Gods Majesty shining no less
resplendently in his veracity than in is Will.

It will be said Protestants agree with the Apostles in sundamentalls, which is
sufficient to be of the Apostles belief, and to Salvation; Repl. There are two
sorts of Fundamentalls answerable to the twofold precept of belief,
affirmative; He that believes shall be saved; and negative, He that does not
believe shall be condemned, Mar. 16. The first sort is points to be believed,
explicitly or in particular. as the Trinity, the Incarnation, etc. The second
sort is points to be believed, at leastwise, implicitly or in general, as all
points whatsoever relating to belief, both are Fundamentalls, because both are
necessary to Salvation, and both are necessary to Salvation, because both are
equally grounded upon Revelation, whence arises the necessity and obligation
of belief; Now admit it should be granted that Protestants agree with the
Apostles in the first sort of Fundamentalls, that is in points necessary to be
believed explicitly, according to the affirmative precept of belief (which may
well be a question, they not believing them upon account of the Church, but for
fancy or some other humane respect) yet disagreeing in the second sort, that
is, in points necessary to be believed, at leastwise implicitly, according to
the negative precept of belief: How is it true that they do not disagree from
the Apostles in fundamentalls? It will be said those points, Protestants
disagree in, were not revealed to the Apostles, Repl. It is manifest they were,
there being the same light for the revelation of them, as there is for the
revelation of the other; to wit, the Churches Tradition, which giving a like
exidence of both, ought not to be deemed less sufficient for the latter than
the former. It will be said before Scripture had being, the power and right of
declaring Revelation belonged to the Church, but since they were transferred
and given to Scripture, so as now Gods Revelation is to be known thence without
recourse to the Church, Repl. The power and right of declaring Gods Revelation
were bestowed upon the Church, not for the Apostles time only, but for all the
time after, for the Commission was not, each same, but all Nations, Mat. 6.
which is not to be accomplished till the end of the World, when the Jews shall
be gathered from their dispersion, and consequently imparts the fullness of him,
that is to say, so long as this World lasts, or there is time in being: It
will be said, to what purpose then did the Evangelists set pen to paper? Repl.
For more comfort to give Testimony of the Church and her sincerity in teaching,
and not for every one to be his own carver and interpreter. St Paul is
positive, let men esteem of us, etc. as the dispencers of Gods mysteries. 1.
Cor. 4. It was ever held an effect of great improvidence, and an occasion of
much confusion for the people in any state or Commonwealth, to have the
freedom and liberty of construing the Law; Therefore wise Lawmakers, to show
their care and foresight for the good and weal public, as they caused then
Laws to be written, so did they appoint certain select persons of great
ability and in egritie, to administer and dispense the same.

This being true, what an undervalueing must it be of Gods wisdom and
providence, to think that in a Commonwealth of his own immediate establishing,
as the Church is, he has left to all indifferently, a liberty to make what
sense they please of his Law, on which, as on a shelf or Rock, her peace and
safety would be in perpetual danger of Wrack; The Jarres and Garboyles of
Sectaries having scarce had any other source than the privilege every of them
took of reading and interpreting Scripture.

The Reason is clear, because all men are not apt to understand alike; for
being for the most part of different tempers and composures, they have various
fancies, which of necessity will beget a diversity of understanding: Let twenty
read and reason upon Scripture, and not relate to some former exposition, and I
dare be bold to say, that no two of them shall agree; Experience is my warrant
in Luther, Zuing lius, Calvin, who for all their reading and reasoning, made no
less than three contrary and repugnant senses of those plain words; This is my
Body, This is my Blood.

10. It will be said, those selected persons, entrusted with the administering
and dispensing of the Laws, utter by mouth what they understand, and they
understand no more than what their private reading and reasoning are able to
inform them, so that even this way man would be to seek; Repl. Judges have not
only their reading and reasoning to inform and direct them, but likewise the
practice of former Courts from the very promulgation of the Law; at which time
the sense and meaning of the same was declared by the Lawmakers themselves. The
Church, besides the letter of Scripture (which she reads assiduously, with
watching fasting, and prayer, for a right and happy understanding thereof) and
her own reasoning, has the help of a better and surer tradition, and the
assistance of the Holy Ghost. Now I leave it to the impartial Reader to judge,
whether is more like to inform right and sure of Gods revealed truth, ^he that
hath-onely his own private reading and reasoning to help him, or she, that over
and above all these, is favored both by infallible Tradition, and the Holy
Ghost: And again, whether in a matter concerns Salvation, it be not an act of
imprudence and folly, to believe him rather than her.

CHAP. 16. Of the Roman Church.
BY the word Roman are not only comprised the Inhabitants of that particular
Territory of Rome, but likewise all Christians in the world, that acknowledg^
the Bishops of Rome for their chief Pastor, appointed by Christ to govern his
flock. My task in this Chapter is to prove, that this company, together with
the said Bishop, compose and make up the true Catholic Church.

1
1. My first proof is, that company of Christians compose, and make up the true
Catholic Church, to which the definition of the true Catholic Church does
agree; But the difinition of the true Catholic Church does agree to the above
mentioned company, therefore they compose and make up the true Catholic
Church. The first Proposition is evident, every thing being really one and the
same with its definition; as Man with rational, Beast with irrational. The
second Proposition I show. The definition of the true Catholic Church is, a
society of men linck't together in the profession of one Faith, in the use of
the same Sacraments, and under the government of Bishops, and Pastors lawfully
sent, that are able to show their personal and doctrinall succession from
Christ and his Apostles, without the least interruption. A society of men. And
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, others
Pastors and Doctors, to the consmmation of the saints, unto the work of
Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, linck't together, Ephesians. 4.
One body, one spirit, one faith, one Baptism, ibid: Lawfully sent. No man
takes the honor to himself, but he that is called, as Aaron of God. Heb. 5.
How shall they preach unless they be sent. Romans 10. That are able to show etc.
The Mountain of the house of our Lord shall be prepared in the top of
Mountains, and all nations, shall flow unto it. Jsa. 2. He has placed his
Tabernacle in the sun. Psalm. 118. Their Personal and doctrinall succession.
He gave some Doctors and Pastors, etc. Until we all meet in the unity of
faith. Ephesians. 4. without the least interruption. Behold J am with you always
unto the end of the world. Ma. 6.28.

2. Let us look upon this definition in its several parts and veiw, if any be
discrepant from the a forenamed company. The first is, a society of men, this
agrees to the said company, for in that company is to be seen. Jerusalem
descended from above, Apoc. 4. A goodly Hierarchy or Heavenly order, and
subordination of Subdeacon to Deacon; of Deacon to Priest; of Priest to Bishop;
of Bishop to chief Bishop or Pope, and of the Laity to all: And which is yet
more admirable, these degrees are so masterlike set, that they do not hinder
and trouble, but as great and less strings musically tuned, make and preserve
the Melodious Harmony of Peace and Concord. The second part is linck'd
together. This agrees to the said Company; for in that company there is no
diversity of belief; but one (as Monarch) swayeth, in Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, where one and the same belief is embraced for one and the same motive,
Gods Revelation proposed by the Church. The third part is, lawfully sent. This
agrees to the said Company; for in that company, No man clarifieth himself,
but one receives power from another; the Subdeacon, Deacon, and Priest from
the Bishop, the Bishop from the chief Bishop or Pope. The fourth part is Able
to show etc. This a greeth to the said Company: for in that company an exact
succession of power and doctrine is faithfully and with clearness deduced;
Writers of several ages and Nations having put forth and published to the view
of the world authentic schemes and Catalogues of Popes, Coccius, Gualterius.
Bishops and Pastors succeding each other from Christ and the Apostles, and
from time to time laid open their Doctrine. The fifth part is, without the
least interruption. And this agrees with the said Company; for in that Company
a Continual pure stream of power and Doctrine is demonstrated by the said
writers, to have been ever sweetly gliding from its head, Christ, and in its
proper Channel, Bishops and Pastors; and not any moment of time can be
pointed at, in which its course was stopped from beating down infidelity, and
imbalming true Belieuers with the fragrant odours of vertve and Religion.

2.
1. The second Proof is, that Company composeth and makes up the true
Catholic Church, which does acknowledge and embrace a power generally claimed,
and Doctrine generally professed, by the Apostles and Christians ever since.
But the said Company acknowledges and embraces a power generally claymed and
a Doctrine generally professed by the Apostles and Christians ever since;
Therefore that composeth and makes up the true Catholic Church. The first
Proposition is undeniable, in as much as Apostolical power and Doctrine, (where
communion is not wanting) are sure Evidences of the true Catholic Church.

The second Proposition I shall sufficiently clear, by instancing the beginning
and after-rising of those Tenets which Sectaries hold against Catholics, by
she wing how the learned of Catholics (who were as the mouth and pen of the
rest) opposed the said Tenets, as new and never heard of before: lastly by
producing Counsels, witnessing and confirming, the Orthodoxness of this mouth
and pen, and branding the contrary for heresies; Now forasmuch as it is easier,
to evidence our Fathers acts, than our Grandfathers or great Grandfathers etc,
I resolve to take this way, making my first instance in the last, and so
upwards to the Apostles. When Calvin. 1534. changed the Hierarchy of the
Church into Presbytery, framed a spiritual presence of Christ's body in the
Eucharists, established a perpetuity in the Possession of Grace, destroyed all
possibility of keeping the Commandments, Christians generally professed as the
said Company does, that their Commission was to inculcate that the Government
of the Church was instituted by Christ Hierarchicall, and not to be altered,
that Christ's presence in the Eucharist was corporal, that grace once had might
be lost by sin, that keeping of the Commandments was the way to Salvation,
and therefore as possible as salvation its self. Staphilus, Lindanus, Hosius,
Claudius, de Xaintes. Morus, conc: Trident. when Zuinglius. 1525. set up a
sign and figure in the place of Christ's body, Christians generally professed,
as the said Company does that their Commission was to inculcate that the Body
of Christ was truly and really in the Eucharist, Lindanus. Fleidan. Luth. conc.
Trid. When Luther. 1517 reviled the Pope calling him Antichrist, impugned the
Authority of General Counsels, Grace from the Sacraments, Mass, taught
impanature, ubiquity of Christ's Body. Christians generally professed, as the
said Company does, that their Commission was to inculcate that the Pope was
Christ's Vicar appointed to Rule his flock, That General Counsels in their
Canonical decrees were to be obeyed, That the Sacraments did confer grace to
all that received them worthily, that Mass was an holy sacrifice instituted by
Christ, for a Commemoration of his Death and Passion, for exhibition of
sovereign honor to his Eternal father, for propitiation to the living and
dead. That ubiquity was proper to the Godhead, Echius, Cochlaeus, Alphonsus
Acastro, Fisherus, the universality of Collen, Louen, Paris, Henry the 8th.
Conc. Trident. When Valdesius 1170 inveighed against Indulgences and Purgatory,
Christians generally professed, as the said Company does, That their Commission
was to inculcate that the Catholic Church had power to forgive, not only the
fault or guilt of sin, but likewise the pain and punishment due for the same:
That out of this world there was a place of satisfaction for such as departed
in grace. Antoninus, Claudius, Cossiodus, Conc. Florent. Trident. When Photius,
with other greeks 1049 opposed the Popes supremacy, Christians generally
professed as the said Company does, That their Commission was to inculcate,
That the Pope was the supreme Bishop and head of the Church. Rabanus, Haym,
Antoninus, Conc. Florent. Conc. Constant. 8 When Berengarius 104. grew to that
impudence as to out Christ quite the Eucharist, Christians generally professed
as the said Company does, That their Commission was to inculcate, That Christ's
Body was truly and realy there, Lanfranc, Guitmundus: Blondus, Conc.
Lugdunense; When Albanenses 796. questioned extreme unction, Christias
generally professed as the said Company does, That their Commission was to
inculcate, that extreme unction was one of the seven Sacraments instituted by
Christ. Bid, Conc. Worm. When Jacobus, 584 took away Confession, Christians
generally professed as the said Company does; That their Commission was to
inculcate, that Confession of sins to a Priest rightly empowered was
availeable and necessary, Saint Gregory, Cassiodorus, Conc. Trident. When
Sonaras 495 despised Images, Christians generally professed as the said Company
does, that their Commission was to inculcate, that as to other things relating
to God, and his saints, so also to Images a certain degree of respect and
reverence was due. Saint Hier. Theodor, Conc. 2. Nic. When Vigilantius. 424.
cried down holy Relics and prayer to Saints, Christians generally professed
as the said Company does, that their Commission was to inculcate, that respect
to holy things and prayer to Saints was both laudable and beneficial. Saint
Epiphan. Saint Aug. Saint Hier. Saint Greg. Niss. Conc. Constant. Conc. Laodi.
when Pelagius. 405 denied original sin, and the necessity of Baptism,
Christians generally professed as the said Company does, That their Commission
was to inculcate, that since the fall of Adam all were conceived in original
sin, and that to remove it Baptism was requisite. Saint August. Saint
Gregory Naz. Nisse. Saint Basil, Theodoret, Saint Ambr. Saint Hier. Saint John,
Conc. Milev. When Jovinian. 395 made sins all alike grievous, had the same
esteem of Marriage and virginity, Christians generally professed as the said
Company does, that their Commission was to inculcate, That sins according to
their more or less repugnancy to reason, were greater some than other, that how
be it Marriage was good and honorable, yet that virginity was better, and to
be preferred. Saint Hier. Saint August. Conc. Tolens. When Arius. 364 deprived
the Dead of the livings prayers. Christians generally professed as the said
Company does, That their Commission was to inculcate, that to pray for the dead
was an act of Piety and mercy. Saint August. Saint Ambr. Saint Hier. Saint
Chrysostom. Saint Epiphan. Conc. Constant. 3, Conc. Nic. 2. When Eunomius. 358.
attributed to Faith strength and virtue to keep off the harm of sin from the
faithful; Christians generally professed as the said Company does, That their
Commission was to inculcate; That Christians in sin were (notwithstanding
their faith) in state of Damnation. Saint Basil. Saint Ephrem. Saint Chryso.
When Novatus. 250. refused admission to the Penitent after Baptism constituted
a Church of mere just, Christians generally professed as the said Company does,
That their Commission was to inculcate that a sinner truly repentant was to be
received at any time, and that the Church Militant was not without mixture of
bad. Saint Cypr. Saint Ephrem. Saint Hier. Saint August. Conc. Romans When
Gnostici 129 fancied a Justice extrinsecate and imputative, Christians
generally professed, as the said Company does, that their Commission was to
inculcate, That justice was inherent to the soul, and that it consisted of a
spiritual quality called grace, whose property is to expel sin, to
enlighten the mind, to incline and enable the Will to all good. Iren. Justin.
Conc. Trident. When Simon Magus. 55 destroyed freewill, opened heaven to faith
unaccompanied with good works, blasphemed God to be the Author of sin,
Christians generally professed as the said Company does, That their Commission
was to inculcate that through Adams disobedience, freewill was weakened, and
ill inclined but not lost; that faith did dispose and help, but without good
works that she was too weak to justify a sinful soul, that God did all good
things, and for sin, that he did no more than suffer and permit. Saint Peter,
Saint Paul, Saint Luke, Saint John, Saint Matthew, Saint James, Saint Jude, Act.
Saint Dionys. Saint August. Conc. Trid.

17. This Proof will gather strength by observing, that the above named, but
few days or Months before their opposition, held as the rest of Christians
did, in all points with the said Company; and that neither they, nor others in
their behalf have left to posterity the least mention of any number of men in
being, before their opposition, with whom to join and side, to make good the
same. Assuredly, if any such thing had been, so great an advantage would not
have been passed over in silence.

3.
1 The third and last Proof is, That Company composeth and makethup the
Catholic Church, which is acknowledged even by their Adversaries, to be
Apostolical; But the above mentioned Company is acknowledge even by their
Adversaries, to be Apostolical: therefore that Company composeth and makes up
the Catholic Church. The first Proposition is evident: for as much as
Apostolical in a right and genuin sense, sinignifyeth to believe as the
Apostles believed, which is to be Catholic. The second Proposition appears
no less clear in several Protestan writers, who expressly account, that the
Apostles first planted the Christian faith in England; That the same was
retained by Bissiops and Pastors, from the first Plantation to Saint Austin;
That in substance it differed not, from that which Saint Austin brought in;
That Saint Austin was by Gregory the great, Bishop of Rome, to convert the
Saxons in England to the Roman faith; That the Roman Church in Gregory the
greats time, was the same it is at this present. See to this purpose. Perkins.
Exposi. on the Creed Page 266. Powell Cons. pap. rer. page 103. Stow, How,
Speed, Cambden, and all the English Chronicles. Now the Axiom in Philosophy,
which assures, Two Extremes which are one with a third, to be one amongst
themselves, will justify this form; Saint Austins Church and Doctrine were
Apostolical; Saint Austins Church and Doctrine were the same with the now
Roman: Therefore the Roman Church and Doctrine are Apostolical.

CHAP: 17. Of certain Objections made against the Roman Church; Answered.
IT is incdent to vainglorious and haughty men, to spurn at Authority, and to
asperse superiors with failings: Pride sets them on, and malice contrives the
means as black as their end, which is to shake off obedience, to live at
pleasure, and without control. The Enemies of the Roman Church have not shown
more Pride in con temning her power, than malice in raising false and
slanderous reports against her good name: As therefore in the former Chapter I
have done my endeavor to assert her power; so will I in this, to clear her
fame, and show her innocence mainly clouded, and shot at by the ensuing
Objections.

Objection. 1.
1. The first Objection is, The Church of Rome teaches Christ's Body to be
present in many places at once, which implies contradiction. Answer, The
measure of Gods power is his will, and his will is above the reach of our
capacity: Therefore no wonder if God oftentimes does that we cannot dive into
the understanding of, it suffices, we know the thing is done and that we do by
his word; which being plain and express for the presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, and consequently in many places at once, to doubt thereof, is no
less than to question Gods veracity. As for implicancy some labor to convince
this Mystery of, there is none at all; for though a body cannot be locally in
two places at once, by reason of local extension, which confines it to one,
yet this extension being removed, as it is possible to the omnipotent power; it
is as easy for a Body to be in several places at once, as for the Deity to be
in three persons at once, or for the soul to be in the Head, the middle, the
feet at once: Neither does Christ, calling himself a Door, a Vine, etc. Jo.
10.15. any way contradict this truth; because in these propositions, I am a
Door, a Vine, two distinct things, and of different kinds are affirmed of each
other, which according to the literal and proper signification of the words,
cannot be true; in that this is my Body, the same identicall thing is affirmed
of the same, to wit, the body of Christ, out of the Sacrament, when the words
began to be in the Sacrament, when they end, which without trope or figure is
as properly true, as this is the sign of the cross, Tabitha come forth, Acts
9. Nor yet those other sayings, the Flesh profits nothing, my words are
Spirit, Jo. 6. in as much as they were uttered to satisfy the Caphurnaites, who
being a gross carnal people apprehended of Christ's saying, the bread which I
will give is my flesh, my flesh is truly food, unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of man, etc. Jo. 6. that he meant to give his body to be gnawn and
torn in pieces, as ordinary butchers meat, and that he was not of power to
give it any other way; that appears by their murmuring, as conceiving horror
at the eating of humane flesh, this by question they made how can he? In
satisfaction to the former apprehension, Christ said, the flesh profits
nothing, that is, whatsoever flesh given or received as ordinary flesh,
avails not the soul; in satisfaction to the latter Christ said, my words are
spirit, that is, are able to effect what they signify or express, that this is
the meaning of both Christ's answers, I show, because the flesh profits
nothing, literally taken is a false proposition, Christ's, flesh being no less
profitable for man's redemption, than ordinary flesh for his corporal
nourishment, and my words are Spirit, understood otherwise would not have been
to the Capharnaites question, which, as I, said before, was of his power. Now
this meaning is to far from overthrowing the mystery of the realpresence,
that it clearly confirms and establishes the same, for although the manner of
Christ giving his body be Spiritual, yet is it not inconsistent with the
reality of his presence, he was really present to the water of Bethsaida Ma^k.
6. Notwithstanding the manner of his walking was altogether miraculous and
Spiritual. Saint Paul. 1. Cor. 11. knew this consistentcie, when after
instruction of a spiritual and worthy receiving, he scrupuled not to pronounce
condemnation upon the unworthy receiver, not of bread and wine, but the very
body of our Lord. Had Saint Paul meant of figurative or spiritual presence, he
would have said for not discerning the figure of the body of our Lord, and not
the body of our Lord. Besides figurative, or spiritual presence are ordinary
effects, and within the compass of man's power, therefore required not any such
extraordinary munificency, as Christ used of his.

3. If it be true as Philosophy teaches, that a consequence from being, to may
be, is valid and good, Experience demonstrates, that God has power to make
Christ's Body really present in several places at once; for as much as the self
same time, he was sopresent with his father in heaven, he appeared and
discoursed with Saint Paul on Earth saying, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute
me? Acts. 9. For when Saint Paul replied, who art thou Lord? He answered, I
am Jesus whom thou do persecute. Even in nature there is a Resemblance and
light of this Mystery: one and the same water is in the Fountain, River and
Lake at once, one and the same voice in Thousands of Ears at once; one and the
same face in sundry looking glasses at once; should we believe only that which
we understand, there would not be any belief in us of Mysteries of faith; they
being all above the reach of humane Capacity.

4. It will be opposed, Although God by his omnipotent Power, can make the Body
of Christ present, in many places at once, yet his pleasure is not to do it, by
reason of the strange irreverences, and absurdities which would ensue thereof,
as to be subject to the eating and tearing in pieces of Dogs, Catts, Mice, and
to the abuse of wicked men and Miscreants. Reply. He that is of power to render
a Body really present in several places at once, without doubt is able to
defend, and keep the same from all outrages; as God is pleased to do in this
Mystery, by removing local extension, and by consequence possibility, by
means whereof, Dogs, Catts, and Mice, can only tear and destroy the
accidents of Bread and wine: wicked men and Miscreants offer violence to the
same, but not hurt or annoy the Body of Christ; no more than he were of force
to wrong the Godhead, that surprised with a raging fit, should strike at the
air, with an intention to do him mischief. But admit these pretended
inconveniences should follow, I do not conceive there could be inferred any
other than a continuation of that ardent love of Christ, which he showed to
man, when he estranged himself from his eternal father, to bear with patience
and mildness, hunger, cold, whippings, spittings, thorns; and last of all the
bitter and disgraceful Death of the Cross.

Objection. 2.
The second objection is: the Roman Church believes Transubstantiation, 2
doctrine unheard of till the Council of Lateran. Answer the name
Transubstantiation was indeed imposed by the Council of Lateran called the
Great, as the name Consubstantiall by the first Council of Nice, and the name
Trinity by the Church, but as the things signified by the names Consubstantiall
and Trinity were generally believed before the impositions of those names, so
the thing signified by the name Transubstantiation was generally believed
before this name was thought of, witness Saint Cyrill, Jeruso. Catechesi
mystag. 4. saying of Christ he turned water into wine in Cana of Galile and
shall we not believe him that he has turned wine into his blood? Saint Ambrose
says to the same effect, L. 4. de sacram. C. 4. before the words of
consecration it is bread, after consecration, of bread is made the flesh of
Christ etc. If the words of our Lord Jesus be so powerful to give being to
that was not, how much more are they able to turn one thing into another? The
very words of consecration, this is my body confirm no less, in as much as
being an operative proposition, supposes not, as a speculative proposition
does, but makes the thing it fignifies, which implies a real change either
of Christ's body into bread, or of bread into Christ's body; for how can bread
remaining bread be Christ's body? Or Christ's body continuing the same be bread?
Surely no more than water, while it is water, can be wine, or a stone, so long
as it is a stone, can be a tree. Now that the change is not of Christ's body
into bread is evident, because then Christ should have said this is bread, but
saying this is my body, demonstrates clearly that the change is of bread into
Christ's body, which is fitly named Transubstantiation, as declaring the nature
of the mystery believed. It will be opposed that Transubstantiation is, against
experience, which shows that consecrated bread and wine nourish. Repl. if any
such trial has been made, undoubtedly the nourishment was supernatural, God
supplying (...) his extraordinary power the war of the several substances of
brea^ and wine to the end to save faith which according to Saint Pa^^ Hebr. 11.
is of things not appearing. It will be opposed that after consecration still
remain the accidents of bread and wine, who^^ essence consists in inhering in
substance. Repl. As it is true tha^ after consecration the accidents o^ bread
and wine continue the same, so its false that their essence consists in
inherence; for the definition of accident is apt to inhere, which may be
without inherence by means of Gods Omnipotency, whereto their is a necessity
to have recourse in all matters of faith, nature being in those matters at a
loss and useless, as Saint Hilar. Lib. 8 de Trinitate well observes; his words
are, In Gods matters we are not to speak after the ordinary manner of men.

Objection. 3.
1. The third objection is; The Roman Church commits Ido^latry in her
adoration at Mas^ bowing to the name of Jesus Altars, Images, and Relics
Answer. By the Commandment Thou shall not make to thy self any graven thing,
nor adore it, Exodus 20. is neither forbid the art of Engraving, Carving,
Printing, Painting, Casting, Sowing, Embroydering; nor yet all manner of
Religious honor to be given to Creatures: For in the old Tastament (where this
Commandment is enjoined) the use of those several acts was held lawful, and
Religious honor exhibited to the fiery Bush by Moses, Exodus 25. to the Oracle
by the High Priests, 3. Kings. 27. and to the Arc by David, Exodus 3. Levit.
26. Psalm. 131. And God himself justified them therein, by striking Vzziah with
Leprosy, and Oza. with death, for not forbearing to meddle, with holy and
sacred things without authority. 2. Paral. 26. Kings. 6 so that all this
Commandment forbids, is to make graven things, to the end to honor them with
divine honor, that is, to make Gods of them, as the Pagans did.

2. Now to vindicate the Roman Church from all Idolatry in her worship, it is
to be noted, That all things are not of equal worth, but that some things
surpassing other some in perfection and excellency, are more worthy than other;
whence it is, that God is superior to all things, Angels to men, and men some
to others. And hereupon is grounded honor and the degrees thereof, according
to the variety of perfections and excellencies found in things: for where
perfection and excellency are discovered to be, there the very light of nature
teaches honor to be due more or less, as the degrees of excellency and
perfection are observed to be higher or lower. Now honor (as proper to man)
is an outward respect given to a thing, with an inward act of acknowledgment of
some perfection and excellency in the same. So as to the completing of honor
(as to us) two actions are required; an exterior of the body, and an interior
of the mind; when either is wanting, honor becomes lame and manke. A timorous
man apprehending danger in exhibiting outward respect where it is due, makes
only an inward acknowledgment, this comes short of honor. A man distracted or
mad, and so incapable of the inward acknowledgment, by reason of his
distempered senses and faculties, gives an outward respect; this is as far
from honor as the other.

3. Both actions (viz.) both the inward and outward may be expressed to God,
and creatures; as it is lawful to bow or kneel to God, so to creatures, as we
may see, Jos. 5. Genesis 23.33. Exodus 3.1. Kings. 2.1. Paral. 29. Jud. 10.13.
Ester. 8. Number. 2. Now to discern, when these actions come within compass of
divine religious, and Civil honor, depends wholly on a right, and well
differencing of the perfections and excellencies of the things honored. To bow
or kneel to a thing with an inward acknowledgment, that its perfections and
excellencies are absolute, unparticipated, and infinitely exceeding all other,
is divine honor; to bow or to kneel to a thing with an inward acknowledgment,
that its perfections and excellencies are only participated, and relative to
God, Christ, or some glorious soul, is religious honor; to bow or kneel to a
thing with an inward acknowledgment, that its perfections, and excellencies
relate to some wordly dignity or pre-eminence, is Civil honor. Divine honor
is proper to God, and unattributable to any creature under Idolatry; Neither
does the Church of Rome afford this honor but to God alone; her adoration at
Mass being not meant, nor directed to the accidents of Bread and Wine, nor to
the figures of Host and Chalice next to sight (for in these she does not
acknowledge to be the perfections and Excellencies belonging to God) but to the
person of Christ hid and covered under the said accidents and figures. She
allows indeed of religious honor to the name of Jesus, to Altars, Pictures,
Relics, relating to God, Christ, and his Saints; as she does of Civil, to
things in relation to temporal dignities and preheminencies: But to find fault
with this, were to blame justice, for giving to every thing its due, in
acknowledging the truth; it being most true and undoubted, that the name of
Jesus, Altars, Pictures and Reqliques, bear relation to God, Christ, and his
Saints, as persons in dignities, and preheminencies to the same.

4. To urge against the Lawfullness of adoration at Mass, from the
interposition of Creatures, would prove too much, viz. That Christ, were not
adorable in Churches, in the fields, nay at all, by reason of a necessity of
interposition of walls, the Heavens, or Christ's Body betwixt the Adorers, and
his sacred person.

5. It will be opposed, Christ is not capable of adoration in the Sacrament, he
not appearing there like himself with glory and Majesty. Repl. Christ is
adorable where, and howsoever he is pleased to be; else the three Kings, Saint
Mary Magdalen, and the Apostles were reproveable for doing him homage, not in a
sumptuous Palace, and enthroned under a rich cloth of State, but in a poor
stable, a dusty manger, having for Canopy, a rack of hay, not gloriously
attired, and accompanied with Nobles, but in swaddling Clothes betwixt an Ox,
and an Ass, not like a Prince, but a Mechanicke, a Gardener, a Carpenter. The
poorness and meanness of the manner Christ appears in, not only does not
deprive him of the duty of adoration, but renders him much more adorable; for
exaltation is humilities reward, and so it is but meet, they go hand in hand,
and take increase together, that the height of that, may answer the depth of
this. For which respect Saint Paul sticked not to bid honor to be given to the
very name of Jesus, Phil. 2.

Objection. 4.
1. The fourth objection is. The Roman Church challenges power to forgive
sins which belongs only to God. Ans. All Power is naturally and originally
in God, as Lord Paramount of all Creatures; but not incommunicable: for as he
has bestowed the Power of governing kingdoms and Commonwealths on Kings and
Magistrates. Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.1. so the Power of remitting of sins on the
Apostles and their successors: yet men, having these powers by way of gift and
participation, may not be said to govern, or to forgive sins, but as Gods
substitutes and Delegates, suitably to the Condition of their inferiority and
subjection.

Objection. 5.
1. The fifth objection is. The Roman Church derogateth from Christ's
Mediatorship, making it common to Saints and Angels. Answer. Things that are
like have sometimes the same denomination; so kings and Judges are called Gods,
for some resemblance betwixt Gods power and theirs. Psalm. 81.1, 6. The Roman
Church then observing in the intercession of Saints and Angels, a certain
likeness to the Mediation of Christ, they being both expressions of Charitable
and good desires for others, may not unfitly call them alike by the name of
Mediation. But she is so far hereby from intending the least prejudice to
Christ's Mediation, either in confounding or equalling the same with that of
Saints and Angels, that she puts as wide a difference betwixt them, as can be
betwixt two things of different appellations; acknowledging in Christ's
Mediation a worth or right, whereto the thing desired is of Justice due; in the
mediations of Saints and Angels, only a virtue of moving Gods goodness and
mercy to grant their desires; which being not held in jurious to Christ's
Mediation to allow of, as good in the prayers of sinners, hated and abominated
by God for their Crimes and iniquities, much less ought it to be esteemed a
wrong to attribute it to the intercession, and prayers of Saints and Angels,
whose purity and sanctity, render them gracious and pleasing in the sight of
God.

2. It will be opposed, in the vast distance as is betwxt heaven and earth,
Saints and Angels cannot hear. Repl. blessed Souls in their state of
separation have, as Angels, ( Luke. 15.) an hearing, quite other from that of
souls immersed and plunged in flesh and blood: these hear by means of
corporal organs, which limited within a certain distance, cannot receive
impression out of the same; Those; hear with their understandings, which are by
so much the more open, and quick of apprehension, by how much the less their
dependence is on matter. The Saints then being freed of Corporal Cloggs, may
hear at any distance.

3. It will be opposed, Be it, Saints can hear at what distance soever; yet
this is not possible, unless objects be proposed: and what capacity in prayers
sent sofar off, as to reach to Heaven? Repl. Catholics boast not of any such
virtue in their prayers; but they believe (as is confessed by all) that God is
every where, in Heaven, on Earth, and all the way betwixt both: and that he is
the chief and principal cause of all effects, and so of man's prayers. Now it
being proper for every cause to relate to its effects, and so to represent the
same, as looking glasses do faces, and other opposed objects; the Saints (whose
happiness consists in a clear vision of God) must needs see and behold
(amongst other effects of his goodness and mercy) the Petitions of those, who
become humble suitors to them.

4. It will be opposed, If Saints and Angels hear not men's prayers before God
proposes them, he knows them beforehand; whence may be inferred, that their
intercession is needless. Answer. Gods foresight of men's prayers, makes not the
intercession of Saints and Angels any way unprofitable or fruitless; inasmuch
as the effect intended thereby is not to better Gods understanding, but to
obtain from his blessed will, mercy and compassion: For which the intercession
of Saints and Angels is powerful; as well because it is an act of fervent
Charity (the practice whereof is most pleasing and acceptable to God) as also,
because Saints and Angels are Gods friends and favorites. Princes have often
notice of subjects imprisonments and condemnations, yet seldom give reprieves
or enlargements, but at the entreaty of some friend or favorite. Men are
warranted, yea wished to pray for one another 1. Tim. 2. notwithstanding God
has the foresight of their wants and necessities, David's adultery and guilt of
blood were in the sight of God unpardoned, till after a low humiliation, and an
hearty acknowledgment of his fault. 1. King. 12.

Objection. 6.
1. The sixth Objection is, the Roman Church entertaineth division, and
Contrariety in Religion; the Dominicans maintaining a Physical
predetermination; The Jesuits a moral; Those, that the Virgin Mary was
conceived in original sin; these, that she was prevented by Grace, conceived
in the same. And if this be not enough to infer contrariety in Religion,
several Counsels have contradicted each other. Answer. Not every difference
but a difference in points of faith, makes division and contrariety in
Religion: the Dominicans and Jesuits only quarrel about opinions; it being no
matter of belief, that Gods predetermination is Physical or Moral, or that
the blessed Virgin was conceived in original sin, or in grace. These are
mere School nicities, and not at all destructive to that unity, which
Catholics so much Reverence in Religion. It is as untrue, that general and
approved Counsels have contradicted one another in matters of Faith, or
Occumenicall decrees: They have indeed talked and discoursed contrary, yea,
latter Counsels have altered and changed Laws and constitutions of government
made and established by former. But this only proves that Counsels admit a
liberty, and freedom to debate matters of Religion, and that what was once
good and convenient, may prove afterward (Circumstances varying) bad and
inconvenient, which no ways prejudices belief. And this is it, and all St
Austin hints, where he says, the precedent general Counsels are mended by
the following. lib. 2. Cont. Donatist. Cap. 9.

Objection. 7.
1. The seventh objection is, the Roman Church is injurious to Christ's merits,
approving of humane merits. Answer. Reason and experience show a diversity of
Agents; That as some are necessitated as beasts, other some are fee as men, and
therefore capable of merit and demerit, whereby they are differenced from
beasts, which are incapable of either. The Assertion then of humane merits, is
no other wrong to Christ, than the affirming of a plain and clear truth can be
wrong to him.

2. It will be opposed, men are capable of merit and demerit in order to
temporal; but not to eternal reward. Repl. As God has enabled men to deserve
temporal, so eternal Rewards, as is apparent in Scripture; terming Heaven, a
Crown of Justice a Reward, a Goal, 2. Tim. 4. Math. 5.1. Corint. 9. which
necessarily suppose merits as their correlatives, bare actions void of desert,
being looked on, only as by way of gift. It were indeed no less than
Blasphemy, to go about to equal in worth other merits with Christ's; but the
Roman Church offers not any such thing, whilst she beleiveth Christ's merits
to be of infinite value, others only of finite; Christ's merits to have their
desert, and worth from no other; others to hold dependence for both of them:
Rather the Roman Church by asserting other merits, and withal acknowledging
their desert and worth to flow from Christ's merits, attributes more to Christ's
merits than they do, who deny other merits. For hereby are yielded to Christ's
actions a capacity of meriting themselves, and a communicability of the same to
other actions, which are two perfections: and to acknowledge two perfections in
a thing is undoubtedly to give more to that thing, than to acknowledge only one.

3. It will be opposed, All actions besides Christ's, are duties; and duties are
inconsistent with merit. Repl. They are so without Covenant and acceptance; so
is obedience in a Child, a servant, a subject, due to his father, his master,
his Prince: Nevertheless as a father, a master, a Prince making a Compact to
gratify some particular act of his Child, his servant, his subject, innables
the same, and entitles it to what was promised; even so by the means of Gods
Covenant (1. Tim. 4. Romans 2.6. Heb. 6.) that he will reward certain actions of
men (though otherwise due) and accept the same as worthy, they become
meritorious, and a reward due: upon this account Saint Paul deemed it no
presumption to challenge at the hands of God, a Crown of Justice for his good
fighting, well running and constant keeping of Faith. 2. Tim. 4.

Objection. 8.
1. The eighth and last objection is, The Roman Church gives the Communion
under one kind, contrary to Christ's institution. Answer. There is a great deal
of difference betwixt Christ's institutions and his commandments; These
requiring both belief and observance, those only belief: For although
Christ's actions be good examples for us to imitate, yet, as such, they impose
not obligation upon imitation. Christ fasted forty days, and as many nights,
went into the Desert to be tempted, forbear Marriage, etc. are all bound to do
the like? none will say it: The common practice of all religions to the
contrary cries no; wherefore the Roman Church beleiving Christ's institution of
the Sacrament to have been under both kinds, gives to it its full due. for
the Communion under one, there being no Commandment forbidding the same; it is
rashness in a high degree, and want of charity to condemn her as Sacriligious
for so doing.

2 These words indeed, do this in Commemoration of me, Drink ye all of this,
imply a Commandment; but concerning only Preistes, to whom as the power of
making, so the obligation of taking under both kinds, is peculiar and proper;
those other Unless ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
import a Commandment too, and that extending to the Laity; but falling upon
the things, that is to say, upon the body and blood of Christ, and not upon the
kinds, leaves them indifferent and free. The reason of both is, because by
this Commandment, Christ's maine drift is (as the words plainly intimate) to
enforce a Spiritual food; which being Christ, Body and Blood, and since his
Resurrection grown inseparable, may indifferently be taken under one or both
kinds: whereas by that (as the words likewise clearly bear) he cheifely aims
at a Remembrance of his death and Passion; which including a separation of his
Soul from his Body, and his Blood from his flesh cannot be so lively and fully
represented under one kind. For Confirmation, look up into the Primitive
times, even of the Apostles and Christ. Acts. 2.42, 46. and you will find by
their promiscuous Communion, sometimes under one kind, sometimes under another,
and sometimes under both, that they never understood of any Commandment of
Communicating under both kinds.

And thus have you laid before you the will of God, to which all that believe
a God, acknowledge a conformity to be due. Now although I am satisfied by what
has been said, that only Roman Catholics have this Conformity, yet I may
not assure my self that others will be so; knowing full well, that the deepest
reasoning is but beating the air without Gods grace, therefore it concerns all
to crave it. The way to obtain it is to love one another, and the way to this,
is to keep newtrality in our Wills, for if our wills be once admitted to side
with our Judgments; Anger, Hatred, and other passions will crowd in, and they
being sworn disturbers of peace, will undoubtedly break Unity, which is the
bond and tie of love. If our Judgments will needs jarre and quarrel, let them
fight it out among themselves, having worried each other they will at lengh be
glad to give over and rest; by means whereof, we shall be in a fair
likelihood of becoming one sheepfold: And then Christ will own us all as our
Common Pastor, and guide to Eternity, Amen.

FINIS.

