THE Resolution OF DEVONSHIRE AND CORNWALL AND Other adjoining Counties: with
the names of the Forts and Castles given up to the King.

WITH The Copy of a Letter written by I. Air Esquire from Portsmouth, to M.
I. Arundell in London, showing His M^i^^^ie entertainment there, and all
proceedings since his Majesty's coming thither.

ALSO A true Relation of the Passages between the Cavaliers at Wels in
Somersetshire, and the Trained Bands, with their Resolution for the defense of
the King and Parliament, and the number of Volunteers that came to assist them
from the neighboring Counties.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parl.

Printed for Richard West. 1642. August 13.

THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN By I. Air Esquire, to M. John Arundell,
DECLARING HIS MAJESIES PROCEEDINGS at Portsmouth since his coming thither.
SIR,
FOr your unwearied pains and courage for me in these dangerous times
wherewith you have been encompassed, and in that you have minded nothing in all
your consultations and endeavors but Gods glory, His Majesty's honor and
safety, and the Kingdoms good: In requital of which, I have in part sent you
the passages since His Majesty's arrival amongst us at Portsmouth. We have had
continual rumors of wars in these parts, no other discouse stirring, but what
^ath possessed the subjects hearts with fear and terror, by reason of the
continual expectation of blood, yet hitherto we see no such danger; but at his
Majesty's approach the Governor humbled himself, and surrendered his charge.
Then the Mayor, and Aldermen, and inhabitants of the town made a guard, and
waited on him to Sir Henry Walker his house, with about two hundred gentlemen
on horseback: and when he had viewed the town round, and saw it well
fortified, he said, his Parliament has had a great care both of the Kingdom
and his Person, or to that effect: here was exceeding joy, nay I dare boldly
say, that from the greatest to the meanest, they had not the heart to resist
his entrance, as Sir John Hotham did at Hull. The Gentry of the Country have
since flocked to the town in abundance, and happy they are to see his Majesty;
for it was reported that his Majesty much grieved that Sir John Hotham denied
him entrance into the town of Hull, and for that he has made such spoil, and
undone so many men about him, and that he being a peaceable King, was desirous
to leave the Northern parts for fear of bloodshed amongst his subjects. Here
is no suspicion of his Majesty. The greatest Gentry in Hampshire, Isle of
Wight, and other Counties have proffered themselves to live and die in the
defense of his Majesty, and all his just and lawful prerogatives: and the
Governor and Porter of Hust Castle, the Governor and Captain Burley in
Yarmouth, both places in the Isle of Wight, will be ready to resign their
places of trust, if his Majesty pleases: also farther West, at Waymouth,
Poole, and Lymo in Dorsetshire, Apsum, Tingmoth, Dartmouth and Plymmouth in
Devonshire, Penderines, S. Mawes, Foy, and Helford in Cornwall. All these
places of strength, with the brave Commanders and Soldiers therein will be at
his Majesty's service when occasion serves. There is likewise order taken, that
those places of of strength, as Castles, and Forts, which are any ways decayed
in the works or fortifications, shall be speedily rectified and repaired. The
Castle of S. Mawes in Cornwall is extremely decayed in plat-formes, Carriages,
and want of Ordnance, being altogether unfurnished of any sort of ammunition
whatsoever. There is order taken for the amending and supplying of these
places, being of such great consequence. I understood a passage in a Letter
written unto me by my cousin Arundell, that diverse gentlemen in Lincolne-shire
and other Counties adjacent should profer the King all they had, yea and
venture their lives in His Majesty's defense, and the King made answer, their
love should never be forgotten, and said, for their persons he desired not. but
said, they would be then termed Papists, but for their money, horse, or
ammunition he would embrace, knowing them to be no Papists. I desire you to let
me understand by the next Post of the passages in Ireland, but I fear that the
distractions and divisions that have been raised amongst our selves, have much
hindered their relief, and unless these impediments be speedily removed, that
the aid and assistance intended for that service, will be still delayed and
procrastinated, to the utter destruction of that Kingdom, without all hopes of
recovery, or reducing the same to due obedience and subjection to the Crown of
England, because they daily receive encouragement by occasion of our troubles
here: It is to be feared that those barbarous and inhumane Rebels will scarce
put an end to their divellish designs in Ireland, for the inhabitants of the
City of Bristow do now watch in Arms day and night to prevent the surprising
of the City by the Irish Rebels, who gathered a great army over against
Bristow, which is within twenty four hours sail of that part of Ireland.
After two days settlement with His Majesty, our High Sheriff and
Deputy Lieutenants were questioned for the putting of the Militia in execution,
who answered as follows, That what they did was by command of both Houses of
Parliament: And as for my part, quoth the Sheriff, I that have formerly
engaged my self for my King, and Countries good, am now ready, nay more
willing then ever, to adventure both life, estate, liberty, and whatsoever else
I may term mine, for the good of the Kingdom, and advancement of his
Majesty's honor, against any foreign or civil enemy, Under the pleasing
shade of whose Crown we have ever gathered the fruits of justice; and upon
whose happiness the welfare of the whole Commonwealth principally depends,
and our hopes principally consisting in his royal pleasure. I confess, the
jarres amongst our selves must needs be a point of great indignity and
dishonor to our Realm of England, and a joy to those which seek to subvert and
confound our Laws and Religion. But God grant by his goodness that the
wisdom of his sacred Majesty, and good policy of the Parliament we may be all
composed and brought to a happy reconcilement. Vale.

Yours with respect, J. A.

The Lord Marquess Hartford and the Cavaliers being possessed of Wels, the
County of Somerset upon Friday morning last me^ at Chewton, about four miles
distant from Wels, where all the Trained Bands of that part of the Shire,
especially M. Pophams Regiment, twice doubled in number by Volunteers that came
in completely armed. Sca^ce had they been two hours upon the hill, but the
number increased to forty thousand. There came out of Wiltshire 300. Horsemen
most of them well armed, besides three hundred other Horsemen from the city of
Bristol men of good rank and quality, armed with Swords, Pistols and Carbines,
with two wains laden with powder match and bullet, and two other wins with
four small field-peeces, and two Gunners; and from Glocestershire three
hundred Footmen Volunteers led by an expert Commander, all resolving with the
utmost of their power to fall upon the Cavaliers in Wels, and take them with
the Marque, and bring them up to the Parliament, insomuch that the Committees
and Deputy Lieutenants could scarce restrain them. The next day while the
Cavaliers desired time to answer the Propositions propounded by the
Somersetshire men, left the town and rode away, for fear of being taken by the
countrymen.

Ioh. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

