A REMONSTRANCE Sent from Colonel Lilburnes Regiment To his EXCELLENCY Sir
Thomas Fairfax: WHEREIN They declare their Resolutions, to stand and fall with
him; desiring his speedy endeavor for the settling of all men's Interests in the
Kingdom, and freeing the Kingdom from intolerable Oppressions, and then to
disband.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1647.

A REMONSTRANCE Sent from Colonel Lilburnes Regiment to the GENERAL.
May it please your Excellency,
AMidst the many distractions and discontents in the Army and Kingdom which
saddens our hearts, and presents nothing to our view but disorder and
confusion, our experience and commemoration of divine providence propitious to
your Excellency and the Army even from the first of your undertakings to this
very moment, is that alone that refreshes us: nor needs the recollection of
our memories, or that we look far backwards for an occasion of praise; that
late mercy (not the least) whereby a being was regained for us, deserves a
perpetual remembrance, and was not England concerned in the case of our
Regiment? Or is it imaginable, that disobedience was complotted there alone? or
that they were the only maintainers and abetters of non-subjection to
Authority? Surely, if their design to dis-ingage those committed to our charge
by your Excellency, from us as unworthy commands, had been there limited, we
hope we should rather have given way to their desires, (though causlesse) and
with-drawne our selves, then in the least, hazzarded one drop of blood to
continue our Employments. But if we seem more sensible of those dangers that
were almost inevitable, then others do, (in regard we were the first that
tasted of them, and were likely to be swallowed up by them) we humbly desire
your Excellencies pardon and (for a clear manifestation of our integrity to
your Excellency and the Weal public) leave to present unto your Excellency,

1. That as Soldiers and Members of your Excellencies Army, we owe all
obedience and subjection to your Excellencies Authority and Commands, from
which we humbly conceive, that neither Birthrights, nor other Privileges
whatsoever, (whereof we have or ought to have an equal share with others) can
or ought in the least to dis-oblige us; and that we shall rather cease to be
Soldiers, (which is all the Liberty we desire) then dispute your Excellencies
power, or admit of any Corrivall or Competitor therein: nor do we suppose to
have declared any thing more herein, then what always has been, and must of
necessity continue to be our duty; for besides that it is essential both to
the being and well being of an Army to obey Orders according to the Discipline
of War, we yet owe more respect unto your Excellency (of whose care and trouble
for us and the whole Kingdom we are witnesses) then is thereby required from
us: And since necessity pleads for some particular person, to whom the care and
Conduct of an Army must be committed, if we were at liberty herein whom should
we desire but your Excellency?

2. We cannot but remind your Excellency, how that necessity indeed, and the
dissatisfaction of the Army in their just desires, drew them to a solemn
engagement, and thereby the counsels of the Army being in some things altered
from what they were before, has lately been endeavored to be made a
president to alter them again, and male-contented spirits take occasion hereby
to divide the Army into Parties and Factions, endeavoring to turn every man's
sword against his fellow, pleading necessity where there is none: and for such
things as are in themselves very disputable, whether just or unjust, and which
is more then probable may be more destructive to the Commonwealth if granted,
then the refusal of them will be: It is therefore our humble desire unto your
Excellency, that you will still continue to mediate on our behalfes for the
obtaining of those our just and necessary desires in our former Petitions,
Remonstrances and Declarations mentioned, that so the whole Army may be
satisfied and return to its pristine way of Government wherein they have been
very successeful under your Excellency.

Lastly, whereas the prevalency of particular persons in the Parliament, who
have sufficiently manifested their disaffection to the Weal public, has for
the prevention of Factions and parties in that honorable Assembly, manifested
the reasonableness of setting a period to this present Parliament: and that
before that can be with safety, many things of great concernment to the
Kingdom are first to be transacted there, whereof your Excellency and the Army
have already several times desired consideration to be had by this
Parliament; It is our hearty desire, that both Parliament and Army would
jointly resolve, and accordingly act with all expedition to the finishing of
that great work that lies upon them, and has long been by the people
expected from them: and that the whole Kingdom may be prosperous in the
enjoyment of a free Parliament, and every particular person of his own proper
interest, that the world may bear us witness, that we do not only declare
for, but prosecute the obtaining of their Liberties and Freedoms; that so soon
as a firm peace can be settled, the great burden of maintaining Soldiers in
this Kingdom may no longer continue, to the great charge and trouble of the
people, and to the empairing of that esteem which the price of our bloods in
our former achievements have affectionately wrought in their hearts toward
the whole Army, whereof both members and careful tenderers of their reputation
are

Your Excellencies most humble and obliged Servants. Subscribed by Henry
Lilburne, Lievte-Colonell. Paul Hobson Major. Richard Deane. Ethelb. Morgan.
Gabriel Earwood. James Heart.

Captains. Jer. Tolhurst. Abraham Holmes. Robert Hutton.

Lievtenants. Jo. Topping. Jo. Turner. Bar. Davis. Jo. Mason. Fra. Nicholls.
Tho. Cartwright. Ja. Rose. Ed. Boon. Nathanael Strange.

Ensigns. Jo. Branson. Harbert Field. Ed. Swallow. Will. Endecoat. Hen. James.
Jacob Summers. Peter Bush.



FINIS.

