THE REPRESENTATIONS AND Consultations of the General Council of the ARMY at
S. Albans.

WITH Several Propositions to the L. General, from the Officers of diverse
Regiments of the Army, about the present settlement of the Kingdom.

ALSO A DECLARATION OF His Excellency Thomas L. Fairfax, concerning the KINGS
Majesty, and the present proceedings in the Treaty at the Jsle of Wight. With
the Demands of of the Soldiers which guard His Majesty and the Commissioners
in the said Island, when the Treaty is ended: And a Copy of his Excellencies
Letter thereupon.

London: Printed for R. A. 1648.

Several Papers of the daily proceedings of the General Council of the Army,
some Speeches made by the Officers, and the Lord-Generalls Declaration to
assist the King and Parliament in such an agreement as shall be concluded
between them.
THe first day of the meeting of the General Assembly of the Army being
Tuesday the 7. of this instant, his Excellency and many of his chief Officers
met in the Church at S. Albanes, and after prayers for seeking a blessing upon
their assembling together, and a Sermon, they debated on certain Papers
formerly presented to the Lord-Generall in the name of some particular
Regiments of the Army, but nothing concluded on this day, for the time of their
sitting on these affairs was not long, and several Officers not yet come to
the Headquarters.

Wednesday, 8. Nov. the General Council of the Army was fuller then the day
before, and it was agreed that the matters first insisted on should be the
quartering of the Army in such a way, as might afford most ease to the
Country; and for that it is impossible that without pay an Army should not be
burdensome to the places where they quarter, they hold it necessary to consider
of certain Proposalls for ascertaining the pay of the Soldiery.

2. The Officers of the Army expressed an exceeding great sense of the loss of
Colonel Rainsborough, and thought fit that inquiry should be made about that
wicked murder, and that justice should be done therein.

November. 9. Some Speeches were made by diverse Officers of the Army, expressing,
that they apprehended a design of stopping of pay for the Army, on purpose to
cast an Odium upon them, and render them the more burdensome, and less useful
to the Kingdom: And notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and
Treasurers of the Army, and the cheerful readiness of most Counties for the
payment of Assessements, as those where they now quarter do affirm,
nevertheless the private Soldiers are necessitated to take Free Quarter for
the present, which is very irksome unto them to be so burdensome to their
friends, neither are those widows who lost their husbands in the last
engagement, or in the first service, and children that lost their parents,
sufficiently provided for, but are for want of maintenance reduced to great
extremities, even to beggary, having not sufficient provision for their
subsistence, and future livelihood.

There be also some Papers from Commissary Genesis Iretons Regiment and others of
the Army, (besides their late Petition to the Lord General) to be considered
on, wherein they set forth that no certain Provision has been made for the
payment of their dearly earned wages by the expense of their blood and often
hazard of their lives, nor any thing yet perfected for their future security
for things done, as Soldiers in relation to the war which the exegincy
thereof has compelled thereunto, the want whereof they cannot chose but be
very sensible of, when they consider the many sad examples of bitter and
rigorous proceedings at Law against soldiers for acts done in order to the
promotion of the Parliaments service.

November. 10. further time was spent in debate on the present affairs of the
Kingdom, and particularly concerning the settling of a firm peace, and diverse
speeches were made by Colonells of the Army, declaring, that they desire
nothing more then to see this Kingdom restored to a flourishing condition in
peace and amity, and that the hearts of King and people may be knit together in
a threefold cord of love; some things were also moved concerning the former
Proposalls, and bringing Delinquents to trial, it has been also desired, that
those who endeavor to render his Excellencies Army odious by aspersions, and
thereby to deprive them of that honor which they so dearly bought, and to
incense the Kingdom and Soldiers against them, may be proceeded against
according to justice.

November. 11. a Petition was read at the General Counsel in the name of the
Officers of Col. Kich his Regiment, and several others of the Army with the
representations following: viz.

1. That speedy and impartial Justice may be executed upon all the fomentors,
contrivers, and actors in the first and late War.

2. That inquisition be made for the blood of Col. Rainsborough.

3. That the supreme power may be declared and determined, that the want
thereof may not be the ground of future (as it has been of these former)
Wars.

4. That a period be set for this present Parl. to end as soon as may be with
safety, and provisions made for future Parliaments to meet certain without Writ
or summons.

5. That rules may be set down between the people and their Representatives.

6. That Laws may be made in things civil to bind all men, so that no man in
case of offense, may be freed from that Law whereunto another is subject.

7. That all those common grievances and desires in our Declarations of June
14. and June 23. 1647. and expressed in the London Petition, be speedily
granted and redressed.

8. That present Provision be made for the Constant pay of the Army.

9. That the arrears due from the 15. of January, may be paid off, before we be
Commanded to pay Quarters, and that there may be no other abatement from
Officers and Soldiers for free Quarter, then according to the rates set down
in the Ordinance of Parliament, of the 24. day December last.

10. That the Country may be paid for our free Quarter, according to the
Deduction out of our pay out of their Assessements.

11. That in as much as the Assessements fall short to pay the Army. That
therefore there may be Additionall supplies monthly out of the Estates of the
old and new Delinquents, that there be no more Tax or Charge to the
Commonwealth.

12. That fotthwith an Account be called for from all persons, that have been
betrusted with any thing for the State, that the Kingdom may be satisfied
therein.

13. That the Deanes, and Chapters Lands may be given to pay the Soldiers
Arreares, seeing the Parl. have given away the Delinquents Estates that should
have done it.

His Excellency the Lord General has also declared as follows.

That he may not be the dissatisfaction of his friends, the subject of his
Enemies malice, and the suspicion of many in the Kingdom, he shall in
faithfulness and clearness declare, that no worldly thing is so dear unto
him, as the complete settling of the liberties and peace of the Kingdom, and
that he will proceed to such things as may give most hopes of Justice and
righteousness to flow down equally to all, without any overture tending to
overthrow the government of the Kingdom, and that he will clearly commit his
stock or share of interest in this Kingdom, into the common bottom of
Parliaments. And when his Majesty shall give his concurrence to what is
tendered, and what else shall be proposed by the Parliament, necessary for
procuring the Righ^s and Liberties of the People, his Excellency will (to the
utmost of his endeavors) maintain and defend his Majesty and his Parliament in
that just long desired Agreement. And whereas it has been suggested, or
suspected, that the proceedings of the Army have been to overthrow Presbytery,
or hinder the settlement thereof, and to have the Independent Government up, he
does clearly disclaim and dissavour any such design.

His Excellency the Lord Genesis FAIRFAX has sent a Letter to the Committee for
the Army in these words.
HAving had a meeting of diverse Officers of the Army, apprehend their general
sad Resentment of the many pressures now lying upon the Kingdom, in particular,
that of free Quarter, whereby they (and the Soldiers under their Command who
have faithfully served their Generation) are even a burden to themselves,
because they are so much to the poor Country, which is the more grievous to
them, because they have generally paid their Taxes, and yet the Army not
enabled to pay their Quarters, or provide themselves necessaries against the
injury of the approaching season. I hoped ere this we should have received some
good fruit of your last being with us, the matters then agreed, being of such
public concernment, and so much requiring expedition. I desire you to improve
your utmost endeavor for a quick dispatch in providing effectually for the
premises to prevent those ill consequences which otherways delay therein may
produce. I request you to communicate this to the House: so hoping to hear
speedily from you, I remain

Your very assured Friend, FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

