THE REPLY Of the Hamlet of Wapping, to the Answer of the Reactor to their CASE
and Petition; and likewise to the CASE Of the Churchwardens of White-Chappel.
THE Rector has been pleased in Answer to our Case, to contradict many things
which we have asserted; wherefore we think our selves bound to vindicate our
Truth: and do therefore crave leave to reply to his Answer.

First, The Chapel has no such settled Fund to maintain it in repair, as is
intimated in the Rector's Answer.
Whereas he alleges, That our Bill is not to enlarge our Chapel, That we have
a Fund from the Burials to keep it in repair, etc. The contrary of which is
manifest, since he himself claims and receives Duties for all Funerals both in
Chappel-yard and Chapel, and All that is paid for every Corpse buried in the
Chancel, tho he contribute nothing to its repair; and tho every Funeral pay to
the Chapel, yet this is so far from producing a Stock or Fund, that the
Chapel (notwithstanding Voluntary Contributions) is at present much in debt,
and we cannot legally raise by any Tax One Penny toward either the Payment of
its Debts, or keeping it in repair; and therefore unless made Parochial, it
must inevitably fall, and so render the Inhabitants destitute of any Place of
Public Worship; the Church of White Chapel being incapable (as is not denied
by the Rector in his Case) to contain One tenth part of the Parishioners.

Secondly, The Minister has no such Endowment, as is suggested.
He affirms, That our Minister has a Competent Maintenance by Endowment, and
the Gift of several houses, in all worth Six or Seven score pounds per Annum,
etc. Which is so far from being his condition, that all the Endowment he has,
is but Eight pounds per Annum, being the Rent of One House; which likewise he
holds by the Courtesy of the Trustees: And his Dependence besides is on the
Voluntary, Contributions of the People; which being most uncertain, is yet at
best, not above Seventy or Seventy five pounds per Annum; for which he preaches
twice every Lords Day, reads prayers every day in the Week, and performs all
other Ministerial Offices, as Visiting the Sick, etc. So that its far unlike a
Lecture, and therefore not so desirable when vacant, as represented by the
Rector.

Thirdly, Wapping, not like the case of other Chapples of Ease.
He instanceth, That we have always paid Tithes to the Rectors of
White-Chappel, as is done in all Chapels of Ease in England, and infers that
there are many Hundreds of such Chapels in the Nation: And that the making
Wapping a Parish will be of dangerous consequence to Impropriators, etc. But
contrary to this, the Three Kingdoms, do afford (instead of Hundreds) hardly
any such instance of the like nature: Viz,

1. Where the Parish is so large, that the Mother Church cannot contain a Tenth
part of its Inhabitants? 2. Where the Inhabitants of the Chapelry cannot raise
a Penny toward the repairs of the Chapel? 3. Where the Minister has no
Endowed Maintenance, nor the allowance of a Farthing from so rich a Rectory? 4.
Where the Rector does wholly neglect the Pastoral Care? 5. Where the
Inhabitants of the Chapetry are in propo^ much poorer than those of the Parish
at large?
And this is the true state of the Hamlet of Wapping. And as to the dangerous
Consequence to Impropriators, There Is a vast difference between an
Impropriations, which is a Lay Fee, and a Rectory with Cure of Souls, which is
an Ecclesiastical Benefice; so that this can no more affect Impropriations,
than the separating Shadwell from Stepney (a neighboring Parish) did; which by
Act of Parliament, about the year 1670, was made Parochial, allowing the Vicar
of Stepney but Four Nobles per Annum, in lieu of his Tithes.

Fourthly, The Rents of Wapping fallen, yet the Rector keeps up his Rate
Tithes, and advances them arbitrarily on Houses rebuilt.
He urges, That several of the new Houses built in that Parish, have dropped
down, and that the old Houses have fallen in their Rents, etc. The probability
of the former part we leave to the Judgment of this Honorable House, and as to
the later, whatever Houses do in White-Chappel, This is so true, in respect of
Wapping (as to all the Houses in general) that those which were formerly let
at 25 l. 20 l. or 16 l. per Ann. are now reduced to 18 l. 12 l. and 10 l. per
Ann. and yet notwithstanding the Rector has not diminished any thing of his
Rate Tithes on those Houses, but on the contrary, has taken opportunity to
advance them on any Houses new built or divided, taxing them arbitrarily what
he thought fit. As to the present worth of the Rectory, We are willing to refer
our selves to his own Books.

Fifthly, The Hamlet not a Fourth part, and poorer in proportion than
White-Chappel.
He say, The Hamlet of Wapping is above a third part of the Parish, that they
are above a Mile by the Waterside, are accounted a Wealthy People, etc. To
which we must answer more truly, as we have already set forth, that we are not
one Fourth part of the Whole. And are but little above half a Mile of
Statute-measure by the Waterside, and the Houses Situate there are burdened
with vast Charges in keeping up their Damms or Fences toward the Water, and
are lately fallen near a Third part in their Rents, through the removal of the
richest Inhabitants into the new Buildings of White-Chappel, and other places;
so far are we from that Great Trade and Wealth as is untruly intimated. And as
to the Hamlet in general, through the increase of the Poor of Seamens Widows,
Orphans, etc. The Hamlet is so impoverished, that whereas about Twenty years
ago three was no Overcess for the Poor; and about Fourteen years ago 30 or 40
l. per Annum at most, did defray the charge of the accidental poor, now our
Overcess is advanced to 200 l. per Annum.

As to the Case of the Churchwardens; The paving Wapping-streets, the charge
of the Sewers, and the loss of Public Charities, will more than compensate
their Contribution to the High ways.
the Hamlet of Wapping Represents as before, that a Consideration being had to
the daily growth of White-Chappel, To the vast Charge of Wapping in paving
their own Highways, their great expense on the Common, Sewers and their
Outlets. And to the loss of the Proportion of Public Charities given to the
Parish at large, it will appear, That White-Chappel (instead of a detriment)
will receive an advantage.

The Inhabitants of Wapping therefore humbly beg this Honorable House to
promote this good and just Design, in making them a Parish, without such
Reserves as are desired in the Rectors and Churchwardens Case and Petitions.


