A REMONSTRANCE OR DECLARATION Of the ARMY: Presented to the House of Commons
on Monday November. 20. 1648.

By Colonel Ewres and six Lieut. Colonels and Captains of the Army.

Abstracted out of the Original for the present satisfaction of the Kingdom.
1. Wherein they desire that King Charles, as the Capital Grand Author of the
late troubles, may be speedily brought to Justice. 2. That Prince Charles, and
the Duke of York may be sommoned to come in, and render themselves by a
certain day. 3. That this Parliament may have a speedy period put to it, and 4.
The manner of another Parliament to be called, and Delinquents not to Elect or
be Elected. 5. That there may be an Agreement for all the Kingdom to sign,
which shall be above Law, and all to be disfranchized that will not sign it.
Also the Remonstrance of the Regiment of late Col. Rainsborough, to his
Excellency, for revenge of their Colonels death. And Petition of Colonel
Overtons Regiment now at Newcastle.

Published by special Order.

London, Printed for L. Blaikelock, and are to be sold in the old Baily.

A Remonstrance or Declaration of the ARMY, presented to the House on Monday
November. 20. 1649.
By Col. Ewres, and six Lieutenant-Colonels and Captains of the Army.
1. THat the Cappitall and grand Author of our troubles the person of the
King, by whose Commissions, commands or procurement, and in whose behalf, and
for whose interest only (of will and power) all our Wars and troubles have
been (with all the miseries attending them) may be speedily brought to justice
for the Treason, blood, and mischief he is therein guilty of.

2 That a timely and peremptory day may be set for the Prince of Wales and the
Duke of York, to come in and render themselves, by which time if they do not,
that then they may be immediately declared incapable of any government or trust
whatsoever, and to stand exild for ever, as enemies and Traitors, to die
without mercy if ever after taken. And if they or either of them render
themselves within the said time, that then the Prince for his capital
delinquency (being in appearance next to his fathers) and himself and the Duke
to be proceeded against in justice, or remitted according as they shall give
satisfaction. But however that the Estate and Revenue of the Crown may be
sequestered, and all the matter of costly Pomp suspended for a good number of
years, while the desolations and spoils of the poor people may be repaired,
for the ease of the peoples contributions.

3 That for further satisfaction to public justice, capital punishment and
may be speedily executed upon a competent number of his chief Instruments
also, and such as are really in your hands or reach, so as their exemption from
pardon may not be a mockery of Justice in the face God and man.

4 That the rest of the Delinquents (English) in relation to the Wars may upon
submission and rendering themselves to justice, have mercy extended to them for
their lives, and Fines set upon them moderately, yet with respect to public
damage) and their persons further censured, and declared incapable of any
Office or Trust, of electing or being elected, at least for certain years,
but such as have compounded to be pardoned and freed from any troubles, suits,
etc. in relation to the last Wars: But such as will not come in and compound,
their estates to be sold, and their bodies to be ever exiled as enemies and
Traitors, and to die without mercy.

5 That satisfaction of the Arrears of the Soldiery, with other public
debts, and the competent reparation of public damages, (especially of the
well affected who have adheared to and suffered for the common cause) may be
put into some orderly and proportionable way wherein care may be taken for
precedence of satisfaction to such whose loanes or losses have appeared to have
been great, and livelihoods small, so as they can worst bear the want or delay
(not impairing any former securities for just debts.) That the Fines or
Compositions of Delinquents may be disposed of and employed to those uses
only, and also the confiscations and proceeds of their estates.

Now after Justice thus done upon the forementioned particulars we propound
further for settling of the Kingdoms,

1 That you would settle some reasonable and certain period to your own power,
by which time that great and supreme trust reposed in you shall be returned
into the hands of the people, from and for whom you received it.

2 That (with a short period to this Parliament, in relation to the safety of
the Kingdom and public interest thereof, there may be a sound settlement of
the peace and future government thereof, upon grounds of common Right,
Freedom, and Safety, to this effect, viz.

1 That from the end of this, there may be a certain succession of future
Parliaments, Annual or Bienniall, with secure provision for the certainty of
their sitting, meeting, and ending.

2 For the equal distribution of Elections thereunto to render the House of
Commons as near as may be an equal representative of the whole people
electing.

3 For the certainty of the peoples meeting (according to such distributions)
to elect and for their full freedoms in Elections; And that no delinquents
shall elect, or be elected (at least for some years) nor any other that shall
not oppose, or not join in agreement to this settlement.

4 For future clearing and assertaning the power of the said Representatives,
in order to which, that it be declared, That as to the whole interest of the
people of England such Representatives have and shall have the Supreme power
and trust, as to the making of Laws, Constitutions, and Offices, for the
ordering, preservation, and government of the whole, and as to the altering and
repealing or abolishing of the same, the making of War, or peace, and as to the
highest and final judgment in all Civil things, and all to be subject
thereunto, and bound thereby. Provided

1 That they may not censure or question any man after the end of this
Parliament for any thing said or done in relation to the late Wars.

2 That they may not render up, or give or take away any the foundations of
common Right, Liberty, or Safety, contained in this setlement and agreement,
but that the power of these be reserved from, and not entrusted to the said
Representatives.

3 For liberty of entering dissents in the said Representatives, that in case of
corruption or abuse in these things, the people may be in capacity to know who
are free thereof, and who guilty.

These matters of general concernment we propound to be Declared and provided
by this Parliament, or by authority of the Commons here, and to be further
established by a general contract or Agreement of the people with their
subscriptions thereunto; and none capable of any benefit thereby, but who shall
subscribe thereunto; nor any King to be admitted to the Crown, or other person
to any Office or place of public Trust, without express accord and
subscription to the same.

A Remonstrance of the regiment of the late Col. Rainsborough to his
Excellency, for revenge of their Colonells death.
May it please your Excellency,
THough the sad sense of the unhappy loss of our highly esteemed Colonel may
cause us to bear low in our reputation, and sink us into a slownesse to such
high actings as the vigor of his noble spirit might have enabled us to, yet as
Christians and Soldiers endeavoring after right principles of Justice and
Freedom, we humbly crave leave to take advantage from this much lamented
occasion, to offer to your Excellency these our disturbed thoughts.

That we fear that we are deluded into the hopes of a safe peace, by the
expectation of an unsafe Treaty.

That if the utmost purchase of the loss of so much precious and now declared
righteous blood, be only a liberty to Treat with our Capital Enemy, whether
with his dissembled consent we shall enjoy these liberties, that the sword of
the Lord, and the sword of his people have wrung from his bloody hands, we are
consigned to the most fruitless employment, to be always fighting for that we
can never obtain; Armies can subdue powers but not change minds, much treasure
might have been spared, and we long ere this been slaves, if we dared to have
trusted sacred protestations, that we are much perplexed with the intricate
condition, the late resolution of the Parliament have put us into, at the same
time engaged to fight with an enraged enemy; and persuaded to believe that all
our differences shall be wrapped up in the sweet compliance of a Treaty; And
when it was declared to us, that because the King had so often attempted to
inslave the Nation, by raising of Armies contrary to many Protestations, he was
no more to be trusted, nor no more addresses to made unto him, and when they
signified the truth of that their Declaration by the confederate risings of all
his active parties in the Kingdom of England and Scotland; we do much wonder
from thence, there should arise any reason to invite them to a new address, or
fright them to any other applications then to that Army, that under the
protection of the Almighty, had rescued them from such dangers, and had
unanimously declared to live and dye with them in their former resolutions.
Upon all which we ground these our humble desires.

That impartial Justice might be done upon the eminent undertakers of this
second war, especially upon such who formerly acting as friends to the Nations
freedom have (by betraying its confidence) had greater opportunity to enslave
it, That so the cruel mercies showed to our implacable enemies, might not
endanger the lives of our dearest friends.

That we might he as well satisfied in the reasons, why new applications were
made to his Majesty, as we formerly were in their non addresses; that so, if
possible we might live and dye with them in those resolutions? And if it be
found necessary a Treaty should compound the divisions, why such an one wherein
some of both parties are known enemies to the Kingdoms Army.

That it might be known to us, why the Country duly paying their taxes, the
taxes might not as duly pay the Army, the burden of Free Quarter being looked
upon by most as a voluntary oppression not as a necessary grief of the
Soldier.

That by this means concurring with the presented desires of many
well-affected persons in the City of London, and other Counties, with some of
our fellow Soldiers in Arms, we might under your Excellencies conduct, be
made serviceable to the Nations welfare, and be honored in being the Kingdoms
and your Lordships humble servants, etc.

The humble Petition of the Officers of Colonel Overtons Regiment, now in the
Garrison of Berwick.
May it please your Excellencies,
WHen we consider, how gloriously the right hand of our God has exalted it
self in power, to the dashing in pieces the common enemy of this kingdom, and
the overthrow of all that have rose up against us, we cannot but confess there
is none so glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders as our God,
and therefore desire to wait upon him in the way of his judgments, and
confess that according to the greatness of his own heart has he done these
things; but least we may manifest our ingratitude for what we have received, in
not laying hold on those precious opportunities (which in a way of justice he
has given in unto us) for the freeing of our poor Nation from oppression and
violence; the execution of justice on those that have gone on in iniquity and
blood, and obtaining a blessed peace, the just end of our engagements, we
cannot but (being conscientiously thereunto moved) offer unto your Excellency
these few considerations which we humbly request your Excellency to present on
our behalfes) to the honorable houses of Parliament, who we hope will clear
themselves from the jealousies of men, in being a terror, to evil workers, and
a praise to those that do well.

First, we desire that a diligent inquisition may be had for the innocent blood
shed in this late war, and that all Contrivers, Actors, or Abettors may be
brought to exemplary Justice:

That in the destribution of Justice, neither King, Lords, or any such persons
be exempted from being proceeded against according to their demerits knowing
that many whordomes, and witchcrafts of Jesabell hindered the Peace of Israel,
and Princes judging for reward, and the Priest teaching for hire, caused Sion
to be plowed up as a field, and Jerusalem to become an heap.

That the several Petitions of the well-affected of the Kingdom, viz. London,
Leicester, tending to the execution of Justice without partiality securing the
rights of the Subjects, and settling the Peace of the Kingdom, may be seriously
taken into consideration, and not so slighted as they have been.

That while we are necessitated to be active in the present service for the
security of the kingdom; we desire that the Parliament would be pleased to find
out some way for our subsistence, that we may not be burdensome by Free Quarter
as we have been.

Lastly, in the prosecution of these our just desires, we shall not account any
thing dear, to adventure under your Excellencies command for the honor of
Parliament, Peace and liberty of this Kingdom.

FINIS.

