ADAM UNVAILED, AND Seen with open Face: OR, Israel's right way from Egypt to
CANAAN, Lately Discovered.

Wherein his estate is laid down, opened and compared with ours, under several
dispensations, In opposition to what ever has been formerly declared by most
men: In which many excellent Truths appeat, to the great comfort and
consolation of all those that are made capable of it.

By William Rabisha.

1 Cor. 15. 46, 47. Howbeit, that was not first which is spiritual, but that
which was carnal. Jer. 51. 29. In those days they shall say no more, the
Fathers have eaten sour grapes, etc. London, Printed for Giles Calvert at the
black spread-Eagle at the west end of Paul's, 1649.

To the Reader.
A Fountain that is made bitter, cannot send out sweet and pleasant waters: nor
a building that is set upon a sandy Foundation cannot stand; but either the
waters will annoy those that drink thereof; or the building will fall on those
that dwell therein.

Therefore I have considered of the first principles of Christian Religion, on
which almost all the other Principles have some dependence; namly, Adams estate
in Innocence; and also his estate after his Fall. And upon serious
consideration, I have found, that the Star called worm wood, has had some
influence upon this principle, and has made it bitter, as it has also other
rivers and fountains of waters, which are the pure Doctrines of Christ, so
that as many as have drank of that embittered waters, are rather poisoned then
any ways by it refreshed: And indeed this River or Fountain, or principle of
Adams estate in innocence, being corrupted and made bitter, on which almost all
the principles necessary to be believed have some dependence; therefore this
principle being corruped and darkened it will necessarily follow that the other
principles having their dependence on this, will also be corrupted and made
dark by this; and so there cannot be a clear understanding of any truth, this
first principle being not truly understood; therefore since God has given me
some light in this thing, I have been exceedingly pressed in my spirit to make
known what God has made known unto me, to the end that you may be made one
with it as I am, and see your selves and your fall, and not another fall; and
so by your fall you may the better understand Adams fall, for none can
understand a thing until he be apprehensively made one with the thing to be
understood; for what is the reason of all the confusion in the world, but one
seeing with another man's eyes, handling with another man's hands, hearing with
another ears, and tasting with another palate, they being not made
apprehensively sensible of the things they hold? Therefore Reader I entreat you
not to see with the eyes of others, but with your own; believe not this old
principle, because the multitude and almost all Christians hold it to be a
truth; for truth is not commonly found with a multitude; witness Noah, who was
opposed of all men but of seven persons; and also Abraham and Lot, and Elias
who opposed the Priests of the whole Nation; and Daniel and the three Children,
with all the people of God both before and after, being few always in number
have ever been in opposition to to the whole world; as also of late times
Luther withstood the Priests and Monks of all Nations with the Jesuits and
all opposers thereof, who most excellenly did purge the wormwood out of some of
those Rivers and Fountains of waters as were poisoned by that star which
burned like a torch: Therefore because the whole world has been befooled in
all ages, and also the wise of the world is threatened to be fooled; for God
has said that he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to naught the
understanding of the prudent, and use the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the base things of the world to confound the mighty, and
the things that are not to bring to naught the things that are. Reject not such
foolish, such weak, such base, such things that are not, lest in rejecting
such, thou reject the means which God has always declared his Council by and
ever will; trust not any, try all things, hold fast that which thou art made one
in, without learning from another man as a Parret, and earnestly desire the
assistance of Gods Spirit, and the Lord give thee understanding to Judge of the
things that follow.

Yours in the fellowship of the Spirit, and Minister of God according to the
dispensation of grace given unto him. WILLIAM RABISHA.

The Table.
THe common oppinion touching Adams Estate laiddown. p. 1. Adam was made
carnal without holiness and righteousness. ibid. Adam lost nothing by his
eating of the forbidden fruit but gained by virtue thereof. p. 2. 1. Proved
from the name of the trees, what the two trees in Paradise are ibid 2. Proved
from the serpent, and how he may be said to be a lier. p. 3. 3. Proved from the
effects of the fruit, or opening of the eyes, and what these eyes are. p. 4. 5.
4. Proved from God himself. p. 6. 7. The Object. that says that God speaks
by way of an Irony, answered. p. 7. 8. The Object. that says Adam knew good by
the loss of it, and evil by woeful experience answered. p. 9. The Object. that
says Adam was made in the image of God, answered thus. p. 10. The image of God
is understood two ways, 1. his personal appearance, 2. his spiritual and
immortal substance. ibid. Adam was made after the image of Gods person, and
how. p. 11. The woman was not made after the image of God, in the first sense,
proved. p. 12. 13, 14. The second Image described, and how the second Adam may
be said to be made after it in the first. p. 15. 16. The Object. and Reason
given that says Adam was not made in the second image, answered. p. 17. 18. 4.
To confirm the proposition. 1. Reason; That which is immortal cannot become
mortal. p. 19. A query what they mean by holiness and righteousness, if
natural, or if without sin, answered. p. 20. What the true image is. ibid. 2.
Reason, Adam was made carnal and earthly, proved by Scripture and reason. p.
21. 22. 3. Reason, As the second Adam was always one and the same, so was the
first. Object. answered. p. 23. 24. 4. Reason, Our first parents had original
sin, before they eat of the forbidden fruit. p. 25. 26. Sin described two ways.
p. 27. The Object. that says, sin was begotten by the Serpent, answered. p.
28. Sin in them before they eat, by the opposers confession. p. 29. The ground
of this contradiction dicovered. p. 30. The Object. from regeneration,
answered. p. 31. 32. The Object. from the transgression, answered. p. 43, 44.
46. What Adam is in the substance. p. 35. 36. Appli. Adams estate laid down,
and ours compared with his in seven degrees. p. 37. 1. Adam is made out of
Paradise, and so are we. 38. 2. Adam is put into paradise, and so are we, p.
39. 3. Adam was to till the ground and to eat of every tree but one, and so are
we p. 39. 4. Our first Parents did desire to eat of the forbidden fruit, to
become like God, and so do we p. 40, 41, 42. The Obj. from the breach of the
command, answered p. 43, 44, 45. The tree of Life is the righteousness of God,
proved by scripture and 4 reasons, p. 46, 47 And so consequently the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, is the righteousness of man, ib. 5. He eats of that
fruit, and so do we, p. 48 What is meant by eating, explained, p. 49, What is
sin, or what is sin after the similitude of Adams transgression p. 50, 51, 52.
7 Things effected and brought forth upon Adam by his eating, answerable to the
like 7. in us by our eating p. 53. 1. He is deprived of life, and so are we, p.
54 2. It discovers sin both to him and us, p. 54 3. It brings fear both upon
him and also to us p. 55. 4. It brings a curse upon both p. 56, 57 5. It brings
death it self to both, p. 58 None dyed in that flesh of his, but every one does
dye in and for himself; what seems to be truth at one time, may not be truth
after further light, p. 59, 60, 61, 62 6. It caused him to cloth himself with
figleafs, and so it does to us, p. 63 These fig-leafs, and the leafs of the
tree of life described, p. 64, 65 7. The eating of the fruit, did cause him to
run away from God, and hide himself in the tree of the Garden; so it does to
us: the Tree described, p. 66, 67 An Objection answered, p. 68 The 6 degree of
Adams rising; he is clothed with Skins, and so are we p. 69, 70 What these
Skins are; and how, and when we are clothed with them, p. 71, 72, 73 An
Objection answered, how the first dispensation is of God, and how not, p. 75,
76 The second is of God in a more peculiar manner, p. 77 The mystery of the
Trinity opened, p. 78, 79, 80 7. Adam is cast out of paradise, and so are we:
all dispensations give way to this, p. 81, 82, 83 We are brought into a second
paradise, Use. First, this teaches us to be reconciled to God p. 84 Secondly,
a word of reconciliation to seven sorts of men, p. 85, 86, 87, 88, 89 The
strong brother and the weak ought not to condemn nor judge one another, p. 90,
91, 92 It is Antichristian, and of the Devil to compel one another to any
thing in matter of worship; which is contrary to the practice of Christ and his
Apostles, p. 92, 93 All ought to walk according as they have received, p. 94 An
Objection answered, p. 95, 96
REader behold Jewels and Pearls her set,
Jasper and Amethists in this rich Cabinet;
Behold the way if thou these Pearls wilt find,
From step to step unto this glorious mine,
Three ways there are to see this heavenly place,
Through a vail, a glass, and after face to face;
The Earth shall shake, and also Heaven above,
That those things may remain, which shall ne'remove;
Though ADAM did aspire on high by Earth,
Yet fall he did, and lost his prize through death,
That unto life be might be brought again,
And so at last his first prize might obtain;
He Is clothed with skins, a glorious clothing then,
None such are found amongst the Sons of men.
Thus may you learn throughout this History,
Degrees of grace working men up to glory.
Therefore let all men rest in this contented,
For they in ADAM are all represented;
And first as be began to play the prize,
So we as he must die before we rise.
By W. R.
ADAM UNVAYLED, AND Seen with open Face.
The Principle which I do here oppose and deny to be a Truth, is this as
follows:

IT is held almost by all those profess the Christian Religion; that Adam was
made in the Image of God in righteousness, wisdom, and knowledge, and the like;
and that by eating of the forbidden fruit be lost that Image; in respect of
those Attributes, in which he was said to be made like unto God.

This is their understanding of Adam's estate, with whom I have to deal; others
hold other things of Adam, although not so gross or so far contrary to truth:
and I not knowing fully what all opinions are, I shall lay down my own
judgment, which is clear contrary to theirs; whose opinions are herein
specified. According to my understanding, the Spirit of God holds forth in
Scripture, that the first Adam was made of earth earthly,

For he lost nothing by his eating the forbidden fruit; he having nothing to
lose, neither wisdom, righteousness, knowledge, or light inherentin himself;
but contrarily, being merely blind, foolish, ignorant, and empty of all those
attributes, which he was said to have: and whereas it is said that Adam lost
all those attributes by eating the forbidden fruit; I say he gained all his
natural knowledge, light, righteousness, wisdom, and the like, by virtue of
his eating the forbidden fruit; And I make it appear thus: There were two
special Trees in Paradise; the one was the Tree of Knowledge, of good and
evil; the other was the Tree of Life; the fruit of these two Trees, was nothing
else but two laws of righteousness. The first, which was the Tree of Knowledge
of good and evil, was the law of nature, which is the moral law, and is called
the righteousness of man. The second Tree, was the Law of the Spirit and life
in Christ, which is by gift, and is called the righteousness of God: now
before Adam had eaten of either of these Trees, he could have neither of these
two laws of righteousness, which he had not until he had eaten of the fruit
thereof.

For proof whereof, it will First appear from the very attribute or title, that
is put upon the Tree: it is called the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil; and
the reason is because it gives and conveys knowledge of what is good, and what
is evil, in those who eat it.

Secondly, It may be also proved from the Serpents testimony: he speaking in
answer Verse. 3. 4.
to the woman, when she said Verse. 3. that God had said, ye shall not eat of
it, neither shall you touch it least you die: his answer was, ye shall not
surely die; but contrarily says he, God knows that in the day you cat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and
evil.

Object. But it may be some may say that the Serpent did lie, and deceive Eve
by these words. and therefore is called a lier from the beginning.

Answ. The Serpent spoke truth according to the woman's sense and interpretation
of death, that was the dissolution of the body, but not according to Gods
meaning and interpretation of death: therefore he is called a liar from the
beginning, as in another cause. Although the witnessses did testify against
Christ Matthew 26 61. And likewise against Steven, Act. 6. 13. Although these
witnesses speak nothing but truth, as it appears, Joh. 2. 19. compared with
Math. 26. 61. and also Steven denies not what was testified against him; and
proves it by Moses and the Prophets, Acts 6. 33. 48. Yet for all this, those
two sorts of witnesses are called false witnesses, inasmuch as they did not
speak according to their meaning; and in this sense the Serpent is called a
liar from the beginning; because he speaks not according to Gods meaning of
death.

But he was not a liar according to the woman's sense or interpretation of
death; which was the dissolution of the body; for they did eat that day, but
did not die a natural death: thus it is also proved from the Serpent's
testimony: that their eyes shall be opened, and they shall become like Gods
knowing good and evil.

Thirdly, It will appear to be a truth from the effects that the fruit did work
on them, by which the Serpent's words to the woman is made good, verse. 6. 7.
And when the woman saw the Tree was good for food, and pleasant to the oye, and
a Tree to be desired to make one wise; she took of the fruit thereof, and did
eat, and gave also unto her husband with her, and he did eat. And the eyes of
them both were opened, and they knew they were naked: Those eyes were not
mortal, or substantial eyes of the body; for they were open to see the fruit
before they eat thereof: verse. 6. what eyes are there else to be opened besides
the mortal eyes of the body? there are two sorts of eyes besides the mortal
eyes of the body: the first is the natural eyes, and the second is the
spiritual eyes; and as I told you before, there was two sorts of fruits to open
these two sorts of eyes: and here you may see upon eating the first sort of
fruit, the first sort of eyes were opened, namely the eyes of their natural
knowledge, wisdom, and understanding; for the text says, and they knew that
they were naked; it does not say it made them naked, for they were so before;
but before they eat, they had not that understanding to know that they were
naked, or be ashamed of their nakedness: but by virtue of their eating of that
fruit there was knowledge, and wisdom, and light conveyed into them, whereby
they knew what was good and what was evil; therefore well might it be called
the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, when it has such virtue in it to give
knowledge, which could not be attained unto any other ways, as it may be
necessarily gathered by that converse between God and Adam, when the Lord
called to Adam, and said, where art thou? ves. 9. Adam's answer was, I heard
thy voice in the garden and I was afraid because I was naked, verse. 10. Gods
answer to him again was, who told thee that thou wast naked? have thou eaten of
the Tree whereof I commanded thee thou should not eat? as much as if God had
said, it is true thou art naked, (he denies it not) but it is impossible that
thou should know of it, without thou wast told, because thou have no
knowledge in thy self, except thou have eaten of the forbidden fruit: this
speech of God is as if a man should determine in himself to do some good for
his son, and yet make it known but to one man in the world; and yet the son
shall come to his father, and say, if you would do such a thing for me; his
father knowing that none knew it but one, will say, who told thee? have thou
spoken with such a man, implying that he did give his son knowledge of such a
thing, without which he could not know. No more could Adam know his nakedness,
which indeed was his earthliness, without he had eaten of that Tree as it is
clear from these words) who told thee that thou wast naked? have thou eaten of
the Tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? Here you see
opening of eyes, and discovery of nakedness effected in Adam and Eve, by their
eating the forbidden fruit.

Fourthly, We shall confirm all these, and put the point out of question from
God himself, where the says, behold the man is become as one of us, knowing
good and evil, Chap. 3. verse. 22. If Adam by his eating the forbidden fruit
became like God, then it will follow that he was not like God before.

But Adam by his eating of the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
became like God in the knowledge of good and evil: that is, what God esteemed
to be good, that Adam knew, and esteemed likewise to be good; and what God
esteemed to be evil, that Adam also knew and esteemed to be evil: although Adam
did not know things in that measure and fullness as God did; yet he knew as God
did, in the same manner, or nature; as a coal is like a whole world set on
fire, so was Adam like God in the knowledge of good and evil; but here lies
Adam's misery in knowing good and evil, and yet not having power to do the good
known, and shun the evil; which could not be obtained by the eating this fruit,
but by the eating of the second fruit, which is of the Tree of life, as I shall
hereafter show; I might further confirm this truth by diverse arguments and
reasons; but before I proceed, it is necessary that I should answer diverse
objections which lie in the way.

Object. You will say, it is true God says, the man is become like one of us;
but God speaks by the way of an Ironye; as Micaiah speaks to Ahab, the 1 of
Kings 22. 15. the King asked him whether he should go up to Ramoth-Gilead to
battle or no? The Prophet Micaiah bids him, go up, and prosper; and the Lord
shall deliver it into the hands of the King. So God speaks to Adam, because of
his former high thoughts, and endeavors to be great; and when Adam fell short
of what he thought to be, God speaks to him in dirision.

Answ. God speaks not in the way of an Irony: my reasons are these; first,
because God speaks not to Adam as the Prophet did to Ahab, or as the wise man
in the Proverbs did to the young man. But God speaks to himself, in respect of
his threefold relation; that is either like God in his eternal essence or
being; or like God in respect of his influence and power: or thirdly like him
as he dwells and acts, and abaseth himself in Christ; or rather like him in
the knowledge of good and evil, according as he esteems good and evil, in
either of these relations; therefore I say, God speaking to the Trinity, and
not to Adam; It is impossible for God to speak in the way of an Irony, or
deriding, or rather blasphemy, because he speaks not to the person offending
as the Prophet did: therefore your instance will not serve, the case being not
the same; if God had spoken to Adam, there might have been some show or color
for such a thing; but God speaking not to him, there can be no ground or color
for it at all.

The second reason is, why God speaks, not in the way of an Irony is this:
because there was some thing enacted upon, and by reason of his knowledge, in
the latter part of the 22. 23. verses: and now least he take of the tree of
life and live for ever: as much as if God It was the knowledge of God in Adam
that drove him out of the garden Genesis 3. 24.
had said, he is come to that knowledge by virtue of his eating the fruit, he
will be ready to take of the tree of life and live for ever: It is clear that
Adam was put forth by reason of his knowledge; therefore the Lord God sent him
forth from the garden of Eden; the word therefore, has some dependence upon
the fore going words, which was his becoming like God; therefore he was driven
forth.

The third reason proves it a truth, because of the former 3 proofs. First from
the name of the tree, Secondly from the Serpents testimony, and Thirdly from
the effects that the fruit produced in them; all with speaking one thing, it
does further confirm that Gods meaning was really so according as it was spoke,
behold the man is become like one of us, knowing good and evil.

2 Object. And that is from the latter part of the verse, knowing good and
evil; it is true, Adam knew good and evil; but how? he knew good by the loss
of it, and evil by woeful experience.

Ans. I shall grant, if God knew good by the loss of it, and evil by woeful
experience, then Adam did so to; But if God did not, then Adam did not neither;
for Adam knew good and evil as God did, and so says the text, Behold the man
is become libe one of us knowing good and evil.

Obj. You will say Adam was made in the image of God as the Scripture holds
forth, and he being in the image of God in respect of his attributes before his
eating the forbidden fruit; therefore it follows he became not like God by
his eating as you do here affirm.

Answ. In answer to this Objection, you must understand that the image of God
is held forth in Scripture under a twofold consideration.

First, The image of his person or visible appearance, Secondly, The image of
his incomprehensible and spiritual substance. Now as you understand Adam in
innocence as mere man, he was made after the first image, that is to say in the
image of God in respect of his person or visible appearance, and not after the
second image, although he was in some sense, in respect of God, as I shall
hereafter show when I come to speak of the second image; but when I say Adam
was made in the image of God in respect of his person or visible appearance, we
are not to understand that God in his eternal Essence and being can be likened
to any thing; for he is invisible and incomprehensible, but I mean in that
shape and likeness as God did always appear and manifest himself in unto the
sons of men, before the law to Abraham and Lot, and in the time of the Law, and
also in the fulness of time, in the flesh of a man, even in the man Christ
Jesus; for God in his eternal thought and purpose beforetime did determine and
intend (as he did in other things) to appear in this image in time, and so
called it his image; and likewise in his determination intended to make man
according to it; and one end was to speak according to man's capacitity; for if
God had appeared in other shapes, and not in the shape or liknesse of man, then
man through fear would not be capable to receive a message or be instructed by
him (man being in that weak estate as he is made in) so God in time made man
according to the shape or image which he intended to appear in before time; And
when he says, let us make man in our own image: his meaning is in the first
sense, that man's person shoul be made like the image of Gods person or visible
appearance, according as I have already described. It must needs be so for this
reason; because the woman was not made in the image of God: now if you
understand by image any thing besides the image of his person or visible
appearance, let it be knowledge, righteousness, wisdom or what it will, in
that respect, the man and the woman was both alike; but if I shall prove the
woman was not made like the man in the image of God; then it must needs be
granted that the image that Adam was made like unto God in, was the image of
his person or visible appearance. To the end the controversy in proving that
man was made in the image of God, and the woman was not, take notice what
follows.

First, It will appear from Gods resolution before man's creation, as you may
see Genesis 1 26. where God says, let us make man in our own image: the woman
is not mentioned, neither yet included in the man, as it appears in the 27.
verse; where you shall find a particular relation; First, how the man was
created in these words; So God created man in his own image, in the image of
God created he him: Secondly, that they were both created in the latter part of
the verse in these words, male and female created he them; the same expression
is in Genesis chap. 5. verse. 2. from hence it does clearly appear that the man was
created in the image of God, and the woman was not, because there is a
particular relation of their creation; for if they had been both created in the
image of God, it had been easier to say in the image of God created he them
male and female, then to particularise out the man, and say he was created in
the image of God, and then go over them again, and say male and female created
he them; so that by this particular relation the Holy Ghost would have us to
understand, that the man was created after the image of God, but not the woman;
the Apostle Paul by the same spirit clearly understands this truth, and puts it
out of controversy; he speaking in 1 Cor. 11. 7. how a man ought to manifest
his obedience and subjection (to his head, which is God) by his being uncovered
either in prayer or prophesying; and also how a woman ought to manifest her
subjection to her head by her being covered; he says if the woman be not
covered, let her be shaven or shorn; and as he looks upon it to be a great evil
in the woman to be uncovered; so contrarily he looks upon it to be a great evil
in the man to be covered; and his reason's this, for says he, a man indeed
ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the image and gory of God:
now observe, if that be the only reason why he ought not to be covered, because
he is the image of God; I say by the same reason the woman ought not to be
covered, if she had been the image of God; but she being not the image of God,
but the glory of the man, therefore she ought to be covered; I say again, if
they that be in the image of God, do dishonor God by being covered, in praying
or prophesying, as it appears they do by the Apostles reason: then Paul
commands the women of the Church of Corinth to dishonor God, if they were made
in the image of God; but they being not in the image of God, therefore did not
dishonor God, but by it honored their husbands; further, to prove that the
woman was not made in the image of God, spoken of in Genesis 1. 26. and so
consequently, that the image there mentioned must needs be a personal image.

My second reason is this; because Adam and Eve as they were made visible and
mortal substances, they were both Typical of two several things; Adam typed
out Christ the second man, and Eve the Church: and as the things typed out were
of two several natures or figures; it must necessarily follow, that the types
themselves must be of two natures or figures: this must needs be so for this
reason, because the woman and the man is not alike in respect of their natural
image neither in shape, strength, or government: therefore Gods meaning must
needs be understood of man's personal image to be made like Gods.

The third reason may be this, because God always appeared in the shape of a
man, and not in the shape of a woman. Thus having proved that the woman was not
made in the image of God, it will therefore necessarily follow, that the image
spoken of was a personal and visible image, and not the image of God in respect
of holiness, righteousness, wisdom, or the like; for you say, and I grant, that
the man and woman are both alike in that; but you see they were not both alike
in the image of God; for Adam was made in the image of God, and Eve was not,
which is already proved; thus you see the image of God is taken for the image
of his person, or visibility in the first sense.

Secondly, The image of God is held forth A full answer to the Objecti page 1 c
under a second consideration, and in explaining this, I shall further clear
that which is already delivered. And this second image is the invisible,
incomprehensible, and immortal image; it may be taken, and is understood, as I
have already declared, thus: let us make man's person after the image of Gods
person; but God rested not here, neither would he have us to rest here: but
look through the shadow to the substance, through the visible and personal
image, to the invisible, incomprehensible, and immortal image; through the
first Adam to the second Adam, God speaks after the manner of men, in dark
shadows and parables, and carnal men understand accordingly, when indeed God
looks through these shadows and means another thing; God says, let us make
man; here he speaks after the manner of man because a man is a man to men; but
to God * Carnal.
man is not man, but a mere bubble or shadow: therefore God looks upon man in
his own account; and his meaning is, let us make the new substantial and
immortal Adam, after the incomprehensible and immortal image; this saying of
God must needs be understood as that in Genesis 8. 13. When Noah came out of the
Arc, he took of every clean beast, and offered burnt offerings; and the text
says that the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I
will not again curse the earth any more for man's sake. Could a company of poor
earthly creatures make a sweet smelling savor in the nostrils of God; no, no,
God looks through these carnal and typical offerings, to the spiritual and
Antitypical offerings; which are the sweet breathings, and carryings forth of
the spirits of the Saints upon the Altar, which is the divine nature of Christ,
to have communion, and fellowship with himself: So in the like manner, when God
says let us make man, he looks through the carnal man, to the spiritual and
true man, who is created after the image of God, in righteousness and true
holiness: and therefore Christ In this image male and female all one in Christ.
is said to be the express image of his person; we are not to understand that
he means that Christ is the express image of his visible person; that person
which was spoken of 1 Cor 11. 7. in which the woman was not made in, as it has
been made appear: but he means that invisible and immortal righteousness and
holiness which is in God, in his eternal essence and being. This word person is
a phrase after the manner of men, to set out invisible and incomprehensible
things by that which is visible; it is called the express image of his person,
in opposition to all other typical images, or outward federate holinss or
righteousness whatsoever; this is the true image, and new man, that the Saints
are to put on, in opposition to the false image and old man which must be put
off.

Obj. Some may say Gods meaning could not be of this immortal, invisible, or
second image which God speaks of, when he says let us make man, because this
image was not then made.

Answ. The Saints are said to be chosen in Christ, before the foundation of the
world; if chosen, then made under the same consideration; for things must be
before they can be chosen. Again men may say, let us make a house, and in order
thereunto make mortar, and brick; and in doing that, they may be said to make
the house: So it may be understood of God in this place, It was Gods great end
to bring up the elect who were chosen before the foundation of the world into a
communion and fellowship with himself; And in order to this he makes the person
or outward tabernacle for this new man to dwell in, and to bring about this
great end (that is to say) to make man in his own immortal and substantial
Image; for in making the outword and personal he may be said to make the
outward: and Spiritual, for the Apostle says, How be it that was not first
which was spiritual, but that which was carnal, and afterward that which was
spiritual, 1 Cor. 15. 46. Therefore when God says let us make man, he looks
through the first to the latter, and means the end of things, this is that new
man, a man in Gods own account. I having described the image of God under these
two considerations and withal proved that Adam as he was in innocence was made
after the first image, that is to say, the image of his person; I shall also go
on in proving that Adam as he was then made and stood in innocence, was not
made after the second image in holiness, righteousness, knowledge, and the
like; and my reasons are these;

First. If Adam had been immortal in the image Reason 1.
of God, in respect of his attributes, it had been as impossible for him to
fall and become mortal, and unholy, as it would be for God himself; that which
is holy, cannot become unholy; that which is in the nature of God, cannot
change it nature into the nature of sin: God is able to change other things
into his nature; but no other thing can change that which is of God into its
nature. Because I would leave nothing unanswered,

Object. I would willingly know what you mean by holiness and righteousness:
if you mean natural holiness and righteousness, knowledge, light, and the like.

Ans. To this I answer, God has no such image: the Scripture holds forth but a
twofold Image; the first a Personal, the second a Spiritual, according as I
have already described.

Again, If you say, he was holy and righteous, inasmuch as he had not sinned; I
say, in that sense, a stone, or any other vegetative or sensitive creature is
made in the image of God, for it has not sinned: This is like that tenet or
principle held concerning children: for some say, If children should not be
saved, who have never sinned actually, who then can be saved? as if that which
had not sinned, was holy and nearer God: to be without sin only, is not to be
holy, and in the image of God; or to have never so much natural knowledge and
light adds nothing to holiness and righteousness according to Gods image: But
to be holy and righteous in the image of God, is to be immortal, unchangeable,
and to have eternal life in them, which is the gift of God, and there to live
in the enjoyment of God, having inherent righteousness in them; and to* be
begotten by God, and grow up in the very nature of God, as a child grows up in
the nature of his Father: So that you must become little children, and be born
by the Spirit, before you enter into the Kingdom of heaven: that is, there must
be a new and second birth of a new creature, a new life and conversation, new
feeding, new spiritual meat, and drinking anew of wine and water of life with
Christ in the Father's kingdom, a new enjoyment, a new spiritual rest, and all
things must become new* all this is held forth by the first birth, life,
conversation, feeding and resting. If we must become like (or, as) little
children before we can enter into the Kingdom of heaven; then I say, we must
become like old men before we sit down in the Kingdom of heaven in the full
enjoyment of the Father, or in the knowledge of him which is from the
beginning, as the Apostle John says to the Fathers, who out-stripped the
children or young men in the knowledge of God, as he was in them from the
beginning, 2 John 12, 14. These children are not to be understood children by
generation; neither are the young men or fathers to be understood under a
natural consideration; but children in respect of regeneration, and young men
and fathers in respect of spiritual growth, and knowledge in the mystery of
God.

So then, if Adam had been thus, he had been in the image of God, and could no
more have fallen away from the nature and image of his Father, then a child
can fall from the nature and image of his father, into the nature and image of
a beast: neither did he fall in that sense, as you understand he did, nor do
any thing against, or contrary to his nature.

Secondly, He was earthly, and so he acted Reas. 2.
from that principle, and therefore not in the image of God: and that you may
plainly see, if you consider what the Apostle says 1 Cor. 15. 43. in these
words, There is a carnal body, and there is a spiritual body. Although this
may be taken or understood to be our body, or the body of sin fallen in Adam,
in opposition to the spiritual body, which is the spirit of life in Christ;
yet it is not the Apostles understanding only; for he goes about to prove this
by the written word; and that is from Adam's first creation: for (says he) and
so it is written The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam was
made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. The Apostle understands this first man
that was made a living soul, to be a mere natural man; as also he understands
the second to be a spiritual, as you may see ver. 46. in these words, Howbeit,
that was not first which was spiritual, but that which was carnal, and
afterward that which was spiritual. There needs no further evidence in this,
neither can I speak any plainer then the Apostle; for when he goes to prove
there is a natural body, he does not say it became natural through some
miscarriage; but he says, he was made so: he was made a living soul, which
living soul so made by God, he says in the next verse, that it was not
spiritual, but carnal. Nothing that is carnal can have communion with God:
But Adam was carnal: Therefore could have no communion with God. Nothing that
was made carnal was in the image of God: But Adam was made carnal: Therefore
not in the image of God in respect of his Attributes.

Thirdly, The Apostle sets forth the pedigree Reason ^.
or root of the second Adam, by the pedigree or root of the first, in these
words; The first man is of the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from
heaven, verse. 47. As the second did not come in a low estate and condition, and
attain to an higher afterward; for he is the Lord from heaven: so the first
man did not come in an high and glorious condition, and afterward fall into a
lower.

Object. If you said, That Christ, which is the second man, came in a low
estate and condition: which makes against this Argument.

Answ. To which I answer, In respect of his Manhood he was the first Adam; for
it is said, He that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are all of one.
It is not only meant in respect of their spiritual estates after they were
sanctified, but also of their fleshly, except actual sin, as it is Heb. 2. 14.
Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same: And as he was flesh and blood, he came in a low
condition, and so he may be said to grow in grace and knowledge; for he was not
the Lord from heaven, nor the second man in this sense; but he was the Lord
from heaven in respect of his Godhead, or that spiritual influence or
annoynting that came forth from God, and took up flesh, and dewlt therein. In
this sense he was the second Adam, which is the Lord from heaven; and as the
second Adam was always the same, neither higher nor lower at any time; although
he may be higher sometimes, and sometimes lower in respect of manifestation,
yet he is one and the same for ever in his own nature and property: so also the
first man Adam might seem to be in a very high and good condition, and
afterward to be in a low and evil condition in respect of manifestation to
himself, but in his own nature one and the same for ever; for he was made of
the earth earthly: that is, First, as his corporal substance was made of the
material earth: so secondly, his estate and enjoyment was carnal and earthly;
and being earthly minded, carnal, and blind, he was put into Paradise, and
there continued until his eyes were opened by his eating the tree of knowledge
of good and evil; and then he had a discovery of his carnality, as I have
already showed in the letter, and shall hereafter open the mystery to you, when
I come to Application.

Fourthly, Further, if I can prove that our first parents had original sin
before they did eat of the forbidden fruit, the controversy will be ended, and
you must grant my opinion to be a truth: Which I shall prove, as it follows,

2. That our first parents had original Reason 4.
sin in them, by reason of which they could not stand in that estate as they
were in, but fall; And it will appear thus; sin is to understood That is, have
their nakedness discovered.
under a twofold consideration: the first may be called sin in its conception,
that is the lust and earnest desire and inclination of the heart to do such a
thing to satisfy its own lust; this is sin in it self, and that which God
hates and abominates, this is that which Christ witnesses against; for says
he, I say unto you, that whosoever looks upon a woman to lust after her, has
committed adultery already with her in his heart, Math. 5. verse. 28. he says
also the same of murder, and other things verse. 22. if it be conceived in the
heart, its done in respect of God; for as God desires and accepts of the good
conceptions and endeavors of the heart, although they never be put into
action, and also rewards them: so he abhoreth the evil conceptions and
intentions of the heart, and accounts it for sin though it be never put into
action, and rewards it accordingly if unrepented: thus I have described the
first sort of sin, which indeed is sin in it self; and to speak properly there
is no other sin but this, but that which I call the second sort of sin, to
speak properly, is not sin in its self, but rather the manifestation of sin, or
sin breaking forth and making it self visible; and this is called actual sin,
which indeed is sin to us: this is the second sort of sin, or rather the
manifestation of sin; but that sort of sin or original corruption which is the
body of sin, this had Adam before he eat of the Tree of Knowldge of good and
evil: to this purpose look into Genesis 6. where it is said, first that she saw
it was good for food: and secondly, that it was pleasant to the eye: and
thirdly, it was a tree to be desired to make one wis. All these three things
considered by the woman; the goodness of it, the pleasantness of it, and also
that it would produce wisdom: from hence it did cause lust and a burning desire
in her after the fruit thereof; this desire and lust was produced from that
body of sin, or original corruption and earthiness within: and this sin
according to Christ's exposition Math. 5. is the sin or trasgression it self;
for their eating did not effect or produce their lusts and desires, but their
lusts and desires did effect their taking the fruit and their eating thereof;
and this was the sin and transgression it self, as it is clear from the
Apostles words, where he I Tim. 2 14.
says the man was not in the transgression, but the woman; why so? did not the
man eat of the forbidden fruit? yea he did eat of the fruit, but that was not
the transgression; but the sin or transgression it self was the desire to the
fruit, upon such considerations as was before mentioned; and this desire or
lust is recorded of Eve only, and not of Adam, as the Apostle does here affirm;
now Eve holds forth the matter of the Church in this place, that is to say a
carnal man and woman; and therefore the transgressions was attributed to her
alone; (because she was the mother of all living, Genesis 3. verse. 20.) And not to
Adam, for Adam did type out Christ, and as he was a type he was passive in the
transgression, and carried away by Eve, and thus it is in the substance, Romans
7. verse. 23. but I see another Law in my members warring against the La^ of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity t^ the Law of sin: but as Adam was a mee^
creature, Eve held forth both him and he^ self, which is in the substance the
carnal man and woman, or that part which quenches the spirit, and carries
away the inward man captive, as I shall further explain hereafter.

Object. If it be said that this desire of Eve was begotten by, and through the
S^rpents temtation.

Answ. This I do not deny, yet I say at this present it is so with us; for the
Serpent does set forth evil with all the advantage and show of good as
possibly he can; but all that he could do either to Eve or us, is but to
effect the body of sin or original corruption and malignity within, with the
thing so set forth, (for he neither could give desires to them, nor yet to us)
for the desire was from some malignity or corruption within; all that he could
do was to make the evil appear lovely to the eye, that the desire may be raised
up after the same; as he has somethings to work upon in us, so also he had in
Eve, which was her corruption; if there had been nothing within her, he would
have sped with her as he did with Christ; for he having no fuel of original
corruption, therefore the flame of the Serpents temptation could not kindle
that which was not: but Eve having much power of original corruption, it was
soon set on fire with the Serpents temptation.

Secondly, All those that say Adam was 2. Proved from themselves.
made in the Image of God in holiness and righteousness, do confess what is
here affirmed; namely, That our first parents had sin and corruption before
they ate of the fruit. It is a common saying both in their preaching and their
writing, That Adam's aspiring Pride and Ambition to become like God, was the
cause of his Fall: Doctor Usher in his Book of Princip. p. 11. Bifield in his
Principles, page 77, 80.
Usher says, That Adam rather obeyed the voice of the Serpent, then the voice
of God. Bifield says, There was three things occasioned the fall of our first
parents; the first, Rebellion: the second, Unthankfulness: the third, Liberty
they took to add or detract from Gods word; they added the word touch, and they
detracted when they said, lest ye die: And these three sins are and ever will
be cause of our Apostacy, says he. These are sins in the highest degree, as
he himself confesses, page 80. yet this was before they ate of the forbidden
fruit, or the occasion of it, as he says. And thus they contradict themselves,
and give themselves the lie; in that they say Adam was made in holiness and
righteousness, and Winstanly contradicts him self in his Book of The mystery of
God; compare pa. 1. with p. 10.
so continued till he ate of the fruit thereof; and yet to say, he sinned
before he ate thereof, this is a plain contradiction: and therefore the
principle touching Adam's holiness is not a truth. The ground of this
contradiction is the misunderstanding of the Image of God: because the Image of
God is taken for holiness in the new creation of the new man, (according to
that in Coloss. 3. 10.) therefore they attribute this holiness and
righteousness to Adam in innocence, although they have no Scripture to prove
it. These two creations of man must be understood as these following things:

The old Temple that was material, was a figure of the true, which is
spiritual: the old Circumcision made with hands, was a figure of the true made
without hands: the old Sacrifices which were carnal, were a figure of the true,
which are spiritual: So also the fleshly and earthly birth which is seen, was
a figure of the true birth which is spiritual, and not seen with mortal eyes,
which is the new creation, or second Image of God, in holiness and
righteousness, the true Image of God in opposition to that personal and
typical Image that Adam was made in: Except ye be born again, ye cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven; notwithstanding it is said, again, yet the birth is
not the same. So then, this being proved by Scripture, and also by their own
confession, That our first parents had original sin and corruption before they
did eat of the forbidden fruit, which puts the question out of controversy,
that is to say, that Adam was not made in the image of God in respect of his
attributes; neither had they any power to stand in that condition as they were
made, no more then a child has power to stay and never grow to be a man; and
contrarily the same reason proves, that they were merely blind, ignorant and
carnal, whose enjoyment was altogether earthly, they being empty of all these
attributes that they were said to have.

Obj. some may say that Adam was not mad in a low and carnal condition, and did
by eating the forbidden fruit attain to a higher, but contrarily he fell into
a lower. Our reason is, because the Scripture holds forth regeneration and
renewing, which signifies our being brought up into some estate and condition
that we were once in and now have lost.

Answ. This can be no reason against me, nor for you; for you your selves do
not hold that we are by regeneration or the second birth, brought up to that
condition that we were in before in Adam; for if so, then we are as liable to
fall as ever. So then if we be not brought up to that estate that Adam was in,
then regeneration is to be understood thus; we must be brought up in the like
estate; now the like estate is not the same, but it it to be understood thus;
as the lively creature is like the picture or representation: so are regenerate
persons like Adam in innocence; for as he had peace, and enjoyment, and
contentment, and was happy in his own apprehension; so his carnal peace,
delight, and enjoyment, was a figure of that spiritual peace, delight, and
enjoyment, that is attained unto after the second birth: For as he himself
being carnal, was yet a figure of a heavenly and spiritual man; so also his
enjoyment and peace, was a figure of a spituall peace and enjoyment; so, we are
not to understand by regeneration that we are to be brought up into the same
estate as Adam was in, but into the like estate, that is to say, into such an
e^^ate as his did hold forth, and was a figure of: for as the first estate was
peace, contentments, and delights; so is the second, peace, contentments, and
delights; and so may be said to be like one a other, as a pictute of a creature
is like the creature in resemblance, yet not in life, power, and sense; but as
the one was peace, so was the other, and therein alike: the Scripture holds
forth a twofold birth, one like the other, and one holds forth the other; yet
we must not be as Nicodemus, to believe we are to enter into our mothers womb,
because Christ says, we must be born again, or become like little children:
And as this is to be understood in a spiritual sense, that this spiritual
birth is answerable to the natural, and yet not the same; so is Regeneration
to be understood in the like manner. Or else, as the restoration of Israel,
and also their Ordinances, as it is said in Amos 9 11. I will build up the
tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I
will raise up his ruins, and build it as in the days of old. And I will bring
again the captivity of my people of Israel, and they shall build Cities, and
inhabit them, ver. 14. And I will plant them upon their own Land, ver. 15. Now,
although these are plain words, as building a tabernacle as of old, and
building Cities and planting them on their land; yet this must admit of a
spiritual interpretation, as it does appear Act. 15. 16. where the Apostle
James applies this Prophecy to the calling of the Gentiles; and upon his
repeating thereof in ver. 14, he draws this inference, Therefore my sentence
is that we trouble not them which from among the Gentiles are turned to God,
ver. 19. These people thus turned to God, he understands This is the City of
which the Apostle says, We are come unto Mount Sion, the City of the living
God, the heavenly Jerusalem, Hebr. 12. 20. This is the City that the Gent^les
shall tread under foot 42 months, Rev. 11. 2. The same spiritual City shall be
redeemed, Isa. 60. 14. They shall call thee the City of the Lord, the Sion of
the holy* One of Israel; that is, the Saints, and no material City.
to be the tabernacle of David in the substance thereof; and this their
gathering in, and uniting by the Spirit is said to be their building again as
of old; notwithstanding that of old was nothing but a tabernacle, or temple of
wood or stone, with outward adornings of such material things: as also the
Cities and their own Land, which they are said to build, and be planted in, are
also spiritually held out by their old material Cities, as Sion, Jerusalem, and
the Land of Canaan; which spiritual Cities are no material Cities, but such
Cities as righteousness shall be for walls and bulwarks: whose builder and
maker is God, Isa. 60. 18. Heb. 11. 10. Their own land there spoken of, is that
heavenly and spiritual enjoyment and rest which Joshua could not bring them
into, as you may see more plainly in the margin. Thus you are to understand
Regeneration to be but only a bringing up to a spiritual peace and enjoyment,
typed out by a carnal and earthly; God calls in this place the things that
are not, as though they were, Romans 4. 17. he holds forth spiritual things by
carnal, which are things we best understand: as in the Canticles, he holds out
that excellent and spiritual love betwixt Christ and his Church, by that
carnal love which is betwixt man and woman. Thus much in answer to this
Objection.

Another Objection may be formed thus:

Some may say, Adam by his eating the fruit, did break a Commana, therefore it
is impossible that he could be brought nearer to God by his sin and
transgression.

Answ. The matter of his eating was not sin, but the manner or circumstance, as
you may see a full answer to this Objection in page 43, 44, 45, 46.

I having briefly proved that which I undertook, namely, that the first Adam
was made of the earth earthly, and was blind, without wisdom, knowledge,
righteousness, light, or the light, before his eating the forbidden fruit; and
that he lost nothing by his eating, but by virtue thereof he obtained all those
natural gifts which he is said to have before, by them with whom I have to
deal: and in proving of this, I having answered many Objections, Now it would
be necessary to apply this truth to men's several conditions; which indeed was
Gods end in holding forth Adam in these various conditions, that we should not
only see him, but see our selves: and in comparing our selves with Adam in his
various conditions, and Adam with us, we may see our conditions like his: And
herein I shall answer other Objections, and further clear what is already
delivered.

But before I come to apply this truth, you must know, that the man Adam did
represent two things. 1. He did represent another Adam, which is all the
fleshly and carnal actings of men in all the world: These fleshly and carnal
actings of men, is Adam, as truly as ever he that was looked upon to be our
first parent was Adam: And God indeed Adam our first parent held forth Christ
in the flesh: Adam our carnality holds forth Christ in the Spirit; the first is
crucified by the later, and gave place for grace to abound much more. Romans 5 20.
was pleased to hold out this later Adam by him that is not so truly Adam as
this; for this later Adam is he that we should still look to. And whereas I
said that Adam held forth two things, I did not mean only Adam our first
parent, but this later Adam, our carnality holds forth the last of the two
things which I spoke of, which is Jesus Christ in the Saints. The opposition is
not between the two Adams; I mean Adam our first parent and Christ, who died at
Jerusalem, no further then they were two shadows: but the opposition lies
between the two substances, namely, Adam our carnality, and that spirit of life
in Christ, living and acting in the Saints, which is the second Adam: therefore
the Apostle says, Crucify the old man, with the affections and lusts thereof,
and put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness. The same Apostle says, Romans 6. 6. Knowing this, that your old man
is crucified with him: And in the next verse he shows what was done in the
sign, that they might better judge and try themselves whether they had the
substance in them answerable to the sign.

If this be so as it does appear, that every carnal man and woman, in their
carnal, fleshly, and self actings, are the first Adam Col. 3. 9, 10.
in the substance: Then let us see whether the same thing does not befall us in
the substance, as befell Adam in the shadow, and so make some Application to
our selves in our various conditions. And herein I shall strengthen that which
I have formerly delivered.

And in this I shall lay down Adams estate as he was created in, and his
degrees in rising through several dispensations and providence of God, and so
compare our estates and several degrees and risings with his, and then we
shall see whether he did not truly hold forth us, and whether we are not the
true substance of him the shadow.

First, Adam was created without the The first degree of Adam's rising.
Garden of Eden; which Garden holds forth a place of pleasure and delight; so
that Adam had not that pleasure at his creation, but afterward: and the reason
was (as I conceive) because he was not capable of pleasure, being created in
the degree or stature of a child. For he was not actually made by God (as some
vainly and carnally suppose) but he grew out of some thing by the providence of
God, and so was kept and provided for in a miraculous way by Gods great
providence, as some men have been preserved by Eagles and Bears, and the like,
as is recorded in History.

Diverse Reasons may be given for this; but I do not desire to enlarge my self
in it: but take this one Reason.

Adam must needs be created in the degree or stature of a child, because he
lived to the same age as his generation lived, before he departed this life,
for his days were nine hundred and thirty years. Now if Adam had been in the
degree of a middle aged man, in all probability he could not have lived to the
age of the rest of his generation; for there was not above one in all his
generation that did outlive him; which in all probability they would have
done, if he had been created in the degree of a man.

This I speak from my self, and not from the Lord; but there is much reason in
it: Therefore you are not (in my judgment) to think, that God created him
actually with hands, notwithstanding it is said that God formed man with the
dust of the earth: David says the like of himself; Thy hands made and
fashioned me, notwithstanding he came by generation. God made the whole world,
but it was by his influence and power upon and in the creature made, as he does
at this day; by the same power was Adam made, and kept by the same providence.
And thus being made in the degree of a child without Paradise, that is to say,
without pleasure or delight, this was his first estate or degree. So it is with
the substantial Adam, which is all flesh: in the time of their infancy they
live without pleasure or delight, they being not yet capable of the same, being
not yet put into the Garden of Eden. This is our first estate, answerable to
Adam's first estate.

Secondly, Adam is put into the Garden 2. Degree of Adams rising.
to till the ground; that is, into pleasure and delight.

The second degree of the substantial Adam thus answers the second degree of
typical Adam; who is likewise put into Paradise, and grows up to be capable of
pleasures and delights, and to feed themselves as the first Adam did. There is
no constraint in their natures; of every tree they may eat; that is, there is
no command or power inherent in them, to debar or hinder them from every fancy
or delight which is in the garden of man's pleasure; for the heart has a
freedom to feed on any thing that is presented to the eye; which delights are
held forth under the name of the trees of the Garden, according to the
Metaphors held forth in Ezekiel. 47. 12. Isa. 55. 13. The thorn tree shall seem
pleasant to them.
Scripture; as you may see in the Margin.

Thirdly, They were to till the ground: 3 Degree of Adams rising.
that is, they have knowledge and understanding to know what is good for
nourishment to preserve themselves: As also it may be more properly understood
by tilling the ground, their endeavoring to make themselves fit to receive
good seed, as it is understood in Jerem. 4. 3. Break up the fallow Hos. 10. 12.
Some are wrought upon by ^he Spirit ^f God before others.
ground, and sow not among thorns. This is the condition from the age of six
years and upwards upon all flesh, before the creature be brought up to another
degree.

Fourthly, Adam the type was prohibited from eating of one tree in the midst of
^ Degree ^f Adams ^^sing.
the Garden, upon the penalty of death: So in the like manner is Adam the
antitype, which is all flesh, prohibited from power in themselves, and
commanded in the word of God, not to go to make themselves perfect by their own
righteousness, which is the tree of knowledge of good and evil in the
substance; which tree, man's righteousness, or the Law, is in the midst of the
garden, that is, of all the delights and shelters The chief in their
apprehension.
that are: This is one of the chief, even placed in the very heart of man.

And as Adam the shadow had high and ambitious thoughts to be great, and did
endeavor to become like God by his own actings and endeavors, through the
subtilty of the Serpent, who so set forth the excellency of the fruit, and made
it appear so lovely; (yet the Text says, When she saw it was good for food,
and pleasant to the eye, and a tree to be desired, to make one wise, she took
of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave unto her husband with her, and he
did eat: The taking of the fruit is here attributed to the woman only, and not
unto the man; and the reason is, because the woman held forth the Church, which
is both man and woman: the man held forth Christ, and therefore he was not
active in plucking the fruit, but Eve only was active in the transgression. And
although it be not proved that the man Adam did aspire to be great; yet in as
much as she did, he did also in her; for all men and women were in her, and her
name was Adam as well as his, Genesis 5. 2. this holds forth the mystery of Christ
and his Church, who assume each others names;) So then, it being clear, that
Adam the shadow was ambitious as a creature, and did endeavor to be great, and
become like God; and to that end did pluck and eat of the forbidden fruit: It
is also as clear, that Adam the substance, that is, all carnal men and women,
do the same thing. When they are come through these three degrees, and are
capable of any thing, they begin to meditate of the creation of the world, and
to admire him that made all things. Thus it is natural to all men (besides
being instructed by their parents) to meditate and learn to see the invisible
God in some measure through the visible things that are made. And thus their
serious thoughts and considerations make them leave the former fruit in some
measure, which is all manner of fancies, pleasures, and delights, and begin to
look into the middle of the garden, upon the fruit of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, which is the righteousness of man: and it is very pleasant to
the eye of carnal men: they cry out, This is the fruit that will make one
wise, this is the food that we must eat in our journey to heaven: Thus man's
righteousness is carnal man's food, or strength by which he thinks to come to
heaven. If you ask such a man or woman how they think to be saved; they will
say, by their good thoughts and works; and all the Gentiles (called Christians)
both Papists and Protestants, do admire this fruit, which is man's
righteousness; and nothing else is so pleasant to the eye, to make one wise, or
like God, or bring one to heaven, as this is in their apprehensions.

It Is true, Man's righteousness, which is Here begins the Answer to the
Objection page 35.
the tree of knowldge of good and evil, was good to Adam, and is also to us:
yet it was forbidden both to him, and also to us; that is, it was or is
forbidden to accomplish or bring about such an end as man would have it do:
that is to say, to become like God; although it does so too in some measure, in
the knowledge of good and evil, as I have already showed; yet it does not in
the performance of the thing known to be good, or the omitting of the thing
known to be evil, or the living and the enjoying of that life and enjoyment
that is in God; which shall not be obtained by the eating of the fruit of this
tree, but by the eating of the fruit of the tree of life, which also is in the
midst of the Garden, and yet no natural tree no more then the first: for this
second tree is Gods righteousness, and the very ^eaves of it shall serve for
the healing of the Nations: so then, this first fruit is good in ^ts own place,
and without the eating of this we cannot be capable of the other; yet it is
forbidden to be eaten, to accomplish the end that is before prescribed, that is
to say, to become like God.

To prove this, take notice of these Scriptures, and you shall find this
fruit, man's righteousness is forbidden, and the sentence of death passed on
those that feed on it to that end, as our first parents did: The Apostle Gal.
3. 10. speaks thus, For as many as are of the works of the law, are under the
curse. To be carnally minded is death, Romans 8. 6. The Apostles meaning is, to
be carnally minded in their coming up to God, or their seeking after God by or
in carnal things, in endeavoring to make themselves perfect by the flesh, as
they did to whom he speaks Gal. 3. 3. Are you ^o foolish, having begun in the
spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh? As also the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
13. 3. If he should give his body to be burned, and all his goods to the poor,
and have not charity, which is love, or the power of God living, and acting,
and carrying him forth to do it, it is as sounding brass, and a tinkling
cymbal. The Prophets and Christ himself condemn Israel, or those Pharifaicall
men for their fasting, and making long prayers, Isa. 58. 4. Matthew. 6. 16. Why
so? was it not good so to do? Yea, fasting, praying and giving of alms are good
in themselves; So the things were good in themselves, or matter of them, but
not in manner and circumstance; they may be used; but not fed on to be like
God, lest we die.
but they had not the power of God carrying them out to do those things, but
the motive by which they were put upon those duties was self ends, for to
become like God: witness the Pharisee that made the large confession, and
thought to obtain much, and yet was condemned by Christ, Luke 18. 11, 12.

Thus you see, as Adam was forbidden Man is bidden, or commanded to do good,
but not to obtain good by his doing.
to eat this fruit, and death pronounced, and a curse followed upon his eating
thereof: So in like manner are we forbidden to follow after, or feed upon that
fruit which is in the substance our righteousnss, or the Law, and also death is
pronounced, and a curse follows upon our eating thereof; Touch not, taste
not, handle not, for all perish Adam did lie down in sorrow.
with the using, Col. 2. 21. This is the fire that man kindles, and compasses
himself about with the sparks: but God says, This he shall have at mine hands,
he shall lie down in sorrow. So then here you see, that this ambition was not
only in Adam the shadow, but in us the substance, after the forbidden fruit;
and our ends are the same as his was, to be wise, and become like God, through
the subtilty of the Serpent, which holds forth the excellency of this fruit,
our righteousness. This will also serve for an Answer to the Objection framed
from Adams transgression, Page 35.

Object. Some may say, How can the tree of knowledge of good and evil and the
righteteousnesse of man be all one?

Ans. The fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, is nothing else but
the moral Law, or the righteousness of man.

It must needs be so for this Reason;

Because the other tree with it, which is the tree of life, was the
righteousness of Christ, and no material or natural tree.

To prove that it was the righteousness of Christ, you may see Rev. 2. 7. To
him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life in the midst of the
Paradise of God. The like is said of the heavenly Manna, ver. 7. which is one
and the same thing. There is nothing promised to be given to the Saints to eat
or to drink, or to be clothed with, but it is Christ or his righteousness: He
is all this to a Saint, as you may see in these Scriptures; He is water, John
4. 14. and chap. 7. 38. This he spoke of the Spirit. He is Manna, chapt. 6. 48,
50. 1 Cor. 10. 3. He is wine, pomegranats, or apples, or pleasant fruit, Matthew.
26. 29. Cant. 4. 7. Let my Beloved come into his garden, and eat of his
pleasant fruit, Chap. 7. 13. At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits,
new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my Beloved. And chapt. 1. 14. Thy
love is unto us a cluster of camphire. All this is the love of God through
Christ to the Saints, and the reflections of that love, carrying up the souls
of Saints unto God. So this tree of life is the same, even the righteousness
of Christ, or the Spirit. It is compared to an oak and a teyl tree, and the
holy seed is the substance thereof, Isa. 6. 13.

2. This tree of life must needs be the Spirit of Christ, because it bears
twelve manner of fruits; which fruits are twelve degrees, or several gifts of
the Spirit, which are the twelve precious stones, or pearls that the City is
founded upon.

3. This tree of life must needs be the righteousness of Christ; because the
leaves of it are to heal the Nations: Nothing can heal the Nations but Christ;
but the leaves of this tree are to heal the Nations; and therefore they are the
fruits effected and brought forth by the Spirit of Christ.

4. There is nothing life it self, or can give life for ever, but Christ: But
this tree is life it self, and will give life to them that eat it: Therefore
this tree is the righteousness of Christ, Genesis 3. 22.

So then, this being clear, that this tree of life is no material or natural
tree, but the righteousness of Christ, and such a food as will give eternal
life, it must by the same grounds necessarily follow, that this The definition
of the two trees proved page 2. is more fully proved in the seven effects
brought forth by the tree, and man's righteousness.
tree of knowledge of good and evil in the garden with it, is the
righteousness of man, and is no material or natural tree, no more then the
other.

5. The fifth degree of Adam's rising, was 5 Degree of Adams rising.
to put those ambitious thoughts and desires into execution, Genesis 3. 6. She
took of the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave to her husband with her, and
he did eat: And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were
naked: and they sewed fig leaves together, and made them aprons. The fifth
degree of the substantial Adam, or all those that are come up to that degree,
may examine themselves by the shadow, which was our first parents, thus as it
follows; and it will answer as face answers face in a glass: for after they
are come to the fourth degree, which is to see the invisible God, through the
visible things that are made; and also to see and believe our own
righteousness, which is by the Law, to be the only way and means by which
they may become wise, or like that God, or to attain heaven; And also the
excellency of this fruit, so set forth by the serpent, they then with all their
strength follow after their own righteousness, and take of that fruit that was
so lovely to the eye, and so much to be desired to make one wise; and eats
thereof, [bear with the expression] for it is a Metaphor much used in Scripture
in such like words as these, To feed upon husks and not bread; Labor not for
the meat that perishes: Also there is a more pure eating held forth in
Scripture, My flesh is meat indeed; I am that heavenly Manna; Feed my Lambs,
and such like expressions: the Prophet Isaiah speaking prophetically of the
righteousness of God: he calls it, The holy seed; he says, It shall return and
shall be eaten as a Teil-tree, and as an Oak whose substance is in it self,
Isa. 6. 13. the same is spoken concerning the tree of life: And as this is not
to be understood of a natural eating, but of a pure, inward and spiritual
feeding of the new inward and spiritual man: so, in the like manner, that
eating, Genesis 9. is not to be understood of a natural eating, but an inward
corrupt and spiritual feeding of the Old man, which is to be crucified,
mortifyed and destroyed with that, which is husks and not bread.] I say, after
their approving, desiring, and pressing after the righteousness of the Law,
which is called our righteousness, they then take and eat thereof; and no
sooner they have fed on that fruit, but their eyes are opened; and they know
that they are naked, that is, when the creature is convinced, that his own
righteousness is the only means to bring him to heaven, or to be like God, for
that is the thing the creature aims at in all his working, and the more he
follows after and feeds on this, the more he is drawn into bondage, and
sees his unsufficiency in accomplishing that end: so that now the natural
eyes of the understanding are opened, and they see that they are naked; they
are not made naked by following after the righteousness of the Law, but that
which they thought to attain to, by it, they see they are not able to attain,
but contrarily it does discover their nakedness, which is their sin;
therefore the Apostle says by the Law is the knowledge of sin; the Law does
not make the creature sinful and naked, but the Law does open eyes to see that
which was before; for all things that is below God, is sin, though it never
transgressed any outward Commandment, neither in its self, nor any other, (the
Heavens are unclean in his sight) but it is not sin, according to similitude
of Adam's transgression, that is to say, nakedness or sin discovered;
therefore the Apostle says, Romans 5. 14. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam
to Moses, even over them which had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression; that is, they had not their sin and nakedness discovered, as it
is, verse. 13. the Apostle says, Sin was in the world until the Law, but sin
is not imputed where there is no law, that is, sin is not brought home to the
Conscience, and made ours until the powerful coming of the Law, which brings
sin and nakedness to light; thus it was with Adam the figure, he had sin
before, but not discovered until he eat: thus it was with typical Israel, they
had sin from Adam to Moses, yet not discovered outwardly until Moses gave
them the Law; and thus it is with us the substance of those two figures: we
have sin, and death reigning by sin, yet not discovered until the powerful
coming of the Law: for, the same effect that the fruit wrought on Adam, the
same it does upon the Gentiles, which never had the Law in the Letter; for when
the Gentiles, which have not the Law, that is, have not the Law in the Letter,
do the things contained in the Law, which show the works of the Law written in
their heart, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts in the
mean while, accusing or excusing one another, Romans 2. 14, 15. for as Adam was
alive before he eat, and was to dye upon his eating, so you see the Gentiles
dyed that death upon the powerful coming of the Law, though they never had the
law in the letter, yet they had sin imputed inwardly, as it was typed out by an
outward imputation at Mount Sinai after Moses gave the law; thus it was with
Paul also before he had eat or concocted the same fruit, he was alive, as he
says; I was alive once without the Law, but when the Law came, sin revived,
and I dyed: as the fruit or Law did not bring sin to Paul, but gave eyes to
discover sin and nakedness; so in like manner, it brought not sin to Adam, but
opened his eyes, and gave sight to discover and bring sin and nakedness to
light, which was in them before; and as Paul's life before the law came, was
only but in his own apprehension; so also was Adams, and their death after
their eating, but only a discovery of what was in them; for before the law
came, they believed and conceived life and power to be in themselves to bring
them to God: but when the law was come and they had eat of that fruit, it
opens their eyes, and discovers that to be death, which they thought was
life.

So then, the very act of eating the forbidden fruit, or the powerful coming of
the law into the soul, which is all one, is not sin it self, but the discovery
of sin, therefore the Apostle says, What shall we say then? is the Law sin?
God forbid! I had not known sin but by the Law, Romans 7. 7. And he says,
Without the Law sin was dead; so I say, this fruit which Adam eat, was nothing
but the Law which brought sin and nakedness to light, it revived sin, which
before seemed to be dead. Therefore it is called the tree of knowledge of good
and evil; so you see, whatsoever was brought upon Adam by his eating of that
fruit, the same is brought upon them that seeds upon the Law of their own
righteousness: As for example in these particulars:

First, it deprives Adam of life, for he had The effects of the fruit to him
and us, alike compared in 7. particulars.
life, or else he could not dye.

The same does the Law: for says the Apostle, I was alive once without the
Law, Romans 7. 9.

As the first, which was the shadow, had life before he eat of the fruit; so,
the second, which is the substance had life before the law came.

It gives Adam the knowledge of sin and 2. The effects of the fruit.
nakedness; and the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew they were
naked; (which nakedness is a metaphor which holds forth inability and sinfulness
in their coming up to God.) The same does the Law, I had not known sin but by
the law, Romans 7. 7. Chap. 3. 20.

Thirdly, the eating of the fruit brings 3. The effects of the fruit.
fear and terror upon Adam because of sin, Genesis 3. 9. I heard thy voice in the
Garden, and I was afraid.

The same thing does the law work on those that feed on it, or to whom it
comes; the Apostle says, that Christ took flesh and blood upon him to deliver
them who through the fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage,
Hebr. 2. 15. this fear and bondage is through the law; as it will appear, Hebr.
12. 21. where it is said, So terrible was the sight that Moses saw, that he
said, I exceedingly fear and quake.

Adams eating of this fruit, or the coming of the law into the soul, answers
the giving of the law on Mount Sinai; our seeding on the Law, is our coming to
the Mount that burns with fire to blackness and darkness, and the voice of
words; whatsoever was effected by Adams eating of that fruit was the first
figure.
Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, the same was in the second figure at
Mount Sinai, and is likewise in the substance, which is every soul to whom the
Law powerfully comes; for as The giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, was the
second figure.
at the coming of the Law at Mount Sinai, there was a Tempest, and the voice of
words, which was a terror to those to whom it came; the same fear and terror
was effected by Adams eating that fruit, Genesis 3. 8. it is said, They heard the
voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden; this is the voice or word that
they at The coming of the Law into the Soul, is the substance of those two
Figures.
Mount Sinai entreated should be spoke to them no more; the same caused Adam to
run away from God, and to be afraid and hide himself; Adam could not endure
this voice, no more then they to whom this dispensation came at Mount Sinai;
and the reason of it is this, (both to Adam and all those whom I compare with
him, which are the Israelites, or all those to whom the law did come) I say the
reason is this, because this voice is in the cool of the day; in the Hebrew
word it is the [ winds] of the day: so this voice of the Lord God was walking
in the Garden, which is, the pleasure and delights that man lived in; in the
winds of the day; which winds and tempest is all one; What is more terrible
then winds or tempest? It was terrible to Adam, and also to them at Mount
Sinai; it is called Blackness and darkness, and the voice of words, Hebr. 12.
19, 20.

Which voice they entreated they might hear no more: It is called, The winds of
the day, Genesis 3. 8. which emplyeth both blackness, darkness and tempest; so as
this voice of God was in the winds and tempests of the day unto Adam; so also
this voice of words to those at Mount Sinai, was in the winds of the day, even
in blackness, darkness and tempest; whatsoever was a distemper to the first,
was also to the second; and is the same to the substance, even to us that are
under the dispensation of this day.

The eating of the forbidden fruit brings 4. The effects of the fruit.
Thorns thistles, hay, and straw, etc. are taken for the fruits of our
righteousness, Jer. 4. 3. Hos. 10. 12.
a curse upon Adam, and his whole earth; Cursed be the ground for thy sake, in
sorrow shall thou eat of it all days of thy life; Thorns also shall it bring
forth unto thee. The law also in the like manner brings a curse on them to
whom it comes powerfully into, for as many as are of the works of the law, are
under the Curse, Gal. 3. 10. The Law is not of faith, but the man that does
them, shall live in them, Verse 12. so it was said to Adam, In the sweat of thy
face shall thou eat thy bread; as the meaning of that in Gal. 3. 14. is a
spiritual living in the Law, so the meaning of that eating in Rev. 21. 1 Cor.
4. 15, 16. The world is taken for self wisdom righteousness, pleasure or the
like, this shall be burnt up, but the earth shall endure for ever, Dan. 7. 26,
27. Cha. 2. 44 Rev. 19. 6 7. Chap. 11. 15.
Genesis 3. 19. is of eating spiritual bread, a feeding of the inward man in a
laborious way under the yoke of bondage; and this his eating the fruit
produces and brings forth thorns and thistles, which shall be such prickles
in the flesh that it shall choke the good seed that is sown in that ground
but this earth or ground shall become new, and all those thorns, thistles, hay,
straw or stubble shall be burnt up, and he that enjoys it shall enjoy it
without labor, they shall set down under their own Vine and under their own
fig trees, they shall enter into their rest, they shall run and not be faint,
they shall mount up like Eagles and renew their strength, yet the lump or
fabric of this earth shall endure for ever.

And all things therein, both man and beast, Old things shall be done away and
all things shall become new, as the Apostle says to those in Christ, 1 Cor. 5.
27. yet they lived on this Earth. Christ Disciples are taken out of the world,
and yet live in the world.
The meaning is they shall be under a new dispensation, new law, or covenant, a
new heaven and earth, a new Jerusalem and Paradise and Tree of Life, new Name,
new Bread, new manna for which they shall not labor and get with the sweat of
their faces under the second dispensation as they do under the First; And as
Adam did obtain it by his eating the forbidden fruit who was the Type of all
those under the Law, who also get their spiritual bread through much labor
and sweat of their face, and yet it satisfies not, and thus the latter
answers the former in this example.

The eating of the for bidden fruit, brings death it self upon Adam; For, that
day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely dye.

So in the fifth place, to whomsoever the Law comes, it brings death, as it
is 2 Cor. Fifthly. The effects of the fruit.
3. 9. We are able Ministers of the new Testament not of the Letter, but of the
Spirit, for the Letter kills; Again it is said, I was alive without the Law,
but when the Law came, sin revived, and I dyed; so you see as death was brought
upon Adam, upon his eating the fruit, the same also is brought upon every one
to whom the Law powerfully comes; and the former is but only a type or
representation of the latter; So we are not to understand that any fell in that
flesh of his, as is carnally and vainly understood, or that any dyed in him
according to the general understanding of men; the Prophet Ezekiel speaks
prophetically of the destruction of such a principle or tenet as this is; says
he, What mean you that you use this Proverb concerning the land of Israel;
saying, The Fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on
edge?

As I live, says the Lord, you shall not have any more occasion to use this
Proverb in Israel; The soul that sins it shall dye, Ezekiel. 18. 2, 3, 4. And
the Prophet Jeremiah speaks more plain of this, and the time when it shall be,
it is when he makes a new Covenant, and puts his law in their inward parts:
it is when they shall no more every man teach his neighbor, and every man his
brother; saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the least to
the greatest, Jeremiah 31. 31. to the end of the Chap. at the twenty nine verse
of the same Chapter he speaks on this wise; In those days they shall say no
more, the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the Childrens teeth are set on
edg, but every one shall dye for his own iniquity, every man that ^ateth a
sour grape his teeth shall be set on edge; If man dyed for his own iniquity in
those days, then he died not in his fathers before; but in those days every
one did dye for his own iniquities, and therefore they did not dye nor fall in
another before; we who are Israel, are not to look through shadows or through a
vail; for if we are turned to the Lord, the vail is taken away; we see with
open face, we are not spoken to in parables, to us it is given to know the
mysteries of the Kingdom, therefore let us leave off this Proverb, in saying,
that we were lost in Adam; Let God be true, and every man a liar; when he says
in those days this Proverb shall be used no more.

The Objection from Romans 5. 19. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Where it is said, All dyed in
Adam; This Objection must admit of this answer as it follows. How all are
said to dye in Adam.


1. The Apostle speaks not his own Judgment, but condescends to them and speaks
according to this or that saying that they had in Israel concerning the Fathers
eating of sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set an edg; he speaks to
them here in this as unto those Cor. 7. 14. where he says, the unbelieving
husband is sanctified by the believing wife, and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the believing Husband* or else were the children unclean, but
now they are holy. The Apostle here speaks not his own opinion (for he had cast
of all this holiness of Circumcision, and what privilege soever he had by it,
and accounts it loss and as dross and dung) but he speaks according to their
belief or tenet in the time of the Law, which was, if a Circumcised person was
joined to an uncircumcised, yet their seed should be accounted to be within the
Covenant or holy and not unclean; and from this their opinion he goes to take
advantage and reconcile them together, by what they themselves held, and so in
this place he does endeavor to illustrate and make out life to all in Christ,
by that which they held concerning Adam, that is that their teeth was set an
edge by his eating sour grapes; he does in this place as he does in the
Hebraws where he holds out the excellency of the mystery of Christ by the
Ministry that they were best acquainted with.

Secon. We die in Adam, it is trve, all have held it to be a truth, but they have
not looked to the end of things, because their minds are blinded, and the veil
is over their hearts and shall be till they are turned to the Lord, and then
this Proverb shall be used no more.

Quest. How may we be said to die in Adam?

Ans. We may be said to die in him in an allegorical sense; that is, he by his
death did shadow out all those that came to that State or degree as he was in;
mark what the Apostle says in another case, Tell me you little children, do
you not hear the Law read? so he goes to tell them of the Law thus, It is
written, Abraham had two Sons, the one by a bond-Maid, the other by a
Freewoman; this he tells them that in the mystery or the allegorical sense is
the Law, as he says afterward; for this Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia and
answers to Jerusalem, which now is and is in bondage with Galla. 4. 25.
her children; this Hagar is mount Sinai, says he; this is as plain a speech
as to say all dyed in Adam, but yet he looks through this Hagar and Mount Sinai
to the Jews in bondage under the Law which he calls Jerusalem; So in like manner
he looks through our first Parents when he says all dyed in Adam, and means
them who were come to that estate and degree; So then he by his death did
figure out all that came to that degree, that they should come to it that way,
as he did; to die in Adam, is to crucify the old man and dye to ones own
righteousness and strength daily; so then his death did represent this death
of ours, as he by his death did assure us that we shall follow him; in this
sense we may be said to die in him, such Scriptures, which say that we all died
in Adam, must be further answered thus by the like Scriptures, and understood
accordingly as these are.

Christ is said to be slain from the foundation of the world; And, I am that
heavenly Manna that came down from heaven; And Babylon is fallen, is fallen:
when it is said Rev. 13. 8. and 18. 2, 4.
afterward, Come out of her my people; all this while this is but in Gods
account, or in the shadow or representation; so the Fathers eat Manna, and
drank of that rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ, but not
substantially but parabolically; or else it is to be understood as sure as it
is in part, so it shall be in our account, so it shall be in the substance, so
it shall be wholly; thus we must understand our death in Adam.

First, we are all dead men in Gods account.

Secondly, we are all dead in the shadow.

Thirdly, we are all dead in that nature and earnest; the whole world is the
substance and whole payment, which must be brought into the same place as the
earnest was; we must come the same way as he did, and bear our burdens; and by
his death he does assure us that we shall dye assuredly, as it were already
done in him.

Again, when we dyed, we dyed in Adam; for every carnal man is Adam; yet all
the carnality that ever was, is, or shall be, is Adam the old man as it is
formerly proved: And in this Adam, all those to whom the law comes, must dye,
and are dead already in Gods account, or in the shadow and earnest, as has
been proved. Thus much in answer to this Objection.

Object. Adams eating the forbidden fruit did cause him to cloth himself with
fig-leafes; which leafes are the leafes of the same tree; as the eating of the
fruit did open their eyes to see their nakedness; and upon the sight thereof
they were put upon action to cover this nakeduesse with the leafs of the Tree.

Ans. The same thing does the law effect on 6. The effects of the friut.
them to whom it comes; for when the impressions of the law comes in upon the
soul or heart, and discovers nakedness or sin, then these impressions put the
creature upon some thing that it conceives to be a duty to hide this sin, or
to be, as it were, a Mediator to appease the wrath of God, and thereby to quiet
and satisfy its own conscience; so these our good works are the figg-leafs,
for figg-leafs are very broad, and so are our good works: although carnal
persons apprehend themselves to be very naked and sinful; yet if they can but
fast and do penance, and say thus many prayers, then presently sin, which is
their nakedness, is covered, and their conscience is quieted: so then, these
good works are the leafs of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; under which
fig tree all men are found sitting to whom the second dispensation comes; it
finds us there and knows us before we know it, as you may see, John 1. 48.
where Christ spoke in answer to Nathaneel's question, whether he knew him
Christ says unto him, That he knew him before Philip called him under the
fig tree; the leafs of the tree of life shall be for the healing of the
Nations: What are the leafs of the tree of life? only the effects of the fruit,
which fruit is the Spirit of God; and the effects are our good works, brought
forth by that Spirit, says Christ, Let your light so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven,
Matthew 5. 16. 1 Peter 2. 12. Revelat. 11. 13. Thus be these leafs of the tree
of life effected and brought forth by the Spirit; the Nations shall be wonn,
recovered and healed, and shall glorify God; by this you may the more clearly
see what are the leafs of the first tree, they are our good works springing
forth from the law; it shall heal and cover them too in their own apprehensions;
but when the second fruit is given them to eat, they shall come from under that
fig tree, they shall cast their garments away as filthy rags and menstruous
clouts, as Paul did.

For when this second dispensation comes, which is the fruit of the tree of
life, or Christ in the soul, it finds no fruit but only leafs, on which he
pronounces a curse, and it withers away, and is no more seen for ever in
that soul, Matthew. 21. 19. Thus also you may see, that as Adam's eating the
fruit, caused him to cloth himself with figleafs; the same does the powerful
coming of the law.

Adams eating of the forbidden fruit, did 7. The effects of the fruit.
cause him to hide himself amongst the trees of the garden, Genesis 3. 8; the same
thing does the Law effect in them, to whom it comes; when God comes in that
despensation with voices in the wind or tempest of that day, and makes the
creature afraid, the creature presently runs away and hides it self in the
trees of the garden, which trees are these two things; the first sort and
greatest shelter that the creature hides it self under from the wrath of God,
is the opinions and tenants of the fathers or them that pretend to be Ministers
of the people, unto which the creature being frighted runs to tell their
estate, to the end they may have their consciences quieted; and after
confession, by those that are in bondage under the law, to these trees of
Lebanon. And also there being admonished by these tall Cedars in their humane
traditions, they then give them absolution and remission of their sins, that
is to say, their words take effect upon the heart of the fearful, and their
sins are remited declaratively; thus they trust to what others say, and pinn
themselves to them, when they are not made one in the thing that they profess;
and thus their conscience is quieted, they having hid themselves from God in
the former dispensation among the trees, which are some pleasant Tenants or
doctrines of salvation, duties and forms from humane traditions: these are the
trees which men hide themselves from God in. The gathering of figg-leafs in the
sixth Comparison, was a work of the law only; but their hiding themselves among
the trees of the garden, is from humane tradition and gross Idolatry: For
proof hereof, see Hos. 4. 18. where the Prophet speaks in reference to those
trees, which are the Priests, thus, They eat up the sin of my people: and
verse 12, 13. the Prophet speaks in reference to the people; thus, My people
ask counsel after stocks, and their staffs declare unto them; for the spirit
of whoredom has caused them to err: Those stocks and staffs are the Priests;
at the 13 verse, he speaks thus, They sacrifice upon the tops of mountains,
and burn incense upon the hills, under Oaks and Poplar trees, and Elmes, because
the shadow thereof is good: These shadows cover them from these winds and
tempest, which is the voice of God in the law; and as Adam in his greatest
fear, fled and hid himself, and had his sin, as it were, eaten up or covered
by the shadows of these trees, so the sin of these Israelites, was, as it
were, eaten up: This was held forth by Ishmael the son of Hagar, or the son
of the Covenant of works; he was cast under a shrub in his greatest agony, when
all his refreshment of water was gone; In this he held forth the sons of the
Covenant of works, who also do fly from the voice of God, in the wind of the
day, and hide themselves under the shadow of these trees, because it brings
peace, and seems to be good.

Obj. You will say, Adam had no such trees as Priests or Teachers to hide
himself under.

Answ. I grant that, if you speak of these persons; but he sought out those
opinions, traditions and inventions, as they have since learned, and others
have them now without so much labor; and thus under those trees they shelter
themselves from the wrath of God; The second sort of trees are some particular
pleasure or delights; I told you the Garden it self was all manner of pleasures
or delights in general, but after we have eaten of the Tree of knowledge of
good and evil, and our eyes are opened thereby we are driven as it were out of
this carnal pleasure and delight in general; so that we lie under a heavy
yoke of bondage in a mournful and heavy condition, so that the soul is as it
were brought down to hell; then many times such a Soul spies out another sort
of shelter which may be understood to be company, playing, music, singing, or
any such kind of recreation; for says such a one, when I am out of Company I
am so melancholy and discontented and oppressed in my conscience that I know
not what to do, and from hence they seek after recreation to put away
melancholy humors, and cover their sins under such trees as these; here you
may see whatsoever was produced and effected in Adam by eating the forbidden
fruit in these seven particulars; the same also is produced and effected by the
law on whom it powerfully comes; whosoever feeds on it, it brings him
into the same condition as the fruit brought Adam into; and this may be a
sufficient ground or reason to prove that the tree of knowledge of good and
evil and the Law to be one and the same.

The sixth degree of Adams rising is thus as it follows; unto Adam also and to
his Wife did the Lord God make Coats of skins; As in the five former degrees of
Adams rising, I have endeavored to show the substance or end of things; so I
shall in this sixth degree.

First, What this clothing is in the substance; and Secondly, compare us with
Adam, in showing how and when we are clothed with this clothing. First, this
clothing with skins in the substance, is the righteousness, of Faith and
Love, this was the clothing that John was clothed in: for the t^xt says, His
clothing was of Camels hair, and a Girdle of a skin; this righteousness of
God by says is figured out by a skin, in as much as it is a shield to cover
the creature and keep it warm, and secure the life and inwards of a creature
and also bind up the flesh, bones and sinews, and is the very strength thereof,
the same is the righteousness of faith, and love to the inward man; therefore
Christ is said to bind up the broken and cloth the naked; the Apostle calls it
the Armor of God; therefore says he, having your loins girt about with
truth, and having on the breast plate of Righteousness Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. The
same Apostle calls it the breast plate of Faith and Love, These. 58. but Peter
speaking plainer to this thing, 1 Pet. 1. 13. says he; Therefore gird up the
loins of your minds, and be sober and hope to the end; so this clothing is
the righteousness of faith, love and truth which girds and binds up the loins
of the inward man in faith and love unto God; this being true that this
clothing in the substance is the righteousness of faith and love: we shall in
the next place take notice, when and how this clothing is put on. God suffers
man to run on in the first dispensation, working and getting his bread with the
sweat of his face, and clothing himself with fig leaves to cover his
nakedness; and in this his workking God takes advantage, and as it were meets
man half way, and uncloathes him of that clothing of leaves, and clothes him
with another clothing; This was figured out in that of Adam, and also in that
of Mount Sinai, with that of John; for John differed from the dispensation of
Mount Sinai both in his meat and clothing, which are both to be understood, in
a spiritual sense; his meat was Locust and wild Honey, that is he fed on Christ
through dark shadows, he fed on him as he was in the flesh; as John 14. 23.
Luke 24. 25, 26.
Christ's Disciples did, and were reproved by him for it, or as the Apostle Paul
did, although afterward he saw his error, when he says, although I have known
Christ after the flesh, yet henceforth desire I to know him so no more, 2 Cor.
5. 16.

And thus John fed upon Christ through shadows, and in this respect his meat is
said to be Wild Honey; for the pure Word of God which is Christ, is compared
to the Honey and Honey Comb, but John fed not on this honey alone, but upon
Locusts which is the traditions and inventions, and errors of men, which
devour and eat like a Canker; as you may see Exodus 11. 12. Rev. 9. 3, 7. Thus
John saw something darkly of Christ, and something of error. John must
decrease, Christ must encr^ase, Ioh. 3. 30. therefore John's Disciples and Christ
could not agree, much less Moses Disciples and Christ's, after the coming of
the Comforter. John is the greatest of all the Prophets, but the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven is greater then John; yet this dispensation of John was of
God in opposition to that of Mount Sinai, which may be said to be of man; It
was the second dispensation, and answers that second of Adams clothing with
skins, which was of God in opposition to Adams first clothing, which was of
himself; it is also a figure of that righteousness of faith and love, and as I
told you before, according to the figure: God suffers men to run on in the
first dispensation after the powerful coming of the Law to the creature, and
gives him the knowledge of sin which is his nakedness; then the creature runs
on furiously, and endeavors to cover himself with a Garment of his own making,
and in this his toyling under a heavy yoke of bondage and laboring therein, to
become like God, then God as it were condescends and meets him, and uncloaths
him of that menstruous clothing which could not well keep him warm, and
clothes him with the righteousness of Faith, and binds up the loins of his
mind unto God with this spiritual Girdle; and as in the shadow there was two
cloathings to bring them up to God; the first is of man's own which brings
him on his way; the second of Gods, which brings him to the end of his Journey;
man must be clothed with these two cloathings before he come to God, and that
you may see as follows; the Apostle says, For what the Law could not do in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness
of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh; here you may see
these two dispensations or cloathings; First, the Law, or figleaves; and this
did endeavor, but it could not do that which it was put upon to do; but the
Second, God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and this is
Gods own dispensation, or second clothing which condemned sin in the flesh:
this in the clothing of God which hides and covers sin: therefore David says,
Blessed is the man whose sins are covered: this is repeated Romans 4. 7. The
first clothing could not cover our sins neither from God, nor from us. Isaiah
speaks in reference to this clothing, thus: but we are all as unclean
things, and all out righteousness is as filthy rags, and we all do fade as a
leaf, and our iniquities like the wind, have taken us away, Isa. 64. 6. This
first clothing is the same that Joshua was clothed with, which the Angel was
commanded to take away from him that filthy garment; and also he was clothed
with change of raiment, which was the second dispensation, which is the
righteousness of faith and love, which is called fine linen, Revel. 6. 11.

The Apostle had experience of these two cloathings, and he being uncloathed by
God of the first clothing, which he did so much approve of, he now abhors it,
and counted it as dross and dung, in respect of the second, as you may see
Phil. 3. 7, 8, 9. in these words: But what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ; yea, doubtesse I account all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and I account them but dung, that I may win Christ,
and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of
God by faith. Thus you see how we are clothed with the fig leaves of our own
righteousness, and how the shadow answers the substance in these six Degrees,
in showing how far men go in their own righteousness, in clothing themselves
with fig leaves before they are clothed by God with his righteousness.

Object. Some may say, The first dispensation was of God, for God gave it at
Mount Sinai.

Answ. It is true, all things, the crooked Serpent, and whatsoever is called
evil, is of God in one sense; but it is not of God in another sense.

First, As a small plant, or any other thing in their first appearance from
nothing, may be said to be made by God, in this sense all things are of God.

And secondly, In their growth they afterward do naturally bring forth fruit;
that fruit thus brought forth cannot be said to be made by God under the same
consideration as the plant was first made; but as these plants have strength
and power in their natures to bring forth fruit in time, in this sense, in
making the tree, the fruit may be said to be made of God: So God made man
incapable, having neither fruit of sin or righteousness, but with strength
Thus man was made upright, and no otherwise.
in their nature through growth to bring forth fruit: In this sense all things
may be said to be made by God, as he is the Original, and makes things with
strength in their nature to bring forth fruit through growth; in this sense
that dispensation was of God as he was the original of the creature; but not
as he was the actor of the creature: For power is left in all vegetative and
sensitive creatures to bring forth fruit.

And whereas the Objection says, this dispensation was Gods, because it was
given at Mount Sinai.

I answer, By the giving of the Law at Mount Sinai, God did figure out or
represent that which was placed in man naturally by creation; and what
blackness, darkness, and tempest would naturally grow up in man: So then, that
dispensation was not of God; but God did represent and figure out by it what
man should naturally be brought unto. And this you may see in reading of these
Scriptures here quoted, that the dispensation given at Mount Sinai was not of
God according to his nature, Hebr. 7. 16, 18, 19. Chapt. 8. 2, 5. and 9. 8.
Gal. 4. 9. Act. 7. 48, 49, 50. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all:
but that dispensation of Mount Sinai was blackness, darkness and tempest,
therefore it was not of God; wrath is not in God: but in this dispensation was
nothing but wrath, therefore not of God; for God comes in a still voice,
therefore not in blackness and tempest. It is not of God in respect of his
natural influence, but it is of God as he is the Original or Creator of all
things, who gave that Law at Mount Sinai, to signify what was in man naturally
before, and to stir up that nature in man, that sin might appear exceeding
sinful, Romans 7. 13. and 5. 20.

And as the first is not of God, but naturally in man; so the second
dispensation is not of man, that is, it is not natural to man to live in it,
no more then it is for the earth to ascend up into the heaven out of its own
element: this is the gift of God through the influence of the Spirit: this is
grace in opposition to any thing in man, which is called works; this is Gods
righteousness or clothing, in opposition to man's righteousness or clothing
of fig leaves. Therefore mistake not, you that run headlong, and look at things
in general, who say, all men are alike, for all things are of God, and all do
the works of God. I have granted this under this consideration, as he is the
Original; but look who is of God under a second dispensation: look not only
who is naturally made by God, and so is of God, but look who is spiritually
made, and one with God in the nature of God: And then if you are one with them,
your love will more principally extend to them.

The second dispensation, or clothing of the righteousness of God, does that
which was endeavored to be done by the first, even the Law, or man's
righteousness; that is to say, to convince man of sin; which is their casting
out of Paradise or pleasure, which all men naturally live in: But this first
dispensation of the Law could not convince men of all sin, for it could not
convince them that their own righteousness was sin, and so the Law was weak
through the flesh: and therefore God comes forth in the likeness of flesh.

I should snew you a mystery touching the Trinity, which has been hidden from
the wise men of the world: But I shall only point at it now, and further clear
it when opportunity serves.

God casts man out of Paradise by one power manifesting it self, or working
three ways; First, considered as a Creater in making man in that nature to grow
up into the knowledge of a Law, which Law brought man part of his way out of
Paradise or pleasure, and this is of God considered as a Creator, as is before
showed. The second way God manifest himself in casting man out of carnal
pleasure and delight, is that; spirit of God that moved upon the waters and
created the world with all things therein, which spirit afterward took up flesh
and dwelt therein, even in the man Christ Jesus on whom all the ends of the
earth are to look to and be saved, and what could not be done by God considered
as a Creator in giving the creature a law in nature to cast out himself, that
is done by the second dispensation which is called his own Son; he is called
so in regard he is the second power coming forth from God, he is after the
first as a son is after a father; and what the first could not do in that it
was weak through the flesh, God sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

First, Here is one sending, and that is God in his eternal Effence; Secondly,
here is one sent by the first, that is God in his influence and power, which is
the Godhead of Christ: And yet the father remains full in himself, as a man
after he has a natural son; And Thirdly, How this second was sent, that is
in the likeness of sinful flesh; And Fourthly, The end of his sending was to
condemn sin in the flesh; he condemns sin in the flesh under these two
considerations.

First, As a figure which figureth out all those on whom this anointing or
spirit of God comes into; thus he threatens and condemns sin.

Secondly, He condemns sin as being an Ensign to be held to all those that
he is a figure of, to the end that they in the beholding of him may be changed
into the same Image and become one with himself; This is the second
dispensation and that clothing of skins which Adam was clothed with; and as it
was endeavored by the first dispensation to cast man out of carnal pleasure
and delight, it was far more endeavored, and nearer accomplished by the
second dispensation; for where it was said, unto Adam and his wife, did the
Lord God make coats of Skins, Genesis 13. 21. In the next verse it is said,
Behold, the man is become like one of us: Man must be clothed by God with the
righteousness of God, before man become like God in either of his three
relations; so you see through the second dispensation man became like God, and
is also cast out of his carnal pleasure and delight; God is the drawer of man
out of sin, and selfrighteousness.

There is a third dispensation, by which The 7th. degree of Adams rising.
man is wholly cast out of paradise, kept out of paradise, and brought in to a
second and glorious paradise, and that is the Spirit or Comforter; the going
away of the first, is the coming of the second; that of Mount Sinai must
decrease, Christ must increase; so the going away of the second, is the coming
of the third: as Moses gave place to Christ, so Christ gave place to the
Comforter: It is expedient that I go away, or else the Comforter cannot come:
The first witnesses to the second, and says, Him shall ye hear in all things:
The second witnefleth to the third, and says, I will send the Comforter, and
he shall lead you into all truth: Upon the knowing of the third, the second is
to be known no more: Although I have known Christ after the flesh yet
henceforth desire I to know him so no more: This is the new and spiritual
birth; for he that is in Christ, is a new creature; to him old things are done
away, and all things must become new; the law did convince of Sin, Christ in
the flesh did convince of Sin, and so endeavored* to make man like God, and
cast him out of selvish and carnal Paradise: but what the second dispensation
could not do, the third dispensation is sent to do it; and therefore Christ
says, When the Comforter comes, he shall convince the world of sin,
righteousness, and judgment. He shall convince the world of sin, the Law did
endeavor this, and Christ did endeavor this, and may be said to do it as a
means, but it is the Spirit it self, that does completely accomplish this
work: this is the Word of God that divides between the joints and marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; none can call Jesus
Christ but by this Spirit, and this is that which convinces of sin, and
casts man out of carnal pleasure and delight: and not only so, but by this
Spirit we are brought into the antitypicall and spiritual paradise of God, and
therefore Christ says, He shall take of mine, and show it unto you: This is
made good to the Apostle, he being under this dispensation of God, who
witnesses the accomplishment of what was written by Isaiah touching this
dispensation, as it is written, Eye has not seen, non ear has not heard,
neither has it entered into the heart of man, but God has revealed them unto
us by his spirit: For, the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. Thus does the Spirit take of God and show it unto us;
this is the sword, and this is the Cherubim that keeps the way of the tree of
life, that none can come to it, but those whom it takes up to that paradise;
therefore the Apostle says, Such a man I knew who was taken up into Paradise
and heard unspeakablewords, which it is unlawful for a man to utter: this is
the fire that will burn up all things, as hay, stubble, straw, or whatsoever is
not of its own planting, this shall be poured out upon the Governors of Judah,
they shall be as a hearth of fire among wood, and as a torch in a sheaf of
corn: this is the Cherubim that brought a coal of fire from the Altar unto
Isaiah, by which he had his iniquities forgiven and was made fit to go with
Gods message; when man is drove out of his carnality by this Spirit, he is fit
to till the ground from whence he was taken. We may see God in a general way,
through the other two dispensations; but none can know God, Scripture, Sin,
or Righteousness, but by the Spirit; all rules are uncertain but this rule of
the new Creature, and as many as walk according to this rule, peace be unto
them, and to the Israel of God.

And thus you see how one God through 3 discoveries does cast man out of
earthly pleasure and delight, therefore let us put him out, a speech after the
manner of men, which holds forth abundance of mystery, of which I have many
things to say and hard to be uttered or understood, seeing we are so dull of
hearing; that which I promised I shall here commend to the wise, and only
point at two general Uses, and leave what other Uses may be made of it unto
you, or the power of God leading you out unto it.

First, If this be a truth that is here delivered, Use.
that no man fell in Adam really but figuratively as he did represent and
assure us by his fall that we should fall in the like manner; from hence we
should be reconciled unto God, and not to say that God is such a hard Mat. 25.
24.
Master, reaping where he never sowes, and charge him with injustice, iniquity
and partiality, in saying, that all should dye for one man's fault; you that are
Christians and under the new Covenant, what mean you by this Proverb? what
mean you to say, the fathers eat sower grapes and the Childrens teeth are set
an edg? and to shift your Jer. 31. 29. Ezekiel. 12. 24.
own necks out of the collar in charging your sin upon another; what mean
you to make God a liar? when he says; As I live, this Proverb shall be no
more, but every one shall dye for his own iniquity; and he that eats the
sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edg; therefore if you live in those
days as the Prophets points at; if you are Israel according to the Spirit; if
you are turned to the Lord; this vail of Adam will be taken away as well as the
vail of Circumcision, Tabernacle or Altar meats or drinks, washings or
purifyings or whatsoever of that nature, they were all truths once, but when
the substance came, the shadow was to be taken away as well in the one as the
other, therefore be you reconciled unto God; charge not God with injustice; let
this Proverb be heard no more in Israel; let God be true, and every man a liar.

Secondly, If Adam in his rising did figure Use.
out and assure us that we should follow him through these sever^ll
dispensations, ^hen all sorts of men ought to be reconciled together.

First, Thou that art not in Paradise, and A word to seven degrees of mankind.
art not capable of pleasure and delights: thou can not come in of thy self,
until thou art put in by God; why should he that is put in, hate thee who
live in thy own station, for all were as thou art?

Second. If thou art put into carnal Paradise, and live in thy pleasure and
delights by reason of growth, and have no restraint in thy nature, but may
satisfy thy self in every sinful pleasure, I know thou will hate all that are
above thee, that run not with thee into the same excess of riot; but take
heed; by the visible things that are made thou shall be left without excuse and
see thy nakedness and be judged, condemned, confounded and ashamed.

Thirdly, If thou art come to see the invisible God by the visible things that
are made, then thou will leave the other trees in some measure, and look into
the midst of the Garden, upon thy own righteousness which will be very lovely
to thy eye, and the only thing to make thee wife and become like God in thy own
apprehension; Judge not them that are above thee, for thou have been once
deceived already.

Fourthly, If thou have eaten of the tree that thou so much desire to make
thee wise, which is thy own righteousness, then thy eyes are opened and thou
see thy nakedness, and also what is good and evil according to Gods
estimation of good and evil; but here lies thy misery, thou are dead to do
good and alive to do evil; for thou thoughtst thou had life and power in thy
self to become like God by thy own righteousness, but thou shall see upon thy
eating thereof, thou shall become dead, without power and strength in thy self,
thou shall not only be dead to do good, but fear and death shall sease on thee,
when thou hear the voice of God in the winds of the day Genesis 3 10. Esa. 6.
5. Romans 7. 24. Heb. 13. 19, 21.


Fifthly, Then if thou art in this toyling condition, thou will cry with Adam, I
was afaid; with Isaiah, I am a man undone; with Paul, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death? with the Children of Israel who
entreated they might hear that voice no more it was so terrible to them; and so
it will be unto thee, it will make thee hide thy self from God under some
pleasing opinions or tenants, and cloth thy self with thy good works of
fasting, and praying, and such like duties which are the fruits of thy own
righteousness; this thou will be zealous in following after, thy own
righteousness, and hate all those that are above thee or below thee. Be not to
zealous; this is the third time thou have been deceived, thou will again be
deceived, and see all this thy righteousness to be as dross and dung, and that
which thou think to be gain thou will account loss, Philippians 3. 7. 8.

Sixthly, If thou art clothed with the righteousness of faith, or this girdle of
a skin, thou have a glorious clothing which will bind up the loins of thy mind
to the head, by which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment
ministered and knit together, increases with the increase of God; and thus
thou shall grow from one degree to another under this second dispensation, as
thou did under the first until thou come to perfection, and this
perfection is the seventh degree, this is the Sabbath or rest, we having
labored and toyled these six days, that is under these six degrees, and
followed God who is our example; we must all so enter into our rest with him,
he that is entered into his rest Heb. 4. 10.
has ceased from all his works, as God did from his: this is the year of
Jubilee, this is Enoch the seventh from Adam; the first six generations work
and toil every one his day, and get their spiritual bread with the sweat of
their face, for the space of five thousand five hundred and fourteen years, the
years of their six days being added together, and they being a figure of the
carnal world in labor, bondage and time, which was to endure the space of five
thousand five The dawning of the day at the year 5514.
hundred and fourteen years in its height, and then the end shall come nigh,
and a new world shall begin, in which shall dwell righteousness: Enoch the
seventh from Adam from his sixty fifth year was a figure of his day of rest, in
which the Kingdoms of this world should become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his
Christ, and the Kingdoms and dominions, and the greatest of the Kingdom under
the whole Heavens shall be given to the people of the Saints, and all shall
serve and obey him; these Saints are Enoch in the substance, who succeeds the
six generations or days of labor; this is that Enoch that was not, for Enoch
is not of the world, as Christ's disciples are not of the world, but taken out.
It is something cleared at the year 5579.
God took him up unto himself, and he shall walk with God in the heavenly
Jerusalem, where there shall be no unclean thing, and they shall be his people,
and God himself will he their God; they shall not only walk with God, but they
shall dwell in God and God in them, 1 John 4. chap. verses 12. 13. and 16. and
as it is true there is a general and complete perfection or rest for the Saints
at the end of five thousand five hundred seventy nine years ( Enoch's sixty
five years being added, which was the time before God took him) in this earth,
although not in this carnal world, as you may see in these quotations. Rev. 15.
3, 4. Dan. 7. 14. 26. Chap. 2. 44. Luke 1. 33. Micah 4. 7. Zeph. 3. 19. Zach.
1. to verse. 9.

It is also as true, That there is a perfection and rest to some, though not so
complete in the six days, or six generations: there are some that walk with
God, and rest with God on his Sabbath in the time of these six days before
this Sabbath is come in general, of whom Enoch was a type; and both Enoch and
they are a type and a figure of that general and glorious rest, as is before
spoken of. Therefore, Brethren, if this be the result, that the six
generations, and the six days did hold forth six degrees or dispensations to
continue for so many years, as is beforementioned; and also Enoch and the
Sabbath in their succeeding these six generations or days, did hold forth our
rest with God, and living in perfection, then we ought in reason to be
reconciled together. Let not him that is strong, who lives in the sixth or
seventh day, despise him that is weak, that lives in the first or darkest days
or dispensations; Nor let not him that is weak, judge him that is Romans 14. 3.
streng; for God has received him, he walks with God.

You will think him to be a mutherer that should endeavor to make all mankind
to eat one sort of meat; either to make old men to eat milk or suck the breast;
or else to make new born Babes to eat such gross meat as old men do; such will
be murderers of the body: so in the like manner are they soulmurtherers that
will bring all men into one conformity; nay, they are far worse then the
first; for these do not only make spiritual men feed upon spiritual meat of
any kind, but upon Dogs meat and Husks, and such as they themselves feed on. I
am not offended with them for their feeding, but in that they go to take away
my liberty, these are soul. murderers to those who are conformable to them;
and also body-murtherers to them that will not conform with them: But this
Antichrist that thus exalts himself above all that is called god in the Saints,
shall be destroyed by the brightness of his coming; they ought to have the
liberty of their consciences, be they never so corrupt in Worship.

But if thy Conscience be to take away my liberty in worship, ought to be
suppressed as an evil doer, or as one endeavoring to make murder, this is of
Cain, whose seed thou art; this is that City in which all the blood of the
Saints shall be found in her; all that dare to publish such a Tenet, or attempt
to do it, have committed murder, and ought to dye by the Law of God, and Law
of reason; as all mankind cannot live upon one sort of natural meat, except
some must starve: neither can the spiritual seed, live all upon one sort of
spiritual food; therefore Christ speaks to the multitude in parables, but
says to his Disciples, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom: Christ speaks not according to the Excellency of his own knowledge and
light, but condiscends to their weakness in speaking, according to their
capacity, therefore he says to his Disciples, I have many things to say, but
you cannot bear them now.

Also the Apostle Paul endeavors to speak according to the capacity of them
he speaks to, as you may see, 1 Cor. 2. 4. And my speech and my preaching was
not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the spirit
and power: Howbeit we speak wisdom among them that are perfect, we speak the
wisdom of God in a mystery, Verse 7. Thus the Apostle conforms himself to those
he speaks to; as he can live with the highest in Canaan, so he can go down
into Egypt to take his Brethren by the hand, to the end he may bring them from
one degree to another, until they are come to sit with himself in heavenly
places: He was not so high with those to whom he speaks wisdom in a mystery;
but he is as low, where he says, And I brethren. could not speak unto you, as
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ: I have fed
you with milk, not with meat, for hitherto you were not able to bear it,
neither yet now are ye able, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2. He became all thing to all men,
that he might gain some: Also, he says, Hebr. 5. 12, 13, 14. For when for the
time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be
the first principles of the Oracles of God, and are such as have need of milk
and not of strong meat for every one that uses milk is unskilful in the word
of righteonsness, for he is a babe; but strong meat belongs to them that are of
full age, or in the Greek word, perfect; since God has always spoken in sundry
times and diverse manners, and speaks not in one way or one form, therefore let
us not persecute one another; if God speaks not to others in the way he speaks
to us, do not desire to lord Romans 15. 1.
it over Gods heritage; we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the
weak; for who makes thee to differ from another, 1 Cor. 4. 7.
and what have thou that thou did not receive? now if thou did receive it,
why do thou glory as if thou had not received it? before thou receiv'dst
it thou wast as he, thou think meanly of; would thou have been willing to
have been despised and stumbled and so destroyed when thou were weak before
thou had received this grace? and if not, lay not stumbling blocks in thy
brothers way; therefore since we come up all one way to perfection, let every
one of us be reconciled one to another, let every one of Romans 15. 2.
us please his neighbor for his good to edification; let us therefore as many
as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you, nevertheless whereunto you have already
attained, let us walk by the same rule. Now the God of patience and consolation
grant you to be like minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus.

Finis.
POSTSCRIPT.
THe Objection which says, That no man has the knowledge that Adam bad before
his fall, to give the creatures names according to their natures, as he did;
they being deprived of that understanding by his fall.

To which I answer, thus, It remains for you to prove, that there was any
creature in paradise, which I am sure you cannot; for we find, first, that man
was put into paradise Genesis 2. 8. And 2ly. he is drove out of it, Genesis 3. 23.
Here you see the man's bringing in, and his driving out, but no creatures are
brought in, or driven out with him; therefore lest you can prove that the
creatures were there, I shall deny that he named them there.

2. We are not to understand, that the Scriptures are fulfilled in order as
they are written; for if so, then Adam and all the creatures were twice made;
for in the fifth days work, the fish of the sea, and the fowl of the air were
created, Genesis 1. 18 to 23. and in the beginning of the six days, the living
creatures of the earth were created, cattle and creeping things after their
kind, v. 24, 25. and then man was created, v. 27. All things are said to be
made, and God is said to end his work, and rest, and yet Chap. 2. v. 5. it is
said, There is no man to till the ground; and v. 7. it is said, That the Lord
God formed man of the dust of the ground; although before in Chap. 1. the
Creatures are said to be made before man: yet here in this Chapter, man is said
to be made again, and the creatures after him; for he is said to be made, ver.
7. and they, v. 19. Again, for all it is said, Male and Female created he them,
and also that he had ended his works, and did rest from them, Chap. 2. v. 2.
yet you will find, that the Woman was made afterward, as it is ver. 22. And
therefore I say, the Scriptures are not to be understood in order as they are
written; but many times, when a thing is said to be done, it is done many
hundred years after; and so also is this touching our naming of creatures, and
our ruling over them, and our freedom to eat of every herb or fruit of the
earth; if any one of these things is attributed to Adam, and not to us: then by
the same grounds, the other, as ruling, tilling, dressing and eating of the
fruit or herbs must be attributed to him, and not to us; but we are Adam as
well as he, it is to us God brings the creatures, to see what names we will
call them.

3. According to you own understanding of Scripture, Adam did manifest knowledge
and wisdom after his fall, as well as before, as you may see after judgment
pronounced upon him, Chap. 3. v. 20. it is said, Adam called his wife Eve,
because she was the mother of all living. So then, if he had wisdom and
knowledge to name the creatures before his fall, it was a greater piece of
wisdom to name one more excellent then the sensitive creatures, and also to
give the reason of her name, because she was the mother of all living, Genesis 3.
20.

4. There is nothing now in the Old Testament named either by good men or bad,
but signifies either good or bad: God can speak in Caiaphas touching the great
sacrifice, or reprove Balaam by his Ass, yet neither of these knew what they
spoke.

This Objection was omitted, and I hearing some moving of it, thought fit to
point at this answer for the present satisfaction of the Reader.

FINIS.

