A SHORT DISCOVERY OF THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITIE.

2 These. 2.7. For the mystery of Iniquity does already work.

Revel. 17.5. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, etc.

1 Pet. 3.13,14,15. Who is he that will harm you if ye be followers of that
which is good? But and if ye suffer for righteousness sake, etc.

To which is added also, A Brief Discovery of the false holiness of Nations,
their Instituted or Church State, and what appertains thereunto: set forth for
the good of all that love Truth in the inward parts.

By Mich: Quintyne.

2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you.

Verse. 3. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you, etc.

Colos. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, etc.

LONDON: Printed for the Author. Ann. Dom. 1645.

Matthew. 10. from 26. to ver. 34.
REader, take notice in publishing what is agreeable to the will of God, and
welfare of mankind, without special License, is no contempt of Authority, but
of oppression, or the threatenings thereof. Prove. 3.5,6. Trust in the Lord with
all thine heart, etc. In all thy ways acknowledge him, etc. We must not be
afraid to pull Antichrist by the coat, and pull it off also to discover him to
the people; For it is he that makes oppression and injustice easy; till he be
removed here will be no room for a new Heaven and a new Earth; in the sense of
the want thereof, let nothing be spared to gain them; for what is heaven and
earth wherein is no righteousness to be enjoyed, and used toward God and man;
behold the policy to prevent the least touch of false holiness, and
injustice; but woe unto them that seek deep, to hide their counsel from the
Lord. etc. Isa. 29.15,16.

A short Discovery of the Mystery of Iniquity.
I Have formerly commended to the King and Parliament in special manner (yet
not exclusively) to their consideration, the Discovery of the States of
Policy, and likewise the natures from whence they flow (the largest knowledge,
with the right use whereof, is their most lively and proper Element) which
leads to the preservation of the Church of Christ, and maintenance of
humanity: and as fully do charge it upon them (it being principally their work
to discern, and distinguish between them; and so to order their Dominions that
each may have its due: Romans 13.3,4,5,6. 1 Timothy 2.12. both which Treatises were
much lamed in Printing; but I hope the time now is, and yet will be more
wherein men will look upon right drift, and good intentions, then mistakes in
writing and Printing of any point substantial or circumstantiall; Trying all
things, and holding fast that which is good, according to Divine counsel. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. considering man incident to error: And for the better
accomplishment of the work intended, even that all men (whether esteemed better
or worse of each other in Religion) keeping the bonds of Civilitie may live a
peaceable life, enjoying the liberty of their souls and bodies, kept as
aforesaid within the Laws of humanity, in the free use of their consciences in
their religious service of God: I do in the discharge of my duty to God and
man, according as I have received; set forth to the general consideration of
all men, this following Discovery of the Mystery of Iniquity; And that it may
be done in the fullest measure to the common understanding of humane reason,
let it be considered: First, what a Mystery is, or wherein it does consist.
Secondly, whence it flows, or the reason of it. Thirdly, what it serves to,
or is of use for.


A Mystery is or does consist in two respects.

First, in the curious composition of any creature, whether artificial,
politic, or natural; under one of which titles all the creatures that are
have their being.

Secondly, in the curious counterfeiting of any thing, making things seem the
same, which in nature and truth they are very short of, or the absolute
contrary.

In things artificial the first is proved in most Indentures of Apprentiship,
in the expression of what is to be taught, and learned, under the title of
Trade, Art, and Mystery.

The second is sufficiently proved in the usual cheats and common deceits in
artificial things.

In Policy of all sorts is proof of the first in the constitution or way of
unifying the matter and form thereof; both in Civil and Ecclesiastical; the
palpable, gross, and common ignorance, wherein the wrong and false is usually
taken, and used for the true in both sorts, confirms it.

The second is also apparently true in bodies politic, in the Civil, in
cases of usurpation, so likewise in Ecclesiastical, the Jewish false in the
constitution; and the Antichristian false from the institution; and in every
main part of the constitution, yet accepted and approved of, by people,
Nations* and Languages to their utter ruin and destruction; besides your own
experience of the truth hereof, I shall in future passages prove it by
principles rational, confirmed by Divine records.

In things natural, vegitables, animals, and rationals, the first is evidently
true. For the curiosity of their elimentary compositions, or constitutions of
the meanest of them, yea the least part of them is to the wisest of men a
Mystery; for who can make a natural hair? experience is without denial.

The second is most manifestly true in things natural, since the curse in
Adams days upon the earth for his sake; the deceit in vegitables, and in
animals (which also is the more through abuse) takes away all doubt thereof;
And since man's first transgression whereby humane nature became subjected with
a curse (and through the continued permission of God) to the use of the devil,
(the redeemed only in most special manner excepted) unless in the father of
lies himself, where can be found greater mischievous deceit then in the sons of
men?

The Reason of a Mystery in relation to any or either of the foresaid creatures
is twofold.

1 Is from the rareness of the essence or substance, and constitution or
contrivance of things artificial or politic, and from the most curious
composition by creation or generation of natures, and spirits, which by
infusion the Creator alone has brought forth, and does, and will willingly and
permissively, until his determinations are accomplished.

2 Is from the weakness of our capacity, shallowness of our understanding,
and unaptnesse to the right use of any creature subjected to the use, and for
the welfare of mankind: the truth of both these Reasons appears from the
inability in us to any real good, and our aptness to transgress from the
first trespass to this moment, and will to the last of all our days.

The special use this word Mystery serves for is twofold.

1 Is to possess us with the weightinesse, and consequence of things which
most essentially concern man in his personal and politic condition, both
spiritual, and civil, which tend to his extraordinary good or hurt, in
respect of the nature of the things themselves; and stands him upon to be most
exact in the real discovery of them.

2 Is to lead us, in fullest discovery and best distinction of things what they
are in themselves, and to shun or enjoy them in their use with most care and
tenderness, correspondent to their natures and institution given forth by God
himself; The truth of both these, common reason amongst good dispositions in
mere naturals in humane creatures, confirms; and so Gods Word in the greatest
case of man's welfare expressed in 1 Timothy 3.16. in relation to Christ's personal
state, and in Colos. 4.3. to this politic and visible kingdom; the like also
ye have of the opposite conditions: 1 John 3.7. to ver. 13.2. These. 2.7. Revel.
17.5.

It being declared wherein a Mystery does consist, the reason, and the use of
it, in both respects; the result and chief benefit thereof, is to help us in
distinction between good and bad, in the creatures and their use, especially in
those of greatest concernment to the welfare of mankind, both temporal and
spiritual, and the contrary in both kinds; For ever since the curse, man is
liable to both, and most disposed to what is evil, as no reasonable man will
deny; for brevities sake I shall wholly omit to meddle with that of
Artificials, Vegitables, and Animals, which if men buy with experience and
loss it reflects only upon estate, which being high or low commends not to
God, but in the right use of both, they are approved of him; And shall touch
upon humane nature, and the Civil Pollcie thereof, but chiefly address my
self to spend my talent of time and strength received in the distinction of
Divinity and Divillishnesse in the State personal and political, and that
principally of Policy.

In the distinction of humane nature, which since the fall in generation is
extremely corrupted, it is naturally discerned, and with reason concluded,
that, that man whose natural constitution or composition of Elements is most
equal, and freest from violent predomination of either particular, is
naturally most healthful and comfortable, and in humane reason hopefully
lasting, this no Naturalist will deny; the opposite hereof must needs be the
contrary in every respect.

In the distinction of Civil Policy (which was and is a State, God since the
fall approves of, where he formerly gave no religious Institution, as amongst
the Gentiles, neither yet does or will enjoin any, but as spiritually received
from his Son and Disciples) all rational Naturallists, and Disciples of
Christ, hold that to be safest whose constitution and contrivance in State, is
most free for justice in matters between man and man; And is least incident to
ways of oppression through unruly and destructive pride and covetousness, its
not intended by this expression to question what is in present being, and stir
up contention, about it, I wish the chief persons in it for Government were but
so free to do Justice, as the way is open for it, but evil men and oppressors
have done, do, and will abuse all ways of Equity and goodness.

In the distinction of truly Spiritual and Divine Nature in a particular or
personal way, all the holy men of God from Adam to this day in the effects
thereof do declare (in the measure of wisdom, power, and love received) to be
endeavoring of the most good obtainable toward mankind; and the general
well-being of all things for its use: this is most perfectly expressed in Jesus
Christ the perfect pattern of Equity and kindness, answerable to the Angels
Proclamation at his coming, Glory to God, etc. on earth peace, good will
toward men: all the records of Doctrine and Discipline of the way of
Redemption and salvation, the Actions also and sufferings of Christ fully
declare the same; suitable to his divine spiritual nature, he instituted a
visible politic State, without the least prejudice to the Civil, as the
Scripture holds forth at large in his own, and his peoples sufferings by it
without any trespass against it.

In the distinction of the true Ecclesiastical State, or Divine Policy, you
shall find it has its pattern in the nature of Christ's personal being,
according to that, is the Spirit of his Policy, not snaring humane nature, but
saving it; not imposing carnal ordinances or spiritual bonds upon any,
whether within, or without the State; but encouraging and approving the
innocent in their ways with freedom of spirit, both perfect, not extinguish
humane nature in its proper use; this has no works of violence in the way of
offense or defense, works not upon any, but with the word and counsel of the
Spirit of truth; it is always suffering, not doing wrong to any within, or
without it, its free to give, not to receive; to serve, not to be served. In
short, its most clear, that all that is of God and Christ in any spiritual way
in personal and particular respects, or in the politic and public, is in
spirit and truth one and the same with him.

Every Truth discovers its opposite in the nature thereof, whether in things
natural or spiritual; And so in the distinction of falsely spiritual, or
inhumane divillish nature, in a particular or personal way. All the wicked men
from Adam to this day in the effects thereof declare, in the measure of deceit,
pride, and envy received from the devil, to be endeavoring the most mischief
or evil that can be laid upon mankind, and upon all things provided for its
use; This is most perfectly expressed in the cursed nature thereof, transported
out of it self, and subjected under the disposition of the most false and
divellish nature of spirit, which runs out in full stream in the expression
of a false way Religion, or in the abuse and perversion of any institution of
Gods; the truth hereof is proved in Cain, in the Jews, and in all false
spirited persons likewise since those times, and most magnificently in these
last times in the spirit and policy of Antichrist, wherein the very way of
living is denied to those that submit not under the power thereof, in this
personal way from whence springs the policy thereof. The holy Ghost gives
the same distinction in 1 John 3.10,11,12. in the distinction of the policy
whereof, the nature of the spirit of the devil, and his offspring brought
forth in the cursed nature of man, are most publicly and palbably manifested
and discovered.

In the distinction of the Mystery of Iniquity in the public or politic
part thereof, it will appear to be the same with the personal, in disposition
or nature of spirit, not saving, but snaring mankind with all the ways of sin
and misery that the strength and violence of pride, deceit, and envy can make
and do; as it was Abels portion under Cain, the Jews under Egypt, and Babylon;
Christ's under Jews and Gentiles, so it is his Churches under a spiritual Egypt
and Babylon, the great cathedral State that compels all high and low, rich
and poor, bond and free, to be subject or to perish, by deprivation of humane
rights, or by infliction of undue sufferings, here, in false Church Government,
in the Seat and Throne of matters of conscience (which belongs to Christ
alone) the spirit of the devil through delusion with all lying signs and
wonders (rules therein with unnatural violence an higher way then ever was
allowed, or used by Christ, or his followers: 2 These. 2,3,4. Revel. 13. gulleth
the Earth under gilded conformity and uniformitie with forced hypocrisy in a
way of Religion, the most unnatural and divillish bondage in the world; which
in the height of its operation transports humane nature in to the most
implacable murtherous spirit of hell, which is pleased with no thing more then
the utmost ruin of mankind. By this very spirit does the holy Ghost discover
the Beast, the false Church State. Revel. 13.7. to the 18. And thus in shortest
manner I could, I have given you what I have received of the Discovery of the
Mystery of Iniquity, both in the personal or particular; and the public or
political part of it, which shunned and avoided helps to gain and preserve the
welfare of man in general.

Now that this is a way agreeable to reason, and confirmed by Scripture, judge
all rational people, what is from the devil in nature and policy, must needs
be all one, and produce the same effects and fruits, by which, says Christ, of
his special instruments, false Prophets, ye shall know them: Matthew. 7.16. 1
These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good: 1 John 4. read that
Chapter, and to verse 3. of the next Chapter, where you shall find the same way
or means of distinction by trying the spirits, etc. The former Treatises
touching the discovery of Policies and Natures help to clear up this; and so
does this following concerning false holiness, to which I refer you.

A brief Treatise discovering the holiness of Nations in their Church
Institution, and what relates thereunto to be false, and not of God.
Which in short is proved by considering, 1 What holiness is, or what is
meant by the Word. 2 How many sorts there be.


The meaning and drift of the Word is to set forth the pure nature, or use of
any thing, whereby the excellence thereof is expressed, and so the word is used
in Old and New Testament, as is commonly known to set forth God himself, and
all belonging to the Divine nature, and the state and use of all Gods
institutions.

The sorts of it are two.

1 Is invisible, inherent, and unchangeable, relating to the spiritual
substance expressed as an attribute of the same.

2 Is visible, imposed, temproary and pervertable, according to all
Institutions relating also to men's professions and callings, Laws and
Ordinances, stinted by ordination, and limitation, in respect of people, way of
worship, time and place, as has been publicly and tipically expressed in the
Church of the Jews in each particular: and is now refined in the Christian
Church; suitable to the more substantial and spiritual worship, and less
subject to abuse, but by gross and foul delusion, guilding or counterfeiting
the substantial or circumstantiall parts of any Institution, wherein only may
false holiness visibly and possibly cousist, as is most apparent, and will so
remain in farther examination thereof. For counterfeit, or false holiness, or
things seemingly holy, which in truth and proof are the absolute contrary, have
their rise or means of being in humane nature, and things subjected to the use
thereof; for what commands that in spirit is perfectly and unalterably in its
self and nature, good or evil, holy or unholy, which needs no proof in
beholding the fountains thereof.

All things subjected to the use of man, and man himself is under, or rather
capable of a twofold Institution, which God injoyneth and approves of, to wit,
Divine, and Civil government, which the moral Law in the two Tables plainly
shows: the state of the Jews and Gentiles before Christ's personal coming, and
the state of Christ's Church in and since his time, different both from Jews,
and the common way of the Gentiles politiquely and personally also most
eminently hold forth.

Civil Government is, or ought to be that, by which all men good and bad
(except exceeding and inconsistent therewith) have a being and preservation,
wherein the wheat and tares grow together till the harvest, freed from the
unnatural and unjust violence of cursed humane nature, which Christ himself
approves of in Cesars time, and his Apostles also, both doctrinally and
practically. This state except it be delusively transported out of it self for
the ends of divillish pride, deceit, and envy, is like the Sunshine and rain
upon the good and bad, the just and unjust, yea all creatures receive good
thereby; and in its proper centure is not easily perverted to cut off the
innocent from the earth, as common equity informs; And has no relation to
distinguishing of men's spirits, or their uses in any Divine Institution which
God has given, only to his own Son, since the time of types and refining,
wherein their being and use suitable to the beauty of his own love is made more
saving and comfortable to the sons of men.

Divine government which in truth is that, wherein Christians or Saints have
politic and visible fellowship with their spiritual head Christ, and God the
Father, the fountain of all mercy and goodness, and is of an higher, not
contrary, nature to Civility; wherein people are led forth in the disposition
of their Savior more by love and forgiveness, and doing good, yea for evil,
then by principles of equity, and returning like for like in cases of injury
and wrong done and received. This I need not stand to prove from Abels time of
opposition, to this day of Antichrists reign, wherein the innocent have
plentifully gone to the wall as the weakest parties use to do, and will, till
the brightness of innocence delivers them. This being of higher nature and
use then humane nature and sense did before the fall, and much less since the
curse, incline to, either to look into, or affect it, but in pride and
forgetful disobedience to God; is become like the forbidden fruit, by Gods
permission through the Serpents delusion, and perversion, even the greatest
means of destruction to mankind, with the greatest pretense of holiness, which
is truth and realty is altogether contrary thereunto.

This false holiness or abuse of Divine Government, and Gods holy
Institutions, whether in respect of the Church, or the Laws and Ordinances
thereof, will be manifestly discovered, in confidering,

The constitution of the body according to Christ's approved institution;
wherein observe: 1 The nature of the power and life thereof, by which it has
all due motion. 2 The nature of the material part or members incorporated in
that body.


The nature of the power properly by which it is, and moves, is no other in
kind, then that by which Christ gave it being, which is spiritual, according
to a divine instinct, and choice so to be; not by a power magisteriall, or
inhumanely compulsive, forcing humance nature above or contrary to its present
light: this truth is proved in gathering the Church, in making disciples, not
slaves, and by casting out of fellowship no farther then whence received, nor
into any worse condition for matters of the world in any due course; and this
agrees with the holiness of Divinity, which was manifested in himself by all
that he did or commanded to be done for the good of man.

The nature of the members and subject or material part of the constitution of
this divine instituted body, Christ visible Church, Gods worshippers, is
divine and spiritual, suitable to that of the Trinity, and the Law thereof,
which according to measure, brings forth all goodness, in truth of love of
God, in all his ways toward him, and men; and therefore Christ declares that
those that worship God shall do it in spirit and truth, for such the Father
seeks to worship him. Joh. 4.23. Phil. 3.3. you may see what the Apostles
gathered, and endeavored to incorporate into that fellowship and body, by the
several Epistles to the several Churches in their times; you may see likewise
what Law of the Sanctuary leads them to; and declares them to be, or not to
be that; read Ephesians. 4. besides many other Scriptures which are numberless,
and needless to cite to prove the truth hereof; this is suitable to the new man
which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness. Ephesians. 4.24.

Now look upon the false divine Institutions, the false Church States, which
are most divellish in the nature of the parts of constitution, and ye may soon
judge what the devil has done, where he is, and how he has, does, and will,
if not looked unto, use the sons of men as he did their Father Adam, and their
Mother Eve, undo them in their being men, whilst with delusion they seek to be
as gods; in this seeming divine government whether papistical, Episcopal, or
Pretbyteriall, changing of terms and shapes is nothing, without change of
natures, (a woolf is the same in a sheeps skin, and at the same time, as truly
as without it) if you shall find in either Church the nature of the first part
of the constitution wholly short of, or contrary to the preservation of
mankind, and the motion thereby in the Church, suitable to that whereby it is or
has its being, with all power of violence, and lying below civility (which
truly is so that abuses it) threatening people in to the Church, and keeping
them in, with a Babylonish Proclamation, fineing, imprisoning, murdering in to
it, in it, and so to cut off from it; you may easily conclude what it is in
point of holiness, is it not a power of gallant holiness? that can proclaim
Gentiles into Jews, and both into Christians? in the expression thereof, or
render people for dead and undone, and can likewise change the Gentiles hands,
always under civil use, into spiritual, heretical glibes, and tithes;
Artists, and Linguists, into Hevites, and Priests, and make, and mar people
in life and estate, without relation to Christian or Civil trespass;
Magistracy is gloriously honored to serve such Church power, helps well to
propagate the Gospel, and Christianity, the clean contrary way; your exercised
senses herewith needs no proof, it is enough for this part.

Look into the nature of the second part of the constitution, and you will find
the national lamps of the Gentiles spiritual, divine persons, so guided and
led by the Spirit of Christ, and Christian principles, that they can scarce
give time to hang or murder one the other for the weight of a farthing, it is
more proper to tell of their uncivillized natures, then of their Divinity:
witness daily experience of the holiness of the members in general, the holy
Ghost in the Prophets, and Revel. 13. has fully described it; but change
temporal Egypt and Babylon for slaves and slavery, in to spiritual, and it is
the very image of the holiness of this part of the constitution of the
National Churches of Europe, what difference between the Church of Christ and
the worlds? If Nations be the companies of Saints, the generality of Nations
are gallant pieces for holiness, in knowledge, and obedience of the will of
God, either moral, or instituted; Witness experience of least reason: and
what more can be expected from a people sanctified with a great word and a
blow, Truth I perceive must bring forth fullest evidence, though her witnesses
die in Jail or hang for it, before the earth (I mean Civility) will incline to
execute judgment upon the great Whore, by whom it was and is defiled, to the
shedding of a world of innocent blood; and notwithstanding her continual
blaspheming against God, his Name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven. Revel. 13.6. All which is accomplished with mysterious Iniquity, and
false holiness. Well says Wisdom (and most properly in this case) A whore is
a deep ditch: Prove. 23.27. ye may do well to examine also what is said of her
parties, which if true in the natural sense, much more in the spiritual.
Prove. 5.

Concerning Ordinances, circumstantiall Institutions, belonging to the Church
of Christ; which false Churches catch at, and profane as the Babylonians did
the vessels of the Temple in the Jews time. I shall omit to spent time about at
present, and only touch upon the holiness of times, and places, which are
ended in Christ.

Times and places are necessary adjuncts to every action both Civil and
Divine, without them nothing has being, and I know not why Christians which
may pray every where, 1 Timothy 2.8. and always, 1 These. 5.17. in respect of
either enjoined; they should not agree as well as Civil wise men upon the best
advantage in use of both concerning the worshipping of God. Moral commands of
the first Table are obeyed now in the drift and intention of them, not in the
literal expression, or else we have not to do with them, but the Jews only.

In the use of these Discoveries, all former, and that shall be, by whomsoever,
of any truths of God (all which tend in their right use to the good of man)
suffer me, O Nation, King, Parlaments, and People, this once more with my life
in my hand, (for artificially holy, and butcherly uncivil murderers are now
plenty in the Land) freely to speak to you, as one man, for so ye are in Civil
policy, in the prophetical expression of Mich. 6.8. he has showed thee, O
man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee? but to do justly,
love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God; make good your justice and
tenderness toward men, and walk toward God in your own innocent knowledge,
and use of his Institutions, as he reveals himself to you; not in vain
conceits with delusions of getting, or being higher then is your due: remember
what Adam got thereby, the Jews by taking pride in their visible Church State,
and the Egyptians and Babylonians in setting up worship of their own; Stoop a
little, and take Christ's counsel, Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false prophets, etc.
there be two sorts of them, one is in, or of the visible insitituted Chruches
of God, the other altogether without them; so it was in the Jews time, so it was,
and will be in the Christians; the best of them are liars or else could not be
false, in calling, or message; they may both go together for any good that
comes by them, for they undo all where they prevail. Witness all the States
upon Record in Scripture, and in our Civil Histories and Chronicles, and the
present state of this kingdom.

In outward callings I condemn no man's personal condition and virtues, for
God calls his people out of Babylon, yet condemns that State, and their being
therein; destruction approaching by oppression, and believing lies, seldom
does miscarry, because events contrary to expectation are inavoidable. It Was
Adams case, and ours is too much like it: O England, Egypt, and Babylon for
spiritual in stitution, put away the spirit thereof both in temporal and
spiritual bondage, and oppression; lest the continuance thereof, put you yet
farther into their plagues; forget not the mysterious, and holy carriage of the
Clergy, you may one day see from whence they come, though never the bottom of
the place; behold how they reform, but lay out hook and line for power and
means; For humanities sake, let them have means (during life) because they
cannot work (the more is their shame with Christians) but cut off the entail
thereof, upon their artificial Heirs; and for power lend or give none but
Civil protection, which is due to all in Civil demeanor, and it is such, and
more, not less that wins persons to the love of God and his ways; and by
which God strengthens any Civil State. I hope ye that sway the power of the
State, have enough of spiritual compulsive Government, except ye intend to
keep up the trade of oppression, wherein ye shall want pillows for your elbows
to keep all easy, and none so fit to help you with them, as false prophets, or
a proud, covetous ruling priesthood; and ye Subjects, you may have enough, if
you have not yet of turning in Religion by great ones, except ye mean to make a
complete Weathercock thereof, sure if in vain is the teaching for Doctrine
men's precepts therein, as much in vain is your obeying them; Both which you may
plainly perceive by considering, Isa. 29.13. with Matthew. 15.8,9. Farther take
notice civility, love of humanity, not dotage on sacrifice, is the first and
lowest step to Christianity (if Religion shall begin at the right end) for he
that says he loves God, and hates his brother, is a liar: 1 John 20. Let not
this be lost in the service of a State of Cainish, Jewish, and Antichristian
sacrifice; this is the root which inableth to honor all men, love the
brotherhood, fear God, and honor the King: 1 Pet. 2.17. Serve, O earth, no
longer, the cage of every unclean bird, the confined State, or religious person
of flourish, and every way-turning-consciences, which is the Broad way that
leads to the wide gate, if rude Nations, and multitudes go therein. Thus in
Gods way with most hearty desires of your right use, which is your safest means
of preservation, and highest honor, I rest in all service of Civility, yours
to command whilst, M. Q.

To the Clergy of false Prophet, I would add a few lines by way of Inquiry,
but I suppose he is at present in great passion, being oppressed in the want of
a power and way to vent that sacrificing spirit with which Cain showed Abel,
the Egyptians and Babylonians slavourized the people of Israel, the Jews made
away the Lords Prophets; the Jews and Gentiles both put Christ and his
Disciples to death, and torments tending thereunto; and by which also since,
have been all suffering for conscience sake, and besides this cause of passion
before him.

In the time of remembrance, there is in his conscience, and knowledge, hell
and death behind him, where he has left the deluded multitudes of rude Nations
(Saints of his own making) to whom blasphemously he has administered pledges,
and seals of salvation; on the one side of him is desolation (the want of a way
to live) on the other side, the sight of an artificial metlesome Instrument
broken, which is good for naught in any use till new molded by fire, if not in
passion; Here is matter enough for the highest. But how ever if there be any
intermission, or when its over Clergy, remember to answer these ensuing
Quaeries.

1 Qu. Whether does the use of Tongues, by which men speak in several
languages, and translate expressions out of one Tongue into another, enable
people to know God and his ways with the sons of men?

2 Qu. Whether the use of Arts in expression of any thing does infuse any thing
Divine or of God, in spiritual ways either into the relator or hearers; or
rather is it not as strange tongues to such as know them not?

3 Qu. Whether the Prophets thus made, and set up, are not that spiritual
generation which Christ says not pass till the great destructions, and
desolations of his Church, and the earth are fulfilled? Matthew. 24.34.

FINIS.

