A REMONSTRANCE TO THE PEOPLE.

Psalm. 7.9. Oh let the wickedness of the Wicked come to an end, but establish
the Just.

Job 34.30. That the Hypocrite reign not, lest the People be ensnared.

Psalm. 21.7. For the King trusts in the Lord, and through the mercy of the
most high he shall not be moved.

ORdered by the High Court of Reason, that twelve thousand Copies hereof be
forthwith printed and published in the several Counties of this Kingdom
respectively.

LONDON. Printed in the Year 1649.

A REMONSTRANCE TO THE PEOPLE.
Royal and Loyal Fellow Subjects,
WHat honest Heart does not bleed to see this (lately glorious) Nation thus lie
gasping? who can refrain from utterance, who conceives he thinks of any thing
which may advance the reuniting of our distracted obedience? Suffer me also
therefore to disclose my heart, in this sad Case, wherein every good Man has
an Interest, though the Great Ones have the guilt: the brains of a wise Man,
and the bowels of a common Father, met together in one counsel to you, Fear
GOD, and the KING; and meddle not with them that are given to change; here is
our warrant (beyond a Gypsies knot, or a dow-bak'd Ordinance) we may be
Royalists, and Religious too. But the destruction that dogs the contempt of
this advice, you or your Children will live to see and suffer; in the
desolations of your Country which is ready to be laid waste, the dissolution
of its Government, which even at this instant tottereth, and in the miseries
and judgments upon your Posterity which are ineffable and worthy of God; to the
horrid production of these calamities you are all promiscuously made accessory;
impeached by a Confederacy that would be thought meek in Murder, that usurp a
Saintship in Sacrilege, and labor to skreen themselves from obloquy, by an
imputation of their villainies to your consent, and abetting. If we demand, why
the last Parliament was called? They answer, to ease the Grievances of the
People: If we enquire, who chased the KING from His Parliament? They must still
answer, the People: If we ask, who pursued Him? ensnared Him? Imprisoned Him?
who called for Justice against Him? who Butchered Him? Echo is the same, the
People. Thus these Anachims of Hell, these Zanzummins for the Devil, who
flatter themselves under Gods vengeance, and whose transgressions are Registered
to all eternity, in the success of their impieties, practice upon your
stupefied coldness, and take advantage through your fears to scandalize your
Loyalty. If a tile only from the housetop fall on your heads, you are
sensible; and now the Kingdom is falling, are you stupid? shall other Men's
Rebellions taint your Families, and pose succeeding Generations to distinguish
between the Patriots of their Country, and the Cutthroats who waded in their
Princes blood? A Remonstrance to the People was the first invention to unsoder
your obedience from your KING, that was Machiavel's Masterpiece, whereby they
made you, and your Purses the rash Instruments of their ends; but never
acquainted you with their bloody and confused purposes: there they revealed a
visible design, but concealed their capital intentions. The Protestant
Religion (which has cost you so much blood and money, yet is now scoffed at
under the reproach of Pulpit-doctrine) was in danger, Popery was coming in,
the Government of the Church oppressed (tender Consciences) and off went
Canterbury's Head. Evil Counselors labored to subvert the fundamental Laws
(which they are now abrogating) and to introduce an Arbitrary Government (but
they scorned to give this Honor to any but themselves) and away flew
Strafford's Head. Thus they made a strict profession of Zeal, justice, and
piety, and by a subtle inversion of the precept of God, they pretended to do
some good, that much evil might come thereof. In one place they lay before
your eyes their Jealousies, and Fears; when God knows the greatest fears
were, lest through some cranny of their dissimulation, you should discern their
fraudulency. In another place, they are full of immodest bitterness,
peremptory presumption, popular insinuations, and a medley of slanders and
flatteries, all tending to rumor and impression in seduceable Spirits. Thus at
first they dissembled themselves into your unwary hearts, and now they force
themselves into your purses, your houses, your barnes, and your very beds; yet
still you are led by them like the Ox that goes to the slaughter, or the
Fool that laugheth when he is carried to the whipping-post: but let me speak
as to wise Men, and judge ye what I say, imagine how glorious a comparison is
made both by God and man between those that put a Kingdom out of frame, and
those that reduce it into order; think how diffusive that Honor would be over
all the Christian world, and how firm and permanent that comfort would prove
to your Posterity, if you return to your obedience, re-establish your KING, and
by a just retaliation leave these Traitors Paramount, these Crumeni-mulgent
Rebels to catch cold at their backs, and perish by themselves: but because duty
taught and rightly understood, is a surer obligation than a blind custom of
obedience; as a seeing Man may tread surer by a light, than a blind Man can by
a Guide; I will in a compendious endeavor dig to the ground of the
Constitution of this Kingdom, and show you the very root of your obedience,
that seeing the reason, and the reasonableness of it, you may also see your
errors, and seeing them forsake them, and with them your perfidious or blind
Guides.

And here I must declare my self to be such an Admirer of this Architecture,
that whether it had the influence of a supernatural wisdom, whether it were
contrived at once, or perfected by an act of time, I presume no frame of
Government in the whole world does transcend it for exactness of true policy;
here is a regulated provision for the Sovereignty of the KING, and here is an
ample dowry set apart for the People; here is the counterpoize of the Nobility
to restrain Tyrannical excess, and here are also the Privileges of the
People to curb the insolence of the Barons. But, lest I lose my self in
admiration, I proceed, We must bear regard to Government as an indivisible
beam of divine perfection; and as is the Constitution of it, such is the
Ordinance of God; and as is the Ordinance, such ought to be the proportion of
our Duty and Subjection. The customary distinctions of it are threefold; In
relation to the Measure of it, it is either Absolute or Limited. In relation to
the Manner of it, it is either Supreme or Subordinate. And in reference to the
Means of acquiring it, it is either Elective or Successive: That of
Prescription and that also of Conquest is reducible to these.

Secondly, Government is either Nomotheticall, understanding by it the power of
making new Laws, and interpreting the old; or Gubernative, intending by it the
power of putting those Laws in execution. This leads us on to the subject
wherein this Supreme power and trust is resident. And that again according to
the usual partition is threefold: It is either in one, and then it is a
Monarchy. Or in many (the best for Birth and abilities) then it is an
Aristocracy. Or in the whole Community, and then it is a Democracy. That ours
is a Monarchy Successive, needs no proof; but that it is Limited, I prove by
these three Reasons, (many more might be alleged) First, in all Ages beyond
record, the Laws and Customs of this Realm have been the rule and quadrature
of Government. Liberties have been insisted on, and Grants thereof obtained.
Limitations of Regal power are to be seen in a plentiful manner in Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right, and elsewhere. It is limited also in the
Succession; for, a KING cannot leave his Crown to whom he pleases, He cannot
disinherit his Son and Heir by any exorbitancy of will, by any violent
emanations of love contracted by the merit or insinuations of a Privado, or
Favorite, nor for any displeasure or indignation conceived against his Son,
therefore the reason will hold a fortiori; if He cannot, His Subjects cannot;
for, it is liquid, where they limited Him they also bounded themselves,
otherwise the Government were Elective, and not successive: apply the present
practice of the Army, and their Hacknies at Westminster to this rule, and let
any sober Man judge whether they be not the only Subverters of the
Fundamental Laws. Secondly, I conceive it will follow as clearly from hence,
that when they Martyred the KING (who died in the defense of these Laws, and
to protect you from that slavery into which they are about to entangle you)
they dissolved the Parliament for that Grant which did capacitate them to sit
durante beneplacito, could not be intended (neither is it pretended) to bind
His Successors, for then they might sit in infinitum, which also would destroy
both the Succession and the Monarchy, unless they would have us Governed (as
the Spaniard says) par Rey de havas, by a King of beans, or a twelfnight King.
Thus you see you are not bound in point of conscience to obey them as a
Parliament, or to regard their Declarations and Ordinances any more than
Ballads. True it is, they have you under a Power, but such an one as if Beasts
will challenge, rational Men should be ashamed to subject themselves unto;
such a power have Stotes and Polecats, and other vermin over young Chickens
and other poultry: and is this a power for English Subjects to exercise over
one another? Secondly, I prove it limited from the Oath that the Kings have
taken at their Coronation, by which they swear to Govern by the Common and
Statute Laws of the Land; for, those Laws were not devised or made solely by
them, but by the joint concurrence of the other two Estates in Parliament,
therefore to be confined to that which is not merely their own is limited.
Lastly, I prove it limited by the Concession of CHRALES the I. (howl ye
Murderers when ye hear Him named) who neither wanted knowledge in the just
latitude of His Power, nor justice to acknowledge the extent of it: the words
are in His Declaration from Newmarket, where He says, [The Law is the measure
of His Power:] words truly worthy of a King, but does it not open the sluices of
your eyes to remember what measure was returned to Him? well might He
complain, heu patior telis vulnera facta meis! His mercy (by the obliquities
of a Helbred rout) is curdled into the Kingdoms misery, and the simplicity of
His Grace made Him a sacrifice to the ungrateful violence of seducing, and
seduced People: as the former Reasons are clear to show that the Supreme
Authority of this Land is limited; so these following Reasons will also show it
to be mixed.

In the Answer of King CHAARLES the I. to the 19. Propositions, He there
acknowledges, this Monarchy to be mixed with Aristocracy in the House of
Lords, and Democracy in the House of Commons: From which words I reason thus,
that Monarchy in which the three Estates are constituted, to the end that the
power of One should moderate and restrain from excess the powers of the
other, is mixed in the root and essence of it; but such is this Monarchy, as
appears by the KING'S acknowledgment, and also by the Laws of the Land,
therefore it is mixed.

Secondly, that Monarchy where the Legislative power is in all three (jointly)
is in the very radication of it compounded and mixed of those three; for that
is the height of power, to which the other parts are subordinate and
subservient, so that where this resideth in a mixed subject, that is in Three
distinct concurrent Estates, the consent, Votes, and concourse of all most
free, and none depending on the will of the other, that Monarchy in the very
model and frame of it is of a mixed constitution; but such is the state of
this Monatchy, as appears by the former acknowledgement, therefore plainly it
follows that it is mixed.

I shall briefly touch upon three things, wherein it is mixed, for further
illustration of the proofs, and so conclude: First, it is mixed and qualified
in the Nomotheticall power, so that an Act or an Ordinance cannot have the
nature and form of a Law of this Land, if it proceed from any One, or Two of
these, without the positive concurrence of the Third. Secondly, it is mixed in
imposition of Taxes on your Estates; the KING by His Prerogative cannot require
Contributions not granted to Him by Law; you may well wonder then how these
squirting virginal Jacks at Westminster (that move only under the heavy
threatening fingers of the Army) can require them: for, though the House of
Commons in a Parliament be the Representation of the People, yet the People
cannot invest their Representatives with a power which was not in themselves.
Now the People have no power to do an Act which directly or indirectly does
put it in the will and pleasure of any One or Two of the Estates, to overthrow
the Third. But it is now too evident unto your that the power of opening and
shutting the Purse of the Kingdom is such a power, that if it be in One or Two
of the Estates without the concurrence of the Third, then they, or that One, by
that power may necessitate the other to comply to any Act, or to disable it
from its own defense: by this error we have lived to see the damnable and
cruel Butchery of the KING, the Abolishing of the House of Peers; and thus is
the Riddle resolved, of King and Parliament, Parliament and Army, and
Parliament and Kingdom.

Lastly, it is mixed in the united power of transacting the weighty Affairs of
the Kingdom, which in the Writ of Summons are termed the Ardoa Regni: for, I
conceive that there are two kinds of Affairs which cannot be dispatched
without the concurrence of the three Estates: First, such as concern the
public safety and weal, so far as a general damage or advantage extends
to the whole body Politic by the well or ill managing thereof; for, then there
is the same reason as in making of new Laws; for, why was not the power of
making new Laws committed to the trust of One, but reserved for the unanimous
agreement of all Three? but because the intent of the Architects was, that no
new thing which was of public concernment, should be introduced as
Authoritative, and binding, without the consent of the three Estates: therefore
no transactions in this Kingdom can be equipollent to a Law, which are not
enlivened, and informed with this threefold Authority. Secondly, such as are
accompanied with a necessity of public charge as in time of War, for then
is the Purse of the Kingdom required; but it is evident (as I proved before)
that this must be done by the concurrence of all three, for otherwise it would
be all one to put the power of our Estates in the hands of One, as to put the
power of such undertakings in His hands alone, which of necessity do introduce
an engagement of public charge.

I shall now lay down a few Supposals by way of recapitulation, and you shall
not need to go to John Goodwin for a legal Catechism. Suppose then, first:
that a People wearied to it by conquest, or led to it by free choice, both
Nobles and Commons make a resignation of themselves by public Oath and
agreement to our Sovereign, to be Governed by Him, and His Heirs for ever, by
such and such fundamental Laws: here we find a fountainhead of Supremacy,
though stopped in the streams of its exercise. Secondly, suppose that future
contingent cases will happen requiring additionall Laws, and therefore they
covenant with their Sovereign, that in the constitution of postnate Laws,
they both Nobles and Commons will reserve to themselves a free concurrence, and
will not be subject to any such Laws as shall be framed by any One or Two of
the Estates. Thirdly, suppose that although the Peers can assemble in their
Personal capacities, yet the Commons through the greatness of their number
cannot, and therefore it was further articled and agreed upon, that every
Corporation should have power to delegate one, as their Representative in this
public business, where the Nobles by themselves, and the Commons by their
Substitutes assembling, the whole Body may convene for the establishing of new,
and expounding of old Laws. Fourthly suppose, because the occasion of making
new, or interpreting old Laws would not be constant and perpetual; and that
it would carry an appearance of a monstrous Government where there were three
Heads; they did establish these three Estates to be visibly existent, according
to future emergencies; and because a Monarchy was designed and intended, and
therefore a Supremacy of power must be reserved for One; it was concluded that
these two Estates should be a Convention of His Subjects sworn to Him, and all
former Laws, and the new which were to be enacted, should be called His Laws,
and they bound by their Oath to obey Him in them as soon as they had received
His Royal Assent. Fifthly suppose, because He was bound by His Oath to Govern
by His Laws, that He by His Council should best know when there was need of
making new Laws, therefore the power of Assembling and Dissolving these
Estates was solely committed to His hands. Here is the model of this blessed
Government, and now you may perceive you want not Laws, but your KING to
protect you by His Laws. And what quintessence of delusion, what efficacy of
error has bewitched you, to betray and scandalize the succors of your
reason; to forsake a certain, and duly attemper'd Liberty, and to receive a
Bondage with rejoicing from the Sword point of a Rebel, as from a Benefactour!
an Outlaw of Heaven, whose conscience the X. Commandments are no stronger to
tie, than are ten Sunbeams to manacle the Murderers hands. I have seen the
Crocodile weep, strain a face like an old Woman at it with a hard stool, and
counterfeit the Publicans march upon his breast, with Lord be merciful to me a
Sinner! but alas! this is but the brocage of ambition, these are but feigned,
and affected semblances to beguile the world, no true qualities ingenerated in
his nature; for, you may sooner find a Hog to be a High Priest among the Jews,
or a Horse in a Swans nest, than true devotion in an ambitious breast; the
reason is obvious why these Men should introduce a Change, because every branch
of the Law does upbraid their guilt; but for you to abett this Change is as
unreasonable, as for him that knows a near, plain, and secure way to his
house, yet will stay till midnight, and ramble through woods and forests which
swarm with Thieves and Robbers. We read in Samuel, that when Saul was to be
Anointed King, the Holy Ghost says, among the Children of Israel there was not
a godlier Person than he; this, though it failed in the example of Saul, will
thus far justify Phisyognomie, that formosa facies, bone indolis est muta
commendatio: And truly you cannot be so much enamored of Oliver's features,
as to think your selves secure in his virtues; for, by the sign that nature
has hung out, conjecture may be easily made of natures designment for that
head: It is observable also when Saul was to be Anointed he was seeking of
Asses, and the Prophet brought him tidings of them: now it is an even wager
Oliver is upon the same employment, and if John Goodwin his Seer can but bring
tidings of these Asses, Cromwell also may be Anointed; a little unguentum
album, from the Apothecaries, is excellent for S. Anthonies fire in the Nose,
probatum est: but if this Seer chance to meet with some of Balaam's breed, that
turn aside from the Sword of his strange Spirit (as many such there are) then
it may be feared Oliver with all his vamping Hypocrisy will never be able to
clap a new sole of Government upon this Kingdom: The numbering of the People
cost King David threescore and ten thousand of his Subjects lives, (his end was
Pride) but if you would spy day at a little hole and number the loyal hearts,
it may save the lives of so many Englishmen (for the preservation of your
Country is your aim) if when People speak evil of the KING, the Birds of the
air tell tales of it; doubtless the Angels of heaven would conveigh such a
Catalogue of duty, if you want not hearts to send it to your KING: Here is no
place to propound the means to effect it; for, He that shows his treasure
among Thieves, is guilty of his own pillage.

OLIVERUS CROMWELL Anagr. Velo lucri move rus.
HIs ominous nature here decypher'd stands,
Obeying Satan's wiles in his commands.
The Peoples Liberty he makes his train,
But seeks through blood a Kingdom to obtain:
Trace him, but trust him not; his Soul is true
To profit, and ambition; false to you.
For power that may control, when it descends,
Their bondage whom it fawns on, it intends.
But when this Spider, and the web he spins
You have destroyed, your Liberty begins.
FINIS.

