The Qualifications of Persons, declared Capable by the Rump, Parliament to
Elect, or be Elected, Members to supply their House.

Printed in the year 1660.

THE QUALIFICATIONS, Of Persons declared, capable to Elect, or be Elected; as
Members to supply the present house of PARLIAMENT.
THE Representative of the Parliament of England, having for many years
employed their constant endeavor, to impose Freedom and Liberty on the Three
Nations; (notwithstanding their obstinate reluctance, and opposition thereunto,
who would take upon them against all right and reason, to be their own Judges)
and being now after two scandalous Ejectments, and as many signal
Restorations, happily returned to discharge the remaining fragment of their
Trust; do find, (to their unspeakable grief,) the Red-coats, (in whom they
always loyally acquiesed) failing of their pay, to fail likewise of their
Trust, and seduced by evil Counsel, to adhere unto the Common enemy that is
to say; The said three Nations, in complying with their Desires and Addresses,
which are to have this present Representative dissolved, and a Free Parliament,
speedily Convened, (which they tremble to think upon) or the Secluded, Members
readmitted, (which they equally abhominate) or the present House supplied with
new Election, which their bowels sigh to reflect on: Nevertheless, they have
after serious and mature deliberation resolved upon he lest, (that is to say,)
to fill up their House, as being (though of dangerous consequence) less
horrible, and dreadful to themselves, then any other way. And to the end, the
Persons to be Elected, may be of as near a Condition as may be, to match the
present Members, and so possibly, go Hand in Hand with them, in carrying on the
said Work; they have agreed upon these following Qualifications, and do Enact,
and be it here by Enacted, that no Person, whatsoever, presume to Elect, or be
Elected, (under pain of Confiscation of his Estate, and sale of his Person,)
that is not allowed capable thereof, by the said Qualifications, in which they
do profess before the searcher of all hearts, that they have freely discover
the naked truth of all their intentions, as if their Breasts were to be opened,
and their Hearts taken out, (which God defend) it would manifestly appear to
all the World.

Qual. I.
Whosoever has at any time been known to take the Name of God in vain, that
is, to swear, or forswear himself for nothing, without advantage to that
Public, or his own particular concernments, but merely out of rash and
needless profanation; is hereby declared, utterly incapable to Elect, or be
Elected, as a Member to serve in this present Parliament. For Oaths have been
found by experience, to be wonderful expedients in State affiaires; and ought
not to be made or broken, but with great and serious Consideration.

Qual. II.
Whosoever is noted to be a Sabbath breaker, or Prophaner of the Lords day, is
declared, incapable to Elect, or be Elected, etc. For he that cannot one day in
seven observe, (at least in show) on Commandment in ten, that costs nothing
the keeping, nor gains any thing by being broken, is not fitly qualified to sit
in this Parliament; For all such sins, as have no immediate relation to the
service of this House, must be openly detested, that there may be the less
notice taken of such as are for the advantage and interesse thereof.

Qual. III.
Whosoever has at any time, within the space of these twenty years last past,
been observed to be disguised in drink, unless he can bring testimony that it
is his usual Custom to drink himself drunk in private alone, to avoid giving
evil example, or in secret and well affected Company, without healths, is
declared incapable to Elect, or be Elected; Provided that Surfeit and Gluttony
be not included within this incapacity, nor such other alterations, as may fall
upon the Spirit of a man, at Thanksgiving Dinners.

Qual. IV.
Whosoever does live in Adultery, or Fornication, or has at any time had
Carnal Copulation with the Wife, Sisters, or Daughter, of any Member of
Parliament, now sitting without the Consent, or Satisfaction of the said
Member; Or has been seen in the day time, to resort to houses of evil fame,
or frequent the Company of Common women, is declared, incapable to Elect, or be
Elected, etc. Provided that this do not extend to any Person, that has kept a
Concubine or Concubines so long, that now there is no notice taken thereof, or
to such as by the loss of their Eyes or Noses; Botches in their Skins, or
aches in their Bones, can bring proof of their Repentance, and Resentment of
their former Lives: as it has been allowed in the Cases of William Lord
Viscont Monson, Sir Henry Martin, Mr. Secretary Scot, William Heveningham, Esquire
and others.

Qual. V.
Whosoever has suffered for his Conscience, either by Imprisonment,
Sequestration, or sale of his Estate, or has refused to take any Oath, imposed
by this Parliament; Howsoever, contradictory to any former Oath, by him taken.
Or has gained nothing by the Ruin of his Native Country, nor is liable to
suffer by any Revolution, that may tend to the General Settlement thereof, but
being unbias'd by any party, is at liberty to promote the proper and natural
interests of the Nation in General. Or has subscribed any Petition or
Remonstrance for a Free Parliament, or for the Readmission of the Secluded
Members, to their Right of sitting; Or for a time to be prefix't, to determine
the sitting of this present Parliament, or any thing else against the sense of
this House, in order to the settlement of the Nation. Or has declared against
Taxes, Excise, Freequarter, Plunder, Arbitrary Government, the Perpetuation,
and Supremacy of the Present Parliament, Continuation of the distractions,
decay of Trade, and slavery of the English Nation. Any, and every such Person,
is hereby declared, not only incapable to Elect, or be Elected, a Member of
this present, or any future Parliament; or of bearing any Office, or place of
Trust In this Commonwealth, but shall suffer such further punishment, either
by Sequestration, or sale of his Estate or Person, as to the wisdom of this
House shall seem expedient.

Qual. VI.
Whosoever has been engaged in the late Rebellions of Sir George Booth
Barronet, or Lambert Symnell Esquire or any way aiding, or assisting thereunto; Or
has sat or acted, in, or under the late Committee of Safety, or had any hand
in the late disturbances of this present Parliament, is, (beside such other
punishment as this House shall judge fitting) declared incapable, to Elect, or
be Elected, to serve in this or any future Parliament; Provided that this shall
net extend to such Members of this House, as were engaged in the said
Insurrections. For if all such should be impeached before the House be full,
there would not be a Quorum left to make it a Parliament.

Qual. VII.
Whosoever has called Charles Stewart King, or drunk his Health, or prayed God to
restore Him to his Right, and every honest man to his own, or used any such
malignant and treasonable expressions; Or has called the present Parliament,
Rump, Arse, Bum, Tail, or Breech: Or has rejoiced at the interruptions
thereof, or wished it at an end. Or has Sued, Arrested, Reviled, Beaten,
Kicked, Cookolded, Trepand, or refused to Trust any of the Members thereof,
during the intervalls; Or has any Action of Debt, or Bill of Complaint against
any Member now sitting: and does refuse to give the said Member a full
discharge, and general release; any, and every such person is declared
utterly, in capable to Elect, or be Elected, to serve in this present, or any
future Parliament, or of bearing any Office, or place of Trust in this
Commonwealth.

Qual. VIII.
No man shall be judged, rightly qualified, nor admitted to fit in this House
as a Member thereof, that does not first acknowledge this Parliament to be a
Free Parliament, unfounded by the Laws of God or Man; that all things are
exposed to the will of the Members thereof, who may freely dispose of the
Estates, Persons, Consciences, and Lives of men as they please, and afterward
make it lawful. That this House has a greater power in Civil affairs then
the Turk, and in Spiritual then the Pope, for it is Head of Churches, not yet
in being, and judge of more Faith, then all the General Counsels ever were.
That it can damn, and save, and bind, and loose in this World, in dispight of
the Next; make what it pleases, Holy or Profane, True or False, Scripture or
Apocrypha, and no man dares to question its infallibility: and that every
Member thereof, can Vote and Swear Contradictions, and make others do so too,
or pay them for it.

Qual. IX.
No man shall be judged, rightly qualified, nor admitted to sit in this House,
until he has engaged to use his Christian endeavor, to carry on a thorough
Reformation of the Calendar, that the English Nation may no more use the Julian
account, nor reckon by the year of our Lord, but by the Roman Indiction,
according to the custom of the Christians in* Ancient times; that is, reckon
the year by their Taxes, and not their Taxes by the year: A Reformation, which
this Parliament made some progress in before their late interruption, when
they drew the whole year, within the compass of four months, and do intend by
Gods help, to bring to perfection with all Convenient expedition.

Qual. X.
Whosoever makes profession of Godliness and holiness of life, although he be
commonly reputed to be both a Fool, and a Knave, a notorious Villain, and
Diabolical Hypocrite, shall nevertheless be allowed (if duly elected) to be
rightly qualifyed to sit in this present Parliament. Provided that this
capacity do not extend to Charles Fleetwood Esquire John Disbrow Yeoman, and Sr.
Henry Vain Knight, lately Ejected, John Hewson Cordwayner, (...) of the City
of London.

Ordered that Dr. John Owen, Mr. Hugh Peter's, and Major John Wildman, be
included within this Qualifycation notwithstanding they are in Orders,

Qual. XI.
Whosoever has had a hand in the late Kings blood, or Petitioned to bring him
to trial, or has demolished his Houses, cut down his Woods, or pulled down
Churches to sell the materials. Or can bring proof that he has been of one or
more High Courts of Justice, at one or more Committees of Sale or
Sequestration, of the Committee for Propagation of the Gospel. Or has been a
Commissioner of the Excise, a Sequestrator, Treasurer or Trustee, for the sail
of Kings Lands or Goods, or Bishops, and Deanes and Chapters, and Delinquents
Lands. And has gotten a considerable estate by buying or selling, the
aforesaid Lands; And can make it appear that his head is forfieted to the Tower
on London Bridge, and the 4 Quarters of his Outward man to 4 respective Gates
of the City, if any Revolution should happen to the General settlement of the
Nation. Any and every such person is declared rightly Quallifyed to sit in this
present Parliament, and shall be admitted without taking any Oath at all: for a
man's skin is tenderer then his conscience, and this world much nearer to him
then the next.

Qual. XII.
Whosoever can bring proof by the loss of his ears or otherwise, that has
stood the Pillory for Perjury, Forgery, Faction, or sedition to hinder the
government of the late King. Or that he has been burnt in the hand, forehead,
or shoulder, thrown over the Bar, set in the stocks, Carted or whipped at the
tail of a cart, for any thing by him done, said, or written against the said
Government before the year 1642. shall be approved as most fitly qualified to
sit in this present Parliament. Provided that this shall not extend to William
Prin of Swanswick Esquire Utter Bencher of Lincolns-Inne; nor to Major William Poe.

Qual. XIII.
Whosoever is Son, Brother or Nephew, or can prove himself to be the natural
Son or Bastard of any Member, or of the Mother, Sister, or Wife of any Member
of this Parliament now sitting, or any Member thereof deceased that sat since
the year 1648, and will engage to conform to the Sense of this House according
to the example of the said Member unto whom he has relation, is hereby
declared rightly qualifyed, either to elect or be elected a Member of this
present Parliament.

Qual. XIV.
Whosoever can bring proof, that he is a man of a public Spirit, fit for all
times and occasions, of approved liberty of Conscience, and of courage and
resolution to encounter any danger that extends to soul or body, (if need be)
rather then live out of Authority and Command, or under the Laws of God or Man.
That he has proper suit for the service of the present Government, and can do
the same things by the Spirit of God, which other men are drawn to by the
temptations of the Devil. That he can break Oaths by providence, and forswear
himself to the glory of God, deal falsely and treacherously with men out of
Conscience, and verily believes it to be a greater sin to name Faith then to
break it. That Religion is his trade, and God himself his occupation. That he
can hold forth any useful, though notorious untruth with convenient obstinacy,
until he belives himself, and so renders it no sin. That he has an excellent
spirit to find out ways of raising money, and will deserve his share both of
the substance and curses of the People. Any and every such Person is declared
to be most aptly qualifyed to elect or be elected Member of this present
Parliament. Provided that this cappacity do not extend to Bullstard. Whitlock
Esquire Richard Salway Grocer, lately ejected this House.

Qual. XV.
Whosoever can produce testimony, that he has taken the late Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy, the Protestation, the Solemn League and Covenant, the
Engagement to be true and faithful to the present Government, without King or
House of Lords. That he has subscribed the addresses to live and dye with
Oliver and Richard Cromwell, and taken the Oaths to be true and faithful to
the Governments under them, and feels no alteration in his Conscience, but is
ready to take the Oath of Abjuration of Charles Stewart, King Jesus, or any
other single Person. Any and every such person is declared and rightly
qualifyed, to elect or be elected Member of this present Parliament, and shall
be admitted to sit (being duly elected) without taking any further Oath at all.

Qual. XVI.
Ordered that a Bill be forthwith brought in to make Newgate Bridewell and
Bedlam Corporations, that writs may be issued out to empower them to chose
their respective Representatives to serve in this present Parliament in as full
manner as the Upper-bench and the Fleet have already done.

Qual. XVII.
Any Noble man or late Peer of the Realm that will renounce his Creation, or
his Creator, and is otherwise. Qualifyed, shall be allowed capable (being first
naturalized by an Act of this House) to be made a Knight Citizen, or Burgess,
and being duly elected and sworn, shall be admitted to sit among the Rabble of
this House, in as full manner as Phillip Herbert Esquire late Earl of Pembrocke,
and William Cicill late Earl of Salisbury at this present do. Provided that
this shall not extend to any Peer of the late other house, that having a Trade
to get his living honestly by, did nevertheless betake himself to so lewd a
course of life.

Qual. XVIII.
Whosoever by fraud coven or otherwise has possessed himself of another man's
estate or has gotten into his hands any Office or Place of considerable Value,
by ejecting indirectly the right owner thereof, and does not know how to
maintain and justify the same so well as by being chosen a Member of this
House, shall be approved of in so doing to have given good security for his
fidelity to the present Government, and be capable to elect or be elected etc.

Qual. XIX.
Resolved that the Curses of the People shall henceforth (that is to say from
this present 14th of February 1659) be reputed and taken for their free voices,
and whosoever has most of the curses of his Country shall be understood to
have most of their free voices, and be approved as most fitly qualifyed to sit
in this present Parliament. For such will be very profitable Members to this
House when it shall be judged seasonable to make the People pay for their
cursing as well as they have done for their swearing.

Qual. XX.
No Man shall be admitted to sit in this House as a Member thereof howsoever
duly qualifyed and elected (except before excepted) until he has taken the
following Oath upon the Holy Evangelists.

The Oath.
IAB, Do swear in the presence of Almighty God, and by the contents of this
Book to be true and faithful to this present Government as it is now
unestablished, and to the Keepers of the Liberties unsight unseen, whether they
are of invisible and internal Nature as Fiends, Pugs, Elves, Furys, Imps or
Goblins, or whether they are incarnate as Redcoates Lobsters, Corporals,
Troopers, Dragoones. I do also swear that neither Charles Stewart nor any
Person claiming from King James, shall ever be restored to the Crown of England
Scotland or Ireland, either by Foraigne or domestic assistance, All
dispensations, and outgoing of Providence to the contrary notwithstanding. I do
likewise swear never to understand nor believe any thing that is against the
Authority, interest, or sense of this House, and that I will never give my vote
to determine the sitting thereof, during the natural life of every respective
Member thereof, now sitting, nor consent to the establishment of any thing but
Taxes, Excise, Free Quarter, Plunder, Confiscations, Arbitrary Government, High
Courts of Justice, Committees of Sale and Sequestration, a Gospel-preaching
Ministry, and Liberty of Conscience. I do further swear that I will constanly
believe in all the Privileges of Parliament, as the House believes, and that I
will to the uttermost of my power maintain and defend the same, although I do
not understand, nor ever will, what they are, or how far they extend. And lest
the present Members should (when the House is full) be secluded by their own
Votes (by which the secluded Members are declared incapable of ever sitting in
Parliament, or bearing any office of Trust in this Commonwealth) I do swear,
that the Secluded Members (properly so called) are not these who have been
twice secluded, that is to say, the present Members now sitting, but those who
have been secluded but once, that is, the major part of the long Parliament. As
also that when it shall seem good unto this Parliament, to make every Member
thereof an Officer or Commander of the Army, this House will nevertheless be no
Council of Officers, but a very Parliament, and the sword still in the hand of
the civil Magistrate. I do also swear, that whatsoever time shall hereafter
produce (6 Governments off) for the advantage of the present Parliament, or
whatsoever they shall at any time do, say, or swear, in order thereunto, how
contrary soever to any thing by them formerly done, said, or sworn, is, and
will be always the good old Cause, and the work of the Lord. That the present
distractions are for his Glory and the peace of the Government, and that the
slavery of the English Nation is for the liberty of the People. That
notwithstanding they are hard to change their Masters as Christian Bondslaves
as in Turkey, and are conveied from Government to Government, as Rogues are from
Constable to Constable, still to be whipped and punished, all is for their
Freedom and Protection in their ancient Laws, Rights, and Immunities. Lastly,
I do swear never to divulge the secrets of this House, nor discover the hidden
Mysteries thereof. The Admirable Art of manageing Factions with confederate
contests in ordinary matters, and staving, and tayling with the Rabble of
Parties in businesses of Profit and advantage to carry on private designs
under the mask of public Good. The subtle ways of packing Committees and
progging businesses without doors. The Ingenious artifices of double-dealing by
selling with one hand and buying with the other, whereby several Members have
afforded themselves good bargains of Delinquents estates in suborned Purchasers
names. The most excellent invention of advising votes, and finding out the true
value of a leading or seconding voice, third, fourth, or fifth, how many a
lasting voice goes for, like the last Truck at Picquet, how to balance all
these upon account so that every sharer may have his due, with infinite other
curious and occult Sciences with the present-Members out of their long practice
and experience have found out, to the glory of God, and good of the Nation.

So help me God.
Qual. XXI.
And lest the new elected Members should (notwithstanding all these Oaths and
Qualifications) oppose, and being the greater number, overvote the present
Members, like a new piece of cloth upon an old garment instead of patching
tear it wider. It is resolved that but 8 writs for new elections be issued
forth at one time and no more until the new returned Members have been
entrusted in the practice of this House and being engaged by profitable
employments, have given proof of their conformity thereunto, or in case of
refusal have been elected.

FINIS.

