THE RESOLUTION OF THE ARMY, CONCERNING The KING, LORDS, and COMMONS, AND Their
Solemn Contract and Engagement to be tendered to the People of England, upon
the principles of Common Rights and Freedom, and to stand firm, and remain
unalterable for ever.

WITH Their Remonstrance and Proposals to the Kingdom; showing, what Law and
Government they would have established and confirmed; which Laws and Statutes,
are

ORdered to be printed and published, to be read in all Churches and Chapels
throughout the Kingdom, in the presence of each respective Congregation, and a
Copy thereof to be provided and kept by the Ministers, Churchwardens, or other
Officers of the said respective Parishes.

LONDON. Printed for Nehemiah Wilson, and are to be sold near the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill, 1648.

THE RESOLUTION OF THE ARMY Concerning The King, Lords, and Commons, and their
Remonstrance and Proposals to the Kingdom, showing what Law and Government
they desire to have established.
HIs Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, and the General council of Officers,
upon mature deliberation, touching the transaction of affairs, in order to the
settlement of the peace of the Kingdom, have declared, That (for the love and
honor they bear to justice and righteousness, and for the real love they
bear to the silver cords of amity and concord) they will endeavor the
composing of all differences, and executing of impartial justice both upon
King, Lords, and Commons, and all others (even from the highest to the lowest)
who have acted contrary to the known Laws of the Realm, and the trust reposed
in them by the People. And the Army do further remonstrate to the Kingdom, 1
That no Magistrate have power to make any compulsive Law, or execute any
matters of punishment, touching matters of Conscience. 2 That all Statutes,
Laws, and Acts of Parl. be mane and run only in the name of the Commons of
England assembled in Parliament. 3 That no persons whatsoever that are
Lawmakers, be Law executioners, but that a clear distinction be preserved and
kept inviolable betwixt these two principles and pillars of the Commonwealth
for ever. 4 That all Officers of the Commonwelth be made to enjoy their places,
but for a time prefixed, and at the expiration thereof to give an account of
their Stewardship. 5 That no man be kept in prison above a month, but in that
space to be brought to trial by a lawful Jury of his equals, or else to be
discharged of course. 6 That no man be impressed or forced to serve in future
wars. 7 That our Laws be few and plain, free from all ambiguous meanings, and
all in the English tongue, and to be printed in a Volume, and one to be
provided, to be kept in every church throughout the Kingdom and to be read over
at several seasons in open Congregations. 8 That all persons stand alike liable
to the Laws of the Land, in all cases both criminal and civil. 9 That no
more trudging up to Westmin. from all parts of the Land, for the trial of
suits of Law be had, but that (as of old) all suits both criminal and civil
be ended in the several Hundreds. 10 That a solemn Contract upon these and
the like Principles be drawn betwixt the People and their Representatives for
ever. 11 That till the accomplishment of this work, (in behalf of the Army and
People) that no Forces be disbanded, except persons ill affected, and
dissentors from this Expedition. For these things we do declare, and with our
Swords in our hands, as we are Soldiers, we challenge them as the price and
purchase of our Blood, to live and dye for them against all opposers whatsoever.

The Cities Remonstrance.
THe Lord Major, Aldermen, and Common council having seriously debated the
desires of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax (in order to the acommodation
of the Army) upon mature deliberation thereon, made choice of a Committee, to
represent and declare the sense and proposals of the Citizens of London, to his
Excellency, a copy whereof follows, viz. 1 That the City for their security
of 40000 l. desired, may have all the arrears upon any assesments made for this
army within London, and the Liberties thereof, which did grow due to be paid
before the 25. of March last, freed from all engagements. 2 And of those
arreares all that money paid into the Treasury sinde the 30. of November. last,
to be accounted part of the 40000. pesired. And that with the money received
out uf Weavers hall, and the 5500. l. lately received of the Treasurers, the
rest shall be paid on Monday next. 3 That a Common Counsel have undertaken to
discharge the Generals engagements concerning the money taken out of Weavers
Hall, to pay the same thither out of the said arrears. 4 That the Common
council has promised to get in the rest of their arrears, and also to make the
new assesments for the six months ending Michaelmas last, and so collect the
same withal expedition. 5 And upon thls engagement they do humbly pray, that
the army may this night be withdrawn out of the City and Liberties thereof,
according to the intiamtion of col. Whaley, and col. Thomlinson.

Guild-Hal, London, 9 December. 1648.
His Excellencies Answer to the said Declaration and Proposals.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Have perused your paper, and I find the point of security has much troubled
you and us, whereby we are yet without our money, and necessities daily grow
upon us. To prevent which and to make things clear (which I do not conceive
your papers do) I desire that you will within 14. day, or sooner if you please
cause all the money charged upon the City of London for the Army until the 25.
of March next, and in arrear. This being done, I shall both repay the Money from
Weavers Hall, and withdraw all the Forces from the City, the continuance of
which in the City in the mean time, will (I conceive) facilitate your work in
collecting your saidmonies.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

The Lord Generals Declaratson to the City.
My Lord,
HAving sent so often to you for the arreares due from the City, and desired
sums of money to be advanced by you, far short of the sums due from you, yet I
have been delayed and denied, to the hazard of the army, and the prejudice of
others in the Suburbs upon whom they are quartered; wherefore I thought fit to
send to seize the said Tresuries, and to send some forces into the City to
quarter there until I may be satisfied the Arrears due unto the Army: and if
th s seem strange unto you, it is no less then that our forces have been
ordered to do by the Parl. in the several Counties of the Kingdom where
assesments have not bin paid, and there to continue until they have bin paid:
and here give me leave to tell you, the Counties of the kingdom have born free
quarter, and that in a great measure, for want of your paying your Arrears
equally with them; wherefore, these ways if they dislike you, yet they are
merely long of your selves, and are of as great regret to me and to the Army as
your selves, we wishing not only the good and prosperity of your City, but that
things may be so carried toward you, as may give no cause of jealousy: I
thought fit to let you know, that if you shall take a speedy course to supply
us with 40000. l. forthwith, according to my former Desire and provide speedily
what also is in Arrear, I shall not only cause the moneys in the Treasuries to
be not made use of, but leave them to be disposed of as right they might, and
also cause my Forces to be withdrawn from being in any sort troublesome or
chargable to the City; And let the world judge whether this be not just and
equal dealing with you. I rest, My Lord, Your affectionate servant,

T. FAIRFAX.

A Declaration from his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax concerning the Excize,
and the Citizens of London.
Whereas upon the 8. of this instant month, a party of Horse and Foot came to
the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excive;
These are to declare, and assure them, that the said Forces came thither by a
mistake, and that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the
due levying of the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash; and that you may
proceed as formerly, according to those Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament,
which you have received concerning the same.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

Several Proposals have been presented to the House of Commons, by Col.
Whaley, in the name of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, in order to an
impeachment against (...)

A new Remonstrance from the Soldiery.
May it please your Excellency,
FOrasmuch, as for the love and honor we bear to justice and righteousness,
and for the real love we bear to unity upon that account; in order thereunto,
we desire you would give the highest, justest, reasonable, impartial, and
righteous assurance and satisfaction that may be, to all people, and just men
in the army and Kingdom, that you are real to all the Nation, and to Us in
particular, that so the Lord alone may be acknowledged in judgment, and
impartial righteousness in the earth. And then our blood shall not be
precious in our sight, but we will (if God and Nature calls for it) spill it as
water in the streets, to accomplish those ends for the Nation, and our selves,
as individual members thereof, against all tyrants whatsoever, and manifest our
selves as subject to your Authority and Conduct, as any men living, in this our
Generation.

FINIS.

