THE RESOLUTION Of his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, AND His General
Council of Officers.

CONCERNING Major General Brown, Sheriff of the Honorable City of London,
and the time of their bringing him to trial; With his Excellencies Declaration
to the CITIZENS.

ALSO, The dangerous Articles of Impeachment against the King; and the Charge
of the Army, for the bringing of his Majesty to a speedy Trial, Justice, and
Judgment.

WITH A Remonstrance from the Navy, touching the Army, and the Sea-mens
Resolution thereupon.

LONDON: Printed for C. VV. near the Royal Exchange, 1648.

THE ARTICLES Of Impeachment against the KING And the Charge of the Army, for
the speedy bringing his Majesty to trial, justice, and judgment.
I.

THhat the present King Charles, when he was Prince of Wales, did maintain
corespondency with the then Pope of Rome; promising, that he would employ
himself for the time to come, to have but one Religion, viz. the Roman
Catholic, and that he was resolved to suffer manner of discommodities, even
to the hazarding of his Estate and life, for a thing so pleasing unto God, as
the advancement of the Romish Religion.

2 That the said King has taken two solemn Oaths upon both his Treaties of
Marriage with Spain and France, to protect and maintain to the utmost throughout
his Dominions, the Roman Catholic Church and Religion, and to suspend and
abrog^te all Laws against them, and is thereby deeply engaged by virtue of
these Oaths, to side with the Roman Catholic Subjects, both in England,
Ireland, and Scotland, and arm them against his Protestant Subjects and
Parliaments in all the three Kingdoms, of purpose to make good these his Oaths
and Articles.

3 That the said present King Charles, since his coming to the Crown, has
raised a most bloody and unnatural war against the Protestant Cause and party
in his Dominions, in which he has hazarded both his Estate, Life, and Realms,
for the reducing all his Subjects to one Religion, viz. the Roman Catholic.

4 That the said King did permit the Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, during the
Scottish troubles, to call a Parliament and General Council of State among
themselves, even in London, wherein the Popes own Nuntio sat President, in
which parliament, the chief papists out of all parts of England and Wales
assembled, made several Laws and Ordinances for imposing taxes, and raising
moneys upon all Roman Catholics for maintenance of the Scottish wars, which
were seconded with the Queens own letters and instructions to the Catholic
party.

5 That the said King did admit Can the Popes Legate, and that under the very
name, notion, and authority of the peoples Legate, into familiar access to,
and conference with him, by all arts, policies, and arguments, to pervert and
draw him with his three Kingdoms, to a new subjection to the Sea of Rome.

6 That the King condescended to articles of pacification with the rebels of
Ireland contrary to an act of parl. wherein the said wicked rebels are declared
his Majesty's good subjects.

And lastly that the said King did send for many thousands of the said rebels
into England, to massacre the protestant English here, etc.

These Articles are collected out of Romes Masterpiece, and will be more fully
asserted and maintained from the several Writings and labors of Mr. Will.
Pryn, Esquire. The Charge of the Army.
That his Majesty has issued out diverse proclamations under the great Seal,
and given Commissions to English and Irish papists, for the massacring of his
best and trustiest subjects, and that he has been the most capital and grand
Author of all the blood which has bin spilt in England, and therefore desire,
that he may be speedily brought to justice judgment and trial, for the treason,
blood, and mischief he is therein guilty of.

A Declaration from his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax concerning the Excize,
and the Citizens of London.
Whereas upon the 8. of this instant month, a party of Horse and Foot came to
the Excize Office in Broadstreet, which perhaps will occasion some to think the
Army came thither with a purpose to interrupt any more levying of the Excive;
These are to declare, and assure them, that the said Forces came thither by a
mistake, and that there was not any intentions to give interruption unto the
due levying of the Excize, or to seize upon any money in Cash; and that you may
proceed as formerly, according to those Ordinances, and Orders of Parliament,
which you have received concerning the same.

Subscribed, T. FAIRFAX.

The Lord Admirals Letter to the Parliament.
Whereas the Honorable Houses of Parliament have bin pleased to entrust me
with the charge of the Fleet, I shall therefore endeavor to improve that
Authority committed to me, with a faithful and inviolable respect unto my
duty.

For, when I first undertook this great charge, I was sensible how much the
Cause, Truth, and Glory of God, the settlement of my Countries peace, and the
preventing of the bloody and desperate designs of the Enemies thereof, depended
upon the management of this expedition, and how much I was obliged in
Conscience and Honor to omit nothing that might have a tendency to those ends.
That obligation I have (according to my best reason and judgment) fathfully
discharged, and by the blessing of Heaven have received this fruit
(notwithstanding the many obstructions and difficulties that intervened) that
the honor of the Parl. by Sea is cleared, the Fleet committed to my charge
preserved in a condition of honor and safety, the affections of the Seamen
settled, the design of those wicked Revolters, that persidiously betrayed so
considerable a part of the Kingdoms Navy broken, and such as associated with
them either rendered or reduced.

And as to the aspersion and pretended resolution of my joining with the
Prince, in case an agreement be not concluded of between the King and
parliament, I do profess in the presence of God, who knows my heart and
ways, that it never entered into my thoughts, and that my soul abhors it as
inconsistent inconsistent with my Duty prejudicial to the Parliament,
destructive to the Kingdoms peace, and unworthy of a free borne English man.

And therefore, as I have hitherto been faithful to the Kingdom, and to the
Parliament, where I have the honor to sit as a Peer, so I do and shall scorn
to sacrifice my conscience, and those ublike and dear concernments of my
Country, wherein I have a portion.

And while I have a heart, and a hand, I shall not fail (by Gods assistance)
to have them on all occasions, lifted up, for the service of the parliament,
and common interests of England, with my uttermost integrity, and to my highest
hazard.

Subscribed, WARWICK.

December. 13. Letters further from the Navy say, That his Excellency the Lord
Admiral, upon receipt of the intelligence, that the Army had seized on diverse
members of parliament, and entered the City of London, his Lordship declared,
That he wished well to the peace of this famous Metropolis, and desired that
the principles whereon the Army have fixed their resolutions, may prove a
sovereign Cordial, to heal the diseased and corrvpted Ulcers of this bleeding
Kingdom, and that their present Engagement may conduce to the glory of God,
the liberty and freedom of the people, and the peace and tranquillity of the
Common weal of England, throughout all future Ages and Generations.

Major Genesis Brown, and diverse other Members now under restraint: Whereupon the
House ordered that a Committee should be appointed to treat with his
Excellency, concerning the said Members.

Sir, Since the coming in of the revolted ships, most of the Mariners have
entered into a new Protestation and Engagemen; which is, That they will
sacrifice all that is near and dear unto them, for preservation of the Laws,
Liberties, and Freedoms, of their Native and Fellow Commoners of this Nation;
and that they will sacrifice both lives and fortunes, with the Army, under the
Authority and Conduct of his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, for the
accomplishing those good ends, cited in their late Remonstrance, that so much
conduces to the peace and welfare of this bleeding Nation; and that it may
take deep impression in the hearts of all men, who profess themselves lovers
of Righteousness, and Practitioners in the Art of Navigation, they unanimously
resolved to communicate the same, to all Mariners whatsoever, upon the River of
Thames, or else where; to the end, that none may appear opposite, or
dissenting, to the faciliating of so great a Work.

Aboard the St. George 11. December. 1648.

His Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, and his general Council of Officers, have
had some disputatien and debate, touching the Charge against Major Genesis Brown,
and some other of the impeached members, and are resolved to bring them to a
speedy trial, which (in all probability will be upon next Monday. M G. Massey,
and Sir I Clotworthy are removed from the other impeached members, to St.
Iamses, to Sheriff Brown, where they are to be kept during the pleasure of his
Excellency.

THE END.

