A REMONSTRANCE PRESENTED To the High and Mighty Lords the States of ZEALAND By
the Deputies of the four Classes of ZEALAND.

Concerning the Welfare of the Church of ENGLAND.

Sent over by Walter Strickland Esquire, now in Holland, Employed for the
Affairs of the Parliament.

Wherein the Christian Affection of the Ministers of ZEALAND, to the Prosperity
of their Protestan Brethren in England, and their zeal to the maintenance of
the true Protestant reformed Religion;

And the good hand of God in moving the hearts of the Professors of the same
Religion in Foreign Parts is manifested.

Published, even according to the intent of this Order.

Die Mercurii 24. Maii 1643.

It is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That the
Declaration of the States of Zealand concerning the affairs of England, this
day presented to the House, be referred to the perusal and consideration of
Mr. Rous Mr Reynolds and Mr. Pym, who have power to give Order for the Printing
of it, if they shall hold it fitting

H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com. May 29. London, Printed by R. Oulton, Anno
Them. 1643.

A REMONSTRANCE presented to the mighty Lords the States of ZEALAND, By the
Deputies of the four Classes of Zealand, concerning the welfare of the Church
of England: Sent over by Walter Strickland Esquire, now in Holland employed for
the affairs of the Parliament, wherein the Christian affection to their
Protestant Brethren, and zeal to the true reformed Religion is manifested.
THe Churches of Zealand having observed some while since, with sorrow and
great grief of heart, the great troubles, perils, and fears, which are
befallen the Churches of England, Scotland, and Ireland, through the dangerous
differences and mis-understandings between the King and his great Council the
Parliament, which (as all good men observe) threaten the disturbance of the
Reformed Religion, and of that flourishing Church, and the restoring again of
that cursed Papistrie in those Lands, that so there might be brought in again
that abomination of desolation, the Kingdom of Antichrist, which in former
time cost so much blood of holy Martyrs, so much trouble and spoil of the
inhabitants, and so much labor, charges and pains of the godly, before it
could be driven out again: And seeing that hitherto, by the grace of God, and
the wise government of their Majesty's, the Queen Elizabeth and King James of
happy memory, the same has bin kept out, and the true and pure worship and
Religion (which all the godly in those kingdoms esteem more dear and
precious then their own lives and temporal prosperity) has been hitherto
continued, notwithstanding all the fearful attempts, conspiracies, and
murders, which those of the Popish faction have undertaken against the sacred
persons of the aforesaid King and Queen, and against the peace and prosperity
of the bodies and souls of their subjects. And because the Churches of Zealand
stand bound and obliged together with the Churches of England in one Faith, in
one Baptism, and in one holy Communion, being all of the household of Faith,
having one Father, one Inheritance, one common Worship and salvation: As also
the Churches of England have taken greatly to heart the welfare of our Churches
in the first times of the first Reformation, and also the establishing of the
Church of God in these Lands, in the time of heavy contentions against the
Faction of the Remonstrants in the year 1618. And moreover, there have been,
and yet are, many exceeding godly Lights in England, which by their godly
Labors and Writings have greatly edified other Reformed Churches in Doctrine,
and especially in the practice of piety, or practique Theology: And in regard
also of the bond of mutual love in the holy Communion of the body of Christ
(so that when one member suffers the other member suffers also, and we must
mourn with them that mourn) therefore the Churches of Zealand could not
neglect to pour out their complaints and grief there, where they hope, or see
any help, or means of help is to be found, for that perplexed and troubled
State of the Church of England: This doing, not only out of conscience of the
duty we owe to our Brethren, but also that we may escape the curse which God
has pronounced against those which sit still, and are not troubled at the
afflictions of Joseph, and seek not the prosperity of the Israel of God in the
time of need. Curse ye Meroz (says the Angel of the Lord) yea curse the
inhabitants because they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty. And
that we may on the other side obtain the blessing of God which comes upon
all those who seek the welfare of Israel: O pray for the peace of Jerusalem,
let them prosper that love her, Psa 122.6. It is with such a respect and spirit
that we your humble Subjects, and yet Ministers of the Church of Christ, and in
the name of Christ pray and entreat, First, that your Lordships will be pleased
to appoint in our Province of Zealand, (for an example to other States and
Kingdoms) to publish a public day of fasting and prayer, to be first and
solemnly kept by special command, and after to be kept and held weekly or
monthly, as shall be appointed, until that the heavy troubles in England be
ceased and stilled; and also that by your Lordships intercession in the
Assembly of the States general, the same may be obtained in all other the
united Provinces: That so we may seek to God by prayer and humiliation, for
the prosperity, rest, and peace of the troubled Churches in England, and for
the removing of Papistry out of the Churches of that Kingdom, and out of all
other Lands and Towns, and that the pure and true worship of God, which is
according to Gods Word may be exercised. To this end is it that we present to
your Lordships these following moving considerations.

That we and our Churches in these Lands have enjoyed this help of other
Reformed Churches in the time of our troubles. The Churches of Scotland, in the
year 1618. held their public Fasts and prayers in our behalf; and the godly
in England also held their particular days of Fasting and Prayer in regard of
our troubles and have celebrated the same together in private because they
could not do the same in public by reason of the Tyranny of the Bishops:
unthankful should we then be, if we showed not the same zeal, grief, and
affection about their welfare, which they have showed to us. It is a laudable
use with your Lordships and by the whole government of our State approved and
practiced, that days of prayer are published and kept when there is any Town
on our side by besieging to be won or lost: for example, behold in the time of
the siege of Breda! Bosch. and Mastricht, in which Towns there was as well the
exercise of the Popish idolatry, and superstitious worship as the exercise of
the true Religion: How much more laudable is the exercise of fasting and prayer
for a whole kingdom planted with the true worship of God. and out of which all
public exercise of idolatrous worship was rooted out, that so they might the
freer keep and exercise their Religion without trouble free from the public
exercise of Popish Religion, which brings in and erects the Kingdom of
Antichrist

There is not one godly soul, which has sighed for the prosperity of the
kingdom of Jesus Christ his Savior, and love to an holy peace, which desires
not that unity and peace between his Majesty of England and his Parliament,
(who together, as the body, make the constitution of that high power of
Government in England) and their people, might be attained, and that by
contentions between them Papistry may not be tolerated in that Kingdom; What
more sovereign remedy can there be to procure the same, then to set apart
days of humiliation, and with zealous prayer to seek the favor and help of
God, who only has the heart of Kings in his hand, and turns them as the
Rivers of waters; who must also touch the hearts of the people, that they may
follow their Kings and Governors, who likewise by the breath of his mouth
shall destroy the Kingdom of Antichrist, that so he may not exalt himself
against the Kingdom of his Son. How laudably and fruitfully has our State
used days of fasting and prayer in times of trouble and distractions in
Religion, and confusions of our Land, in the year 1618. Every godly man
rejoiced in that God heard them, and gave such a good success thereunto. The
distrastions of England are our Brethrens, yea by consequence and reflection
are our own, and all which our enemy (the Kingdom of Antichrist) wins therein
by these contentions, the same he wins from us. We pray therefore that God will
move the hearts of your Lordships to use the means which has been found so
profitable and fruitful in our State, in such distractions, for redress of
the same. For this every good soul longs, sighs, and desires: All the Ministers
of the Churches under your Lordships command, long that they may exercise this
work of devotion and humiliation in public, to the preventing of Gods wrath,
and the reconciliation of the Kingdom of England. It is so that in cases of
Gods worship vour Lordships have not used to oppress your trusty and faithful
subjects, the Churches of the Reformed religion, or to hinder them, but rather
to approve and favor their zeal, and satisfy their desires.

How richly shall the faithful and godly in England reward us with their
prayers and exercises of humiliation in time of our need, when God shall be
wrathfully displeased with us, then will they also set themselves in the
breach, even as we do now desire to do for them. And seeing we are pressed by
our own consciences, (which is only known to God) and constrained in secret
to mourn and sigh, and with our own families and friends to keep days of
fasting and prayer apart, so rewarding our brethren in England, the same they
have done for us there in time of our troubles, which in public they could not
do, because of the oppression of the Bishops; knowing that we so doing
discharge the duty of our consciences get praise and approbation before God,
and free our selves of all fault and blame, which by our neglect in this case
might otherwise redound unto us. Therefore we beseech your Lordships, that it
may be granted unto us, that we may by your Lordships authority do it, and
that the people of your Lordships Province by your authority may be called
together, and so holy a service performed.

The second, that we in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, desire
most humbly with Prayer and sighs, is, that your Lordships will be pleased to
use the Power, Authority, Honor, and means which GOD has put into your
Lordships hands, and approve to that end; that the true and pure Reformed
Religion, and exercise of the same in the Kingdom of England, may suffer no
damage or detriment, and the Popish Religion get no advantage in the exercise
of it; but that the same with remainders in doctrine, Divine Worship, and
spiritual Government of the Church, may be destroyed and rooted out of that
Church. To move your Lordships hereunto, we give you to consider. The Kingdom
of England has in the Years 1617. and 1618. used great endeavor to maintain
the pure and upright truth of the Christian Reformed Religion amongst us. It is
not unknown unto the Members of this Noble and mighty Assembly the writings
and famous endeavors of King James in the Cause of Conradus I'orstius. The
Office and zealous labor of that Noble and no less excellent Learned
Carleton, Ambassador of that Kingdom, concerning the case of Religion, against
the Innovators of the same: the manifold advises, exhortations, (etc.) which by
the King, the Parliament, Archbishops, and Bishops (etc.) were sent unto our
States and Church, and the great weight which the Divines of the Church of
England, in the Synod of Dort, got to the main^aining of the true and pure
Religion, and suppressing of errors; this burning love and zeal of the Church
of England toward our State and Religion manifested in that time, requires also
the same of us toward them in these times. The King in his Letter the 20 March
1617, to the Lords the States general, desired and conjured them in the name
of GOD, which you (says he) hitherto so happily have maintained, to suppress
errors and factions which the Devil by the subtilty of your enemies has
brought in among you, and already so advanced among you, that in regard
thereof, destruction of your State is at hand, if you do not with all
expedition, speedily prevent it; and hold you wholly close and fast to your
old, and true doctrine, whereof you have always made profession and which is
approved and received among you, by the common consent of all the Reformed
Churches, and of which there is a general confession, as the first and
chiefest foundation, and also a strong and the only fast cement which held and
maintatined the straight friendship, and intelligence, that has bin so long
time maintained between our Crown and your Provinces. These endeavors his
Majesty in the same Letters testifies he has taken for the stopping of the
ruin of our Religion and State, being moved through the zeal he had to the
Church of God, and out of his especial affection which his Majesty bore to the
welfare of our State. Oh that our State would now recompense that good which
England by their King has done to our Religion, and pure worship in those
times of our troubles.

This State has more ground and Reason to do it, seeing that their zeal and
care should be not only against the errors of the Remonstrants, which simply
concern Religion and faith, but also against Idolatry, Superstition, and
seditious Papistry, which concerns the security of the Civil State, and the
life of the Sovereign power. For albeit some Papists, moved by morality and
considerations of an honest life, or by an imbred disposition of nature, or by
fear of temporal punishment, seem to manifest obedience to the Ordinances
and Laws of the Magistrate yet notwithstanding it is certain, that those of the
Reformed Religion, hold and maintain the Ordinances and Laws of the
Magistrate for Conscience sake. But the Papists defend and maintain these
wicked and damnable positions, as 1. That the Pope has power to excommunicate
all Christian Kings in the whole World. 2. That he has power to absolve and
to discharge all Subjects of their faithful obedience. 3. That the Pope has
power to depose Kings and Princes from their Crowns, and Thrones, and to give
them unto others. 4. That they are not bound to keep their Faith and Troth
with Heretics. 5. That whoever is not in communion with the Romish Church is
an Heretic. 6. That no spiritual person can commit any Treason against any
Earthly Prince or King because he is not the Kings Subject, but the Popes, and
the like, etc. Which Maxims being maintained, that it is unpossible to govern
the Civil State in Peace and Tranquillity under the natural and lawful
Governors thereof, (as we think) the experience in France, Venice, and
England, has sufficiently taught, and your Lordships out of natural Reason
can easily conclude. To keep the Kingdom of England from such a subjection
under the Romish Sea; we think it to be a work becoming the care of all
Reformed Potentates, and chiefly the care of our State: The rather because we
esteem the destruction and weakening of the Reformed Churches in England, to be
the beginning of the ruin of all the Reformed Churches in whole Europe.
Scotland notwithstanding it is conjunction with the Kingdom of England, under
one Sovereign, equality of Privileges and Laws, and it is so near
Neighborhood if not communion, shall not possibly escape the same state of
Religion with England, and will also be forced to forsake and lose the same
freedom and Reformation of Church and Policy, which they with such honor and
glory by their Arms, lately have obtained; What weight and consequence it has
concerning our Religion and State, we leave it to your Lordships wise and
provident judgment to consider, to whom the mutual combination and
conjunction of both Governments is better known then to us, knowing this only
from the fore-related words of King James, that the general confession of
faith, is the first and chiefest foundation, and the only strong and fast
cement which has maintained the straight friendship and Intelligence which
has been of a long time between the Crowns of England and Scotland, and our
Provinces. And what has the Church of France to expect from such an example,
which is now stripped of all defense, only rests on the favor which by their
friends, or by their enemies, they can get from the King. The Lord preserve his
Church from such a blow, that their judgment and destruction proceed not from
England, from whence in former times came, the advancement and prosperity, and
preservation of the purity of Religion, and yet is to be expected in the time
of trouble. Hence it is, that it was so laudably practiced in the time of the
first Reformation, that the Potentates and Ruler of those Lands in which the
Reformation of Religion was set up, have used such a mutual correspondence,
advise, and Counsel, which have given to others such faithful warnings and
admonitions, and helps to the furtherance, and maintenance of the begun
Reformation of Religion here, in following the holy examples (by God himself
approved) of the Kings of Judah, Ezekias, and Josiah, which in their Government
were not content only to raise up the ruins of the decayed Church of Judah,
but also invited the Israelites though captivated under the power of the
Assyrians, to the maintenance of the pure Worship of God. For we must not
think that we are to set the same limits to our Lands, and to our duties, for
the enlarging of Gods glory. Therefore Christian Princes, who have great power,
and much means in their hands, must not think they have well and faithfully
performed their Office, when they only take care for the Churches, and
Religion which is under their Government, and go no further, not regarding
what befalls their oppressed Brethren and Religious friends, but must be Nurses
to the Church of God in all Lands, where they may or can prevail with their
Authority and Power.

Since then that the love and friendship between the united Netherlands and the
Kingdom of England are so firmly and naturally joined together, by so many
civil respects, and mutual interresses, that the respect of this State may
prevail very much with the King and Parliament to the defense of our holy
Religion. Therefore know (Noble and Mighty Lords) that in regard of God as a
duty, this lies upon your Consciences, namely to employ in England all your
power for the maintenance of the true Religion and Worship of GOD, that
Religion we say which is reverend and full of Majesty, in regard of the good
Laws, and righteous Ordinances; in regard of the Truth, Power, and Virtue of
it, unreprovable in respect of the Doctrine leading to all Godliness and
Virtue, diswading from all evil and sin; a Religion approved of GOD
himself, revealed by his own Wisdom, confirmed by his spirit, written in the
holy Scriptures, Sealed with the blood of many hundred Martyrs, constantly
confessed by all the holy Professors, defended by the first Christian Emperor,
loved of all the Primitive Fathers; which gives to God that which is Gods, and
to Caesar that which is Cesars; which to defend is godly, even in an Idiot, but
zeal in wise and understanding people: And in a Prince and Ruler a Kingly and
Godly Magnanimity. That help and profit which this Religion shall obtain in
her feared danger, by this great Assembly before other Provinces, Republiques,
and Kingdoms shall be your glory, and Crown, and an everlasting blessing and
praise shall be upon your Lordships persons and Government. Therefore we your
Lordships faithful Subjects, entreat your Lordships most humbly, with all
subjection; Yea we desire and beseech you in the name of God and our Savior,
that your Lordships will not strengthen the hands of the ungodly, of the Popish
Faction, by the power and blessing of your Land, against the faithful
Protestants and professors of the Religion: remaining still by the laudable
resolutions of Neutrality, which your Lordships lately have made. But rather
weaken and debilitate all those which endeavor to weaken our Faith and
Religion, and Worship. And come and help the crying necessity of the afflicted
Church in England, by such means as the fear of God, the holy Wisdom, and
good providence of your Lordships shall teach you. We desire your Lordships to
take this our zeal in good part, and to interpret it as pleasing to God, being
expressed through our love to our holy Religion and Worship, and proceeding
from such of your Subjects, as are of intentions, so upright and sincere, in
such humble obedience and unspotted faithfulness to serve your Lordships, as
the faithfullest Israelite ever showed unto King David: trusting that your
Lordships will always remain constant defenders of the true reformed Religion,
and who will empoly always your godly care for the rooting out of all Idolatry.

Your Lordships most faithful Servants, the Ministers of the word of God in
the Province of Zealand, and in their Names. Gulielmus Apollonij. Johannes
Rogiers. Philippus Lansbergius.


FINIS.

