REMONSTRANS REDIVIVVS: OR AN ACCOUNT OF THE REMONSTRANCE AND PETITION,
Formerly presented by diverse Citizens of London, to the view of many; and since
honored by the late Conspirators, to be placed under their Title of Extreme
ill Designs, With the Remonstrance it self.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for John Rothwell and Thomas Underhill.
July 25. 1643.

To the Christian Reader.
TRVTH gave being and zeal life to the late Remonstrance, and therefore its
admired by some, how the child of such active parents, should at all live, and
be so void of further motion, as it has seemed to be, (unless like the River
Anas, its Current has been as swift as ever, though less visible) especially
when it was never denied acceptance; What ever Mercurius Aulicus, or Extreme
ill Designs, those lying Twinns suggest, only conceived by some not then so
seasonable, which gave occasion to the commitment of it, by means whereof it was
some-while retarded, until shortly after, swords proved more useful then pens,
and hands then tongues, as still they seem to be: Yet as well for the
satisfaction of the desires of many, as for its own vindication from spurious
copies, and for that it holds forth nothing derogatory to the good of
political Monarchy, (unless such Kings will account that a diminution of their
power which God does not of his, but an argument of it, viz. to affirm, that
they cannot act against their own essence, nor do injustice) Nor to the
wisdom of Parliament (unless to reflect those beams which have shined from
those two great Luminaries, be to reflect upon themselves, which certainly is
no more presumption, then in that Scholar, who to encourage his Master in his
future labor and instructions, shows by his Repetitions, what useful
impressions his former documents have made:) Nor may it be less useful to the
less knowing sort of men, whose Candlestick only it attempts to be, to hold
out, though in a mod^ll of Clay, some glimpses of that borrowed light it has
received, (unless our Religion, Laws and Privileges, should resemble those of
the Pope and Mahomet, which like bad wares ever sell best in darkest shops.)
But since heresies have appeared not only in Church but State, and the end
which first animated this, was to unite and settle divided judgments in
distracted times: without expecting further formalities. It now presents it
self thus to the public view.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS CITIZENS and Burgesses in the Commons House of
Parliament Assembled. The humble Remonstrance and Petition, etc.
SHOWS,
THat when with grief of heart we remember the innumerable grievances
suffered by us and the whole Kingdom for many years before this Parliament,
in matters that concerned our Religion, the libetie of our persons, and
freedom of our Estates: And call to mind our earnest desires of attaining a
through reparation by the wisdom and justice of P^rliament, in the exemplary
punishment of those who had been authors and instruments to subvert the power
and purity of our Religion, and the ancient just constitution of Government.
Our spirits are confounded within us to confider that after (by the wisdom,
care, and resolution of this Parliament) we are justly freed from those
Incendiaries the Bishops and many others the known promoters of Arbitrary
Government. And full Remonstrances made of the Injuries done by Papists and
others of the Malignant party and their wicked intentions, discovered to
extirpate the Protestant party in the three Kingdoms: After the Protestation
taken with great solemnity by the people of the Land. And after all your many
and unwearied labors (which with all thankfulness we acknowledge, to reduce us
from misery and fears, and to establish and unite us with the other Kingdoms
upon the lasting foundation of truth and peace. By which your proceedings the
well-affected party of the Kingdom were justly invited to adhere unto you: and
to reveal and lay out themselves as well by bearing of Arms as large
Contributions for the advance and maintenance of this most just and necessary
war, with a full resolution to stand or fall with you. And your being
possessed of the Kingdoms strength as well by Sea as Land, and of the
affections of the people still manifested by their readiness from all Quarters
to rise and appear in considerable bodies for the carrying on of this just and
undoubted Cause. Which with the many deliverances from plotts and treasons, and
the victories already obtained upon all resolved attempts, afforded great
assurance of a blessed and successful issue. That notwithstanding all these
and many more your constant endeavors in the midst of high oppositions, There
should still remain before us as bitter fruits of the inveterate malice of our
restles enemies (though occasioned partly by the insensibility of many amongst
our selves both in City and Kingdom) The miserable sufferings of our brethren
in Ireland, and in humane conjectures the almost irrecoverable estate of that
Kingdom. The opportunities gained here by the Popish and Malignant party (of
which the Army raised against the Parliament consists) as well to invite,
convey hither, and entertain the Irish Rebels, as to gather and increase
themselves into formidable forces. The indulgent usage and escapes of many
discovered and accused Traitors, which advances the Kings design abroad, and
animates the evil party here at home: some of them being taken in actual
war against the Parliament (a crime voted to be treason, Li. Decla. Par. 576.
and they to be proceeded against as Traitors) whilst diverse worthy Members of
this honorable House, and many others well-affected to the Parliament taken
prisoners by the Kings Forces, have been used in a most inhumane manner. The
frequent printing and dispersing of the Kings Declarations, and many scandalous
books, deserving exemplary punishment; By which and by the Prelaticall and
scandalous Clergy, have been sowed the seeds of sedition and insurrection,
inciting to the violating of Magistrates and others the most active and
well-affected of this City. The usual misconstruing and perverting that
supposition of Law, That Kings can do no wrong, which being never intended (as
we conceive) of his personal commands and actions, is notwithstanding made
use of to maintain them, and thereby in a mysterious manner to deceive the
people. All which with their probable consequences, we have so seriously
considered, That as well from the consideration thereof, as to the end the best
men (your chiefest friends) may be established in the truth, and the unresolved
our brethren and neighbors (who out of misguided consciences for want of a
full and positive satisfaction and determination of the principles of our
Government chiefly stagger, and to our souls grief remain unsatisfyed
through the contrariety of the Kings and your Commands and Declarations) may
be informed and we hope reclaimed. We crave leave humbly to recollect and
Remonstrate what are our apprehensions, grounded as well upon right reason as
your own Declarations being here collected, which are there dispers't,
concerning the true form and state of our English Government, not doubting but
you will continue that spirit and courage which justly moved you to declare and
publish those convincing truths and resolutions: Which apprehensions of ours
are.

1. Petition of Lords and Commons, 14. Dec. 1641.
That the safety of the people is the Supreme Law; and is the foundation and
end of all just Government, even of Parliaments themselves, which alone are in
this Kingdom ordained to be Judges of and providers for the safety of the
Commonwealth: being limited by no Customs, no Presidents, nor Statutes made
by former Parliaments, but may justly do whatsoever is good in their
understandings for the safety and freedom of the people. Lib. Decl. 265


2. Lib. Decl. 705. and 697. 280. 690.
That originally the Supreme power being in the whole people, Parliaments were
by them constituted to manage the same for the preservation and well being of
the Commonwealth: So as properly in the Parliaments of England acting for the
same does the Supreme power reside; Lib. Decl. 270.
from whose judgments there is no appeal, being presumed ever to intend the
proper interest of the Commonwealth, that is, the safety and freedom thereof,
it being the highest of treasons through fear or favor to neglect or betray
the same.

3. Lib. Decl. 714.
That all just Magistracy in this Kingdom is a power created by the Kingdom
and Parliaments for the execution of Laws, or to govern the people in freedom
and safety according to the Laws. And is a matter of trust only for the good
of the people, and to be regulated by the Supreme power. It being most
agreeable to reason that those who by the consent of all are entrusted with the
making of Laws, should direct those that are to put the same in execution.

4. Lib. Decl. 701, 702, 703.
That all Magistrates and Officers of the Kingdom are accomptable to the
Parliament, for that otherwise the safety and freedom of the people would not
be sufficiently provided for.

5. Lib. Decl. 207* 14 De^. 1641. Petit. of Lords and Commons.
That the King (though the chief Magistrate or Officer of the Kingdom) does
not personally judge in any Court, nor can of right interpose his personal
command or judgment against the proceedings thereof.

6. Lib. Decl. 701, 702.
That the calling of Parliaments never was (of right) arbitrary at the Kings
will, but a trust annexed to his Office: 4. Ed. 3.14. 36. Ed. 3.10.
And of duty to be called every year according to Statutes made in the time of
Edward the third, which were declarative of the Common Law.

7. Lib. Decl 706.715.
That the usage of passing Bills of right and justice in Parliament by the
King, is but matter of form annexed to his Office and not left to his will:
Lib. Decl. 714.703.704.
For otherwise the safety and freedom of the people should depend upon his
will, and such proceedings of Parliament be made void by his assumed negative
voice.

8. Lib. Decl. 701.702,
That the dissolving of Parliaments is also a matter of form belonging to the
Kings Office, and not left arbitrary to be dissolved at his pleasure without
consent of both Houses: For then all the affairs of Parliament would
necessarily depend upon his sole will, to proceed or conclude, not according to
the Supreme Law (the safety of the people) but the pleasure of the King. The
Parliament being never of right heretofore nor hereafter to be dissolved until
themselves signify that the general affairs of the Kingdom are fully
settled. Lib. Decl. 703.704.


9. Lib. Decl. 267.
That to Parliaments for the Kingdoms safety do justly appertain the
strength of the Kingdom, the disposing of our persons, propriety of our
estates, and the transacting of the great affairs of peace and war, wherein
the Kingdom is concerned, which for any other person or Council to assume or
employ otherwise then in the Kingdoms right, and for it is safety, is unjust,
arbitrary, and tyrannical.

10. Lib. Decl 208. Master Prinus second part published by Authority of
Parliament.
That the Kings personal and voluntary absence from Parliament, whereby his
Office therein is not discharged, neither is nor of right can be any hindrance
to the making of laws or other proceedings of Parliament for the good and
safety of the Kingdom.

All which we humbly conceiving to be undoubted fundamentalls of our
Government, It is our hearty desire and prayer, That before it be too late the
judgment of the Kingdom may be fully settled in the right understanding of the
truth and equity thereof, and no longer scruple in their obedience to the
Supreme power, when the Kings Commands are contrary. That it may be examined
wherein the safety and interest of the Commonwealth have suffered prejudice,
either by the impunitie of Delinquents, the violation of our Laws, or
perverting the Constitutions of our Government, that the authors thereof be
made known and severely punished, and divine Justice which cries for vengeance
fully satisfied. That the justnes of the present war, which (for the glory of
God, the Government of Christ, the regaining and maintenance of our liberties,
and the Kingdoms defense against utter desolation) is undertaken by you, may
be more fully yet made known to the world, and that neither you nor we have
done the King any wrong. That the privileges of this highest Court may be kept
inviolable, and where that Supreme power has been in any wise suspended or
ecclipsed, such a redress may be made as becomes the greatness thereof. That
no members of Parliament who have been or shall appear in this unnatural
war against you be readmitted, and special care taken that such only be
continued and placed in the public services and employments of Parliament and
Kingdom, as have given full testimony of their zeal, judgment, and fidelity.
And though our desires are, That their portion may be to perish in intestine
wars that delight in them, yet they likewise are, That the Kings return to
his Kingly office and the Parliament in a well settled peace (which we daily
pray for) may never be purchased by such conditions as thereby either to leave
the truth and life of our Religion and Laws unsecured, or give opportunity to
involve us and our posterity in perpetual thraldom. That the National
Covenant already concluded may be with such speed and care personally proposed,
that thereby the well-affected of the Kingdom being both in hearts and hands
united, our friends from foes may be distinguished, and we thereby enabled to
preserve and defend our selves, both in peace and war. That you would also
consider that the eyes of Christendom are upon Englands Parliament, and that
public and private prayer and days of Fasting in this and many foreign
Nations are set apart and powered forth to Heaven, as for your persons so to
produce your conceptions and beginnings of a perfect reformation unto a
glorious birth. For your faithful endeavors wherein, as you have engaged your
selves (though you should perish in the work;) so be pleased still to
conclude, that whilst with undaunted Resolutions you persist therein, you
shall not find in us, (nor we hope) in the rest of the Kingdom any defection
in the further exposing of our lives and livelihoods for the advancing and
crowning of so good a cause. For our love and zeal to which only we have in
all humility and faithfulness presented these our apprehensions and desires,
submitting the same to your grave Wisdoms.

And shall ever pray, etc.
FINIS.

