THE QUAKERS QUAKING.

OR, The most just and deserved punishment inflicted on the person of JAMES
NAYLOR for his most horrid blasphemies.

Together with the confession of his Associates, who were Timothy Wedlock.
Thomas Symons. John Stranger. Hannah Stranger. Martha Symons. Dorcas Erbury.


As also the reasons why the further punishment of the said James Naylor was
suspended on Saturday, December. 20. and deferred by order of Parliament until
Saturday, December. 27. He remains still a prisoner to Newgate, where many of his
Associates do daily resort to him.

To which is added, The several damnable Opinions of the said QUAKERS.

^ondon, Printed for W. Gilbertson at the Bible in Giltspurstreet, without
Newgate. 1657.

depiction of James Naylor in the pillory The manner of James Naylors standing
in the Pillory in the Pallace-yard at Westminster.


The Quakers quaking.
WE live now in the Evening of the World; and what our Savior did prophecy
should then come to pass, and did advise us to take heed of, is fulfiilled in
our days: Take heed (says our Savior Jesus Christ) in Luke 13. verse 5. lest
any man deceive you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and
shall deceive many. And in Matthew. 24. verse 20. our Savior foretelling the
strong delusions to come, does advise us in these words: Therefore if any man
shall say unto you, lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not, for there
shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show signs and
wonders, in so much that if it were possible they shall deceive the very elect.

The generation of Quakers, who had their original in the North, have been so
fruitful in a short time, that they have infected a great part of the West,
and thousands in this populous City stand affected to them, being deluded by
their pretended simplicity and zeal. You shall find them masters of so
confident a spirit, as if the Oracles of truth did proceed only out of their
mouths, and they must be cast out to partake both of the shame and punishment
of liars whoever shall endeavor to contradict them.

The names of George Fox and James Naylor have been famous with many deluded
people in this City, and they have made a mouth of many at the Mouth at
Aldersgate At the last they began to quarrel among themselves, and did in their
way endeavor to excommunicate one another from their Congregations. It is said
that the latter of them, who both for his confession and his punishments shall
be the subject of this discourse, has been accounted to have been bewitched by
the same creature, who having brought him to her will, did afterward adore
him; for it is manifest by the confession of Martha Symons before the Mayor and
Aldermen of Bristol that she had struck the said James Naylor into a trance for
three days together, which although the said James Naylor did deny, yet being
informed that the confession of Martha Symons did extend so far he was
possessed with an amazing silence that so much should be discovered of her
strength and his weakness.

But before I proceed to give you a Narrative of his blasphemies, and how he
was and would be adored as a new Jesus. I will in the first place give you a
character of his person, which is, that he is of about four and thirty years of
age, a man of a good complexion brown hair, which he wears of an indisterent
length, but his beard was short; he is of a melancholy aspect, and he wears his
hat hanging over his brows, his clothes very plain; he wears a little band
close to his collar, without any band-strings, as does the other great Quaker
George Fox; he does strive in his looks and posture to imitate the Picture of
our Savior, as it was sent up to Rome in the days of Tiberius Caesar; and
therefore he strives to wear his hair as it were with a seam on the crown of
his head, and so flowing down on each side of it. His parentage is of the
meanest rank, his father being said to be a Sowgilder in Yorkshire, in which
County he himself was born, at a place called Anderslow, and has a Wife still
living at Wakefield. In the time of the late wars he was a Soldier, and served
under the command of the Lord Fairfax, and afterward under the command of
General Lambert in Scotland, where he was a Quartermaster, and falling sick
he returned to his own Country, where he had not long continued but he was
entered into the number of the Quakers, and coming to London grew acquainted
with many women, with some of whom he was too familiar, and were instruments of
his going down into the West, where what horrid blasphemies were broached by
him in counterfeiting himself to be Jesus the Savior of mankind, the following
Narration will advertise you. The coming of James Naylor into Bristol, and the
antic manner of Martha Symons waving her handkerchief, and singing, Holy,
holy, holy, before him: and of Hannah stranger singing in the same manner, and
of Dorcas Erbury pulling off his stockings, and laying her own clothes beneath
his feet, has already been discoursed by several Pens. I shall in this place
give you the most material passages of all their examinations: and in the first
place I will begin with James Naylor, who being demanded whether he was the
only son of God, confessed that he was the son of God, but must acknowledge
that he had many brethren.

The Examination of James Naylor.
Q. Have any called thee by the Name of Jesus?

A. Not as the visible Jesus, but as to Jesus the Christ within me?

Q. Dare thou to own the name of the King of Israel?

A. Not as I am a creature, but if they give it Christ within me, I then do
own it, and I have a Kingdom, but not of this world, my kingdom is of another
world, of which thou wists not.

Q. Art thou the Prophet of the most high?

A. Thou have said that I am a prophet.

Q. Is not the written Word of God the guide?

A. It declares of it, and what is not according to that is not true.

Q. Were thou ever called the Lamb of God?

A. There might be some such thing in some Letter sent, but I am a Lamb, and
have sought it long before I could witness it.

Q. Art thou the everlasting Son of God?

A. I do witness God in the flesh I am the Son of God, and the Son of God is
but one.

Q. Art thou the Prince of peace?

A. The Prince of everlasting peace is begotten in me.

Q. Art thou the everlasting Son of God?

A. I am and the everlasting righteousness is wrought in me: if ye were
acquainted with the Father, ye would also be acquainted with me.

Q. Do thou live without bread?

A. As long as it shall please my heavenly Father, I have tasted of that bread
of which he that eats shall never die.

Q. How long have thou lived without corporal sustenance?

A. Some fifteen of sixteen days, feeding on nothing but the Word of God.

Q. Was Dorcas Erbury dead two days in Exeter, and did thou raise her from
the dead?

A I can do nothing of my self, the Scripture bears witness to the power in
me which is everlasting: It is the same power I have which w^ read in Scripture.

Q. Art thou the unspotted Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world?

A. Were I not a Lamb, Wolves would not seek to devour me.

Q. Art not thou guilty of horrid blasphemy by thy words?

A. Who made me a judge over them?

Q. Why came thou in such an unusual posture riding into this City, with two
women leading thy horse, and singing, holy holy, holy; and another before thee
bare headed, and knee deep in the mud, at such a time that it raining most
extremely thy companions received it at their necks, and vented it at their
hose and breeches.

A. It tended to my fathers praise and glory, and I ought not to slight any
thing which the Spirit of the Lord moves.

Q. Do thou think that the Spirit of the Lord moved them?

A. Yes.

Q. These books thou have written, will thou affirm what is therein.

A. Yea, with my dearest blood.

The most material passages in the Examination of Martha Symons.
Q. Do thou own James Naylor to be the Prince of peace?

A. He is a perfect man, and he that is a perfect man is the Prince of peace.

Q. What made thee to leave thy husband to follow James Naylor?

A. It is our life to praise the Lord.

Q. Ought thou to worship him upon thy knees?

A. I ought to do it.

Q. And wherefore so?

A. He is the Lord of righteousness, and the new man within him is the
everlasting Son of righteousness, and James Naylor will be Jesus when the new
man is born in him?

Q. By what name do thou call him?

A. Lord.

Q And why Lord?

A. Because he is prince of peace, and Lord of righteousness.

Q. Why do thou call him King of Israel?

A. He is anointed.

Q. Who anointed him?

A. A Prophet.

Q. Who was that Prophet?

A. I will not tell thee.

Q. Does that spirit of Jesus which thou say is in him make a sufficient
Jesus unto others?

A. There is a seed born in him which I and every one ought to honor.

Q. Is he King of Israel, as thy Husband says?

A. If he sath so, thy testimony is double.

The most material passages in the Examination of Hannah Stranger.
Q. Do thou own James Naylor for the Prince of peace?

A. Yea, he is so.

Q. What do thou call his name?

A. It has been said, I, and others have already told it.

Q. Do thou not know it to be blasphemy to give him such and such attributes?

A. If I have offended the Law, etc.

Q. Did not thou send him that Letter wherein he is called the son of God?

A. Yes, I do own that Letter.

Being demanded why she called him Jesus, she would return no answer at all.

The Examination of Timothy Wedlock.
Q. Do thou own James Naylor to be the only son of God?

A. I do own him to be the son of God.

Q. Wherefore did thou sing before him Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Israel?

A. I do own the songs of Sion.

Q. Wherefore did thou go bare headed before him, when thou will not be
uncovered before a Magistrate?

A. What I did was as the Lord commanded me.

Q. Wherefore did thou kneel before him?

A.The truth made me.

The most material passages in the Examination of Dorcas Erbury the Relict of
William Erbury, sometime a Minister, but now a Quaker.
Q. Do thou own him who rode on the Horse to be the holy one of Israel?

A. Yea, I do, and with my blood I will maintain it.

Q Do thou own him for the son of God?

A. He is the only begotten son of God.

Q. Wherefore did thou pull off his stockings, and lay thy clothes at his
feet?

A. He is worthy of it, for the is the holy one of Israel.

Q. Know thou no other Jesus, the only begotten son of God?

A. I know no other Savior.

Q. Do thou believe in James Naylor?

A. Yea, I do.

Q. By what name do thou call him?

A. The son of God, but I am to serve him, and to call him Lord and Master.

Q. Jesus was crucified, but this man is alive?

A. He has shoke off his carnal body.

Q. What body has he then?

A. Say not the Scriptures, the natural body I will change, and it shall be
spiritual.

Q. But Christ raised those who are dead, so has not he?

A. He raised me.

Q. In what manner?

A. He laid his hand on my head when I had been dead two days, and said unto
me Dorcas arise, and I arose and live as thou see.

Q. What witness have thou for this?

A. My mother who was present.

Q. Jesus Christ does sit at the right hand of the Father, when the world shall
be judged by him?

A. He whom thou call Naylor, shall sit at the right hand of the Father, and
shall judge the world with equity.

The Substance of several Letters sent to the said James Naylor.
HAnnah Stranger in her Letter to him calls him The everlasting Son of
righteousness, and Prince of Peace.

And in another place writing to the said Naylor, she has these words, The
Lord shall not suffer his holy one to see corruption, nor his soul to lie in
Hell; but will cause the mountains to melt at his presence, and the little
hills to bring him Peace.

And in another Letter, she calls him the fairest of ten thousand, the only
begotten Son of God; her heart pants after him. Her Husband in his Letter to
him, tells him that his name, is no more to be called James but Jesus: and
this he owned at his Examination.

The Opinions of the Quakers are these.
1. They deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God. 2. They esteem their own
speakings to be of as much Authority. 3. They hold it lawful to expound, or to
interpret the Scriptures. 4. They say, He that preaches by a Text of Scripture
is a Conjurer. 5. They affirm that the holy letter is carnal. 6. That the Bible
ought to be burned. 7. That Jesus Christ inhabiteth in the flesh of Man. 8.
Some of them have said, that Christ never ascended into Heaven. 9. That to pray
that their sins may be pardoned is needless. 10. That they believe not that
there is another World. 11. Some of them deny the Resurrection. 12. They affirm
they cannot sin, but are perfect. 13. They make no distinction of Persons.
According to the Sentence passed upon him, the said James Naylor stood in the
Pillory, was whipped on Thursday last being December 18. from the Palace-yard
in Westminster to the Royal Exchange: and the further prosecution of his
Sentence had been put in Execution on Saturday December 20, but by an Order
from the Parliament, the said Naylor pretending sickness, it is deferred until
Saturday December twenty Seven, at which time he is to receive his just Reward,
according to his desert.

FINIS.

