Questions resolved, and propositions tending to accommodation and agreement
between the King being the Royal head, and both Houses of Parliament being
the representative body of the Kingdom of England.
The first Question.
1. Whether a King be ordained of God for the welfare of the people, or the
people appointed subjects to the King for the honor and pleasure of a King.
THis must needs be resolved that the King is instituted of God by his divine
Ordinance, but by subordinate means of the people their first and primary
Election, or by their approbation of his precedent Title or allowed merits,
wherein though it be an hereditary or successive right of a Crown; Yet is that
inheritance or succession either originally and immediately given, or
subsequently and mediately approved and allowed to him and his posterity by the
people: And by and with the means of the Laws, Customs, or Consttutions of
the Nation whereof he becomes the head and Governor. To the end that he may
and shall Rule, guide and govern and protect the people under his charge and
care in the true worship and service of God, with love and faithfulness, and
with such tenderness as a Lord and Master ought to use toward his family, a
shepherd toward his flock, and a father toward his dear beloved children.
Not that he should in any wise like a domineering Master cruelly beat and
evil entreat his servants, or an hired (no true) shepherd, neglect or peele
his flock; or be careless of their protection and fafety from ravening
Woolves, and biting Curres. Nor as an unnatural and hard hearted father,
grieve and afflict his children with overmuch chastisement, or give them stones
instead of bread. And although it cannot be denied that the Kings of Israel
were anointed by the holy Prophets of their time by the immediate appointment
of God their proper King and heavenly father, who miraculously ruled, guided
and protected them from the beginning before they had any earthly King like
other Nations: Yet when they desired a King (like as other Nations had) the
Lord then told them what such Kings did and would take upon them and use to do.
Not that God did appoint or assign or allow them so to do; for God did not
tell any King by the mouth of his Prophets, that he would give him a people to
use at his pleasure, but he granted the people a King to guide and command them
as he Moses long before. And when Saul their first King was chosen (being the
tallest man among the people) and anointed by the Prophet to be King over
Israel (which height of stature did only note that the people should remarke
the height of his dignity when he was set over them) The declaration of Gods
divine grace and holy Spirit infused by the word of the Prophet made him fit
and worthy to Rule (yea even to prophecy among the Prophets) and so was he
accepted by the Acclamation of the people. For no sooner that Divine Spirit of
grace had left him, but he became an Apostate from God, and his religious duty
of well governing as a King; and was thenceforth relict of God, and neither the
haughtiness of his stature, nor the dignity of his Throne availed him any
longer; but the youngest and least of Ishai his sons was chosen from the
sheepfoldes to be King and to Rule and Govern Gods people, which after his
annoyntment by the Prophet and the time of his exaltation to the Crown, he
governed with a faithful and true heart, and ruled them prudently with all his
power. And in after ages the Chronicles of the Kings do show how often the
good Kings that maintained the true Worship of God did long continue in their
States and Thrones and flourisht, but such as were evil, and set up Idols and
hill Altars, and caused or suffered the people to sin against their God, God
did rend and divide and utterly take away their Kingdoms from them. Only it
is specially remarkable of the good King Hezekiah who had slipped and erred,
but repented and recollected himself, that the merciful God quickly heard his
prayers and saw his tears, and added to his days and happy Reign fifteen
years; which number if it be added to our good King Hezekiah, his Reign will
exceed the time of many of his progenitors. But God may please to add fifty in
steed of fifteen, and then the years both of his life and Reign will exceed
all his noble progenitors.

The like is to be observed of Christian Kings and Emperors after but Savior
his Incarnation, and that the Christian faith was established; they had their
Annoyntment from God by the hand of the Bishops, but their acceptance was by
the people. And it is manifest that both the ancient Kings of Israel before the
Incarnation of our Savior, as also all Christian Kings since were bound by
Oath taken, or by Royal obligation to Rule and Reign by and according to the
Laws of the Land. For Bartolus says, a King is Solutus legibus, but obligatus
vinculo pietatis, to rule secundum leges. Of all which it follows, that Kings
Reigns are provided by God for the welfare of the people, and their honor and
dignity prolonged in reward of their righteousness in government according to
the Etymologies of the terms or titles, Quia Reges dicuntur a regendo in pace
secundum. Regulam and normam Justitiae. Imperatores autem ab imperando in
bello. Tyranni (...), quod est saeuire in populum.

The second Question.
2. Whether a King makes or imposes the Laws upon the people, or the Laws
and ancient, native and national Customs of the Land do erect and establish
the Throne and Crown of the King?
IT is usual indeed amongst the flattering Courtiers and Royalists in this
kingdom to term the Laws the Kings Laws, Quasi dicerent, the King does
imponere leges populi. But that is their ignorance. For the Laws of England
are most ancient right and rites and Customs of the Land, Non Juradata, nec
leges impisitae, sed usu and longaevitate temporum inductae and tanquam
innatae. For if it be as truly as vulgarly said, Consue^udo est altera Natura,
Then are our Customary Laws the most natural Laws of this Land; whereby also
appears the Levity of their conceits or Judgments, who having stepped a
little over the Seas in a Fly boat, and parled a little French in Paris or
Orleance, do peremptorily assume upon them to define and pronounce that our
Laws are illiterall and imperfect, and that the Civil and Impertiall Law in
other parts of Christendom are the most excellent, absolute and best Laws for
all, and for this Common wealth. Forgetting (in mean while) that even in those
Foreign Lands where the Civil Law, Roman or Imperial, has place and Rule,
the Natural and National or provincial usages and Customs there do abridge
and restrain the General Rules, Theses, or Hypotheses of that General Law.

And for our Statutory Laws called Jus Statutorium, they are not Indicta or
promulgata, but Enacted, Statuta facta, or Constituta by the King and both
Houses of Parliament. In which the chiefest consideration and ponderation of
the reasons of making of them are most in the debate and voting of both Houses,
and the Royal assent is only left to the King with a le Rey le veult, or his
di^assent stays them; yet not peremptorily, but with a modest answer, Il Rey
se advisera. Neither is the abrogation or remission of any penal Law received
left to the King, though it be only malum prohibitum, not malum in se. But his
Majesty may dispense with, or remit the penalty of a Statute, and that not
merely and perpetually, but only Ad tempus, and that not de Jure, but by his
prerogative Royal, upon collateral or accidental event happening ex post
facto, after the making of the Statute, yet not without cause or consideration,
and for experience of some further or more weighty cause or consideration of
benefit or convenience to the Commonwealth, which being discovered to be
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, then the Letters Patents of the dispensation
becomes void in Law, and frustrate, and vanishes again, or is made utterly
void and condemned for ever at the next Parliament.

The third Question.
3. What power or prerogative the King has Supra legem, praeter legem, or
contra legem terrae.
ALthough it was anciently said by a King of this Land H. 3. Nolumus
praerogativam nostram disputari, yet that was answered again by the Peers and
Barons in Parliament with another Nolumus: Nolumus leges Angliae mutari. So
that with favor and good manners and duty the Kings prerogative may be talked
of in respect of the Law of the Land, and of the natural right and Liberty and
property of the Subject. And thus it is resolved, That the King has in some
Cases a regal power or prerogative supra legem, and in some Cases praeter or
ultra legem. But in no Case has his Majesty power or prerogative contra legem
Terrae or Statuta Regni.

The Cases of example wherein his Majesty may by his great Seal do something
supra legem are diverse; but especially those of his mercy and Grace extended
to delinquent Subjects that fall into some offenses and danger of Law by
trespasses or felonies. Although the Law be positive and penal condemning the
offenders, yet his Majesty may pardon them the trespass or felony, and the
punishment, fine or forfeiture thereupon, Quoad interesse suum: but therein
also the Law does stay or restrain the Kings power, that he cannot by his
pardon remit or give away Interesse partis: But that the party grieved or
wronged, may and ought to have his action; And the son or wife may have and
prosecute the Appeal, de morte patris or viri, and the King by no power
Imperial can take it from them.

The Cases praeter legem, are some dispensative Proclamations or grants of
experience, whether something be pro bono publico or not, as for importation or
exportation of some or other foreign or native Commodity, or the exercise or
practice of some new invented Art, Science, or Mystery among the people, which
having most commonly the specious show of good, yet no sooner that it be
discovered to be hurtful to the Commonwealth, or derogatory to the liberty or
property of the Subject, or that it bring on any burden, tax, or charge, or
do secretly exhaust, or diminish the rightful profits of any Trade, Mystery,
or Science, before lawfully used, or belonging to any of the Kings Liege
people, or Subjects, then the same is to be abhorred, condemned, and
suppressed, as an odious project, monopoly, or unwarrantable thing. And the
Rule and reason of Common Law, which is that In omnibus salus populi suprema
Lex esto, hinders that no Regal, or Prerogative power can uphold or
maintain it, though the case be praeter Legem, and not provided for by any
Statute; Or if it be provided for, and the King has dispensed by a Non
obstante.

The Cases of example Contra Legem, are either when the King does grant,
Authorize, or permit any thing whatsoever against the Common Law of the Land,
or the rule or reason thereof, such his Majesty's grant by Letters Patents,
Proclamations, or other Commands, or such license or permission cannot be, nor
is of any force, or can, or ought to stand or be used, practiced, or suffered
in this Land. And this is first to be understood of the Common Law of this
Land, in point of Commutative Justice, that concerns the right and interest
of every Subject, viz. Jus personarum, rerum and actionum, of every man,
whereof the first is expressly preserved by the great Charter of England,
Nullus liber homo capietur, imprisonetur, etc. The second is secured to every
man, by the Law of property, wherein it is said, Quod nostrum est, sine furte
aut assensu nostro a nobis tolli non potest, upon which no Regal power or
Prerogative can trench. And the third, both by the words of the great Charter,
Nulli negabimus, etc. justitiam, and by the Statute Ordaining that every man
should enjoy the benefit of Law, and Courts of Justice for his Freehold Lands,
Goods or Chattels. And that neither the great Seal, nor Privy Seal, should
hinder the due course of Law.

Secondly, in point of distributive Justice, either in paena or praemio, for
good or evil behavior in the public conversation or actions of one toward
another. And in this part of Common Law of the Land, Malum in se is most
concerned, that vice should be punished, and ought not to be spared by any
Regal power, leave, or license in any case whatsoever, for it were improper
that the King (being Gods Vicegerent) might or ever should connive at, or leave
unpunished, any crime or offense, contrary to the Commandments of God, or the
Law of Nature. For his Majesty is said to be like God, Dixi Dii estis, and the
Schoolmen say, Deus non potest ma um agere quia non vult, and non vult, quod
non potest: according to which the Lawyers say, Id possumus quod de jure
possumus, and that Le Rey ne poit fair tort. And for the malum prohibitum, by
Statutes or Ordinances of Parliament, his Majesty cannot, nor will go against
them, but in Tutiorem partem, to pardon where there is hope of amendment.
Otherwise see the Statute of Northampton, wherein some odious crimes are denied
the King to pardon. Wherefore so it is, that if the King, through that natural
propensity of Kings (spoken of by God himself) do more then he should do
toward the people, or that by his omission some enormities are crept in, then
it behooves him to call together his great Council in Parliament, to advise
with them for his own better direction, and for Reformation of abuses, and
Corrections of such as have abused and misled his Majesty, whereupon the fourth
Question ensues.

The Fourth Question.
4. What Power or privilege the High Court of Parliament has, when they are
assembled together; and are become the Representative Body of the Kingdom?
IT is Resolved, that they, with the Kings assent, may, as cause shall require,
make new Laws, or abrogate any former Statutes; But the maine Common Law, and
the Ancient Rites, Usages, and Native Customs of the Land, they themselves
cannot alter. For (as the Lawyers phrase is to say) it is Oppositum in objecto,
that they that sit by the Common Laws, and by the ancient Rites, Usages and
Customs of the Land, should alter and change that which gave them their
Authority to be a Representative Body.

Also the two Houses of Peers and Commons Rege absente and non consentiente,
may declare the Common Law in Cases where doubt is, or ambiguity or difficulty,
but they can make no Law without the King, to stand as a Law and Statute. Only
they can make temporary Ordinances of Parliament, like Orders or Sentences
interlocutory, sendente Paerliamento, and they may censure and punish
delinquents.

But in case the King will not call a Parliament, as in Richard the second his
time, when the urgent occasions of the Commonwealth required it; the Peers
called the Parliament. Then the Peers and Commons can do all things as a
complete Parliament without the King. And at this time the Kings Majesty having
called a Parliament, and so sarre proceeded as he has done already, in making
some good and wholesome Laws for Reformation of the greatest errors and abuses
that ever were in this Commonwealth. And especially having condescended to a
Trienniall Parliament to be for ever hereafter, and neither this present
Parliament, nor any Parliament hereafter assembled, to be dissolved without the
consent of both Houses: Yet now his Majesty being seduced by evil instruments,
does dissever himself from his Parliament, and by his absence, does (as they
say) hinder their proceedings, to the making of good and wholesome Laws, for
the kingdom and Commonwealth. What i^ this Case may be done, is not to be
resolved by any wit or judgment, but by the absolute Wisdom and Authority of
that high Court, consisting of both Houses, to whom in all humbleness the
Writer hereof leaves it.

Nevertheless, with the like humility and awful fear of offense against the
Public, and with a faithful zeal to the Commonwealth, he offers these
considerations, scrutative of the matter or cause of the variances between his
Majesty and his great Council of Parliament, viz.

What is the very true cause of his Majesty's absence, and severance from his
Parliament sitting at Westminster, whither they were first summoned, and which
is the most convenient place of their assembly and fitting?

The King alleges that it was the tumultuous riot of the disordered
Londoners, rash and young Prentices, and of furious and fanaticke Brownists,
Anabaptists, and Sectaries of the City and Suburbs, pretending to cry out
against Bishops, but intending and offering affront and disloyalty to his
Majesty, his Regal authority, whereby his royal Person was endangered at
Whitehall, had he not had a Guard about him, and so his Majesty says, they
were like to do again, if he were at London.

The Parliament says, it was a malignant party of Cavalieres, and others not
well affected to peace, and enemies to the Commonwealth, who by flattery and
false in sinuations did dissuade his Majesty from concurring with the grave
advise of his great Council. And the Papists, and papal affected Bishops,
dreading that their plots were discovered, and like to be prevented, and the
delinquents punished by the more scvere Laws or Orders of the Parliament, did
incite his Majesty to proceed in that ill advised Course.

And further, that such the malignant party seducing his Majesty, endeavored to
bring in imperial power and Arbitrary rule for his Majesty to overruled the
Laws, and ancient Usages, and Customs of England, and the privileges of
Parliament, and abridge the liberty and property of the Subjects. The evidence
whereof has been partly shown forth by some Declarations divulged, and
Printed by Order of both Houses of Parliament, expressing the precedent
attempts of foraine force, and domesticke, and coercive power of Arms, which
late before the Parliament, was plotted and put in way of constraint upon the
Commonwealth. And that moved the Parliament to crave and assume to themselves
the Militia at home, for the securing of the Coasts of the Sea, and of guarding
and fortifying the Ports and other places at Land. That though his Majesty were
seduced and misled by the malignant party, and their Accomplices; Yet his Royal
Person, Crown and Dignity, should be preserved in peace and safety, and the
Commonwealth and people should be defended and kept in peace and prosperity,
maugre the devilish plots abroad, and within the bowels of the Land, by
Papists, Priests, papal Bishops, bloody and rapinous military men, Captains,
and Cavaliers, whose disposition was, and is properly bent to war and
bloodshed, and to rapine and spoil, and to make their prey on the wealth of
the rich Citizens and other the quiet people of the Land.

The King contrariwise taking high displeasure at that part or point of the
Parliaments Demand for, and touching the Militia, Alleged that the right of
Militia, or Command of Arms within the Land, belongs properly to his
Regality, and as a Flower of his Crown, not to be assayed, or attempted by any
Subject, no not the High Court of Parliament, though they be the Representative
body of the people, no more then it could be lawful for the people themselves
to rise and take Arms against their Sovereign King.

Wherein, as by some Written and Printed discourse or Declaration, It has
been already avowed, and maintained, that the Militia was not improperly
desired of and from his Majesty, nor unlawfully assumed by them for a certain
convenient time. They perceiving more then the King or people do know of the
imminent danger both of his Royal Person, Crown and dignity, and to the
privileges of Parliament, and to the Laws of the Land, and Liberties of the
People like to been subverted, and most especially the whole honor and true
worship of God, and true Protestant Religion to be overthrown, may and will,
by and through Gods grace and assistance, prevent and pervert or quell and
subdue the evil and wicked attempts of all the malignant opposites. It is
therefore by all true and sound reason of all Laws, Divine Laws of Nature and
Nations, Civil policy, and the Provincial Rites, Usages, and Custom, which
are the Laws of his Land, resolved that the Militiai to be distinguished of,
and the point defined and determined thus, viz The King of this Land no less,
but as much, and as amply as any other Foraine Christian King has in himself,
and pertaining to his Regalty, Crown, and Dignity, the Jus Militiae, at all
times to use, and to lead and to command by his Lieutenant, the General and
Captains, for the safety and peace of his Land and people, against any foraine
foes, or domesticke traiterous enemies: But this is to be understood, when his
Majesty, with his own prospective eye, and watchfulness, or by the advice of
his Privy Council, before Parliament or great Council in Parliament, has or
does discover the Plots or purposes of foraine enemies intending mischief,
assault or ruin, by Invasion foraine, or of domesticke traitors, by
Insurrection and Rebellion at home.

For in truth it is a Flower of the Kings Crown, and an incident of his
Regality, (as he is a King) to have Liberam and absolutam potestatem, or, Jus
Bellum indicendi and gerendi, to or against any Foraine Prince or Potentate;
and again, Jus and potestatem pacis contrahendae and paciscendae, with any of
them: and thus all the learned Authors, writing of Law and Policy, by the
Titles of their Books de lege Regia, have averred, and maintained, and it is
not to be denied, because the King is the head of the body politic; which
compared to the natural body, wherein the five senses are operative, and do
their Offices by their Organa rite disposita, yet the naturalists do affirm,
that the Communis sensus is in the brain, or in Occipite, and that per
discursum practicum, it judges and resolves of the other senses, their
pleasing or being useful and profitable to the whole body, or offending and
annoying it: And so the King has the Jus militiae, or power and command of
Arms at home, throughout his kingdom, for he has Potestatem vitae and necis,
as the Civilians term it. And in our Law, the death of any is to be accounted
for to the King, and the taking away of any Liege Subjects life, is in the
Indictment said to be Contra Coronam and dignitatem Regis. But all this
notwithstanding the general position of the Jus Principis, or Lex Regia,
placing the power of Arms and Militia, in the Crown, yet his Majesty cannot
otherwise levy the Militia, but by lawful means, and not by Commission of
Array, as lately has been, for that is an undue charge, not warranted by Law.
And in case of particular accidents that the King the Head, be misinformed of
his and the Commonwealths enemies, conceiving them to be friends which are
secret and desperate adversaries, complotting clandestine Ruin and destruction
to the body, and refuse to afford aid for the prevention of imminent danger;
will any judicious man doubt but the eyes of the body, being the great Council
of Commonwealth, discerning the mischief and danger, do well and
providently, if they call the Arms and Hands to strike and fight, the Loins
to join in strength, and Legs and Feet; to go and run to help to defend
the Total, that so the Head being disquieted with ache and pains, may be
preserved in rest, and quiet repose.

Wherefore in such case as now it is here in England, the Representative body
has, and in all Reason, Prosalute Regis and Populi, ought to have and to use,
and command the Militia, throughout the Land, until such time as the King be
better informed, and the Commonwealth and Body be settled again in peace and
safety, and that then some provident Law concerning the Mi itia, be made for
time to come, to prevent such like accidents as this has been.

And hereupon it may be considered, whether the two Houses of Peers and
Commons, had not cause to demand the approbation of some Officers of State. The
Militia not consisting merely in the having of Arms, but also in the power of
force to defend against Invasion, or the fierceness of an Enemy, wherein if
such Officers as should be entrusted with the power and force of the Arms, and
with the custody of the Forts, and other places of strength within the
kingdom, should not be well and truly affected to the government of this
Land: How easily may it be perceived, those strong holds, which already are, or
at least are intended by the wisdom of the Parliament, shortly to be
fortifyed for the greatest defense, will or may become the greatest offense,
and those Bands of Military Forces, which are supposed to be for the safeguard
of the kingdom, turn to the Ruin and Destruction of the Commonwealth?

These then being the true and genuine causes or motives of the woeful
severances between the King and Parliament, whereat all true hearts have
grieved; What presumption shall it be deemed in a true English heart, bleeding
with compassionate sorrow, for the head and body Politic so miserably
endangered of utter perdition, by unnatural and civil broils, which Lucan
writing of, lamenteth and describes in these words and lines, Bella per
Ematheos plusquam Civilia Campos,
Jusque datum sceleri canimus, populumque potentem,
In sua victrici conversum viscera dextra,
Cognatasque acies, etc.


If I say, such a true hearted English man, do propose these Sovereign Salves
for so deadly a sore, and these present Remedies for so desperate a sickness,
to prevent the instant death and desolation of this famous and renowned
kingdom and Nation, whose people were of old time surnamed Angli quasi Angeli,
or ab Angulo dicti, as being in an angle or corner of the world, and severed
from the rest, according to that of the Poet, Et penitus toto divisos orb
Britannos; And which some Divines term one of the beloved Isles of the
Gentiles, wherein the Gospel of Christ was soonely Preached after his
Ascension.

1. First then may it please his most Excellent Majesty piously and
religiously to turn his Royal Heart and gracious affection toward his great
Council of Parliament, who do represent all his dear people, and be advised
by them, no more to respect or give ear to those Syrene hallucinations of
flattering seducers, the Papists and Jesuit Priests, the Papally inclined
Bishops, who stand so much for their Hierarchy, as that they with Demas have
forsaken the purity of the Gospel, and neglect the Preaching of the holy Word
of God, and have embraced this present World, making themselves Lords over Gods
Heritage, not true Shepherds to feed his flock, as they ought to do, in
Season, and out of Season, and to wait upon the All-seeing eye of Gods
providence for his beloved Spouse the Church, to be purged and cleansed of her
late inbred and inbrought corruptions.

2. Secondly, that his Majesty will abandon and quite put away the thought or
imagination of any Tyrannical or Imperial Government over this Land, which
the Papal Bishops and Hierarchicall Prelates and Priests, and other Lay
Flatterers, did presume to use daily, and insinuate and inculcate to his Sacred
Ears, under the pretense of telling his Majesty, that he is an absolute
Imperial Monarch, free and above, and without all Laws, to Rule his people ad
Arbitrium Principis, and that he being Gods Anointed is responsall only to
God, if he do tyrannize or grieve his Subjects; Whereas they are or make
themselves utterly ignorant of the true State and quality of the kingdom of
England, after the old triple distinction of Empire, written by Bartolus and
Baldus, the best Civilian Doctors, viz. That there is Imperium merum, and
Imperium mixtum cum Jurisdictione, and that in some places there is only
Jurisdictio sine imperio, as is the state of the Low Countries, and other
Aristocraticall and Democraticall Governments: whereof the first, i.e. Merum
Imperium, was the Roman Empire gotten merely by the sword, and for the most
part kept by the sword, according to the saying of Justin the Historian, in the
beginning of his Book, Imperium iisdem modis tenetur quibus paratur. And by
that Empire, Principis placitum legis babet vigorem. As Justinian in the first
of his Institutes mentions. The second, i.e. Mixtum Imperium cum
jurisdictione, is the Crown or Kingly power of England, Monarchichall indeed;
for Rex in solio is sine paci; But in Parliamento or Concilio regendi, he has
Pares Regni, i.e. Peers, so dignifyed by him, and honored from the Fountain
of his Majesty's Honor. And he has also the Communitatem Populi, which the
blessed, and ever prosperous Queen Elizabeth accounted sibi preciosissimam.
And all these three States of King, Peers, and Commons, were happily Conjunct
and preserved together, by the ligaments of the ancient Laws of the Land, and
Privileges of Parliament, which Laws and Privileges were never subjugated by
any conquest; but ever over-lived the change of Kings, and appeased force, and
induced Kings into their settled Reigns here. According as that learned Chief
Justice, Sir Edward Coke, was bold in presence to tell his Majesty, the late
King James, of famous memory, That the Law set the Crown upon his head.
Whereat his Majesty seemed angry, but was so prudent and wise, as not to be so.
And the old learned Bracton, that wrote like, as he was, a studied Civilian, as
well as a Judge of the Common Law, in King Henry the second his time, advises
every King of this Land in these words, Id tribuat Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuit
ei.

Which two maine points or Principles in this present state of England, that is
to say, the Church Government established with the true Protestant faith and
Religion, and the free Regal power, qualifyed with the Natural and National
Laws of this Land, the untouched Privileges of Parliament, and the Rites and
Liberties of the people, being not only Cordially professed, and protested by
his Majesty, but secured by the high wisdom, and care of the Peers and
Commons, and his Majesty joyously returning to his beloved Parliament.

May it please the Almighty God of his infinite goodness, so to inspire both
King, and Peers, and Commons, with his Divine grace, that Anarchy, and
Dissolution of Church Government be avoided and prevented by due restraint, and
correction of all Sectaries and Schismatickes, Brownists, Anabaptists, etc. Who
in truth, if they might obtain their fanaticke intents, would have no King at
all over them on Earth, nor Church, or material Churches; But in rapture of
the Spirit would fly up to Heaven for the Judaicke King, and in the mean time
would hold their Church and Conventicles in the Air, or Woods or Barnes, or
Stables, or in their own holy breasts, whereas though Christ himself said his
kingdom was not of this world, yet he taught his Disciples, that in this world
they should obey Kings, as of Gods ordinance, and be tributary to them. Date
Caesari quae sunt Caesaris.

And that no conceit of any popular or plebeian sway in this Land, be in any
true English heart: But that the Members of both Houses may so prepare good and
wholesome Laws for the Church, as may quite extirpate Popery, and prevent
Schisms, and all rendings or divisions of Christ, his seamelesse garment of
unity of the Spirit, to be fast girt with the bond of Peace. And for the
Commonwealth that never hereafter there be any more Inrodes upon the Laws,
privileges, or Liberties of free English men.

That finally God may be truly honored, and purely served and worshipped, his
holy Word rightly dispensed, and his Sacraments duly and decently administered;
And then his Heavenly blessings will undoubtedly shower down upon this little
Isle of Great Britain, and the words and wishes of an Ingenious Votary may be
fulfilled. Long live King Charles, and leave
Brave Britain to his Son,
And he to his, and they to theirs,
Until the world be done.


In this Treatise may be discovered and noted six sorts of malignant parties,
against this unity of King and Parliament, and the happy effects and fruits
thereof.
Whose Corrections or Reformation, if it so please God, the King, and
Parliament, may be as follows.
1. All Papists, Priests, and Lay, who certainly in their secret dispositions
(whatsoever they make show of) are against King and Church of England, and do
plot and practice the advancement of Popish religion and Church, and to bring
in again that foreign usurped power of the Pope, Supra Reges, which is
banished and abolished by the Statute. 1. Eliz.

These may and ought to have the Law and Statutes of the Realm put in
execution against them, and more severe if need be to compel them to come to
Church and receive the Communion, which if they will do, then let them not be
branded with a name of Church Papist, so to deter them and drive them out
again.

2. All papal affected Bishops and Clergy, who though they contrariwise to the
Papist Priests profer to obey Kings, yet in their hearts could wish the Clergy
to be separate from the Kingly Authority and Temporal Law, but to beat down
Law and Privileges of Parliament, do Hyperbolically exalt and extol the
Monarchical Arbitrary power of the King as above and solute of all Law, and
responsall only to God.

These must know their error and ignorance in their Tenets of Kingly power and
government within this Realm, and be told by Sir Edward Coke, if he were
living, that never any man in England kicked his heel against the Laws of the
Land, but in fine the Law brake his neck; and let these Hierarchical Bishops
be corrected of their superbity, and reformed in their superiority and
domination in the Church and their worldly mindedness in Country and
Commonwealth, as please the King and Parliament.

3. All Court flatterers and Royalists, who daily in their affections and
discourses maintain absolute and Prerogative power in the King, to grant by
his Letters Patents, what and how he will, above the Laws and Statutes, and
would have Proclamations to be Laws, that so they might have Monopolies and
projects to serve their turn.

These weak men of Learning for the most part, in the deep points of Law and
policy, must be taught to wait on the King their Master, with all diligent
service and attendance, and leave off their discourses of Kingly Authority and
of Parliamentall Privileges and force of Laws, and content themselves
henceforth with the King their Masters reward of their service, without peeling
or preying on the people with their Monopolies and Projects.

4. All Cavaliers, Captains, and Martial men, who desire war and tumult and
disturbance in the Land and Commonwealth, that so they may have rapine and
spoil.

These must be sent into foreign parts where they may freely have and take
their rapine and spoil upon foreign Enemies, and not to rake the bowels and
baggs of their own Countrymen. And there also they may gain honor by valor,
which here is not to be used.

5. All Sectaries and Schismatickes of the Church, who disaffect government,
either Royal or Ecclefiastique.

These must learn to Conform themselves to the uniformity of the Church, and
to obey and submit themselves to their lawful King, who is the Lords Anointed,
and set over them by his divine Ordinance.

6. All popular and plebeian Humorists, who do affect and desire Democracy,
(which they term or call a Free state) and by their leaves be it said, they
would have neither this King nor his posterity, nor any King to sit on the
Throne.

These must be put in mind, or made to know, that Monarchy qualified by Law is
the best Government. As the old Poet Homer, (...), and so all the best learned
Authors writing of States and Policy do affirm and conclude, and the ancient
Histories of England do show that here was ever one or more Kings. But this
Land never more flourished, then since it has been now these six or seven
hundred years, under one Christian King, ruling according to the ancient
Laws, Usages and Customs of the Land.

FINIS.

