A REMONSTRANCE TO VINDICATE HIS EXCELLENCE ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX From some
false Aspersions cast upon His PROCEEDINGS.

To the 17. of August. 1643.

Printed for T. W. 1643.

THE rash and injurious speeches, which some misunderstanding people have let
fall concerning the actions of our noble General have drawn from us, with no
less justice than necessity, this short and true vindication. Though his
Excellence, secure in his own worth and conscience, would forgive such
calumnies, and that in the noblest way of forgiveness, to take no notice at
all of them: yet we who are privy to all passages, whom it concerns in
Justice to satisfy the world, and whom it more behooves to vindicate than it
can do any man to calumniate, cannot be guilty of so great a neglect, as not
endeavoring to make the truth appear. And since it is proved by frequent
experience, that the grounds of all jealousies and suspicions, which people
ignorant of the present actions are apt to conceive against any man, are
usually raised from some precedent demeanours of the same person: let it not be
thought amiss, if we digress a little from the present narration, in showing
what his Excellence has formerly been, and how little cause can arise from
thence for any man to suspect his truth, valor, or discretion. It will not be
denied that my Lord of Essex was esteemed as loyal a servant to the Royal
Family, as true a Patriot to all interests of England, and as constant an
adventurer in the maintenance of the reformed Religion (and it has pleased God
to put England of late years into that condition, that the greatest advancement
of her temporal interest is by protection of the reformed Religion) as any
Nobleman whatsoever, as by his former free services for the Palatinate,
Holland, etc. may plainly appear; in which not only his Majesty but the
Queen of Bohemia will be pleased to acknowledge his fidelity, ready always,
though never obliged by the Court, nor waiting upon his Majesty in that way, to
serve him truly in all warlike and honorable employments; and in the late
businesses of Cales and Scotland, though he commanded not in chief, and little
was done; yet what was best done, was done by him, as the wisest which were
there will acknowledge. So that it may seem his Majesty made choice of his
service as a man of unquestionable fidelity to his Country; and the
representative body of the Kingdom now chose him as a man of undoubted loyalty
to his Sovereign; those two virtues being inseparable in the breast of a noble
Englishman; and which his Excellence professes that in his conscience he
believes this present Parliament never intended to disjoyne. Upon this the
Parliament in this extreme and sad necessity chose him their General, with a
Commission as large and absolute as ever was granted; it being conceived that a
more narrow Commission was not worthy to engage him in so dangerous an
enterprise, nor of power sufficient to enable him to the accomplishment of
great designs. Which was the practice (to compare it with elder times) of that
sovereign Senate of Rome; who in times of most imminent danger, waving her
usual government in war by Consuls, chose a Dictator, putting the sole and
independent command of the Soldiery upon one man for a limited time; it being
observed by wisest authors, that too strait a limitation of Generals in their
power has been destructive to their best designs; for which not only the old
petty States of Greece have been blamed, but great Carthage which was able to
contest with Rome her self, and in later times the Spaniards (as wise as they
think their Councels) have lost much by it. Therefore in a plain narration we
shall endeavor to show that his Excellence has not been wanting in any
performance, unless disobedience to his power, want of necessary pay for his
Soldiers, or too frequent interpositions of another power have sometimes
hindered his real intentions. At our march from Windsor (where the necessity of
the season, and the safeguard of the City had long detained the body of our
Army) the Soldiers were much in arrere, which was willingly forborne till the
State should be better able, upon promise of constant pay for the future. We
came to Reading, lay 16. days before it; no money came; upon the Treaty his
Excellence sent the Conditions to the Parliament, who liked it, and the
Soldiers to forbear plundring were promised 12. shillings a man, besides their
pay, but their pay could not be had, although his Excellence after 8. days
expectation made a journey himself to London for it; in the mean time, by
reason of that infected town a great sickness and mortality fell upon the Army;
notwithstanding his Excellence by the advice of his Council of War, intended
to march thence for better air; but such a general mutiny was raised for want
of money, that his Excellence, though with much courage, and just severity, he
began to suppress it, was advised by his Council of War to desist for fear of a
general defection, till money might come from the City. Notwithstanding upon
this discontent, his Excellence removing to Cawsham house (which he did to
prevent the infection) many of them did disband and go away. The day following
his Excellence coming thither received intelligence of the defeat of the Devon
forces under the command of the Earl of Stanford, at Stretton in Cornwall, and
that P. Maurice and Marquis Harford were designed that way. Whereupon he sent
an express with order to Sir William Waller, forthwith to march with his
forces to join with the forces of Devon, and the other Western Countries to
prevent the joining of the enemies forces; and withal writ to the Governor of
Bristol to assist Sir W. Waller with such horse and foot as he could
conveniently spare out of his garrison. And that nothing might be wanting for
the safety of the Western Country, which any way lay in his Excellences power,
(well knowing them to be of greatest consequence) at a Council of War it was
fully debated, put to the question, and resolved that a strong party of horse
and foot should then be sent after P. Maurice to fall upon him before he should
join with Hoptons forces, and the body of the Army to have remained
thereabouts till a Fort had been raised upon Kennets mouth to have secured the
river, and commanded the town; but that design was not executed, partly
because it was then pressed that the moving of the whole Army would better
satisfy the City, and would be of greater concernment to march toward Oxford,
to meet with the auxiliary forces of the associated Counties, and partly by
reason of Sir William Waller his own Letter, which assured my Lord General
that he would presently obey his commands, and march into the West, which
notwithstanding was not done; for Sir William marched to Worcester, and went
not toward the West; whereas had they marched thither, they might have been
furnished with money better (those Counties being rich and well affected to us)
than in judgment could be expected at Worcester, which was a fortified
Garrison town; nor were Horse and Dragoones proper or probable to prevail
against it. However Sir William Waller not certifying his Excellence of the
altering his purpose, the reasons of it, or of his march to Worcester, till
after he was engaged in his March, he relied wholly upon his marching to the
West. But by that occasion necre 20. days were spent ere he marched toward the
West, in which time the forces of P. Maurice, Marquess Harford, and Hopton
joined together. The Lord General (it being much urged as a thing of absolute
necessity to move with the whole army toward Oxford, for pleasing of the City,
from whom otherwise we were to expect no money) did, though much against
judgment, proceed in that design, and marched to Them with the whole army to
meet with the associate forces of the Counties. Upon his coming thither he
found neither his own forces, nor those new forces of that number that was
expected and promised, there being not above 1000. Dragoons and foot at most,
which came up to us. At Them the hand of God in an extreme increase of sickness
(hundreds in a day falling desperately il) and by strong unseasonablenesse of
weather, and great rain continuing 14. days, the place being upon a flat,
clayie, and moist ground, made it impossible to advance from that quarter. In
which time the army was by sickness, and departure away of most of the
auxiliary forces, brought to a number utterly unable to attempt the former
design without certain ruin; the situation of Oxford upon the river of Thames
considered, it being impossible to block up the town without a double number
to what his Excellence then had. Yet as soon as the rain ceased, and the
waters abated, to make the ways passable, intelligence being given that P.
Rupert had drawn out his horse and foot toward Buckingham, and intended there
to give battle, having brought thither, as was reported his Canon, called in the
Country, and made open profession before them, that upon his honor he would
fight with our forces, though they were 10. for 1. the Lo: General marched
with all speed toward Buckingham to fight with the Enemy, whose shows of
bravery, and desires of sighting quickly came to nothing; for when the Lo:
General marched within two miles of Buckingham, intelligence was given that
they had all in a disorderly manner quitted the town, left their provisions
behind them, horst their foot, and were marched away the night before. His
Excellence then knowing it was not possible for him with his train of
Artillery, and foot to follow the enemy to any advantage, or by those forces he
had to hinder P. Rupert from joining with the Queen, desisted from his march
to Buckingham, sending into the town a party of horse to quarter there that
night, and to bring away the enemies provision; he himself with the rest of
his Army marched to great Brickhill, a place most convenient to lie between
the Enemy and London, to defend the associate Counties, to assist or join with
the forces of the Lo: Gray of Grooby, Sir John Meldrum, and Colonel Crumwel,
to whom his Excellence had given many strict commands to have fought with the
Queens forces, and stopped her passage up to the King, for which design they had
a competent force; but notwithstanding it was not done, nor were such
opportunities as were offered taken to have fallen upon the enemy; but the
Queen and P. Rupert were suffered to join with all their forces. (yet the Lo:
Gray of Grooby came afterward readily with his forces to his Excellence.)
About this time came intelligence of good success which Sir William Waller had
upon the enemy in the West, taken some of their Canon, forced them to retreat,
and had pursued them to the Devises, of which his Excellence on Tuesday night
following the defeat received a Letter from Sir William Waller, dated on the
Monday, confirming the truth of it; which was seconded with further
intelligence that Sir W. Wallers forces had routed more of the Enemies horse,
and beat a convoy of Ammunition sent from Oxford by the Lo: Craford, and that
the Lo: Wilmot upon news thereof, who was with 2. Regiments of horse going
after the Lo: Craford, retreated to Oxford, and that the enemy had but 1200.
foot left in the Western Counties, which were got into the Devises, and
offered to quit that town upon fair conditions, Sir William Waller having a
victorious and very considerable army before it. Now the case standing thus,
the fear of the Western parts was changed into joy and thankfulness for
victory and success, his Excellence having out of his great care and
circumspection written to Sir William Waller in these words:

I Would have you fight with the Marquess of Hartford, if possibly you may,
not upon unequal terms; if not, to march up after him, and to hinder and
trouble him in the Rear as much as in you lies, and so join with this Army;
otherwise if the King send any supply of force to the Enemy there, (if I have
notice thereof) I shall take all possible care to supply you accordingly.

No information at all was given him of any such forces, nor received he any
other Letter from Sir William Waller (saving one Letter from Sir Arthur
Hazelrick dated on the Monday at noone, and one other on the Wednesday,
desiring his Excellence to take care of the forces at Oxford) during the time
that he lay before the Devises, but still supposed him to proceed prosperously
against the enemy; until the sad news of his being routed was rumored, and by
himself written to his Excellence, which was upon the Thursday, not above 48.
hours after he received the Letter of his victory (scarce time enough to have
rid post betwixt his Excellences army and Sir William Wallers) in which Letter
Sir William Waller assured his Excellence he had lost but 100. men, and some
arms, which he doubted not suddenly to rally, and resolved the next day to
take the field, not desiring any assistance or supply from his Excellence in
either of his Letters. Notwithstanding which, Sir William Waller (though the
care and safety of the Western Countries were committed to him) contrary to his
Excellences expectation, consent or knowledge, left the West to take care of it
self, marched to Warwick, and from thence sent a Letter by an express to his
Excellence, signifying the imminent danger of the West, especially of Bristol
and Gloucester, unless his Excellence did speedily advance, and that he was
ready at Warwick with his Might (his own expression in his Letter) which was
affirmed by the messenger to be 2000.) to assist him. The Lo: General
presently upon receipt of this intelligence, though there was no money to pay
the Soldiers, and the Army then on its march another way, commanded that the
Army should march toward the West, and by advice of the Council of War sent
order to Sir William Waller to meet ten miles toward Brackley, entending the
next day after all the forces should have met at some convenient place of
Rendevous, and so have proceeded to relieve the West, if it were possible,
either by falling upon Oxford, or marching on to Bristol, as should be advised.

But Sir William Waller before the receipt of his Excellences Order was marched
to Northampton, a contrary way, and sent Colonel Popham, and Col: Carre to
signify that his force was inconfiderable, not above 400. horse (strangely
shrunk, if, as is said, he mustered 2000. at Bristol after his defeat,) that he
had a desire to lay down his Commission, and go to London. And the day
following he came to his Excellence, and assured him that his horse, which was
all the strength he had, was so inconsiderable, that a Corporal with an
ordinary squadron of horse would rout them all, and desired he might go to
London, where he heard there would presently be new forces and money raised to
set him out again. This strange news quasht the design for relief of the
West, his Excellences army being shrunk through the continual increase of
violent sickness, want of pay, clothing, and other necessaries to such a
number as is not requisite to name, that he could not proceed further, lest his
army might be engaged to the utter ruin of it, and danger of the Kingdom,
since Colonel Crumwels, and the other forces of those associate Counties were
neither willing, nor could with safety be commanded so far from their own
Countries. This notwithstanding his Excellence before Bristol was lost, offered
that if the Parliament would send him three thousand foot, and five hundred
horse to recrewt his army, he would march to relieve it; under which number,
considering the present weakness of his army, he could neither hope to
atchieve any thing, nor with safety convey his great Artillery. We should
extend this discourse to too great a length, if we should specify the
several engagements, which from time to time have been made to him that he
should be supplied with money and other necessaries, and the often failings,
only that he has not yet received from the State for his army since the
beginning 600000. pounds; besides, at his coming to Kingstone last, the
soldiers were then promised 5. weeks pay, and clothes; yet after they had
stayed a fortnight longer, only a weeks pay was sent to them at Kingstone,
whereupon, there being so long before promised six weeks, they disbanded to
the number of above a thousand, saying openly they would be no more fooled with
promises.

By what misfortune Sir William Waller lost that strong army, we think it not
our part to make any relation; but refer the Reader to what relation his own
Commanders will make of it. This brief narration had no other end than to
inform those people in the truth of proceedings, who might through ignorance
have been too apt to have thrown undeserved aspersions upon our noble General,
and restrain those which have already done it, from wronging themselves any
more hereafter: And has extended no farther than the necessity of that
required; which a judicious Reader will by the language easily perceive,
expressing only what impediments have sometimes crossed his real and
honorable designs, and that without any bitterness of contestation, or
invectives, conceiving that such things are too much unmanly, and too far
below that pen whose subject is so noble as the vindication of such a man. We
will only insert what we have heard his Excellence still profess; that
notwithstanding his true intentions and unwearied endeavors to serve his
Country have unjustly met with so many misunderstandings (less injuries tha^
those having made other persons of quality desert the cause which they had
chosen, though such loose plants could never be well and honorably rooted) it
shall no whit discourage him, much less divert him from that, in which his
conscience to God, and dear affection to his native Country have once engaged
him, but that for the future (hoping that the Parliament will afford him just
and necessary accommodations) his life and fortunes shall not be spared when
the cause shall require an adventure of them; hoping that God will bless his
endeavors and his Country esteem of them as they deserve, since Fame, though
it be not the chief end which a wise man shoots at in his undertakings, yet it
is such a reward as a noble mind cannot easily contemn.

FINIS.

