A BRIEF TREATISE containing a full DISCOVERY
1. Of Caesar's politic state, or civil Government, 2. Of the Divine
politic state, or Kingdom of Christ Jesus, given him of his Father. 3. Of
the devilish politic state or kingdom of Antichrist.
Laid open in the essential and main circumstantiall parts of each body or
state by substantial and fundamental reasons and principles of policy both
divine and humane, and confirmed by holy Scripture.

Whereby the great and intolerable grievances of Christ Jesus and his subjects
are made known:

Also how honorable Magistracy and civil Government is, and how far it
extends, without intrenching upon the prerogative of Christ, does evidently
appear in this Treatise.

Humbly presented to the serious consideration of the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and the High Court of Parliament now assembled.

By Michael Quintine.

Matthew. 22.21. Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto
God the things that are Gods.

2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9. And then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord
shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming.

London printed. 1641.

TO THE MOST HIGH COURT OF Parliament, the Right Honorable the Lords and
Barons, and the Honorable House of COMMONS, to all and every of them now
assembled, be a full blessing of wisdom and right spirit, from the glorious
Trinity, suitable to their callings, and the weighty occasions that concern
them therein.
ACcording to my undoubted duty in discharging my Conscience of fulfilling the
will of Jesus Christ, I do present to both Houses of this Honorable Court,
the greatest and most general cause of the particular grievances of Christ
Jesus, and his servants, the upright, the innocent, and tender in conscience;
which as it did in special manner concern my Sovereigne Lord the King, from
whose hand it might most seasonably have been cast upon the consideration of
this high Court, from whence only do issue all politic acts, statute-lawes,
and ordinances, concerning matters Ecclesiastical and Civil within his
Majesty's Realm of England, I procured to be presented to his Highness own
hand in January last, 1640. The copy of the passages therein contained; lest
those should sleep, I have here again recited, and do present them unto you:
accept and peruse them as you see cause.

And this be pleased to take notice of; as the Laws of Divine and Civil
Policy admit not of two heads in one body, so likewise does not the
transcendent and glorious Kingdom of Christ, which is above the humane
element, admit of Civil Lawmakers in confining conscience and disposing of
matters thereto belonging; the same Scripture and reason which denies Caesar
to sit on Christ's throne; denies you power of making Laws for the ordering
the Laws thereof, who shall increase or diminish the liberties, Laws, and
privileges of the Gospel of Christ's Kingdom, but they must incur the curse,
and who shall be wiser than his maker but to his own destruction?

The cause aforesaid of all grievances of Christ and his servants is oppression
of conscience, otherwise conscionable oppression, for so it is taken, although
it be impossible, being oppression, so to be; the root from whence it
springs, the tree, and every part of it, is discovered by the following
passages, to which I refer you.

And that you may not be found false in the trust committed to you by the King
and Country, for the ordering of the affairs of this Land, for the peace and
welfare of the Church of God, and likewise of the King and Commonwealth; let
it be your special care to remove and repeal all things and statutes, tending
to the bondage of conscience, be not wiser than the Trinity in continuing and
establishing penal acts, and statutes, to bring people under conformity, in
external worship; if you consider from whence every good and spiritual gift
is, who it is that gives light, what it is that is acceptable to him, to whom
all worship is due, and that Law, Do unto all as you would they should do unto
you: ye cannot, neither would ye go about Antichristian-like, to make yokes
for conscience, it is most Papisticall, and why will ye do what ye condemn
your selves in others? do not correct Tyrants with tyranny, but overcome evil
with good: if you fear Papists will be treacherous to State and Commonwealth,
let them have a civil providence over them for prevention, and in case they or
any of them prove so, as some prove naught and treacherous of all Religions,
let them have civil correclion; for it is that, not conscience keeps people
in general within bounds of Civility, and leave the cutting off, or rooting
out of errors in matters spiritual to the free use of the sword of Gods
Spirit, which is sharper than a two-edged sword; and fear ye not but in case
of liberty of conscience, true Religion, which only is of God, will have the
upper hand, and fullest approbation of all civilly disposed persons; if it be
not Caesar's due, to sit on the Ecclesiastical Throne, nor any man's beside,
look you to it, how you set or continue any person thereon; and except God had
consecrated and set apart a parcel of the earthly revenues for spiritual
uses, how dare ye powers of the earth to do it, or to allow of it? but to avoid
tediousness, I commend you to the serious minding of the following passages,
hoping you will not slight what is substantially appliable to your selves, by
the injunction of the will of the Lord Almighty, lest ye be found resisters of
God: and so I remain yours in all due service, even to my power and life.

Michael Quintyne.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WHereas your most submissive and faithful subject has in some measure
perceived, and in the following Treatise substantially discovered the way of
greatest deceit, wherein God and the King are insufferably and most subtly
deprived of their due, and does in the freedom and strength of fidelity in the
sight of all hazards of good success, humbly present it unto your most
Excellent Majesty.

His just and humble request is, that your Highness will be graciously pleased
to accept of it accordingly, and now the Scales of this your Kingdom are in
use, let it be truly weighed, not cast by, and as it is found in the balance,
for the main scope and substance thereof, even so, let it be done to your poor
subject, who during life, shall heartily pray for your long happy and most
prosperous reign,

Michael Quintyne.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty, Gods greatest and most special Officer
and Minister within his Majesty's Dominions in place of Authority and power of
Justice, be a full blessing from the blessed Trinity, of a right and suitable
spirit, for his high Calling, with all truly desirable issues thereof.
IN the cause of Heavens right no man is enjoined silence, but may move the
case before the greatest of men on earth, Matthew. 10.31, 3^. who are but men in
person, though Gods anointed, Gods in place of Government, to whom with God
belongs a due to be rendered, Matthew. 22.21. Romans 13* 7 Let not place of
honor, as it has been in times past, be an occasion of pride, and
forgetfulness, whereby men have forgotten that they were men, and the
remembrance of their Master, his cause, and servants, the upright and innocent;
but examine, consider, and scorn not, the real demonstration and reasonable
motion in the case of greatest wrong put upon the Trinity and the whole Host of
Heaven, and your Majesty's dignity and honor of civil Government; for relief
wherein if you do not your part, let your neglect rest with your self, for I
will present it to you with my life in my hand, accept it as you please.

The Kingdom of the Gospel, the divine politic state, the Ecclesiastical
Government, or visible Church, which was given to Christ Jesus by his Father,
is by the Kingdom of Darkness the false Ecclesiastical state, and false
Church, together with the deluded and abused assistance of your own civil
state, the honorable Ordinance of God, utterly defaced, trodden under foot,
excluded and banished your Dominions, to the greatest dishonor, and
undervaluing of the Trinity, the power, wisdom, and goodness thereof,
represented and expressed in the contrivance and establishment of the said
Kingdom of Christ, to the greatest destruction, desolation, disconsolation,
and loss of conscionable and saintlike persons, and to the great overthrow of
your own subjects, and decay or strength in your own Dominions.

To prove the truth of this cause is not hard, the Laws and Rules of the
policy of Divinity and Humanity jumpe home to it: neither will the Laws and
Rules of devilish policy, be able to contrary it, although they may dazzle and
cloud it.

All bodies of policy, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, true and false, as all
other things, do consist of matter and form, by the quality of which two
essential parts all politic bodies transcendent, different, and contrary in
nature, are reasonably and substantially distinguished, and known one from the
other: and all bodies politic of one nature, whether Ecclesiastical, true,
false, or civil are distinguished one from another by the extent, limitation,
and confines of those two forenamed essential parts.

The realty and truth of this Rule will appear in the incontradictable and
undeniable discovery and manifestation of each politic body and Kingdom in an
essential way.

Every body and state of policy consists of like, or one and the same
essential and circumstantiall parts in respect of name and number, the
difference or means of distinction lies in the transcendent, different, and
contrary qualities of those parts.

Circumstantiall differences are of consequence, the misplacing, misapplying,
and misusing of any such part in any body of policy, deserves reproof and
disclamation of the members or subjects of any such body; but essential
differences misplacing, misapplying, and misusing any such parts is intolerable
and incommunicable, and requires separation: the truth of all these things
will be most fully proved by humane and natural reason, and holy Scripture, is
setting forth the several kinds of bodies of policy in their essential and
main circumstantiall parts.

That there is a true and false Ecclesiastical state, I need not stand to
prove, but refer it to the several definitions and full demonstration of them
justifiable from Scripture, Laws of all policy, and common experience, for all
Europe grants the same, and most foreign and domestique wars and jars are
more concerning Ecclesiastical affairs, than all the matters in the earth
besides, according as Christ prophetically speaks, Matthew. 24. 5, 6, 7. The
whole earth is filled with the cry, Lo here, Lo there, the voice of greatest
deceivers, of which special care is to be had for the avoiding them, Matthew.
24.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

And that the world in general, and most especially, my native King and his
Dominions, may not continue in contention, which is the readiest way to
confusion, and to be made a prey to strangers about which is the true Church,
or about circumstances thereof, I have with heart in hand, yea heart in hand,
undertaken, and shall essentially and fully make it appear from the Rule of
divine and humane wisdom and policy, that it is impossible for any national
Church to be the true Church of Christ, or to be righted by force of Arms, in
case it were really so; either by the King in way of offense, or by his
subjects in way or defense; and why should not great ones be as ready to try
and prove the truth hereof, as to kill me in wrath, which no way accomplisheth
Gods will in righteousness, Iam 1.20. But what Effects shall be expected of
Creatures lifted up above their Element, but actions of pride and scorn, in
oblivion of God and man, and what Laws of Divinity shall rule the Potentates
of the Earth, who make Laws and confines for the same: the glory of high
powers is mercy and the grace of humanity is to be humble and faultlesse, not
cowardly and murderous; and that I may briefly come at, and accomplish the
performance of what I have undertaken, even essentially to discover the Church
of Christ, to be trodden under foot, and made desolate, by on Antichristian and
false Ecclesiastical state, through the assistance of the civil state,
obtained by delusion, and deceivablenesse of unrighreousnesse, in all the
Kingdoms of the Earth; I have thought it necessary to begin with a discovery of
the Civil State, in the essential parts of it, the circumstantiall ones also,
and the use of the whole.

Civil State or body of humanity, wheresoever thou dwell in any measure of
truth and realty, thou art Gods Ordinance, the offspring of the second Table
of the Moral Law of God, the Image of Innocence in the first Creation, in man
toward man thou art the Parent of all Nations, in whole honor and dishonor
is length and shortness of days.

The subject or material part of the consistance of this body of Civility is
Mankindle in general, contained within the limits and confines of any such
body.

The formal or part of life which gives being to this Civil politic body,
is the Kingly or Regal Civil politic Power, by which any member has any
politic motion, actively or passively, by which also any Law belonging
thereto has any vigor or current.

The quality of both these essential parts is merely civil and humane, and
such as have relation to this state, concerns them only in temporal
affairs, for the civil ordering and governing their persons and estates
according to the Law of equity between man and man.

To prove the matter and form of this, Civil body politic, to be as
aforesaid, the reason of all unions and bodies in the world serves (hand pat)
to do it, for the matter and form of every body is comprehended within it
self, neither without either of those two parts can the body well or ill
subist; the Creator, Parent, and Institutour can be no part of the Creature,
production and platform or institution, and all other things, belonging to
this body are circumstantiall, and serve properly to prove the quality of the
essential parts to be merely civil and humane.

The isntrumental means of the being of this body is ordinarily Victory or
Conquest, by force of Arms, whereof only men's bodies and goods are capable,
for conscience who is all the witnesses of a reasonable, or unreasonable soul
is free, beyond the reach of the power of man to command and subdue, because if
a man subject his body unto the sword of the Magistrate to maintain the freedom
and peculiar use of his conscience, and soul, as in some cases Christ advises,
Matthew. 10.17, 18. Also verse 28 and 39 and loses the use of his body and
bodily life, his conscience and soul is not overcome and subdued, but
overcommeth, which plainly proves the quality and disposition of this body to
be humane.

The manner of the being of this body, state, or platform, which was and may
be when that of Christ was not and may not be, it is of imparity, superiority
and degrees of Authority, consisting of lordly and inferior offices; which are
necessary for the well being thereof; for what else should rule national and
confused lumps of the cursed posterity of Adam, and it is but meet that some in
order of office should have a sword ready drawn to cut off intolerably uncivil,
and inhumane persons; and to disable them in their strength and command of
estate; and that all uncivil and brutish persons and actions may be prevented,
which is the only means of a peaceable and godly life; all Christians are
exhorted to pray for all men in Civil Government, for Kings and all in place of
Authority, 2 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And this also is a means to distinguish
and discern the quality of the essence of this body to be as aforesaid, Luke
22.24, 25, 26, 27.

The Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances belonging to this body communicable
between the head and members thereof, and conveyed from one to another by the
several offices of the state thereof; they all generally* tend to the
prevention of oppression, and preservation of equity in the civil use of men's
bodies and personal estates, the truth hereof daily experience testifies in
the use of all Courts of common justice and belonging to the Laity, this
witnesses the Spirit of Christ who suffered under Civil Authority approving
their stately calling and the Laws and Ordinances, and the good and necessary
use of them, Romans 13. This likewise proves the quality of the essential parts
of this body to be humane and civil only.

Divine politic body, true Ecclesiastical state, visible Church of Christ,
or Kingdom, to which belongs the Gospel and all the Records of new Testament;
thou art the new Jerusalem, the Body comprehending the substances of all Types
and shadows, the perfection of all order of sacrifice, the union of the
fullness of him that fills all things, thou art the Government of the
everlasting Prince the Son of David, of which there shall be no end, Isay 9.6,
7. This is the most beautiful daughter of the first Table of the Moral Law,
the most perfect and fullest resemblance of the invisible bond in divine
nature, the compleatest use whereof the elect shall enjoy, when they have put
off their mortality, and are all accomplished, when also Christ also shall
deliver up his Kingdom, and government to his Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. etc. Which
resemblance and expression of the Law written in the heart shall remain for
ever and ever.

The subject or material part of this divine politic body and true
Ecclesiastical state, (of the true Son and Heir apparent of God, and right
Successor of the Crown and Ecclesiastical Throne of David, the Alone
Redeemer of the whole company of Gods elect, the believing seed of Abraham both
Jews and Gentiles, who brake down the partition wall, the Jewish national
state, and set up and established a divine spiritual Kingdom, capable of the
Saints, of all sorts whatsoever) Is the sort of all mankind which Jesus Christ
pronounces blessed, Matthew. 5. Such as worship God in spirit and in truth, John
4.23, 24. without respect to Nation or Tribe, Acts 10.34, 35. In short it is
faithful persons, believers, real, saintlike people, as the several Epistles
to the Churches nominated in the New Testament do declare; to shut up the proof
of this truth that the subject or material part of the Kingdom of Christ is
as aforesaid, of Christian people take also this one witness more, Romans 8.8, 9
Here take notice, real profession gives real being to members, and is the
form of a member, but not the form of the Church, but the material quality
thereof.

But the formal part of this divine politic body or true Ecclesiastical
state or kingdom which Christ Jesus has upon earth, which also is the life of
the same, is the divine regal and kingly politic power of Christ; by which
every member performs every Church action, whereby every Law in every Office
is communicable, and executed; in this sense, not in a personal sense speaks
Christ, Matthew. 18.20. 1 Cor. 5.4.

The quality of the two essential parts of this divine politic body is
divine love, the Fountain of all merciful goodness, from whence issues every
good gift toward man, and the communicable benefits thereof, between man and
man; this is the quality of wisdoms house, derived from the Father and the Son,
and expressed by the holy Spirit proceeding from both, and lively set forth in
the matter and form of the same, as largely will appear by the discovery of
the circumstantiall parts, belonging to the being and welbeing of this body.

The isntrumental means of the being of this divine politic body or union,
is by agreement and free consent of love, issuing from one Lord through one
Faith, one Spirit, one Baptism, John 5.12, 13 There is no other isntrumental
means of a peculiar body, consistting of Volunteers; and of such consists
this Kingdom of the Lamb of God, as prophetically speaks the holy Ghost by
way of proclamation, Isai 55.1. Fulfilling the same in like manner, speaks
the same Spirit, Rev. 22.15. In this way a right Captain accomplisheth a right
Band or body of Soldiers, Rev. 14.4. Rev. 17.14. By instinct of nature, not
compulsion, Birds of a Feather flock together, this main circumstantiall part
belonging to the being of this body aforesaid, declares it to be the
Tabernacle of God, who is love, 1 Ioh. 4.16. which is the prepared dwelling for
persons of love, Revel 21.1, 2, 3.

The state platform or manner of being of this Kingdom of heaven upon earth,
wherein the matter and form are united, and the divine Laws and Ordinances
thereof executed, and performed, consists of Offices of service, not of
command and authority, Matthew. 20.25, 26, 27. Luke 22.24, 25, 26, 27. And is the
perfect Emblem or representation of the most complete current of divine, and
most perfect love, as the only necessary Offices cf Administration of the
head, which in Divinity as in humanity are three; to wit, direction, provision,
and protection; and because humanity is inseparable from Christianity, wisdom
has left civil protection to the head thereof, but has provided an Office of
distribution for his subjects, in necessity, and tender attendance for the
sick and weak in body, that his body may be as one in all things,
communicating according to occasion the gifts and graces which God has given
them, for the building up and for divine and reasonable preservation of one
another, and this the holy Ghost testifies, Romans 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. This also
makes it plain that the power of the disposing of Offices and execution of all
Laws and Ordinances truly Ecclesiastical and belonging to this body of Christ
which is the Church, Col 1.24. is in the Church, and derived from the Church,
as plainly witnesses, Matthew 18.17. here is the state or manner of being of the
house of God, which is the Church, 1 Timothy 3.15. of the body of parity, whose
members are all Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6. This is the state of the body (not
the body of the state,) which is the representation or expression of the
current of the divine nature of the Church of Christ which is the express
Image of the form thereof, and when that fails, members or Church cease to
be, and state and all; for this see the seven Churches mentioned in Rev. 2. and
3. cl.

This circumstantiall part belonging to the being of this body, declares the
matter and form to be qualified as aforesaid.

The Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances belonging to this body of Christ are
transcending in nature those of humanity (which prevent oppression and enjoyne
equity and civil and reasonable use of men's persons and estates:) for these not
only allow the same; but prevent oppression, injoyne equity, and command mercy
and compassion; yea, doing good for evil, in all cases belonging to soul and
body, thus Christ teaches Christians, Matthew. 5.44, 45, etc. Thus the Spirit of
Christ is exercised, and against such there is no Law, Gal. ^.22, 23. In the
performance of such is fulfilling the Law of Love, established by the Son of
God, John 13.34. These divine, yea, most heavenly Laws, etc. manifestly
discovers the matter and form of the body of Christ his Visible Church, to
be qualified as aforesaid, to the bodies of such a constitution did the
Apostles write their Epistles.

Devilish politic body, false Ecclesiastical state, Visible Church of
Antichrist, or Kingdom to which belongs the Charter books of humane
Constitutions, and Canons, and all Records of Heathenish and Jewish national
Traditions, touching matters Ecclesiastical, and cases of Conscience; Thou art
the man of sin, whose complete image consists especially in the breach of the
first Table of the Moral Law, the fullest expression whereof is in taking Gods
power from him, and Christ his kingly Office from him, sitting in the Temple of
God which is Conscience, (for God dwells not in Temples made with hands) as
God, and exalting thy self above all that is called God, commanding the
Conscience of mankind in the way of politic (which only and property is
public) worship, for in no other sense can any sit in the Temple of God, or
exalt himself above all that is called God; Thou art Babylon the great, the
mystery of iniquity, who robbest God of his honor, in usurping the Prerogative
Royal of his Son, for thou interposest with thy power Ecclesiastical, which
snareth and captivateth all Nations, in the liberties of their consciences,
persons, personal and temporal estates; thou art the City spiritually called
Sodom and Egypt* for no filthy person lives that lives not in thee, and the
height of thy power Egypt like opposes God, for who shall get out of thy
merciless and more than inhumane murderous clutches? thou committest sin by a
Law, and put a man to death for conscience sake, thou art the devils
masterpiece, the express image of devilish inhumanity, Cain like spoiling the
innocent, and what thou can not restore, the earth cannot bear a fuller
measure or pride, craft, and envy, than thou art composed of, (the unlimited
composition whereof is the devil himself) thou art a body of confusion, an
hotch-potch without respect of good or bad, rich or poor, bond or free,
devilish, humane or divine.

The subject or material part of this false Ecclesiastical body or Kingdom of
Antichrist, is mankind in general, without any respect of spiritual quality,
or Christian spirit and divine disposition, only with relation to an enforced
and conjured profession of Christ, which is of the devils putting on, not
Christ's, and being compelled it is the garment of Hypocrisy, not of
uprightness, and in the fleest use is often made an Hypocrites cloak, which is
the very opposite quality of the material part of Christ's Church, but the
special and chosen disposition of Antichrists, which is justified by these
Scriptures, Matthew. 24.5. 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2 Thessalonians 2.10, 11, 12. Rev.
13.7, 8. also verses 16, 17.

The formal part which is the politic power of the false Ecclesiastical
state or body of devilish policy, is dragonish, violent and compulsive
commanding powers of death, to seazon such as will not subject their
consciences to it; or rather be slavonized therein; which is clean contrary to
heavenly powers, and is a stark enemy to humanity both personal and
politic, for there is none under heaven able to give light or peace, or to
deal for another conscience between God and him, the contrary conceit whereof,
begotten by delusion and conceived by corruption of humane nature, has and
will produce more unnatural and unreasonable wars and plagues upon the earth
than it can bear with a seeming to subsist; that the quality of the formal
part of the false Ecclesiastical body is really such as is now proposed, take
these Scriptures for witness, Rev. 13.2. and verse 7, 8. also verse 15, 16,
17. This is the express image of the devil ruling in the generation of Cain
and cursed seed of Adam, to their utter ruin, if it be not looked into in time.

The isntrumental means of the being of this body (with the other main
circumstantiall parts) prove the quality of the forenamed essential parts to
be as aforesaid.

For it is produced and effected by a compulsive powerful proclamation,
conjured out of the civil powers of the earth by lying wonders and delusion,
Matthew. 24.5, 6, 7. also verse 24. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 13.13, 14.

The state or manner of being of this body of devilish policy, or which is
falsely called Ecclesiastical, and divine, it is most magnificently
majesticall and tyrannical, full of offices of greatest superiority and
highest authority, Rev. 13.2. and are more for gain than administration of any
good, 2 Pet. 2.3. This circumstantiall part testifies the matter and form to
be as aforesaid.

The Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, Constitutions, and Canons, of this body
of Antichrist, are devilish and inhumane, opposite to those of the body of
Christ, and most pernicious to humanity; these bind Conscience which Christ's
Laws set free, and compel external conformity in circumstantiall matters,
which breeds more hypocrisy than sincerity, and destroys civilly disposed
persons, for the proper and peculiar use of their own Consciences, the truth
hereof, witnesses all persons which have suffered, do and shall suffer for
their Consciences; these are compulsive and enforcing Conscience, and although
set on foot with fair pretenses, yet are such snares and traps for men, that
thereby their Consciences are made very slaves, or their persons and personal
estates ruined; of these the Epistle to the Colossians speaks pertinently in
way of caution and preadmonition, Col. 2.8. also verse 20, 21, 22, 23. These
circumstantiall things also belonging to the being of this body, declare the
quality of the matter and form to be most palpably, Antichristian as aforesaid.

Most noble King, impartially let former passages be considered, and call to
mind of what generation you came, of Adam and Eve in Paradise, and in the time
of their innocence were miscarried by temptation of the devil; what may be the
condition of their posterity, since the curse passed upon them and their being
thrust out of the Presence Garden of God by head and shoulders; though I
conceive your calling to be the chiefest that is given to the sons of men, and
although God has given you a Land flowing with milk and honey, yet I am
persuaded you are no more privileged from temptation, and transgression,
against God, than were your first parents, and those Kings of Israel (which
were Types of Christ the King of new Jerusalem) whose calling or state and seat
was above yours, yet no disparagement to yours neither, for upon that Throne
sits the Son of God, and Lord of David; if your first parents were deceived
by flattery and an ambitious inclination, and if they by looking after more
than God gave them lost what they had, may not their posterity be taken in the
same snare; yea, they are subjected to it under a curse, which followed since
their fall; if the true Light which lights every man that comes into the
World, was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew Him
not; if He came unto his own, and his own received Him not, John 1 9, 10, 11.
may we not suspect our own averseness and the double advantage our old false
friend the devil, who is worse than an open enemy to all mankind, has against
us, take notice of the passages of Scripture before mentioned, and these
following, John 5.43. Matthew. 7.1^. Matthew. 24.24. 1. John 2.18. If there be a
generation to whom nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is
defiled, which profess they know God, but in works deny him, Titus 1.15, 16.
who will talk of Christ or teach Him, yet deny Him to be come in the flesh, I
mean so as to yield him the Throne of his father David, to sit as King in
matters Ecclesiastical, and to let him rule in the Element of Conscience,
which is that spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. O noble King, is not a double
jealousy of being deceived necessarily called upon in you, whom these
forenamed persons have made supreme Head of the Church, as if one body could
have two heads, or two bodies (different in nature) one head, of which
interposition and confusion the Laws of your own policy admit not; be judge
your self, it is not outward religious performances please God, witness Caine
and Abe: under pretense of long prayers some devour widows houses: what is
acceptable with God of this nature, see James 1.26, 27. To be short, fully
plain and faithful, do but consider the Book or Revelation, which from the
fifth Chapter includes the discovery of the state of Christ and his Church,
and Antichrist and his Kingdom, and the birth, life and death of him, and the
main particular passages of the combat, between them both, and behavior of
the Kings of the earth therein toward either side, and observe how poor deluded
man, in the state and seat of Kings is beset, when the vials of Gods wrath are
poured out to the destruction of the Beast, especially when he is touched upon
his seat and revenue, which is his life and livelihood, Rev. 16.13, 14. Most
royal Sovereign, be not angry and full of wrath which accomplisheth not the
will of God, James 1.20. But look well to your going, Prove. 14.15, 16.

And be pleased now to take into your hand the line of truth which defines all
the Creatures and things upon the face of the earth whatsoever, and judge and
deal by all states and bodies of policy according to their several natures and
qualities of their essential parts, and of their circumstantiall parts, which
belong unto them; wherein the Rules of holy Scripture and of humane reason and
policy, will bear you out against all opposition.

View the Ecclesiastical states within your own dominions, which are so apt
to breed wars, to maintain the truth of their being, and to call for
subscription thereof from all others, and examine how the quality of their
essential and circumstantiall parts suit with that of Christ's Church, or with
that of Antichrist, and accordingly you may account of them, and deal by them,
so far as concerns you in your state of civility. And thus far I can do
no less than move your Majesty to do, sithence to God and Caesar belongs a
due; and that you would take to what is your own, and give unto God the things
that are Gods, to which Act I am confident all good and faithful Subjects
would consent upon fair evidence (whereof sacred Scripture and natural reason
will afford sufficient to all persons and Courts of Parliament) to the
performance thereof.

And for your own due, none can deny, but as you are Head of all Civil
powers, within your own do minions; so the execution of all Civil Laws
(whereof your power is the life) for the preservation of your Subjects in all
Civil respects, belongs unto you: therefore keep it to your self, and for
that use only, and give it not into the hands of any Ecclesiastical persons,
for Christ never called for the use of it, to cut off men for Conscience sake,
but for incivility, and for that same purpose God did ordain it, Rom 9. And
only in this respect are Kings and Queens held truly to be nursing Fathers
and Mothers, to the Church of Christ, for in so doing they defend the innocent,
relieve the oppressed, and preserve the meek, from unreasonable and Cain-like
men of the world, and hatch up the people in general, by maintaining equity
between man and man, out of which Christ calls his chosen, such as are
appointed for the worship and special service of the Trinity.

Likewise for your own due, none can deny, since God has put an end to the
Jewish and national Ecclesiastical state; but that the use of all means set
apart for Ecclesiastical uses of right belongs to none but persons in Civil
state, of Government, the lands and Tenths set apart for holy persons and holy
uses are with the holy persons the Tribe of Levi, the holy places, holy times,
and all external holiness ended in Christ; now the Kingdom of Heaven is
within, it has not relation to the matters of this World, John 18.36. Romans
14.17. But the devil remembers how to coozen and cheat mankind of old, make
men believe they shall be as Gods, and the while bring them to be the greatest
slaves to himself: let me speak freely though I hang for mine uprightness, so
has he since Christ to deceive the whole earth, even all Civil Government, set
a company of deceivers, to lift up the Kings of the earth above their own
Element, into Christ's seat: and to draw them to support such as are lifted up
into it, and the while coozen the Kings of the earth of the greatest part of
their temporal revenues, and were it not that Princes came out of the loins
of Adam and Eve, and are most beset with witches and deluders, it were
impossible to be thought that they should be so handled, to be persuaded that
God should put an end to a natural generation, and raise an artificial one in
their stead, and that out of a contrary Nation, which should carry five times a
greater revenue of the earth than the former; considering how largely Christ
and his Disciples declared themselves in this case, in the last recited
Scriptures, and also in the passage of Tribute money, Matthew. 22.19, 20, 21.
Once let that old devilish suggested opinion and proverb be buried, I mean no
Bishop no King, it is but a delusion and mere dream, for what shall more
oblige Subjects than when they have all the freedom that conscience and
natural reason can afford them? and were it no more for fear of penalty in
transgressing civil Laws than for wounding Conscience; what would not be done
in these days? I appeal to your own and the general experimental knowledge,
and what pleasure has God in such formality? Be no longer thus gulled of what
is your own, and that in a devilish way, to the confusion of your own
Kingdom; for every one shall be saved or damned by his own believing or
unbeleeving, Mark 16.16. Not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Matthew. 7.21. Without faith it is impossible for any
man to please God, Heb. 11.6. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans
14.23. And since faith is the gift of God, not of: you, Ephesians. 2.8. James 1.17.
Take to your self what is your own, and apply and employ both your sword and
maintenance to and in the matters of your own Element, defending the innocent
and civil, and releeving the poor and oppressed, then Christ shall bear rule
in his own, and amongst his own, and you shall be master of your own: these
things are easy to be accomplished by Parliament, how can any of any Religion
which conceive themselves to be of God, be against the casting off of the
tyrannical though golden bonds of conscience, and setting that at liberty they
need not fear sinking, A ts 5.39. That which is not of God shall have a time to
be rooted up, Matthew. 15.13. And double and double the Laws and execution of
them in all cases of civility, and what can your Majesty ask that will not be
yours.

And let the blessed Trinity in their own cause in matters of Conscience, use
their own sword which is sharper than yours, Heb. ^.12. Let the light be free,
not limited and confined by the eyes of men, support none that add to it or
detract from it, neither cut off any with your sword which are enemies to it;
but in cases of intolerable incivility; for persecutors may be converted, if
they be not intrade and custom of murdering: but if so, let no Caines raging
on the earth live within your Dominions; neither favor that posterity of his
who exercise his spirit according to, 1 John 3.12.

So I leave all passages to your royal consideration, and commit my self in
the manifestation of realty and faithfulness in the service of God, my King,
and Country, to your Majesty's sword of Justice and due protection.

FINIS.

