The first BOOK Of the WORKS of Mr. FRANCIS RABELAIS, DOCTOR IN Physic:
Containing five Books of the Lives, Heroic Deeds, and Sayings of GARGANTUA,
And his SON PANTAGRUEL.

TOGETHER With the Pantagrueline Prognostication, the Oracle of the divine
Bacbuc, and response of the bottle.

Hereunto are annexed the Navigations unto the sounding Isle, and the Isle of
the Apedefts: as likewise the Philosophical cream with a Limosm Epistle. All
done by Mr. FRANCIS RABELAIS, in the French Tongue, and now faithfully
translated into English.

(...).
LONDON, Printed for Richard Baddeley, within the middle Temple-gate. 1653.

TO THE HONORED, NOBLE Translatour OF RABELAIS.
RABELAIS whose wit prodigiously was made
All men, professions, actions to invade,
With so much furious vigor, as if it
Had lived, ore each of them and each had quit:
Yet with such happy slight and careless skill
As, like the serpent, does with laughter kill;
So that although his noble leaves appear.
Antic and Gottish, and dull souls forbear
To turn them over, lest they should only find
Nothing but savage Monsters of a mind;
No shapen beautuous thoughts; yet when the wise
Seriously strip him of his wild disguise,
Melt down his dross, refine his massy ore,
And polish that which seemed rough-cast before,
Search his deep sense, unveil his hidden mirth,
And make that fiery which before seemed earth;
(Conquering those things of highest consequence,
What Is difficult of language or of sense)
He will appear some noble table writ,
In the old Egyptian Hieroglyphick wit:
Where though you Monsters and Grotescoes see,
You meet all mysteries of Philosophy.
For he was wise and Sovereignly bred
To know what mankind is, how't may be led:
He stooped unto them, like that wiseman, who
Rid on a stick when is children would do so.
For we are easy sullen things, and must
Be laughed aright, and cheated into trust,
Whilst a black piece of Phlegm that lays about
Dull menaces, and terrifies the rout.
And Cajoles it with all its peevish strength
Pitiously stretched and botch'd up into length,
Whilst the tired rabble sleepily obey
Such opiate talk, and snore away the day.
By all his noise as much their minds releeves,
As caterwalling of wild Cats frights thieves.
But RABELAIS was another thing, a man
Made up of all that Art and Nature can
Form from a fiery Genius, he was one
Whose soul so universally was thrown
Through all the Arts of life, who understood
Each stratagem by which we stray from good
So that he best might solid virtue teach,
As some against sins of their own bosoms preach:
He from wise choice did the true means prefer,
In the fools coat acting the Philosopher.
Thus hoary Esop's beasts did mildly tame
Fierce man, and moralize him into shame;
Thus brave Romances while they seem to lay
Great trains of lust, Platonic love display;
Thus would old Sparta, if a seldom chance
Showed a drunk slave, teach children temperance;
Thus did the later Poets nobly bring
The scene to height, making the fool the King.
And, noble Sir, you vigorously have trod
In this hard path, unknown, un-understood
By its own countrymen, it is you appear
Our full enjoyment which was our despair,
Scattering his mists, cheering his Cynick frowns
(For radiant brightness now dark Rabelais crowns.)
Leaving your brave Heroic cares which must
Make better mankind and embalme your dust,
So undeceiving us that now we see
All wit in Gascone and in Cromartie,
Besides that Rabelais is conveyed to us,
And that our Scotland is not barbarous.
J. de la Salle.
RABLOPHILA, The first DECADE.
The Commendation.
MUsa! canas nostrorum in testimonium Amorum,
Et GARGANTUEAS perpetuato faces.
Utque homini tali resultet nobilis ECHO:
Quicquid Fama canit, PANTAGRUELIS erit.
The ARGUMENT.
Here I intend mysteriously to sing
With a pen plucked from Fame's own wing.
Of Garagantua that learned Breech-wiping King.
DECADE the first.
I.
Help me, propitious STARS; a mighty blaze
Benumm's me! I must sound the praise
Of him has turned this crabbed work in such heroic phrase.
II.
What wit would not court martyrdom to hold
Upon his head a Laurel of gold,
Where for each rich conceit a Pumpion-pearle is told?
III.
And such a one is this, Arts Masterpiece,
A thing never equaled by old Greece:
A thing never matched as yet, a real Golden-fleece.
IV.
Vice is a soldier fights against mankind;
Which you may look but never find:
For it is an envious thing, with cunning interlin'd.
V.
And thus he railes at drinking all before 'um,
And for lewd women does be-whore 'um,
And brings their painted-faces and black patches to the Quorum.
VI.
To drink he was a furious enemy
Contented with a SIX PENNY --
(With Diamond-hatband, silver spurs, six horses.) PIE*
VII.
And for Tobacco's pate-rotunding smoke,
Much had he said, and much more spoke,
But't was not then found out, so the design was broke.
VIII.
Muse! Fancy! Faith! come now arise aloud,
Assembled in a blew-veyn'd cloud,
And this tall Infant in Angelick arms now shroud.
IX.
To praise it further I would now begin
Were It not a thorough-faire and Inn,
It harbors vice, though 't be to catch it in a ginne.
X.
Therefore, my Muse, draw up thy flowing sail,
And acclamate a gentle HAIL
With all thy Art and Metaphors, which must prevail.
Jam prima Oceani pars est praeterita nostri.
Imparibus restas danda secunda modis.
Quam si praestiterit mentem Demon malus addam,
Cum sapiens totus prodierit RABELAIS.
MALEVOLUS.
REader, the Errataes, which in this book are not a few, are casually lost, and
therefore the Translator not having leisure to collect them again, craves thy
pardon for such as thou may meet with.

THE AUTHORS Prologue To the FIRST BOOK.
MOST Noble and Illustrious Drinkers, and you thrice precious Pockified blades;
(for to you, and none else do I dedicate my writings) Alcibiades, in that
Dialogue of Plato's, which is entitled The Banquet, whilst he was setting
forth the praises of his Schoolmaster Socrates (without all question the Prince
of Philosophers) amongst other discourses to that purpose said, that he
resembled the Silenes. Silenes of old were little boxes, like those we now may
see in the shops of Apothecaries, painted on the outside with wanton toyish
figures, as Harpyes, Satyrs, bridled Geese, horned Hares, saddled Ducks, flying
Goats, Thiller Hearts, and other such like counterfeted pictures at discretion,
to excite people unto laughter, as Silenus himself, who was the foster-father
of good Bacchus, was wont to do; but within those capricious caskets were
carefully preserved and kept many rich jewels, and fine drugs, such us Balm,
Ambergreece, Amamon, Musk, Civet, with several kinds of precious stones, and
other things of great price. Just such another thing was Socrates, for to have
eyed his outside, and esteemed of him by his exterior appearance, you would not
have given the peel of an Oinion for him, so deformed he was in body, and
ridiculous in his gesture: he had a sharp pointed nose, with the look of a
Bull, and countenance of a foot: he was in his carriage simple, boorish in his
apparel, in fortune poor, unhappy in his wives, unfit for all offices in the
Commonwealth, always laughing, tippling, and merrily carousing to every one,
with continual gybes and jeeres, the better by those means to conceal his
divine knowledge: now opening this box you would have found within it a
heavenly and inestimable drug, a more then humane understanding, an admirable
virtue, matchless learning, invincible courage, unimitable sobriety, certain
contentment of mind, perfect assurance, and an incredible misregard of all
that, for which men commonly do so much watch, run, sail, fight, travel, toil
and turmoile themselves.

Whereunto (in your opinion) does this little flourish of a preamble tend? For
so much as you, my good disciples, and some other jolly fools of ease and
leisure, reading the pleasant titles of some books of our invention, as
Gargantua, Pantagruel, Whippot, the dignity Fessepinee
of Cod-peeces, of Pease and Bacon with a Commentary, etc. are too ready to
judge, that there is nothing in them but jests, mockeries, lascivious
discourse, and recreative lies; because the outside (which is the Title) is
usually (without any farther enquiry) entertained with scoffing and derision:
but truly it is very unbeseeming to make so slight account of the works of men,
seeing your selves avouch that it is not the habit makes the Monk, many being
Monasterially accoutred, who inwardly are nothing less then monachal, and that
there are of those that we are Spanish caps, who have but little of the valor
of Spaniards in them. Therefore is it, that you must open the book, and
seriously consider of the matter treated in it, then shall you find that it
contains things of far higher value then the box did promise; that is to
say, that the subject thereof is not so foolish, as by the Title at the first
sight it would appear to be.

And put the case that in the literal sense, you meet with purposes merry and
solacious enough, and consequently very correspondent to their inscriptions,
yet must not you stop there as at the melody of the charming Sirens, but
endeavor to interpret that in a sublimer sense, which possibly you intended to
have spoken in the jollitie of your heart; did you ever pick the lock of a
cupboard to steal a bottle of wine out of it? Tell me truly, and if you did
call to mind the countenance which then you had? or did you ever see a Dog
with a marrow-bone in his mouth (the beast of all other, says Plato, lib. 2.
de Republica, the most Philosophical) if you have seen him, you might have
remarked with what devotion and circumspectnesse he wards and watches it; with
what care he keeps it: how fervently he holds it: how prudently he gobbets it:
with what affection he breaks it: and with what diligence he sucks it: to what
end all this? what moves him to take all these pains? what are the hopes of
his labor? what does he expect to reap thereby? nothing but a little marrow:
True it is, that this little is more savoury and delicious then the great
quantities of other sorts of meat, because the marrow (as Galen testifies, 5.
facult. not. and 11. de usu partium) is a nourishment most perfectly elaboured
by nature.

In imitation of this Dog, it becomes you to be wise, to smell, feel and have
in estimation these fair goodly books, stuffed with high conceptions, which
though seemingly easy in the pursuit, are in the cope and encounter somewhat
difficult; and then like him you must, by a sedulous Lecture, and frequent
meditation, break the bone, and suck out the marrow; that is, my allegorical
sense, or the things I to my self propose to be signified by these Pythagorical
Symbols, with assured hope, that in so doing, you will at last attain to be
both well-advised and valiant by the reading of them; for in the perusal of
this Treatise, you shall find another kind of taste, and a doctrine of a more
profound and abstruse consideration, which will disclose unto you the most
glorious Sacraments, and dreadful mysteries, as well in what concerns your
Religion, as matters of the public State, and Life oeconomical.

Do you believe upon your conscience, that Homer whilst he was a couching his
Iliads and Odysses, had any thought upon those Allegories, which Plutarch,
Heraclides, Ponticus, Fristatius, Cornutus squeesed out of him, and which
Politian silched again from them: if you trust it, with neither hand nor foot
do you come near to my opinion, which judges them to have been as little
dreamed of by Homer, as the Gospel-sacraments were by Ovid in his
Metamorphosis, Friar lubin croq* lardon.
though a certain gulligut Friar and true bacon-picker, would have undertaken
to prove it, if perhaps he had met with as very fools as himself (and as the
Proverb says) a lid worthy of such a kettle; if you give no credit thereto,
why do not you the' same in these jovial new chronicles of mine; albeit when I
did dictate them, I thought upon no more then you, who possibly were drinking
(the whilst) as I was; for in the composing of this lordly book, I never lost
nor bestowed any more, nor any other time then what was appointed to serve me
for taking of my bodily refection, that is, whilst I was eating and drinking.
And indeed that is the fittest, and most proper hour, wherein to write these
high matters and deep Sciences: as Homer knew very well, the Paragon of all
Philologues, and Ennius, the father of the Latin Poets (as Horace calls him)
although a certain sneaking jobernol alleged that his Verses smelled more of
the wine then oil.

So says a Turlupin or a new start-up grub of my books, but a turd for him.
The fragrant odor of the wine; O how much more dainty, pleasant, laughing,
Riant, priant, friand.
celestial and delicious it is, then that smell of oil! and I will glory as
much when it is said of me, that I have spent more on wine then oil, as did
Demosthenes, when it was told him, that his expense on oil was greater then on
wine; I truly held it for an honor and praise to be called and reputed a
frolic Gualter, and a Robin goodfellow; for under this name am I welcome in
all choice companies of Pantagruelists: it was upbraided to Demosthenes by an
envious surly knave, that his Orations did smell like the sarpler or wrapper of
a foul and filthy oile-vessel; for this cause interpret you all my deeds and
sayings in the perfectest sense; reverence the cheese-like brain that feeds you
with these fair billevezees, and trifling jollities, and do what lies in you
to keep me always merry. Be frolic now my lads, cheer up your hearts, and
joyfully read the rest, with all the ease of your body and profit of your
reins; but hearken joltheads, you viedazes, or dickens take ye, remember to
drink a health to me for the like favor again, and I will pledge you
instantly, Tout ares metys.

RABELAIS TO THE Reader.
GOod friends, my Readers, who peruse this Book,
Be not offended, whilst on it you look:
Denude your selves of all depraved affection,
For it contains no badnesse, nor infection:
It Is true that it brings forth to you no birth
Of any value, but in point of mirth;
Thinking therefore how sorrow might your mind
Consume, I could no apter subject find;
One inch of joy surmounts of grief a span;
Because to laugh, is proper to the man.
CHAP. I. Of the Genealogy and Antiquity of GAR GANTUA.
I Must refer you to the great Chronicle of Pantagruel for the knowledge of
that Genealogy, and Antiquity of race by which Gargantua is come unto us; in it
you may understand more at large how the Giants were born in this world, and
how from them by a direct line issued Gargantua the father of Pantagruel: and
do not take it ill, if for this time I pass by it, although the subject be
such, that the oftener it were remembered, the more it would please your
worshipful Seniorias; according to which you have the authority of Plato in
Philebo and Gorgias; and of Flaccus, who says that there are some kinds of
purposes (such as these are without doubt) which the frequentlier they be
repeated, still prove the more delectable.

Would to God every one had as certain knowledge of his Genealogy since the
time of the Arc of Noah until this age. I think many are at this day
Emperors, Kings, Dukes, Princes, and Popes on the earth, whose extraction is
from some porters, and pardon-pedlars, as on the contrary, many are now poor
wandering beggars, wretched and miserable, who are descended of the blood and
lineage of great Kings and Emperors, occasioned (as I conceive it) by the
transport and revolution of Kingdoms and Empires from the Assyrians to the
Medes, from the Medes to the Persians, from the Persians to the Macedonians,
from the Macedonians to the Romans, from the Romans to the Greeks, from the
Greeks to the French, etc.

And to give you some hint concerning my self, who speaks unto you, I cannot
think but I am come of the race of some rich King or Prince in former times,
for never yet saw you any man that had a greater desire to be a King, and to be
rich, then I have; and that only that I may make good cheer, do nothing, nor
care forany thing, and plentifully enrich my friends, and all honest and
learned men: but herein do I comfort my self, that in the other world I shall
be so, yea and greater too then at this present I dare wish: as for you, with
the same or a better conceit consolate your selves in your distresses, and
drink fresh if you can come by it.

To return to our weathers, I say, that by the sovereign gift of heaven, the
Antiquity and Genealogy of Gargantua has been reserved for our use more full
and perfect then any other except that of the Messiah, whereof I mean not to
speak; for it belongs not unto my purpose, and the Devils (that is to say) the
false accusers, and dissembled gospellers will therein oppose me. This
Genealogy was found by John Andrew in a meadow, which he had near the
Pole-arch, under the Olive Tree, as you go to Marsay: where, as he was making
cast up some ditches, the diggers with their mattocks struck against a great
brazen tomb, and unmeasurably long, for they could never find the end thereof,
by reason that it entered too far within the Sluices of Vienne; opening this
Tomb in a certain place thereof, sealed on the top with the mark of a goblet,
about which was written in Hetrurian letters HIC BIBITUR; They found nine
Flaggons set in such order as they use to rank their kyles in Gasconie, of
which that which was placed in the middle, had under it a big, fat, great,
gray, pretty, small, moldy, little pamphlet, smelling stronger, but no better
then Roses. In that book the said Genealogy was found written all at length, in
a Chancery hand, not in paper, not in parchment, nor in wax, but in the bark of
an elme-tree, yet so worn with the long tract of time, that hardly could three
letters together be there perfectly discerned.

I (though unworthy) was sent for thither, and with much help of those
Spectacles, whereby the art of reading dim writings, and letters that do not
clearly appear to the sight, is practiced, as Aristotle teaches it, did
translate the book as you may see in your pantagruelising, that is to say, in
drinking stiffly to your own hearts desire; and reading the dreadful and
horrifick acts of Pantagruel: at the end of the book there was a little
Treatise entitled the Antidoted Fanfreluches, or a Galimatia of extravagant
conceits. The rats and mothes, or (that I may not lie) other wicked beasts, had
nibled off the beginning, the rest I have hereto subjoyned, for the reverence I
bear to antiquity.

THE Antidoted Fanfreluches: Or, A Galimatia of extravagant conceits found in
an ancient Monument.
No sooner did the Cymbrians overcommer
Pass through the air to shun the dew of summer
But at his coming straight great tubs were filled;
With pure fresh Butter down in showers distilled
Wherewith when watered was his Grandam heigh
A loud he cried, Fish it, Sir, I pray ye;
Because his beard is almost all beray'd,
Or that he would hold to'm a scale he prayed.
To lick his slipper, some told was much better,
Then to gain pardons and the merit greater,
In th'interim a crafty chuff approaches,
From the depth issued, where they fish for Roches;
Who said, Good sirs, some of them let us save,
The Eele is here, and in this hollow cave
You Will find, if that our looks on it demurre,
A great wast in the bottom of his furre.
To read this Chapter when he did begin,
Nothingbut a calves horns were found therein;
I feel (quoth he) the Miter which does hold
My head so chill, it makes my brains take cold.
Being with the perfume of a Turnup warmed,
To stay by chimney hearths himself he armed,
Provided that a new thill horse they made
Of every person of a hair-braind head.
They talked of the bunghole of Saint Knowles,
Of Gilbathar and thousand other holes;
If they might be reduced to a scarry stuff,
Such as might not be subject to the cough:
Since every man unseemly did it find,
To see them gaping thus at every wind:
For if perhaps they handsomely were closed
For pledges they to men might be exposed.
In this arrest by Hercules the Raven
Was flayd at her return from Lybia haven,
Why am not I said Minos there invited,
Unless it be my self not one's omitted:
And then it is their mind I do no more
Of Frogs and Oysters send them any store;
In case they spare my life and prove but civil,
I give their sale of distaffs to the Devil.
To quell him comes Q. R. who limping frets
At the safe pass of trixie Crackarets,
The boulter, the grand Cyclops cousin, those
Did massacre whilst each one wiped his nose;
Few ingles in this fallow ground are bred,
But on a Tanners mill are winnowed:
Run thither all of you the alarmes sound clear,
You shall have more then you had the last year.
Short while thereafter was the bird of Jove
Resolved to speak, though dismal it should prove;
Yet was afraid when he saw them in ire,
They should or'throw quite flat down dead the empire
He rather chus'd the fire from heaven to steal,
To boats where were red Herrings put to sale;
Then to be calm against those who strive to brave us,
And to the Massorets fond words enslave us.
All this at last concluded galantly,
In spite of Ate and her Hern-like thigh,
Who sitting saw Penthesilea taken,
In her old age for a cresse-selling queen:
Each one cried out thou filthy Collier toad,
Does it become thee to be found abroad?
Thou have the Roman Standard filtch'd away,
Which they in rags of parchment did display.
Juno was borne who under the Rainbow,
Was a bird-catching with her Duck below:
When her with such a grievous trick they plied
That she had almost been bethwacked by it:
The bargain was that of that throat full she
Should of Proserpina have two eggs free;
And if that she thereafter should be found,
She to a Haw-thorn hill should be fast bound.
Seven months thereafter lacking twenty two,
He that of old did Carthage town undo:
Did bravely amidst them all himself advance,
Requiring of them his inheritance;
Although they justly made up the division,
According to the shoe-welt-lawes decision;
By distributing store of brews and beef
To those poor fellows that did pen the Brief.
But the year will come sign of a Turkish Bow,
Five spindles yarnd, and three pot-bottomes too,
Wherein of a discourteous King the dock
Shall peppered be under an Hermits frock,
Ah that for one she hypocrite you must
Permit so many acres to be lost:
Cease, cease, this vizard may become another,
Withdraw your selves unto the Serpents brother.
It Is in times past that he who is shall reign
With his good friends in peace now and again;
No rash nor heady Prince shall then rule crave,
Each good will its arbitrament shall have:
And the joy promised of old as doom
To the heavens guests shall in its beacon come:
Then shall the breeding mares that benumbed were
Like royal palfreys ride triumphant there.
And this continue shall from time to time,
Till Mars be fettred for an unknown crime,
Then shall one come who others will surpass,
Delightful, pleasing, matchless, full of grace;
Cheer up your hearts, approach to this repast,
All trusty friends of mine for he is deceast,
Who would not for a world return again,
So highly shall time past be cried up then.
He who was made of wax shall lodge each member
Close by the hinges of a block of timber:
We then no more shall master master whoot
The swagger who th'alarum bell holds out;
Could one seize on the dagger which he bears,
Heads would be free from tingling in the ears
To baffle the whole storehouse of abuses,
And thus farewell Apollo and the Muses.
CHAP. III. How Gargantua was carried eleven months in his mothers belly.
GRangousier was a good fellow in his time, and notable jester; he loved to
drink neat, as much as any man that then was in the world, and would willingly
eat salt meat: to this intent he was ordinarily well furnished with gammons of
Bacon, both of Westphalia, Mayence and Bayone; with store of dried Neats
tongues, plenty of Links, Chitterlings and Puddings in their season; together
with salt Beefand mustard, a good deal of hard rows of powdered mullet called
Botargos, great provision of Sauciges, not of Bolonia (for he feared the
Lombard boccone) but of Bigorre, Longaulnay, Brene, and Rouargue. In the vigor
of his age he married Gargamelle, daughter to the King of the Parpaillons, a
jolly pug, and well mouthed wench. These two did often times do the two backed
beast together, joyfully rubbing and frotting their Bacon against one another,
insofarre, that at last she became great with child of a fair son, and went
with him unto the eleventh month, for so long, yea longer may a woman carry
her great belly, especially when it is some masterpiece of nature, and a
person predestined to the performance, in his due time, of great exploits; as
Homer says, that the child which Neptune begot upon the Nymph, was borne a
whole year after the conception, that is, in the twelfth month; for as Aulus
Gellius says, libr. 3. this long time was suitable to the majesty of Neptune,
that in it the child might receive his perfect form: for the like reason
Jupiter made the night, wherein he lay with Alcmena, last forty eight hours,
a shorter time not being sufficient for the forging of Hercules, who cleansed
the world of the Monstres and Tyrants, wherewith it was suppressed. My masters,
the ancient pantagruelists have confirmed that which I say, and withal
declared it to be not only possible, but also maintained the lawful birth and
legitimation of the infant borne of a woman in the eleventh month after the
decease of her husband, Hypocrates, lib. de alimento. Plinius lib. 2. cap. 5.
Plautus in his Cistellaria. Marcus Varo in his Satyr inscribed, The Testament,
alleging to this purpose the authority of Aristotle. Censorinus lib. de die
natali. Arist. lib. 2. cap. 3. and 4. de natura animalium. Gellius lib. 3. cap.
16. Servius in his exposition upon this verse of Virgils Eclogues, Matri longa
december. etc. and a thousand other fools whose number has been increased by the
Lawyers. ff. de suis and Leg. intestato paragrapho sin. and in Auth. de
restitu. and ea quae patit in xi mense; moreover upon these grounds they have
foysted in their Robidilardick, or Lapiturolive Law. Gallus ff. de libr. and
posth. L. sept. ff. de stat. hom. And some other Laws which at this time I
dare not name; by means whereof the honest widows may without danger play at
the close buttock game with might and maine, and as hard as they can for the
space of the first two months after the decease of their husbands. I pray you,
my good lusty springal lads, if you find any of these females, that are worth
the pains of untying the cod-peece-point, get up, ride upon them, and bring
them to me; for if they happen within the third month to conceive, the child
shall be heir to the deceased, if before he died he had no other children, and
the mother shall pass for an honest woman.

When she is known to have conceived, thrust forward boldly, spare her not
whatever betide you, seeing the paunch is full; as Julia the daughter of the
Emperor Octavian never prostituted her self to her belly-bumpers, but when she
found her self with child, after the manner of Ships that receive not their
steers-man, till they have their ballast and lading; and if any blame them for
this their rataconniculation, and reiterated lechery upon their pregnancy and
big-belliednesse, seeing beasts in the like exigent of their fullness, will
never suffer the male-masculant to incroach them: their answer will be, that
those are beasts, but they are women, very well skilled in the pretty vales,
and small fees of the pleasant trade and mysteries of superfetation, as
Populius heretofore answered, according to the relation of Macrobius lib. 2.
Saturnal. If the Devil will not have them to bag, he must wring hard the
spigot, and stop the bunghole.

CHAP. IV. How Gargamelle, being great with Gargantua, did eat a huge deal of
tripes.
THe occasion and manner how Gargamelle was brought to bed, and delivered of
her child, was thus: and if you do not believe it, I wish your bum-gut fall
out, and make an escapade, her bum-gut indeed or fundament escaped her in an
afternoon, on the third day of February, with having eaten at dinner too many
Godebillios, Godebillios are the fat tripes of coiros, coiros are beeves fatned
at the cratch in Ox stalls, or in the fresh guimo meadows, guimo meadows are
those that for their fruitfulness may be mowed twice a year: of those fat
beeves they had killed three hundred sixty seven thousand and fourteen, to be
salted at Shrovetide, that in the entering of the Spring they might have plenty
of poudred beef wherewith to season their mouths at the beginning of their
meals, and to taste their wine the better.

They had abundance of tripes as you have heard, and they were so delicious,
that every one licked his fingers, but the mischife was this, that for all men
could do, there was no possibility to keep them long in that relish; for in a
very short while they would have stunk, which had been an undecent thing: it
was therefore concluded, that they should be all of them gulched up, without
losing any thing; to this effect they invited all the Burguers of Sainais, of
Suille, of the Roche clermand, of Vaugaudry, without omitting the Boudray,
Monpensier, the Guedevede, and other their neighbors, all stiff drinkers,
brave fellows, and good players at the kyles. The good man Grangousier took
great pleasure in their company, and commanded there should be no want nor
pinching for any thing: nevertheless he bade his wife eat sparingly, because
she was near her time, and that these tripes were no very commendable meat:
they would feign (said he) be at the chewing of ordure, that would eat the case
wherein it was. Notwithstanding these admonitions, she did eat sixteen
quarters, two bushels, three pecks and a pipkin full: O the fair fecality
wherewith she swelled, by the ingrediency of such shitten stuff; after dinner
they all went out in a hurl, to the grove of the willows, where on the green
grass, to the sound of the merry Flutes, and pleasant Bagpipes, they danced so
gallantly, that it was a sweet and heavenly sport to see them so frolic.

CHAP. V. The discourse of the drinkers.
THen did they fall upon the chat of victuals and some belly furniture to be
snatched at in the very same place, which purpose was no sooner mentioned, but
forthwith began flaggons to go, gammons to trot, goblets to fly, great bowls
to ting, glasses to ring, draw, reach, fill, mix, give it me without water, so
my friend, so, whip me off this glass neatly, bring me hither some claret, a
full weeping glass till it run over, acessation and truce with thirst. Ha thou
false Fever, will thou not be gone? by my figgins, godmother, I cannot as yet
enter in the humor of being merry, nor drink so currantly as I would, you have
caught a cold gamer, yea forsooth Sir; by the belly of Sanct Buf let us talk
of our drink, I never drink but at my hours, like the Popes Mule, and I never
drink but in my breviary, like a fair father Gardien. Which was first, thirst
or drinking? Thirst, for who in the time of innocence would have drunk without
being athirst? nay, Sir, it was drinking; for privatio praesupponit habitum. I
am learned you see, Foecundi calices quem non fecere disertum? we poor
innocents drink but too much without thirst: not I truly, who am a sinner, for
I never drink without thirst, either present or future, to prevent it, (as you
know) I drink for the thirst to come; I drink eternally, this is to me an
eternity of drinking, and drinking of eternity; let us sing, let us drink, and
tune up our round-lays; where is my funnel? what, it seems I do not drink but
by an Attorney? do you wet your selves to dry, or do you dry to wet you? pish,
I understand not the Rhethorick (Theorick I should say) but I help my self
somewhat by the practice. Baste enough, I sup, I wet, I humect, I moisten my
gullet, I drink, and all for fear of dying; drink always and you shall never
die: If I drink not, I am a ground dry, gravelled and spent, I am stark dead
without drink, and my soul ready to fly into some marish amongst Frogs; the
soul never dwells in a dry place, drouth kills it. O you butlers, creators of
new forms, make me of no drinker a drinker, a perennity and everlastingnesse
of sprinkling, and bedewing me through these my parched and sinnewy bowels; he
drinks in vain that feels not the pleasure of it: this enters into my
veins, the pissing tools and urinal vessels shall have nothing of it. I would
willingly wash the tripes of the calf, which I apparelled this morning. I have
pretty well now balasted my stomach, and stuffed my paunch: if the papers of my
bonds and bills could drink as well as I do, my creditors would not want for
wine when they come to see me, or when they are to make any formal exhibition
of their rights to what of me they can demand; this hand of yours spoils your
nose. O how many other such will enter here before this go out, what, drink so
shallow, it is enough to break both girds and pettrel, this is called a cup of
dissimulation, or flaggonal hypocrisy.

What difference is there between a bottle La bouteille est fermele a bouchon,
etle flaccon a vis.
and a flaggon? great difference, for the bottle is stopped and shut up with a
stoppel, but the flaggon with a vice, bravely and well played upon the words,
Our fathers drank lustily, and emptied their cans; well cack'd, well sung; come
let us drink: will you send nothing to the river, here is one going to wash the
tripes: I drink no more then a sponge, I drink like a Templer Knight: and I
tanquam sponsus, and I sicut terra sine aqua, give me a synonymon for a gammon
of bacon? it is the compulsory of drinkers: it is a pully; by a pully-rope wine
is let down into a cellar, and by a gammon into the stomach, hei now boys
hither, some drink some drink, there is no trouble in it, respice personam,
pone pro duos, bus non est in usu. If I could get up as well as I can swallow
down, I had been long ere now very high in the air.

Thus became Tom tosse-pot rich, thus went in the Tailors stitch: Thus did
Bacchus conquer the inde thus Philosophy Melinde: a little rain allayes a
great deal of wind: long tippling breaks the thunder. But if there came such
liquor from my ballock, would not you willingly thereafter suck the udder
whence it issued; here page fill; I prithee, forget me not when it comes to my
turn, and I will enter the election I have made of thee into the very register
of my heart. Sup Guillot, and spare not, there is yet somewhat in the pot. I
appeal from thirst, and disclaim its jurisdiction. Page sue out my appeal in
form, this remnant in the bottom of the glass must follow its Leader. I was
wont heretofore to drink out all, but now I leave nothing. Let us not make too
much haste, it is requisite we carry all along with us; hey day, here are
tripes fit for our sport, and in earnest excellent Godebillios of the dun Ox
(you know) with the black streak. O for Gods sake let us lash them soundly, yet
thriftily. Drink, or I will. No, no, drink I beseech Ouje vous je vous pry.
you; sparrows will not eat unless you bob them on the tail, nor can I drink
if I be not fairly spoke to. The concavities of my body are like another Hell
for their (...), lateris cavitas: (...), orcus: and (...), alter
capacity. Lagonaedatera, there is not a corner, nor cunniborow in all my body
where this wine does not ferret out my thirst. Ho, this will bang it soundly,
but this shall banish it utterly. Let us wind our horns by the sound of
flaggons and bottles, and cry aloud, that whoever has lost his thirst, come
not hither to seek it. Long clysters of drinking are to be voided without
doors: the great God made the Planets, and we make the platters neat. I have
the word of the Gospel in my mouth, Sitio. The stone called Asbestos, is not
more unquenchable, then the thirst of my paternitie. Appetite comes with eating
says Angeston, but the thirst goes away with drinking. I have a remedy against
thirst, quite contrary to that which is good against the biting of a mad dog
keep running after a Dog, and he will never bite you, drink always before the
thirst, and it will never come upon you. There I catch you, I awake you. Argus
had a hundred eyes for his sight; a butler should have (like Briareus) a
hundred hands wherewith to fill us wine indefatigably. Hey now lads, let us
moisten our selves, it will be time to dry hereafter. White wine here, wine
boys, pour out all in the name of Lucifer, fill here you, fill and fill
(pescods on you) till it be full. My tongue peels. Lanstrinque, to thee
Countreyman, I drink to thee good fellow, camarade to thee, lusty, lively, ha,
la, la, that was drunk to some purpose, and bravely gulped over. O lachryma
Christi, it is of the best grape; I, faith, pure Greek, Greek, O the fine white
wine, upon my conscience it is a kind of taffatas wine, hin, hin, it is of one
ear, well wrought, and of good wool; courage camrade, up thy heart billy, we
will not be beasted at this bout, for I have got one trick, ex hoc in hoc,
there is no enchantment, nor charm there, every one of you has seen it, my
prentiship is out, I am a free man at this trade. I am prester mast,
(Prish-Brun I should say) master past. O the drinkers, those that are a Prestre
mace maistre pass.
dry, O poor thirsty souls, good Page my friend, fill me here some, and crown
the wine I pray thee, like a Cardinal, Natura abhorret vacuum. Would you say
that a fly could drink in this, this is after the fashion of Swisserland,
clear off, neat, super-naculum, come therefore blades to this divine liquor,
and celestial juice, swill it over heartily, and spare not, it ^s a decoction
of Nectar and Ambrosia.

CHAP. VI. How Gargantua was borne in a strange manner.
Whilst they were on this discourse, and pleasant tattle of drinking,
Gargamelle began to be a little unweil in her lower parts, whereupon
Grangousier arose from off the grass, and fell to comfort her very honestly
and kindly, suspecting that she was in travel, and told her that it was best
for her to sit down upon the grass under the willows, because she was like
very shortly to see young feet, and that therefore it was convenient she should
pluck up her spirits, and take a good heart of new at the fresh arrival of her
baby, saying to her withal, that although the pain was somewhat grievous to
her, it would be but of short continuance, and that the succeeding joy would
quickly remove that sorrow, in such sort that she should not so much as
remember it. On with a sheeps courage (quoth he) dispatch this boy, and we will
speedily fall to work for the making of another. Ha (said she) so well as you
speak at your own ease, you that are men; well then, in the name of God i will do
my best, seeing you will have it so, but would to God that it were cut off from
you: what? (said Grangousier) ha (said she) you are a good man indeed, you
understand it well enough; what my member? (said he) by the goats blood, if it
please you that shall be done instantly, cause bring hither a knife; a las,
(said she) the Lord forbid, I pray Jesus to forgive me, I did not say it from
my heart, therefore let it alone, and do not do it neither more nor less any
kind of harm for my speaking so to you; but I am like to have work enough to
do to day; and all for your member, yet God bless you and it.

Courage, courage, (said he) take you no care of the matter, let the four
foremost oxen do the work. I will yet go drink one whiffe more, and if in the
mean time any thing befall you that may require my presence, I will be so near
to you, that at the first whistling in your fist, I shall be with you
forthwith: a little while after she began to groan, lament and cry; then
suddenly came the midwives from all quarters; who groping her below, found some
peloderies, which was a certain filthy stuff, and of a taste truly bad
enough, this they thought had been the child, but it was her fundament, that
was slipped out with the molification of her straight intrall, which you call the
bum-gut, and that merely by eating of too many tripes, as we have showed you
before: whereupon an old ugly trot in the company, who had the repute of an
expert she-Physician, and was come from Brispaille near to Saint Gnou
threescore years before, made her so horrible a restrictive, and binding
medicine, and whereby all her Larris, arse-pipes and conduits were so opilated,
stopped, obstructed, and contracted, that you could hardly have opened and
enlarged them with your teeth, which is a terrible thing to think upon; seeing
the Devil at the Mass at Saint Martins was puzzled with the like task, when
with his teeth he had lengthened out the parchment whereon he wrote the tittle
tattle of two young mangy whoores; by this inconvenient the cotyledons of her
matrix, were presently loosed, through which the child sprung up and leapt,
and so entering into the hollow vein, did climb by the diaphragm even above
her shoulders, where that vein divides it self into two, and from thence
taking his way toward the left side, issued forth at her left ear; as soon
as he was borne, he cried not as other babes use to do, miez, miez, miez, miez,
but with a high, sturdy and big voice shouted a loud, some drink, some drink,
some drink, as inviting all the world to drink with him; the noise hereof was
so extremely great, that it was heard in both the Countries at once, of Beauce
and Bibarois. I doubt me that you do not thoroughly believe the truth of this
strange nativity, though you believe it not I care not much: but an honest man,
and of good judgment believes still what is told him, and that which he
finds written.

Is this beyond our Law, or our faith? against reason or the holy Scripture?
for my part, I find nothing in the sacred Bible that is against it; but tell
me, if it had been the will of God, would you say that he could not do it? ha
for favor sake (I beseech you) never emberlucock or inpulregafize your spirits
with these vain thoughts and idle conceits; for I tell you, it is not
impossible with God, and if he pleased all women henceforth should bring forth
their children at the ear; was not Bacchus engendered out of the very thigh of
Jupiter? did not Roquetaillade come out at his mothers heel? and Crocmoush
from the slipper of his nurse? was not Minerva born of the brain, even through
the ear of Jove? Adonis of the bark of a Myrre-tree; and Castor and Pollux of
the doupe of that Egg which was laid and hatched by Leda? But you would wonder
more, and with far greater amazement, if I should now present you with that
chapter of Plinius, wherein he treats of strange births, and contrary to
nature, and yet am not I so impudent a lier as he was. Read the seventh book
of his Natural History, chapt. 4. and trouble not my head any more about this.

CHAP. VII. After what manner Gargantua had his name given him, and how he
tippled, bibbed, and curried the can.
THE good man Grangousier drinking and making merry with the rest, heard the
horrible noise which his son had made as he entered into the light of this
world, when he cried out, Some drink, some drink, some drink; whereupon he said
in French, Que grand tuas et souple le gousier, that is to say, How great and
nimble a throat thou have; which the company hearing, said, that verily the
child ought to be called Gargantua; because it was the first word that after
his birth his father had spoke in imitation, and at the example of the ancient
Hebrews, whereunto he condescended, and his mother was very well pleased
therewith; in the mean while to quiet the child, they gave him to drink a
tirelarigot, that is, till his throat was like to crack with it; then was he
carried to the Font, and there baptized, according to the manner of good
Christians

Immediately thereafter were appointed for him seventeen thousand, nine
hundred, and thirteen Cowes of the towns of Pautille and Breemond to furnish
him with milk in ordinary, for it was impossible to find a Nurse sufficient
for him in all the Country, considering the great quantity of milk that was
requisite for his nourishment; although there were not wanting some Doctors of
the opinion of Scotus, who affirmed that his own mother gave him suck, and that
she could draw out of her breasts one thousand, four hundred, two pipes, and
nine pailes of milk at every time.

Which indeed is not probable, and this point has been found duggishly
scandalous and offensive to tender ears, for that it savoured a little of
Heresy; thus was he handled for one year and ten months, after which time by
the advice of Physicians they began to carry him, and then was made for him a
fine little cart drawn with Oxen, of the invention of Jan Denio, wherein they
led him hither and thither with great joy, and he was worth the seeing; for he
was a fine boy, had a burly physnomie, and almost ten chins; he cried very
little, but beshit himself every hour: for to speak truly of him, he was
wonderfully phlegmatic in his posteriors, both by reason of his natural
complexion, and the accidental disposition which had befallen him by his too
much quaffing of the septembral juice. Yet without a cause did not he sup one
drop; for if he happened to be vexed, angry, displeased or sorry; if he did
fret, if he did weep, if he did cry, and what grievous quarter soever he kept
in bringing him some drink, he would be instantly pacified, reseated in his own
temper, in a good humor again, and as still and quiet as ever. One of his
governesses told me (swearing by her fig) how he was so accustomed to this
kind of way, that, at the sound of pintes and flaggons he would on a sudden
fall into an ecstasy, as if he had then tasted of the joys of Paradise: so
that they upon consideration of this his divine complexion, would every morning
to cheer him up, play with a knife upon the glasses, on the bottles with their
stopples, and on the pottle-pots with their lids and covers, at the sound
whereof he became gay, did leap for joy, would loll and rock himself in the
cradle, then nod with his head, monocorsing his fingers, and barytonising with
his tail.

CHAP. VIII. How they apparelled Gargantua.
BEing of this age, his father ordained to have clothes made to him in his own
livery, which was white and blew. To work then went the Tailors, and with great
expedition were those clothes made, cut, and sewed, according to the fashion
that was then in request. I find by the ancient Records or Pancarts, to be
seen in the chamber of accounts, or Count of the Exchequer at Montforeo, that
he was accoutred in manner as follows. To make him every shirt of his were
taken up nine hundred else of Chatelero linen, and two hundred for the
guissets, in manner of cushions, which they put under his armpits; his shirt
was not gathered nor plaited, for the plaiting of shirts was not found out,
till the Seamsters (when the Besonger du cul, Englished, The eye of the needle.
point of their needles was broken) began to work and occupy with the
tail; there were taken up for his doublet, eight hundred and thirteen else of
white Satin, and for his points fifteen hundred and nine dogs skins and a half.
Then was it that men began to tie their breeches to their doublets, and not
their doublets to their breeches: for it is against nature, as has most amply
been showed. Ockam upon the explonibles of Master Hautechaussade.

For his breeches were taken up eleven hundred and five else, and a third of
white broad cloth; They were cut in form of pillars, chamfered, channel'd and
pinked behind, that they might not over-heat his reins: and were within the
panes, puffed out with the lining of as much blew damask as was needful: and
remark, that he had very good Leg-harnish, proportionable to the rest of his
stature.

For his Codpeece were used sixteen else, and a quarter of the same cloth, and
it was fashioned on the top like unto a Triumphant Arch, most gallantly
fastened with two enameled Clasps, in each of which was set a great Emerauld,
as big as an Orange; for, as says Orpheus lib. de lapidibus, and Plinius libr.
ultimo, it has an erective virtue and comfortative of the natural member. The
extiture, out-jecting or out-standing of his Codpiece, was of the length of a
yard, jagged and pinked, and withal bagging, and strouting out with the blew
damask lining, after the manner of his breeches: but had you seen the fair
Embroyderie of the small needle work purle, and the curiously interlaced knots,
by the Goldsmiths Art, set out and trimmed with rich Diamonds, precious Rubies,
fine Turquoises, costly Emeraulds, and Persian pearls; you would have compared
it to a fair Cornucopia, or Horn of abundance, such as you see in Anticks, or
as Rhea gave to the two Nymphs, Amalthea and Ida, the Nurses of Jupiter.

And like to that Horn of abundance, it was still gallant, succulent, droppie,
sappie, pithie, lively, always flourishing, always fructifying, full of
juice, full of flower, full of fruit, and all manner of delight. I avow God, it
would have done one good to have seen him, but I will tell you more of him in
the book which I have made of the dignity of Codpieces: One thing I will tell
you, that as it was both long and large, so was it well furnished and
victualled within, nothing like unto the hypocritical Codpieces of some fond
Wooers, and Wench-courters, which are stuffed only with wind, to the great
prejudice of the female sex.

For his shoes, were taken up four hundred and six else of blew
Crimson-velvet, and were very neatly cut by parallel lines, joined in uniforme
cylindres: for the soling of them were made use of eleven hundred Hides of
brown Cowes, shapen like the tail of a Keeling.

For his coat were taken up eighteen hundred else of blew velvet, died in
grain, embroidered in its borders with fair Gilliflowers, in the middle decked
with silver purle, intermixed with plates of gold, and store of pearls, hereby
showing, that in his time he would prove an especial good fellow, and singular
whip-can.

His girdle was made of three hundred else and a half of silken serge, half
white and half blew, if I mistake it not. His sword was not of Valentia, nor
his dagger of Saragosa, for his father could not endure these hidalgos
borrachos maranisados como diablos: but he had a fair sword made of wood, and
the dagger of borled leather, as well painted and gilded as any man could wish.

His purse was made of the cod of an Elephant, which was given him by Herre
Praecontal, Proconsul of Lybia.

For his Gown were employed nine thousand six hundred else, wanting two
thirds, of blew velvet, as before, all so diagonally purled, that by true
perspective issued thence an unnamed color, like that you see in the necks of
Turtle-doves or Turkie-cocks, which wonderfully rejoices the eyes of the
beholders. For his Bonnet or Cap were taken up three hundred two else, and a
quarter of white velvet, and the form thereof was wide and round, of the
bigness of his Head; for his father said, that the Caps of the Mirabaise
fashion, made like the Cover of a Pastie, would one time or other bring a
mischief on those that wore them. For his Plume, he wore a fair great blew
feather, plucked from an Onocrotal of the country of Hircania the wild, very
prettily hanging down over his right ear: For the Jewel or broach which in his
Cap he carried; he had in a Cake of gold, weighing threescore and eight marks,
a fair piece enameled, wherein was portrayed a man's body with two heads,
looking toward one another, four arms, four feet, two arses, such as Plato
in Symposio says, was the mystical beginning of man's nature; and about it was
written in Ionick letters, (...), or rather, (...), that is, Vir and Mulier
junctim propriissime homo. To wear about his neck, he had a golden chain,
weighing twenty five thousand and sixty three marks of gold, the links thereof
being made after the manner of great berries, amongst which were set in work
green Jaspers engraven, and cut Dragon-like, all environed with beams and
sparks, as King Nicepsos of old was wont to wear them, and it reached down to
the very bust of the rising of his belly, whereby he reaped great benefit all
his life long, as the Greek Physicians knew well enough. For his Gloves were
put in work sixteen Otters skins, and three of lougarous or men-eating wolves,
for the bordering of them: and of this stuff were they made, by the
appointment of the Cabalists of Sanlono. As for the Rings which his father
would have him to wear to renew the ancient mark of Nobility; He had on the
forefinger of his left hand a Carbuncle as big as an Ostrige's Egg, inchased
very daintily in gold of the finenesse of a Turkey Seraph. Upon the middle
finger of the same hand, he had a Ring made of four metals together, of the
strongest fashion that ever was seen; so that the steel did not crash against
the gold, nor the silver crush the copper. All this was made by Captain
Chappins, and Alcofribas his good Agent. On the medical finger of his right
hand, he had a Ring made Spire ways, wherein was set a perfect baleu rubie, a
pointed Diamond, and a Physon Emerald of an inestimable value; for Hans-carvel
the King of Melinda's Jeweller, esteemed them at the rate of threescore nine
millions, eight hundred ninety four thousand and elghteen French Crowns of
Berrie, and at so much did the foucres of Auspurg prize them.

CHAP. IX. The Colors and Liveries of Gargantua.
GArgantua's colors were white and blew, as I have showed you before, by which
his father would give us to understand, that his son to him was a heavenly
joy, for the white did signify gladness, pleasure, delight and rejoicing, and
the blew, celestial things. I know well enough, that in reading this you laugh
at the old drinker, and hold this exposition of colors to be very extravagant,
and utterly disagreeable to reason, because white is said to signify faith,
and blew constancy. But without moving, vexing, heating or putting you in a
chafe, (for the weather is dangerous) answer me if it please you; for no other
compulsory way of arguing will I use toward you, or any else; only now and
then I will mention a word or two of my bottle. What is it that induces you?
what stirs you up to believe, or who told you that white signifies faith; and
blew, constancy? An old paultry book, say you, sold by the hawking Pedlars and
Balladmongers, entitled The Blason of Colors: Who made it? whoever it was, he
was wise in that he did not set his name to it; but besides, I know not what I
should rather admire in him, his presumption or his sottishness: his
presumption and overweening, for that he should without reason, without cause,
or without any appearance of truth, have dared to prescribe by his private
authority, what things should be denotated and signified by the color: which
is the custom of Tyrants, who will have their will to bear sway in stead of
equity; and not of the wise and learned, who with the evidence of reason
satisfy their Readers: His sottishness and want of spirit, in that he
thought, that without any other demonstration or sufficient argument, the world
would be pleased to make his blockish, and ridiculous impositions, the rule of
their devices. In effect, (according to the Proverb, To a shitten tail fails
never ordurre,) he has found (it seems) some simple Ninnie in those rude times
of old, when the wearing of high round Bonnets was in fashion, who gave some
trust to his writings, according to which they carved and ingraved their
apophthegms and motto's, trapped and caparisoned their Mules and
Sumpter-horses, apparelled their Pages, quartered their breeches, bordered
their gloves, fringed the courtains and vallens of their beds, painted their
ensigns, composed songs, and which is worse, placed many deceitful juglings,
and unworthy base tricks undiscoveredly, amongst the very chastest Matrons, and
most reverend Sciences. In the like darkness and mist of ignorance, are
wrapped up these vainglorious Courtiers, and name-transposers, who going about
in their impresa's, to signify esperance, (that is, hope) have portrayed a
sphere and birds pens for peines: Ancholie (which is the flower colombine)
for melancholy: A waning Moon or Cressant, to show the increasing or rising of
ones fortune; A bench rotten and broken, to signify bankrout: non and a
corslet for non dur habit, (otherwise non durabit, it shall not last) un lit
sanc ciel, that is, a bed without a testerne, for un licencie, a graduated
person, as Batchelour in Divinity, or utter Barrester at law; which are
aequivocals so absurd and witless, so barbarous and clownish, that a foxes
tail should be fastened to the neckpiece of, and a Vizard made of a Cowsheard,
given to every one that henceforth should offer, after the restitution of
learning, to make use of any such fopperies in France; by the same reasons (if
reasons I should call them, and not ravings rather, and idle triflings about
words,) might I cause paint a panier, to signify that I am in peine: a
Mustard-pot, that my heart tarries much for it: one pissing upwards for a
Bishop: the bottom of a pair of breeches for a vessel full of farthings: a
Codpiece for the office of the Clerks of the sentences, decrees or judgments,
or rather (as the English bears it,) for the tail of a Cod-fish; and a dogs
turd, for the dainty turret, wherein lies the love of my sweet heart. Far
otherwise did heretofore the Sages of Egypt, when they wrote by letters, which
they called Hieroglyphics, which none understood who were not skilled in the
virtue, property and nature of the things represented by them: of which Orus
Apollon has in Greek composed two books, and Polyphilus in his dream of love
set down more: In France you have a taste of them, in the device or impresa of
my Lord Admiral, which was borne before that time by Octavian Augustus. But my
little skiffe along these unpleasant gulphs and sholes, will sail no
further, therefore must I return to the Port from whence I came: yet do I hope
one day to write more at large of these things, and to show both by
Philosophical arguments and authorities, received and approved of by and from
all antiquity, what, and how many colors there are in nature, and what may be
signified by every one of them, if God save the mould of my Cap, which is my
best Wine-pot, as my Grandame said.

CHAP. X. Of that which is signified by the Colors, white and blew.
THe white therefore signifies joy, solace and gladness, and that not at
random, but upon just and very good grounds: which you may perceive to be true,
if laying aside all prejudicate affections, you will but give ear to what
presently I shall expound unto you.

Aristotle says, that supposing two things contrary in their kind, as good
and evil, virtue and vice, heat and cold, white and black, pleasure and pain,
joy and grief: And so of others, if you couple them in such manner, that the
contrary of one kind may agree in reason with the contrary of the other, it
must follow by consequence, that the other contrary must answer to the remanent
opposite to that wherewith it is conferred; as for example, virtue and vice are
contrary in one kind, so are good and evil: if one of the contraries of the
first kind, be consonant to one of those of the second, as virtue and good
nesse, for it is clear that virtue is good, so shall the other two contraries,
(which are evil and vice) have the same connection, for vice is evil.

This Logical rule being understood, take these two contraries, joy and
sadness: then these other two, white and black, for they are Physically
contrary; if so be then that black do signify grief, by good reason then
should white import joy. Nor is this signification instituted by humane
imposition, but by the universal consent of the world received, which
Philosophers call Jus Gentium, the Law of Nations, or an uncontrolable right of
force in all countries whatsoever: for you know well enough, that all people,
and all languages and nations, (except the ancient Syracusans, and certain
Argives, who had cross and thwarting souls) when they mean outwardly to give
evidence of their sorrow, go in black; and all mourning is done with black,
which general consent is not without some argument, and reason in nature, the
which every man may by himself very suddenly comprehend, without the
instruction of any; and this we call the Law of nature: By virtue of the same
natural instinct, we know that by white all the world has understood joy,
gladness, mirth, pleasure and delight. In former times, the Thracians and
Crecians did mark their good, propitious, and fortunate days with white
stones: and their sad, dismal and unfortunate ones with black, is not the night
mournful, sad and melancholic? it is black and dark by the privation of light;
does not the light comfort all the world? and it is more whitet hen any thing
else, which to prove, I could direct you to the book of Laurentius Valla
against Bartolus, but an Evangelical testimony I hope will content you, Matthew.
7. it is said, that at the transfiguration of our Lord, Vestimenta ejus facta
sunt alba sicut lux, his apparel was made white like the light, by which
lightsome whiteness he gave his three Apostles to understand the Idea and
figure of the eternal joys; for by the light are all men comforted, according
to the word of the old woman, who although she had never a tooth in her head,
was wont to say, Bona lux: and Tobit, chap. 5. after he had lost his sight,
when Raphael saluted him, answered, What joy can I have, that do not see the
light of Heaven? In that color did the Angels testify the joy of the whole
world, at the Resurrection of our Savior, John 20. and at his Ascension, Acts
1. with the like color of vesture did St. John the Evangelist, Apoc. 4. 7. see
the faithful clothed in the heavenly and blissed Jerusalem.

Read the ancient both Greek and Latin histories, and you shall find that
the town of Alba, (the first pattern of Rome,) was founded, and so named by
reason of a white sow that was seen there: You shall likewise find in those
stories, that when any man, after he had vanquished his enemies, was by decree
of the Senate to enter into Rome triumphantly, he usually rode in a chariot
drawn by white horses: which in the Ovation triumph was also the custom; for
by no sign or color would they so significantly express the joy of their
coming, as by the white: You shall there also find, how Pericles, the General
of the Athenians, would needs have that part of his Army, unto whose lot befell
the white beans, to spend the whole day in mirth, pleasure and ease, whilst
the rest were a fighting. A thousand other examples and places could I allege
to this purpose, but that it is not here where I should do it.

By understanding hereof, you may resolve one Problem, which Alexander
Aphrodiseus has accounted unanswerable, why the Lion, who with his only cry
and roaring affrights all beasts, dreads and fears only a white cock? for (as
Proclus says, libro de Sacrificio and Magia) it is because the presence of the
virtue of the Sun, which is the Organ and Promptuarie of all terrestrial and
syderial light, does more symbolize and agree with a white cock, as well in
regard of that color, as of his property and specifical quality, then with a
Lion. He says furthermore, that Devils have been often seen in the shape of
Lions, which at the sight of a white cock have presently vanished. This is the
cause, why Galli or Gallices, (so are the Frenchmen called, because they are
naturally white as milk, which the Greeks call Gala,) do willingly wear in
their Caps white feathers, for by nature they are of a candid disposition,
merry, kind, gtacious and well-beloved, and for their cognizance and arms
have the whitest flower of any, the Flower de luce or Lilie. If you demand, how
by white, nature would have us understand joy and gladness? I answer, that the
analogy and uniformity is thus, for as the white does outwardly disperse and
scatter the rays of the sight, whereby the optic spirits are manifestly
dissolved, according to the opinion of Aristotle in his Problemes and
perspective Treatises; as you may likewise perceive by experience, when you
pass over mountains covered with snow, how you will complain that you cannot
see well: as Xenophon writes to have happened to his men, and as Galen very
largely declares, lib. 10. de usu partium: Just so the heart with excessive
joy is inwardly dilated, and suffers a manifest resolution of the vital
spirits, which may go so far on, that it may thereby be deprived of its
nourishment, and by consequence of life it self. By this Pericharie or
extremity of gladness, as Galen says, lib. 12. method. lib. 5. de locis
affectis, and lib. 2. de symptomatum causis. And as it has come to pass in
former times, witness Marcus* Tullius lib. 1. quaest. Tuscut. Verrius,
Aristotle, Titus Livius in his relation of the battle of Cannas, Plinius lib.
7. cap. 32. and 34. A. Gellius lib. 3. c. 15. and many other Writers of
Diagoras the Rhodian, Chilon Sophocles, Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilie,
Philippides, Philemon, Polycrates, Philipion, M. Juventi; and others who died
with joy, and as Avicen speaks, in ^. canon. and lib. de virib. cordis, of
the Saffron, that it does so rejoice the heart, that if you take of it
excessively, it will by a superfluous resolution and dilatation deprive it
altogether of life. Here peruse Alex. aphrodiseus lib. 1. Probl. cap. 19. and
that for a cause: But what? it seems I am entered further into this point then I
intended at the first; Here therefore will I strike sail, referring the rest
to that book of mine, which handles this matter to the full. Mean while, in a
word I will tell you, that blew does certainly signify Heaven and heavenly
things, by the same very tokens and symbols, that white signifies joy and
pleasure.

CHAP. XI. Of the youthful age of Gargantua.
GArgantua from three years upwards unto five, was brought up and instructed
in all convenient discipline, by the commandment of his father; and spent that
time like the other little children of the country, that is, in drinking,
eating and sleeping: in eating, sleeping and drinking: and in sleeping,
drinking and eating: still he wallowed and rolled up and down himself in the
mire and dirt: he blurred and sullied his nose with filth: he blotted and
smutch't his face with any kind of scurvie stuff, he trod down his shoes in
the heel: At the flies he did oftentimes yawn, and ran very heartily after the
Butterflies, the Empire whereof belonged to his father. He pissed in his shoes,
shit in his shirt, and wiped his nose on his sleeve: He did let his snot and
snivel fall in his pottage, and dabled, padled and slabbered every where: He
would drink in his slipper, and ordinarily rub his belly against a Panier: He
sharpened his teeth with a top, washed his hands with his broth, and combed his
head with a bole: He would sit down betwixt two stools, and his arse to the
ground, would cover himself with a wet sack, and drink in eating of his soupe:
He did eat his Cake sometimes without bread, would bite in laughing, and laugh
in biting; Oftentimes did he spit in the basin, and fart for fatness; piss
against the Sun, and hide himself in the water for fear of rain. He would
strike out of the cold iron, be often in the dumps, and frig and wriggle it. He
would flay the Fox, say the Apes Paternoster, return to his sheep, and turn the
Hogs to the Hay: He would beat the Dogs before the Lion, put the Plough before
the Oxen, and claw where it did not itch: He would pump one to draw somewhat
out of him, by griping all would hold fast nothing, and always eat his white
bread first. He shooed the Geese, kept a self-tickling to make himself laugh,
and was very stedable in the Kitchen: made a mock at the gods, would cause sing
Magnificat at Matines, and found it very connenient so to do: He would eat
cabbage, and shite beets; knew flies in a dish of milk, and would make them
lose their feet: He would scrape paper, blur parchment, then run away as hard
as he could: He would pull at the Kids leather, or vomit up his dinner, then
reckon without his Host: He would beat the bushes without catching the birds,
thought the Moon was made of green cheese, and that bladders are lanternes: out
of one sack he would take two moutures or fees for grinding; would act the
Asses part to get some bran, and of his fist would make a Mallet: He took the
cranes at the first leap, and would have the Mail-coats to be made link after
link: He always looked a given horse in the mouth, leaped from the cock to the
ass, and put one ripe between two green: By robbing Peter he paid Paul, he
kept the Moon from the wolves, and hoped to catch Larks if ever the Heavens
should fall: He did make of necessity virtue, of such bread such pottage, and
cared as little for the peeled as for the shaven: Every morning he did cast up
his gorge, and his fathers little dogs eat out of the dish with him, and he
with them: He would bite their ears and they would scratch his nose: he would
blow in their arses, and they would lick his chaps. But hearken good fellows,
the spigot ill betake you, and whirle round your brains, if you do not give
ear: This little Lecher was always groping his Nurses and Governesses, upside
down, arswerzie, topsiturvie, harribourr quet, with a Yacco haick, hyck gio,
handling them very rudely in jumbling and tumbling them to keep them going; for
he had already begun to exercise the tools, and put his Codpiece in practice;
which Codpiece or Braguette, his Governesfes did every day deck up and adorn
with fair nosegayes, curious rubles, sweet flowers, and fine silken tufts, and
very pleasantly would pass their time, in taking you know what between their
fingers, and dandling it, till it did revive and creep up to the bulk and
stiffenesse of a suppository, or streat magdaleon, which is a hard rolled up
salve, spread upon leather. Then did they burst out in laughing, when they saw
it lift up its ears, as if the sport had liked them; one of them would call it
her little dille, her staff of love, her quillety, her faucetin, her
dandilollie: Another her peen, her jolly kyle, her bableret, her membretoon,
her quickset Imp: Another again, her branch of coral, her female adamant, her
placket-racket, her cyprian scepter, her jewel for Ladies: and some of the
other women would give it these names, my bunguetee, my stopple too, my
busherusher, my gallant wimble, my pretty boarer, my coney-borow ferret, my
little piercer, my augretine, my dangling hangers, down right to it, stiff and
stout, in and to, my pusher, dresser, pouting stick, my honey pipe, my pretty
pillicock, linkie pinkie, futilletie, my lusty andouille, and crimson
chitterlin: my little couille bredouille, my pretty rogue, and so forth: It
belongs to me said one: it is mine said the other: What, quoth a third, shall I
have no share in it? by my faith I will cut it then: Ha, to cut it (said the
other,) would hurt him; Madam, do you cut little childrens things? were his cut
off, he would be then Monsieur sans queue, the curtailed Master. And that he
might play and sport himself after the manner of the other little children of
the country, they made him a fair weather whirljack, of the wings of the
windmil of Myrebalais.

CHAP. XII. Of Gargantua's wooden Horses.
Afterward, that he might be all his lifetime a good Rider, they made to him a
fair great horse of wood, which he did make leap, curvete, yerk out behind,
and skip forward, all at a time: to pace, trot, rack, gallop, amble, to play
the hobbie, the hackney-guelding: go the gate of the camel and of the wild
ass. He made him also change his color of hair, as the Monks of Coultibo,
(according to the variety of their holy days) use to do their clothes, from
bay, brown, to sorrel, daple-gray, mouse-dun, deer-colour, roan, cow-colour,
gingioline, skued color, pybal'd, and the color of the savage elk.

Himself of an huge big post made a hunting nag: and another for daily service,
of the beam of a Vine-presse: and of a great Oak, made up a mule, with a
foot-cloth for his chamber. Besides this, he had ten or twelve spare horses,
and seven horses for post; and all these were lodged in his own chamber, close
by his bedside. One day the Lord of Breadinbag came to visit his father in
great Painen sac Francrepas mouillevent.
bravery, and with a gallant train: and at the same time to see him came
likewise the Duke of Free-meale, and the Earl of Wetgullet. The house truly
for so many guests at once was somewhat narrow, but especially the stables;
whereupon the steward and harbinger of the said Lord Breadinbag, to know if
there were any other empty stables in the house, came to Gargantua, a little
young lad, and secretly asked him where the stables of the great horses were,
thinking that children would be ready to tell all? Then he led them up along
the stairs of the Castle, passing by the second Hall unto a broad great
Gallery, by which they entered into a large Tower, and as they were going up at
another pair of stairs, said the harbinger to the steward, this child
deceives us, for the stables are never on the top of the house: You may be
mistaken (said the steward,) for I know some places at Lions, at the Basmette,
at Chaunon, and elsewhere, which have their stables at the very tops of the
houses, so it may be, that behind the house there is a way to come to this
ascent, but I will question with him further. Then said he to Gargantua, My
pretty little boy, whither do you lead us? To the stable (said he) of my great
horses, we are almost come to it, we have but these stairs to go up at, then
leading them along another great Hall, he brought them into his chamber, and
opening the door said unto them, This is the stable that you ask for: this is
my gennet, this is my gelding, this my courser, and this my hackney, and laid
on them with a great Leaver: I will bestow upon you (said he) this Frizeland
horse, I had him from Francfort, yet will I give him you; for he is a pretty
little nagge, and will go very well, with a tessel of goosehawk, half a dosen
of spaniels, and a brace of greyhounds, thus are you King of the hares and
partridges for all this winter. By St. John (said they) now we are paid, he
has gleeked us to some purpose, bobbed we are now for ever: I deny it (said
he) he was not here above three days, judge you now, whether they had most
cause, either to hide their heads for shame, or to laugh at the jest: as they
were going down again thus amazed, he asked them, Will you have a whimwham?
What is that, said they? It is (said he) five turds Aubeliere.
to make you a muzzel: To day (said the steward,) though we happen to be
roasted, we shall not be burnt, for we are pretty well quipped and larded in my
opinion. O my jolly daper boy, thou have given us a gudgeon, I hope to see thee
Pope before I die: I think so (said he) my self: and then shall you be a
puppie, and this gentle popinjeay a perfect papelard, that is, dissembler:
Well, well, (said the harbinger,) But (said Gargantua;) guess how many
stitches there are in my mothers smock: Sixteen (quoth the harbinger,) You do
not speak Gospel (said Gargantua) for there is sent before, and sent behind,
and you did reckon them ill, considering the two under holes: When (said the
harbinger?) Even then (said Gargantua,) when they made a shovel of your nose to
take up a quarter of dirt, and of your throat a funnel, wherewith to put it
into another vessel, because the bottom of the old one was out. Cocksbod (said
the steward) we have met with a Prater. Farewell (Master tatler) God keep you,
so goodly are the words which you come out with, and so fresh in your mouth,
that it had need to be salted.

Thus going down in great haste, under the arch of the stairs, they let fall
the great Leaver, which he had put upon their backs, whereupon Gargantua said,
what a deedle, you are (it seems) but bad horsemen, that suffer your bilder to
fail you, when you need him most, if you were to go from hence to Chausas,
whether had you rather ride on a gesling, or lead a sow in a Leash? I had
rather drink (said the harbinger,) with this they entered into the lower Hall,
where the company was, and relating to them this new story, they made them
laugh like a swarm of flies.

CHAP. XIII. How Gargantua's wonderful understanding, became known to his
father Grangousier, by the invention of a Torchcul or Wipebreech.
ABout the end of the fifth year, Grangousier returning from the Conquest of
the Canarians, went by the way to see his son Gargantua, there was he filled
with joy, as such a father might be at the sight of such a child of his: and
whilst he kissed him and embraced him, he asked many childish questions of him
about diverse matters, and drank very freely with him and with his governesses,
of whom in great earnest, he asked amongst other things, whether they had been
careful to keep him clean and sweet? To this Gargantua answered, that he had
taken such a course for that himself, that in all the country there was not to
be found a cleanlier boy then he. How is that (said Grangousier?) I have
(answered Gargantua) by a long and curious experience found out a means to
wipe my bum, the most lordly, the most excellent, and the most convenient that
ever was seen? What is that. (said Grangousier,) how is it? I will tell you by
and by (said Gargantua,) once I did wipe me with a Gentlewomans Velvet-mask,
and found it to be good; for the softness of the silk was very voluptuous and
pleasant to my fundament. Another time with one of their Hoods, and in like
manner that was comfortable: At another time with a Ladies Neck-kerchief, and
after that I wiped me with some ear-pieces of hers made of Crimson satin, but
there was such a number of golden spangles in them (turdie round things, a pox
take them) that they fetched away all the skin of my tail with a vengeance.
Now I wish St. Anthonies fire burn the bum-gut of the Goldsmith that made them,
and of her that wore them: This hurt I cured by wiping my self with a Pages
cap, garnished with a feather after the Suitsers fashion.

Afterward, in dunging behind a bush, I found a March-Cat, and with it wiped
my breech, but her claws were so sharp that they scratched and exulcerated all
my perinee; Of this I recovered the next morning thereafter, by wiping my self
with my mothers gloves, of a most excellent perfume and sent of the Arabian
Benin. After that I wiped me with sage, with fennil, with anet with marjoram,
with roses, with gourd-leavs, with beets, with colewort, with leaves of the
vine-tree, with mallows, wool-blade, (which is a tail-scarlet) with latice and
with spinach leaves. All this did very great good to my leg. Then with
Mercury, with pursley, with nettles, with comfrey, but that gave me the bloody
flux of Lumb ardie, which I healed by wiping me with my braguette; then I wiped
my tail in the sheets, in the coverlet, in the curtains, with a cushion, with
Arras hangings, with a green carpet, with a tablecloth, with a napkin, with a
handkerchief, with a combing cloth, in all which I found more pleasure then do
the mangie dogs when you rub them. Yea, but (said Grangousier) which torchecul
did thou find to be the best? I was coming to it (said Gargantua) and by and
by shall you hear the tu autem, and know the whole mystery and knot of the
matter: I wiped my self with hay, with straw, with thatch-rushes, with flax,
with wool, with paper, but

Who his foul tail with paper wipes,
Shall at his hallocks leave some chips.
What, (said Grangousier) my little rogue, have thou been at the pot, that thou
do rhyme already? Yes, yes, my Lord the King (answered Gargantua,) I can rhyme
gallantly, and rhyme till I become hoarse with Rheum; Hark what our Privy says
to the Sky ters: Shittard Squirtard Crackard
Turdous. Thy bung Has flung Some dung
on us: Filthard Cackard Stinkard:
St. Antonie's fire seize on thy toane, If thy Dirty Dounby
Thou do not wipe ere thou be gone.

Will you have any more of it? Yes, yes, (answered Grangousier:) Then said
Gargantua,

A Roundlay.
In shiting yesday I did know
The sesse I to my arse did owe:
The smell was such came from that slunk,
That I was with it all bestunk:
O had but then some brave Signor
Brought her to me I waited for, in shiting:
I would have cleft her watergap,
And joined it close to my flipflap;
Whilst she had with her fingers guarded
My foul Nockandrow, all bemerded in shiting.
Now say that I can do nothing, by the Merdi they are not of my making, but I
heard them of this good old grandam, that you see here, and ever since have
retained them in the budget of my memory.

Let us return to our purpose (said Grangousier,) What (said Gargantua) to
skite? No (said Grangousier) but to wipe our tail; But (said Gargantua) will
not you be content to pay a punchion of Britton-wine, if I do not blank and
gravel you in this matter, and put you to a nonplus? Yes truly (said
Grangousier.)

There is no need of wiping ones tail (said Gargantua) but when it is foul;
foul it cannot be unless one have been a skiting; skite then we must before
we wipe our tails. O my pretty little waggish boy (said Grangousier,) what an
excellent wit thou have? I will make thee very shortly proceed Doctor in the
jovial quirks of gay learning, and that by G --, for thou have more wit then
age; now I prethie go on in this torcheculaife, orw ipe-bummatory discourse,
and by my beard I swear, for one puncheon thou shall have threescore pipes, I
mean of the good Breton wine, not that which grows in Britain, but in the good
country of Verron. Afterward I wiped my bum (said Gargantua,) with a
kerchief, with a pillow, with a pantoufle, with a pouch, with a pannier, but
that was a wicked and unpleasant torchecul; then with a hat, of hats note that
some are shorn, and others shaggie, some velveted, others covered with
taffitie's, and others with satin, the best of all these is the shaggie hat,
for it makes a very neat abstersion of the fecal matter.

Afterward I wiped my tail with a hen, with a cock, with a pullet, with a
calves skin, with a hare, with a pigeon, with a cormorant, with an Atturneyes
bag, with a montero, with a coife, with a faulconers lure; but to conclude, I
say and maintain, that of all torcheculs, arsewisps, bumfodders, tail-napkins,
bunghole-cleansers and wipe-breeches, there is none in the world comparable to
the neck of a goose, that is well douned, if you hold her head betwixt your
legs: and believe me therein upon mine honor, for you will thereby feel in
your nockhole a most wonderful pleasure, both in regard of the softness of the
said down, and of the temperate heat of the goose, which is easily
communicated to the bum-gut, and the rest of the inwards, insofarre as to come
even to the regions of the heart and brains; and think not, that the felicity
of the heroes and demigods in the Elysian fields, consists either in their
Asphodele, Ambrosia, or Nectar, as our old women here use to say; but in this,
(according to my judgment) that they wipe their tails with the neck of a
goose, holding her head betwixt their legs, and such is the opinion of Master
John of Scotland, alias Scotus.

CHAP. XIV. How Gargantua was taught Latin by a Sophister.
THe good man Grangousier, having heard this discourse, was ravished with
admiration, considering the high reach, and mavelous understanding of his
son Gargantua, and said to his governesses, Philip King of Macedon knew the
great wit of his son Alexander, by his skilful managing of a horse; for his
horse Bucephalus was so fierce and unruly, that none durst adventure to ride
him, after that he had given to his Riders such devilish falls, breaking the
neck of this man, the other man's leg, braining one, and putting another out of
his jaw bone. This by Alexander being considered, one day in the hippodrome,
(which was a place appointed for the breaking and managing of great horses,) he
perceived that the fury of the horse proceeded merely from the fear he had of
his own shadow, whereupon getting on his back, he run him against the Sun, so
that the shadow fell behind, and by that means tamed the horse, and brought
him to his hand: whereby his father, knowing the divine judgment that was in
him, caused him most carefully to be instructed by Aristotle, who at that time
was highly renowned above all the Philosophers of Greece: after the same manner
I tell you, that by this only discourse, which now I have here had before you
with my son Gargantua; I know that his understanding does participate of some
divinity, and that if he be well taught, and have that education which is
fitting, he will attain to a supreme degree of wisdom. Therefore will I commit
him to some learned man, to have him indoctrinated according to his capacity,
and will spare no cost, Presently they appointed him a great Sophister-Doctor,
called Master Tubal Holophernes, who taught him his A B C, so well, that he
could say it by heart backwards; and about this he was five years and three
months. Then read he to him, Donat, facet, theodolet, and Alanus in parabolis:
About this he was thirteen years, six months, and two weeks; but you must
remark, that in the mean time he did learn to write in Gottish characters, and
that he wrote all his books, for the Art of printing was not then in use, and
did ordinarily carry a great pen and inkhorne, weighing above seven thousand
quintals, (that is, 700000 pound weight,) the penner whereof was as big and as
long, as the great pillar of Enay, and the horn was hanged to it in great iron
chains, it being of the wideness of a tun of merchand ware. After that he
read unto him the book de modis significandi, with the Commentaries of
Hurtbise, of Fasquin, of Tropifeu, of Gualhaut, of Jhon Calf, of Billonio, of
Berlinguandus, and a rabble of others, and herein he spent more then eighteen
years and eleven months, and was so well versed in it, that to try masteries
in School disputes with his condisciples, he would recite it by heart
backwards: and did sometimes prove on his fingers ends to his mother, quod de
modis significandi non erat scientia. Then did he read to him the compost, for
knowing the age of the Moon, the seasons of the year, and tides of the sea, on
which he spent sixteen years and two months, and that justly at the time that
his said Praeceptor died of the French Pox, which was in the year one thousand
four hundred and twenty. Afterward he got an old coughing fellow to teach
him, named Master Jobelin Bride, or muzled doult, who read unto him Hugotio,
Flebard, Grecisme, the doctrinal, the parts, the quid est, the supplementum,
Marmoretus de moribus in mensa servandis, Seneca de quatuor virtutibus
cardinalibus, Passavantus cum commentar: and dormi secure for the holy days and
some other of such like mealie stuff, by reading whereof he became as wise as
any we ever since baked in an Oven.

CHAP. XV. How Gargantua was put under other Schoolmasters.
AT the last his father perceived, that indeed he studied hard, and that
although he spent all his time in it, did nevertheless profit nothing, but
which is worse, grew thereby foolish, simple, doted and blockish, whereof
making a heavy regret to Don Philip of Marays, Viceroy or deputie-King of
Papeligosse, he found that it were better for him to learn nothing at all,
then to be taught such like books, under such Schoolmasters, because their
knowledge was nothing but brutishness*, and their wisdom but blunt foppish
toys, serving only to bastardize good and noble spirits, and to corrupt all
the flower of youth. That it is so, take (said he) any young boy of this time,
who has only studied two years, if he have not a better judgment, a better
discourse, and that expressed in better terms then your son, with a
compleater carriage and civility to all manner of persons, account me for ever
hereafter a very clounch, and baconslicer of Brene. This pleased Grangousier
very well, and he commanded that it should be done. At night at supper, the
said Des Marays brought in a young page of his, of Ville-gouges, called
Eudemon, so neat, so trim, so handsome in his apparel, so spruce, with his hair
in so good order, and so sweet and comely in his behavior, that he had the
resemblance of a little Angel more then of a humane creature. Then he said to
Grangousier, Do you see this young boy* he is not as yet full twelve years
old; let us try (if it please you) what difference there is betwixt the
knowledge of the doting Mateologians of old time, and the young lads that are
now. The trial pleased Grangousier, and he commanded the Page to begin. Then
Eudemon, asking leave of the Vice-King his Master so to do, with his cap in his
hand, a clear and open countenance, beautiful and ruddie lips, his eyes
steadie, and his looks fixed upon Gargantua, with a youthful modesty; standing
up straight on his feet, began very gracefully to commend him; first for his
virtue and good manners; secondly for his knowledge; thirdly for his nobility;
fourthly for his bodily accomplishments: and in the fifth place most sweetly
exhorted him to reverence his father with all due observancy, who was so
careful to have him well brought up; in the end he prayed him, that he would
vouchsafe to admit of him amongst the least of his servants; for other favor
at that time desired he none of heaven, but that he might do him some grateful
and acceptable service: all this was by him delivered with such proper
gestures, such distinct pronunciation, so pleasant a delivery, in such
exquisite fine terms, and so good Latin, that he seemed rather a Gracchus, a
Cicero, an Aemilius of the time past, then a youth of this age: but all the
countenance that Gargantua kept was, that he fell to crying like a Cow, and
cast down his face, hiding it with his cap, nor could they possibly draw one
word from him, no more then a fart from a dead Ass; whereat his father was so
grievously vexed, that he would have killed Master Jobelin, but the said, Des
marays withheld him from it by fair persuasions, so that at length he pacified
his wrath. Then Grangousier commanded he should be paid his wages, that they
should whittle him up soundly, like a Sophister with good drink, and then give
him leave to go to all the devils in hell: at least (said he) to day, shall it
not cost his host much, if by chance he should die as drunk as a Suitser.
Master Jobelin being gone out of the house, Grangousier consulted with the
Viceroy what Schoolmaster they should choose for him, and it was betwixt them
resolved, that Ponocrates the Tutor of Eudemon should have the charge, and that
they should go altogether to Paris, to know what was the study of the young men
of France at that time.

CHAP. XVI. How Gargantua was sent to Paris, and of the huge great Mare that he
rode on; How she destroyed the Oxe-flies of the Beauce.
IN the same season Fayoles, the fourth King of Numidia, sent out of the
country of Africa to Grangousier, the most hideously great Mare that ever was
seen, and of the strangest form, (for you know well enough how it is said,
that Africa always is productive of some new thing: she was as big as six
elephants, and had her feet cloven into fingers, like Julius Caesar's horse,
with slouch-hanging ears, like the goats in Languedoc, and a little horn on
her buttock, she was of a burnt sorel hue, with a little mixture of daple gray
spots, but above all she had a horrible tail; for it was little more or less,
then every whit as great as the Steeple-pillar of St. Mark beside Langes* and
squared as that is, with tuffs and ennicroches, or haire-plaits wrought within
one another, no otherwise then as the beards are upon the ears of corn.

If you wonder at this, wonder rather at the tails of the Scythian Rams, which
weighed above thirty pounds each, and of the Surian sheep, who need (if Tenaud
say true,) a little cart at their heels to bear up their tail, it is so long
and heavy. You female Lechers in the plain countries have no such tails. And
she was brought by sea in three Carricks and a Brigantine unto the harbor of
Olone in Thalmondois. When Grangousier saw her, Here is (said he) what is fit
to carry my son to Paris. So now, in the name of God, all will be well, he
will in times coming be a great Scholar, if it were not (my masters) for the
beasts, we should live like Clerks: The next morning (after they had drunk, you
must understand) they took their journey; Gargantua, his Pedagogue Ponocrates,
and his train, and with them Eudemon the young Page, and because the weather
was fair and temperate, his father caused to be made for him a pair of dun
boots, Babin calls them buskins: Thus did they merrily pass their time in
traveling on their high way, always making good cheer, and were very pleasant
till they came a little above Orleans, in which place there was a forest of
five and thirty leagues long, and seventeen in breadth, or thereabouts. This
forest was most horribly fertile and copious in dorflies, hornets and wasps,
so that it was a very Purgatory for the poor mares, asses and horses: But
Gargantua's mare did avenge her self handsomely of all the outrages therein
committed upon beasts of her kind, and that by a trick whereof they had no
suspicion; for as soon as ever they were entered into the said forest, and that
the wasps had given the assault, she drew out and unsheathed her tail, and
therewith skirmishing, did so sweep them, that she overthrew all the wood
along and athwart, here and there, this way and that way, longwise and
sidewise, over and under, and felled every where the wood with as much ease, as
a mower does the grass, in such sort that never since has there been there,
neither wood, nor Dorflies: for all the country was thereby reduced to a plain
champian-field: which Gargantua took great pleasure to behold, and said to his
company no more but this, Je trouve beau ce, I find this pretty; whereupon that
country has been ever since that time called Beauce: but all the breakfast
the mare got that day, was but a little yawning and gaping, in memory whereof
the Gentlemen of Beauce, do as yet to this day break their fast with gaping,
which they find to be very good, and do spit the better for it; at last they
came to Paris, where Gargantua refresh't himself two or three days, making
very merry with his folks, and enquiring what men of learning there were then
in the city, and what wine they drunk there.

CHAP. XVII. How Gargantua paid his welcome to the Parisians, and how he took
away the great Bells of our Ladies Church.
SOme few days after that they had refresh't themselves, he went to see the
city, and was beheld of every body there with great admiration; for the People
of Paris are so sottish, so badot, so foolish and fond by nature, that a
jugler, a carrier of indulgences, a sumpter-horse, or mule with cymbals, or
tinkling bells, a blind fiddler in the middle of a cross lane, shall draw a
greater confluence of people together, then an Evangelical Preacher: and they
pressed so hard upon him, that he was constrained to rest himself upon the towers
of our Ladies Church; at which place, seeing so many about him, he said with a
loud voice, I believe that these buzzards will have me to pay them here my
welcome hither, and my Proficiat: it is but good reason, I will now give them
their wine, but it shall be only in sport; then smiling, he untied his fair
Braguette, and drawing out his mentul into the open air, he so bitterly
all-to-bepist them, that he drowned two hundred and sixty thousand, four
hundred and eighteen, besides the women and little children: some nevertheless
of the company escaped this piss-flood by mere speed of foot, who when they
were at the higher end of the University, sweating, coughing, spitting, and out
of breath, they began to swear and curse, some in good hot earnest, and others
in jest, Carimari, Carimara: Golynoly, Golynolo: by my sweet Sanctesse, we are
washed in sport, a sport truly to laugh at, in French Parris, for which that
city has been ever since called Paris, whose name formerly was Leucotia, (as
Strabo testifies, lib. quarto) from the Greek word (...), whiteness, because
of the white thighs of the Ladies of that place, and forasmuch as at this
imposition of a new name; all the people that were there, swore every one by
the Sancts of his parish, the Parisians, which are patched up of all nations,
and all pieces of countries, are by nature both good Jurers, and good Jurists,
and somewhat overweening; whereupon Joanninus de Barrauco libro de copiositate
reverentiarum, thinks that they are called Parisians, from the Greek word
(...), which signifies boldness and liberty in speech. This done, he
considered the great bells, which were in the said tours, and made them sound
very harmoniously, which whilst he was doing, it came into his mind, that
they would serve very well for tingling Tantans, and ringing Campanels, to hang
about his mares neck, when she should be sent back to his father, (as he
intended to do) loaded with Brie cheese, and fresh herring; and indeed he
forthwith carried them to his lodging. In the mean while there came a master
begar of the Friars of S. Anthony, to demand in his cantting way the usual
benevolence of some hoggish stuff, who, that he might be heard afar off, and
to make the bacon, he was in quest of, shake in the very chimneys, made account
to filch them away privily. Nevertheless, he left them behind very honestly,
not for that they were too hot, but that they were somewhat too heavy for his
carriage. This was not he of Bourg, for he was too good a friend of mine. All
the city was risen up in sedition, they being (as you know) upon any slight
occasion, so ready to uproars and insurrections, that foreign nations wonder
at the patience of the Kings of France, who do not by good justice restrain
them from such tumultuous courses, seeing the manifold inconveniences which
thence arise from day to day. Would to God I knew the shop, wherein are forged
these divisions, and factious combinations, that I might bring them to light in
the confraternities of my parish. Believe for a truth, that the place wherein
the people gathered together, were thus sulfured, hoparymated, moiled and
bepist, was called Nesle, where then was, (but now is no more) the Oracle of
Leucotia: There was the case proposed, and the inconvenience showed of the
transporting of the bells: after they had well ergotedpro and con, they
concluded in Baralipton, that they should send the oldest and most sufficient
of the faculty unto Gargantua, to signify unto him the great and horrible
prejudice they sustain by the want of those bells; and notwithstanding the good
reasons given in by some of the University, why this charge was fitter for an
Orator then a Sophister, there was chosen for this purpose our Master Janotus
de Bragmardo.

GHAP. XVIII. How Janotus de Bragmardo was sent to Gargantua, to recover the
great bells.
MAster Janotus, with his hair cut round like a dish a La caesarine, in his
most antic accoustrement Liripipionated with a graduates hood, and having
sufficiently antidoted his stomach with Oven -Marmalades, that is, bread and
holy water of the Cellar, transported himself to the lodging of Gargantua,
driving before him three red muzled beadles, and dragging after him five of six
artlesse masters, all thoroughly bedagled with the mire of the streets. At their
entry Ponocrates met them, who was afraid, seeing them so disguised, and
thought they had been some maskers out of their wits, which moved him to
enquire of one of the said artlesse masters of the company, what this mummery
meant? it was answered him, that they desired to have their bells restored to
them. As Soon as Ponocrates heard that, he ran in all haste to carry the news
ununto Gargantua, that he might be ready to answer them, and speedily resolve
what was to be done. Gargantua being advertised hereof, called apart his
Schoolmaster Ponocrates, Philotimus Steward of his house, Gymnastes his
Esquire, and Eudemon, and very summarily conferred with them, both of what he
should do, and what answer he should give. They were all of opinion that they
should bring them unto the goblet-office, which is the Buttery, and there make
them drink like Roysters, and line their jackets soundly: and that this cougher
might not be puffed up with vainglory, by thinking the bells were restored at
his request, they sent (whilst he was chopining and plying the pot) for the
Major of the City, the Rector of the faculty, and the Vicar of the Church,
unto whom they resolved to deliver the bells, before the Sophister had
propounded his commission; after that, in their hearing he should pronounce his
gallant Oration, which was done, and they being come, the Sophister was brought
into a full hall, and began as follows, in coughing.

CHAP. XIX. The Oration of Master Jonatus de Bragmardo, for recovery of the
bells.
HEm, hem, Gudday Sirs, Gudday and vobis my masters, it were but reason that
you should restore to us our bells; for we have great need of them. Hem, hem,
aihfuhash, we have oftentimes heretofore refused good money for them of those
of London in Cahors, yea and of those of Bourdeaux in Brie, who would have
bought them for the substantifick quality of the elementary complexion, which
is intronificated in the terrestreity of their quidditative nature, to
extraneize the blasting mists, and whirlwindes upon our Vines; indeed not ours,
but these round about us: for if we lose the piot and liquour of the grape, we
lose all both sense and law. If you restore them unto us at my request, I shall
gain by it six basketfuls of sauciges, and a fine pair of breeches, which
will do my legs a great deal of good, or else they will not keep their promise
to me. Ho by gob domine, a pair of breeches is good, and vir sapiens non
abhorrebit eam. Ha, ha, a pair of breeches is not so easily got, I have
experience of it my self. Consider, Domine, I have been these eighteen days in
metagrabolising this brave speech, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris, Caesari, and
quae sunt Dei, Deo. Ibi jacet lepus, by my faith, Domine, if you will sup with
me in cameris, by cox body, charitatis nos faciemus bonum cherubin; ego occidit
unum porcum, and ego habet bonum vino: but of good wine we cannot make bad
Latin. Well, de part Dei date nobis bellas nostras; Hold, I give you in the
name of the faculty a Sermones de utino, that utinam you would give us our
bells. Vultis etiam pardonos? per diem vos habebitis, and nihil payabitis. O
Sir Domine, Bellagivaminor nobis; verily, est bonum vobis. They are useful to
every body, if they fit your mare well, so do they do our faculty; quae
comparata est jumentis insiplentibus, and similis factae est eis, Psalmo nescio
quo; yet did I quote it in my note-book and est unum bonum Achilles, a good
defending argument, hem, hem, hem, haikhash; for I prove unto you that you
should give me them. Ego sic argumentor, Omnis bella bellabilis in Bellerio
bellando, bellans bellative, bellare facit, bellabiliter bellantes: parisius
habet bellas; ergo gluc. Ha, ha, ha, this is spoken to some purpose; it is in
tertio primae, in Darii, or elsewhere. By my soul, I have seen the time that I
could play the devil in arguing, but now I am much failed, and henceforward
want nothing but a cup of good wine, a good bed, my back to the fire, my belly
to the table, and a good deep dish. Hei domine, I beseech you, in nomine
Patris, Filii, and Spiritus sancti, Amen, to restore unto us our bells: and God
keep you from evil, and our Lady from health; qui vivit and regnat per omnia
secula seculorum. Amen. Hem, hashchehhawksash, qzrchremhemhash, verum enim
vero, quandoquidem, dubio procul, aedepol, quoniam, ita certe, medius fidius; A
Town without bells is like a blind man without a staff, an Ass without a
crupper, and a Cow without Cymbals; therefore be assured, until you have
restored them unto us, we will never leave crying after you, like a blind man
that has lost his staff, braying like an Ass without a crupper, and making a
noise like a Cow without Cymbals: A certain Latinisator dwelling near the
Hospital, said since, producing the authority of one Taponnus, I lie, it was
Pontanus the secular Poet, who wished those bells had been made of feathers,
and the clapper of a foxtail, to the end they might have begot a chronicle in
the bowels of his brain, when he was about the composing of his carminiformal
lines: but Nac petetin petetac tic torche Lorgne, or Rot kipipur kipipot put
pantse malf. He was declared an Heretic; We make them as of wax. And no more
said the deponent. Valete and plaudite. Calepinus recensui.

CHAP. XX. How the Sophister carried away his cloth, and how he had a suite in
law against the other Masters.
THe Sophister had no sooner ended, but Ponocrates and Eudemon burst out in a
laughing so heartily, that they had almost split with it, and given up the
ghost, in rendering their souls to God: even just as Crassus did, seeing a
lubberly Ass eat thistles; and as Philemon, who for seeing an Ass eat those
figs which were provided for his own dinner, died with force of laughing:
together with them Master Jonatus fell a laughing too as fast as he could, in
which mood of laughing they continued so long, that their eyes did water by the
vehement concussion of the substance of the brain, by which these lachrymal
humidities, being pressed out, glided through the optic nerves, and so to the
full represented Democritus Heraclitising, and Heraclitus Democritising. When
they had done laughing, Gargantua consulted with the prime of his retinue, what
should be done. There Ponocrates was of opinion, that they should make this
fair Orator drink again, and seeing he had showed them more pastime, and made
them laugh more then a natural soul could have done, that they should give him
ten baskets full of sauciges, mentioned in his pleasant speech, with a pair of
hose, three hundred great billets of log-wood, five and twenty hogsheads of
wine, a good large down-bed, and a deep capacious dish, which he said were
necessary for his old age; All this was done as they did appoint: only
Gargantua doubting that they could not quickly find out breeches fit for his
wearing, because he knew not what fashion would best become the said Orator,
whether the martingal fashion of breeches, wherein is a spunghole with a
drawbridge, for the more easy caguing: or the fashion of the Mariners, for
the greater solace and comfort of his kidneyes: or that of the Switsers, which
keeps warm the bedondaine or belly-tabret: or round breeches with streat
cannions, having in the seat a piece like a Cods tail; all which considered,
for fear of over-heating his reins, he caused to be given him seven else of
white cloth for the linings. The wood was carried by the Porters, the Masters
of Arts carried the sauciges and the dishes, and Master Janotus himself would
carry the cloth. One of the said Masters, (called Jesse Bandouille,) showed him
that it was not seemly nor decent for one of his condition to do so, and that
therefore he should deliver it to one of them: Ha, said Janotus, Baudet,
Baudet, or Blockhead, Blockhead, thou do not conclude in modo and figura; for
lo, to this end serve the suppositions, and parva Logicalia: pannus, pro quo
supponit? Confuse (said Bandouille) and distributive. I do not ask thee (said
Janotus,) Blockhead, quomodo supponit, but pro quo? It is Blockhead pro tibiis
meis, and therefore I will carry it, Egomet, sicut suppositum, portat
appositum; so did he carry it away very close and covertly, as Patelin the
Buffoon did his cloth. The best was, that when this cougher in a full act or
assembly held at the Mathurins, had with great confidence required his breeches
and sauciges, and that they were flatly denied him, because he had them of
Gargantua, according to the informations thereupon made, he showed them that
this was gratis, and out of his liberality, by which they were not in any sort
quit of their promises. Notwithstanding this, it was answered him, that he
should be content with reason, without expectation of any other bribe there.
Reason? (said Janotus,) we use none of it here, unluckie traitors, you are not
worth the hanging: the earth bears not more arrant Villains then you are, I
know it well enough; Halt not before the lame; I have practiced wickedness
with you: by Gods rattle I will inform the King of the enormous abuses that are
forged here, and carried underhand by you, and let me be a Leper, if he do not
burn you alive like Sodomites, Traitors, Heretics and Seducers, enemies to God
and virtue. Upon these words they framed articles against him: he on the other
side warned them to appear: In sum, the Process was retained by the Court,
and is there as yet. Hereupon the Magisters made a vow, never to decrott
themselves in rubbing off the dirt of either their shoes or clothes: Master
Janotus with his Adherents, vowed never to blow or snuff their noses, until
judgment were given by a definitive sentence; by these vows do they continue
unto this time both dirty and snottie; for the Court has not garbeled, sifted,
and fully looked into all the pieces as yet. The judgment or decree shall be
given out and pronounced at the next Greek Calends, that is, never: as you know
that they do more then nature, and contrary to their own articles: the articles
of Paris maintain, that to God alone belongs infinity, and nature produces
nothing that is immortal; for she puts an end and period to all things by
her engendered, according to the saying, Omnia orta cadunt, etc. But these
thick mist-swallowers make the suits in law depending before them, both
infinite and immortal; in doing whereof, they have given occasion to, and
verified the saying of Chilo the Lacedemonian, consecrated to the Oracle at
Delphos, that misery is the inseparable companion of law-debates: and that
pleaders are miserable; for sooner shall they attain to the end of their lives,
then to the final decision of their pretended rights.

CHAP. XXI. The Study of Gargantua, according to the discipline of his
Schoolmasters the Sophisters.
THe first day being thus spent, and the bells put up again in their own place,
the Citizens of Paris, in acknowledgement of this courtesy, offered to
maintain and feed his Mare as long as he pleased, which Gargantua took in good
part, and they sent her to graze in the forest of Biere. I think she is not
there now. This done, he with all his heart submitted his study to the
discretion of Ponocrates: who for the beginning appointed that he should do as
he was accustomed, to the end he might understand by what means, in so long
time, his old Masters had made him so sottish and ignorant. He disposed
therefore of his time in such fashion, that ordinarily he did awake betwixt
eight and nine a clock, whether it was day or not, (for so had his ancient
governors ordained,) alleging that which David says, Vanum est vobis ante
lucem surgere. Then did he tumble and toss, wag his legs, and wallow in the
bed sometime, the better to stir up, and rouse his vital spirits, and
apparelled himself according to the season: but willingly he would wear a
great long gown of thick freeze, furred with fox-skins. Afterward he combed
his head with an Alman comb, which is the four fingers and the thumb: for his
Praeceptor said, that to comb himself otherwise, to wash and make himself
neat, was to lose time in this world. Then he dung'd, pist, spued, belched,
cracked, yawned, spitted, coughed, yexed, sneezed and snotted himself like an
Archdeacon: and to suppress the dew and bad air, went to breakfast, having
some good fried tripes, fair rashers on the coals, excellent gamons of bacon,
store of fine minced meat, and a great deal of sippet brewis, made up of the
fat of the beef-pot, laid upon bread, cheese and chop't pursley strewed
together. Ponocrates showed him, that he ought not to eat so soon after rising
out of his bed, unless he had performed some exercise beforehand: Gargantua
answered, What have not I sufficiently well exercised my self? I have wallowed
and rolled my self six or seven turns in my bed, before I rose: is not that
enough? Pope Alexander did so, by the advice of a Jew his Physician, and lived
till his dying day in despite of his enemies. My first Masters have used me to
it, saying that to breakfast made a good memory, and therefore they drank
first. I am very well after it, and dine but the better: and Master Tubal, (who
was the first Licenciat at Paris,) told me that it was not enough to run apace,
but to set forth betimes; so does not the total welfare of our humanity depend
upon perpetual drinking in a rible rabble, like ducks, but on drinking early in
the morning: unde versus,

To rise betimes is no good hour.
To drink betimes is better sure.
After that he had thoroughly broke his fast, he went to Church, and they
carried to him in a great basket, a huge impantousted or thick-covered
breviary, weighing what in grease, clasps, parchment and cover, little more or
less then eleven hundred and six pounds. There he heard six and twenty or
thirty Masses: This while, to the same place came his orison-mutterer
impaletocked, or lap't up about the chin, like a tufted whoop, and his breath
pretty well antidoted with store of the Vine-tree-sirrup: with him he mumbled
all his Kiriele, and dunsical breborions, which he so curiously thumbed and
fingered, that there fell not so much as one grain to the ground; as he went
from the Church, they brought him upon a Dray drawn with oxen, a confused heap
of Patinotres and Aves of Sante Claude, every one of them being of the bigness
of a hatblock; and thus walking through the cloisters, galleries or garden, he
said more in turning them over, then sixteen Hermites would have done. Then did
he study some paltry half-houre with his eyes fixed upon his book; but (as the
Comic says,) his mind was in the Kitchen. Pissing then a full Urinal, he
sat down at table: and because he was naturally phlegmatic, he began his meal
with some dozens of gammons, dried neats tongues, hard rows of mullet, called
Botargos, Andouilles or sauciges, and such other forerunners of wine; in the
mean while, four of his folks did cast into his mouth one after another
continually mustard by whole shovels full. Immediately after that, he drank a
horrible draught of white wind for the ease of his kidneys. When that was done,
he ate according to the season meat agreeable to his appetite, and then left
off eating when his belly began to strout, and was like to crack for fullness;
as for his drinking, he had in that neither end nor rule; for he was wont to
say, that the limits and bounds of drinking were, when the cork of the shoes of
him that drinks, swells up half a foot high.

CHAP. XXII. The Games of Gargantua.
THen blockishly mumbling with a set on countenance a piece of scurvie grace,
he washed his hands in fresh wine, picked his teeth with the foot of a hog, and
talked jovially with his Attendants: then the Carpet being spread, they brought
plenty of cards, many dice, with great store and abundance of checkers and
chesse-boards.

There he played.

At Flusse. At Primero. At the beast. At the rifle. At trump. At the prick and
spare not. At the hundred. At the peenie. At the unfortunate woman. At the fib.
At the pass ten. At one and thirty. At post and pair, or even and sequence.
At three hundred. At the unluckie man. At the last couple in hell. At the hock.
At the surly. At the lanskenet. At the cukoe. At puff, or let him speak that
has it. At take nothing and throw out. At the marriage. At the frolic or
jackdaw. At the opinion. At who does the one, does the other. At the sequences.
At the ivory bundles. At the tarots. At losing load him. At he is gulled and
esto. At the torture. At the handruf. At the click. At honors. At love. At the
chesse. At Reynold the fox. At the squares. At the cowes. At the lottery. At
the chance or mumchance. At three dice or maniest bleaks. At the tables. At
nivinivinack. At the lurch. At doublets or queens-game. At the failie. At the
french tictac. At the long tables or ferkeering. At feldown. At Tods body. At
needs must. At the dames ordraughts At bob and mow. At primus secundus. At
mark-knife. At the keys. At span-counter. At even or odd. At cross or pile.
At bal and huckle-bones. At ivory balls. At the billiards. At bob and hit. At
the owl. At the charming of the hare. At pull yet a little. At trudgepig. At
the magatapies. At the horn. At the flowerd orshrovetide ox. At the
madge-owlet. At pinch without laughing. At prickle me tickle me. At the
unshoing of the Ass. At the cocksesse. At hari hohi. At I set me down. At
earl beardie. At the old mode. At draw the spit. At put out. At gossip lend me
your sack. At the ramcod ball. At thrust out the harlot. At marfeil figs. At
nicknamrie. At stick and hole. At book or him, or flaying the fox. At the
branching it. At trill madam or graple my Lady. At the cat selling. At blow the
coal. At the rewedding. At the quick and dead judge. At unoven the iron. At
the false clown. At the flints, or at the nine stones. At to the crutch hulch
back. At the Sanct is found. At hinch, pinch and laugh not. At the leek. At
Bumdockdousse. At the loose gig. At the hoop. At the sow. At belly to belly. At
the dales or straths. At the twigs. At the quoits. At I Am for that. At tilt at
weekie. At nine pins. at the cock quintin. at tip and hurl. at the flat
bowls. at the veere and tourn. at rogue and ruffian. at bumbatch touch. at the
mysterious trough. at the short bowls. at the daple gray. at cock and crank
it. at break-pot. at my desire. at twirlie whirlietrill. at the rush bundles.
at the short staff. at the whirling gigge. at hide and seek, or are you all
hid. at the picket. at the blank. at the pilfrers. at the caveson. at prison
bars. at have at the nuts. at cherrie-pit. at rub and rice. at whip-top. at
the casting top. at the hobgoblins. at the O wonderful. at the soily smutchie.
at fast and loose. at scutchbreech. at the broom-beesome. at St. Cosme I come
to adore thee. at the lusty brown boy. at I take you napping. at fair and
softly passes lent. at the forked oak. at trusse. at the wolfes tail. at bum
to busse, or nose in breech. at Geordie give me my lance. at swaggie, waggie or
shoggieshou. at stook and rook, sheare, and threave. at the birch. at the
musse. at the dillie dilli darling. at ox moudie. at purpose in purpose. at
nine less. at blinde-man-buffe. at the fallen bridges. at bridled nick. at the
white at buts. at thwack swinge him. at apple, pear, plum. at mumgl. at the
toad. at cricket. at the pounding stick. at jack and the box. at the queens. at
the trades. at heads and points. at the vine-tree hug. at black be thy fall. at
ho the distaffe. at Joane Thomson. at the boulting cloth. at the oats seed. at
greedy glutton. at the morish dance. at feebie. at the whole frisk and
gambole. at battabum, or riding of the wild mare. at Hind the Plowman. at the
good mawkin. at the dead beast. at climb the ladder Billie. at the dying hog.
at the salt doup. at the pretty pigeon. at barley break. at the bavine. at the
bush leap. at crossing. at bo-peep. at the hardit arsepursie. at the harrowers
nest. at forward hey. at the fig. at gunshot crack. at mustard peel. at the
gome. at the relapse. at jog breech, or prick him forward. at knockpate. at the
Cornish cough. at the crane-dance. at slash and cut. at bobbing, or the flirt
on the nose. at the larks. at filipping.
After he had thus well played, reveled, past and spent his time, it was
thought fit to drink a little, and that was eleven glassefuls the man, and
immediately after making good cheer again, he would stretch himelf upon a fair
bench, or a good large bed, and there sleep two or three hours together,
without thinking or speaking any hurt. After he was awakened he would shake his
ears a little. In the mean time they brought him fresh wine, there he drank
better then ever. Ponocrates showed him, that it was an ill diet to drink so
after sleeping. It is (answered Gargantua,) the very life of the Patriarchs and
holy Fathers; for naturally I sleep salt, and my sleep has been to me in
stead of so many gamons of bacon. Then began he to study a little, and out came
the patenotres or rosary of beads: which the better and more formally to
dispatch, he got up on an old mule, which had served nine Kings, and so
mumbling with his mouth, nodding and dodling his head, would go see a coney
ferretted or caught in a grinne; At his return he went into the Kitchen, to
know what roste meat was on the spit, and what otherwise was to be dressed for
supper: and supped very well upon my conscience: and commonly did invite some
of his neighbors that were good drinkers, with whom carousing and drinking
merrily, they told stories of all sorts from the old to the new. Amongst
others, he had for domestics the Lords of Fou, of Gourville, of Griniot, and
of Marigny. After supper were brought in upon the place the fair wooden
Gospels, and the books of the four Kings, that is to say, many paires of
tables and cards: or the fair flusse, one, two, three: or at all to make
short work: or else they went to see the wenches there-abouts with little small
banquets, intermixed with collations and reer-Suppers. Then did he sleep
without unbrideling, until eighr a clock in the next morning.

CHAP. XXIII. How Gargantua was instructed by Ponocrates, and in such sort
disciplinated, that he lost not one hour of the day.
WHen Ponocrates knew Gargantua's vicious manner of living, he resolved to
bring him up in another kind; but for a while he bore with him, considering
that nature cannot endure a sudden change, without great violence. Therefore to
begin his work the better, he requested a learned Physician of that time,
called Master Theodorus, seriously to perpend (if it were possible,) how to
bring Gargantua unto a better course; the said Physician purged him canonically
with Anticyrian ellebore, by which medicine he cleansed all the alteration, and
perverse habitude of his brain. By this means also Ponocrates made him forget
all that he had learned under his ancient Praeceptors, as Timothy did to his
disciples, who had been instructed under other Musicians. To do this the
better, they brought him into the company of learned men, which were there, in
whose imitation he had a great desire and affection to study otherwise, and to
improve his parts. Afterward he put himself into such a road and way of
studying, that he lost not any one hour in the day, but employed all his time
in learning, and honest knowledge. Gargantua awaked them about four a clock in
the morning; whilst they were in rubbing of him, there was read unto him some
chapter of the holy Scripture aloud and clearly, with a pronunciation fit for
the matter, and hereunto was appointed a young page borne in Basche, named
Anagnostes, according to the purpose and argument of that lesson, he oftentimes
gave himself to worship, adore, pray, and send up his supplications to that
good God, whose Word did show his majesty and mavelous judgment. Then went
he unto the secret places to make excretion of his natural digestions: there
his Master repeated what had been read, expounding unto him the most obscure
and difficult points; in returning, they considered the face of the sky, if it
was such as they had observed it the night before, and into what signs the Sun
was entering, as also the Moon for that day. This done, he was apparelled,
combed, curled, trimmed and perfumed, during which time they repeated to him
the lessons of the day before: he himself said them by heart, and upon them
would ground some practical cases concerning the estate of man, which he would
prosecute sometimes two or three hours, but ordinarily they ceased as soon as
he was fully clothed. Then for three good hours he had a lecture read unto
him. This done, they went forth, still conferring of the substance of the
lecture, either unto a field near the University called the Brack, or unto the
meadows where they played at the ball, the long-tennis, and at the Piletrigone,
(which is a play wherein we throw a triangular piece of iron at a ring, to
pass it,) most gallantly exercising their bodies, as formerly they had done
their minds. All their play was but in liberty, for they left off when they
pleased, and that was commonly when they did sweat over all their body, or were
otherwise weary. Then were they very well wiped and rubbed, shifted their
shirts, and walking soberly, went to see if dinner were ready. Whilst they
stayed for that, they did clearly and eloquently pronounce some sentences that
they had retained of the lecture, in the mean time Master Appetite came, and
then very orderly sat they down at table; at the beginning of the meal, there
was read some pleasant history of the warlike actions of former times, until he
had taken a glass of wine. Then (if they thought good) they continued reading,
or began to discourse merrily together; speaking first of the virtue,
propriety, efficacy and nature of all that was served in at the table: of
bread, of wine, of water, of salt, of fleshes, fishes, fruits, herbs, roots,
and of their dressing; by means whereof, he learned in a little time all the
passages competent for this that were to be found in Pliny, Athenaeus,
Dioscorides, Julius Pollux, Galen, Porphirie, Oppian, Polybius, Heliodore,
Aristotle, Elian, and others. Whilst they talked of these things, many times
to be the more certain, they caused the very books to be brought to the table,
and so well and perfectly did he in his memory retain the things abovesaid,
that in that time there was not a Physician that knew half so much as he did.
Afterward they conferred of the lessons read in the morning, and ending their
repast with some conserve or marmelade of quinces: he picked his teeth with
mastick tooth-pickers; washed his hands and eyes with fair fresh water, and
gave thanks unto God in some fine Canticks, made in praise of the divine bounty
and munificence. This done, they brought in cards, not to play, but to learn a
thousand pretty tricks, and new inventions, which were all grounded upon
Arithmetic: by this means he fell in love with that numerical science, and
every day after dinner and supper he past his time in it as pleasantly, as he
was wont to do at cards and dice: so that at last he understood so well both
the Theory and Practical part thereof; that Tunstal the Englishman, who had
written very largely of that purpose, confessed that verily in comparison of
him he had no skill at all. And not only in that, but in the other Mathematical
Sciences, as Geometry, Astronomy, Music, etc. for in waiting on the
concoction, and attending the digestion of his food, they made a thousand
pretty instruments and Geometrical figures, and did in some measure practice
the Astronomical canons.

After this, they recreated themselves with singing musically, in four or five
parts, or upon a set theme or ground at random, as it best pleased them; in
matter of musical instruments, he learned to play upon the Lute, the Virginals,
the Harp, the Allman Flute with nine holes, the Viol, and the Sackbut. This
hour thus spent, and digestion finished, he did purge his body of natural
excrements, then betook himself to his principal study for three hours
together, or more, as well to repeat his matutinal lectures, as to proceed in
the book wherein he was, as also to write handsomely, to draw and form the
Antic and Roman letters. This being done, they went out of their house, and
with them a young Gentleman of Touraine, named the Esquire Gymnast, who taught
him the Art of riding; changing then his clothes, he rode a Naples courser, a
Dutch roussin, a Spanish gennet, a barded or trapped steed, then a light fleet
horse, unto whom he gave a hundred carieres, made him go the high saults,
bounding in the air, free the ditch with a skip, leap over a style or pale,
turn short in a ring both to the right and left hand. There he broke not his
lance; for it is the greatest foolery in the world, to say, I have broken ten
lances at tilt, or in fight, a Carpenter can do even as much: but it is a
glorious and praiseworthy action, with one lance to break and overthrow ten
enemies: therefore with a sharp, stiff, strong and well-steeled lance, would
he usually force up a door, pierce a harness, beat down a tree, carry away the
ring, lift up a cuirasier saddle, with the male-coat and gantlet; all this he
did in complete arms from head to foot. As for the prancing flourishes, and
smacking popismes, for the better cherishing of the horse, commonly used in
riding, none did them better then he. The cavallerize of Ferrara was but as an
Ape compared to him. He was singularly skilful in leaping nimbly from one horse
to another, without putting foot to ground, and these horses were called
desultories: he could likewise from either side, with a lance in his hand, leap
on horseback without stirrups, and rule the horse at his pleasure without a
bridle, for such things are useful in military engagements. Another day he
exercised the battel-axe, which he so dexterously wielded, both in the nimble,
strong and smooth management of that weapon, and that in all the feats
practiseable by it, that he past Knight of Arms in the field, and at all
Essays. Then tossed he the pike, played with the two-handed sword, with the
backsword, with the spanish tuck, the dagger, poiniard, armed, unarmed, with a
buckler, with a cloak, with a targuet. Then would he hunt the Heart, the
Roe-buck, the Bear, the fallow Deer, the wild Boar, the Hare, the Phesant,
the Partridge and the Bustard. He played at the baloon, and made it bound in
the air, both with fist and foot. He wrestled, ran, jumped, not at three steps
and a leap (called the hops,) nor at clochepied, (called the Hares leap,) nor
yet at the Almanes; for (said Gymnast,) these jumps are for the wars
altogether unprofitable, and of no use: but at one leap he would skip over a
ditch, spring over a hedge, mount six paces upon a wall, ramp and grapple after
this fashion up against a window, of the full height of a lance. He did swim in
deep waters on his belly, on his back, sidewise, with all his body, with his
feet only, with one hand in the air, wherein he held a book, crossing thus the
breadth of the river of Seine, without wetting it, and dragged along his cloak
with his teeth, as did Julius Caesar; then with the help of one hand, he entered
forcibly into a boat, from whence he cast himself again headlong into the
water, sounded the depths, hollowed the rocks, and plunged into the pits and
gulphs. Then turned he the boat about, governed it, led it swiftly or slowly
with the stream and against the stream, stopped it in its course, guided it
with one hand, and with the other laid hard about him with a huge great Oar,
hoised the sail, hied up along the mast by the shrouds, ran upon the edge of
the decks, set the compass in order, tackled the boulins, and steered the
helm. Coming out of the water, he ran furiously up against a hill, and with
the same alacrity and swiftness ran down again; he climbed up at trees like a
cat; and leaped from the one to the other like a squirrel; he did pull down the
great boughs and branches, like another Milo; then with two sharp well-steeled
daggers, and two tried bodkins, would he run up by the wall to the very top of
a house like a cat; then suddenly came down from the top to the bottom, with
such an even composition of members, that by the fall he would catch no harm.

He did cast the dart, throw the bar, put the stone, practice the javelin,
the boar-spear or partisan, and the halbard; he broke the strongest bows in
drawing, bended against his breast the greatest crosse-bowes of steel, took
his aim by the eye with the hand-gun, and shot well, traversed and planted the
Canon, shot at but-marks, at the papgay from below upwards, or to a height;
from above downwards, or to adescent, then before him, sidewise, and behind
him, like the Parthians. They tied a cable-rope to the top of a high Tower, by
one end whereof hanging near the ground, he wrought himself with his hands to
the very top: Then upon the same tract came down so sturdily and firm that you
could not on a plain meadow have run with more assurance. They set up a great
pole fixed upon two trees, there would he hang by his hands, and with them
alone, his feet touching at nothing, would go back and sore along the foresaid
rope with so great swiftness, that hardly could one overtake him with running;
and then to exercise his breast and lungs, he would shout like all the Devils
in hell; I heard him once call Eudemon from St. Victors gate to Monmartre:
Stentor had never such a voice at the siege of Troy. Then for the strengthening
of his nerves or sinews, they made him two great sows of lead, each of them
weighing eight thousand and seven hundred kintals, which they called Alteres;
those he took up from the ground in each hand one, then lifted them up over his
head, and held them so without stirring three quarters of an hour and more,
which was an inimitable force; he fought at Barriers with the stoutest and most
vigorous Champions: and when it came to the cope he stood so sturdily on his
feet, that he abandoned himself unto the strongest, in case they could remove
him from his place, as Milo was wont to do of old; in whose imitation likewise
he held a Pomgranat in his hand, to give it unto him that could take it from
him: The time being thus bestowed, and himself rubbed, cleansed, wiped, and
refresht with other clothes, he returned fair and softly; and passing through
certain meadows, or other grassie places, beheld the trees and plants,
comparing them with what is written of them in the books of the Ancients, such
as Theophrast, Dioscorides, Marinus, Pliny, Nicander, Macer, and Galen, and
carried home to the house great handfuls of them, whereof a young Page called
Rizotomos had charge; together with little Mattocks, Pickaxes, Grubbing-hooks,
Cabbies, Pruning-knives, and other instruments requisite for herborising. Being
come to their lodging, whilst supper was making ready, they repeated certain
passages of that which has been read, and sat down at table. Here remark,
that his dinner was sober and thrifty, for he did then eat only to prevent the
gnawings of his stomach, but his supper was copious and large; for he took then
as much as was fit to maintain and nourish him; which indeed is the true diet
prescribed by the Art of good and sound Physic. Although a rabble of
loggerheaded Physicians, nuzzeled in the brabling shop of Sophisters, counsel
the contrary; during that repast was continued the lesson read at dinner as
long as they thought good: the rest was spent in good discourse, learned and
profitable. After that they had given thanks, he set himself to sing vocally,
and play upon harmonious instruments, or otherwise passed his time at some
pretty sports, made with cards or dice; or in practicing the feats of
Legerdemain, with cups and balls. There they stayed some nights in frolicking
thus, and making themselves merry till it was time to go to bed; and on other
nights they would go make visits unto learned men, or to such as had been
travelers in strange and remote countries. When it was full night before they
retired themselves, they went unto the most open place of the house to see the
face of the sky, and there beheld the comets, if any were, as likewise the
figures, situations, aspects, oppositions and conjunctions of the both fixed
stars and planets.

Then with his Master did he briefly recapitulate after the manner of the
Pythagoreans, that which he had read, seen, learned, done and understood in the
whole course of that day.

Then prayed they unto God the Creator, in falling down before him, and
strengthening their faith toward him, and glorifying him for his boundless
bounty, and giving thanks unto him for the time that was past, they recommended
themselves to his divine clemency for the future, which being done, they went
to bed, and betook themselves to their repose and rest.

CHAP. XXIV. How Gargantua spent his time in rainie weather.
IF it happened that the weather were any thing cloudie, foul and rainie, all
the forenoon was employed, as before specified, according to custom, with this
difference only, that they had a good clear fire lighted, to correct the
distempers of the air: but after dinner, in stead of their wonted
exercitations they did abide within, and by way of Apotherapie, (that is, a
making the body healthful by exercise,) did recreate themselves in botteling up
of hay, in cleaving and sawing of wood, and in threshing sheaves of corn at the
Barn. Then they studied the Art of painting or carving; or brought into use the
antic play of tables, as Leonicus has written of it, and as our good friend
Lascaris plays at it. In playing they examined the passages of ancient
Authors, wherein the said play is mentioned, or any metaphore drawn from it.
They went likewise to see the drawing of metals, or the casting of great
ordnance: how the Lapidaries did work, as also the Goldsmiths and Cutters of
precious stones: nor did they omit to visit the Alchymists, money-coiners,
Upholsters, Weavers, Velvet-workers, Watchmakers, Looking-glasse-framers,
Printers, Organists, and other such kind of Artificers, and every where giving
them somewhat to drink, did learn and consider the industry and invention of
the trades. They went also to hear the public lectures, the solemn
commencements, the repetitions, the acclamations, the pleadings of the gentle
Lawyers, and Sermons of Evangelical Preachers. He went through the Halls and
places appointed for fencing, and there played against the Masters themselves
at all weapons, and showed them by experience, that he knew as much in it as
(yea more then) they. And instead of her borising, they visited the shops of
Druggists, Herbalists and Apothecaries, and diligently considered the fruits,
roots, leaves, gums, seeds, the grease and ointments of some foreign parts, as
also how they did adulterate them. He went to see the Juglers, Tumblers,
Mountebanks and Quacksalvers; and considered their cunning, their shifts, their
summer-saults and smooth tongue, especially of those of Chauny in Picardie, who
are naturally great praters, and brave givers of fibs in matter of green apes.
At their return they did eat more soberly at supper then at other times, and
meats more desiccative and extenuating; to the end that the intemperate
moisture of the air, communicated to the body by a necessary confinitie, might
by this means be corrected, and that they might not receive any prejudice for
want of their ordinary bodily exercise. Thus was Gargantua governed, and kept
on in this course of education, from day to day profiting, as you may
understand such a young man of his age may of a pregnant judgment with good
discipline well continued. Which although at the beginning it seemed difficult,
became a little after so sweet, so easy, and so delightful, that it seemed
rather the recreation of a King, then the study of a Scholar. Nevertheless
Ponocrates, to divert him from this vehement intension of the spirits, thought
fit once in a month, upon some fair and clear day to go out of the City betimes
in the morning, either toward Gentilly, or Boulogne, or to Montrouge, or
Charantou-bridge, or to Vanures, or St. Clou, and there spent all the day long
in making the greatest cheer that could be devised, sporting, making merry,
drinking healths, playing, singing, dancing, tumbling in some fair meadow,
unnestling of sparrowes, taking of quails, and fishing for frogs and crabs;
but although that day was past without books or lecture, yet was it not spent
without profit; for in the said meadows they usually repeated certain pleasant
verses of Virgils Agriculture, of Hesiod and of Politians husbandry, would set
a broach some witty Latin Epigrams, then immediately turned them into
round-lays and songs for dancing in the French language. In their feasting,
they would sometimes separate the water from the wine that was therewith mixed,
as Cato teaches de re rustica, and Pliny with an ivy cup: would wash the
wine in a basin full of water, then take it out again with a funnel as pure as
ever. They made the water go from one glass to another, and contrived a
thousand little automatarie Engines, that is to say, moving of themselves.

CHAP. XXV. How there was great strife and debate, raised betwixt the
Cake-bakers of Learn, and those of Gargantua 's countrey-whereupon were waged
great wars.
AT that time, which was the season of Vintage, in the beginning of Harvest,
when the country shepherds were set to keep the Vines, and hinder the
Starlings from eating up the grapes: as some cake-bakers of Learn happened to
pass along in the broad high way, driving unto the City ten or twelve horses
loaded with cakes, the said shepherds courteously entreated them to give them
some for their money, as the price then ruled in the market; for here it is to
be remarked, that it is a celestial food to eat for breakfast hot fresh cakes
with grapes, especially the frail clusters, the great red grapes, the
muscadine, the verjuice grape and the luskard, for those that are costive in
their belly; because it will make them gush out, and squirt the length of a
Hunters staff, like the very tap of a barrel; and oftentimes thinking to let
a squib, they did all-to-besquatter and conskite themselves, whereupon they are
commonly called the Vintage-thinkers. The Bunsellers or Cake-bakers were in
nothing inclinable to their request; but (which was worse) did injure them most
outragiously, calling them prattling gablers, lickorous gluttons, freckled
bittors, mangie rascals, shiteabed scoundrels, drunken roysters, sly knaves,
drowsy loiterers, slapsauce fellows, slabberdegullion druggels, lubbardly
lowts, cosening foxes, ruffian rogues, paultrie customers, sycophant-varlets,
drawlatch hoydons, flouting milksops, jeering companions, staring clowns,
forlorn snakes, ninnie lobcocks, scurvie sneaksbies, fondling fops, base lowns,
saucy coxcombs, idle lusks, scoffing Braggards, noddie meacocks, blockish
grutnols, dod-di-pol-jolt-heads, jobernol goosecaps, foolish loggerheads,
slutch calf-lollies, grouthead gnatsnappers, lob-dotterels, gaping changelings,
codshead loobies, woodcock slangams, ninniehammer flycatchers, noddiepeak
simpletons; Turdie gut, shitten shepherds, and other such like defamatory
epithetes, saying further, that it was not for them to eat of these dainty
cakes, but might very well content themselves with the course unraunged bread,
or to eat of the great brown household loaf. To which provoking words, one
amongst them, called Forgier, (an honest fellow of his person, and a notable
springal,) made answer very calmly thus: How long is it since you have got
horns, that you are become so proud? indeed formerly you were wont to give us
some freely, and will you not now let us have any for our money? This is not
the part of good neighbors, neither do we serve you thus when you come hither
to buy our good corn, whereof you make your cakes and buns: besides that, we
would have given you to the bargain some of our grapes, but by his Zounds, you
may chance to repent it, and possibly have need of us at another time, when we
shall use you after the like manner, and therefore remember it. Then Marquet, a
prime man in the confraternity of the cake-bakers, said unto him, Yea Sir, thou
art pretty well crest-risen this morning, thou did eat yesternight too much
millet and bolymoug, come hither Sirrah, come hither, I will give thee some
cakes: whereupon Forgier dreading no harm, in all simplicity went toward him,
and drew a sixpence out of his leather sachel, thinking that Market would have
sold him some of his cakes; but in stead of cakes, he gave him with his whip
such a rude lash overthwart the legs, that the marks of the whipcord knots were
apparent in them; then would have fled away, but Forgier cried out as loud as
he could, O murder, murder, help, help, help, and in the mean time threw a
great cudgel after him, which he carried under his arm, wherewith he hit him
in the coronal joint of his head, upon the crotaphick artery of the right side
thereof, so forcibly, that Marquet fell down from his mare, more like a dead
then living man. Meanwhile the farmers and countrey-swaines that were watching
their walnuts near to that place, came running with their great poles and long
staves, and laid such load on these cake-bakers, as if they had been to thresh
upon green rye. The other shepherds and shepherdesses hearing the lamentable
shout of Forgier, came with their slings and slackies following them, and
throwing great stones at them, as thick as if it had been hail. At last they
overtook them, and took from them about four or five dosen of their cakes:
nevertheless they paid for them the ordinary price, and gave them over and
above one hundred eggs, and three baskets full of mulberries. Then did the
cake-bakers help to get up to his mare -Marquet, who was most shrewdly wounded,
and forthwith returned to Learn, changing the resolution they had to go to
Pareille, threatening very sharp and boistrously the cowherds, shepherds and
farmers of Sevile and Sinays. This done, the shepherds and shepherdesses made
merry with these cakes and fine grapes, and sported themselves together at the
sound of the pretty small pipe, scoffing and laughing at those vainglorious
cake-bakers, who had that day met with a mischief for want of crossing
themselves with a good hand in the morning. Nor did they forget to apply to
Forgiers leg some fair great red medicinal grapes, and so handsomely dressed it
and bound it up, that he was quickly cured.

CHAP. XXVI. How the inhabitants of Learn, by the commandment of Picrochole
their King, assaulted the shepherds of Gargantua, unexpectedly and on a sudden.
THe Cake-bakers being returned to Learn, went presently, before they did
either eat or drink, to the Capitol, and there before their King called
Picrochole, the third of that name; made their complaint, showing their paniers
broken, their caps all crumpled, their coats torn, their cakes taken away, but
above all Marquet most enormously wounded, saying, that all that mischief was
done by the shepherds and herdsmen of Grangousier, near the broad high way
beyond Sevile: Pichrocole incontinent grew angry and furious; and without
asking any further what, how, why or wherefore? commanded the ban and arriere
ban to be sounded through out all his country, that all his vassals of what
condition soever, should upon pain of the halter come in the best arms they
could, unto the great place before the Castle, at the hour of noone, and the
better to strengthen his design, he caused the drum to be beat about the town.
Himself, whilst his dinner was making ready, went to see his artillery mounted
upon the carriage, to display his colors, and set up the great royal standard,
and loaded waines with store of ammunition both for the field and the belly,
arms and victuals: at dinner he dispatched his commissions, and by his
express Edict my Lord Shagrag was appointed to command the Vanguard, wherein
were numbered sixteen thousand and fourteen harquebusiers or firelocks,
together with thirty thousand and eleven Voluntier-adventurers. The great
Touquedillion, Master of the horse, had the charge of the Ordnance, wherein
were reckoned nine hundred and fourteen brazen pieces, in cannons, double
cannons, basilisks, serpentines, culverins, bombards or murderers, falcons,
bases or passevolans, spiroles and other sorts of great guns. The Reerguard was
committed to the Duke of Scrapegood: In the maine battle was the King, and the
Princes of his Kingdom. Thus being hastily furnished, before they would set
forward, they sent three hundred light horsemen under the conduct of Captain
Swillwind, to discover the country, clear the avenues, and see whether there
was any ambush laid for them: but after they had made diligent search, they
found all the land round about in peace and quiet, without any meeting or
convention at all; which Picrochole understanding, commanded that every one
should march speedily under his colors: then immediately in all disorder,
without keeping either rank or file, they took the fields one amongst another,
wasting, spoiling, destroying and making havoc of all wherever they went, not
sparing poor nor rich, privileged nor unpriviledged places, Church nor Laity,
drove away oxen and cowes, bulls, calves, heifers, wethers, ewes, lambs, goats,
kids, hens, capons, chickens, geese, ganders, goslings, hogs, swine, pigs and
such like. Beating down the walnuts, plucking the grapes, tearing the hedges,
shaking the fruit trees, and committing such incomparable abuses, that the like
abomination was never heard of. Nevertheless, they met with none to resist
them, for every one submitted to their mercy, beseeching them, that they might
be dealt with courteously, in regard that they had always carried themselves,
as became good and loving neighbors, and that they had never been guilty of
any wrong or outrage done upon them, to be thus suddenly surprised, troubled
and disquieted, and that if they would not desist, God would punish them very
shortly; to which expostulations and remonstrances no other answer was made,
but that they would teach them to eat cakes.

CHAP. XXVII. How a Monk of Sevile saved the Closse of the Abbey from being
ransacked by the enemy.
SO much they did, and so far they went pillaging and stealing, that at last
they came to Sevile, where they robbed both men and women, and took all they
could catch: nothing was either too hot or too heavy for them. Although the
plague was there in the most part of all the houses, they nevertheless entered
every where; then plundered and carried away all that was within; and yet for
all this not one of them took any hurt, which is a most wonderful case. For the
Curates, Vicars, Preachers, Physicians, Chirurgions and Apothecaries, who went
to visit, to dress, to cure, to heal, to preach unto, and admonish those that
were sick were all dead of the infection; and these devilish robbers and
murderers caught never any harm at all. Whence comes this to pass, (my
masters) I beseech you think upon it? the town being thus pillaged, they went
unto the Abbey with a horrible noise and tumult, but they found it shut and
made fast against them; whereupon the body of the army marched forward toward
a pass or ford called the Sue de vede, except seven companies of foot, and two
hundred lanciers, who staying there, broke down the walls of the Closse, to
waste, spoil and make havoc of all the Vines and Vintage within that place.
The Monks (poor devils) knew not in that extremity to which of all their Sancts
they should vow themselves; nevertheless, at all adventures they rang the
bells ad capitulum capitulantes: there it was decreed, that they should make a
fair Procession, stnssed with good lectures, prayers and letanies, contra
hostium insidias, and jollie responses pro pace.

There was then in the Abbey a claustral Monk, called Freer Ihon of the funnels
and gobbets, in French des entoumeures, young, gallant, frisk, lusty, nimble,
quick, active, bold, adventurous, resolute, tall, lean, wide-mouthed,
long-nosed, a fair dispatcher of morning prayers, unbridler of masses, and
runner over of vigils: and to conclude summarily in a word, a right Monk, if
ever there was any, since the Monking world monked a Monkerie: for the rest a
Clerk, even to the teeth in matter of breviary. This Monk hearing the noise
that the enemy made within the enclosure of the Vineyard, went out to see what
they were doing; and perceiving that they were cutting and gathering the
grapes, whereon was grounded the foundation of all their next years wine,
returned unto the quire of the Church where the other Monks were, all amazed
and astonished like so many Bell-melters, whom when he heard sing, im, nim, pe,
ne, ne, ne, ne, nene, tum, ne, number, number, ini, i mi, co, o, no, o, o, neno, ne,
no, no, no, rum, nenum, number. It is well shit, well sung, (said he) by the
virtue of God, why do not you sing Paniers farewell, Vintage is done; The devil
snatch me, if they be not already within the middle of our Closse, and cut so
well both Vines and Grapes, that by cods body there will not be found for these
four years to come so much as a gleaning in it. By the belly of Sanct James,
what shall we (poor devils) drink the while? Lord God! da mihi potum. Then said
the Prior of the Covent, What should this drunken fellow do here, let him be
carried to prison for troubling the divine service: Nay, said the Monk, the
wine service, let us behave our selves so, that it be not troubled; for you
your self, my Lord Prior, love to drink of the best, and so does every honest
man. Never yet did a man of worth dislike good wine, it is a monastical
apophthegme. But these responses that you chant here by G.- are not in season:
wherefore is it that our devotions were instituted to be short in the time of
Harvest and Vintage, and long in the Advent, and all the winter? The late
Friar, Massepelosse of good memory, a true zealous man, (or else I give my self
to the devil) of our religion, told me, and I remember it well, how the reason
was, that in this season we might press and make the wine, and in Winter
whiffe it up. Hark you, my masters, you that love the wine, Cops body follow
me, for Sanct Antonie burn me as freely as a faggot, if they get leave to taste
one drop of the liquour, that will not now come and fight for relief of the
Vine. Hogs belly, the goods of the Church! Ha, no, no: what the devil, Sanct
Thomas of England was well content to die for them; if I died in the same
cause, should not I be a Sanct likewise? Yes: yet shall not I die there for all
this, for it is I that must do it to others and send them a packing. As he
spoke this, he threw off his great Monks habit, and laid hold upon the staff
of the cross, which was made of the heart of a sorbaple-tree, it being of the
length of a lance, round, of a full gripe, and a little poudred with lilies
called flower de luce, the workmanship whereof was almost all defaced and worn
out. Thus went he out in a fair long-skirted jacket, putting his frock
scarfewayes athwart his breast, and in this equipage, with his staff, shaft or
truncheon of the cross, laid on so lustily, brisk and fiercely upon his
enemies, who without any order, or ensign, or trumpet, or drum, were busied in
gathering the grapes of the Vineyard; for the Cornets, Guidons and
Ensigne-bearers, had laid down their standards, banners, and colors by the
wallsides: the Drummers had knocked out the heads of their Drums on one end, to
fill them with grapes: The Trumpeters were loaded with great bundles of
bunches, and huge knots of clusters: In sum, every one of them was out of
array, and all in disorder. He hurried therefore upon them so rudely, without
crying gare or beware, that he overthrew them like hogs, tumbled them over like
swine, striking athwart and along, and by one means or other laid so about
him, after the old fashion of fencing, that to some he beat out their brains,
to others he crushed their arms, battered their legs, and bethwacked their
sides till their ribs cracked with it; to others again he unjoynted the
spondyles or knuckles of the neck, disfigured their chaps, gashed their faces,
made their cheeks hang flapping on their chin, and so swinged and belammed
them, that they fell down before him like hay before a Mower: to some others he
spoiled the frame of their kidneys, marred their backs, broke their
thigh-bones, pash't in their noses, poached out their eyes, cleft their
mandibules, tore their jaws, dung in their teeth into their throat, shook
asunder their omoplates or shoulder blade, sphacelated their shins, mortified
their shanks, inflamed their ankles, heaved off of the hinges their ishies,
their sciatica or hip-gout, dislocated the joints of the knees, squattered into
pieces the boughts or pestles of their thighs, and so thumped, mawled and
belabored them every where, that never was corn so thick and threefold
thresh't upon by Plowmens flailes, as were the pitifully disjoynted members of
their mangled bodies, under the merciless baton of the cross. If any offered
to hide himself amongst the thickest of the Vines, he laid him squat as a
flounder, bruised the ridge of his back, and dash't his reins like a dog. If
any thought by flight to escape, he made his head to fly in pieces by the
Lambdoidal commissure, which is a seame in the hinder part of the scull. If any
one did scramble up into a tree, thinking there to be safe, he rent up his
perinee, and impaled him in at the fundament. If any of his old acquaintance
happened to cry out, Ha Friar Ihon my friend, Friar Ihon, quarter, quarter, I
yield my self to you, to you I render my self: So thou shall (said he) and must
whether thou would or no, and withal render and yield up thy soul to all the
devils in hell, then suddenly gave them Dronos, that is, so many knocks,
thumps, raps, dints, thwacks and bangs, as sufficed to warn Pluto of their
coming, and dispatch them a going: if any was so rash and full of temerity as
to resist him to his face, then was it he did show the strength of his muscles,
for without more ado he did transpierce him, by running him in at the breast,
through the mediastine and the heart. Others again he so quashed and bebumped,
that with a sound bounce under the hollow of their short ribs, he overturned
their stomachs so that they died immediately: to some with a smart souse on the
Epigaster, he would make their midrif swag, then redoubling the blow; gave them
such a home-push on the navel, that he made their puddings to gush out. To
others through their ballocks he pierced their bum-gut, and left not bowel,
tripe nor intral in their body, that had not felt the impetuosity, fierceness
and fury of his violence. Believe that it was the most horrible spectacle that
ever one saw: some cried unto Sanct Barbe, others to St. George; O the holy
Lady Nytouch, said one, the good Sanctesse; O our Lady of Succors, said
another, help, help: others cried, Our Lady of Cunaut, of Loretta, of good
tidings on the other side of the water St. Mary over: some vowed a pilgrimage
to St. James, and others to the holy handkerchief at Chamberrie, which three
months after that burnt so well in the fire, that they could not get one
thread of it saved: others sent up their vows to St. Cadouin; others to St.
Ihon d' Angelie, and to St. Eutropius of Xaintes: others again invoked St.
Mesmes of Chinon, St. Martin of Candes, S. Clouod of Sinays, the holy relics
of Laurezay, with a thousand other jolly little Sancts and Santrels: Some died
without speaking, others spoke without dying; some died in speaking, others
spoke in dying. Others shouted as loud as they could, Confession, Confession,
Confiteor, miserere, in manus; so great was the cry of the wounded, that the
Prior of the Abbey with all his Monks came forth, who when they saw these poor
wretches so slain amongst the Vines, and wounded to death, confessed some of
them: but whilst the Priests were busied in confessing them, the little
Monkies ran all to the place where Friar Ihon was, and asked him, wherein he
would be pleased to require their assistance? To which he answered, that they
should cut the throats of those he had thrown down upon the ground. They
presently leaving their outer habits and cowles upon the railes, began to
throttle and make an end of those whom he had already crushed: Can you tell
with what instruments they did it? with fair gullics, which are little
hulchback't demi-knives, the iron tool whereof is two inches long, and the
wooden handle one inch thick, and three inches in length, wherewith the little
boys in our country cut ripe walnuts in two, (while they are yet in the
shell,) and pick out the kernel, and they found them very fit for the
expediting of that wezand-slitting exploit. In the mean time Friar Ihon with
his formidable baton of the Cross, got to the breach which the enemies had
made, and there stood to snatch up those that endeavored to escape: Some of
the Monkito's carried the standards, banners, ensigns, guidons and colors
into their cells and chambers, to make garters of them. But when those that had
been shriven, would have gone out at the gap of the said breach, the sturdy
Monk quash't and felled them down with blows, saying, These men have had
confession and are penitent souls, they have got their absolution, and gained
the pardons: they go into Paradise as straight as a sickle, or as the way is to
Faye, (like Crooked-Lane at Eastcheap.) Thus by his prowess and valor were
discomfited all those of the army that entered into the Closse of the Abbey,
unto the number of thirteen thousand, six hundred, twenty and two, besides the
women and little children, which is always to be understood. Never did Maugis
the Hermit bear himself more valiantly with his bourdon or Pilgrims staff
against the Saracens, of whom is written in the Acts of the four sons of
Haymon, then did this Monk against his enemies with the staff of the Cross.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Picrochole stormed and took by assault the rock Clermond,
and of Grangousiers unwillingnesse and aversion from the undertaking of war.
Whilst the Monk did thus skirmish, as we have said, against those which were
entered within the Closse; Picrochole in great haste passed the ford of Vede, (a
very especial pass) with all his souldierie, and set upon the rock Clermond,
where there was made him no resistance at all: and because it was already
night, he resolved to quarter himself and his army in that town, and to refresh
himself of his pugnative choler. In the morning he stormed and took the
Bulwarks and Castle, which afterward he fortified with rampires, and furnished
with all ammunition requisite, intending to make his retreat there, if he
should happen to be otherwise worsted; for it was a strong place, both by Art
and Nature, in regard of the stance and situation of it. But let us leave them
there, and return to our good Gargantua, who is at Paris very assiduous and
earnest at the study of good letters, and athletical exercitations, and to the
good old man Grangousier his father, who after supper warmeth his ballocks by a
good, clear, great fire, and waiting upon the broyling of some chestnuts, is
very serious in drawing scratches on the hearth, with a stick burnt at the one
end, wherewith they did stir up the fire, telling to his wife and the rest of
the family pleasant old stories and tales of former times. Whilst he was thus
employed, one of the shepherds which did keep the Vines, (named Pillot) came
toward him, and to the full related the enormous abuses which were committed,
and the excessive spoil that was made by Picrochole King of Learn, upon his
lands and territories, and how he had pillaged, wasted and ransacked all the
country, except the enclosure at Sevile, which Friar Ihon des entoumeures to
his great honor had preserved: and that at the same present time the said King
was in the rock Clermond: and there with great industry and circumspection, was
strengthening himself and his whole army. Halas, halas, alas, (said
Grangousier,) what is this good people? do I dream, or is it true that they
tell me? Picrochole my ancient friend of old time, of my own kindred and
alliance, comes he to invade me? what moves him? what provokes him? what sets
him on? what drives him to it? who has given him this counsel? Ho, ho, ho, ho,
ho, my God, my Savior, help me, inspire me, and advise me what I shall do. I
protest, I swear before thee, so be thou favorable to me, if ever I did him or
his subjects any damage or displeasure, or committed any the least robbery in
his country; but on the contrary I have succored and supplied him with men,
money, friendship and counsel upon any occasion, wherein I could be steadable
for the improvement of his good; that he has therefore at this nick of time so
outraged and wronged me, it cannot be but by the malevolent and wicked spirit.
Good God, thou know my courage, for nothing can be hidden from thee; if
perhaps he be grown mad, and that thou have sent him hither to me for the
better recovery and re-establishment of his brain: grant me power and wisdom
to bring him to the yoke of thy holy will by good discipline. Ho, ho, ho, ho,
my good people, my friends and my faithful servants, must I hinder you from
helping me? alas, my old age required henceforward nothing else but rest, and
all the days of my life I have labored for nothing so much as peace: but now
I must (I see it well) load with arms my poor, weary and feeble shoulders; and
take in my trembling hand the lance and horsemans mace, to succor and protect
my honest subjects: reason will have it so; for by their labor am I
entertained, and with their sweat am I nourished, I, my children and my family.
This notwithstanding, I will not undertake war, until I have first tried all
the ways and means of peace, that I resolve upon. Then assembled he his
counsel, and proposed the matter as it was indeed, whereupon it was concluded,
that they should send some discreet man unto Picrochole, to know wherefore he
had thus suddenly broken the Peace, and invaded those lands unto which he had
no right nor title. Furthermore, that they should send for Gargantua, and those
under his command, for the preservation of the country, and defense thereof
now at need. All this pleased Grangousier very well, and commanded that so it
should be done. Presently therefore he sent the Basque his Lackey, to fetch
Gargantua with all diligence, and wrote to him as follows.

CHAP. XXIX. The tenor of the letter which Grangousier wrote to his son
Gargantua.
THe fervency of thy studies did require, that I should not in a long time
recall thee from that Philosophical rest thou now enjoyest: if the confidence
reposed in our friends and ancient confederates had not at this present
disappointed the assurance of my old age: But seeing such is my fatal destiny,
that I should be now disquieted by those in whom I trusted most: I am forced to
call thee back to help the people and goods, which by the right of nature
belong unto thee; for even as arms are weak abroad if there be not counsel at
home: so is that study vain, and counsel unprofitable, which in a due and
convenient time is not by virtue executed and put in effect. My deliberation is
not to provoke, but to appease: not to assault, but to defend: not to conquer,
but to preserve my faithful subjects and hereditary dominions: into which
Picrochole is entered in a hostile manner without any ground or cause, and from
day to day pursues his furious enterprise with that height of insolence that
is intolerable to freeborn spirits. I have endeavored to moderate his
tyrannical choler, offering him all that which I thought might give him
satisfaction: and oftentimes have I sent lovingly unto him, to understand
wherein, by whom, and how he found himself to be wronged? but of him could I
obtain no other answer, but a mere defiance, and that in my lands he did
pretend only to the right of a civil correspondency and good behavior, whereby
I knew that the eternal God has left him to the disposure of his own free will
and sensual appetite, which cannot choose but be wicked, if by divine grace it
be not continually guided: and to contain him within his duty, and bring him to
know himself, has sent him hither to me by a grievous token. Therefore, my
beloved son, as soon as thou can, upon sight of these letters, repair hither
with all diligence, to succor not me so much (which nevertheless by natural
Piety thou ought to do,) as thine own People, which by reason thou may
save and preserve. The exploit shall be done with as little effusion of blood
as may be; and if possible, by means far more expedient, such as military
policy, devices and stratagems of war; we shall save all the souls, and send
them home as merry as crickets unto their own houses. My dearest Son, the peace
of Jesus Christ our Redeemer be with thee; salute from me Ponocrates, Gymnastes
and Eudemon; the twentieth of September.

Thy Father Grangousier.

CHAP. XXX. How Ulrich Gallet was sent unto Picrochole.
THe letters being dictated, signed and sealed, Grangousier ordained that
Ulrich Gallet, Master of the requests (a very wise and discreet man, of whose
prudence and sound judgment he had made trial in several difficult and
debateful matters) to go unto Picrochole, to show what had been decreed amongst
them. At the same hour departed the good man Gallet, and having past the ford,
asked at the Miller that dwelt there, in what condition Picrochole was: who
answered him, that his soldiers had left him neither cock nor hen, that they
were retired and shut up into the rock Clermond, and that he would not advise
him to go any further for fear of the Scouts, because they were enormously
furious; which he easily believed, and therefore lodged that night with the
Miller. The next morning he went with a Trumpeter to the gate of the Castle,
and required the guards he might be admitted to speak with the King of somewhat
that concerned him. These words being told unto the King, he would by no means
consent that they should open the gate; but getting upon the top of the
bulwark, said unto the Ambassador, What is the news? what have you to say?
then the Ambassador began to speak as follows.

CHAP. XXXI. The speech made by Gallet to Picrochole.
THere cannot arise amongst men a juster cause of grief, then when they receive
hurt and damage, where they may justly expect for favor and good will; and not
without cause, (though without reason,) have many, after they had fallen into
such a calamitous accident, esteemed this indignity less supportable then the
loss of their own lives, in such sort, that if they have not been able by
force of arms, nor any other means, by reach of wit or subtilty, to stop them
in their course, and restrain their fury, they have fallen into desparation,
and utterly deprived themselves of this light. It is therefore no wonder if
King Grangousier my Master be full of high displeasure, and much disquieted in
mind upon thy outrageous and hostile coming: but truly it would bea marvel, if
he were not sensible of, and moved with the incomparable abuses and injuries
perpetrated by thee and thine upon those of his country, toward whom there
has been no example of inhumanity omitted; which in it self is to him so
grievous for the cordial affection, wherewith he has always cherished his
subjects, that more it cannot be to any mortal man; yet in this (above humane
apprehension) is it to him the more grievous, that these wrongs and sad
offenses have been committed by thee and thine, who time out of mind from all
antiquity, thou and thy Predecessors have been in a continual league and amity
with him, and all his Ancestors; which, even until this time, you have as
sacred together inviolably preserved, kept and entertained, so well, that not
he and his only, but the very barbarous Nations of the Poictevins, Bretons,
Manceaux, and those that dwell beyond the isles of the Canaries, and that of
Isabella, have thought it as easy to pull down the firmament, and to set up
the depths above the clouds, as to make a breach in your alliance; and have
been so afraid of it in their enterprises, that they have never dared to
provoke, incense or indamage the one for fear of the other. Nay, which is
more, this sacred league has so filled the world, that there are few Nations
at this day inhabiting throughout all the continent and isles of the Ocean, who
have not ambitiously aspired to be received into it, upon your own covenants
and conditions, holding your joint confederacy in as high esteem as their own
territories and dominions; in such sort, that from the memory of man, there
has not been either Prince or league so wild and proud, that durst have
offered to invade, I say not your countries, but not so much as those of your
confederates: and if by rash and headie counsel they have attempted any new
design against them, as soon as they heard the name and title of your alliance,
they have suddenly desisted from their enterprises. What rage and madness
therefore does now incite thee, all old alliance infringed, all amity trod
under foot, and all right violated, thus in a hostil manner to invade his
country, without having been by him or his in any thing prejudiced, wronged or
provoked? where is faith? where is law? where is reason? where is humanity?
where is the fear of God? do thou think that these atrocious abuses are
hidden from the eternal spirits, and the supreme God, who is the just rewarder
of all our undertakings? if thou so think, thou deceivest thy self; for all
things shall come to pass, as in his incomprehensible judgment he has
appointed. Is it thy fatal destiny, or influences of the stars that would put
an end to thy so long enjoyed ease and rest? for that all things have their end
and period, so as that when they are come to the superlative point of their
greatest height, they are in a trice tumbled down again, as not being able to
abide long in that state. This is the conclusion and end of those who cannot by
reason and temperance moderate their fortunes and prosperities. But if it be
predestined that thy happiness and ease must now come to an end, must it
needs be by wronging my King? him by whom thou were established? If thy house
must come to ruin, should it therefore in its fall crush the heels of him that
set it up? The matter is so unreasonable, and so dissonant from common sense,
that hardly can it be conceived by humane understanding, and altogether
incredible unto strangers, till by the certain and undoubted effects thereof it
be made apparent, that nothing is either sacred or holy to those, who having
emancipated themselves from God and reason, do merely follow the perverse
affections of their own depraved nature. If any wrong had been done by us to
thy subjects and dominions: if we had favored thy ill-willers: if we had not
assisted thee in thy need: if thy name and reputation had been wounded by us:
or (to speak more truly) if the calumniating spirit, tempting to induce thee to
evil, had by false illusions and deceitful fantasies, put into thy conceit the
impression of a thought, that we had done unto thee any thing unworthy of our
ancient correspondence and friendship, thou ought first to have enquired out
the truth, and afterward by a seasonable warning to admonish us thereof; and
we should have so satisfied thee, according to thine own hearts desire, that
thou should have had occasion to be contented. But, O eternal God, what is
thy enterprise? would thou like a perfidious tyrant, thus spoil and lay
waste my Masters Kingdom? have thou found him so silly and blockish, that he
would not: or so destitute of men and money, of counsel and skill in military
discipline, that he cannot withstand thy unjust invasion? March hence
presently, and to morrow some time of the day retreat unto thine own conntrey,
without doing any kind of violence or disorderly act by the way: and pay
withal a thousand besans of gold, (which in English money, amounts to five
thousand pounds) for reparation of the damages thou have done in his country:
half thou shall pay to morrow, and the other half at the ides of May next
coming, leaving with Tournemole, baldefesses, menuail, gratelles, morfiaille.
us in the mean time for hostages, the Dukes of Turnebank, Lowbuttock and
Small-trash: together with the Prince of Itches, and Viscount of Snatch-bit.

CHAP. XXXII. How Grangousier to buy Peace, caused the Cakes to be restored.
WIth that the good man Gallet held his peace, but Picrochole to all his
discourse answered nothing but Come and fetch them, come and fetch them: they
have ballocks fair and soft, they will knead and provide some cakes for you.
Then returned he to Grangousier, whom he found upon his knees bare-headed,
crouching in a little corner of his cabinet, and humbly praying unto God, that
he would vouchsafe to assuage the choler of Picrochole, and bring him to the
rule of reason without proceeding by force. When the good man came back, he
asked him, Ha, my friend, my friend, what news do you bring me? There is
neither hope nor remedy, (said Gallet) the man is quite out of his wits, and
forsaken of God. Yea but (said Grangousier,) my friend, what cause does he
pretend for his outrages? He did not show me any cause at all (said Gallet,)
only that in a great anger, he spoke some words of cakes. I cannot tell if they
have done any wrong to his Cake-bakers. I will know (said Grangousier,) the
matter thoroughly, before I resolve any more upon what is to be done; then sent
he to learn concerning that business, and found by true information, that his
men had taken violently some cakes from Picrocholes people, and that Marquets
head was broken with a slackie or short cudgel: that nevertheless all was well
paid, and that the said Marquet had first hurt Forgier with a stroke of his
whip athwart the legs; and it seemed good to his whole counsel, that he should
defend himself with all his might. Notwithstanding all this (said Grangousier,)
seeing the question is but about a few cakes, I will labor to content him; for
I am very unwilling to wage war against him. He enquired then what quantity
of cakes they had taken away, and understanding that it was but some four or
five dozen, he commanded five cart-loads of them to be baked that same night:
and that there should be one full of cakes made with fine butter, fine yolks of
eggs, fine saffron and fine spice, to be bestowed upon Marquet, unto whom
likewise he directed to be given seven hundred thousand and three Philips,
(that is, at three shillings the piece, one hundred five thousand pounds and
nine shillings of English money) for reparation of his losses and hindrances,
and for satisfaction of the Surgeon that had dressed his wound: and
furthermore settled upon him and his for ever in freehold the Apple-Orchard
called La Pomardiere; for the conveyance and passing of all which was sent
Gallet, who by the way as they went made them gather near the willow-trees
great store of boughs, canes and reeds, wherewith all the Cariers were enjoined
to garnish and deck their carts, and each of them tocarry one in his hand, as
himself likewise did, thereby to give all men to understand that they demanded
but Peace, and that they came to buy it.

Being come to the gate, they required to speak with Picrochole from
Grangousier. Picrochole would not so much as let them in, nor go to speak with
them, but sent them word that he was busy, and that they should deliver their
mind to Captain Touquedillon, who was then planting a piece of Ordnance upon
the wall. Then said the good man unto him, My Lord, to ease you of all this
labor, and to take away all excuses why you may not return unto our former
alliance, we do here presently restore unto you the Cakes upon which the
quarrel arose: five dozen did our people take away, they were well paid for;
we love Peace so well, that we restore unto you five cartloads, of which this
cart shall be for Marquet, who does most complain; besides, to content him
entirely, here are seven hundred thousand and three Philips, which I deliver to
him: and for the losses he may pretend to have sustained, I resign for ever
the farm of the Pomardiere, to be possessed in fee-simple by him and his for
ever, without the payment of any duty, or acknowledgement of homage, fealty,
fine or service whatsoever: and here is the tenor of the deed, and for Gods
sake let us live henceforward in Peace, and withdraw your selves merrily into
your own country from within this place, unto which you have no right at all,
as your selves must needs confess, and let us be good friends as before.
Touquedillon related all this to Picrochole, and more and more exasperated his
courage, saying to him, These clowns are afraid to some purpose: by G --
Grangousier conskites himself for fear; the poor drinker he is not skilled in
warfare, nor has he any stomach for it, he knows better how to empty the
flaggons, that is his Art. I am of opinion that it is fit we send back the
carts and the money; and for the rest, that very speedily we fortify our
selves here, then prosecute our fortune. But what do they think to have to do
with a ninnie-whoop, to feed you thus with cakes? You may see what it is; the
good usage, and great familiarity which you have had with them heretofore, has
made you contemptible in their eyes. Anoint a villain, he will prick you: prick
a villain, and he will anoint you: Sa, sa, sa, (said Picrochole,) by St. James
you have Ungentem pungit. pungentem rusticus ungit.
given a true character of them. One thing I will advise you (said
Touquedillon,) we are here but badly victualled, and furnished with
mouth-harnasse very slenderly: if Grangousier should come to besiege us, I
would go presently, and pluck out of all your soldiers heads and mine own all
the teeth except three to each of us, and with them alone we should make an end
of our provision, but too soon we shall have (said Picrochole,) but too much
sustenance and feeding-stuffe: came we hither to eat or to fight? To fight
indeed (said Touquedillon,) yet from the panch comes the dance, and where
famine rules force is exiled. Leave off your prating (said Picrochole,) and
forthwith seize upon what they have brought. Then took they money and cakes,
oxen and carts, and sent them away without speaking one word, only that they
would come no more so near, for a reason that they would give them the morrow
after. Thus without doing any thing, returned they to Grangousier, and related
the whole matter unto him, subjoyning that there was no hope left to draw them
to Peace, but by sharp and fierce wars.

CHAP. XXXIII. How some Statesmen of Picrochole, by hairebrain'd counsel put
him in extreme danger.
THe carts being unloaded, and the money and cakes secured, there came before
Menuaille spadaslin merdaille.
Picrochole, the Duke of Small-trash, the Earl Swash-buckler, and Captain
Durtaille, who said unto him, Sir, this day we make you the happiest, the most
warlike and chivalrous Prince that ever was since the death of Alexander of
Macedonia. Be covered, be covered, (said Picrochole,) Grammercie (said they) we
do but our duty: The manner is thus, you shall leave some Captain here to have
the charge of this Garrison, with a Party competent for keeping of the place,
which besides its natural strength, is made stronger by the rampires and
fortresses of your devising. Your Army you are to divide into two parts, as you
know very well how to do: one part thereof shall fall upon Grangbusier and his
forces, by it shall he be easily at the very first shock routed, and then shall
you get money by heaps, for the Clown has store of ready coin: Clown we call
him, because a noble and generous Prince has never a penny, and that to hoard
up treasure is but a clownish trick. The other part of the Army in the mean
time shall draw toward Onys, Xiantouge, Angoulesme and Gascony: then march to
Perigourt, Medos and Elanes, taking wherever you come without resistance,
towns, castles and forts: Afterward to Bayonne, St. Ihon de luz, to
Fuentarabia, where you shall seize upon all the ships, and coasting along
Galicia and Portugal, shall pillage all the maritine places, even unto Lisbone,
where you shall be supplied with all necessaries befitting a Conqueror. By
copsodie Spain will yield, for they are but a race of Loobies: then are you to
pass by the streights of Gibraltar, where you shall erect two pillars more
stately then those of Hercules, to the perpetual memory of your name, and the
narrow entrance shall be called the Picrocholinal sea.

Having past the Picrocholinal sea, behold, Barbarossa yields himself your
slave: I will (said Picrochole) give him fair quarter and spare his life. Yea
(said they) so that he be content to be christened. And you shall conquer the
Kingdoms of Tunes, of Hippos, Argier, Bomino, Corode, yea all Barbary.
Furthermore, you shall take into your hands Majorca, Minorca, Sardinia,
Corsica, with the other Islands of the Ligustick and Balearian seas. Going
along on the left hand, you shall rule all Gallia Narbonensis, Provence, the
Allobrogians, Genua, Florence, Luca, and then God biwy Rome; By my faith (said
Picrochole,) I will not then kiss his pantuffle.

Italy being thus taken, behold, Naples, Calabria, Apulia and Sicilie, all
ransacked, and Malta too. I wish the pleasant Knights of the Rhodes heretofore
would but come to resist you, that we might see their urine. I would (said
Picrochole) very willingly go to Loretta. No, no, (said they) that shall be at
our return; from thence we will sail Eastwards, and take Candia, Cyprus,
Rhodes, and the Cyclade Islands, and set upon Morea. It is ours by St. Trenian,
the Lord preserve Jerusalem; for the great Sultan is not comparable to you in
power: I will then (said he) cause Solomon's Temple to be built: No, (said
they) not yet, have a little patience, stay a while, be never too sudden in
your enterprises. Can you tell what Octavian Augustus said, Festina lent; it
is requisite that you first have the lesser Asia, Caria, Lycia, Pamphilia,
Cilicia, Lydia, Phrygia, Mysia, Bithynia, Cara; Zia, Satalia, Samagaria,
Castamena, Luga, Sanasta, even unto Euphrates; Shall we see (said Picrochole,)
Babylon and Mount Sinai? There is no need (said they) at this time; have we not
hurried up and down, traveled and toyled enough, in having transfreted and
past over the Hircanian sea, marched along the two Armenias, and the three
Arabias? By my faith (said he) we have played the fools, and are undone: Ha,
poor souls! What Is the matter, said they? What shall we have (said he) to
drink in these deserts? for Julian Augustus, with his whole Army died there for
thirst, as they say. We have already (said they) given order for that. In the
Siriack sea you have nine thousand and fourteen great ships laden with the best
wines in the world: they arrived at Port-Joppa, there they found two and twenty
thousand Camels, and sixteen hundred Elephants, which you shall have taken at
one hunting about Sigelmes, when you entered into Lybia: and besides this, you
had all the Mecca Caravane. Did not they furnish you sufficiently with wine?
Yes, but (said he) we did not drink it fresh: By the virtue (said they) not of
a fish, a valiant man, a Conqueror, who pretends and aspires to the Monarchy
of the world, cannot always have his ease. God be thanked, that you and your
men are come safe and sound unto the banks of the river Tigris; But (said he)
what does that part of our Army in the mean time, which overthrows that
unworthy Swill-pot Grangousier? They are not idle (said they) we shall meet
with them by and by, they shall have won you Britany, Normandy, Flanders,
Haynault, Brabant, Artois, Holland, Zealand; they have past the Rhine over the
bellies of the Switsers and Lanskenets, and a Party of these has subdued
Luxemburg, Lorrain, Champaigne and Savoy, even to Lions, in which place they
have met with your forces, returning from the naval Conquests of the
Mediterranean sea: and have rallied again in Bohemia, after they had plundered
and sacked Suevia, Wittemberg, Bavaria, Austria, Moravia and Styria. Then they
set fiercely together upon Lubeck, Norway, Swedeland, Rye, Denmark, Gitland,
Greenland, the Sterlins, even unto the frozen sea; this done, they conquered
the isles of Orkney, and subdued Scotland, England and Ireland. From thence
sailing through the sandy sea, and by the Sarmates, they have vanquished and
overcome Prussia, Poland, Lituania, Russia, Walachia, Transylvania, Hungary,
Bulgaria, Turquieland, and are now at Constantinople. Come (said Picrochole,)
let us go join with them quickly, for I will be Emperor of Trebezonde also:
shall we not kill all these dogs, Turks and Mahumetans? What a devil should we
do else, said they: and you shall give their goods and lands to such as shall
have served you honestly: Reason (said he) will have it so, that is but just, I
give unto you the Caramania, Surie, and all the Palestine. Ha, Sir, (said they)
it is out of your goodness; Grammercie, we thank you, God grant you may
always prosper. There was there present at that time an old Gentleman well
experienced in the wars, a stern soldier, and who had been in many great
hazards, named Echephron, who hearing this discourse, said, I do greatly doubt
that all this enterprise will be like the tale or interlude of the pitcher full
of milk, wherewith a Shoemaker made himself rich in conceit: but when the
pitcher was broken, he had not whereupon to dine: what do you pretend by these
large Conquests? what shall be the end of so many labors and crosses? Thus it
shall be (said Picrochole) that when we are returned, we shall sit down, rest
and be merry: But (said Echephron,) if by chance you should never come back,
for the voyage is long and dangerous, were it not better for us to take our
rest now, then unnecessarily to expose our selves to so many dangers? O (said
Swashbuckler,) by G -- here is a good dotard, come let us go hide our selves in
the corner of a chimney, and there spend the whole time of our life amongst
Ladies, in threading of pearls, or spinning like Sardanapalus: He that nothing
ventures, has neither horse nor mule, (says Solomon:) He who adventureth too
much (said Echephron) loses both horse and mule, answered Malchon. Enough
(said Picrochole,) go forward: I fear nothing, but that these devilish
legions of Grangousier, whilst we are in Mesopotamia, will come on our backs,
and charge up our rear, what course shall we then take? what shall be our
remedy? A very good one; (said Durtaille) a pretty little commission, which you
must send unto the Muscoviters, shall bring you into the field in an instant
four hundred and fifty thousand choice men of war; O that you would but make
me your Lieutenant General, I should for the lightest faults of any inflict
great punishments. I fret, I charge, I strike, I take, I kill, I slay, I play
the devil. On, on, (said Picrochole) make haste, my lads, and let him that
loves me, follow me.

CHAP. XXXIV. How Gargantua left the City of Paris, to succor his country,
and how Gymnast encountered with the enemy.
IN this same very hour Gargantua, who was gone out of Paris, as soon as he had
read his fathers letters, coming upon his great mare had already past the
Nunnerie-bridge himself, Ponocrates, Gymnast and Eudemon, who all three, the
better to enable them to go along with him took Posthorses: the rest of his
train came after him by even journeys at a slower pace, bringing with them all
his books and Philosophical instruments; as soon as he had alighted at Parille,
he was informed by a farmer of Gouget, how Picrochole had fortified himself
within the rock Clermond, and had sent Captain Tripet with a great army to set
upon the wood of Vede and Vaugaudry, and that they had already plundered the
whole country, not leaving cock nor hen, even as far as to the wine press
of Billiard. These strange and almost incredible news of the enormous abuses,
thus committed over all the land, so affrighted Gargantua, that he knew not
what to say nor do: but Ponocrates counseled him to go unto the Lord of
Vauguyon, who at all times had been their friend and confederate, and that by
him they should be better advised in their business: which they did
incontinently, and found him very willing, and fully resolved to assist them,
and therefore was of opinion, that they should send some one of his company, to
scout along and discover the country, to learn in what condition and posture
the enemy was, that they might take counsel, and proceed according to the
present occasion. Gymnast offered himself to go; whereupon it was concluded,
that for his safety, and the better expedition, he should have with him some
one that knew the ways, avenues, turnings, windings and rivers thereabout.
Then away went he and Prelingot, (the Querry or Gentleman of Vauguyons horse,)
who scouted and espied as narrowly as they could upon all quarters without any
fear. In the mean time Gargantua took a little refreshment, ate somewhat
himself, the like did those who were with him, and caused to give to his mare a
Picotine of Oats, that is, threescore and fourteen quarters and three bushels.
Gymnast and his Camerade rode so long, that at last they met with the enemies
forces, all scattered and out of order, plundering, stealing, robbing and
pillaging all they could lay their hands on: and as far off as they could
perceive him, they ran thronging upon the back of one another in all haste
toward him, to unload him of his money, and untrusse his Portmantles. Then
cried he out unto them, (My Masters,) I am a poor devil, I desire you to spare
me, I have yet one Crown left, come, we must drink it; for it is aurum
potabile, and this horse here shall be sold to pay my welcome: afterward take
me for one of your own; for never yet was there any man that knew better how to
take, lard, roast and dress, yea by G -- to tear asunder and devour a hen,
then I that am here: and for my Proficiat I drink to all good fellows. With
that he unscrued his Borracho, (which was a great dutch leathern bottle,) and
without putting in his nose drank very honestly: the marousle Rogues looked
upon him, opening their throats a foot wide, and putting out their tongues like
Greyhounds, in hopes to drink after him: but Captain Tripet, in the very nick
of that their expectation, came running to him to see who it was. To him
Gymnast offered his bottle, saying, Hold, Captain, drink boldly and spare not;
I have been thy taster, it is wine of La fay monjau. What? (said Tripet) this
fellow gybes and flowts us; Who art thou? (said Tripet) I am (said Gymnast) a
poor devil, (pauvre diable:) Ha, (said Tripet) seeing thou art a poor devil, it
is reason that thou should be permitted to go whithersoever thou will, for
all poor devils pass every where without toll or tax; but it is not the
custom of poor devils to be so well mounted, therefore, Sir devil, come down,
and let me have your horse, and if he do not carry me well, you, Master devil,
must do it; for I love a life that such a devil as you should carry me away.

CHAP. XXXV. How Gymnast very souply and cunningly killed Captain Tripet, and
others of Picrocholes men.
WHen they heard these words, some amongst them began to be afraid, and blessed
themselves with both hands, thinking indeed that he had been a devil disguised:
insomuch that one of them, named good Ihon, Captain of the trained bands of the
Country bumpkins, took his Psalter out of his Codpiece, and cried out aloud,
Hagios ho theos. If thou be of God speak: if thou be of the other spirit avoid
hence, and get thee going: yet he went not away; which words being heard by all
the soldiers that were there, diverse of them being a little inwardly
terrified, departed from the place: all this did Gymnast very well remark and
consider, and therefore making as if he would have alighted from off his horse,
as he was poysing himself on the mounting side, he most nimbly (with his short
sword by his thigh,) shifting his feet in the stirrup, performed the
stirrup-leather feat, whereby after the inclining of his body downwards, he
forthwith lanch't himself aloft in the air, and placed both his feet together
on the saddle, standing upright with his back turned toward the horses head;
Now (said he) my case goes backward. Then suddenly in the same very posture
wherein he was, he fetched a gambole upon one foot, and turning to the left
hand, failed not to carry his body perfectly round, just into its former
stance, without missing one jot. Ha (said Tripet,) I will not do that at this
time, and not without cause. Well, (said Gymnast) I have failed, I will undo
this leap: then with a mavelous strength and agility, turning toward the
right hand he fetched another frisking gambole, as before, which done, he set
his right hand thumb upon the hind bow of the saddle, raised himself up, and
sprung in the air, poysing and upholding his whole body, upon the muscle and
nerve of the said thumb: and so turned and whirled himself about three times:
at the fourth reversing his body, and overturning it upside down, and foreside
back, without touching any thing he brought himself betwixt the horses two
ears, springing with all his body into the air, upon the thumb of his left
hand, and in that posture turning like a windmill, did most actively do that
trick which is called the Millers Pass. After this, clapping his right hand
flat upon the middle of the saddle, he gave himself such a jerking swing, that
he thereby seated himself upon the crupper, after the manner of Gentlewomens
sitting on horseback: this done, he easily past his right leg over the saddle,
and placed himself like one that rides in croup: But, said he, it were better
for me to get into the saddle; then putting the thumbs of both hands upon the
crupper before him, and thereupon leaning himself, as upon the only supporters
of his body, he incontinently turned heels over head in the air, and straight
found himself betwixt the bow of the saddle in a good settlement. Then with a
summer-sault springing into the air again, he fell to stand with both his feet
close together upon the saddle, and there made above a hundred frisks, turns
and demi-pommads, with his arms held out acrosse, and in so doing, cried out
aloud, I rage, I rage, devils, I am stark mad; devils, I am mad, hold me,
devils, hold me, hold, devils, hold, hold.

Whilst he was thus vaulting, the Rogues in great astonishment said to one
another, By cocks death he is a goblin or a devil thus disguised, Ab host
maligno libera nos, Domine, and ran away in a full flight, as if they had been
routed, looking now and then behind them like a dog that carries away a
goose-wing in his mouth. Then Gymnast spying his advantage, alighted from his
horse, drew his sword, and laid on great blows upon the thickest, and
highest-crested amongst them, and overthrew them in great heaps, hurt, wounded
and bruised, being resisted by no body, they thinking he had been a starved
devil, as well in regard of his wonderful feats in vaulting, which they had
seen, as for the talk Tripet had with him, calling him poor devil: only Tripet
would have traitorously cleft his head with his horsemans sword, or
lanse-knight fauchion; but he was well armed, and felt nothing of the blow, but
the weight of the stroke; whereupon turning suddenly about, he gave Tripet a
home-thrust, and upon the back of that, whilst he was about toward his head
from a flash, he in ran him at the breast with a hit, which at once cut his
stomach, the fifth gut called the Colon; and the half of his liver, wherewith
he fell to the ground, and in falling gushed forth above four pottles of
pottage, and his soul mingled with the pottage.

This done, Gymnast withdrew himself, very wisely considering, that a case of
great adventure and hazard, should not be pursued unto its utmost period, and
that it becomes all Cavaliers modestly to use their good fortune, without
troubling or stretching it too far; wherefore getting to horse, he gave him
the spur, taking the right way unto Vauguyon, and Prelingot with him.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Gargantua demolished the Castle at the Ford of Vede, and how
they past the Ford.
AS soon as he came, he related the estate and condition wherein they had found
the enemy, and the stratagem which he alone had used against all their
multitude, affirming that they were but rascally rogues, plunderers, thieves
and robbers, ignorant of all military discipline, and that they might boldly
set forward unto the field; it being an easy matter to fell and strike them
down like beasts. Then Gargantua mounted his great Mare, accompanied as we have
said before, and finding in his way a high and great tree, (which commonly was
called by the name of St. Martins tree, because heretofore St. Martin planted a
Pilgrims staff there, which in tract of time grew to that height and
greatness,) said, This is that which I lacked; this tree shall serve me both
for a staff and lance: with that he pulled it up easily, plucked off the
boughs, and trimmed it at his pleasure: in the mean time his Mare pissed to
ease her belly, but it was in such abundance, that it did overflow the country
seven leagues, and all the piss of that Urinal flood, ran glib away toward
the Ford of Vede, wherewith the water was so swollen, that all the Forces the
enemy had there, were with great horror drowned, except some who had taken the
way on the left hand toward the hills. Gargantua being come to the place of
the wood of Vede, was informed by Eudemon, that there was some remainder of the
enemy within the Castle, which to know, Gargantua cried out as loud as he was
able, Are you there, or are you not there? if you be there, be there no more;
and if you be not there, I have no more to say. But a ruffian gunner, whose
charge was to attend the Portcullis over the gate, let fly a cannon-ball at
him, and hit him with that shot most furiously on the right temple of his head,
yet did him no more hurt, then if he had but cast a prune or kernel of a
wine-grape at him: What is this? (said Gargantua) do you throw at us
grape-kernels here? the Vintage shall cost you dear, thinking indeed that the
bullet had been the kernel of a grape, or raisin-kernel.

Those who were within the Castle, being till then busy at the pillage, when
they heard this noise, ran to the towers and fortresses, from whence they shot
at him above nine thousand and five and twenty falconshot and harcabusades,
aiming all at his head, and so thick did they shoot at him, that he cried out,
Ponocrates my friend, these flies here are like to put out mine eyes, give me a
branch of those willow-trees to drive them away, thinking that the bullets and
stones shot out of the great ordnance had been but dunflies. Ponocrates looked
and saw that there were no other flies, but great shot which they had shot from
the Castle. Then was it that he, rusht with his great tree against the Castle,
and with mighty blows overthrew both towers and fortresses, and laid all level
with the ground, by which means all that were within were slain and broken in
pieces. Going from thence, they came to the bridge at the Mill, where they
found all the Ford covered with dead bodies, so thick, that they had choked up
the Mill, and stopped the current of its water, and these were those that were
destroyed in the Urinal deluge of the Mare. There they were at a stand,
consulting how they might pass without hinderance by these dead carcasses. But
Gymnast said, If the devils have past there, I will pass well enough. The
devils have past there (said Eudemon,) to carry away the damned souls. By St.
Rhenian (said Ponocrates,) then by necessary consequence he shall pass there:
Yes, yes, (said Gymnastes) or I shall stick in the way: then setting spurs to
his horse, he past through freely, his horse not fearing, nor being any thing
affrighted at the sight of the dead bodies; for he had accustomed him
(according to the doctrine of Aelian) not to fear armor, nor the carcasses of
dead men; and that not by killing men as Diomedes did the Thracians, or as
Ulysses did in throwing the Corpses of his enemies at his horses feet, as Homer
says, but by putting a Jack-a-lent amongst his hay, and making him go over it
ordinarily, when he gave him his oats. The other three followed him very
close, except Eudemon only, whose horses foreright or far forefoot, sank up to
the knee in the paunch of a great fat chuffe, who lay there upon his back
drowned, and could not get it out: there was he pestered, until Gargantua with
the end of his staff thrust down the rest of the Villains tripes into the
water, whilst the horse pulled out his foot; and (which is a wonderful thing
in Hippiatrie,) the said horse was thoroughly cured of a ringbone which he had
in that foot, by this touch of the burst guts of that great loobie.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Gargantua in combing his head, made the great cannon-ball
fall out of his hair.
BEing come out of the river of Vede, they came very shortly after to
Grangousiers Castle, who waited for them with great longing; at their coming
they were entertained with many congies, and cherished with embraces, never was
seen a more joyful company, for supplementum supplementi Chronicorum, says,
that Gargamelle died there with joy; for my part, truly I cannot tell, neither
do I care very much for her, nor for any body else. The truth was, that
Gargantua in shifting his clothes, and combing his head with a comb, (which
was nine hundred foot long of the Jewish Canne-measure, and whereof the teeth
were great tusks of Elephants, whole and entire) he made fall at every rake
above seven balls of bullets, at a dozen the ball, that stuck in his hair, at
the razing of the Castle of the wood of Vede, which his father Grangousier
seeing, thought they had been lice, and said unto him, What, my dear son,
have thou brought us thus far some short-winged hawks of the College of
Mountague? I did not mean that thou should reside there; Then answered
Ponocrates, my sovereign Lord, think not that I have placed him in that lousy
College, which they call Montague; I had rather have put him amongst the
grave-diggers of Sanct Innocent, so enormous is the cruelty and villainy that I
have known there; for the Galleyslaves are far better used amongst the Moors
and Tartars, the murderers in the criminal dungeons, yea the very dogs in your
house, then are the poor wretched Students in the aforesaid College; and if I
were King of Paris, the devil take me if I would not set it on fire, and burn
both Principal and Regents, for suffering this inhumanity to be exercised
before their eyes: then taking up one of these bullets, he said, These are
cannon-shot, which your son Gargantua has lately received by the treachery
of your enemies, as he was passing before the Wood of Vede.

But they have been so rewarded, that they are all destroyed in the ruin of
the Castle, as were the Philistines by the policy of Samson, and those whom the
tower of Silohim slew, as it is written in the thirteenth of Luke; My opinion
is, that we pursue them whilst the luck is on our side, for occasion has all
her hair on her forehead, when she is past, you may not reca^l her, she has
no tuft whereby you can lay hold on her, for she is bald in the hind-part of
her head, and never returns again. Truly (said Grangousier,) it shall not be
at this time; for I will make you a feast this night, and bid you welcome.

This said, they made ready supper, and of extraordinary besides his daily
fare, were roasted sixteen oxen, three heifers, two and thirty calves,
threescore and three fat kids, sourscore and fifteen wethers, three hundred
barrow-pigs or sheats sowced in sweet wine or must, elevenscore partridges,
seven hundred snites and woodcocks, four hundred Loudon and Cornwal-capons,
six thousand pullets, and as many pigeons, six hundred orammed hens, fourteen
hundred leverets, or young hares and rabbets, three hundred and three buzzards,
and one thousand and seven hundred cockrels. For venison, they could not so
suddenly come by it, only eleven wild bores, which the Abbot of Turpenay sent,
and eighteen fallow deer which the Lord of Gramount bestowed; together with
sevenscore phesants, which were sent by the Lord of Essars; and some dozens of
queests, coushots, ringdoves and woodculvers; River-fowle, teales and awteales,
bittorns, courts, plovers, francolins, briganders, tyrasons, young lapwings,
tame ducks, shovelers, woodlanders, herons, moorehens, criels, storks,
canepetiers, oronges, flamans, which are phaenicopters, or crimsonwinged
sea-fowles, terrigoles, turkies, arbens, coots, solingeese, cnrlews, termagants
and water-wagtails, with a great deal of cream, curds and fresh cheese, and
store of soupe, pottages, and brewis with variety. Without doubt there was meat
enough, and it was handsomely dressed by Snapsauce, Hotchpot and Brayverjuice,
Grangousiers Cooks. Jenkin, Trudg-apace and Clean-glasse, were very careful to
fill them drink.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How Gargantua did eat up six Pilgrims in a sallet.
THe story requires, that we relate that which happened unto six Pilgrims, who
came from Sebastian near to Nantes: and who for shelter that night, being
afraid of the enemy, had hid themselves in the garden upon the chichling pease,
among the cabbages and lettices. Gargantua finding himself somewhat dry, asked
whether they could get any lettice to make him a sallet; and hearing that there
were the greatest and fairest in the country (for they were as great as
plum-trees, or as walnut-trees) he would go thither himself, and brought thence
in his hand what he thought good, and withal carried away the six Pilgrims, who
were in so great fear, that they did not dare to speak nor cough.

Washing them therefore first at the fountain, the Pilgrims said one to another
softly, What shall we do? we are almost drowned here amongst these lettice,
shall we speak? but if we speak, he will kill us for spies: and as they were
thus deliberating what to do, Gargantua put them with the lettice into a
platter of the house, as large as the huge tun of the white Friars of the
Cistertian order, which done, with oil, vinegar and salt he ate them up, to
refresh himself a little before supper: and had already swallowed up five of
the Pilgrims, the sixth being in the platter, totally hid under a lettice,
except his bourdon or staff that appeared, and nothing else. Which Grangousier
seeing, said to Gargantua, I think that is the horn of a shell-snail, do not
eat it. Why not, (said Gargantua) they are good all this month, which he no
sooner said, but drawing up the staff, and therewith taking up the Pilgrim, he
ate him very well, then drank a terrible draught of excellent white wine. The
Pilgrims thus devoured, made shift to save themselves as well as they could, by
withdrawing their bodies out of the reach of the grinders of his teeth, but
could not escape from thinking they had been put in the lowest dungeon of a
prison. And when Gargantua whiffed the great draught, they thought to have been
drowned in his mouth, and the flood of wine had almost carried them away into
the gulf of his stomach. Nevertheless skipping with their bourdons, as St.
Michaels Palmers use to do, they sheltered themselves from the danger of that
inundation, under the banks of his teeth. But one of them by chance, groping or
sounding the country with his staff, to try whether they were in safety or
no, struck hard against the cleft of a hollow tooth, and hit the mandibulary
sinew, or nerve of the jaw, which put Gargantua to very great pain, so that he
began to cry for the rage that he felt; to ease himself therefore of his
smarting ache, he called for his tooth-picker, and rubbing toward a young
walnut-tree, where they lay skulking, unnestled you my Gentlemen Pilgrims.

For he caught one by the legs, another by the scrip, another by the pocket,
another by the scarf, another by the band of the breeches, and the poor fellow
that had hurt him with the bourdon, him he hooked to him by the Codpiece, which
snatch nevertheless did him a great deal of good, for it pierced unto him a
pockie botch he had in the groine, which grievously tormented him ever since
they were past Ancenis. The Pilgrims thus dislodged ran away athwart the Plain
a pretty fast pace, and the pain ceased, even just at the time when by Eudemon
he was called to supper, for all was ready. I will go then (said he) and piss
away my misfortune, which he did do in such a copious measure, that the urine,
taking away the feet from the Pilgrims, they were carried along with the stream
unto the bank of a tuft of trees: upon which, as soon as they had taken footing,
and that for their selfpreservation they had run a little out of the road, they
on a sudden fell all six, except Fourniller, into a trap that had been made to
take wolves by a train: out of which nevertheless they escaped by the industry
of the said Fourniller, who broke all the snares and ropes. Being gone from
thence, they lay all the rest of that night in a lodge near unto Coudry, where
they were comforted in their miseries, by the gracious words of one of their
company, called Sweertogo, who showed them that this adventure had been
foretold by the Prophet David, Psalm. Quum exurgerent homines in nos, forte
vivos deglutissent nos; when they were eaten in the sallet, with salt, oil and
vinegar, Quum iraseeretur furor eorum in nos, forsitan aqua absorbuisset nos;
when he drank the great draught, Torrentem pertransivit anima nostra; when the
stream of his water carried us to the thicket, Forsitan pertransisset anima
nostra aquam intoler abilem; that is, the water of his Urine, the flood whereof
cutting our way, took our feet from us. Benedictus Dominus qui non dedit nos in
captionem dentibus eorum: anima nostra sicut passer erepta est de laqueo
venantium; when we fell in the trap, Laqueus contritus est, by Fourniller, Et
nos liberati sumus, adjutorium nostrum, etc.

CHAP. XXXIX. How the Monk was feasted by Gargantua, and of the jovial
discourse they had at supper.
WHen Gargantua was set down at table, after all of them had somewhat stayed
their stomachs by a snatch or two of the first bits eaten heartily; Grangousier
began to relate the source and cause of the war, raised between him and
Picrochole: and came to tell how Friar Ihon of the Funnels, had triumphed at
the defense of the close of the Abbey, and extolled him for his valor above
Camillus, Scipio, Pompey, Caesar and Themistocles. Then Gargantua desired that
he might be presently sent for, to the end that with him they might consult of
what was to be done; whereupon by a joint consent his steward went for him, and
brought him along merrily, with his staff of the Cross upon Grangousiers
Mule: when he was come, a thousand huggings, a thousand embracements, a
thousand good days were given: Ha Friar Ihon my friend, Friar Ihon my brave
cousin, Friar Ihon from the devil: let me clip thee (my heart) about the neck,
to me an armesful; I must gripe thee (my ballock) till thy back crack with it;
Come (my cod,) let me coll thee till I kill thee; and Friar Ihon the gladdest
man in the world, never was man made welcomer, never was any more courteously
and graciously received then Friar Ihon. Come, come, (said Gargantua, a stool
here close by meat this end: I am content, (said the Monk) seeing you will have
it so. Some water (Page) fill, my boy fill, it is to refresh my liver; give me
some (child) to gargle my throat withal. Deposita cappa, (said Gymnast) let us
pull off this frock. Ho, by G -- Gentleman (said the Monk) there is a chapter
in statutis ordinis, which opposes my laying of it down; Pish (said Gymnast) a
fig for your chapter, this frock breaks both your shoulders, put it off. My
friend (said the Monk) let me alone with it; for by G -- I Will drink the better
that it is on: it makes all my body jocund; if I should lay it aside, the
waggish Pages would cut to themselves garters out of it, as I was once served
at Coulaines: and which is worse, I should lose my appetite: but if in this
habit I sit down at table, I will drink by G -- both to thee and to thy horse,
and so courage, frolic, God save the company: I have already sup't, yet will I
eat never a whit the less for that; for I have a paved stomach, as hollow as a
But of malvoisie, or St. Benedictus boot, and always open like a Lawyers
pouch. Of all fishes, but the tench, take the wing of a Partridge, or the thigh
of a Nun; Does not he die like a good fellow that dies with a stiff Catso?
Our Prior loves exceedingly the white of a capon: In that (said Gymnast) he
does not resemble the foxes; for of the capons, hens and pullets which they
carry away, they never eat the white: Why? (said the Monk) Because (said
Gymnast) they have no Cooks to dress them; and if they be not competently made
ready, they remain red and not white, the redness of meats being a token that
they have not got enough of the fire, whether by boiling, rosting or otherwise,
except the shrimps, lobsters, crabs and crayfishes, which are cardinalised with
boiling: by Gods feast-gazers (said the Monk) the Porter of our Abbey then has
not his head well-boyled, for his eyes are as red as a mazer made of an
elder-tree. The thigh of this lerevet, is good for those that have the gout. To
the purpose of the truel, what is the reason that the thighs of a Gentlewoman
are always fresh and cool: This Problem (said Gargantua) is neither in
Aristotle, in Alexander Aphrodiseus, nor in Plutarch. There are three causes
(said the Monk) by which that place is naturally refreshed. Primo, because the
water runs all along by it. Secundo, because it is a shadie place, obscure and
dark, upon which the Sun never shines. And thirdly, because it is continually
flabbell'd, blown upon and aired by the northwindes of the hole arstick, the
fan of the smock, and flipflap of the Codpiece. And lusty my lads, some
bousing liquour, Page; so: Crack, crack, crack. O how good is God that gives us
of this excellent juice! I call him to witness, if I had been in the time of
Jesus Christ, I would have kept him from being taken by the Jews in the garden
of Olivet: and the devil fail me, if I should have failed to cut off the hams
of these Gentlemen Apostles, who ran away so basely after they had well supped,
and left their good Master in the lurch. I hate that man worse then poison that
offers to run away, when he should fight and lay stoutly about him. Oh that I
were but King of France for fourscore or a hundred years! by G -- I should
whip like curtail-dogs these run-awayes of Pavie: A pla^gue take them, why did
not they choose rather to die there, then to leave their good Prince in that
pinch and necessity? Is it not better and more honorable to perish in fighting
valiantly, then to live in disgrace by a cowardly running away? We are like to
eat no great store of goslings this year, therefore, friend, reach me some of
that roasted pig there.

Diavolo, is there no more must? no more sweet wine? Germinavit radix Jesse, je
renie m^e, vij' enrage de soif; I renounce my life, I rage for thirst, this
wine is none of the worst; what wine drink you at Paris? I give my self to the
devil, if I did not once keep open house at Paris for all comers six months
together; Do you know Friar Claud of the high kildrekins: Oh the good fellow
that he is, but I do not know what fly has stung him of late, he is become so
hard a student; for my part, I study not at all. In our Abbey we never study
for fear of the mumps, (which disease in horses is called the mourning in the
chine;) Our late Abbot was wont to say, that it is a monstrous thing to see a
learned Monk by G --. Master, my friend, Magis magnos clericos non sunt, magis
magnos sapientes. You never saw so many hares as there are this year. I could
not any where come by a gosse-hawk, nor tassel of falcon: my Lord Beloniere
promised me a Lanner, but he wrote to me not long ago, that he was become
pursie. The Partridges will so multiply henceforth, that they will go near to
eat up our ears: I take no delight in the stalking-horse; for I catch such
cold, that I am like to founder my self at that sport; if I do not run, toil,
travel and trot about, I am not well at ease. True it is, that in leaping over
hedges and bushes my frock leaves always some of its wool behind it. I have
recovered a dainty greyhound; I give him to the devil if he suffer a hare to
escape him. A groom was leading him to my Lord Hunt-little, and I robbed him of
him; did I ill? No, Friar Ihon, (said Gymnast,) no by all the devils that are,
no: So (said the Monk) do I attest these same devils so long as they last, or
rather virtue G --, what could that gowtie Limpard have done with so fine a
dog? by the body of G -- he is better pleased, when one presents him with a
good yoke of oxen. How now? (said Ponocrates) you swear, Friar Ihon; It is only
(said the Monk) but to grace and adorn my speech; they are colors of a
Ciceronian Rhetoric.

CHAP. XL. Why Monks are the outcasts of the world? and wherefore some have
bigger noses then others?
BY the faith of a Christian (said Eudemon) I do wonderfully dote, and enter in
a great ecstasy, when I consider the honesty and good fellowship of this Monk;
for he makes us here all merry. How is it then that they exclude the Monks from
all good companies? calling them feast-troublers, marrers of mirth, and
disturbers of all civil conversation, as the bees drive away the drones from
their hives; Ignavum fucos pecus (said Maro) a praesepibus arcent. Hereunto
answered Gargantua, There is nothing so true, as that the frock and cowle draw
unto it self the opprobries, injuries and maledictions of the world, just as
the wind called Cecias attracts the clouds: the peremptory reason is, because
they eat the ordure and excrements of the world, that is to say, the sins of
the people, and like dungchewers and excrementitious eaters, they are cast into
the privies and secessive places; that is, the Covents and Abbeys separated
from Political conversation, as the jakes and retreats of a house are: but if
you conceive how an Ape in a family is always mocked, and provokingly
incensed, you shall easily apprehend how Monks are shunned of all men, both
young and old. The Ape keeps not the house as a dog does: He draws not in the
plow as the ox: He yields neither milk nor wool as the sheep: He carries no
burden as a horse does; that which he does, is only to conskite, spoil and
defile all, which is the cause wherefore he has of all men mocks, frumperies
and bastonadoes.

After the same manner a Monk (I mean those lither, idle, lazy Monks) does not
labor and work, as do the Peasant and Artificer: does not ward and defend the
country, as does the man of war: cures not the sick and diseased, as the
Physician does: does neither preach nor teach, as do the Evangelical Doctors
and Schoolmasters: does not import commodities and things necessary for the
Commonwealth, as the Merchant does: therefore is it, that by and of all men
they are hooted at, hated and abhorred. Yea, but (said Grangousier,) they pray
to God for us. Nothing less, (answered Gargentua.) True it is, that with a
tingle tangle jangling of bells they trouble and disquiet all their neighbors
about them: Right, (said the Monk,) a mass, a matine, a vespre well rung are
half said. They mumble out great store of Legends and Psalms, by them not at
all understood: they say many patenotres, interlarded with ave-maries, without
thinking upon, or apprehending the meaning of what it is they say, which truly
I call mocking of God, and not prayers. But so help them God, as they pray for
us, and not for being afraid to lose their victuals, their manchots, and good
fat pottage. All true Christians, of all estates and conditions, in all places
and at all times send up their prayers to God, and the Mediator prays and
intercedeth for them, and God is gracious to them. Now such a one is our good
Friar Ihon, therefore every man desires to have him in his company, he is no
bigot or hypocrite, he is not torn and divided betwixt reality and appearance,
no wretch of a rugged and peevish disposition, but honest, jovial, resolute and
a good fellow: he travels, he labors, he defends the oppressed, comforts the
afflicted, helps the needy, and keeps the close of the Abbey: Nay (said the
Monk) I do a great deal more then that; for whilst we are in dispatching our
matines and anniversaries in the quire; I make withal some crossebowe-strings,
polish glasse-bottles and boults; I twist lines and weave purse-nets, wherein
to catch coneys; I am never idle; but now hither come, some drink, some drink
here, bring the fruit. These chestnuts are of the wood of Estrox, and with good
new wine are able to make you a fine cracker and composer of bum-sonnets. You
are not as yet (it seems) well moistened in this house with the sweet wine and
must, by G -- I drink to all men freely, and at all Fords like a Proctor or
Promoters horse. Friar Ihon, (said Gymnast) take away the snot that hangs at
your nose. Ha, ha, (said the Monk,) am not I in danger of drowning, seeing I am
in water even to the nose? No, no, quare? quia, though some water come out from
thence, there never goes in any; for it is well antidoted with
pot-proof-armour, and sirrup of the Vine-leaf.

O my friend, he that has winter-boots made of such leather, may boldly fish
for oysters, for they will never take water. What is the cause (said Gargantua)
that Friar Ihon has such a fair nose? Because (said Grangousier) that God
would have it so, who frames us in such form, and for such end, as is most
agreeable with his divine Will, even as a Potter fashioneth his vessels.
Because (said Ponocrates) he came with the first to the fair of noses, and
therefore made choice of the fairest and the greatest. Pish, (said the Monk)
that is not the reason of it, but, according to the true Monastical Philosophy,
it is because my Nurse had soft teats, by virtue whereof, whilst she gave me
suck, my nose did sink in as in so much butter. The hard breasts of Nurses make
children shortnosed. But hey gay, Ad formam nasi cognoscitur ad te levavi. I
never eat any confections, Page, whilst I am at the bibbery; Item, bring me
rather some tosts.

CHAP. XLI. How the Monk made Gargantua sleep, and of his hours and breviaries.
SUpper being ended, they consulted of the business in hand, and concluded
that about midnight they should fall unawares upon the enemy, to know what
manner of watch and ward they kept, and that in the mean while they should take
a little rest, the better to refresh themselves. But Gargantua could not sleep
by any means, on which side soever he turned himfelf. Whereupon the Monk said
to him, I never sleep soundly, but when I am at Sermon or Prayers; Let us
therefore begin, you and I, the seven penitential Psalms, to try whether you
shall not quickly fall asleep. The conceit pleased Gargantua very well, and
beginning the first of these Psalms, as soon as they came to the words Beati
quorum, they fell asleep both the one and the other. But the Monk for his being
formerly accustomed to the hour of Claustral matines, failed not to awake a
little before midnight, and being up himself awaked all the rest, in singing
aloud, and with a full clear voice, the song,

Awake, O Reinian; Ho, awake;
Awake, O Reinian, Ho:
Get up, you no more sleep must take,
Get up; for we must go.
When they were all rowsed and up, he said, My Masters, it is a usual saying,
that we begin matines with coughing, and supper with drinking; let us now (in
doing clean contrarily) begin our matines with drinking, and at night before
supper we shall cugh as hard as we can. What? (said Gargantua) to drink so soon
after sleep, this is not to live according to the diet and prescript rule of
the Physicians, for you ought first to scour and cleanse your stomach of all
its superfluities and excrements. O well physicked, (said the Monk) a hundred
devils leap into my body, if there be not more old drunkards, then old
Physicians: I have made this paction and covenant with my appetite, that it
always lies down, and goes to bed with my self, (for to that I every day give
very good order,) then the next morning it also rises with me, and gets up
when I am awake. Mind you your charges, (Gentlemen) or tend your cures as much
as you will; I will get me to my Drawer, (in terms of falconrie, my tiring.)
What drawer or tiring do you mean? (said Gargantua.) My breviary (said the
Monk,) for just as the Falconers, before they feed their hawks, do makethem
draw at a hens leg, to purge their brains of phlegm, and sharpen them to a
good appetite: so by taking this merry little breviary, in the morning I scour
all my lungs, and am presently ready to drink.

After what manner (said Gargantua) do you say these fair hours and prayers
of yours? After the manner of Whipfield, said the Monk, by three Psalms, and
three Fessecamp and corruptly Fecan.
Lessons, or nothing at all, he that will: I never tie my self to hours,
prayers and sacraments: for they are made for the man, and not the man for
them; therefore is it that I make my Prayers in fashion of stirrup-leathers; I
shorten or lengthen them when I think good. Brevis or atio penetrat coelos, and
longa potatio evacuat Scyphos: where is that written? by my faith (said
Ponocrates,) I cannot tell (my Pillicock;) but thou art more worth then gold:
Therein (said the Monk) I am like you: but, venite, apotemus. Then made they
ready store of Carbonadoes, or rashers on the coals, and good fat soupes, or
brewis with sippets; and the Monk drank what he pleased. Some kept him company,
and the rest did forbear, for their stomachs were not as yet opened. Afterward
every man began to arm and befit himself for the field; and they armed the
Monk against his will; for he desired no other armor for back and breast, but
his frock, nor any other weapon in his hand, but the staff of the Cross: yet
at their pleasure was he completely armed cap-a-pe, and mounted upon one of the
best horses in the Kingdom, with a good slashing sable by his side, together
with Gargantua, Ponocrates, Gymnast, Eudemon, and five and twenty more of the
most resolute and adventurous of Grangousiers house, all armed at proof with
their lances in their hands, mounted like St. George, and every one of them
having a harquebusier behind him.

CHAP. XLII. How the Monk encouraged his fellow-champions, and how he hanged
upon a tree.
THus went out those valiant champions on their adventure, in full resolution,
to know what enterprise they should undertake, and what to take heed of, and
look well to, in the day of the great and horrible battle. And the Monk
encouraged them, saying, My children, do not fear nor doubt, I will conduct
you safely; God and Sanct Benedict be with us. If I had strength answerable to
my courage, by Sdeath I would plume them for you like ducks. I fear nothing
but the great ordnance; yet I know of a charm by way of Prayer, which the
subsexton of our Abbey taught me, that will preserve a man from the violence of
guns, and all manner of fire-weapons and engines, but it will do me no good,
because I do not believe it. Nevertheless, I hope my staff of the cross
shall this day play devilish pranks amongst them; by G -- whoever of our Party
shall offer to play the duck, and shrink when blows are a dealing, I give my
self to the devil, if I do not make a Monk of him in my stead, and hamper him
within my frock, which is a sovereign cure against cowardice. Did you never
hear of my Lord Meurles his greyhound, which was not worth a straw in the
fields; he put a frock about his neck, by the body of G -- there was neither
hare nor fox that could escape him, and which is more, he lined all the bitches
in the country, though before that he was feeble-reined, and ex frigidis and
maleficiatis. The Monk uttering these words in choler, as he past under a
walnut-tree, in his way toward the Causey, he broached the vizor of his
helmet, on the stump of a great branch of the said tree: nevertheless, he set
his spurs so fiercely to the horse, who was full of metal, and quick on the
spur, that he bounded forwards, and the Monk going about to ungrapple his
vizor, let go his hold of the bridle, and so hanged by his hand upon the bough,
whilst his horse stole away from under him. By this means was the Monk left,
hanging on the walnut-tree, and crying for help, murder, murder, swearing
also that he was betrayed: Eudemon perceived him first, and calling Gargantua,
said, Sir, come and see Absalom hanging. Gargantua being come, considered the
countenance of the Monk, and in what posture he hanged; wherefore he said to
Eudemon, You were mistaken in comparing him to Absalom; for Absalom hung by his
hair, but this shaveling Monk hangs by the ears. Help me (said the Monk) in
the devils name, is this a time for you to prate? you seem to me to be like the
decretalist Preachers, who say, that whosoever shall see his neighbor in the
danger of death, ought upon pain of trisulk excommunication, rather choose to
admonish him to make his Confession to a Priest, and put his conscience in the
state of Peace, then otherwise to help and relieve him.

And therefore when I shall see them fallen into a river, and ready to be
drowned, I shall make them a fair long sermon de contemptu mundi* and fuga
seculi; and when they are stark dead, shall then go to their aid and succor
in fishing after them: Be quiet (said Gymnast,) and stir not my minion; I am
now coming to unhang thee, and to set thee at freedom, for thou art a pretty
little gentle Monachus; Monachus inclaustro non vdlet ova duo; sed quando est
extra been valet triginta: I have seen above five hundred hanged, but I never
saw any have a better countenance in his dangling and pendilatory swagging;
truly if I had so good a one, I would willingly hang thus all my lifetime;
What? (said the Monk) have you almost done preaching: help me in the name of
God, seeing you will not in the name of the other spirit, or by the habit which
I wear you shall repent it, tempore and loco praelibatis.

Then Gymnast allghted from his horse, and climbing up the walnut-tree, lifted
up the Monk with one hand, by the gushets of his armor under the armpits, and
with the other undid his vizor from the stump of the broken branch, which done,
he let him fall to the ground and himself after: As Soon as the Monk was down,
he put off all his armor, and threw away one piece after another about the
field, and taking to him-again his staff of the Cross, remounted up to his
horse, which Eudemon had caught in his running away. Then went they on merrily,
riding along on the high way.

CHAP. XLIII. How the Scouts and fore-party of Picrochole were met with by
Gargantua, and how Tireavant.
the Monk slew Captain Draw-forth, and then was taken prisoner by his enemies.
PIcrochole at the relation of those who had escaped out of the broile and
defeat, wherein Tripet was untriped, grew very angry that the devils should
have so run upon his men, and held all that night a counsel of war, at which
Rashcalf and Touchfaucet Hastueau. Touquedillon.
concluded his power to be such, that he was able to defeat all the devils of
hell, if they should come to justle with his forces. This Picrochole did not
fully believe, though he doubted not much of it: Therefore sent he under the
command and conduct of the Count Draw-forth, for discovering of the country,
the number of sixteen hundred horsemen, all well-mounted upon light horses for
skirmish, and thoroughly besprinkled with holy water; and every one for their
field-mark or cognizance had the sign of a star in his scarf, to serve at
all adventures, in case they should happen to encounter with devils; that by
the virtue, as well of that Gregorian water, as of the stars which they wore,
they might make them disappear and evanish.

In this equipage, they made an excursion upon the country, till they came
near to the Vauguyon, (which is the valley of Guyon) and to the spittle, but
could never find any body to speak unto; whereupon they returned a little
back, and took occasion to pass above the aforesaid hospital, to try what
intelligence they could come by in those parts, in which resolution riding on,
and by chance in a pastoral lodge, or shepherds cottage near to Coudray,
hitting upon the five Pilgrims, they carried them way-bound and manacled, as if
they had been spies, for all the exclamations, adjurations and requests that
they could make. Being come down from thence toward Seville, they were heard
by Gargantua, who said then unto those that were with him, Camerades and fellow
soldiers, we have here met with an encounter, and they are ten times in number
more then we: shall we charge them or no? What a devil (said the Monk) shall we
do else? Do you esteem men by their number, rather then by their valor and
prowes? With this he cried out, Charge, devils, charge; which when the enemies
heard, they thought certainly that they had been very devils, and therefore
even then began all of them to run away as hard as they could drive, Draw-forth
only excepted, who immediately settled his lance on its rest, and therewith hit
the Monk with all his force on the very middle of his breast, but coming
against his horrifick frock, the point of the iron, being with the blow either
broke off or blunted, it was in matter of execution, as if you had struck
against an Anvil with a little wax-candle.

Then did the Monk with his staff of the Cross, give him such a sturdie thump
and whirret betwixt his neck and shoulders, upon the Acromion bone, that he
made him lose both sense and motion, and fall down stone dead at his horses
feet; and seeing the sign of the star which he wore scarfwayes, he said unto
Gargantua, these men are but Priests, which is but the beginning of a Monk; by
St. Ihon I am a perfect Monk, I will kill them to you like flies: Then ran he
after them at a swift and full gallop, till he overtook the reere, and felled
them down like tree-leaves, striking athwart and along and every way. Gymnast
presently asked Gargantua if they should pursue them? To whom Gargantua
answered, by no means; for, according to right military discipline, you must
never drive your enemy unto despair, for that such a strait does multiply his
force, and increase his courage, which was before broken and cast down; neither
is there any better help, or outgate of relief for men that are amazed, out of
heart, toiled and spent, then to hope for no favor at all. How many victories
have been taken out of the hands of the Victors by the vanquished, when they
would not rest satisfied with reason, but attempt to put all to the sword, and
totally to destroy their enemies, without leaving so much as one to carry home
news of the defeat of his fellows? Open therefore unto your enemies all the
gates and ways, and make to them a bridge of silver rather then fail, that
you may be rid of them. Yea, but (said Gymnast) they have the Monk: Have they
the Monk? (said Gargantua) Upon mine honor then it will prove to their cost:
but to prevent all dangers, let us not yet retreat, but halt here quietly, as
in an ambush; for I think I do already understand the policy and judgment of
our enemies, they are truly more directed by chance and mere fortune, then by
good advice and counsel. In the mean while, whilst these made a stop under the
walnut-trees, the Monk pursued on the chase, charging all he overtook, and
giving quarter to none, until he met with a trouper, who carried behind him
one of the poor Pilgrims, and there would have rifled him. The Pilgrim, in hope
of relief at the sight of the Monk, cried out, Ha, my Lord Prior, my good
friend, my Lord Prior, save me, I beseech you, save me; which words being heard
by those that rode in the van, they instantly faced about, and seeing there was
no body but the Monk that made this great havoc and slaughter among them, they
loded him with blows as thick as they use to do an Ass with wood: but of all
this he felt nothing, especially when they struck upon his frock, his skin was
so hard. Then they committed him to two of the Marshals men to keep, and
looking about, saw no body coming against them, whereupon they thought that
Gergantua and his Party were fled: then was it that they rode as hard as they
could toward the walnut-trees to meet with them, and left the Monk there all
alone, with his two foresaid men to guard him. Gargantua heard the noise and
neighing of the horses, and said to his men, Camerades, I hear the track and
beating of the enemies horse-feet, and withal perceive that some of them come
in a troop and full body against us; let us rallie and close here, then set
forward in order, and by this means we shall be able to receive their charge,
to their loss and our honor.

CHAP. XLIV. How the Monk rid himself of his Keepers, and how Picrocholes
forlorn hope was defeated.
THe Monk seeing them break off thus without order, conjectured that they were
to set upon Gargantua and those that were with him, and was wonderfully grieved
that he could not succor them; then considered he the countenance of the two
keepers in whose custody he was, who would have willingly run after the
troops to get some booty and plunder, and were always looking toward the
valley unto which they were going; farther, he syllogized, saying, These men
are but badlys killed in matters of war, for they have not required my
paroll, neither have they taken my sword from me; suddenly hereafter he drew
his brackmard or horsemans sword, wherewith he gave the keeper which held him,
on the right side such a sound slash, that he cut clean thorough the jugularie
veins, and the sphagitid or transparent arteries of the neck, with the
forepart of the throat called the gargareon, even unto the two Adenes, which
are throat-kernels; and redoubling the blow, he opened the spinal marrow
betwixt the second and third vertebrae; there fell down that keeper stark dead
to the ground. Then the Monk reining, his horse to the left ran upon the
other, who seeing his fellow dead, and the Monk to have the advantage of him,
cried with a loud voice, Ha, my Lord Prior, quarter, I yield, my Lord Prior,
quarter, quarter, my good friend, my Lord Prior: and the Monk cried likewise,
My Lord Posterior, my friend, my Lord Posterior, you shall have it upon your
posteriorums: Ha, said the keeper, my Lord Prior, my Minion, my Gentile, Lord
Prior, I pray God make you an Abbot; By the habit (said the Monk) which I
wear, I will here make you a Cardinal; what do you use to pay ransomes to
religious men? you shall therefore have by and by a red hat of my giving: and
the fellow cried, Ha, my Lord Prior, my Lord Prior, my Lord Abbot that shall
be, my Lord Cardinal, my Lord all, ha, ha, hes, no my Lord Prior, my good
little Lord the Prior, I yield, render and deliver my self up to you: and I
deliver thee (said the Monk) to all the Devils in hell; then at one stroke he
struck off his head, cutting his scalp upon the temple-bones, and lifting up in
the upper part of the scul the two triangularie bones called sincipital, or the
two bones bregmatis, together with the sagittal commissure or dart-like seame
which distinguishes the right side of the head from the left, as also a great
part of the coronal or forehead-bone, by which terrible blow likewise he cut
the two meninges or filmes which inwrap the brain, and made a deep wound in
the brains two posterior ventricles, and the cranium or skull abode hanging
upon his shoulders, by the skin of the pericranium behind, in form of a
Doctors bonnet, black without and red within. Thus fell he down also to the
ground stark dead.

And presently the Monk gave his horse the spur, and kept the way that the
enemy held, who had met with Gargantua and his companions in the broad
highway, and were so diminished of their number, for the enormous slaughter
that Gargantua had made with his great tree amongst them, as also Gymnast,
Ponocrates, Eudemon, and the rest, that they began to retreat disorderly and in
great haste, as men altogether affrighted and troubled in both sense and
understanding; and as if they had seen the very proper species and form of
death before their eyes; or rather as when you see an Ass with a brizze or
gad-bee under his tail, or fly that stings him, run hither and thither
without keeping any path or way, throwing down his load to the ground, breaking
his bridle and reins, and taking no breath nor rest, and no man can tell what
ailes him, for they see not any thing touch him: so fled these people destitute
of wit, without knowing any cause of flying, only pursued by a panick terror,
which in their minds they had conceived. The Monk perceiving that their whole
intent was to betake themselves to their heels, alighted from his horse, and
got upon a big large rock, which was in the way, and with his great Brackmard
sword laid such load upon those runawayes, and with maine strength fetching a
compass with his arm without feigning or sparing, slew and overthrew so many,
that his sword broke in two pieces, then thought he within himself that he had
slain and killed sufficiently, and that the rest should escape to carry news;
therefore he took up a battle-axe of those that lay there dead, and got upon
the rock again, passing his time to see the enemy thus flying, and to tumble
himself amongst the dead bodies, only that he suffered none to carry Pike,
Sword, Lance nor Gun with him, and those who carried the Pilgrims bound, he
made to alight, and gave their horses unto the said Pilgrims, keeping them
there with him under the hedge, and also Touchefaucet, who was then his
prisoner.

CHAP. XLV. How the Monk carried along with him the Pilgrims, and of the good
words that Grangousier gave them.
THis skirmish being ended, Gargantua retreated with his men, excepting the
Monk, and about the dawning of the day they came unto Grangousier, who in his
bed was praying unto God for their safety and victory: and seeing them all safe
and sound, he embraced them lovingly, and asked what was become of the Monk?
Gargantua answered him, that without doubt the enemies had the Monk? then have
they mischief and ill luck (said Grangousier) which was very true; thererefore
is it a common proverb to this day, to give a man the Monk (or as in French,
luy bailler le money) when they would express the doing unto one a mischief;
then commanded he a good breakfast to be provided for their refreshment: when
all was ready, they called Gargantua, but he was so agrieved that the Monk was
not to be heard of, that he would neither eat nor drink: in the mean while
the Monk comes, and from the gate of the outer Court cries out aloud, Fresh
wine, fresh wine Gymnast my friend. Gymnast went out and saw that it was Friar
Jhon, who brought along with him five Pilgrims and Touch-faucet prisoners;
whereupon Gargantua likewise went forth to meet him, and all of them made him
the best welcome that possibly they could, and brought him before Grangousier,
who asked him of all his adventures: the Monk told him all, both how he was
taken, how he rid himself of his keepers, of the slaughter he had made by the
way, and how he had rescued the Pilgrims, and brought along with him Captain
Touch-faucet. Then did they altogether fall to banqueting most merrily; in the
mean time Grangousier asked the Pilgrims what countrymen they were, whence
they came, and wither they went? Sweertogo in the name of the rest answered, My
Sovereign Lord, I am of Saint -Genou in Berrie, this man is of Patvau, this
other is of Onzay, this of Argy, and this man of Villebrenin; we came from
Saint Sebastian near Nantes, and are now returning, as we best may, by easy
journeys; Yea, but said Grangousier, what went you to do at Saint Sebastian? We
went (said Sweertogo) to offer up unto that Sanct our vows against the Plague.
Ah poor men (said Grangousier) do you think that the Plague comes from Saint
Sebastian? Yes truly, (answered Sweertogo) our Preachers tell us so indeed. But
is it so? (said Grangousier) do the false Prophets teach you such abuses? do
they thus blaspheme the Sancts and holy men of God, as to make them like unto
the Devils, who do nothing but hurt unto mankind, as Homer writes, that the
Plague was sent into the camp of the Greeks by Apollo, and as the Poets feign a
great rabble of Vejoves and mischievous gods. So did a certain Cafard or
dissembling religionarie preach at Sinay, that Saint Antonie sent the fire into
men's legs, that Saint Eutropius made men hydropick; Saint Clidas, fools; and
that Saint Genou made them goutish: but I punished him so exemplarily, though
he called me Heretic for it, that since that time no such hypocritical rogue
durst set his foot within my territories; and truly I wonder that your King
should suffer them in their sermons to publish such scandalous doctrine in his
dominions; for they deserve to be chastised with greater severity then those
who by magical art, or any other device have brought the pestilence into a
country; the pest kills but the bodies, but such abominable Impostors
empoyson our very souls. As he spoke these words, in came the Monk very
resolute, and asked them, whence are you, you poor wretches? of Saint Genou
(said they;) And how (said the Monk) does the Abbot Gulligut the good drinker,
and the Monks, what cheer make they? by G -- body they will have a fling at your
wives, and breast them to some purpose whilst you are upon your roaming rant
and gadding Pilgrimage: Hin, hen (said sweertogo) I am not afraid of mine; for
he that shall see her by day, will never break his neck to come to her in the
nightime: Yea mary (said the Monk) now you have hit it, let her be as ugly as
ever was Proserpina, she will once by the Lord G -- be over-turned, and get her
skin-coat shaken, if there dwell any Monks near to her, for a good Carpenter
will make use of any kind of timber: let me be peppered with the pox, if you
find not all your wives with child at your return; for the very shadow of
the steeple of an Abbey is fruitful: It is (said Gargantua) like the water of
Nilus in Egypt, if you believe Strabo and Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 3. What virtue
will there be then (said the Monk) in their bullets of concupiscence, their
habits and their bodies?

Then (said Grangousier,) Go your ways, poor men in the name of God the
Creator, to whom I pray to guide you perpetually, and henceforward be not so
ready to undertake these idle and unprofitable journeys; Look to your families,
labor every man in his vocation, instruct your children, and live as the good
Apostle St. Paul directs you: in doing whereof, God, his Angels and Sancts
will guard and protect you, and no evil or plague at any time shall befall you.
Then Gargantua led them into the hall to take their refection: but the Pilgrims
did nothing but sigh, and said to Gargantua, O how happy is that land which
has such a man for their Lord! we have been more edified and instructed by the
talk which he has had with us, then by all the Sermons that ever were preached
in our town. This is (said Gargantua) that which Plato says, lib. 5. de
republ. That those Commonwealths are happy, whose Rulers philosophate, and
whose Philosophers rule. Then caused he their wallets to be filled with
victuals, and their bottles with wine, and gave unto each of them a horse to
ease them upon the way, together with some pence to live by.

CHAP. XLVI. How Grangousier did very kindly entertain Touchefaucet his
Prisoner.
TOuchefaucet was presented unto Grangousier, and by him examined upon the
enterprise and attempt of Picrochole, what it was he could pretend to, or aim
at, by the rustling stir, and tumultuary coil of this his sudden invasion:
whereunto he answered, that his end and purpose was to conquer all the
country, if he could, for the injury done to his cake-bakers: It is too great
an undertaking (said Grangousier;) and (as the Proverb is) He that gripes too
much, holds fast but little: the time is not now as formerly, to conquer the
Kingdoms of our neighbor Princes, and to build up our own greatness upon the
loss of our nearest Christian brother: this imitation of the ancient
Herculeses, Alexanders, Hannibals, Scipios, Caesar's, and other such heroes is
quite contrary to the Profession of the Gospel of Christ, by the which we are
commanded to preserve, keep, rule and govern every man his own country and
lands, and not in a hostile manner to invade others, and that which heretofore
the Barbars and Saracens called prowess and valor, we do now call robbing,
theevery and wickedness; It would have been more commendable in him to have
contained himself within the bounds of his own territories, royally governing
them, then to insult and domineer in mine, pillaging and plundering every where
like a most unmerciful enemy; for by ruling his own with discretion, he might
have increas't his greatness, but by robbing me he cannot escape destruction;
Go your ways in the name of God, prosecute good enterprises, show your King
what is amiss, and never counsel him with regard unto your own particular
profit, for the public loss will swallow up the private benefit. As for your
ransom, I do freely remit it to you, and will that your arms and horse be
restored to you: so should good neighbors do, and ancient friends; seeing this
our difference is not properly war, as Plato, lib. 5. de repub. would not
have it called war but sedition, when the Greeks took up arms against one
another, and that therefore when such combustions should arise amongst them,
his advice was to behave themselves in the managing of them, with all
discretion and modesty. Although you call it war, it is but superficial, it
enters not into the closet and inmost cabinet of our hearts; for neither of
us has been wronged in his honor, nor is there any question betwixt us in the
main, but only how to redress by the by some petty faults committed by our
men; I mean, both yours and ours, which although you knew you ought to let
pass; for these quarrelsome persons deserve rather to be contemned then
mentioned, especially seeing I offered them satisfaction according to the
wrong. God shall be the just Judge of our variances, whom I beseech by death
rather to take me out of this life, and to permit my goods to perish and be
destroyed before mine eyes, then that by me or mine he should in any sort be
wronged. These words uttered, he called the Monk, and before them all spoke
thus unto him: Friar Ihon, my good friend, is it you that took prisoner the
Captain Touchfaucet here present? Sir (said the Monk) seeing himself is here,
and that he is of the years of discretion, I had rather you should know it by
his confession then by any words of mine. Then said Touchfaucet, My sovereign
Lord, it is he indeed that took me, and I do therefore most freely yield my
self his prisoner. Have you put him to any ransom, said Grangousier to the
Monk? No, (said the Monk,) of that I take no care: How much would you have for
having taken him? nothing, nothing, (said the Monk,) I am not swayed by that,
nor do I regard it; Then Grangousier commanded, that in presence of
Touchefaucet, should be delivered to the Monk for taking him, the sum of
threescore and two thousand saluts (in English money fifteen thousand and five
hundred pounds) which was done, whilst they made a collation or little banquet
to the said Touchfaucet, of whom Grangousier asked, if he would stay with him,
or if he loved rather to return to his King? Touchfaucet answered, that he was
content to take whatever course he would advise him to; Then (said Grangousier)
return unto your King, and God be with you.

Then he gave him an excellent sword of Avienue blade, with a golden scabbard
wrought with Vine-branch-like flourishes, of fair Goldsmiths work, and a
collar or neck-chain of gold, weighing seven hundred and two thousand marks (at
eight ounces each,) garnished with precious stones of the finest sort, esteemed
at a hundred and sixty thousand ducats, and ten thousand crowns more, as an
honorable donative, by way of present.

After this talk, Touchefaucet got to his horse, and Gargantua for his safety
allowed him the guard of thirty men at arms, and six score archers to attend
him under the conduct of Gymnast, to bring him even unto the gate of the rock
Clermond, if there were need. As Soon as he was gone, the Monk restored unto
Grangousier the threescore and two thousand saluts, which he had received,
saying, Sir it is not as yet the time for you to give such gifts, stay till
this war be at an end, for none can tell what accidents may occur, and war
begun without good provision of money beforehand for going through with it, is
but as a breathing of strength, and blast that will quickly pass away; coin
is the sinews of war. Well then (said Grangousier) at the end I will content
you by some honest recompense, as also all those who shall do me good service.

CHAP. XLVII. How Grangousier sent for his legions, and how Touchefaucet slew
Rashcalf, and was afterward executed by the command of Picrochole.
ABout this same time those of Besse, of the old Market, of St. James bourg, of
the draggage of Parille, of the Rivers, of the rocks St. Pol, of the Vaubreton,
of Pautille, of the Brahemont, of Clainbridge, of Cravant, of Grammont, of the
town at the Badgerholes, of Huymes, of Serge, of Husse, of St. Lovant, of
Panzoust, of the Coldraux, of Vernon, of Coulaines, of Chose, of Varenes, of
Bourgueil, of the Bouchard Claud, of the Croulay, of Narsie, of Cand, of
Monsoreau and other bordering places, sent Ambassadors unto Grangousier, to
tell him that they were advised of the great wrongs which Picrochole had done
him, and in regard of their ancient confederacy, offered him what assistance
they could afford, bothin men, money, victuals and ammunition, and other
necessaries for war; The money, which by the joint agreement of them all was
sent unto him, amounted to sixscore and fourteen millions, two crowns and a
half of pure gold. The forces wherewith they did assist him, did consist in
fifteen thousand cuirasiers, two and thirty thousand light horsemen, fourscore
and nine thousand dragoons, and a hundred and forty thousand voluntier
adventurers. These had with them eleven thousand and two hundred cannons,
double cannons, long pieces of Artillery called Basilisks, and smaller sized
ones, known by the name of spirols, besides the mortar-pieces and grenades. Of
pioneers they had seven and forty thousand, all victualled and paid for six
months and four days of advance* which offer Gargantua did not altogether
refuse, nor wholly accept of: but giving them hearty thanks, said that he would
compose and order the war by such a device, that there should not be found
great need to put so many honest men to trouble in the managing of it; And
therefore was content at that time to give order only for bringing along the
legions, which he maintained in his ordinary Garison-townes of the Deviniere,
of Chavignie, of Granot, and of Quinquenais, amounting to the number of two
thousand cuirasiers, threescore and six thousand foot-souldiers, six and twenty
thousand dragoons, attended by two hundred pieces of great ordnance, two and
twenty thousand Pioneers, and six thousand light horsemen, all drawn up in
troops, so well befitted and accommodated with their commissaries, sutlers,
ferriers, harnasse-makers, and other such like necessary members in a military
camp; so fully instructed in the Art of warfare, so perfectly knowing and
following their colors, so ready to hear and obey their Captains, so nimble to
run, so strong at their charging, so prudent in their adventures, and every day
so well disciplined, that they seemed rather to be a consort of organ-pipes, or
mutual concord of the wheels of a clock, then an infantry and cavalry, or army
of soldiers.

Touchefaucet immediately after his return, presented himself before
Picrochole, and related unto him at large all that he had done and seen, and at
last endeavored to persuade him with strong and forcible arguments, to
capitulate and make an agreement with Grangousier, whom he found to be the
honestest man in the world, saying further, that it was neither right nor
reason thus to trouble his neighbors, of whom they had never received any
thing but good: and in regard of the main point, that they should never be able
to go through stitch with that war, but to their great damage and mischief:
for the forces of Picrochole were not so considerable, but that Grangousier
could easily overthrow them.

He had not well done speaking, when Rashcalf said out aloud, Unhappy is that
Prince, which is by such men served, who are so easily corrupted, as I know
Touchefaucet is; for I see his courage so changed, that he had willingly joined
with our enemies to fight against us and betray us, if they would have received
him; but as virtue is of all, both friends and foes, praised and esteemed, so
is wickedness soon known and suspected, and although it happen the enemies to
make use thereof for their profit, yet have they always the wicked, and the
traitors in abomination.

Touchefaucet being at these words very impatient, drew out his sword, and
there with ran Rashcalf through the body, a little under the nipple of his left
side, whereof he died presently, and pulling back his sword out of his body,
said boldly, So let him perish, that shall a faithful servant blame. Picrochole
incontinently grew furious, and seeing Touchefaucets new sword and his scabbard
so richly diapred with flourishes of most excellent workmanship, said, Did they
give thee this weapon, so felloniously therewith to kill before my face my so
good friend Rashcalf? then immediately commanded he his guard to hew him in
pieces, which was instantly done, and that so cruelly, that the chamber was all
died with blood: Afterward he appointed the corpse of Rashcalf to be honorably
buried, and that of Touchefaucet, to be cast over the walls into the ditches.

The news of these excessive violences were quickly spread through all the
Army; whereupon many began to murmr against Picrochole, insofarre that
Pinchpennie said to him, My sovereign Lord, I know not what the issue of this
enterprise will be; I see your men much dejected, and not well resolved in
their minds, by considering that we are here very ill provided of victual,
and that our number is already much diminished by three or four sallies.
Furthermore, great supplies and recruits come daily in to your enemies: but we
so moulder away, that if we be once besieged, I do not see how we can escape a
total destruction; Tush, pish, (said Picrochole) you are like the Melun eeles,
you cry before they come to you; Let them come, let them come, if they dare.

CHAP. XLVIII. How Gargantua set upon Picrochole, within the rock Clermond, and
utterly defeated the Army of the said Picrochole.
GArgantua had the charge of the whole Army, and his father Grangousier stayed
in his Castle, who encouraging them with good words, promised great rewards
unto those that should do any notable service. Having thus set forward, as soon
as they had gained the Pass at the Ford of Vede, with boats and bridges
speedily made, they past over in a trice, then considering the situation of the
town, which was on a high and advantageous place, Gargantua thought fit to call
his counsel, and pass that night in deliberation upon what was to be done: But
Gymnast said unto him, My sovereign Lord, such is the nature and complexion of
the frenches, that they are worth nothing, but at the first push, then are they
more fierce then devils; but if they linger a little, and be wearied with
delays, they will prove more faint and remiss then women: my opinion is
therefore, that now presently after your men have taken breath, and some small
refection, you give order for a resolute assault, and that we storm them
instantly. His advice was found very good, and for effectuating thereof, he
brought forth his army into the plain field, and placed the reserves on the
skirt or rising of a little hill. The Monk took along with him six companies of
foot, and two hundred horsemen well armed, and with great diligence crossed the
marish, and valiantly got up on the top of the green hillock, even unto the
highway which leads to Loudin. Whilst the assault was thus begun, Picrocholes
men could not tell well what was best, to issue out and receive the Assailants,
or keep within the town and not to stir: Himself in the mean time, without
deliberation, sallied forth in a rage with the cavalry of his guard, who were
forthwith received, and royally entertained with great cannon-shot, that fell
upon them like hail from the high grounds, on which the Artillery was planted;
whereupon the Gargantuists betook themselves unto the valleys, to give the
ordnance leave to play, and range with the larger scope.

Those of the town defended themselves as well as they could, but their shot
past over us, without doing us any hurt at all: Some of Picrocholes men that
had escaped our Artillery, set most fiercely upon our soldiers, but prevailed
little; for they were all let in betwixt the files, and there knocked down to
the ground, which their fellow soldiers seeing, they would have retreated, but
the Monk having seized upon the Pass, by the which they were to return, they
run away and fled in all the disorder and confusion that could be imagined.

Some would have pursued after them, and followed the chase, but the Monk
withheld them, apprehending that in their pursuit the Pursuers might lose their
ranks, and so give occasion to the besieged to sallie out of the town upon
them. Then staying there some space, and none coming against him, he sent the
Duke Phrontist, to advise Gargantua to advance toward the hill up on the left
hand, to hinder Picrocholes retreat at that gate, which Gargantua did with all
expedition, and sent thither four brigades under the conduct of Sebast, which
had no sooner reached the top of the hill, but they met Picrochole in the
teeth, and those that were with him scattered.

Then charged they upon them stoutly, yet were they much indamaged by those
that were upon the walls, who galled them with all manner of shot, both from
the great ordnance, small guns and bows. Which Gargantua perceiving, he went
with a strong Party to their relief, and with his Artillery began to thunder
so terribly upon that canton of the wall, and so long, that all the strength
within the town, to maintain and fill up the breach, was drawn thither. The
Monk seeing that quarter which he kept besieged, void of men and competent
guards, and in a manner altogether naked and abandoned, did most magnanimously
on a sudden lead up his men toward the Fort, and never left it till he had got
up upon it, knowing that such as come to the reserve in a conflict, bring with
them always more fear and terror, then those that deal about them with their
hands in the fight.

Nevertheless he gave no alarm till all his soldiers had got within the wall,
except the two hundred horsemen, whom he left without to secure his entry. Then
did he give a most horrible shout, so did all these who were with him, and
immediately thereafter without resistance, putting to the edge of the sword the
guard that was at that gate, they opened it to the horsemen, with whom most
furiously they altogether ran toward the Eastgate, where all the hurly
burly was, and coming close upon them in the rear, overthrew all their forces.
The besieged seeing that the Gargantuists had won the town upon them, and that
they were like to be secure in no corner of it, submitted themselves unto the
mercy of the Monk, and asked for quarter, which the Monk very nobly granted to
them, yet made them lay down their arms; then shutting them up within
Churches, gave order to seize upon all the staves of the Crosses, and placed
men at the doors to keep them from coming forth; then opening that Eastgate,
he issued out to succor and assist Gargantua: but Picrochole, thinking it had
been some relief coming to him from the town, adventured more forwardly then
before, and was upon the giving of a most desperate home-charge, when Gargantua
cried out, Ha, Friar Ihon, my friend, Friar Ihon, you are come in a good hour;
which unexpected accident so affrighted Picrochole and his men, that giving all
for lost, they betook themselves to their heels, and fled on all hands.
Gargantua chased them till they came near to Vaugaudry, killing and slaying all
the way, and then sounded the retreat.

CHAP. XLIX. How Picrochole in his flight fell into great misfortunes, and what
Gargantua did after the battle.
PIcrochole thus in despair, fled toward the Bouchard island, and in the way
to Rivere his horse stumbled and fell down, whereat he on a sudden was so
incensed, that he with his sword without more ado killed him in his choler;
then not finding any that would remount him, he was about to have taken an Ass
at the Mill that was thereby: but the Millers men did so baste his bones, and
so soundly bethwack him, that they made him both black and blew with strokes;
then stripping him of all his clothes, gave him a scurvie old canvas jacket
wherewith to cover his nakedness. Thus went along this poor choleric wretch,
who passing the water at Porthuaux, and relating his misadventurous disasters,
was foretold by an old Lourpidon hag, that his Kingdom should be restored to
him at the coming of the Cocklicranes, which she called Coquecigrues. What is
become of him since we cannot certainly tell, yet was I told that he is now a
porter at Lions, as testie and pettish in humor as ever he was before, and
would be always with great lamentation enquiring at all strangers of the
coming of the Cocklicranes, expecting assuredly, (according to the old woman's
prophecy, that at their coming he shall be re-established in his Kingdom. The
first thing Gargantua did after his return into the town, was to call the
Muster-roll of his men, which when he had done, he found that there were very
few either killed or wounded, only some few foot of Captain Tolmeres company,
and Ponocrates who was shot with a musket-ball through the doublet. Then he
caused them all at and in their several posts and divisions to take a little
refreshment, which was very plenteously provided for them in the best drink and
victuals that could be had for money, and gave order to the Treasurers and
Commissaries of the Army, to pay for and defray that repast, and that there
should be no outrage at all, nor abuse committed in the town, seeing it was his
own. And furthermore commanded, that immediately after the soldiers had done
with eating and drinking for that time sufficiently, and to their own hearts
desire, a gathering should be beaten for bringing them altogether, to be drawn
up on the Piazza before the Castle, there to receive six months pay
completely, all which was done. After this by his direction, were brought
before him in the said place, all those that remained of Picrocholes Party;
unto whom in the presence of the Princes, Nobles and Officers of his Court and
Army, he spoke as follows.

CHAP. L. Gargantua's speech to the vanquished.
Our forefathers and Ancestors of all times, have been of this nature and
disposition, that upon the winning of a battle, they have chosen rather for a
sign and memorial of their triumphs and victories, to erect trophies and
monuments in the hearts of the vanquished by clemency, then by architecture in
the lands which they had conquered; for they did hold in greater estimation,
the lively remembrance of men purchased by liberality, then the dumb
inscription of arches, pillars and pyramides, subject to the injury of storms
and tempests, and to the envy of every one. You may very well remember of the
courtesy, which by them was used toward the Bretons, in the battle of St.
Aubin of Cormier, and at the demolishing of Partenay. You have heard, and
hearing admire their gentle comportment toward those at the barreers of
Spaniola, who had plundered, wasted and ransacked the maritime borders of Olone
and Talmondois. All this hemisphere of the world was filled with the praises
and congratulations, which your selves and your fathers made, when Alpharbal
King of Canarre, not satisfied with his own fortunes, did most furiously invade
the land of Onyx, and with cruel Piracies molest all the Armorick islands, and
confine regions of Britanie; yet was he in a set naval fight justly taken and
vanquished by my father, whom God preserve and protect. But what? whereas other
Kings and Emperors, yea those who entitle themselves Catholics, would have
dealt roughly with him, kept him a close prisoner, and put him to an extreme
high ransom: he entreated him very courteously, lodged him kindly with himself
in his own Palace, and out of his incredible mildness and gentle disposition
sent him back with a safe conduct, laden with gifts, laden with favors,
laden with all offices of friendship: what fell out upon it? Being returned
into his country, he called a Parliament, where all the Princes and States of
his Kingdom being assembled, he showed them the humanity which he had found in
us, and therefore wished them to take such course by way of compensation
therein, as that the whole world might be edified by the example, as well of
their honest graciousnesse to us, as of our gracious honesty toward them. The
result hereof was, that it was voted and decreed by an unanimous consent, that
they should offer up entirely their Lands, Dominions and Kingdoms, to be
disposed of by us according to our pleasure.

Alpharbal in his own person, presently returned with nine thousand and thirty
eight great ships of burden, bringing with him the treasures, not only of his
house and royal lineage, but almost of all the country besides; for he
imbarking himself, to set sail with a West-North-East wind, every one in
heaps did cast into the ship gold, silver, rings, jewels, spices, drugs, and
aromatical parfumes, parrets, pelicans, monkies, civet-cats, black-spotted
weesils, porcupines, etc. He was accounted no good Mothers son, that did not
cast in all the rare and precious things he had.

Being safely arrived, he came to my said father, and would have kissed his feet:
that action was found too submissively low, and therefore was not permitted,
but in exchange he was most cordially embraced: he offfered his presents, they
were not received, because they were too excessive: he yielded himself
voluntarily a servant and vassal, and was content his whole posterity should be
liable to the same bondage; this was not accepred of, because it seemed not
equitable: he surrendered by virtue of the decree of his great Parliamentarie
council, his whole Countries and Kingdoms to him, offering the Deed and
Conveyance, signed, sealed and ratified by all those that were concerned in it;
this was altogether refused, and the parchments cast into the fire. In end,
this free good will, and simple meaning of the Canarriens, wrought such
tenderness in my fathers heart, that he could not abstain from shedding
tears, and wept most profusely: then by choice words very congruously adapted,
strove in what he could to diminish the estimation of the good offices which he
had done them, saying, that any courtesy he had conferred upon them, was not
worth a rush, and what favor soever he had showed them, he was bound to do it.
But so much the more did Alpharbal augment the repute thereof. What was the
issue? whereas for his ransom in the greatest extremity of rigor, and most
tyrannical dealing, could not have been exacted above twenty times a hundred
thousand crowns, and his eldest sons detained as hostages, till that sum had
been paid, they made themselves perpetual tributaries, and obliged to give us
every year twomillions of gold at four and twenty carats fine: The first year
we received the whole sum of two millions: the second year of their own accord
they paid freely to us three and twenty hundred thousand crowns: the third
year six and twenty hundred thousand; the fourth year three millions, and do so
increase it always out of their own good will, that we shall be constrained to
forbid them to bring us any more. This is the nature of gratitude and true
thankfulness. For time which gnawes and diminishes all things else, augments
and increases benefits; because a noble action of liberality done to a man of
reason, does gnaw continually, by his generous thinking of it, and remembering
it.

Being unwilling therefore any way to degenerate from the hereditary mildness
and clemency of my Parents; I do now forgive you, deliver you from all fines
and imprisonments, fully release you, set you at liberty, and every way make
you as frank and free as ever you were before. Moreover, at your going out of
the gate, you shall have every one of you three months pay to bring you home
into your houses and families, and shall have a safe convoy of six hundred
cuirasiers and eight thousand foot under the conduct of Alexander, Esquire of
my body, that the Clubmen of the Country may not do you any injury. God be
with you. I am sorry from my heart that Picrochole is not here; for I would
have given him to understand, that this war was undertaken against my will,
and without any hope to increase either my goods or renown: but seeing he is
lost, and that no man can tell where nor how he went away, it is my will that
his Kingdom remain entire to his son; who because he is too young, (he not
being yet full five years old) shall be brought up and instructed by the
ancient Princes, and learned men of the Kingdom. And because a Realm thus
desolate, may easily come to ruin; if the covetousness and avarice of those,
who by their places are obliged to administer justice in it, be not curbed and
restrained: I ordain and will have it so, that Ponocrates be overseer and
superintendent above all his governors, with whatever power and authority is
requisite thereto, and that he be continually with the child, until he find
him able and capable to rule and govern by himself.

Now I must tell you, that you are to understand how a too feeble and dissolute
facility in pardoning evildoers, gives them occasion to commit wickedness
afterward more readily, upon this pernicious confidence of receiving favor; I
consider, that Moses, the meekest man that was in his time upon the earth, did
severely punish the mutinous and seditious people of Israel: I consider
likewise, that Julius Caesar, who was so gracious an Emperor, that Cicero said
of him, that his fortune had nothing more excellent then that he could; and his
virtue nothing better, then that he would always save and pardon every man: He
notwithstanding all this, did in certain places most rigorously punish the
authors of rebellion; After the example of these good men, it is my will and
pleasure, that you deliver over unto me before you depart hence, first, that
fine fellow Marquet, who was the prime cause, origin and groundwork of this
war, by his vain presumption and overweening: secondly, his
fellow-cakebakers, who were neglective in checking and reprehending his idle
haire-brain'd humor in the instant time: and lastly, all the Counselors,
Captains, Officers and Domestics of Picrochole, who had been incendiaries or
fomenters of the war, by provoking, praising or counselling him to come out
of his limits thus to trouble us.

CHAP. LI. How the victorious Gargantuists were recompensed after the battle,
WHen Gargantua had finished his speech, the seditious men whom he required,
were delivered up unto him, except Swashbuckler, Durtaille and Smaltrash, who
ran away six hours before the battle, one of them as far as to Lainielneck
at one course, another to the valley of Vire, and the third even unto Logroine,
without looking back, or taking breath by the way; and two of the Cake-bakers
who were slain in the fight, Gargantua did them no other hurt, but that he
appointed them to pull at the Presses of his Printing House, which he had newly
set up: then those who died there he caused to be honorably buried in
Black-soile-valley, and Burn-hag-field, and gave order that the wounded should
be dressed and had care of in his great Hospital or Nosocome. After this,
considering the great prejudice done to the town and its inhabitants, he
re-imbursed their charges, and repaired all the losses that by their confession
upon oath could appear they had sustained: and for their better defense and
security in times coming against all sudden uproars and invasions, commanded a
strong citadel to be built there with a competent Garrison to maintain it; at
his departure he did very graciously thank all the soldiers of the brigades
that had been at this overthrow, and sent them back to their winter quarters in
their several stations and Garrisons; the Decumane Legion only excepted, whom
in the field on that day he saw do some great exploit, and their Captains also,
whom he brought along with himself unto Grangousier.

At the sight and coming of them, the good man was so joyful, that it is not
possible fully to describe it; he made them a feast the most magnificent,
plentiful, and delicious that ever was seen since the time of the King
Assuerus; at the taking up of the table he distributed amongst them his whole
cupboard of plate, which weighed eight hundred thousand and fourteen Besants of
gold, in great Each Besant is worth five pounds English money.
antic vessels, huge pots, large basins, big tasses, cups, goblets,
candlesticks, comfit-boxes, and other such plate, all of pure massy gold
besides the precious stones, enameling and workmanship, which by all men's
estimation was more worth then the matter of the gold; then unto every one of
them out of his coffers caused he to be given the sum of twelve hundred
thousand crowns ready money: and further he gave to each of them for ever and
in perpetuity (unless he should happen to decease without heirs) such Castles
and neighboring lands of his as were most commodious for them: to Ponocrates
he gave the rock Clermond; to Gymnast, the Coudray; to Eudemon, Monpensier,
Rinan, to Tolmere; to Ithibolle, Montsaurean; to Acamas, Cande; Varenes, to
Chirovacte; Gravot to Sebast; Quinquenais to Alexander; Legre to Sophrone; and
so of his other places.

CHAP. LII. How Gargantua caused to be built for the Monk the Abbey of Theleme.
THere was left only the Monk to provide for, whom Gargantua would have made
Abbot of Seville, but he refused it; he would have given him the Abbey of
Bourgueil, or of Sanct Florent which was better, or both, if it pleased him;
but the Monk gave him a very peremptory answer, that he would never take upon
him the charge nor government of Monks; For how shall I be able (said he) to
rule over others, that have not full power and command of my self: if you think
I have done you, or may hereafter do any acceptable service, give me leave to
found an Abbey after my own mind and fancy; the motion pleased Gargantua very
well, who thereupon offered him all the Country of Tholem by the river of
Loire, till within two leagues of the great forest of Port-huaut: the Monk
then requested Gargantua to institute his religious order contrary to all
others. First then (said Gargantua) you must not build a wall about your
convent, for all other Abbeys are strongly walled and mured about: See (said
the Monk) and not without cause (seeing wall and mure signify but one and the
same thing;) where there is Mur before, and Mur behind, there is store of
Murmur, envy, and mutual conspiracy. Moreover, seeing there are certain
convents in the world, whereof the custom is, if any woman come in (I mean
chaste and honest women) they immediately sweep the ground which they have trod
upon; therefore was it ordained that if any man or woman entered into religious
orders, should by chance come within this new Abbey, all the rooms should be
thoroughly washed and cleansed through which they had passed; and because in all
other Monasteries and Nunneries all is compassed, limited, and regulated bv
hours, it was decreed that in this new structure there should be neither Clock
nor Dial, but that according to the opportunities, and incident occasions, all
their hours should be disposed of; for (said Gargantua) The greatest loss of
time that I know, is to count the hours, what good comes of it? nor can there
be any greater dotage in the world, then for one to guide and direct his
courses by the sound of a Bell, and not by his own judgment and discretion.

Item, Because at that time they put no women into Nunneries, but such as were
either purblinde, blinkards, lame, crooked, ill-favored, misshapen, fools,
senseless, spoiled or corrupt; nor encloystered any men, but those that were
either sickly, subject to defluxions, ill-bred lowts, simple sots, or peevish
trouble-houses: but to the purpose; (said the Monk) A woman that is neither
fair nor good, to what use serves she? To make a Nun of, said Gargantua: Yea
said the Monk) and to make shirts and smocks; therefore was it ordained that
into this religious order should be admitted no women that were not fair, well
featured, and of a sweet disposition; nor men that were not comely, personable
and well conditioned.

Item, Because in the convents of women men come not but underhand, privily,
and by stealth; it was therefore enacted that in this house there shall be no
women in case there be not men, nor men in case there be not women.

Item, Because both men and women that are received into religious orders after
the expiring of their noviciat or probation-year, were constrained and forced
perpetually to stay there all the days of their life; it was therefore ordered,
that all whatever, men or women, admitted within this Abbey, should have full
leave to depart with peace and contentment, whenever it should seem good to
them so to do.

Item, for that the religious men and women did ordinarily make three Vows, to
wit, those of chastity, poverty and obedience, it was therefore constituted and
appointed, that in this Convent they might be honorably married, that they
might be rich, and live at liberty. In regard of the legitimat time of the
persons to be initiated, and years under and above, which they were not capable
of reception, the women were to be admitted from ten till fifteen, and the men
from twelve til eighteen.

CHAP. LIII. How the Abbey of the Thelemites was built and endowed.
FOr the fabric and furniture of the Abbey, Gargantua caused to be delivered
out in ready money seven and twenty hundred thousand, eight hundred and one and
thirty of those golden rams of Berrie, which have a sheep stamped on the one
side, and a flowred cross on the other; and for every year, until the whole
work were completed, he allotted threescore nine thousand crowns of the Sun,
and as many of the seven stars, to be charged all upon the receipt of the
custom. For the foundation and maintenance thereof for ever, he settled a
perpetual fee-farm-rent of three and twenty hundred, threescore and nine
thousand, five hundred and fourteen rose nobles, exempted from all homage,
fealty, service or burden whatsoever, and payable every year at the gate of
the Abbey; and of this by letters pattent passed a very good grant. The
Architecture was in a figure hexagonal, and in such a fashion, that in every
one of the six corners there was built a great round tower of threescore foot
in diameter, and were all of alike form and bigness. Upon the north-side ran
along the river of Loire, on the bank whereof was situated the tower called
Arctick: going toward the East, there was another called Calaer, the next
following Anatole; the next Mesembrine: the next Hesperia, and the last Criere.
Every tower was distant from other the space of three hundred and twelve paces.
The whole Aedifice was every where six stories high, reckoning the Cellars
under ground for one: the second was arched after the fashion of a
basket-handle; the rest were seeled with pure wainscot, flourished with
Flanders fretwork, in the form of the foot of a lamp: and covered above with
fine slates, with an indorsement of lead, carrying the antic figures of little
puppets, and animals of all sorts, notably well suited to one another, and
guilt, together with the gutters, which jetting without the walls, from betwixt
the cross bars in a diagonal figure, painted with gold and azur, reached to
the very ground, where they ended into great conduit-pipes, which carried all
away unto the river from under the house.

This same building was a hundred times more sumptuous and magnificent then
ever was Bonnivet, Chambourg or Chantillie; for there were in it nine thousand,
three hundred and two and thirty chambers, every one whereof had a withdrawing
room, a handsome closet, a wardrobe, an oratory, and neat passage, leading into
a great and spacious hall. Between every tower, in the midst of the said body
of building, there was a pair of winding (such as we now call lantern)
stairs, whereof the steps were part of Porphyrie, (which is a dark red marble,
spotted with white,) part of Numidian stone, (which is a kind of yellowishly
streaked marble upon various colors,) and part of Serpentine marble, (with
light spots on a dark green ground) each of those steps being two and twenty
foot in length, and three fingers thick, and the just number of twelve betwixt
every rest, or (as we now term it) landing place. In every resting place were
two fair antic arches where the light came in: and by those they went into a
Cabinet, made even with and of the breadth of the said winding, and the
re-ascending above the roofs of the house, ended conically in a pavillion: By
that vize or winding, they entered on every side into a great hall, and from
the halls into the chambers; from the Arctick tower unto the Criere, were the
fair great libraries in Greek, Latin, Hebrew, French, Italian and Spanish,
respectively distributed in their several cantons, according to the diversity
of these languages. In the midst there was a wonderful scalier or
windingstaire, the entry whereof was without the house, in a vault or arch six
fathom broad. It was made in such symmetrie and largeness, that six men at
arms with their lances in their rests, might together in a breast ride all up
to the very top of all the Palace; from the tower Anatole to the Mesembrine
were fair spacious galleries, all colored over and painted with the ancient
prowesses, histories and descriptions of the world. In the midst thereof there
was likewise such another ascent and gate, as we said there was on the
riverside. Upon that gate was written in great antic letters, that which
follows.

CHAP. LIVE. The Inscription set upon the great gate of Theleme.
HEre enter not vile bigots, hypocrites,
Externally devoted Apes, base snites,
Puffed up, wry-necked beasts, worse then the Huns
Or Ostrogots, forerunners of baboons:
Cursed snakes, dissembled varlers, seeming Sancts,
Slipshod caffards, beggars pretending wants,
Fat chuffcats, smell-feast knockers, doltish gulls,
Out-strouting cluster-fists, contentious bulls,
Fomenters of divisions and debates,
Elsewhere, not here, make sale of your deceits.
Your filthy trumperies
Stuff't with pernicious lies,
(Not worth a bubble)
Would do but trouble,
Our earthly Paradise,
Your filthy trumperies.
Here enter not Atturneys, Barresters,
Nor bridle champing-law-Practitioners:
Clerks, Commissaries, Scribes nor Pharisees,
Wilful disturbers of the Peoples ease:
Judges, destroyers, with an unjust breath,
Of honest men, like dogs, even unto death.
Your salarie is at the gibet-foot:
Go drink there; for we do not here fly out
On those excessive courses, which may draw
A waiting on your courts by suits in law.
Lawsuits, debates and wrangling
Hence are exiled, and jangling.
Here we are very
Frolic and merry,
And free from all intangling,
Lawsuits, debates and wrangling.
HEre enter not base pinching Usurers,
Pelf-lickers, everlasting gatherers.
Gold-graspers, coine-gripers, gulpers of mists:
Niggish deformed sots, who, though your chests
Vast sums of money should to you affoard,
Would ne'rthelesse add more unto that hoard,
And yet not be content, you cluntchfist dastards,
Insatiable fiends, and Plutoes bastards.
Greedy devourers, chichie sneakbil rogues,
Hell-mastiffs gnaw your bones, you ravenous dogs.
You beastly looking fellows,
Reason does plainly tell us,
That we should not
To you allot
Room here, but at the Gallows,
You beastly looking fellows.
HEre enter not, fond makers of demurres
In love-adventures, peevish, jealous curres.
Sad pensive dotards, raisers of garboyles,
Hags, goblins, guhosts, firebrands of household broyls.
Nor drunkards, liars, cowards, cheaters, clowns,
Thieves, cannibals, faces o'recast with frowns.
Nor lazy slugs, envious, covetous:
Nor blockish, cruel, nor too credulous.
Here mangie, pockie folks shall have no place,
No ugly lusks, nor persons of disgrace.
Grace, honor, praise, delight,
Here sojourn day and night.
Sound bodies lined
With a good mind,
Do here pursue with might
Grace, honor, praise, delight.
HEre enter you, and welcome from our hearts,
All noble sparks, endowed with gallant parts.
This is the glorious place, which bravely shall
Afford wherewith to entertain you all.
Were you a thousand, here you shall not want
For any thing; for what you will ask, we will grant.
Stay here you lively, jovial, handsome, brisk.
Gay, witty, frolic, cheerful merry, frisk,
Spruce, jocund, courteous, furtherers of trades,
And in a word, all worthy gentile blades.
Blades of heroic breasts
Shall taste here of the feasts,
Both privily
And civilly
Of the celestial guests,
Blades of heroic breasts.
HEre enter you, pure, honest, faithful, true,
Expounders of the Scriptures old and new.
Whose glosses do not blind our reason, but
Make it to see the clearer, and who shut
Its passages from hatred, avarice,
Pride, factious cov'nants, and all sort of vice.
Come, settle here a charitable faith,
Which neighbourly affection nourishes.
And whose light chaseth all corrupters hence,
Of the blist Word, from the aforesaid sense.
The Holy Sacred Word
May it always afford
T'us all in common
Both man and woman
A sp'ritual shield and sword,
The holy sacred Word.
HEre enter you all Ladies of high birth,
Delicious, stately, charming, full of mirth,
Ingenious, lovely, miniard, proper, fair,
Magnetic, graceful, splendid, pleasant, rare,
Obliging, sprightly, virtuous, young, solacious,
Kind, neat, quick, feat, bright, count, ripe, choice, dear, precious.
Alluring, courtly, comely, fine, complete,
Wise, personable, ravishing and sweet.
Come joys enjoy, the Lord celestial
Has given enough, wherewith to please us all.
Gold give us, God forgive us,
And from all woes relieve us.
That we the treasure
May reap of pleasure.
And shun what e're is grievous.
Gold give us, God forgive us.
CHAP. LV. What manner of dwelling the Thelemites had.
IN the middle of the lower Court there was a stately fountain of fair
Alabaster; upon the top thereof stood the three Graces, with their cornucopias,
or horns of abundance, and did jert out the water at their breasts, mouth,
ears, eyes, and other open passages of the body; the inside of the buildings
in this lower Court stood upon great pillars of Cassydonie stone, and Porphyrie
marble, made arch-wayes after a goodly antic fashion. Within those were
spacious galleries, long and large, adorned with curious pictures, the horns
of Bucks and Unicorns: with Rhinoceroses, water-horses called Hippopotames, the
teeth and tusks of Elephants, and other things well worth the beholding. The
lodging of the Ladies (for so we may call those gallant women) took up all from
the tower Arctick unto the gate Mesembrine: the men possessed the rest, before
the said lodging of the Ladies, that they might have their recreation betweeen
the two first towers. On the outside were placed the tilt-yard, the barriers
or lists for turnements, the hippodrome or riding Court, the theater or public
playhouse, and Natatorie or place to swim in, with most admirable bathes in
three stages, situated above one another, well furnished with all necessary
accommodation, and store of myrtlewater. By the riverside was the fair garden
of pleasure: and in the midst of that the glorious labyrinth. Between the two
other towers were the Courts for the tennis and the baloon. Toward the tower
Criere stood the Orchard full of all fruit trees, set and ranged in a
quincuncial order. At the end of that was the great Park, abounding with all
sort of Venison. Betwixt the third couple of towers were the buts and marks for
shooting with a snap work-gun, an ordinary bow for common archery, or with a
Crosse-bowe. The office-houses were without the tower Hesperie, of one story
high. The stables were beyond the offices, and before themstood the falconrie,
managed by Ostridge-keepers and Falconers, very expert in the Art, and it was
yearly supplied and furnished by the Candians, Venetians, Sarmates (now called
Moscoviters) with all sorts of most excellent hawks, eagles, gerfalcons,
gosehawkes, sacres, lanners, falcons, sparrowhawks, Marlins, and other kinds
of them, so gentle and perfectly well manned, that flying of themselves
sometimes from the Castle for their own disport, they would not fail to catch
whatever they encountered. The Venerie where the Beagles and Hounds were kept,
was a little farther off drawing toward the Park.

All the halls, chambers, and closets or cabinets, were richly hung-with
tapestrie, and hangings of diverse sorts, according to the variety of the
seasons of the year. All the pavements and floors were covered with green
cloth: the beds were all embroidered: in every back-chamber or withdrawing room
there was a looking-glass of pure crystal set in a frame of fine gold,
garnished all about with pearls, and was of such greatness, that it would
represent to the full the whole lineaments and proportion of the person that
stood before it. At the going out of the halls, which belong to the Ladies
lodgings, were the perfumers and trimmers, through whose hands the gallants
past when they were to visit the Ladies; those sweet Artificers did every
morning furnish the Ladies chambers with the spirit of roses,
orange-flower-water and Angelica; and to each of them gave a little precious
casket vapouring forth the most odoriferous exhalations of the choicest
aromatical sents.

CHAP. LVI. How the men and women of the religious order of Theleme were
apparelled.
THe Ladies at the foundation of this order, were apparelled after their own
pleasure and liking: but since that of their own accord and free will they have
reformed themselves, their accountrement is in manner as follows. They wore
stockins of scarlet crimson, or ingrained purple die, which reached just three
inches above the knee, having a list beautified with exquisite embroideries,
and rare incisions of the Cutters Art. Their garters were of the color of
their bracelets, and circled the knee a little, both over and under. Their
shoes, pumps and slippers were either of red, violet, or crimfon-velvet, pinked
and jagged like Lobster wadles.

Next to their smock they put on the pretty kirtle or vasquin of pure silk
chamlet: above that went the taffatie or tabie vardin-gale, of white, red,
tawnie, gray, or of any other color; Above this taffatie petticoat they had
another of cloth of tissue or brocado, embroidered with fine gold, and
interlaced with needle work, or as they thought good, and according to the
temperature and disposition of the weather, had their upper coats of satin,
damask or velvet, and those either orange, tawnie, green, ash-colored, blew,
yelow, bright, red, crimson or white, and so forth; or had them of cloth of
gold, cloth of silver, or some other choice stuff, enriched with purle, or
embroidered according to the dignity of the festival days and times wherein
they wore them.

Their gowns being still correspondent to the season, were either of cloth of
gold frizled with a silver-raised work; of red satin, covered with gold purle:
of tabie, or taffatie, white, blew, black, tawnie, etc. of silk serge, silk
chamlot, velvet, cloth of silver, silver tissue, cloth of gold, gold wire,
figured velvet, or figured satin tinselled and overcast with golden threads,
in diverse variously purfled draughts.

In summer some days in stead of gowns they wore light handsome mantles, made
either of the stuff of the aforesaid attire, or like Moresco rugs, of violet,
velvet frizled, with a raised work of gold upon silver purle: or with a knotted
cord-work of gold embroiderie, every where garnished with little Indian
pearls. They always carried a fair Pannache, or plume of feathers, of the
color of their muffe, bravely adorned and tricked out with glistering spangles
of gold. In the wintertime they had their taffatie gowns of all colors, as
abovenamed: and those lined with the rich furrings of hinde-wolves, or
speckled linxes, black-sported weesils, martlet-skins of Calabria, sables, and
other costly furs of an inestimable value. Their beads, rings, bracelets,
collars, carcanets and neck-chaines were all of precious stones, such as
carbuncles, rubies, baleus, diamonds, saphirs, emeralds, turkoises, garnets,
agates, berilles, and excellent margarits. Their head-dressing also varied with
the season of the year, according to which they decked themselves. In winter
it was of the French fashion, in the spring of the Spanish: in summer of the
fashion of Tuscanie, except only upon the holy days and Sundays, at which
times they were accoutred in the French mode, because they accounted it more
honorable, and better befitting the garb of a matronal pudicity.

The men were apparelled after their fashion: their stockins were of tamine or
of cloth-serge, of white, black, scarlet, or some other ingrained color: their
breeches were of velvet, of the same color with their stockins, or very near,
embroidered and cut according to their fancy: their doublet was of cloth of
gold, of cloth of silver, of velvet, satin, damask, taffaties, etc. of the
same colors, cut, embroidered, and suitably trimmed up in perfection: the
points were of silk of the same colors; the tags were of gold well enameled:
their coats and jerkins were of cloth of gold, cloth of silver, gold, tissue or
velvet embroidered, as they thought fit: their gowns were every whit as costly
as those of the Ladies: their girdles were of silk, of the color of their
doublets* every one had a gallant sword by his side, the hilt and handle
whereof were gilt, and the scabbard of velvet, of the color of his breeches,
with a chape of gold, and pure Goldsmiths work: the dagger was of the same:
their caps or bonnets were of black velvet, adorned with jewels and buttons of
gold: upon that they wore a white plume, most prettily and minion-like, parted
by so many rows of gold spangles, at the end whereof hung dangling in a more
sparkling resplendencie fair rubies, emeralds, diamonds, etc. but there was
such a sympathy betwixt the gallants and the Ladies, that every day they were
apparelled in the same livery: and that they might not miss, there were
certain Gentlemen appointed to tell the youths every morning what vestments the
Ladies would on that day wear; for all was done according to the pleasure of
the Ladies. In these so handsome clothes, and abiliaments so rich, think not
that either one or other of either sex did waste any time at all; for the
Masters of the wardrobes had all their raiments and apparel so ready for every
morning, and the chamber-Ladies so well skilled, that in a trice they would be
dressed, and completely in their clothes from head to foot. And to have those
accoutrements with the more convenience; there was about the wood of Teleme a
row of houses of the extent of half a league, very neat and cleanly, wherein
dwelt the Goldsmiths, Lapidaries, Jewellers, Embroiderers, Tailors,
Gold-drawers, Velvet-weavers, Tapestrie-makers and Upholsters, who wrought
there every one in his own trade, and all for the aforesaid jollie Friars and
Nuns of the new stamp; they were furnished with matter and stuff from the
hands of the Lord Nausiclete, who every year brought them seven ships from the
Perlas and Cannibal-islands, laden with ingots of gold, with raw silk, with
pearls and precious stones. And if any margarites (called unions) began to
grow old, and lose somewhat of their natural whiteness and luster, those with
their Art they did renew, by tendering them to eat to some pretty cocks, as
they use to give casting unto hawks.

CHAP. LVII. How the Thelemites were governed, and of their manner of living.
ALL their life was spent not in laws, statutes or rules, but according to
their own free will and pleasure. They rose out of their beds, when they
thought good: they did eat, drink, labor, sleep, when they had a mind to it,
and were disposed for it. None did awake them, none did offer to constrain them
to eat, drink, nor to do any other thing; for so had Gargantua established it.
In all their rule, and strictest tie of their order, there was but this one
clause to be observed.

Do what thou will.

Because men that are free, well-borne, well-bred, and conversant in honest
companies, have naturally an instinct and spur that prompteth them unto
virtuous actions, and withdraws them from vice, which is called honor. Those
same men, when by base subjection and constraint they are brought under and
kept down, turn aside from that noble disposition, by which they formerly were
inclined to virtue, to shake off and break that bond of servitude, wherein they
are so tyrannously inslaved; for it is agreeable with the nature of man to long
after things forbidden, and to desire what is denied us.

By this liberty they entered into a very laudable emulation, to do all of them
what they saw did please one; if any of the gallants or Ladies should say, Let
us drink, they would all drink: if any one of them said, Let us play, they all
played; if one said, Let us go a walking into the fields, they went all: if it
were to go a hawking or a hunting, the Ladies mounted upon dainty well-paced
nags, seated in a stately palfrey saddle, carried on their lovely fists
miniardly begloved every one of them, either a Sparhawk, or a Laneret, or a
Marlin, and the young gallants carried the other kinds of Hawks: so nobly were
they taught, that there was neither he nor she amongst them, but could read,
write, sing, play upon several musical instruments, speak five or six several
languages, and compose in them all very quaintly, both in Verse and Prose:
never were seen so valiant Knights, so noble and worthy, so dextrous and
skilful both on foot and a horseback, more brisk and lively, more nimble and
quick, or better handling all manner of weapons then were there. Never were
seen Ladies so proper and handsome, so miniard and dainty, less froward, or
more ready with their hand, and with their needle, in every honest and free
action belonging to that sex then were there: for this reason when the time
came, that any man of the said Abbey, either at the request of his parents, or
for some other cause, had a mind to go out of it, he carried along with him
one of the Ladies, namely her whom he had before that chosen for his Mistress,
and were married together: and if they had formerly in Theleme lived in good
devotion and amity, they did continue therein and increase it to a greater
height in their state of matrimony: and did entertain that mutual love till
the very last day of their life, in no less vigor and fervency, then at the
very day of their wedding: here must not I forget to set down unto you a
riddle, which was found under the ground, as they were laying the foundation of
the Abbey, engraven in a copper plate; and it was thus as follows.

CHAP. LVIII.
A Prophetical Riddle.
POor mortals, who wait for a happy day,
Cheer up your hearts, and hear what I shall say:
If it be lawful firmly to believe,
That the celestial bodies can us give
Wisdom to judge of things that are not yet:
Or if from Heaven such wisdom we may get,
As may with confidence make us discourse
Of years to come, their destiny and course;
I to my hearers give to understand,
That this next Winter, though it be at hand,
Yea and before, there shall appear a race
Of men, who loath to sit still in one place
Shall boldly go before all peoples eyes,
Suborning men of diverse qualities,
To draw them unto covenants and sides,
In such a manner, that whatever betides,
They Will move you, if you give them ear (no doubt)
With both your friends and kindred to fall out.
They make a vassal to gain-stand his Lord,
And children their own Parents, in a Word
All reverence shall then be banished:
No true respect to other shall be had:
They Will say that every man should have his turn,
Both in his going forth, and his return;
And hereupon there shall arise such woes,
Such jarrings, and confused toos and froes,
That never were in history such coyles
Set down as yet, such tumults and garboyles.
Then shall you many gallant men, see by
Valor stirred up, and youthful fervencie,
Who trusting too much in their hopeful time,
Live but a while, and perish in their prime.
Neither shall any who this course shall run,
Leave off the race which he has once begun,
Till they the heavens with noise by their contention
Have filled, and with their steps the earths dimension.
Then those shall have no less authority,
That have no faith, then those that will not lie;
For all shall be governed by a rude,
Base, ignorant, and foolish multitude;
The veriest lowt of all shall be their Judge.
O horrible, and dangerous deluge!
Deluge I call it, and that for good reason,
For this shall be omitted in no season:
Nor shall the earth of this foul stir be free,
Till suddenly you in great store shall see
The waters issue out, with whose streams the
Most moderate of all shall moist'ned be,
And justly too; because they did not spare
The flocks of beasts that innocentest are,
But did their sinews, and their bowels take,
Not to the gods a sacrifice to make,
But usually to serve themselves for sport;
And now consider, I do you exhort,
In such commotions so continual,
What rest can take the globe terrestrial?
Most happy then are they, that can it hold,
And use it carefully as precious gold,
By keeping it in Goal, whence it shall have
No help but him, who being to it gave:
And to increase his mournful accident,
The Sun, before it set in the occident;
Shall cease to dart upon it any light,
More then in an eclipse, or in the night.
So that at once its favor shall be gone,
And liberty with it be left alone.
And yet before it come to ruin thus,
Its quaking shall be as impetuous
As Aetna's was, when Titan's sons lay under,
And yield, when lest, a fearful sound like thunder.
Inarime did not more quickly move,
When Typheus did the vast huge hills remove,
And for despite into the sea them threw.
Thus shall it then be lost by ways not few,
And changed suddenly, when those that have it
To other men that after come shall leave it.
Then shall it be high time to cease from this
So long, so great, so tedious exercise;
For the great waters told you now by me,
Will make each think where his retreat shall be;
And yet before that they be clean dispersed,
You may behold in the air where naught was erst,
The burning heat of a great flame to rise,
Lick up the water, and the enterprise.
It rests after those things to declare,
That those shall fit content, who chosen are,
With all good things, and with celestial man,
And richly recompensed every man:
The others at the last all stripped shall be,
That after this great work all men may see
How each shall have his due, this is their lot;
O he is worthy-praise that shrinketh not.
No sooner was this aenigmatical monument read over, but Gargantua fetching a
very deep sigh, said unto those that stood by, It is not now only (I perceive)
that People called to the faith of the Gospel, and convinced with the certainty
of Evangelical truths are persecuted; but happy is that man that shall not be
scandalized, but shall always continue to the end, in aiming at that mark,
which God by his dear Son has set before us, without being distracted or
diverted by his carnal affections and depraved nature.

The Monk then said, What do you think in your conscience is meant and
signified by this riddle? What? (said Gargantua) the progress and carrying on
of the divine truth. By St. Goderan (said the Monk) that is not my exposition;
it is the style of the Prophet Merlin: make upon it as many grave allegories
and glosses as you will, and dote upon it you and the rest of the world as long
as you please: for my part, I can conceive no other meaning in it, but a
description of a set at tennis in dark and obscure terms. The suborners of men
are the Makers of matches, which are commonly friends. After the two chases are
made, he that was in the upper end of the tennis-court goes out, and the other
comes in. They believe the first, that says the ball was over or under the
line. The waters are the heats that the players take till they sweat again. The
cords of the rackets are made of the guts of sheep or goats. The Globe
terrestrial is the tennis-ball. After playing, when the game is done, they
refresh themselves before a clear fire, and change their shirts: and very
willingly they make all good cheer, but most merrily those that have gained;
And so farewell.

FINIS.
The Second BOOK Of the WORKS of Mr. FRANCIS RABELAIS, DOCTOR IN Physic:
Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the good PANTAGRUEL.

Written Originally in the FRENCH TONGUE, And now faithfully Translated into
ENGLISH. By S. T. U. C.

(...),
Mean, speak, and do well.
LONDON, Printed for Richard Baddeley, within the middle Temple-gate. 1653.

FOR THE Reader.
THe Reader here may be pleased to take notice, that the Copy of Verses by the
title of Rablophila, premised to the first book of this Translation, being but
a kind of mock-Poem, in imitation of somewhat lately published, (as to any
indifferent Observer will easily appear, by the false quantities in the Latin,
the abusive strain of the English, and extravagant subscription to both,) and
as such, by a friend of the Transtators, at the desire of some frolic
Gentlemen of his acquaintance (more for a trial of skill, then prejudicacie to
any,) composed in his jollity, to please their fancies; was only ordained to be
prefixed to a dozen of books, and no more, thereby to save the labor of
transcribing so many, as were requisite for satisfying the curiosity of a
company of just that number; and that therefore the charging of the whole
Impression with it, is merely to be imputed to the negligence of the
Presse-men, who receiving it about the latter end of the night, were so eager
before the next morning to afford complete books, that as they began, they went
on, without animadverting what was recommended to their discretion: This is
hoped will suffice to assure the ingenuous Reader, that in no Treatise of the
Translators, (whether Original or Translatitious) shall willingly be offered
the meanest rub to the reputation of any worthy Gentleman, and that however
Providence dispose of him, no misfortune shall be able to induce his mind to
any complacency in the disparagement of another.

Again.

The Pentateuch of Rabelais, mentioned in the title page of the first book of
this Translation, being written Originally in the French Tongue, (as it
comprehends some of its bruskest dialects,) with so much ingeniositie, and
wit, that more impressions have been sold thereof in that language, then of any
other book, that has been set forth at any time, within these fifteen hundred
years: so difficult nevertheless to be turned into any other speech, that
many prime spirits in most of the Nations of Europe, since the year 1573.
(which was fourscore years ago) after having attempted it, were constrained
(with no small regret) to give it over, as a thing impossible to be done, is
now in its Translation thus far advanced, and the remainder faithfully
undertaken with the same hand to be rendered into English by a Person of
quality, who (though his lands be sequestered, his house garrisoned, his other
goods sold, and himself detained a Prisoner of war at London, for his having
been at Worcester fight) has, at the most earnest entreaty of some of his
especial friends, well acquainted with his inclination to the performance of
conducible singularities promised, besides his version of these two already
published, very speedily to offer up unto this Isle of Britain, the virginity
of the Translation of the other three most admirable books of the aforesaid
Author; provided that by the plurality of judicious and understanding men it be
not declared, he has already proceeded too far, or that the continuation of
the rigor whereby he is dispossessed of all his both real and personal estate,
by pressing too hard upon him, be not an impediment thereto, and to other more
eminent undertakings of his, as has been oftentimes very fully mentioned by
the said Translatour, in several original Treatises of his own penning, lately
by him so numerousty dispersed, that there is scarce any, who being skilful in
the English Idiome, ar curious of any new ingenious invention, has not either
read them, or heard of them.

The ERRATAES of the First Book.
Upon the margin of the first eight verses. IXLXGPX
PAge 13. line 11. for pray read pray'y. p. 26. marg. for fermele r. fermee. p.
36. l. 22. for monocorsing r. monocordising. p. 37. l. 19. for Seamsters r.
Seamstresses. p. 46. l. 16. for borne r. carried. p. 15. l. 25. for arswersie
r. arsiversie. p. 79. l. 18. for hoparymated r. hopurymated. p. 90. l. 29. for
pursley r. parsley. p. 92. l. 5. for kiriele r. kiriels. p. 107. l. 28. for
sore r. fore. p. 113. l. 21. for charantou r. charanton. p. 123. l. 5. for
Suedevede r. gue de vede. p. 123. l. 16. for stussed r. stuffed. p. 127. l. 5.
for blade r. blades. p. 149. l. 24. for entrance r. entrance there p. 157. l.
19. for marousle r. marousle. p. 159. l. 7. for feet r. foot. p. 161. l. 25.
for in ran him r. ran him in. p. 176 l. 9. for elder tree r. alder-tree. p.
177. l. 21. for mae, vi r. mavie. p. 184. l. 22. for ough r. cough. p. 186. l.
19. for sable. r. shable. p. 192. l. 8. for five r. six. p. 196. l. 18. for
vertebrae r. verteber. p. 200. l. 15. for five r. six. p. 201. l. 2. for argy,
and r. Argy, this of St. Nazarand. p. 224. l. 16. for gnaw r. grow. p. 242. l.
9. for sparrow-hawks r. sparhawks. p. 251. l. 20. for they r they will. p. 253. l.
15. for lest r. lost.

The EKRATA of the Second Book.
PAge 4. of the Prologue. line 17. for roll-book r. jollie book. p. 2. l. 19.
for their regular r. the irregular. p. 18. l. 3. for be the r. be they. p. 26.
l. 31. for bury r. burn. p. 49. l. 14. for bumsquicbracker. r. bumsquibcraker.
p. 77. l. 27. for thirst r. thrust. p. 80. l. 22. for patains r. patins.

Mr. HUGH SALEL TO Rabelais.
IF profit mixed with pleasure may suffice,
TO extol an Authors worth above the skies,
Thou certainly for both must praised be:
I know it; for thy judgment has in the
Contexture of this book set down such high
Contentments, mingled with utility:
That (as I think) I see Democritus
Laughing at men as things ridiculous:
Insist in thy design; for though we prove
Ungrate on earth, thy merit is above.
THE AUTHORS Prologue.
MOst Illustrious and thrice valourous Champions, Gentlemen and others, who
willingly apply your minds to the entertainment of pretty conceits, and honest
harmless knacks of wit: You have not long ago seen, read and understood the
great and inestimable Chronicle of the huge and mighty Giant Gargantua, and
like upright Faithfullists, have firmly believed all to be true that is
contained in them, and have very often past your time with them, amongst
Honorable Ladies and Gentlewomen, telling them fair long stories, when you
were out of all other talk, for which you are worthy of great praise and
sempiternal memory: and I do heartily wish that every man would lay aside his
own business, meddle no more with his Profession nor Trade, and throw all
affairs concerning himself behind his back, to attend this wholly, without
distracting or troubling his mind with any thing else, until he have learned
them without book; that if by chance the Art of printing should cease, or in
case that in time to come all books should perish, every man might truly teach
them unto his children, and deliver them over to his successors and survivors
from hand to hand, as a religious Cabal; for there is in it more profit, then a
rabble of great pockie Loggerheads are able to discern, who surely understand
far less in these little merriments, then the fool Raclet did in the
institutions of Justinian.

I have known great and mighty Lords, and of those not a few, who going a
Deer-hunting, or a hawking after wild Ducks, when the chase had not encountered
with the blinks, that were cast in her way to retard her course, or that the
Hawk did but plain and smoothly fly without moving her wings, perceiving the
prey by force of flight to have gained bounds of her, have been much chafed and
vexed, as you understand well enough; but the comfort unto which they had
refuge, and that they might not take cold, was to relate the inestimable deeds
of the said Gargantua. There are others in the world, (These are no flimflam
stories, nor tales of a tub) who being much troubled with the toothache, after
they had spent their goods upon Physicians, without receiving at all any ease
of their pain, have found no more ready remedy, then to put the said Chronicles
betwixt two pieces of linen cloth made somewhat hot, and so apply them to the
place that smarteth, synapising them with a little powder of projection,
otherwise called doribus.

But what shall I say of those poor men, that are plagued with the Pox and the
Gowt? O how often have we seen them, even immediately after they were anointed
and thoroughly greased, till their faces did glister like the Keyhole of a
powdering tub, their teeth dance like the jacks of a pair of little Organs or
Virginals, when they are played upon, and that they foamed from their very
throats like a boar, which the Mongrel Mastiffe-hounds have driven in, and
overthrown amongst the foyles: what did they then? All their consolation was to
have some page of the said Roll-book read unto them: and we have seen those who
have given themselves to a hundred punchions of old devils, in case that they
did not feel a manifest ease and asswagement of pain, at he hearing of the
said book read, even when they were kept in a purgatory of torment; no more nor
less then women in travel use to sinde their sorrow abated, when the life of
St. Margarite is read unto them: is this nothing? find me a book in any
language, in any faculty or science whatsoever, that has such virtues,
properties and prerogatives, and I will be content to pay you a quart of
tripes. No, my Masters, no, it is peerlesse, incomparable, and not to be
matched; and this am I resolved for ever to maintain even unto the fire
exclusive. And those that will pertinaciously hold the contrary opinion, let
them be accounted Abusers, Predestinators, Impostors and Seducers of the
People; it is very true, that there are found in some gallant and stately
books, worthy of high estimation, certain occult and hid properties; in the
number of which are reckoned Whippot, Orlando furio so, Robert the devil,
Fierabras, William without fear, Huon of Bourdeaux, Monteville, and Matabrune:
but they are not comparable to that which we speak of; and the world has well
known by infallible experience, the great emolument and utility which it has
received by this Gargantuine Chronicle; for the Printers have sold more of them
in two months time, then there will be bought of Bibles in nine years.

I therefore (your humble slave) being very willing to increase your solace and
recreation yet a little more, do offer you for a Present another book of the
same stamp, only that it is a little more reasonable and worthy of credit then
the other was; for think not, (unless you wilfully will err against your
knowledge) that I speak of it as the Jews do of the Law; I was not born under
such a Planet, neither did it ever befall me to lie, or affirm a thing for
true that was not: I speak of it like a lusty frolic Onocratal is a bird not
much unlike a Swaa, which sings like an Asses braying.
Onocrotarie, I should say Crotenotaire or notaire crotre croquenotaire or
notaire croque are but allusions in decision of Protonotaire, which signifies
a Pregnotarie.
Crotenotarie, of the martyrised Lovers and Croquenotarie of love: Cuod
vidimus, testamur. It is of the horrible and dreadful feats and prowesses of
Pantagruel, whose menial servant I have been ever since I was a page till this
hour, that by his leave I am permitted to visit my Cow-countrey, and to know
if any of my Kindred there be alive.

And therefore to make an end of this Prologue, even as I give my self to an
hundred Panniers-full of fair devils, body and soul, tripes and guts, in case
that I lie so much as one single word in this whole History: After the like
manner, St. Anthonies fire burn you: Mahooms disease whirle you; the squinance
with a stitch in your side, and the Wolf in your stomach trusse you, the
bloody flux seize upon you, the cursed sharp inflammations of wild fire, as
slender and thin as Cowes hair, strengthened with quick silver, enter into
your fundament, and like those of Sodom and Gomorrha, may you fall into
sulphur, fire and bottomless pits, in case you do not firmly believe all that
I shall relate unto you in this present Chronicle.

The Second Book of RABELAIS, Treating of the Heroic Deeds and Sayings of the
good PANTAGRUEL.
CHAP. I. Of the Original and Antiquity of the great Pantagruel.
IT will not be an idle nor unprofitable thing, seeing we are at leisure to put
you in mind of the Fountain and Original Source, whence is derived unto us the
good Pantagruel; for I see that all good Historiographers have thus handled
their Chronicle; not only the Arabians, Barbarians and Latins; but also the
gentle Greeks, who were eternal drinkers. You must therefore remark, that at
the beginning of the world, (I speak of a long time, it is above forty
quarantaines, or forty times forty nights, according to the supputation of
the ancient Druids) a little after that Abel was killed by his brother Cain,
the earth imbrued with the blood of the just, was one year so exceeding fertile
in all those fruits which it usually produces to us, and especially in
Medlars, that ever since, throughout all ages it has been called the year of
the great medlars, for three of them cid fill a bushel: in it the Calends were
found by the Grecian Almanacks, there was that year nothing of the month of
March in the time of Lent, and the middle of August was in May: in the month
of October, as I take it, or at least September, (that I may not err; for I
will carefully take heed of that) was the week so famous in the Annals, which
they call the week of the three Thursdayes; for it had three of them by means
of their regular Leap-yeares, (called Bissextils)* occasioned by the Suns
having tripped and stumbled a little toward the left hand, like a debtor
afraid of Sergeants coming right upon him to arrest him: and the Moon varied
from her course above five fathom, and there was manifestly seen the motion of
trepidation in the firmament of the fixed stars, called Aplanes, so that the
middle Pleiade leaving her fellows, declined toward the Equinoctial, and the
star named Spica, left the constellation of the Virgin to withdraw her self
toward the balance known by the name of Libra, which are cases very terrible,
and matters so hard and difficult, that Astrologians cannot set their teeth in
them; and indeed their teeth had been pretty long if they could have reached
thither.

However account you it for a truth, that every body then did most heartily eat
of those medlars, for they were fair to the eye, and in taste delicious: but
even as Noah that holy man, (to whom we are so much beholding, bound and
obliged, for that he planted to us the Vine, from whence we have that
nectarian, delicious, precious, heavenly, joyful and deifick liquour, which
they call the piot or tiplage) was deceived in the drinking of it, for he was
ignorant of the great virtue and power thereof: so likewise the men and women
of that time did delight much in the eating of that fair great fruit, but
diverse and very different accidents did ensue thereupon; for there fell upon
them all in their bodies a most terrible swelling, but not upon all in the same
place, for some were swollen in the belly, and their belly strouted out big
like a great tun, of whom it is written ventrem omnipotentem, who were all very
honest men, and merry blades: and of this race came St. Fatgulch and
Shrovetuesday; Others did swell Pansart mardigras.
at the shoulders, who in that place were so crump and knobbie; that they were
therefore called Montifers, (which is as much to say as Hill-carriers,) of whom
you see some yet in the world of diverse sexes and degrees: of this race came
Aesop, some of whose excellent words and deeds you have in writing: some other
puffes did swell in length by the member, which they call the Labourer of
nature, in such sort that it grew mavelous long, fat, great, lusty, stirring
and Crestrisen, in the Antic fashion, so that they made use of it as of a
girdle, winding it five or six times about their waste: but if it happened the
foresaid member to be in good case, spooming with a full sail bunt fair
before the wind, then to have seen those strouting Champions, you would have
taken them for men that had their lances settled on their Rest, to run at the
ring or tilting whintam: of these believe me the race is utterly lost and quite
extinct, as the women say; for they do lament continually, that there are none
extant now of those great, etc. you know the rest of the song. Others did grow
in matter of ballocks so enormously, that three of them would well fill a sack,
able to contain five quarters of wheat, from them are descended the ballocks of
Lorraine, which never dwell in Codpieces, but fall down to the bottom of the
breeches. Others grew in the legs, and to see them, you would have said they
had been Cranes, or the reddish-long-bill'd-stork-like-scrank-legged
sea-fowles, called Flamans, or else men walking upon stilts or scatches: the
little Grammar school-boyes (known by the name of Grimos,) called those
leg-grown slangams Jambus, in allusion to the French word Jambe, which
signifies a leg. In others, their nose did grow so, that it seemed to be the
beak of a Limbeck, in every part thereof most variously diapred with the
twinkling sparkles of Crimson-blisters budding forth, and purpled with pimples
all enameled with thick-set wheales of a sanguine color, bordered with
gueules, and such have you seen the Chanon, or Prebend Panzoul, and Woodenfoot
the Physician of Angiers: of which race there were few that liked the Ptisane,
but all of them were perfect lovers of the pure septembral juice; Naso and Ovid
had their extraction from thence, and all those of whom it is written, Ne
reminiscaris. Others grew in ears, which they had so big, that out of one
would have been stuff enough got, to make a doublet, a pair of breeches and a
jacket, whilst with the other they might have covered themselves as with a
Spanish Cloak: and they say, that in Bourbonois this race remains yet. Others
grew in length of body, and of those came the Giants, and of them Pantagruel.

And the first was Chalbroth who begat Sarabroth who begat Faribroth who begat
Hurtali, that was a brave eater of pottage, and reigned in the time of the
flood. who begat Nembroth who begat Atlas, that with his shoulders kept the sky
from falling. who begat Goliath who begat Erix, that invented the Hocus pocus
plays of Legerdemain. who begat Titius who begat Eryon who begat Polyphemus
who begat Cacos who begat Etion, the first man that ever had the pox, for not
drinking fresh in Summer, as Bartachin witnesses. who begat Enceladus who
begat Ceus who begat Tiphaeus who begat Alaeus who begat Othus who begat Aegeon
who begat Briareus that had a hundred hands. who begat Porphyrio who begat
Adamastor who begat Anteus who begat Agatho Who begat Porus, against whom
fought Alexander the great. who begat Aranthas who begat Cabbara, that was the
first inventor of the drinking of healths. who begat Goliath of Secondille who
begat Offot, that was terribly well nosed for drinking at the barrel-head. who
begat Artachaeus who begat Oromedon who begat Gemmagog, the first inventor of
Poulan shoes which are open on the foot, and tied over the instep with a
latchet. who begat Sisyphus, who begat the Titans, of whom Hercules was born.
who begat Enay, the most skilful man that ever was, in matter of taking the
little worms (called Cirons) out of the hands. who begat Fierabras, that was
vanquished by Oliver Peer of France, and Rowlands Camrade. who begat Morgan,
the first in the world that played at dice with spectacles. who begat
Fracassus, of whom Merlin Coccaius has written, and of him was borne Ferragus.
who begat Hapmouche, the first that ever invented the drying of neats tongues
in the Chimney; for before that, people salted them, as they do now gammons of
bacon. who begat Bolivorax who begat Longis who begat Gayoffo, whose ballocks
were of poplar, and his pr... of the servise or sorb-apple-tree. who begat
Maschefain who begat Bruslefer who begat Angoulevent who begat Galehaut the
inventor of flaggons. who begat Mirelangaut who begat Gallaffre who begat
Salourdin who begat Roboast who begat Sortibrant of Conimbres. who begat
Brusbaut of Mommiere who begat Bruyer that was overcome by Ogier the Dane Peer
of France. who begat Mabrun who begat Foutasnon who begat Haquelebac who begat
Vitdegrain who begat Grangousier who begat Gargantua who begat the noble
Pantagruel my Master.
I know that reading this passage, you will make a doubt within your selves,
and that grounded upon very good reason: which is this, how it is possible that
this relation can be true, seeing at the time of the flood all the world was
destroyed, except Noah, and seven persons more with him in the Ark, into whose
number Hurtali is not admitted; doubtless the demand is well made, and very
apparent, but the answer shall satisfy you, or my wit is not rightly caulked:
and because I was not at that time to tell you any thing of my own fancy, I
will bring unto you the authority of the Massorets, good honest fellows, true
ballokeering blades, and exact Hebraical bagpipers, who affirm that verily the
said Hurtali was not within the Ark of Noah, (neither could he getin, for he
was too big) but he sat astride upon it, with one leg on the one side, and
another on the other, as little children use to do upon their wooden horses: or
as the great Bull of Berne, which was killed at Marinian, did ride for his
Hackney the great murdering piece called the Canonperrier, a pretty beast of a
fair and pleasant amble without all question.

In that posture, he after God, saved the said Ark from danger, for with his
legs he gave it the brangle that was needful, and with his foot turned it
whither he pleased, as a ship answers her rudder. Those that were within sent
him up victuals in abundance by a Chimney, as people very thankfully
acknowledging the good that he did them; And sometimes they did talk together
as Varomenippus did to Jupiter, according to the report of Lucian. Have you
understood all this well? drink then one good draught without water; for if you
believe it not: no truly do I not, quoth she.

CHAP. II. Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted Pantagruel.
GArgantua at the age of four hundred, fourscore forty and four years
begat his son Pantagruel, upon his wife named Badebec, daughter to the King
of the Amaurots in Utopia, who died in childe-birth, for he was so wonderfully
great and lumpish, that he could not possibly come forth into the light of the
world, without thus suffocating his mother. But that we may fully understand
the cause and reason of the name of Pantagruel, which at his Baptism was given
him, you are to remark, that in that year there was so great drought over all
the country of Afric, that there past thirty and six months, three weeks,
four days, thirteen hours, and a little more without rain, but with a heat
so vehement, that the whole earth was parched and withered by it: neither was
it more scorched and dried up with heat in the days of Eliah, then it was at
that time; for there was not a tree to be seen, that had either leaf or bloom
upon it: the grass was without verdure or greenness, the rivers were drained,
the fountains dried up, the poor fishes abandoned and forsaken by their
proper element, wandering and crying upon the ground most horribly: the birds
did fall down from the air for want of moisture and dew, wherewith to refresh
them: the wolves, foxes, hearts, wild-boares, fallow-deer, hares, coneys,
weesils, brocks, badgers, and other such beasts were found dead in the fields
with their mouths open; in respect of men, there was the pity, you should have
seen them lay out their tongues like hares that have been run six hours: many
did throw themselves into the wells: others entered within a Cowes belly to be
in the shade; those Homer calls Alibants: all the Country was idle, and could
do no virtue: it was a most lamentable case to have seen the labor of mortals
in defending themselves from the vehemency of this horrifick drought; for they
had work enough to do to save the holy water in the Churches from being wasted;
but there was such order taken by the counsel of my Lords the Cardinals, and of
our holy Father, that none did dare to take above one lick: yet when any one
came into the Church, you should have seen above twenty poor thirsty fellows
hang upon him that was the distributer of the water, and that with a wide open
throat, gaping for some little drop, (like the rich glutton in Luke,) that
might fall by, lest any thing should be lost. O how happy was he in that year,
who had a cool Cellar under ground, well plenished with fresh wine!

The Philosopher reports in moving the question, wherefore it is that the
seawater is salt? that at the time when Phoebus gave the government of his
resplendent chariot to his son Phaeton, the said Phaeton, unskilful in the
Art, and not knowing how to keep the ecliptic line betwixt the two tropicks of
the latitude of the Suns course, strayed out of his way, and came so near the
earth, that he dried up all the Countries that were under it, burning a great
part of the Heavens, which the Philosophers call via lactea, and the
Huffsnuffs, St. James his way, although the most coped, lofty, and high-crested
Poets affirm that to be the place where Juno's milk fell, when she gave suck
to Hercules.

The earth at that time was so excessively heated, that it fell into an
enormous sweat, yea such a one as made it sweat out the sea, which is therefore
salt, because all sweat is salt; and this you cannot but confess to be true,
if you will taste of your own, or of those that have the pox, when they are put
into a sweating, it is all one to me. Just such another case fell out this same
year: for on a certain Friday, when the whole people were bent upon their
devotions, and had made goodly Processions, with store of Letanies, and fair
preachings, and beseechings of God Almighty, to look down with his eye of mercy
upon their miserable and disconsolate condition, there was even then visibly
seen issue out of the ground great drops of water, such as fall from a
puff-bagg'd man in a top sweat; and the poor Hoydons began to rejoice, as if
it had been a thing very profitable unto them; for some said that there was not
one drop of moisture in the air, whence they might have any rain, and that the
earth did supply the default of that. Other learned men said, that it was a
shower of the Antipodes, as Seneca says in his fourth book Quaestionum
naturalium, speaking of the source and spring of Nilus: but they were deceived,
for the Procession being ended, when every one went about to gather of this
dew, and to drink of it with full bowls; they found that it was nothing but
pickle, and the very brine of salt, more brackish in taste then the saltest
water of the sea: and because in that very day Pantagruel was borne, his father
gave him that name; for panta in Greek is as much to say as all, and Gruel in
the Hagarene language does signify thirsty; inferring hereby, that at his
birth the whole world was a dry and thirsty, as likewise foreseeing that he,
would be some day Suprem Lord, and Sovereign of the thirsty Ethrappels, which
was shown to him at that very same hour by a more evident sign; for when his
mother Badebec was in the bringing of him forth, and that the Midwives did wait
to receive him: there came first out of her belly threescore and eight
Tregeneers (that is, Salt-sellers,) every one of them leading in a Halter a
Mule heavy laden with salt: after whom issued forth nine Dromedaries, with
great loads of gammons of bacon, and dried neats tongues on their backs: then
followed seven Camels loaded with links and chitterlins, Hogs puddings and
salciges: after them came out five great waines, full of leeks, garlic, onions
and chibols, drawn with five and thirty strong Cart-horses, which was six for
every one, besides the Thiller. At the sight hereoi the said Midwives were much
amazed; yet some of them said, Lo, here is good provision, and indeed we need
it; for we drink but lazily, as if our tongues walked on crutches, and not
lustily like Lansman duchess: truly this is a good sign, there is nothing here
but what is fit for us, these are the spurs of wine that set it a going. As
they were rattling thus together after their own manner of chat, behold, out
comes Pantagruel all hairie like a Bear, whereupon one of them inspired with a
prophetical Spirit, said, This will be a terrible fellow, he is borne with all
his hair, he is undoubtedly to do wonderful things; and if he live, he shall
have age.

CHAP. III. Of the grief wherewith Gargantua was moved at the decease of his
wife Badebec.
WHen Pantagruel was borne, there was none more astonished and perplexed then
was his father Gargantua; for of the one side, seeing his wife Badebec dead,
and on the other side his son Pantagruel born, so fair and so great, he knew
not what to say nor what to do: and the doubt that troubled his brain, was to
know whether he should cry for the death of his wife, or laugh for the joy of
his son: he was hinc inde choked with sophistical arguments, for he framed
them very well in modo and figura, but he could not resolve them, remaining
pestered and entangled by this means, like a mouse caught in a trap, or kite
snared in a ginne: Shall I weep (said he?) Yes, for why? my so good wife is
dead, who was the most this, the most that, that ever was in the world: never
shall I see her, never shall I recover such another, it is unto me an
inestimable loss! O my good God, what had I done that thou should thus
punish me? why did thou not take me away before her? seeing for me to live
without her is but to languish. Ah Badebec, Badebec, my minion, my dear heart,
my sugar, my sweeting, my honey, my little C... (yet it had in circumference
full six acres, three rods, five poles, four yards, two foot, one inche and a
half of good woodland measure) my tender peggie, my Codpiece darling, my bob
and hit, my slipshoe-lovie, never shall I see thee! Ah, poor Pantagruel, thou
have lost thy good mother, thy sweet nurse, thy well-beloved Lady! O false
death, how injurious and despightful have thou been to me? how malicious and
outrageous have I found thee? in taking her from me, my well-beloved wife, to
whom immortality did of right belong. With these words he did cry like a Cow,
but on a sudden fell a laughing like a Calfe, when Pantagruel came into his
mind: Ha, my little son, (said he, my childilollie, fedli^ondie,
dandlichuckie, my ballockie, my pretty rogue; O how jollie thou art, and how
much am I bound to my gracious God, that has been pleased to bestow on me a
son, so fair, so spriteful, so lively, so smiling, so pleasant, and so
gentle. Ho, ho, ho, ho, how glad I am? Let us drink, ho; and put away
melancholy: bring of the best; rense the glasses, lay the cloth, drive out
these dogs, blow this fire, light candles, shut that door there, cut this bread
in sippets for brewis, send away these poor folks in giving them what they
ask, hold my gown, I will strip my self into my doublet, (e^n cuerpo) to make
the Gossips merry, and keep them company.

As he spoke this, he heard the Letanies and the memento's of the Priests that
carried his wife to be buried, upon which he left the good purpose he was in,
and was suddenly ravished another way, saying, Lord God, must I again contrist
my self? this grieves me; I am no longer young, I grow old, the weather is
dangerous; I may perhaps take an ague, then shall I be foiled, if not quite
undone; by the faith of a Gentleman, it were better to cry less, and drink
more.

My wife is dead, well, by G -- (da jurandi) I shall not raise her again by my
crying: she is well, she is in Paradise at least, if she be no higher: she
prays to God for us, she is happy, she is above the sense of our miseries,
nor can our calamities reach her: what though she be dead, must not we also
die? the same debt which she has paid, hangs over our heads; nature will
require it of us, and we must all of us some day taste of the same sauce: let
her pass then, and the Lord preserve the Survivors; for I must now cast about
how to get another wife. But I will tell you what you shall do, (said he) to
the Midwives in France called wise women (Where be the good folks? I cannot see
them,) go you to my wives interrement, and I will the while rock my son: for
I find my self somewhat altered and distempered, and should otherwise be in
danger of falling sick: but drink one good draught first, you will be the
better for it; and beleeeve me upon mine honor, they at his request went to
her burial and funeral obsequies: in the mean while, poor Gargantua staying at
home, and willing to have somewhat in remembrance of her to be engraven upon
her tomb, made this Epitaph in the manner as follows.

Dead is the noble Badebec,
Who had a face like a Rebeck;
A Spanish body, and a belly
Of Swisserland, she died, I tell ye,
In childe-birth: pray to God, that her
He pardon wherein she did err.
Here lies her body, which did live
Free from all vice, as I believe;
And did decease at my bedside,
The year and day in which she died.
CHAP. IV. Of the Infancy of Pantagruel.
I Find by the ancient Historiographers and Poets, that diverse have been borne
in this world, after very strange manners, which would be too long to repeat;
read therefore the seventh chapter of Pliny, if you have so much leisure: yet
have you never heard of any so wonderful as that of Pantagruel; for it is a
very difficult matter to believe, how in the little time he was in his mothers
belly, he grew both in body and strength. That which Hercules did, was nothing,
when in his Cradle he slew two serpents; for those serpents were but little and
weak: but Pantagruel being yet in the Cradle, did far more admirable things,
and more to be amazed at. I pass by here the relation of how at every one of
his meals he supped up the milk of four thousand and six hundred Cowes: and
how to make him a skellet to boil his milk in, there were set a work all the
Brasiers of Somure in Anjou, of Villedieu in Normandy, and of Bramont in
Lorraine: and they served in this whitepot-meat to him in a huge great Bell,
which is yet to be seen in the City of Bourge in Berrie, near the Palace; but
his teeth were already so well grown, and so strengthened in vigor, that of
the said Bell he bit off a great morsel, as very plainly does appear till this
hour.

One day in the morning, when they would have made him suck one of his Cows,
(for he never had any other Nurse, as the History tells us) he got one of his
arms loose from the swaddling bands, wherewith he was kept fast in the Cradle,
laid hold on the said Cow under the left fore hamme, and grasping her to him,
ate up her udder and half of her paunch, with the liver and the kidneys, and
had devoured all up, if she had not cried out most horribly, as if the wolves
had held her by the legs, at which noise company came in, and took away the
said Cow from Pantagruel; yet could they not so well do it, but that the
quarter whereby he caught her was left in his hand, of which quarter he gulp't
up the flesh in a trice, even with as much ease as you would eat a salcige;
and that so greedily with desire of more, that when they would have taken away
the bone from him, he swallowed it down whole, as a Cormorant would do a little
fish; and afterward began fumblingly to say, Good, good, good, for he could
not yet speak plain; giving them to understand thereby, that he had found it
very good, and that he did lack but so much more; which when they saw that
attended him, they bound him with great cable-ropes, like those that are made
at Tain, for the carriage of salt to Lions; or such as those are, whereby the
great French ship rides at Anchor, in the Road of Newhaven in Normandy. But on
a certain time, a great Bear which his father had bred, got loose, came
toward him, began to lick his face, for his Nurses had not thoroughly wiped his
chaps, at which unexpected approach being on a sudden offended, he as lightly
rid himself of those great cables, as Samson did of the haulser ropes wherewith
the Philistines had tied him, and by your leave, takes me up my Lord the Bear,
and tears him to you in pieces like a pullet, which served him for a gorge-ful
or good warm bit for that meal.

Whereupon Gargantua fearing lest the child should hurt himself, caused four
great chains of iron to be made to bind him, and so many strong wooden arches
unto his Cradle, most firmly stocked and mortaised in huge frames: of those
chains you have one at Rochel. which they draw up at night betwixt the two
great towers of the Haven: Another is at Lions: A third at Angiers: And the
fourth was carried away by the devils to bind Lucifer, who broke his chains
in those days, by reason of a cholick that did extraordinarily torment him,
taken with eating a Sergeants soul fried for his breakfast, and therefore you
may believe that which Nicolas de Lyra says upon that place of the Psalter,
where it is written, Et Og regem Basan, that the said Og being yet little, was
so strong and robustious, that they were feign to bind him with chains of
iron in his Cradle; thus continued Pantagruel for a while very calm and quiet,
for he was not able so easily to break those chains, especially having no room
in the Cradle to give a swing with his arms. But see what happened, once upon
a great Holiday, that his father Gargantua made a sumptuous banquet to all the
Princes of his Court: I am apt to believe, that the menial officers of the
house were so imbusied in waiting each on his proper service at the feast, that
no body took care of poor Pantagruel, who was left a reculorum, behinde-hand
all alone, and as forsaken. What did he? Hark what he did, good people: he
strove and essayed to break the chains of the Cradle with his arms but coold
not, for they were too strong for him: then did he keep with his feet such a
stamping stir, and so long, that at last he beat out the lower end of his
Cradle, which notwithstanding was made of a great post five foot in square: and
as soon as he had gotten out his feer, he slid down as well as he could, till he
had got his soales to the ground; and then with a mighty force he rose up,
carrying his Cradle upon his back, bound to him like a Tortoise that crawles up
against a wall; and to have seen him, you would have thought it had been a
great Carrick of five hundred tun upon one end. In this manner he entered into
the great Hall, where they were banqueting, and that very boldly, which did
much affright the company; yet because his arms were tied in, he could not
reach any thing to eat, but with great pain stooped now and then a little, to
take with the whole flat of his tongue some lick, good bit or morsel.

Which when his father saw, he knew well enough that they had left him without
giving him: any thing to eat, and therefore commanded that he should be loosed
from the said chains, by the counsel of the Princes and Lords there present:
besides that, also the Physicians of Gargantua said, that if they did thus keep
him in the Cradle, he would be all his lifetime subject to the stone. When he
was unchained they made him to sit down, where after he had fed very well, he
took his Cradle, and broke it into more then five hundred thousand pieces with
one blow of his fist, that he struck in the midst of it, swearing that he would
never come into it again.

CHAP. V. Of the Acts of the noble Pantagruel in his youthful age.
THus grew Pantagruel from day to day, and to every ones eye waxed more and
more in all his dimensions, which made hrs father to rejoice by a natural
affection: therefore caused he to be made for him, whilst he was yet little, a
pretty Crossebowe, wherewith to shoot at small birds, which now they call the
great Crossebowe at Chantelle. Then he sent him to the school to learn, and to
spend his youth in virtue: in the prosecution of which design he came first to
Poictiers, where, as he studied and profited very much, he saw that the
Scholars were oftentimes at leisure, and knew not how to bestow their time,
which moved him to take such compassion on them, that one day he took from a
long ledge of rocks (called there Passelourdin,) a huge great stone, of about
twelve fathom square, and fourteen handfuls thick, and with great ease set it
upon four pillars in the midst of a field, to no other end, but that the said
Scholars when they had nothing else to do, might pass their time in getting up
on that stone, and feast it with store of gammons, pasties and flaggons, and
carve their names upon it with a knife, in token of which deed, till this hour
the stone is called the lifted stone: and in remembrance hereof there is none
entered into the Register and matricular Book of the said University, or
accounted capable of taking any degree therein, till he have first drunk in the
Caballine fountain of Croustelles, passed at Passelourdin, and got up upon the
lifted stone.

Afterward reading the delectable Chronicles of his Ancestors, he found that
Jafrey of Lusinian called Jafrey with the great tooth, Grandfather to the
Cousin in law of the eldest Sister of the Aunt of the Son in law of the Uncle
of the good daughter of his Stepmother, was interred at Maillezais; therefore
one day he took campos, (which is a little vacation from study to play a
while,) that he might give him a visit as unto an honest man: and going from
Poictiers with some of his companions, they passed by the Guge, visiting the
noble Abbot Ardillon: then by Lusinian, by Sansay, by Celles, by Coalonges, by
Fontenay the Conte, saluting the learned Tiraqueau, and from thence arrived at
Maillezais, where he went to see the Sepulcher of the said Jafrey with the
great tooth; which made him somewhat afraid, looking upon the picture, whose
lively draughts did set him forth in the representation of a man in an extreme
fury, drawing his great Malchus faulchion half way out of his scabbard: when
the reason hereof was demanded, the Chanons of the said place told him, that
there was no other cause of it, but that Pictoribus atque Poetis, etc. that is
to say, that Painters and Poets have liberty to paint and devise what they list
after their own fancy: but he was not satisfied with their answer, and said,
He is not thus painted without a cause; and I suspect that at his death there
was some wrong done him, whereof he requires his Kindred to take revenge: I
will enquire further into it, and then do what shall be reasonable; then he
returned not to Poictiers, but would take a view of the other Universities of
France: therefore going to Rochel, he took shipping and arrived at Bourdeaux,
where he found no great exercise, only now and then he would see some Mariners
and Lightermen a wrestling on the key or strand by the riverside: From thence
he came to Toulouse, where he learned to dance very well, and to play with the
two-handed sword, as the fashion of the Scholars of the said University is to
bestir themselves in games, whereof they may have their hands full: but he
stayed not long there, when he saw that they did cause bury their Regents
alive, like red herring, saying, Now God forbid that I should die this death;
for I am by nature sufficiently dry already, without heating my self any
further.

He went then to Monpellier, where he met with the good wives of Mirevaux, and
good jovial company withal, and thought to have set himself to the study of
Physic* but he considered that that calling was too troublesome and
melancholic; and that Physicians did smell of glisters like old devils.
Therefore he resolved he would study the laws; but seeing that there were but
three scauld, and one bald-pated Legist in that place, he departed from thence,
and in his way made the Bridge of Guard, and the Amphitheater of Neems in less
then three hours, which nevertheless seems to be a more divine then humane
work. After that he came to Avignon, where he was not above three days before
he fell in love; for the women there take great delight in playing at the close
buttock-game, because it is Papal ground; which his Tutor and Pedagogue
Epistemon perceiving, he drew him out of that place, and brought him to Valence
in the Dauphinee, where he saw no great matter of recreation, only that the
Lubbards of the Town did beat the Scholars, which so incensed him with anger,
that when upon a certain very fair Sunday, the people being at their public
dancing in the streets, and one of the Scholars offering to put himself into
the ring to partake of that sport, the foresaid lubbardly fellows would not
permit him the admittance into their society; He taking the Scholars part, so
belabored them with blows, and laid such load upon them, that he drove them
all before him, even to the brink of the river Rhosne, and would have there
drowned them, but that they did squat to the ground, and there lay close a full
half league under the river. The hole is to be seen there yet.

After that he departed from thence, and in three strides and one leap came to
Angiers, where he found himself very well, and would have continued there some
space, but that the plague drove them away. So from thence he came to Bourges,
where he studied a good long time, and profited very much in the faculty of the
Laws: and would sometimes say, that the books of the Civil Law, were like unto
a wonderfully precious, royal and triumphant robe of cloth of gold, edged with
dirt; for in the world are no goodlier books to be seen, more ornate, nor more
eloquent then the texts of the Pandects; but the bordering of them, that is to
say, the gloss of Accursius is so scurvie, vile, base and unsavourie, that it
is nothing but filthiness and villainy.

Going from Bourges, he came to Orleans, where he found store of swaggering
Scholars that made him great entertainment at his coming, and with whom he
learned to play at tennis so well, that he was a Master at that game; for the
Students of the said place make a prime exercise of it; and sometimes they
carried him unto Cupids houses of commerce (in that City termed Islands,
because of rheir being most ordinarily environed with other houses, and not
contiguous to any,) there to recreate his person at the sport of Poussevant,
which the wenches of London call the Ferkers in and in. As for breaking his
head with overmuch study, he had an especial care not to do it in any case,
for fear of spoiling his eyes; which he the rather observed, for that it was
told him by one of his Teachers, (there called Regents,) that the pain of the
eyes was the most hurtful thing of any to the sight: for this cause when he one
day was made a Licentiate, or Graduate in law, one of the Scholras of his
acquaintance, who of learning had not much more then his burden, though in
stead of that he could dance very well, and play at tennis, made the blason and
device of the Licentiates in the said University, saying,

So you have in your hand a racket,
A tennis-ball in your Cod-placket,
A Pandect law in your Caps tippet,
And that you have the skill to trip it
In a low dance, you will b' allowed
The grant of the Licentiates hood.
CHAP. VI. How Pantagruel met with a Limousin, who too affestedly did
counterfeit the French Language.
Upon a certain day, I know not when, Pantagruel walking after supper with some
of his fellow-Students, without that gate of the City, through which we enter
on the rode to Paris, encountered with a young spruce-like Scholar that was
coming upon the same very way; and after they had saluted one another, asked
him thus; My friend, from whence come thou now? the Scholar answered him:
From the alme, inclyte and celebrate Academie, which is vocitated Lutetia. What
is the meaning of this (said Pantagruel) to one of his men? It is (answered he)
from Paris. Thou come from Paris then (said Pantagruel,) and how do you spend
your time there, you my Masters the Students of Paris? the Scholar answered, We
transfretate the Sequan at the dilucul and crepuscul, we deambulate by the
compites and quadrives of the Urb: we despumate the Latial verbocination: and
like verisimilarie amorabons, we captat the benevolence of the omnijugal,
omniform, and omnigenal foeminine sex: upon certain diecules we invisat the
Lupanares, and in a venerian extase inculcate our veretres, into the
penitissime recesses of the pudends of these amicabilissim meretricules: then
do we cauponisate in the meritory taberns of the pineapple, the castle, the
magdalene, and the mule, goodly vervecine spatules perforaminated with
petrocile; and if by fortune there be rarity, or penury of pecune in our
marsupies; and that they be exhausted of ferruginean metal, for the shot we
dimit our codices, and oppugnerat our vestiments, whilst we prestolate the
coming of the Tabellaries from the Penates and patriotick Lares: to which
Pantagruel answered, What devilish language is this? by the Lord, I think thou
art some kind of Heretic: My Lord, no, said the Scholar; for libentissimally
as soon as it illucesceth any minutle slice of the day; I demigrate into one of
these so well architected minsters; and there irrorating my self with fair
Iustral water; I mumble offlittle parcels of some missick precation of our
sacrificuls: and submurmurating my horarie precules, I elevate and absterge my
anime from its nocturnal inquinations: I revere the Olympicols: I latrially
venere the supernal Astripotent: I dilige and redame my proxims: Iobserve the
decalogical precepts; and according to the facultatule of my vires, I do not
discede from them one late unguicule; nevertheless it is veriforme, that
because Mammona does not supergurgitate any thing in my loculs, that I am
somewhat rare and lent to supererogate the elemosynes to thoseegents, that
hostially queritate their stipe.

Prut, tut, (said Pantagruel,) what does this fool mean to say? I think he is
upon the forging of some diabolical tongue, and that inchanter-like he would
charm us; to whom one of his men said, Without doubt (Sir) this fellow would
counterfeit the Language of the Parisians, but he does only flay the Latin,
imagining by so doing that he does highly Pindarize it in most eloquent terms,
and strongly conceiteth himself to be therefore a great Orator in the French,
because he disdaineth the common manner of speaking; to which Pantagruel said,
Is it true? the Scholar answered, My worshipful Lord, my genie is not apt nate
to that which this flagitious Nebulon says, to excoriate the cutule of our
vernacular Gallick, but viceversally I gnave opere, and by vele and rames enite
to locupletate it, with the Latinicome redundance. By G -- (said Pantagruel) I
will teach you to speak: but first come hither, and tell me whence thou art? To
this the Scholar answered: The primeval origin of my aves and ataves, was
indigenarie of the Lemonick regions, where requiesceth the corpor of the
hagiotat St. Martial; I understand thee very well (said Pantagruel,) when all
comes to all, thou art a Limousin, and thou will here by the affected speech
counterfeit the Parisiens: well now, come hither, I must show thee a new trick,
and handsomely give thee the combfeat: with this he took him by the throat,
saying to him, Thou flayest the Latin; by St. John I will make thee flay the
fox; for I will now flay thee alive: then began the poor Limousin to cry; Haw,
gwid Maaster, haw, Laord, my halp, and St. Marshaw, haw, I Am worried: haw, my
thropple, the bean of my cragg is bruck: haw, for gauads seck, lawt my lean,
Mawster; waw, waw, waw: Now (said Pantagruel) thou speak naturally, and so
let him go, for the poor Limousin had totally berayed, and thoroughly conshit
his breeches, which were not deep and large enough, but round streat caniond
gregs, having in the seat a piece like a keelings tail; and therefore in
French called de chausses, a queue de merlus. Then (said Pantagruel) St.
Alipantiu, what civette? si to the devil with this Turnepeater, as he stinks,
and so let him go: but this hug of Pantagruels was such a terror to him all
the days of his life, and took such deep impression in his fancy, that very
often distracted with sudden affrightments, he would startle and say that
Pantagruel held him by the neck; besides that it procured him a continual
drought and desire to drink so that after some few years he died of the death
Roland in plain English called thirst, a work of divine vengeance, showing us
that which says the Philosopher and Aulus Gellius, that it becomes us to
speak according to the common language: and that we should (as said Octavian
Augustus) strive to shun all strange and unknown terms with as much
heedfulnesse and circumspection, as Pilots of ships use to avoid the rocks and
banks in the sea.

CHAP. VII. How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice Books of the
Library of St. Victor.
AFter that Pantagruel had studied very well at Orleans, he resolved to see the
great University at Paris; but before his departure, he was informed that there
was a huge big bell at St. Anian in the said town of Orleans, under the ground,
which had been there above two hundred and fourteen years; for it was so great
that they could not by any device get it so much as above the ground, although
they used all the means that are found in Vitruvius de Architectura, Albertus
de re aedificatoria, Euclid, Theon, Archimedes, and Hero de ingeniis: for all
that was to no purpose, wherefore condescending heartily to the humble request
of the Citizens and Inhabitants of the said Town, he determined to remove it to
the tower that was erected for it: with that he came to the place where it was,
and lifted it out of the ground with his little finger, as easily as you would
have done a Hawks bell, or Bell-weathers tingle tangle: but before he would
carry it to the foresaid tower or steeple appointed for it, he would needs make
some Music with it about the Town, and ring it along all the streets, as he
carried it in his hand, wherewith all the people were very glad; but there
happened one great inconveniency, for with carrying it so, and ringing it about
the streets, all the good Orleans wine turned instantly, waxed flat, and was
spoiled, which no body there did perceive till the night following; for every
man found himself so altered, and a dry with drinking these flat wines, that
they did nothing but spit, and that as white as Maltha cotton, saying: We have
of the Pantagruel, and our very throats are salted. This done, he came to Paris
with his retinue, and at his entry every one came out to see him, (as you know
well enough, that the people of Paris is sottish by nature, by B. flat, and B.
sharp,) and beheld him with great astonishment, mixed with no less fear, that
he would carry away the Palace into some other country a remotis, and far
from them, as his father formerly had done the great peal of Bells at our
Ladies Church, to tie about his Mares neck. Now after he had stayed there a
pretty space, and studied very well in all the seven liberal Arts, he said it
was a good town to live in, but not to die; for that the grave-digging rogues
of St. Innocent, used in frostie nights to warm their bums with dead men's
bones. In his abode there he found the Library of St. Victor, a very stately
and magnifick one, especially in some books which were there, of which
follows the Repertory and Catalogue; Et primo, The for Godsake of salvation.
The Codpiece of the Law. The Slipshoe of the Decretals. The Pomegranate of
vice. The Clew-bottom of Theology. The Duster or foxtail-flap of Preachers,
Composed by Turlupin. The churning Ballock of the Valiant: The Henbane of the
Bishops. Marmoretus de baboonis and apis, cum Commento Dorbellis. Decretum
Universitatis Parisiensis super gorgiasitate muliercularum ad placitum. The
Apparition of Sancte Geltrud, to a Nun of Poissie, being in travel, at the
bringing forth of a child. Ars honest fartandi in societate per Marcum
Corvinum. The mustard-pot of penance. The Gamashes, alias the boots of
patience. Formicarium artium. De brodiorum usu, and honestate quartandi per
Sylvestrem prioratem Jacobinum. The coosened, or gulled in Court. The Frail of
the Scriveners. The Marriage-packet. The cruzie or crurible of Contemplation.
The Flimflams of the Law. The Prickle of Wine. The Spur of Cheese.
Ruboffatorium scolarium. Tartaretus de modo cacandi. The Bravades of Rome.
Bricot de differentiis Browsarum. The tail-piece-cushion, or close-breech of
Discipline. The cobled Shoe of Humility. The Trevet of good thoughts. The
Kettle of Magnanimity. The cavilling intanglements of Confessors. The
Snatchfare of the Curats. Reverendi patris fratris Lubini provincialis
Slabrardiae dc gulpendis lardslicionibus libri tres. Pasquilli doctoris
marmorei de capreolis cum artichoket a comedendis tempore Papali ab Ecclesia
interdicto. The invention of the Holy Cross, personated. by six wily Priests.
The Spectacles of Pilgrims bound for Rome. Majoris de modo faciendi Puddinos.
The Bagpipe of the Prelates. Beda de optimitate triparum. The complaint of the
Barresters upon the reformation of Confites. The furred Cat of the Sollicitors
and Atturneys. Of pease and bacon cum Commento. The small vales or drinking
money of the Indulgences. Praeclarissimi juris utriusque Doctoris Maistre
pilloti, etc. Scrapfarthingi de botchandis glossaccursianae Trislis repetitio
enncidiluculissima Stratagemata francharchaeri de Baniolet. Carlbumpkinus de re
militari cum figuris Tevoti. De usu and utilitate flayandi equos and equas
authore Magistro nostro de quebecu. The sauciness of Countrey-Stuarts. M. N.
Rostocostojan Bedanesse de mustarda post prandium servienda, libri quatuor
decim apostillati per M. Vaurillonis. The covillage or wench-tribute of
Promooters. Quaestio fubtilissima, utrum Chimaera in vacuo bombizant posset
comedere secundas intentiones, and fuit debatuta per december hebdomadas in
Consilio Constantiensi. The bridle-champer of the Advocates. Smutchudlamenta
Scoti. The rasping and hard-scraping of the Cardinals. De calcaribus removendis
Decades undecim per M. Albericum de rosata. Ejusdem de castramentandis
criminibus libri tres. The entrance of Antonie de leve into the territories of
Brasil. De peelandis aut unskinnandis blurrandisque Cardinalium mulis. The said
Authors Apology against those who allege that the Popes mule does eat but at
set times. Prognosticatio quae incipit Silvitriquebillobalata per M. N. the
deep dreaming gull Sion. Bondarini Episcopi de emulgentiarum profectibus
Aeneades novem, cum privilegio Papali ad triennium and postea non. The
shitabranna of the maids. The bald arse or peeled breech of the widows. The
cowle or capouch of the Monks. The mumbling devotion of the Coelestine Friars.
The passage-toll of beggarlinesse. The teeth-chatter or gum-didder of lubberly
lusks. The paring-shovel of the Theologues. The drench-horne of the Masters of
Arts. The scullians of Oleam the uninitiated Clerk. Magistri N. lickdishetis de
garbellisiftationibus horarum canon carum libri quadriginta arsiver sitatorium
confratriarum incerto authore. The gulsgoatonie or rasher of Cormorants and
ravenous feeders. The raminishnesse of the Spaniards supergivure gondigaded by
Friar Indigo. The muttring of pitiful wretches. Dastardismus rerum Itallcarum,
authore Magistro Burnegad. R. Lu llius de batisfolagiis Principum.
Calibistratorium caffardiae, authore M. Jacobo hocstraten hereticometra.
Codtickler de magistro nostrandorum magistri nostratorumque beneventi libri
octo galantissimi. The Crackarades of balists or stone-throwing Engines,
contrepate Clerks, Scriveners, Brief-writers, Rapporters, and Papal
Bull-dispatchers lately compiled by Regis. A perpetual Almanac for those that
have thgowt and the pox, Manera sweepandi fornacellos per Mag. ecciam. The
shable or cimeterre of Merchants. The pleasures of the Monachal life. The
hotchpot of Hypocrites. The history of the Hobgoblins. The ragamuffianisme of
the pensionary maimed soldiers. The gulling fibs and counterfeit shows of
Commissaries. The litter of Treasurers. The juglingatorium of Sophisters.
Antipericat a met a naparbeuged amphisistationes toordicantium. The periwinkle
of ballad-makers. The push-forward of the Alchimists. The niddie noddie of the
sachel-loaded seekers by Friar Bindfastatis. The shackles of Religion. The
racket of swag-waggers. The leaning-stock of old age. The muzzle of Nobility.
The Apes pater noster. The Crickets and Hawks bells of Devotion. The pot of the
Emberweeks. The mortar of the politic life. The flap of the Hermites. The
riding-hood or Monterg of the Penitentiaries. The trictrac of the knocking
Friars. Blockheadodus de vita and honestate bragadochiorum. Lyrippii Sorbonici
moralisationes per M. Lupoldum. The Carrier-horse-bells of Travelers. The
bibbings of the tippling Bishops. Dolloporediones Doctorum Coloniensium ad
versus Reuclin. The Cymbals of Ladies. The Dungers martingale.
Whirlingfriskorum Chasemarkerorum per fratrem Crackwoodloguetis. The clouted
patches of a stout heart. The mummerie of the racket-keeping
Robin-good-fellows. Gerson de auferibilitate Papae ab Ecclesia. The Catalogue
of the nominated and graduated persons. Jo. Dyrebrodii de terribilitate
excommunicationis libellus acephalos. Ingeniositas invocandi diabolos and
diabolas per M. Guingolphum. The hotchpotch or gallimafree of the perpetually
begging Friars. The morrish-dance of the Heretics. The whinings of Cajetan.
Muddisnowt Doctoris cherubici de origin roughfootedarum and wryneckedorum
ritibus libri septem. Sixty nine fat breviaries. The Nightmare of the five
orders of Beggars. The skinnery of the new start-ups extracted out of the
fallow butt, incornifistibulated and plodded upon in the Angelick sum. The
raver and idle talker in cases of conscience. The fat belly of the Presidents.
The bafling flowter of the Abbots. Sutoris adversus eum qui vocaverat eum
Slabsauceatorem, and quod slabsauceatores non sunt damnati ab Ecclesia.
Cacatorium medicorum. The chimney-sweeper of Astrology. Campi clysteriorum per
paragraph. C. The bumsquicbracker of Apothecaries. The kissebreech of
Chirurgerie. Justinianus de whiteleperotis tollendis. Antidotarium animae.
Merlinus Coccaius de patria diabolorum. The Practice of iniquity by Cleuraunes
sadden. The Mirror of baseness by Radnecu Waldenses. The ingrained rogue by
Dwarsencas Eldenu. Thhe merciless Cormorvnt by Hoxinidno ^he Jew.
Of which Library some books are already printed, and the rest are now at the
Press, in this noble City of Tubinge.

CHAP. VIII. How Pantagruel being at Paris received letters from his father
Gargantua, and the Copy of them.
PAntagruel studied very hard, as you may well conceive, and profited
accordingly; for he had an excellent understanding, and notable wit, together
wtth a capacity in memory, equal to the mea sure of twelveoyle budgets, or
butts of Olives. And as he was there abiding one day, he received a letter from
his father in manner as follows. Most dear son, amongst the gifts, graces
and prerogatives, with which the Sovereign Plasmator God Almighty, has endowed
and adorned humane Nature at the beginning, that seems to me most singular and
excellent, by which we may in a mortal estate attain to a kind of immortality,
and in the course of this transitory life perpetuate our name and seed, which
is done by a progeny issued from us in the lawful bonds of Matrimony: whereby
that in some measure is restored unto us, which was taken from us by the sin of
our first Parents, to whom it was said, that because they had not obeyed the
Commandment of God their Creator, they should die, and by death should be
brought to naught that so stately frame and Plasmature, wherein the man at
first had been created.

But by this means of seminal propagation, which continues in the children
what was lost in the Parents, and in the grandchildren that which perished in
their fathers, and so successively until the day of the last judgment, when
Jesus Christ shall have rendered up to God the Father his Kingdom in a
peaceable condition, out of all danger and contamination of sin; for then shall
cease all generations and corruptions, and the elements leave off their
continual transmutations; seeing the so much desired peace shall be attained
unto and enjoyed, and that all things shall be brought to their end and period;
and therefore not without just and reasonable cause, do I give thanks to God my
Savior and Preserver, for that he has enabled me to see my bald old age
reflourish in thy youth: for when at his good pleasure, who rules and governes
all things, my soul shall leave this mortal habitation; I shall not account my
self wholly to die, but to pass from one place unto another: considering that
in and by that I continue in my visible image living in the world, visiting and
conversing with people of honor, and other my good friends, as I was wont to
do: which conversation of mine, although it was not without sin, (because we
are all of us trespassers, and therefore ought continually to beseech his
divine Majesty, to blot our transgressions out of his memory) yet was it by the
help and grace of God, without all manner of reproach before men.

Wherefore if those qualities of the mind but shine in thee, wherewith I am
endowed, as in thee remains the perfect image of my body, thou will be
esteeined by all men to be the perfect guardian and treasure of the immortality
of our name: but if otherwise, I shall truly take but small pleasure to see it,
considering that the lesser part of me, which is the body, would abide in thee:
and the best, to wit, that which is the soul, and by which our name continues
blessed amongst men, would be degenerate and abastardised: This I do not speak
out of any distrust that I have of thy virtue, which I have heretofore already
tried, but to encourage thee yet more earnestly to proceed from good to better:
and that which I now write unto thee, is not so much that thou should live
in this virtuous course, as that thou should rejoice in so living and having
lived, and cheer up thy self with the like resolution in time to come; to the
prosecution and accomplishment of which enterprise and generous undertaking
thou may easily remember how that I have spared nothing, but have so helped
thee, as if I had had no other treasure in this world, but to see thee once in
my life, completely well bred and accomplished, as well in virtue, honesty and
valor, as in all liberal knowledge and civility: and so to leave thee after my
death, as a mirror, representing the person of me thy father, and if not so
excellent, and such indeed as I do wish thee, yet such in my desire.

But although my deceased father of happy memory Grangousier, had bent his best
endeavors to make me profit in all perfection and Political knowledge, and
that my labor and study was fully correspondent to, yea, went beyond his
desire: nevertheless, as thou may well understand, the time then was not so
proper and fit for learning as it is at present, neither had I plenty of such
good Masters as thou have had; for that time was dark some, obscured with
clouds of ignorance, and savouring a little of the infelicity and calamity of
the Goths, who had, wherever they set footing, destroyed all good literature,
which in my age has by the divine goodness been restored unto its former
light and dignity, and that with such amendment and increase of the knowledge,
that now hardly should I be admitted unto the first form of the little
Grammar-school-boyes: I say, I, who in my youthful days was, (and that justly)
reputed the most learned of that age; which I do not speak in vain boasting,
although I might lawfully do it in writing unto thee, in verification whereof
thou have the authority of Marcus Tullius in his book of old age, and the
sentence of Plutarch, in the book entitled how a man may praise himself
without envy: but to give thee an emulous encouragement to strive yet further.

Now is it that the minds of men are qualified with all manner of discipline,
and the old sciences revived, which for many ages were extinct: now it is, that
the learned languages are to their pristine purity restored, viz. Greek,
(without which a man may be ashamed to account himself a scholar,) Hebrew,
Arabic, Chaldaean and Latin. Printing likewise is now in use, so elegant, and
so correct, that better cannot be imagined, although it was found out but in my
time by divine inspiration, as by a diabolical suggestion on the other side was
the invention of Ordnance. All the world is full of knowing men, of most
learned Schoolmasters, and vast Libraries: and it appears to me as a truth,
that neither in Plato's time, nor Cicero's, nor Papinian's, there was ever such
convenience for studying, as we see at this day there is: nor must any
adventure henceforward to come in public, or present himself in company, that
has not been pretty well polished in the shop of Minerva: I see robbers,
hangmen, free-booters, tapsters, ostlers, and such like, of the very rubbish of
the people, more learned now, then the Doctors and Preachers were in my time,

What shall I say? the very women and children have aspired to this praise and
celestial Manna of good learning: yet so it is, that in the age I am now of, I
have been constrained to learn the Greek tongue, which I contemned not like
Cato, but had not the leisure in my younger years to attend the study of it:
and take much delight in the reading of Plutarchs Morals, the pleasant
Dialogues of Plato, the Monuments of Pausanias, and the Antiquities of
Athenaeus, in waiting on the hour wherein God my Creator shall call me, and
command me to depart from this earth and transitory pilgrimage. Wherefore (my
son) I admonish thee, to employ thy youth to profit as well as thou can,
both in thy studies and in virtue. Thou art at Paris, where the laudable
examples of many brave men may stir up thy mind to gallant actions, and have
likewise for thy Tutor and Paedagogue the learned Epistemon, who by his lively
and vocal documents may instruct thee in the Arts and Sciences.

I intend, and will have it so, that thou learn the Languages perfectly: first
of all, the Greek, as Quintilian will have it: secondly, the Latin; and then
the Hebrew, for the holy Scripture-sake: and then the Chaldee and Arabic
likewise, and that thou frame thy stilein Greek in imitation of Plato; and for
the Latin, after Cicero, let there be no history which thou shall not have
ready in thy memory; unto the prosecuting of which design, books of
Cosmographie will be very conducible, and help thee much. Of the liberal Arts
of Geometry, Arithmetic and Music, I gave thee some taste when thou were yet
little, and not above five or six years old; proceed further in them, and
learn the remainder if thou can. As for Astronomy, study all the rules
thereof, let pass nevertheless the divining and judicial Astrology, and the
Art of Lullius, as being nothing else but plain abuses and vanities. As for the
Civil Law, of that I would have thee to know the texts by heart, and then to
confer them with Philosophy.

Now in matter of the knowledge of the works of Nature, I would have thee to
study that exactly, and that so there be no sea, river nor fountain, of which
thou do not know the fishes, all the fowls of the air, all the several
kinds of shrubs and trees, whether in forests or orchards: all the sorts of
herbs and flowers that grow upon the ground: all the various metals that are
hid within the bowels of the earth: together with all the diversity of precious
stones, that are to be seen in the Orient and South-parts of the world, let
nothing of all these be hidden from thee. Then fail not most carefully to
peruse the books of the Greek, Arabian and Latin Physicians, not despising the
Talmudists and Cabalists; and by frequent Anatomies get thee the perfect
knowledge of the other world, called the Microcosme, which is man: and at some
hours of the day apply thy mind to the study of the holy Scriptures: first in
Greek, the New Testament with the Epistles of the Apostles; and then the Old
Testament in Hebrew In brief, let me see thee an Abyss, and bottomless pit of
knowledge: for from hence forward, as thou growest great and becomest a man,
thou must part from this tranquillity and rest of study, thou must learn
chivalrie, warfare, and the exercises of the field, the better thereby to
defend my house and our friends, and to succor and protect them at all their
needs against the invasion and assaults of evil doers.

Furthermore, I will that very shortly thou try how much thou have profited,
which thou can not better do, then by maintaining publicly Theses and
Conclusions in all Arts, against all persons whatsoever, and by haunting the
company of learned men, both at Paris and otherwhere. But because as the wise
man Solomon says, Wisdom enters not into a malicious mind; and that
knowledge without conscience is but the ruin of the soul, it behooveth thee
to serve, to love, to fear God, and on him to cast all thy thoughts and all
thy hope, and by faith formed in charity to cleave unto him, so that thou
may never be separated from him by thy sins. Suspect the abuses of the
world: set not thy heart upon vanity; for this life is transitory, but the Word
of the Lord endures for ever. Be serviceable to all thy neighbors, and love
them as thy self: reverence thy Praeceptors: shun the conversation of those
whom thou desire not to resemble, and receive not in vain the graces which
God has bestowed upon thee: and when thou shall see that thou have attained to
all the knowledge that is to be acquired in that part, return unto me, that I
may see thee, and give thee my blessing before I die, My son, the peace and
grace of our Lord be with thee. Amen.

From Vtopia the 17. day of the month of March. Thy father Gargantua.




These letters being received and read, Pantagruel plucked up his heart, took a
fresh courage to him, and was inflamed with a desire to profit in his studies
more then ever, so that if you had seen him, how he took pains, and how he
advanced in learning, you would have said that the vivacity of his spirit
amidst the books, was like a great fire amongst dry wood, so active it was,
vigorous and indefatigable.

CHAP. IX. How Pantagruel found Panurge, whom he loved all his lifetime.
ONe day as Pantagruel was taking a walk without the City, toward St. Antonies
Abbey, discoursing and philosophating with his own servants and some other
Scholars, met with a young man of a very comely stature, and surpassing
handsome in all the lineaments of his body, but in several parts thereof most
pitifully wounded; in such bad equipage in matter of his apparel, which was but
totters and rags, and every way so far out of order, that he seemed to have
been a fighting with mastiffe-dogs, from whose fury he had made an escape, or
to say better, he looked in the condition wherein he then was, like an
Apple-gatherer of the country of Perch.

As far off as Pantagruel saw him, he said to those that stood by:. Do you
see that man there, who is a coming hither upon the road from Charanton-bridge?
by my faith, he is only poor in fortune; for I may assure you, that by his
Physiognomie it appears, that nature has extracted him from some rich and
noblerace, and that too much curiosity has thrown him upon adventures, which
possibly have reduced him to this indigence, want and penury. Now as he was
just amongst them, Pantagruel said unto him, Let me entreat you, (friend) that
you may be pleased to stop here a little, and answer me to that which I shall
ask you, and I am confident you will not think your time ill bestowed; for I
have an extreme desire, (according to my ability) to give you some supply in
this distress, wherein I see you are; because I do very much commiserate your
case, which truly moves me to great pity; Therefore (my friend) tell me, who
you are? whence you come? whither you go? what you desire? and what your name
is? the companion answered him in the Dutch tongue, thus.

Yunker got geb euch gluck und heil; surwar lieber yunker, ich las euch wissen
das dar mich wungraft, is it ein arm und erbamlich ding, und were wol darvon
Zusagen welches euch verdrusflich Zuceten, und mer Zuerzelen were, wiewol die
Poeten und Oratores vortzeiten habengesagt in item sprichen: und sentenzen das
die gedecktnus des ellendzund armut vortangs erlitten, is it ein grosser lust. My
friend (said Pantagruel,) I have no skill in that gibberish of yours;
therefore, if you would have us to understand you, speak to us in some other
language; then did the drole answer him thus.

Albarildim gotfano dechmin brin alabo dordio falbroth ringuam albaras; nin
porthzadikin almucatin milko prin alelmin en thoth dalheben enfuim: kuthim
alidum alkaim nimbroth deehoth porth min michais im endoch, pruch dal maisulum
hol moth dansrihim lupaldas im voldemoch. Nim hur diavoth mnarbotim dal gousch
palfrapin duch imscoth pruch galeth dal chinon min foulchrich al conin
buthathen does dal prim. Do you understand none of this, said Pantagruel to the
company? I believe (said Epistemon,) that this is the language of the
Antipodes, and such a hard one that the devil himself knows not what to make
of it. Then, said Pantagruel, Gossip, I know not if the walls do comprehend the
meaning of your words, but none of us here does so much as understand one
syllable of them; then said my blade again.

Signor mio voi vedete per essempio che la cornemusa non suona may, se non ha
il ventre pieno: cosi io parimente non vi so contare le mie fortune, se prima
il tribulato ventre non ha la solita refectione: alquale e adviso che le mani e
li denti abbi person il loro ordine natural, e del tutto annichilati. To which
Epistemon answered as much of the one as of the other, and nothing of either.
Then said Panurge.

Lard gestholb besuavirtuisbe intelligence: ass yi body scalbisbe natural
reloth cholb should osme pety have; for nature hass visse equaly maid bot fortune
sum exaiti hesse andoyis deprevit: non yeless viviss mou virtiuss deprevit and
virtuiss men decreviss for anen ye ladeniss non quid. Yet less said
Pantagruel; then said my jollie Panurge.

Jonaandie gaussa goussy etan beharda er remedio beharde ver sela ysser landa.
Aubar es otoy yes nausu ey nessassu gourray proposiam ordine. den. Non yssena
bayte facheria egabe gen her assy badea sadassu noura assia: Aram hon davan
gualde cydassu nydassuna estou oussye ecvinausoury hin cr darstur a eguy harm:
Genicoa plasar vadu. Are you there (said Eudemon?) Genicoa, to this (said
Carpalin) St. Trinian's rammer unstirch your bum, for I had almost understood
it. Then answered Panourge.

Prugfrest frinst sorgdmand strochdi dthds page breleland gravot chavygni
pomardiere rusth pkalldracg devinier a pras. Nays: beville balmuch monach drupp
del meupplist rincque, drind dodelp up drent lochmine stzincq jald de vins ders
cordelis bur jocst stzampenards. Do you speak Christian (said Epistemon) or the
Buffoon language, otherwise called patclinots? Nay, it is the puzlatory tongue
(said another) which some call Lanternois. Then said Panurge.

Her reje sprexe andeers gheen taele dan kersten taele my dunct nochoans, al en
seg je met even ubord, myven noot velaert glenouch bbat re beglere gheest my
unyt bet mhet richeyt yet waer unje ghevoet match zunch: To which answered
Pantagruel, as much of that: then said Panurge.

Sennor de tanto hablar yo soy cansado, porque supplico avuestra excellencia
que mire alos precettos Evangelicos, para que ellos muevan vuestra excellencia
a lo que es de consciencia, ysiellos no bastaren paramo ver vuesa excellencia
apiedad, supplico que mire a la piedad natural, laqual yo creoque le mova, como
es de razon, y concesso, no digo mas? Truly (my friend) I doubt not but you can
speak diverse languages, but tell us that which you would have us to do for you
in some tongue, which you conceive we may understand? then said the companion.

Mine her, reendog ieg met ingen tunge talede; lyge some boeen, oeg usk wlig
creatuer: mine clee bon och my me legioms mager heb xv duyfer alliguck lalig
hwad tyng mog meest behoff riteres, somaer sandeligh mad och dryck: hwar for
forbar me regom lyder offuer megoch besael argyffua meg nogeth off haylketieg
kad styre mine groeendes match lygeruss son mand Cerbero en Souppesor setihr:
soa^ schalfue loeffue lenge oekyk salitgth: I think really (said Eusthenes)
that the Goths spoke thus of old: and that, if it pleased God, we would all of
us speak so with our tails. Then again said Panurge.

Adon seolom lechai in ischar harob hal hebdeca bimeherch thitbe li kikar
lehem: chauchar ublaah aldonaicho neral: To which answered Epistemon, at this
time have I understood him very well; for it is the Hebrew tongue most
Rhetorically pronounced: Then again said the Gallant.

Despotatin in panagathe, dorrisy mi ve artodotis, horasgar limo analiscomenon
eme athlios, ee ento metalieme ve eleis udamos, getis de par emu ha vehre ce
homos philology pandes homologositote logus te ce rehemetta petitta hyrpachin
opote pragma asto pafi delon esti. Eusta garnancei monon logusin hina pragmata
(hem peri emphibetumen) me prophoros epiphenete: What? (said Carpalim)
Pantagruels footman, it is Greek, I have understood him: and how? have thou
dwelt any while in Greece? Then said the drole again.

Agonou don't oussys vous desdaignez algarou: nou denfaron zamist vous mariston
ulbrou, fousquez voubrol tam bredaguez maupreton den goulhoust daguez daguez
non croupys fost bardonnoffist nougrou: agou paston tol nalbrol prissys houriou
los echatonous, prou dehouguys brol pany gouden bascrou noudous caguons goutf^e
goul oustatouppassou? Me thinks I understand him (said Pantagruel) for either
it is the language of my country of Utopia, or sounds very like it: and as he
was about to have begun some purpose, the companion said,

Jam toties vos per sacra, perque deos deasque omnes obtestatus sum, ut si quae
vos pietas permovet, egestatem meam solaremini nec hilum proficio clamans and
ejulans: sinite, quaeso, sinite, viri impii, quo me fata vocant abite: nec
ultra vanis vestris interpellationibus obtundatis, memores veteris illius
adagii, quo venture famelious auriculis carere dicitur. Well, my friend, (said
Pantagruel) but cannot you speak French? that I can do (Sir) very well, (said
the companion) God be thanked: it is my natural language and mother tongue: for
I was borne and bred in my younger years in the garden of France, to wit,
Touraine: Then (said Pantagruel) tell us what is your name, and from whence you
are come; fot by my faith, I have already stamped in my mind such a deep
impression of love toward you, that if you will condescend unto my will, you
shall not depart out of my company, and you and I shall make up another couple
of friends, such as Aeneas and Achates were; Sir, (said the companion) my true
and proper christen name is Panurge, and now I come out of Turkey, to which
country I was carried away prisoner at that time, when they went to Metelin
with a mischief: and willingly would I relate unto you my fortunes, which are
more wonderful then those of Ulysses were: but seeing that it pleases you to
retain me with you, I most heartily accept of the offer, protesting never to
leave you, should you go to all the devils in hell; we shall have therefore
more leisure at another time, and a fitter opportunity wherein to report them;
for at this present I am in a very urgent necessity to feed, my teeth are
sharp, my belly empty, my throat dry, and my stomach fierce and burning: all is
ready, if you will but set me to work, it will be as good as a balsamum for
sore eyes, to see me gulch and raven it, for Gods sake give order for it. Then
Pantagruel commanded that they should carry him home, and provide him good
store of victuals, which being done, he ate very well that evening, and
(capon-like) went early to bed, then slept until dinnertime the next day, so
that he made but three steps and one leap from the bed to the board.

CHAP. X. How Pantagruel judged so equitably of a Controversy, which was
wonderfully obscure and difficult: that by reason of his just decree therein,
he was reputed to have a most admirable judgment.
PAntagruel, very well remembering his fathers letter and admonitions, would one
day make trial of his knowledge. Thereupon in all the Carrefours, that is,
throughout all the four quarters, streets and corners of the City, he set up
Conclusions to the number of nine thousand seven hundred sixty and four, in
all manner of learning, touching in them the hardest doubts that are in any
science. And first of all, in the fodder-street he held dispute against all the
Regents or Fellows of Colleges, Artists or Masters of Arts, and Orators, and
did so gallantly, that he overthrew them, and set them all upon their tails,
he went afterward to the Sorbone, where he maintained argument against all the
Theologians or Divines, for the space of six weeks, from four a clock in the
morning, until six in the evening, except an interval of two hours to refresh
themselves, and take their repast: and at this were present the greatest part
of the Lords of the Court, the Masters of Requests, Presidents, Counselors,
those of the Accounts, Secretaries, Advocates and others: as also the Sheriffs
of the said town, with the Physicians and Professors of the canon law; amongst
which it is to be remarked, that the greatest part were stubborn jades, and in
their opinions obstinate; but he took such course with them, that for all their
Ergo's and fallacies, he put their backs to the wall, gravelled them in the
deepest questions, and made it visibly appear to the world, that compared to
him, they were but monkies, and a knot of mufled calves: Whereupon, every body
began to keep a bustling noise, and talk of his so mavelous knowledge,
through all degrees of persons in both sexes, even to the very Laundresses,
Brokers, Rostmeat-sellers, Penknife-makers and others, who, when he past along
in the street, would say, This is he; in which he took delight, as Demosthenes,
the Prince of Greek Orators did, when an old crouching wife, pointing at him
with her fingers, said, That is the man.

Now at this same very time there was a process or suit in law, depending in
Court between two great Lords, of which one was called my Lord Kissebreech,
Plaintiff of one side, and the other my Lord Suckfist, Defendant of the other;
whose Controversy was so high and difficult in Law, that the Court of
Parliament could make nothing of it. And therefore by the Commandment of the
King, there were assembled four of the greatest, and most learned of all the
Parliaments of France, together with the great Council, and all the principal
Regents of the Universities, not only of France, but of England also and Italy,
such as Jason, Philippus-Decius, Petrus de Petronibus, and a rabble of other
old Rabbinists: who being thus met together, after they had thereupon consulted
for the space of six and forty weeks, finding that they could not fasten their
teeth in it, nor with such clearness understand the case, as that they might
in any manner of way be able to right it, or take up the difference berwixt the
two aforesaid Parties, it did so grievously vex them, that they most
villanously conshit themselves for shame. In this great extremity, one amongst
them named Du Douhait, the learned of all, and more expert and prudent then
any of the rest, whilst one day they were thus at their wits end,
all-to-be-dunced and philogrobolized in their brains, said unto them: We have
been here (my Masters,) a good long space without doing any thingelse, then
trifle away both our time and money, and can nevertheless find neither brim
nor bottom in this matter; for the more we study about it, the less we
understand therein, which is a great shame and disgrace to us, and a heavy
burden to our consciences; yea such, that in my opinion we shall not rid our
selves of it without dishonor, unless we take some other course; for we do
nothing but dote in our consultations.

See therefore what I have thought upon: you have heard much talking of that
worthy personage named Master Pantagruel, who has been found to be learned
above the capacity of this present age, by the proofs he gave in those great
disputations, which he held publicly against all men: my opinion is, that we
send for him, to confer with him about this business; for never any man will
encompasse the bringing of it to an end, if he do it not.

Hereunto all the Counselors and Doctors willingly agreed, and according to
that their result having instantly sent for him, they entreated him to be
pleased to canvass the process, and sift it thoroughly, that after a deep
search and narrow examination of all the points thereof, he might forthwith
make the report unto them, such as he shall think good in true and legal
knowledge: to this effect they delivered into his hands the bags wherein were
the Writs and Pancarts concerning that suit, which for bulk and weight were
almost enough to lade four great couillard or stoned Asses; but Pantagruel
said unto them, Are the two Lords, between whom this debate and process is,
yet living? it was answered him, Yes: To what a devil then (said he,) serve so
many paultry heaps, and bundles of papers and copies which you give me? is it
not better to hear their Controversy from their own mouths, whilst they are
face to face before us, then to read these vile fopperies, which are nothing
but trumperies, deceits, diabolical cosenages of Cepola, pernicious slights and
subversions of equity? for I am sure, that you, and all those thorough whose
hands this process has past, have by your devices added what you could to it
pro and contra, in such sort, that although their difference perhaps was clear
and easy enough to determine at first, you have obscured it, and made it more
intricate, by the frivolous, sottish, unreasonable and foolish reasons, and
opinions of Accursius, Baldus, Bartolus, de castro, de imola, Hippolytus,
Panormo, Bertachin, Alexander, Curtius, and those other old Mastiffs, who never
understood the least law of the Pandects, they being but mere blockheads and
great tithe-calvs, ignorant of all that which was needful for the understanding
of the laws; for (as it is most certain) they had not the knowledge either of
the Greek or Latin tongue, but only of the Gothic and Barbarian; the laws
nevertheless were first taken from the Greeks, according to the testimony of
Ulpian. l. poster. de origin juris, which we likewise may perceive by that all
the laws are full of Greek words and sentences: and then we find that they
are reduced into a Latin style, the most elegant and ornate, that whole
language is able to afford, without excepting that of any that ever wrote
therein; nay, not of Salust, Varo, Cicero, Seneca, Titus Livius, nor
Quintilian: how then could these old dotards be able to understand aright the
text of the laws, who never in their time had looked upon a good Latin book,
as does evidently, enough appear by the rudeness of their style, which is
fitter for a Chimney-sweeper, or for a Cook or a Scullion, then for a
Jurisconsult and Doctor in the Laws.

Furthermore, seeing the Laws are excerpted out of the middle of moral and
natural Philosophy, how should these fools have understood it, that have by G
-- studied less in Philosophy then my Mule? in respect of humane learning,
and the knowledge of Antiquities and History, they were truly laden with those
faculties as a toad is with feathers: and yet of all this the Laws are so
full, that without it they cannot be understood, as I intend more fully to show
unto you in a peculiar Treatise, which on that purpose I am about to publish.
Therefore if you will that I take any meddling in this process; first, cause
all these papers to be burnt: secondly, make the two Gentlemen come personally
before me; and afterward, when I shall have heard them, I will tell you my
opinion freely without any feignednes or dissimulation whatsoever.

Some amongst them did contradict this motion, as you know that in all
companies there are more fools then wise men, and that the greater part
always surmounts the better, as says Titus Livius, in speaking of the
Carthaginians: but the foresaid Du Douet held the contrary opinion, maintaining
that Pantagruel had said well, and what was right, in affirming that these
records, bills of inquest, replies, rejoinders, exceptions, depositions, and
other such diableries of truth-intangling Writs, were but Engines wherewith to
overthrow justice, and unnecessarily to prolong such suits as did depend before
them; and that therefore the devil would carry them all away to hell, if they
did not take another course, and proceeded not in times coming according to the
Prescripts of Evangelical and Philosophical equity. In fine, all the papers
were burnt, and the two Gentlemen summoned and personally convented; at whose
appearance before the Court, Pantagruel said unto them, Are you they that have
this great difference betwixt you? Yes, (my Lord) said they: Which of you (said
Pantagruel,) is the Plaintiff? It is I, said my Lord Kissebreech: Go to then,
my friend, (said he) and relate your matter unto me from point to point,
according to the real truth, or else (by cocks body) if I find you to lie so
much as in one word, I will make you shorter by the head, and take it from off
your shoulders, to show others by your example, that in justice and judgment
men ought to speak nothing but the truth; theresore take heed you do not add
nor impare any thing in the Narration of your case. Begin.

CHAP. XI. How the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist did plead before
Pantagruel without an Attorney.
THen began Kissebreech in manner as follows; My Lord, it is true, that a
good woman of my house, carried eggs to the market to sell: Be covered,
Kissebreech, said Pantagruel: Thanks to you, my Lord, said the Lord
Kissebreech; but to the purpose, there passed betwixt the two tropicks, the
sum of three pence toward the zenith, and a halfpeny, forasmuch as the
Riphaean mountains had been that year oppressed with a great sterility of
counterfeit gudgions, and shows without substance, by means of the babbling
tattle, and fond fibs, seditiously raised between the gibblegablers, and
Accursian gibberish-mongers, for the rebellion of the Swissers, who had
assembled themselves to the full number of the bum-bees, and myrmidons, to go a
handsel-getting on the first day of the new year, at that very time when they
give brewis to the oxen, and deliver the key of the coals to the
Countrey-girles, for serving in of the oats to the dogs. All the night long
they did nothing else (keeping their hands still upon the pot) but dispatch
both on foot and horseback, leaden-sealed Writs or letters, (to wit, Papal
Commissions commonly called Bulls,) to stop the boats: for the Tailors and
Seamsters would have made of the stolen shreds and clippings a goodly sagbut
to cover the face of the Ocean, which then was great with child of a potfull
of cabbidge, according to the opinion of the hay-bundle-makers: but the
Physicians said, that by the Urine they could discern no manifest sign of the
Bustards pace, nor how to eat double-tongued mattocks with mustard, unless the
Lords and Gentlemen of the Court should be pleased to give by B. mol express
command to the pox, not to run about any longer, in gleaning up of Coppersmiths
and Tinkers; for the Jobernolls had already a pretty good beginning in their
dance of the British gig, called the estrindore, to a perfect diapason, with
one foot in the fire, and their head in the middle, as good man Ragot was wont
to say.

Ha (my Masters,) God moderates all things, and disposes of them at his
pleasure, so that against unluckie fortune a Carter broke his frisking whip,
which was all the winde-instrument he had: this was done at his return from the
little paultry town, even then when Master Amitus of Cresseplots was
licentiated, and had past his degrees in all dullerie and blockishnesse,
according to this sentence of the Canonists, Beati Dunces, quoniam ipsi
stumblaverunt. But that which makes lent to be so high, by St. Fiacre of Bry,
is for nothing else, but that the Pentecost never comes, but to my cost; yet on
before there hoe, a little rain stills a great wind, and we must think so,
seeing that the Sergeant has propounded the matter so far above my reach,
that the Clerks and Secondaries could not with the benefit thereof lick their
fingers feathered with gaunders, so orbicularly, as they were wont in other
things to do. And we do manifestly see, that every one acknowledges himself to
be in the error, wherewith another has been charged, reserving only those
cases whereby we are obliged to take an ocular inspection in a perspective
glass of these things, toward the place in the Chimney, where hangs the
sign of the wine of forty girths; which have been always accounted very
necessary for the number of twenty pannels and pack-saddles of the bankrupt
Protectionaries of five years respit; howsoever at least he that would not let
fly the foul before the Cheesecakes, ought in law to have discovered his
reason why not, for the memory is often lost with a wayward shooing: Well, God
keep Theobald Mit ain from all danger. Then said Pantagruel, Hold there: Ho, my
friend, soft and fair, speak at leisure, and soberly without putting your self
in choler; I understand the case, go on. Now then (my Lord) said Kissebreech,
the foresaid goodwoman, saying her gaudez and audinos, could not cover her
self with a treacherous backblow, ascending by the wounds and passions of the
privileges of the Universitie: unless by the virtue of a warming-pan she had
Angelically fomented every part of her body, in covering them with a hedge of
garden-beds: then giving in a swift unavoidable thirst very near to the place
where they sell the old rags, whereof the Painters of Flanders make greatuse,
when they are about neatly to clap on shoes on grasshoppers, locusts, cigals,
and such like flie-fowles, so strange to us, that I am wonderfully astonished
why the world does not lay, seeing it is so good to hatch.

Here the Lord of Suckfist would have interrupted him and spoken somewhat,
whereupon Pantagruel said unto him, St, by St. Antonies belly, does it become
thee to speak without command? I sweat here with the extremity of labor and
exceeding toil I take to understand the proceeding of your mutual difference,
and yet thou come to trouble and disquiet me: peace, in the devils name,
peace, thou shall be permitted to speak thy belly full, when this man has
done, and no sooner Go on, (said he) to Kissebreech, speak calmly, and do not
over-heat your self with too much haste.

I perceiving then (said Kissebreech) that the praginatical sanction did make
no mention of it, and that the holy Pope to every one gave liberty to fart at
his own ease, if that the blankets had no streaks, wherein the liars were to be
crossed with a ruffian-like crew: and the rainbow being newly sharpened at
Milan to bring forth larks, gave his full consent that the good woman should
tread down the heel of the hipgut-pangs, by virtue of a solemn protestation put
in by the little testiculated or codsted fishes, which to tell the truth, were
at that time very necessary for understanding the syntax and construction of
old boots. Therefore John Calfe her Cosen gervais once removed with a log from
the woodstack, very seriously advised her not to put her self into the hazard
of quagswagging in the Lee, to be scowred with a buck of linen clothes, till
first she had kindled the paper: this counsel she laid hold on, because he
desired her to take nothing, and throw out, for Non de ponte vadit, qui cum
sapientia cadit: matters thus standing, seeing the Masters of the chamber of
Accounts, or members of that Committee, did not fully agree amongst themselves
in casting up the number of the Almanie whistles, whereof were framed those
spectacles for Princes, which have been lately printed at Antwerp: I must needs
think that it makes a bad return of the Writ; and that the adverse Party is not
to be believed, in sacer verbo dotis; for that having a great desire to obey
the pleasure of the King, I armed my self from toe to top with belly furniture,
of the soles of good venison-pasties, to go see how my grape-gatherers and
vintagers had pinked and cut full of small holes their high coped-caps, to
lecher it the better, and play at in and in. And indeed the time was very
dangerous in coming from the Fair, in so far that many trained bowe-men were
cast at the muster, and quite rejected, although the chimney-tops were high
enough, according to the proportion of the windgalls in the legs of horses, or
of the Malaunders, which in the esteem of expert Farriers is no better disease,
or else the story of Ronypatifam, or Lamibaudichon, interpreted by some to be
the tale of a tub, or of a roasted horse, savours of Apocrypha, and is not an
authentic history; and by this means there was that year great abundance
throughout all the country of Artois, of tawny buzzing beetles, to the no
small profit of the Gentlemen-great-stick-faggot-carriers, when they did eat
without disdaining the cocklicranes, till their belly was like to crack with it
again: as for my own part, such is my Christian charity toward my neighbors,
that I could wish from my heart every one had as good a voice, it would make us
play the better at the tennis and the baloon. And truly (my Lord) to express
the real truth without dissimulation, I cannot but say that those petty subtle
devices, which are found out in the Etymologizing of patains, would descend
more easily into the river of Seine, to serve for ever at the Millars bridge
upon the said water, as it was heretofore decreed by the King of the
Canarrians, according to the sentence or judgment given thereupon, which is to
be seen in the Registry and Records within the Clerks office of this house.

And therefore (my Lord) I do most humbly require, that by your Lordship there
may be said and declared upon the case what is reasonable, with costs, damages,
and interests. Then said Pantagruel, My friend, is this all you have to say?
Kissebreech answered, Yes, (my Lord) for I have told all the tuautem, and have
not varied at all upon mine honor in so much as one single word. You then,
(said Pantagruel) my Lord of Suckfist, say what you will, and be brief, without
omitting nevertheless any thing that may serve to the purpose.

CHAP. XII. How the Lord of Suckfist pleaded before Pantagruel.
THen began the Lord Suckfist in manner as follows: My Lord, and you my
masters, if the iniquity of men were as easily seen in categoricall judgment,
as we can discern flies in a milk-pot; the worlds four Oxen had not been so
eaten up with Rats, nor had so many ears upon the earth been nibled away so
scurvily; for although all that my adversary has spoken be of a very soft and
downy truth, in so much as concerns the Letter and History of the factum: yet
nevertheless the crafty slights, cunning subtilties, sly cosenages, and
little troubling intanglements are hid under the Rose-pot, the common cloak and
cover of all fraudulent deceits

Should I endure, that, when I am eating my pottage equal with the best, and
that without either thinking or speaking any manner of ill, they rudely come to
vex, trouble, and perplex my brains with that antic Proverb which says, Who
in his pottage-eating drink^, will not
When he is dead and buried, see one jot.
and good Lady, how many great Captains have we seen in the day of battle,
when in open field the Sacrament was distributed in lunchions of the sanctified
bread of the Confraternity, the more honestly to nod their heads, play on the
lute, and crack with their tails, to make pretty little platform leaps, in
keeping level by the ground: but now the world is unshackled from the corners
of the packs of Leycester. One flies out lewdly and becomes debauched, another
likewise five, four and two, and that at such random, that if the Court take
not some course therein, it will make as bad a season in matter of gleaning
this year, as ever it made, or it will make goblets. If any poor creature go
to the stoves to illuminate his muzzle with a Cow-shard, or to buy
winter-boots, and that the Sergeants passing by, or those of the watch happen
to receive the decoction of a clystere, or the fecal matter of a close-stool,
upon their rustling-wrangling-clutter-keeping masterships, should any because
of that make bold to clip the shillings and testers, and fry the wooden dishes?
sometimes when we think one thing, God does another; and and when the Sun is
wholly set, all beasts are in the shade: let me never be believed again, if I
do not gallantly prove it by several people that have seen the light of the day.

In the year thirty and six, buying a Dutch curtail, which was a middle sized
horse, both high and short, of a wool good enough, and died in grain, as the
Goldsmiths assured me, although the Notarie put an etc. in it; I told really,
that I was not a Clerk of so much learning as to snatch at the Moon with my
teeth; but as for the Butterfirkin, where Vulcanian deeds and evidences were
sealed, the rumor was, and the report thereof went current, that salt-beefe
will make one find the way to the wine without a candle, though it were hid in
the bottom of a Colliers sack, and that with his drawers on he were mounted on
a barbed horse furnished with a fronstal, and such arms, thighs and leg-pieces
as are requisite for the well frying and broyling of a swaggering sauciness.
Here is a sheeps head, and it is well they make a proverb of this, that it is
good to see black Cowes in burnt wood, when one attains to the enjoyment of his
love. I had a consultation upon this point with my Masters the Clerks, who for
resolution concluded in frisesomorum, that there is nothing like to mowing in
the summer, and sweeping clean away in water, well garnished with paper, ink,
pens and penknives of Lions upon the river of Rosne; dolopym dolopof, tarabin
tarabas, tut prut pish: for incontinently after that armor begins to smell of
garlic, the rust will go near to eat the liver, not of him that wears it, and
then do they nothing else but withstand others courses, and wry-neckedly set up
their bristles against one another, in lightly passing over their afternoons
sleep, and this is that which makes salt so dear. My Lords, believe not, when
the said good woman had with bird-lime, caught the shovelar foul, the better
before a Sergeants witness, to deliver the younger sons portion to him, that
the sheeps pluck, or hogs haslet, did dodge and shrink back in the Usurers
purses, or that there could be any thing better to preserve one from the
Cannibals, then to take a rope of onions, knit with three hundred turnips, and
a little of a Calves Chaldern of the best allay that the Alchymists have:
provided, that they daub and do over with clay, as also calcinate and burn to
dust these pantoffles, muf in muf out; Mouflin mouflard, with the fine sauce of
the juice of the rabble rout, whilst they hide themselves in some petty
moldwarphole, saving always the little slices of bacon. Now if the dice will
not favor you with any other throw but ambesace, and the chance of three at
the great end, mark well the ace, then take me your dame, settle her in a
corner of the bed, and whisk me her up drille-trille there there,
tourelouralala, which when you have done, take a hearty draught of the best,
despicando grenovillibus, in despite of the frogs; whose fair course
bebuskined stockins shall be set apart for the little green geese, or mued
goslings, which fatned in a coope, take delight to sport themselves at the
wagtaile game, waiting for the beating of the metal, and heating of the wax
by the slavering drivellers of consolation.

Very true it is, that the four oxen which are in debate, and whereof mention
was made, were somewhat short in memory: nevertheless, to understand the gamme
aright, they feared neither the Cormorant nor Mallard of Savoy, which put the
good people of my country in great hope, that their children sometime should
become very skilful in Algorisme; therefore is it, that by a law rubric and
special sentence thereof, that we cannot fail to take the wolf, if we make
our hedges higher then the windmill, whereof somewhat was spoken by the
Plaintiff. But the great Devil did envy it, and by that means put the high
Duchess far behind, who played the devils in swilling down and tippling at
the good liquour, trink mien herr, trink, trink, by two of my table men in the
corner-point I have gained the lurch; for it is not probable, nor is there any
appearance of truth in this saying, that at Paris upon a little bridge the hen
is proportionable: and were they as copped and high-crested as marish whoops,
if veritably they did not sacrifice the Printers pumpet-balls at Moreb, with a
new edge set upon them by text letters, or those of a swift-writing hand, it is
all one to me, so that the head-band of the book breed not moths or worms in
it. And put the case, that at the coupling together of the buck-hounds, the
little puppies should have waxed proud before the Notarie could have given an
account of the serving of his Writ by the Cabalistick Art, it will necessarily
follow (under correction of the better judgment of the Court,) that six acres
of meadow ground of the greatest breadth, will make three butts of fine ink,
without paying ready money: considering that at the Funeral of King Charles, we
might have had the fathom in open market for one and two, that is deuce ace:
this I may affirm with a safe conscience upon my oath of wool.

And I see ordinarily in all good bagpipes, that when they go to the
counterfeiting of the chirping of small birds, by swinging a broom three times
about a chimney, and putting his name upon record, they do nothing but bend a
Crossebowe backward, and wind a horn, if perhaps it be too hot, and that by
making it fast to a rope he was to draw, immediately after the sight of the
letters, the Cowes were restored to him. Such another sentence after the
homeliest manner was pronounced in the seventeenth year, because of the bad
government of Louzefougarouse, whereunto it may please the Court to have
regard. I desire to be rightly understood; for truly I say not, but that in all
equity, and with an upright conscience, those may very well be dispossessed, who
drink holy water, as one would do a weavers shuttle, whereof suppositories are
made to those that will not resign, but on the terms of ell and tell, and
giving of one thing for another. Tunc (my Lords) quid juris pro minoribus? for
the common custom of the Salick law is such, that the first incendiarie or
firebrand of sedition, that flayes the Cow, and wipes his nose in a full
consort of music, without blowing in the Cobblers stitches, should in the time
of the nightmare sublimate the penury of his member by moss gathered when
people are like to foundre themselves at the mess at midnight, to give the
estrapade to these white-wines of Anjou, that do the feat of the leg in lifting
it (by horsemen called the Gambetta,) and that neck to neck, after the fashion
of Britanie, (concluding as before with costs, damages and interests.

After that the Lord of Suckfist had ended, Pantagruel said to the Lord of
Kissebreech, My friend, have you a mind to make any reply to what is said? No,
(my Lord) answered Kissebreech; for I have spoke all I intended, and nothing
but the truth, therefore put an end for Gods sake to our difference, for we are
here at great charge.

CHAP. XIII. How Pahtagruel gave judgment upon the difference of the two Lords.
THen Pantagruel rising up, assembled all the Presidents, Counselors and
Doctors that were there, and said unto them: Come now (my Masters) you have
heard (vivae vocis or aculo) the Controversy that is in question, what do you
think of it? They answered him, We have indeed heard it, but have not
understood the devil so much as one circumstance of the case; and therefore we
beseech you una voce, and in courtesy request you, that you would give
sentence as you think good, and ex nunc prout ex tunc, we are satisfied with
it, and do ratify it with our full consents: Well, my Masters (said
Pantagruel) seeing you are so pleased, I will do it: but I do not truly find
the case so difficult as you make it: your paragraph Caton: the law Frater, the
law Gallus, the law Quinque pedum, the law Vinum, the law Si Dominus, the law
Matter, the law Mulier bona, the law Si quis, the law Pomponius, the law Fundi,
the law Emptor, the law Praetor, the law Venditor, and a great many others are
far more intricate in my opinion. After he had spoke this, he walked a turn
or two about the hall, plodding very profoundly as one may think; for he did
groan like an Ass, whilst they girth him too hard, with the very
intensivenesse of considering how he was bound in conscience to do right to
both parties, without varying or accepting of persons. Then he returned, sat
down, and began to pronounce sentence as follows.

Having seen, heard, calculated and well considered of the difference between
the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist; the Court says unto them, that in
regard of the sudden quaking, shivering and hoarinesse of the flickermouse
bravely declining from the estival solstice, to attempt by private means the
surprisal of toyish trifles in those, who are a little unwell for having taken
a draught too much, through the lewd demeanor and vexation of the beetles,
that inhabit the Diarodal climate of an hypocritical Ape on horseback, bending
a Crossebowe backwards. The Plaintiff truly had just cause to calfet, or with
Ockam to stop the chinks of the gallion, which the good woman blew up with
wind, having one foot shod and the other bare, reimbursing and restoring to
him low and stiff in his conscience, as many bladder-nuts and wild pistaches
as there is of hair in eighteen Cowes, with as much for the embroiderer, and
so much for that. He is likewise declared innocent of the case privileged from
the Knapdardies, into the danger whereof it was thought he had incurred;
because he could not jocundly and with fullness of freedom untrusse and dung,
by the decision of a pair of gloves perfumed with the sent of bum-gunshot, at
the walnut-tree taper, as is usual in his country of Mirobalois. Slacking
therefore the top-saile, and letting go the boulin with the brazen bullets,
where with the Mariners did by way of protestation bake in paste-meat, great
store of pulse, interquilted with the dormouse, whose hawks bells were made
with a puntinaria, after the manner of Hungary or Flanders lace, and which his
brother in law carried in a Panier, lying near to three chevrons or bordered
gueules, whilst he was clean out of heart, drooping and crest-fallen by the
too narrow sifting, canvassing, and curious examining of the matter, in the
angulary dog-hole of nastie scoundrels, from whence we shoot at the vermiformal
popingay, with the flap made of a foxtaile.

But in that he charge the Defendant, that he was a botcher, cheese-eater,
and trimmer of man's flesh imbalmed, which in the arsiversie swagfall tumble was
not found true, as by the Defendant was very well discussed.

The Court therefore does condemn and amerce him in three porringers of curds,
well cemented and closed together, shining like pearls, and Codpieced after
the fashion of the Country, to be paid unto the said Defendant, about the
middle of August in May: but on the other part the Defendant shall be bound to
furnish him with hay and stubble, for stopping the caltrops of his throat,
troubled and impulregafized, with gabardines garbeled shufflingly, and friends
as before, without costs and for cause.

Which sentence being pronounced, the two Parties departed both contented with
the decree, which was a thing almost incredible; for it never came to pass
since the great rain, nor shall the like occur in thirteen jubilees hereafter,
that two Parties contradictorily contending in judgment, be equally satisfied
and well pleased with the definitive sentence. As for the Counselors, and
other Doctors in the law, that were there present, they were all so ravished
with admiration at the more then humane wisdom of Pantagruel, which they did
most clearly perceive to be in him, by his so accurate decision of this so
difficult and thornie cause, that their spirits, with the extremity of the
rapture, being elevated above the pitch of actuating the organs of the body,
they fell into a trance and sudden ecstasy, wherein they stayed for the space
of three long hours, and had been so as yet in that condition, had not some
good people fetched store of vinegar and rose water, to bring them again unto
their former sense and understanding, for the which God be praised every where;
And so be it.

CHAP. XIV. How Panurge related the manner how he escaped out of the hands of
the Turks.
THe great wit and judgment of Pantagruel, was immediately after this made
known unto all the world, by setting forth his praises in print, and putting
upon record this late wonderful proof he has given thereof amongst the Rolls
of the Crown, and Registers of the Palace, in such sort, that every body began
to say, that Solomon, who by a probable guess only, without any further
certainty, caused the child to be delivered to its own mother, showed never in
his time such a Masterpiece of wisdom, as the good Pantagruel has done; happy
are we therefore that have him in our Country. And indeed they would have made
him thereupon Master of the Requests, and President in the Court: but he
refused all, very graciously thanking them for their offer, for (said he) there
is too much slavery in these offices, and very hardly can they be saved that do
exercise them, considering the great corruption that is amongst men: which
makes me believe, if the empty seats of Angels be not filled with other kind of
people then those, we shall not have the final judgment these seven thousand
sixty and seven jubilees yet to come; and so Cusanus will be deceived in his
conjecture: Remember that I have told you of it, and given you fair
advertisement in time and place convenient.

But if you have any hogsheads of good wine, I willingly will accept of a
present of that, which they very heartily did do, in sending him of the best
that was in the City, and he drank reasonably well, but poor Panurge bibbed and
bowsed of it most villainously, for he was as dry as a red-herring, as lean as
a rake, and like a poor, lank, slender cat, walked gingerly as if he had trod
upon eggs: so that by some one being admonished, in the midst of his draught
of a large deep bowl, full of excellent Claret, with these words, Fair and
softly, Gossip, you suck up as if you were mad: I give thee to the devil, (said
he) thou have not found here thy little tippling sippers of Paris, that drink no
more then the little bird called a spink or chaffinch, and never take in their
beak full of liquour, till they be bobbed on the tails after the manner of the
sparrows. O companion, if I could mount up as well as I can get down, I had
been long ere this above the sphere of the Moon with Empedocles. But I cannot
tell what a devil this means. This wine is so good and delicious, that the
more I drink thereof, the more I am athirst; I believe that the shadow of my
Master Pantagruel, engendereth the altered and thirsty men, as the Moon does
the catarres and defluxions; at which word the company began to laugh: which
Pantagruel perceiving, said, Panurge What is that which moves you to laugh so?
Sir, said he, I was telling them that these devilish Turks are very unhappy,
in that they never drink one drop of wine, and that though there were no other
harm in all Mahomets Alcoran, yet for this one base point of abstinence from
wine, which therein is commanded, I would not submit my self unto their law.
But now tell me, (said Pantagruel) how you escaped out of their hands. By G --
Sir (said Panurge) I will not lie to you in one word.

The rascally Turks had broached me upon a spit all larded like a rabbet, (for
I was so dry and meagre, that otherwise of my flesh they would have made but
very bad meat) and in this manner began to roast me alive. As they were thus
roasting me, I recommended my self unto the divine grace, having in my mind
the good St. Lawrence, and always hoped in God that he would deliver me out of
this torment, which came to pass, and that very strangely; for as I did commit
my self with all my heart unto God, crying, Lord God help me, Lord God save me,
Lord God take me out of this pain and hellish torture, wherein these traitorous
dogs detain me for my sincerity in the maintenance of thy law: the roster or
turn-spit fell asleep by the divine will, or else by the virtue of some good
Mercury, who cunningly brought Argus into a sleep for all his hundred eyes:
when I saw that he did no longer turn me in roasting, I looked upon him, and
perceived that he was fast asleep, then took I up in my teeth a firebrand by
the end where it was not burnt, and cast it into the lap of my roaster, and
another did I throw as well as I could under a field-couche, that was placed
near to the chimney, wherein was the strawbed of my Master turnspit; presently
the fire took hold in the straw, and from the straw to the bed, and from the
bed to the loft, which was planked and seeled with fur, after the fashion of
the foot of a lamp: but the best was, that the fire which I had cast into the
lap of my paultry roaster, burnt all his groine, and was beginning to cease
upon his cullions, when he became sensible of the danger, for his smelling was
not so bad, but that he felt it sooner then he could have seen daylight: then
suddenly getting up, and in a great amazement running to the window, he cried
out to the streets as high as he could, dalbaroth, dalbaroth, dalbaroth, which
is as much to say as, Fire, fire, fire: incontinently turning about, he came
straight toward me, to throw me quite into the fire, and to that effect had
already cut the ropes, wherewith my hands were tied, and was undoing the cords
from off my feet; when the Master of the house hearing him cry, Fire, and
smelling the smoke from the very street where he was walking with some other
Baashaws and Mustaphaes, ran with all the speed he had to save what he could,
and to carry away his Jewels; yet such was his rage (before he could well
resolve how to go about it,) that he caught the broach whereon I was spitted,
and therewith killed my roaster stark dead, of which wound he died there for
want of government or otherwise; for he ran him in with the spit a little above
the navel, toward the right flank, till he pierced the third lappet of his
liver, and the blow flanting upwards from the midriffe or diaphragme, through
which it had made penetration, the spit past athwart the pericardium, or
capsule of his heart, and came out above at his shoulders, betwixt the spondyls
or turning joints of the chine of the back, and the left homoplat, which we
call the shoulder blade.

True it is, (for I will not lie,) that in drawing the spit out of my body, I
fell to the ground near unto the Andirons, and so by the fall took some hurt,
which indeed had been greater, but that the lardons, or little slices of bacon,
wherewith I was stuck, kept off the blow. My Baashaw then seeing the case to be
desperate, his house burnt without remission, and all his goods lost, gave
himself over unto all the devils in hell, calling upon some of them by their
names, Gringoth, Astaroth, Rappalus, and Gribouillis, nine several times, which
when I saw, I had above six pence worth of fear, dreading that the devils
would come even then to carry away this fool, and seeing me so near him would
perhaps snatch me up too: I am already (thought I) half roasted, and my
lardons, will be the cause of my mischief; for these devils are very lickorous
of lardons, according to the authority which you have of the Philosopher
Jamblicus and Murmault, in the Apology of Bossuris, adulterated pro magistros
nostros: but for my better security I made the sign of the Cross; crying,
Hageos, athanatos, hotheos, and none came: at which my rogue Baashaw being very
much aggrieved, would in transpiercing his heart with my spit have killed
himself; and to that purpose had set it against his breast, but it could not
enter, because it was not sharp enough; whereupon I perceiving that he was not
like to work upon his body the effect which he intended, although he did not
spare all the force he had to thrust it forward, came up to him and said,
Master Bugrino, thou do here but trifle away thy time, or rashly lose it, for
thou will never kill thy self thus as thou do: well thou may hurt or
bruise somewhat within thee, so as to make thee languish all thy lifetime most
pitifully amongst the hands of the Chirurgions; but if thou will be counseled
by me, I will kill thee clear outright, so that thou shall not so much as feel
it, and trust me, for I have killed a grear many others, who have found
themselves very well after it: Ha, my friend, said he, I prithee do so, and for
thy pains I will give thee my Codpiece, take, here it is, there are six
hundred Seraphs in it, and some fine Diamonds, and most excellent Rubies. And
where are they (said Epistemon?) By St. John (said Panurge) they are a good way
hence, if they always keep going: but where is the last years snow? this was
the greatest care that Villon the Parisien Poet took. Make an end (said
Pantagruel) that we may know how thou did dress thy Baashaw: By the faith of
an honest man (said Panurge) I do not lie in one word, I swadled him in a
scurvie swathel-binding, which I found lying there half burnt, and with my
cords tied him royster-like both hand and foot, in such sort that he was not
able to winse, then past my spit thorough his throat, and hanged him thereon,
fastening the end thereof at two great hooks or cramp-irons, upon which they
did hang their Halberds; and then kindling a fair fire under him, did flame
you up my Milourt, as they use to do dry herrings in a chimney: with this,
taking his budget, and a little javelin that was upon the foresaid hooks, I ran
away a fair gallop-rake, and God he knows how I did smell my shoulder of
mutton.

When I was come down into the street, I found every body come to put out the
fire with store of water, and seeing me so halfe-roasted, they did naturally
pity my case, and threw all their water upon me, which by a most joyful
refreshing of me, did me very much good: then did they present me with some
victuals, but I could not eat much, because they gave me nothing to drink but
water afrer their fashion. Other hurt they did me none, only one little
villainous Turkey knobbreasted rogue, came thiefteously to snatch away some of
my lardons, but I gave him such a sturdie thump and sound rap on the fingers,
with all the weight of my javelin, that he came no more the second time.
Shortly after this, there came toward me a pretty young Corinthian wench, who
brought me a box full of Conserves, of round Mirabolan plums, called Emblicks,
and looked upon my poor Robin with an eye of great compassion, as it was
flea-bitten and pinked with the sparkles of the fire from whence it came, for
it reached no further in length, (believe me) then my knees; but note, that
this roasting cured me entirely of a Sciatick, whereunto I had been subject
above seven years before, upon that side, which my roaster, by falling asleep,
suffered to be burnt.

Now whilst they were thus busy about me, the fire triumphed, never ask, How?
for it took hold on above two thousand houses, which one of them espying, cried
out, saying, By Mahooms belly all the City is on fire, and we do nevertheless
stand gazing here, without offering to make any relief: upon this every one ran
to save his own; for my part, I took my way toward the gate. When I was got
upon the knap of a little hillock, not far off, I turned me about as did Lots
wife, and looking back, saw all the City burning in a fair fire, whereat I was
so glad, that I had almost beshit my self for joy: but God punished me well
for it: How? said Pantagruel: Thus, said Panurge; for when with pleasure I
beheld this jolly fire, jesting with my self, and saying, Ha poor flies, ha
poor mice, you will have a bad winter of it this year, the fire is in your
reeks, it is in your bed-straw, out came more then six, yea more then thirteen
hundred and eleven dogs great and small, altogether out of the town, flying
away from the fire; at the first approach they ran all upon me, being carried
on by the sent of my leacherous half-roasted flesh, and had even then devoured
me in a trice, if my good Angel had not well inspired me with the instruction
of a remedy, very sovereign against the toothache. And wherefore (said
Pantagruel) were thou afraid of the toothache, or pain of the teeth? were
thou not cured of thy Rheumes? By Palme-sunday, (said Panurge) is there any
greater pain of the teeth, then when the dogs have you by the legs? but on a
sudden, (as my good Angel directed me) I thought upon my lardons, and threw
them into the midst of the field amongst them: then did the dogs run, and fight
with one another at fair teeth, which should have the lardons: by this means
they left me, and I left them also bustling with, and hairing one another. Thus
did I escape frolic and lively, grammercie roastmeat and cookery.

CHAP. XV. How Panurge showed a very new way to build the walls of Paris.
PAntagruel one day to refresh himself of his study, went a walking toward St.
Marcels suburbs, to see the extravagancie of the Gobeline building, and to
taste of their spiced bread. Panurge was with him, having always a flaggon
under his gown, and a good slice of a gammon of bacon; for without this he
never went, saying, that it was as a Yeoman of the guard to him, to preserve
his body from harm, other sword carried he none: and when Pantagruel would
have given him one, he answered, that he needed none, for that it would but
heat his milt. Yea but (said Epistemon) if thou should be set upon, how
would thou defend thy self? With great buskinades or brodkin blows,
answered he, provided thursts were forbidden. At their return, Panurge
considered the walls of the City of Paris, and in derision said to Pantagruel,
See what fair walls here are! O how strong they are, and well fitted to keep
geese in a mue or coop to fatten them! by my beard they are competently scurvie
for such a City as this is; for a Cow with one fart would go near to overthrow
above six fathoms of them. O my friend (said Pantagruel) do thou know what
Agesilaus said, when he was asked, Why the great City of Lacedemon was not
enclosed with walls? Lo here (said he) the walls of the City, in showing them
the inhabitants and Citizens thereof, so strong, so well armed, and so expert
in military discipline; signifying thereby, that there is no wall but of bones;
and that Towns and Cities cannot have a surer wall, nor better fortification
then the prowess and virtue of the Citizens and Inhabitants; so is this City
so strong, by the great number of warlike people that are in it, that they care
not for making any other walls. Besides, whosoever would go about to wall it,
as Strasbourg, Orleans or Ferrara, would find it almost impossible, the cost
and charges would be so excessive. Yea, but (said Panurge) it is good
nevertheless to have an outside of stone, when we are invaded by our enemies,
were it but to ask, Who is below there? As for the enormous expense, which you
say would be needful for undertaking the great work of walling this City about,
if the Gentlemen of the Town will be pleased to give me a good rough cup of
wine, I will show them a pretty, strange and new way how they may build them
good cheap. How (said Pantagruel?) Do not speak of it then (answered Panurge,)
and I will tell it you. I see that the sine quo nons, killibistris, or
contrapunctums of the women of this Country, are better cheap then stones: of
them should the walls be built, ranging them in good symmetrie by the rules of
Architecture, and placing the largest in the first ranks, then sloping
downwards ridgewayes, like the back of an Ass, the middle sized ones must be
ranked next, and last of all the least and smallest. This done, there must be a
fine little interlacing of them, like points of Diamonds, as is to be seen in
the grear Tower of Bourges, with a like number of the nudinnudo's,
nilnisistando's, and stiff bracmards, that dwell in amongst the claustral
Codpieces. What devil were able to overthrow such walls? there is no metal like
it to resist blows, in so far that if Culverin-shot should come to grease
upon it, you would incontinently see distill from thence the blessed fruit of
the great pox, as small as rain: beware in the name of the devils, and hold
off; furthermore, no thunderbolt or lightning would fall upon it, for why? they
are all either blessed or consecrated: I see but one inconveniency in it: Ho, ho,
ha, ha, ha, (said Pantagruel,) and what is that? It is that the flies would be
so lickorish of them, that you would wonder, and would quickly gather there
together, and there leave their ordure and excretions, and so all the work
would be spoiled. But see how that might be remedied, they must be wiped and
made rid of the flies with fair fox-tailes, or good great viedazes (which are
Asse-pizzles) of Provence. And to this purpose I will tell you (as we go to
supper,) a brave example set down by Frater Lubinus libro de compotationibus
mendicantium; in the time that the beasts did speak, which is not yet three
days since.

A poor Lion, walking through the fortest of Bieure, and saying his own little
private devotions, past under a tree, where there was a roguish Collier gotten
up to cut down wood, who seeing the Lion, cast his hatchet at him, and wounded
him enormously in one of his legs, whereupon the Lion halting, he so long
toiled and turmoiled himself in roaming up and down the forest to find help,
that at last he met with a Carpenter, who willingly looked upon his wound,
cleansed it as well as he could, and filled it with moss, telling him that he
must wipe his wound well, that the flies might not do their excrements in it,
whilst he should go search for some yarrow or millefoile, commonly called the
Carpenters herb. The Lion being thus healed, walked along in the forest, at
what time a sempiternous Crone and old Hag, was picking up, and gathering some
sticks in the said forest, whoseeing the Lion coming toward her, for fear
fell down backwards, in such sort, that the wind blew up her gown, coats and
smock even as far as above her shoulders; which the Lion perceiving, for pity
ran to see whether she had taken any hurt by the fall, and thereupon
considering her how do you call it, said, O poor woman, who has thus wounded
thee? which words when he had spoken, he espied a fox, whom he called to come
to him, saying, Gossip Renard, hau, hither, hither, and for cause: when the fox
was come, he said unto him, My gossip and friend, they have hurt this good
woman here between the legs most villainously, and there is a manifest solution
of continuity, see how great a wound it is, even from the tail up to the
navel, in measure four, nay full five handfulls and a half; this is the blow
of an hatchet, I doubt me it is an old wound, and therefore that the flies may
not get into it, wipe it lustily well and hard; I prethy, both within and
without; thou have a good tail and long, wipe, my friend, wipe, I beseech
thee, and in the mean while I will go get some moss to put into it; for thus
ought we to succor and help one another, wipe it hard, thus, my friend, wipe
it well, for this wound must be often wiped, otherwise the Party cannot be at
ease: go to, wipe well, my little gossip, wipe, God has furnished thee with a
tail, thou have a long one, and of a bigness proportionable, wipe hard and be
not weary. A good wiper, who in wiping continually, wipeth with his wipard, by
wasps shall never be wounded: wipe, my pretty minion, wipe, my little bullie, I
will not stay long. Then went he to get store of moss; and when he was a
little way off, he cried out in speaking to the fox thus, Wipe well still,
gossip, wipe, and let it never grieve thee to wipe well, my little gossip, I
will put thee into service to be wiper to Don Pedro de Castille, wipe, only
wipe, and no more: the poor fox wiped as hard as he could, here and there,
within and witho u: but the false old trot did so fizzle and fist, that she
stunk like a hundred devils, which put the poor fox to a great deal of ill
ease, for he knew not to what side to turn himself, to escape the unsavory
perfume of this old woman's postern blasts, and whilst to that effect he was
shifting hither and thither, without knowing how to shun the annoyance of those
unwholesom gusts, he saw that behind there was yet another hole, not so great
as that which he did wipe, out of which came this filthy and infectious air.
The Lion at last returned, bringing with him of moss more then eighteen packs
would hold, and began to put into the wound, with a staff that which he had
provided for that purpose, and had already put in full sixteen packs and a
half, at which he was amazed: What a devil? (said he) this wound is very deep,
it would hold above two cart-loads of moss. The fox perceiving this, said unto
the Lion, O gossip Lion, my friend, I pray thee do not put in all thy moss
there, keep somewhat; for there is yet here another little hole, that stinks
like five hundred devils; I am almost choked with the smell thereof, it is so
pestiferous and impoisoning.

Thus must these walls be kept from the flies, and wages allowed to some for
wiping of them. Then said Pantagruel, How do thou know that the privy parts
of women are at such a cheap rate? for in this City there are many virtuous,
honest and chaste women besides the maids: Et ubi prenus, said Panurge? I will
give you my opinion of it, and that upon certain and assured knowledge. I do
not brag that I have bumbasted four hundred and seventeen, since I came into
this City, though it be but nine days ago: but this very morning I met with a
good fellow, who in a wallet, such as Aesops was, carried two little girls of
two or three years old at the most, one before, and the other behind: he
demanded alms of me, but I made him answer, that I had more cods then pence;
afterward I asked him, Good man, these two girls are they maids? Brother,
said he, I have carried them thus these two years, and in regard of her that
is before, whom I see continually, in my opinion she is a Virgin, nevertheless
I will not put my finger in the fire for it; as for her that is behind,
doubtless I can say nothing. Indeed (said Pantagruel) thou art a gentile
companion, I will have thee to be apparelled in my liverly, and therefore
caused him to be clothed most gallantly according to the fashion that then was,
only that Panurge would have the Codpiece of his breeches three foot long, and
in shape square, not round, which was done and was well worth the seeing.
Oftentimes was he wont to say that the world had not yet known the emolument
and utility that is in wearing great Codpieces; but time would one day teach it
them, as all things have been invented in time. God keep from hurt (said he)
the good fellow whose long Codpiece or Braguet has saved his life: God keep
from hurt him, whose long Braguet has been worth to him in one day, one
hundred threescore thousand and nine Crowns: God keep from hurt him, who by his
long Braguet has saved a whole City from dying by famine. And by G -- I will
make a book of the commodity of long Braguets, when I shall have more leisure.
And indeed he composed a fair great book with figures, but it is not printed
as yet that I know of.

CHAP. XVI. Of the qualities and conditions of Panurge.
PAnurge was of a middle stature, not too high, nor too low, and had somewhat
an Aquiline nose, made like the handle of a rasor: he was at that time five and
thirty years old or thereabouts, fine to gild like a leaden dagger; for he was
a notable cheater and cony-catcher, he was a very gallant and proper man of his
person, only that he was a little leacherous, and naturally subject to a kind
of disease, which at that time they called lack of money: it is an incomparable
grief, yet notwithstanding he had chreescore and three tricks to come by it at
his need, of which the most honorable and most ordinary was in manner of
thieving, secret purloining and filching; for he was a wicked lewd rogue, a
cosener, drinker, royster, rover, and a very dissolute and debautch'd fellow,
if there were any in Paris; otherwise, and in all matters else, the best and
most virtuous man in the world: and he was still contriving some plot, and
devising mischief against the Sergeants and the watch.

At one time he assembled three or four especial good hacksters and roaring
boys, made them in the evening drink like Templers, afterward led them till
they came under St. Genevieve, or about the College of Navarre, and at the
hour that the watch was coming up that way, which he knew by putting his sword
upon the pavement, and his ear by it, and when he heard his sword shake, it
was an infallible sign that the watch was near at that instant: then he and
his comanions took a tumbrel or dung-cart, and gave it the brangle, hurling it
with all their force down the hill, and so overthrew all the poor watchmen like
pigs, and then ran away upon the other side; for in less then two days, he
knew all the streets, lanes and turnings in Paris, as well as his Deus det.

At another time he made in some fair place, where the said watch was to
pass, a train of gunpowder, and at the very instant, that they went along,
set fire to it, and then made himself sport to see what good grace they had in
running away, thinking that St. Antonies fire had caught them by the legs. As
for the poor Masters of Arts, he did persecute them above all others: when he
encountered with any of them upon the street, he would not never fail to put
some trick or other upon them, sometimes putting the bit of a fried turd in
their graduate hoods: At other times pinning on little fox-tails, or
hares-eares behind them, or some such other roguish prank. One day that they
were appointed all to meet in the fodder-street, he made a Borbonnesa tart, or
filthy and slovenly compound, made of store of garlic, of Assa foetida, of
Castoreum, of dogs turds very warm, which he steeped, tempered and liquifi'd in
the corrupt matter of pockie biles, and pestiferous botches, and very early in
the morning, therewith anointed all the pavement, in such sort, that the devil
could not have endured it, which made all these good people, there to lay up
their gorges, and vomit what was upon their stomachs before all the world, as
if they had flayed the fox; and ten or twelve of them died of the plague,
fourteen became lepers, eighteen grew lousie, and above seven and twenty had
the pox but he did not care a button for it. He commonly carried a whip under
his gown wherewith he whipped without remission the pages, whom he found
carrying wine to their Masters, to make them mend their pace. In his coat he
had above six and twenty little fabs and pockets always full, one with some
lead-water, and a little knife as sharp as a glovers needle, wherewith he used
to cut purses: Another with some kind of bitter stuff, which he threw into
the eyes of those he met: another with clotburrs, penned with little geese or
capons feathers, which he cast upon the gowns and caps of honest people: and
often made them fair horns, which they wore about all the City, sometimes all
their life. Very often also upon the women's French hoods would he stick in the
hind-part somewhat made in the shape of a man's member. In another he had a
great many little horns full of fleas and lice, which he borrowed from the
beggars of St. Innocent, and cast them with small canes or quills to write
with, into the necks of the daintiest Gentlewomen that he could find* yea even
in the Church, for he never seated himself above in the quire, but always sat
in the body of the Church amongst the women, both at Mass, at Vespres, and at
Sermon. In another, he used to have good store of hooks and buckles, wherewlth
he would couple men and women together, that sat in company close to one
another, but especially those that wore gowns of crimson taffaties, that when
they were about to go away, they might rent all their gowns. In another, he
had a squib furnished with tinder, matches, stones to strike fire, and all
other tackling necessary for it: in another, two or three burning glasses,
wherewith he made both men and women sometimes mad, and in the Church put them
quite out of countenance; for he said that there was but an Antistrophe, or
little more difference then of a literal inversion between a woman, folle a la
mess, and molle a la fesse; that is, foolish at the Mass, and of a pliant
buttock.

In another he had a good deal of needles and thread, wherewith he did a
thousand little devilish pranks. One time at the entry of the Palace unto the
great Hall, where a certain gray Friar or Cordelier was to say Mass to the
Counselors: He did help to apparel him, and put on his vestments, but in the
accoutring of him, he sowed on his alb, surplice or stole to his gown and
shirt, and then withdrew himself, when the said Lords of the Court, or
Counselors came to hear the said Mass; but when it came to the Ite, missa
est, that the poor Frater would have laid by his stole or surplice (as the
fashion then was) he plucked off withal both his frock and shirt which were
well sowed together, and thereby stripping himself up to the very shoulders,
showed his bell vedere to all the world, together with his Don Cypriano, which
was no small one, as you may imagine: and the Friar still kept haling, but so
much the more did he discover himself, and lay open his back-parts, till one of
the Lords of the Court said, How now, what is the matter? will this fair Father
make us here an offering of his tail to kiss it? nay, St. Antonies fire kiss
it for us. From thenceforth it was ordained that the poor Fathers should never
disrobe themselves any more before the world, but in their vestry-room, or
sextry, as they call it; especially in the presence of women, lest it should
tempt them to the sin of longing, and disordinate desire. The people then
asked, why it was the Friars had so long and large genitories? the said Panurge
resolved the Problem very neatly, saying, That which makes Asses to have such
great ears, is that their dams did put no biggins on their heads, as Alliaco
mentions in his suppositions: by the like reason, that which makes the
genitories or generation-tooles of those fair Fraters so long is, for that
they ware no bottomed breeches, and therefore their jolly member having no
impediment, hangs dangling at liberty, as far as it can reach, with a
wigle-wagle down to their knees, as women carry their patinotre beads: and the
cause wherefore they have it so correspondently great, is, that in this
constant wig-wagging the humors of the body descend into the said member: for
according to the Legists, Agitation and continual motion is cause of attraction.

Item, he had another pocket full of itching powder, called stone-allum,
whereof he would cast some into the backs of those women, whom he judged to be
most beautiful and stately, which did so ticklishly gall them, that some would
strip themselves in the open view of the world, and others dance like a cock
upon hot embers, or a drumstick on a taber: others again ran about the streets,
and he would run after them: to such as were in the stripping vein, he would
very civilly come to offer his attendance, and cover them with his cloak, like
a courteous and very gracious man.

Item, in another he had a little leather bottle full of old oil, wherewith,
when he saw any man or woman in a rich new handsome suit, he would grease,
smutch and spoil all the best parts of it under color and pretense of touching
them, saying, This is good cloth, this is good satin, good taffaties; Madam,
God give you all that your noble heart desires; you have a new suit, pretty
Sir; and you a new gown, sweet Mistress, God give you joy of it, and maintain
you in all prosperity, and with this would lay his hand upon their shoulder, at
which touch such a villainous spot was left behind, so enormously engraven to
perpetuity in the very soul, body and reputation, that the devil himself could
never have taken it away: Then upon his departing, he would say, Madam, take
heed you do not fall, for there is a filthy great hole before you, whereinto if
you put your foot, you will quite spoil your self. Another he had all full of
Euphorbium, very finely pulverised, in that powder did he lay a fair
handkerchief curiously wrought, which he had stolen from a pretty Seamstresse
of the Palace, in taking away a lowse from off her bosom, which he had put
there himself: and when he came into the company of some good Ladies, he would
trifle them into a discourse of some fine workmanship of bonelace, then
immediately put his hand into their bosom, asking them, And this work, is it
of Flanders, or of Hainault? and then drew out his handkerchief, and said,
Hold, hold, look what work here is, it is of Foutiman or of Foutarabia* and
shaking it hard at their nose, made them sneeze for four hours without
ceasing: in the mean while he would fart like a horse, and the women would
laugh and say, How now, do you fart, Panurge? No, no, Madam (said he,) I do but
tune my tail to the plain song of the Music, which you make with your nose.
In another he had a picklock, a pelican, a crampiron, a crook, and some other
iron tools, wherewith there was no door nor coffer which he would nor pick
open. He had another full of little cups, wherewith he played very
artificially, for he had his fingers made to his hand, like those of Minerva or
Arachne, and had heretofore cried Triacle. And when he changed a teston,
cardecu, or any other piece of money, the changer had been more subtle then a
fox, if Panurge had not at every time made five or six sols, (that is some six
or seven pence) vanish away invisibly, openly and manifestly, without making
any hurt or lesion, whereof the changer should have felt nothing but the wind.

CHAP. XVII. How Panurge gained the pardons, and married the old women, and of
the suit in law which he had at Paris.
ONe day I found Panurge very much out of countenance, melancholic and silent,
which made me suspect that he had no money; whereupon I said unto him, Panurge,
you are sick, as I do very well perceive by your physiognomie, and I know the
disease, you have a flux in your purse; but take no care I have yet seven pence
half penny, that never saw father nor mother, which shall not be wanting, no
more then the pox in your necessity: whereunto he answered me, Well, well, for
money, one day I shall have but too much; for I have a Philosophers stone,
which attracts money out of men's purses, as the adamant does iron; but will you
go with me to gain the pardons, said he? By my faith (said he) I am no great
pardon-taker in this world; if I shall be any such in the other, I cannot tell:
yet let us go in Gods Name, it is but one farthing more or less. But (said he)
lend me then a farthing upon interest. No, no, (said I) I will give it you
freely, and from my heart, Grates vobis dominos, said he.

So we went along, beginning at St. Gervase, and I got the pardons at the first
box only, for in those matters very little contenteth me: then did I say my
small suffrages, and the prayers of St. Brigid, but he gained them at all the
boxes, and always gave money to every one of the Pardoners; from thence we
went to our Ladies Church, to St. John's, to St. Antonies, and so to the other
Churches, where there was a banquet of pardon, for my part, I gained no more of
them: but he at all the boxes kissed the relics, and gave at every one: to be
brief, when we were returned, he brought me to drink at the Castle-tavern, and
there showed me ten or twelve of his little bags full of money, at which I
blessed my self, and made the sign of the Cross, saying, Where have you
recovered so much money in so little time? unto which he answered me, that he
had taken it out of the basins of the pardons; For in giving them the first
farthing (said he) I put it in with such slight of hand, and so dexterously
that it appeared to be a threepence; thus with one hand I took threepence,
nine-pence or sixpence at the least, and with the other as much, and so
thorough all the Churches where we have been. Yea, but (said I) you damn your
self like a snake, and are withal a thief and sacrilegious person. True (said
he) in your opinion, but I am not of that mind; for the Pardoners do give me
it, when they say unto me in presenting the relics to kiss, Centuplum
accipies, that is, that for one penny I should take a hundred; for accipies is
spoken according to the manner of the Hebrews, who use the future tense in
stead of the imperative, as you have in the law, Diliges Dominum, that is,
dilige: even so when the Pardon-bearer says to me, Centuplum accipies, his
meaning is, centuplum accipe; and so does Rabbi Kimy, and Rabbi Aben Ezra
expound it, and all the Massorets, and ibi Bartholus. Moreover, Pope Sixtus
gave me fifteen hundred francks of yearly pension (which in English money is a
hundred and fifty pounds) upon his Ecclesiastical revenues and treasure, for
having cured him of a canckrous botch, which did so torment him, that he
thought to have been a Cripple by it all his life. Thus I do pay my self at my
own hand (for otherways I get nothing) upon the said Ecclesiastical treasure.
Ho, my friend, (said he) if thou did know what advantage I made, and how well
I feathered my nest, by the Popes bull of the Croisade, thou would wonder
exceedingly. It was worth to me above six thousand florins (in English coin
six hundred pounds,) and what a devil is become of them? (said I) for of that
money thou have not one half penny. They returned from whence they came (said
he,) they did no mote but change their Master.

But I employed at least three thousand of them (that is, three hundred pounds
English,) in marrying (not young Virgins; for they find but too many husbands)
but great old sempiternous trots, which had not so much as one tooth in their
heads; and that out of the consideration I had, that these good old women had
very well spent the time of their youth in playing at the close-buttock-game to
all comers, serving the foremost first, till no man would have any more
dealing with them. And by G -- I will have their skin-coat shaken once yet
before they die; by this means, to one I gave a hundred florins, to another
six score, to another three hundred, according to that they were infamous,
detestable and abominable; for by how much the more horrible and execrable they
were, so much the more must I needs have giventhem, otherwise the devil would
not have jum'd them. Presently I went to some great and fat wood-porters, or
such like, and did my self make the match, but before I did show him the old
Hags, I made a fair muster to him of the Crowns, saying, Good fellow, see
what I will give thee, if thou will but condescend to dufle, dinfredaille, or
lecher it one good time: then began the poor rogues to gape like old mules, and
I caused to be provided for them a banquet, with drink of the best, and store
of spiceries, to put the old women in rut and heat of lust. To be short, they
occupied all like good souls, only to those that were horribly ugly and
ill-favored, I caused their head to be put within a bag, to hide their face.

Besides all this, I have lost a great deal in suits of law: And what lawsuits
could thou have? (said I) thou have neither house norlands. My friend, (said
he) the Gentlewomen of this City had found out, by the instigation of the devil
of hell, a manner of high-mounted bands, and neckerchiefs for women, which did
so closely cover their bosoms, that men could no more put their hands under;
for they had put the slit behind, and those neck-cloths were wholly shut
before, whereat the poor sad contemplative lovers were much discontented. Upon
a fair Tuesday, I presented a Petition to the Court, making my self a Party
against the said Gentlewomen, and showing the great interest that I pretended
therein, protesting that by the same reason, I would cause the Codpeece of my
breeches to be sowed behind, if the Co ur would not take order for it. In
sum, the Gentlewomen put in their defenses, showed the grounds they went
upon, and constituted their Attorney for the prosecuting of the cause, but I
pursued them so vigorously, that by a sentence of the Court it was decreed,
those high neckclothes should be no longer worn, if they were not a little
cleft and open before, but it cost me a good sum of money. I had another very
filthy and beastly process against the dung-farmer (called Master Fifi) and
his Deputies, that they should no more read privily the pipe, punchon, nor
quart of sentences, but in fair full day, and that in the fodder schools, in
face of the Arrian Sophisters, where I was ordained to pay the charges, by
reason of some clause mistaken in the relation of the Sergeant. Another time I
framed a complaint to the Court, against the mules of the Presidents,
Counselors and others, tending to this purpose, that when in the lower Court
of the Palace, they left them to champ on their bridles: some bibs were made
for them, that with their drivelling they might not spoil the pavement, to the
end, that the Pages of the Palace might play upon it with their dice, or at the
game of coxbody, at their own ease, without spoiling their breeches at the
knees; and for this I had a fair decree, but it cost me dear. Now reckon up
what expense I was at in little banquets, which from day to day I made to the
Pages of the Palace, and to what end, said I? My friend (said he) thou have no
passe-time at all in this world, I have more then the King, and if thou will
join thy self with me, we will do the devil together. No, no, (said I) by St.
Adauras that will I not, for thou will be hanged one time or another: And thou
(said he) wilt be interred sometime or other; now which is most honorable, the
air or the earth? Ho, gross pecore, whilst the Pages are at their
banqueting, I keep their mules, and to some one I cut the stirrup-leather of
the mounting side, till it hang but by a thin strap or thread, that when the
great puffe-guts of the Counselor or some other has taken his swing to get
up, he may fall flat on his side like a pork, and so furnish the Spectators
with more then a hundred francks worth of laughter. But I laugh yet further, to
think how at his home-coming the Master-page is to be whipped like green rye,
which makes me not to repent what I have bestowed in feasting them. In brief,
he had (as I said before) threescore and three ways to acquire money, but he
had two hundred and fourteen to spend it, besides his drinking.

CHAP. XVIII. How a great Scholar of England would have argued against
Pantagruel, and was overcome by Panurge.
IN that same time, a certain learned man, named Thaumast, hearing the fame and
renown of Pantagruels incomparable knowledge, came out of his own country of
England, with an intent only to see him, to try thereby, and prove, whether his
knowledge in effect was so great as it was reported to be. In this resolution,
being arrived at Paris, he went forthwith unto the house of the said
Pantagruel, who was lodged in the Palace of St. Denis, and was then walking in
the garden thereof with Panurge, philosophizing after the fashion of the
Peripateticks. At his first entrance he startled, and was almost out of his
wits for fear, seeing him so great, and so tall, then did he salute him
courteously as the manner is, and said unto him, Very true it is, (says Plato
the Prince of Philosophers,) that if the image and knowledge of wisdom were
corporeal and visible to the eyes of mortals, it would stir up all the world
to admire her: which we may the rather believe, that the very bare report
thereof, scattered in the air, if it happen to be received in to the ears of
men, who for being studious, and lovers of virtuous things, are called
Philosophers, does not suffer them to sleep nor rest in quiet, but so pricketh
them up, and sets them on fire, to run unto the place where the person is, in
whom the said knowledge is said to have built her Temple, and uttered her
Oracles, as it was manifestly shown unto us in the Queen of Sheba, who came
stom the utmost borders of the East and Persian sea, to see the order of
Solomon's house, and to hear his wisdom; in Anacharsis, who came out of
Scythia, even unto Athens, to see Solon; in Pythagoras, who traveled far to
visit the Memphitical Vaticinators; in Platon, who went a great way off to see
the Magicians of Egypt, and Archit as of Tarentum; in Apollonius Tianeus, who
went as far as unto Mount Caucasus, passed along the Scythians, the
Massagetes, the Indians, and sailed over the great river Phison, even to the
Brachmans to see Hiarchas; as likewise unto Babybon, Chaldea, Media, Assyria,
Barthia, Syria, Phoenicia, Arabia, Palestina and Alexandria, even unto
Aethiopia, to see the Gymnosoph sts: the like example have we of Titus Livius,
whom to see and hear, diverse studious persons came to Rome, from the Consines
of France and Spain; I dare not reckon my self in the number of those so
excellent persons, but well would be called studious, and a lover, not only of
learning, but of learned men also: and indeed, having heard the report of your
so inestimable knowledge, I have left my country, my friends, my kindred and
my house, and am come thus far, valuing at nothing the length of the way, the
tediousness of the sea, nor strangeness of the land, and that only to see
you, and to confer with you about some passages in Philosophy, of Geomancie,
and of the Cabalistick Art; whereof I am doubtful, and cannot satisfy my
mind, which if you can resolve, I yield my self unto you for a slave
henceforward, together with all my posterity; for other gift have I none, that
I can esteem a recompense sufficient for so great a favor: I will reduce them
into writing, and to morrow publish them to all the learned men in the City,
that we may dispute publicly before them.

But see in what manner, I mean that we shall dispute: I will not argue pro and
contra, as do the sottish Sophisters of this town, and other places; likewise I
will not dispute after the manner of the Academicks by declamation: nor yet by
numbers, as Pythagoras was wont to do, and as Picus de la mirandula did of late
at Rome: but I will dispute by signs only without speaking, for the matters
are so abstruse, hard and arduous, that words proceeding from the mouth of man,
will never be sufficient for unfolding of them to my liking. May it therefore
please your Magnificence to be there, it shall be at the great Hall of Navarre
at seven a clock in the morning. When he had spoke these words, Pantagruel very
honorably said unto him, Sir, of the graces that God has bestowed upon me, I
would not deny to communicate unto any man to my power; for whatever comes from
him is good, and his pleasure is, that it should be increased, when we come
amongst men worthy and fit to receive this celestial Manna of honest
literature: in which number, because that in this time (as I do already very
plainly perceive,) thou hold the first rank, I give thee notice that at all
hours thou shall find me ready to condescend to every one of thy requests,
according to my poor ability: although I ought rather to learn of thee, then
thou of me, but as thou have protested, we will confer of these doubts
together, and will seek out the resolution, even unto the bottom of that
undrainable Well, where Heraclitus says the truth lies hidden: and I do highly
commend the manner of arguing which thou have proposed, to wit, by signs
without speaking; for by this means thou and I shall understand one another
well enough, and yet shall be free from this clapping of hands, which these
blockish Sophisters make, when any of the Arguers has gotten the better of the
Argument: Now to morrow I will not fail to meet thee at the place and hour
that thou have appointed, but let me entreat thee that there be not any strife
or uproare between us, and that we seek not the honor and applause of men, but
the truth only: to which Thaumast answered, The Lord God maintain you in his
favor and grace, and instead of my thankfulness to you, pour down his
blessings upon you, for that your Highness and magnificent greatness, has
not disdained to descend to the grant of the request of my poor baseness, so
farewell till to morrow? Farewell, said Pantagruel. Gentlemen, you that read this
present discourse, think not that ever men were more elevated and transported
in their thoughts, then all this night were both Thaumast and Pantagruel; for
the said Thaumast, said to the Keeper of the house of Cluny, where he was
lodged, that in all his life he had never known himself so dry, as he was that
night. I think (said he) that Pantagruel held me by the throat; Give order, I
pray you, that we may have some drink, and see that some fresh water be brought
to us, to gargle my palate: on the other side Pantagruel stretched his wits as
high as he could, entering into very deep and serious meditations, and did
nothing all that night but dote upon, and turn over the book of Beda, de
numeris and signis: Plotius book, de inenarrabilibus: the book of Proclus, de
magia: the book of Artemidorus, (...); of Anaxagaras, (...); Dinatius, (...);
the books of Philistion: Hipponax, (...): and a rabble of others, so long, that
Panurge said unto him,

My Lord, leave all these thoughts and go to bed; for I perceive your spirits
to be so troubled by a too intensive bending of them, that you may easily fall
into some Quotidian Fever, with this so excessive thinking and plodding: but
having first drunk five and twenty or thirty good draughts, retire your self
and sleep your fill: for in the morning I will argue against, and answer my
Master the Englishman; and if I drive him not ad metam non loqui, then call me
Knave: Yea, but (said he) my friend Panurge, he is marvellously learned, how
will thou be able to answer him? Very well, (answered Panurge) I pray you talk
no more of it, but let me alone; is any man so learned as the devils are? No,
indeed (said Pantagruel,) without Gods especial grace: Yet for all rhat (said
Panurge) I have argued against them, gravelled and blanked them in disputation,
and laid rhem so squat upon their tails, that I have made them look like
Monkies; therefore be assured, that to morrow I will make this vainglorious
Englishman to skite vinegar before all the world. So Panurge spent the night
with tippling amongst the Pages, and played away all the points of his breeches
at primus secundus, and at peck point (in French called Lavergette.) Yet when
the condescended on time was come, he failed not to conduct his Master
Pantagruel to the appointed place, unto which (believe me) there was neither
great nor small in Paris but came; thinking with themselves that this devilish
Pantagruel, who had overthrown and vanquished in dispute all these doting
fresh water Sophisters, would now get full payment and be tickled to some
purpose; for this Englishman is a terrible bustler, and horrible coyle-keeper,
we will see who will be Conqueror, for he never met with his match before.

Thus all being assembled, Thaumast stayed for them, and then when Pantagruel
and Panurge came into the Hall, all the School-boyes, Professors of Arts,
Senior-Sophisters and Batchelors began to clap their hands, as their scurvie
custom is. But Pantagruel cried out with a loud voice, as if it had been the
sound of a double canon, saying, Peace. with a devil to you, peace: by G -- you
rogues, if you trouble me here, I will cut off the heads of every one of you:
at which words they remained all daunted and astonished, like so many ducks,
and durst not do so much as cough, although they had swallowed fifteen pounds
of feathers: withal they grew so dry with this only voice, that they laid out
their tongues a full half foot beyond their mouths, as if Pantagruel had
salted all their throats. Then began Panurge to speak, saying to the
Englishman, Sir, are you come hither to dispute contentiously in those
Propositions you have set down, or otherwise but to learn and know the truth?
To which answered Thaumast, Sir, no other thing brought me hither, but the
great desire I had to learn, and to know that of which I have doubted all my
life long, and have neither found book nor man able to content me in the
resolution of those doubts which I have proposed: and as for disputing
contentiously, I will not do it, for it is too base a thing, and therefore
leave it to those sottish Sophisters, who in their disputes do not search for
the truth, but for contradiction only and debate. Then said Panurge, if I who
am but a mean and inconsiderable disciple of my Master my Lord Pantagruel;
content and satisfy you in all and every thing, it were a thing below my said
Master, wherewith to trouble him: therefore is it fitter that he be Chairman,
and sit as a Judge and Moderator of our discourse and purpose, and give you
satisfaction in many things, wherein perhaps I shall be wanting to your
expectation. Truly (said Thaumast) it is very well said: begin then. Now you
must note that Panurge had set at the end of his long Codpiece, a pretty tuft
of red silk, as also of white, green and blew, and within it had put a fair
orange.

CHAP. XIX. How Panurge put to a nonplus the Englishman, that argued by signs.
EVery body then taking heed, and hearkening with great silence, the Englishman
lift up on high into the air his two hands severally, clunching in all the
tops of his fingers, together after the manner which (alachinonnese) they call
the hens arse, and struck the one hand on the other by the nails four several
times: then he opening them, struck the one with the flat of the other, till it
yielded a clashing noise, and that only once: again in joining them as before
he struck twice, and afterward four times in opening them; then did he lay
them joined, and extended the one toward the other, as if he had been devoutly
to send up his prayers unto God. Panarge suddenly lifted up in the air his
right hand, and put the thumb thereof into the nostril of the same side,
holding his four fingers straight out, and closed orderly in a parallel line
to the point of his nose, shutting the left eye wholly, and making the other
wink with a profound depression of the eyebrows and eyelids. Then lifted he
up his left hand, with hard wringing and stretching forth his four fingers,
and elevating his thumb, which he held in a line directly correspondent to the
situation of his right hand, with the distance of a cubit and a half between
them. This done, in the same form he abased toward the ground, both the one
and the other hand; Lastly, he held them in the midst, as aiming right at the
English man's nose: And if Mercury, said the English man: there Panurge
interrupted him, and said, You have spoken Mask.

Then made the English man this sign, his left hand all open he lifted up into
the air, then instantly shut into his fist the four fingers thereof, and his
thumb extended at length he placed upon the gristle of his nose: Presently
after, he lifted up his right hand all open, and all open abased and bent it
downwards, putting the thumb thereof in the very place where the little finger
of the left hand did close in the fist, and the four right hand fingers he
softly moved in the air: then contrarily he did with the right hand what he
had done with the left, and with the left what he had done with the right.

Panurge being not a whit amazed at this, drew out into the air his Trismegist
Codpiece with the left hand, and with his right drew forth a trunchion of a
white oxe-rib, and two pieces of wood of a like form, one of black eben, and
the other of incarnation brasil, and put them betwixt the fingers of that hand
in good symmetrie: then knocking them together, made such a noise as the Lepers
of Britanie use to do with their clappering clickets, yet better resounding,
and far more harmonious; and with his tongue contracted in his mouth, did
very merrily warble it, always looking fixedly upon the English man. The
Divines, Physicians and Chirurgions that were there, thought that by this sign
he would have inferred that the English man was a Leper: the Counselors,
Lawyers and Decretalists conceived, that by doing this he would have concluded
some kind of mortal felicity to consist in Leprosy, as the Lord maintained
heretofore,

The English man for all this was nothing daunted, but holding up his two hands
in the air, kept them in such form, that he closed the three master-fingers
in his fist, and passing his thumbs thorough his indical, or foremost and
middle fingers, his auricularie or little fingers remained extended and
stretched out, and so presented he them to Panurge; then joined he them so,
that the right thumb touched the left, and the left little finger touched the
right. Hereat Panurge, without speaking one word, lift up his hands and made
this sign.

He put the nail of the forefinger of his left hand, to the nail of the thumb
of the same, making in the middle of the distance as it were a buckle, and of
his right hand shut up all the fingers into his fist, except the forefinger
which he often thrust in and out through the said two others of the left hand:
then stretched he out the forefinger, and middle finger or medical of his right
hand, holding them asunder as much as he could, and thrusting them toward
Thaumast. Then did he put the thumb of his left hand upon the corner of his
left eye, stretching out all his hand like the wing of a bird, or the finne of
a fish, and moving it very daintily this way and that way, he did as much with
his right hand upon the corner of his right eye. Thaumast began then to wax
somewhat pale, and to tremble, and made him this sign.

With the middle finger of his right hand, he struck against the muscle of the
palm or pulp, which is under the thumb: then put he the forefinger of the
right hand in the like buckle of the left, but he put it under and not over, as
Panurge did. Then Panurge knocked one hand against another, and blowed in his
palm and put again the forefinger of his right hand into the overture or mouth
of the left, pulling it often in and out; then held he out his chinne, most
intentively looking upon Thaumast. The people there which understood nothing in
the other signs, knew very well what therein he demanded (without speaking a
word to Thaumast,) What do you mean by that? In effect, Thaumast then began to
sweat great drops, and seemed to all the Spectators a man strangely ravished in
high contemplation. Then he bethought himself, and put all the nails of his
left hand against those of his right, opening his fingers as if they had been
semicircles, and with this sign lift up his hands as high as he could.
Whereupon Panurge presently put the thumb of his right hand under his jaws,
and the little finger thereof in the mouth of the left hand, and in this
posture made his teeth to sound very melodiously, the upper against the lower.
With this Thaumast with great toil and vexation of spirit rose up, but in
rising let a great bakers fart, for the bran came after, and pissing withal
very strong vinegar, stunk like all the devils in hell: the company began to
stop their noses; for he had conskited himself with mere anguish and
perplexity. Then lifted he up his right hand, clunching it in such sort, that
he brought the ends of all his fingers to meet together, and his left hand he
laid flat upon his breast: whereat Panurge drew out his long Codpiece with his
tuffe, and stretched it forth a cubit and a half, holding it in the air with
his right hand, and with his left took out his orange, and casting it up into
the air seven times, at the eight he hid it in the fist of his right hand,
holding it steadily up on high, and then began to shake his fair Codpiece,
showing it to Thaumast.

After that Thaumast began to puff up his two cheeks like a player on a
bagpipe, and blew as if he had been to puff np a pigs bladder; whereupon
Panurge put one finger of his left hand in his nockandrow, by some called St.
Patricks hole, and with his mouth sucked in the air, in such a manner as when
one eats oysters in the shell, or when we sup up our broth; this done, he
opened his mouth somewhat, and struck his right hand flat upon it, making
therewith a great and a deep sound, as if it came from the superficies of the
midriffe through the trachiartere or pipe of the lungs, and this he did for
sixteen times; but Thaumast did always keep blowing like a goose. Then Panurge
put the forefinger of his right hand into his mouth, pressing it very hard to
the muscles thereof; then he drew it out, and withal made a great noise, as
when little boys shoot pellets out of the pot-canons made of the hollow sticks
of the branch of an aulder-tree, and he did it nine times.

Then Thaumast cried out, Ha, my Masters, a great secret; with this he put in
his hand up to the elbow; then drew out a dagger that he had, holding it by the
point downwards; whereat Panurge took his long Codpiece, and shook it as hard
as he could against his thighs; then put his two hands intwined in manner of a
comb upon his head, laying out his tongue as far as he was able; and turning
his eyes in his head, like a goat that is ready to die. Ha, I understand (said
Thaumast) but what? making such a sign, that he put the haft of his dagger
against his breast, and upon the point thereof the flat of his hand, turning in
a little the ends of his fingers; whereat Panurge held down his head on the
left side, and put his middle finger into his right ear, holding up his thumb
bolt upright; then he crossed his two arms upon his breast, and coughed five
times, and at the fifth time he struck his right foot against the ground: then
he lift up his left arm, and closing all his fingers into his fist, held his
thumb against his forehead, striking with his right hand six times against his
breast. But Thaumast, as not content therewith, put the thumb of his left hand
upon the top of his nose, shutting the rest of his said hand: whereupon Panurge
set his two Master-fingers upon each side of his mouth, drawing it as much as
he was able, and widening it so, that he showed all his teeth: and with his two
thumbs plucked down his two eyelids very low, making therewith a very
ill-favored countenance, as it seemed to the company.

CHAP. XX. How Thaumast relates the virtues, and knowledge of Panurge.
THen Thaumast rose up, and putting off his cap, did very kindly thank the said
Panurge, and with a loud voice said unto all the people that were there, My
Lords, Gentlemen and others, at this time may I to some good purpose speak that
Evangelical word, Et ecce plus quam Solomon hic: You have here in your presence
an incomparable treasure, that is, my Lord Pantagruel, whose great renown has
brought me hither, out of the very heart of England, to confer with him about
the insoluble problemes, both in Magic, Alchymie, the Caballe, Geomancie,
Astrology and Philosophy, which I had in my mind: but at present I am angry,
even with fame it self, which I think was envious to him, for that it did not
declare the thousandth part of the worth that indeed is in him: You have seen
how his disciple only has satisfied me, and has told me more then I asked of
him: besides, he has opened unto me, and resolved other inestimable doubts,
wherein I can assure you he has to me discovered the very true Well, Fountain
and Abyss of the Encyclopedeia of learning; yea in such a sort, that I did not
think I should ever have found a man that could have made his skill appear, in
so much as the first elements of that concerning which we disputed by signs,
without speaking either word or half word. But in fine, I will reduce into
writing that which we have said and concluded, that the world may not take them
to be fooleries, and will thereafter cause them to be printed, that every one
may learn as I have done. Judge then what the Master had been able to say,
seeing the disciple has done so valiantly; for, Non est discipulus super
Magistrum. Howsoever God be praised, and I do very humbly thank you, for the
honor that you have done us at this Act: God reward you for it eternally: the
like thanks gave Pantagruel to all the company, and going from thence, he
carried Thaumast to dinner with him, and believe that they drank as much as
their skins could hold, or, as the phrase is, with unbottoned bellies, (for in
that age they made fast their bellies with buttons, as we do now the colars of
our doublets or jerkins) even till they neither knew where they were, nor
whence they came. Blessed Lady, how they did carouse it, and pluck (as we say)
at the Kids leather: and flaggons to trot, and they to toote, Draw, give (page)
some wine here reach hither, fill with a devil, so? There was not one but did
drink five and twenty or thirty pipes, can you tell how? even Sicut terra sine
aqua; for the weather was hot, and besides, that they were very dry. In matter
of the exposition of the Propositions set down by Thaumast: and the
signisication of the signs which they used in their disputation, I would have
set them down for you according to their own relation: but I have been told
that Thaumast made a great book of it imprinted at London, wherein he has set
down all without omitting any thing, and therefore at this time I do pass by
it.

CHAP. XXI. How Panutge was in love with a Lady of Paris.
PAnurge began to be in great reputation in the City of Paris, by means of this
disputation, wherein he pre veiled against the English man, and from
thenceforth made his Codpiece to be very useful to him, to which effect he had
it pinked with pretty little Embroideries after the Romanesca fashion; And the
world did praise him publicly, in so far that there was a song made of him,
which little children did use to sing, when they went to fetch mustard: he was
withal made welcome in all companies of Ladies and Gentlewomen, so that at last
he became presumptuous, and went about to bring to his lure one of the greatest
Ladies in the City: and indeed leaving a rabble of long prologues and
protestations, which ordinarily these dolent contemplative Lent-lovers make,
who never meddle with the flesh; one day he said unto her, Madam; it would be a
very great benefit to the Commonwealth, delightful to you, honorable to your
progeny, and necessary for me, that I cover you for the propagating of my race,
and believe it, for experience will teach it you: the Lady at this word thrust
him back above a hundred leagues, saying, You mischievous fool, is it for you
to talk thus unto me? whom do you think you have in hand? be gone, never to
come in my sight again; for if one thing were not, I would have your legs and
arms cut off. Well, (said he) that were all one to me, to want both legs and
arms, provided you and I had but one merry bout together, at the brangle
buttock-game; for here within is (in showing her his long Codpiece) Master John
Thursday, who will play you such an Antic, that you shall feel the sweetness
thereof even to the very marrow of your bones: He is a gallant, and does so
well know how to find out all the corners, creeks and ingrained inmates in
your carnal trap, that after him there needs no broom, he will sweep so well
before, and leave nothing to his followers to work upon: whereunto the Lady
answered, Go, villain, go, if you speak to me one such word more, I will cry
out, and make you to be knocked down with blows. Ha, (said he) you are not so
bad as you say, no, or else I am deceived in your physiognomie, for sooner
shall the earth mount up unto the Heavens, and the highest Heavens descend unto
the Hells, and all the course of nature be quite perverted, then that in so
great beauty and neatness as in you is, there should be one drop of gall or
malice: they say indeed, that hardly shall a man ever see a fair woman that is
not also stubborn: yet that is spoke only of those vulgar beauties, but yours
is so excellent, so singular, and so heavenly, that I believe nature has given
it you as a paragon, and masterpiece of her Art, to make us know what she can
do, when she will employ all her skill, and all her power. There is nothing in
you but honey, but sugar, but a sweet and celestial Manna: to you it was, to
whom Paris ought to have adjudged the golden Apple, not to Venus, no, nor to
Juno, nor to Minerva; for never was there so much magnificence in Juno, so much
wisdom in Minerva, nor so much comeliness in Venus, as there is in you. O
heavenly gods and goddesses! how happy shall that man be to whom you will grant
the favor to embrace her, to kiss her, and to rub his bacon with hers? by G
-- that shall be I, I know it well; for she loves me already her belly full, I
am sure of it, and so was I predestined to it by the Fairies: and therefore
that we lose no time, put on, thrust out your gamons, and would have embraced
her, but she made as if she would put out her head at the window, to call her
neighbors for help. Then Panurge on a sudden ran out, and in his running away,
said, Madam, stay here till I come again, I will go call them my self, do not
you take so much pains: thus went he away not much caring for the repulse he
had got, nor made he any whit the worse cheer for it. The next day he came to
the Church, at the time that she went to Mass, at the door he gave her some*
of the holy water, bowing himself very low before her, afterward he kneeled
down by her very familiarly, and said unto her, Madam, know that I am so
amorous of you, that I can neither piss nor dung for love: I do not know
(Lady,) what you mean, but if I should take any hurt by it, how much would you
be too blame? Go, said she, go, I do not care, let me alone to say my prayers.
I but (said he) equivocate upon this; a Beaumon le viconte, or to fair mount
the priccunts: I cannot, said she: It is, said he, a beau con le vit monte, or
to a fair C... the pr... mounts: and upon this pray to God to give you that
which your noble heart desires, and I pray you give me these patenotres. Take
them (said she) and trouble me no longer: this done, she would have taken off
her patenotres, which were made of a kind of yellow stone called Cestrin, and
adorned with great spots of gold, but Panurge nimbly drew out one of his
knives, wherewith he cut them off very handsomely, and whilst he was going away
to carry them to the Brokers, he said to her, Will you have my knife? No, no,
said she: But (said he) to thepurpose, I am at your commandment, body and
goods, tripes and bowels.

In the mean time, the Lady was not very well content with the want of her
patinotres; for they were one of her implements to keep her countenance by in
the Church: then thought with her self, this bold flowting Royster, is some
giddy, fantastical, lightheaded fool of a strange country; I shall never
recover my patenotres again, what will my husband say, he will no doubt be
angry with me; but I will tell him that a thief has cut them off from my hands
in the Church, which he will easily believe, seeing the end of the riban left
at my girdle. After dinner Panurge went to see her carrying in his sleeve a
great purse full of Palace-crowns called counters, and began to say unto her,
Which of us two loves other best, you me, or I you? whereunto she answered, As
for me, I do not hate you; for as God commands, I love all the world: But to
the purpose, (said he) are not you in love with me? I have (said she) told you
so many times already, that you should talk so no more to me, and if you speak
of it again, I will teach you, that I am not one to be talked unto dishonestly:
get you hence packing, and deliver me my patenotres, that my husband may not
ask me for them.

How now, (Madam) said he, your patenotres? nay, by mine oath I will not do so,
but I will give you others; had you rather have them of gold well enameled in
great round knobs, or after the manner of love-knots, or otherwise all massive,
like great ingots, or if you had rather have them of Ebene, of Jacinth, or of
grained gold, with the marks of fine Turkoises, or of fair Topazes, marked
with fine Saphirs, or of baleu Rubies, with great marks of Diamonds of eight
and twenty squares? No, no, all this is too little; I know a fair bracelet of
fine Emeraulds, marked with spotted Ambergris, and at the buckle a Persian
pearl as big as an Orange: it will not cost above five and twenty thousand
ducates, I will make you a present of it, for I have ready coin enough, and
withal he made a noise with his counters as if they had been French Crowns.

Will you have a piece of velvet, either of the violet color, or of crimson
died in grain: or a piece of broached or crimson satin? will you have
chains, gold, tablets, rings? You need no more but say, Yes, so far as fifty
thousand ducates may reach, it is but as nothing to me; by the virtue of which
words he made the water come in her mouth: but she said unto him, No, I thank
you, I will have nothing of you. By G -- said he, but I will have somewhat of
you; yet shall it be that which shall cost you nothing, neither shall you have
a jot the less, when you have given it, hold, (showing his long Codpiece) this
is Master John Good fellow, that asks for lodging, and with that would have
embraced her; but she began to cry out, yet not very loud. Then Panurge put off
his counterfeit garb, changed his false visage, and said unto her, You will not
then otherwise let me do a little, a turd for you, you do not deserve so much
good, nor so much honor: but by G -- I will make the dogs ride you, and with
this he ran away as fast as he could, for fear of blows, whereof he was
naturally fearful.

CHAP. XXII. How Panurge served a Parisian Lady a trick that pleased her not
very well.
NOw you must note that the next day was the great festival of Corpus Christi,
called the Sacre, wherein all women put on their best apparel, and on that day
the said Lady was clothed in a rich gown of crimson satin, under which she
wore a very costly white velvet petticoat.

The day of the Eve (called the vigile* Panurge searched so long of one side
and another, that he found a hot or salt bitch, which when he had tied her with
his girdle, he led to his chamber, and fed her very well all that day and
night; in the morning thereafter he killed her, and took that part of her which
the Greek Geomanciers know, and cut it into several pieces as small as he
could; then carrying it away as close as might be, he went to the place where
the Lady was to come along, to follow the Procession, as the custom is upon
the said holy day; and when she came in, Panurge sprinkled some holy water on
her, saluting her very courteously: then a little while after she had said her
petty devotions, he sat down close by her upon the same bench, and gave her
this roundlay in writing, in manner as follows.

A Roundlay.
For this one time, that I to you my love
Discovered, you did too cruel prove
To send me packing, hopeless, and so soon,
Who never any wrong to you had done
In any kind of action, word or thought:
So that if my suit liked you not, you ought
TO have spoke more civilly, and to this sense,
My friend, be pleased to depart from hence For this one time.
What hurt do I to wish you to remark
With favor and compassion how a spark
Of your great beauty has inflamed my heart
With deep affection, and that for my part,
I only ask that you with me would dance
The brangle gay in feats of dalliance
For this one time.

And as she was opening this paper to see what it was, Panurge very promptly
and lightly scattered the drug that he had, upon her in diverse places, but
especially in the plaits of her sleeves, and of her gown: then said he unto
her, Madam, the poor lovers are not always at ease; as for me, I hope that
those heavy nights, those pains and troubles which I suffer for love of you,
shall be a deduction to me of so much pain in Purgatory: yet at the least pray
to God to give me patience in my misery. Panurge had no sooner spoke this, but
all the dogs that were in the Church came running to this Lady with the smell
of the drugs that he had strowed upon her, both small and great, big and
little, all came, laying out their member; smelling to her, and pissing every
where upon her, it was the greatest villainy in the world. Panurge made the
fashion of driving them away: then took his leave of her, and withdrew himself
into some Chapel or Oratory of the said Church, to see the sport; for these
villainous dogs did compisse all her habiliaments, and left none of her attire
unbesprinkled with their staling, in so much that a tall greyhound pist upon
her head, others in her sleeves, others on her crupper-piece, and the little
ones pissed upon her pataines: so that all the women that were round about her
had much ado to save her. Whereat Panurge very heartily laughing, he said to
one of the Lords of the City, I believe that the same Lady is hot, or else that
some greyhound has covered her lately. And when he saw that all the dogs were
flocking about her, yarring at the retardment of their access to her, and
every way keeping such a coil with her, as they are wont to do about a proud
or salt bitch, he forthwith departed from thence, and went to call Pantagruel:
not forgetting in his way along all the streets, thorough which he went,
where he found any dogs to give them a bang with his foot, saying, Will you not
go with your fellows to the wedding? Away, hence, avaunt, avaunt, with a devil
avaunt: And being come home, he said to Pantagruel, Master, I pray you come and
see all the dogs of the country, how they are assembled about a Lady, the
fairest in the City, and would dufle and line her; whereunto Pantagruel
willingly condescended, and saw the mystery, which he found very pretty and
strange: But the best was at the Procession, in which were seen above six
hundred thousand and fourteen dogs about her, which did very much trouble and
molest her, and whithersoever she past, those dogs that came afresh, tracing
her footsteps, followed her at the heels, and pist in the way where her gown
had touched. All the world stood gazing at this spectacle, considering the
countenance of those dogs, who leaping up got about her neck, and spoiled all
her gorgeous accoutrements, for the which she could find no remedy, but to
retire unto her house, which was a Palace: Thither she went, and the dogs after
her; she ran to hide her self, but the Chamber-maids could not abstain from
laughing. When she was entered into the house, and had shut the door upon her
self, all the dogs came running, of half a league round, and did so well
bepisse the gate of her house, that there they made a stream with their urine,
wherein a duck might have very well swimmed, and it is the same current that
now runs at St. Victor, in which Gobelin dies scarlet, for the specifical
virtue of these pisse-dogs, as our Master Doribus did heretofore preach
publicly. So may God help you; a Mill would have ground corn with it; yet not
so much as those of Basacle at Toulouse.

CHAP. XXIII. How Pantagruel departed from Paris, hearing news, that the
Dipsodes had invaded the Land of the Amaurots: and the cause wherefore the
leagues are so short in France.
A Little while after Pantagruel heard news that his father Gargantua had been
translated into the land of the Fairies by Morgue, as heretofore were Oger and
Arthur together, and that the report of his translation being spread abroad,
the Dipsodes had issued out beyond their borders, with inrodes had wasted a
great part of Utopia, and at that very time had besieged the great City of the
Amaurots; whereupon departing from Paris, without bidding any man farewell, for
the business required diligence, he came to Rowen.

Now Pantagruel in his journey, seeing that the leagues of that little
territory about Paris called France, were very short in regard of those of
other Countries, demanded the cause and reason of it from Panurge, who told him
a story which Marotus set down of the lac Monachus, in the acts of the Kings of
Canarre, saying, that in old times Countries were not distinguished into
leagues, miles, furlongs, nor parasanges, until that King Pharamond divided
them, which was done in manner as follows. The said King chose at Paris a
hundred fair, gallant, lusty, brisk young men, all resolute and bold
adventurers in Cupids duels, together with a hundred comely, pretty, handsome,
lovely and well complexioned wenches of Picardie, all which he caused to be
well entertained, and highly fed for the space of eight days; then having
called for them, he delivered to every one of the young men his wench, with
store of money to defray their charges, and this injunction besides, to go unto
diverse places here and there, and wheresoever they should biscot and thrum
their wenches, that thy setting a stone there, it should be accounted for a
league: thus went away those brave fellows and sprightly blades most merrily,
and because they were fresh, and had been at rest, they very oftenjum'd and
fanfreluched almost at every sields end, and this is the cause why the leagues
about Paris are so short; but when they had gone a great way, and were now as
weary as poor devils, all the oil* in their lamps being almost spent, they did
not chink and dufle so often, but contented themselves, (I mean for the men's
part,) with one scurvie paultry bout in a day, and this is that which makes the
leagues in Britany, Delanes, Germany, and other more remote Countries so long:
other men give other reasons for it, but this seems to me of all other the
best. To which Pantagruel willingly adhered. Parting from Rowen, they arrived
at Honfleur, where they took shipping, Pantagruel, Panurge, Epistemon,
Eusthenes and Carpalim.

In which place, waiting for a favorable wind, and caulking their ship, he
received from a Lady of Paris (which I had formerly kept, and entertained a
good long time,) a letter directed on the outside thus, To the best beloved of
the fair women, and least loyal of the valiant men,

PNTGRL.

CHAP. XXIV. A Letter which a messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of
Paris, together with the exposition of a Posie, written in a gold Ring.
WHen Pantagruel had read the superscription, he was much amazed, and therefore
demanded of the said messenger the name of her that had sent it: then opened he
the letter, and found nothing written in it, nor otherwise enclosed, but only
a gold ring, with a square table-diamond. Wondering at this, he called Panurge
to him, and showed him the case; whereupon Panurge told him, thar the leaf of
paper was written upon, but with such cunning and artifice* that no man could
see the writing at the first sight, therefore to find it out he set it by the
fire, to see if it was made with Sal Armoniack soaked in water; then put he it
into the water, to see if the letter was written with the juice of Tithymalle:
after that he held it up against the candle, to see if it was written with the
juice of white onions.

Then he rubbed one part of it with oil of nuts, to see if it were not written
with the lee of a fig tree: and another part of it with the milk of a woman
giving suck to her eldest daughter, to see if it was written with the blood of
red toads, or green earth-frogs: Afterward he rubbed one corner with the ashes
of a Swallows nest, to see if it were not written with the dew that is found
within the herb Alcakengie, called the winter-cherry. He rubbed after that one
end with eare-wax, to see if it were not written with the gall of a Raven: then
did he dip it into vinegar, to try if it was not written with the juice of the
garden Spurge: After that he greased it with the fat of a bat or flittermouse,
to see if it was not written with the sperm of a whale, which some call
ambergris: Then put it very fairly into a basin full of fresh water, and
forthwith took it out, to see whether it were written with stone alum: But
after all experiments, when he perceived that he could find out nothing, he
called the messenger, and asked him, Good fellow, the Lady that sent thee
hither, did she not give thee a staff to bring with thee? thinking that it had
been according to the conceit, whereof Aulus Gellius makes mention, and the
Messenger answered him, No, Sir. Then Panurge would have caused his head to be
shaven, to see whether the Lady had written upon his bald pate, with the hard
lie whereof soap is made, that which she meant; but perceiving that his hair
was very long, he forbore, considering that it could not have grown to so great
a length in so short a time.

Then he said to Pantagruel, Master, by the virtue of G -- I cannot tell what
to do nor say in it; for to know whether there be any thing written upon this
or no; I have made use of a good part of that which Master Francisco di Nianto,
the Tuscan sets down, who has written the manner of reading letters that do
not appear; that which Zoroastes published, peri grammaton acriton; and
Calphurnius Bassus de literis illegibilibus: but I can see nothing, nor do I
believe that there is any thing else in it then the Ring: let us therefore look
upon it, which when they had done, they found this in Hebrew written within,
Lamach sabathani; whereupon they called Epistemon, and asked him what that
meant? to which he answered, that they were Hebrew words, signifying, Wherefore
have thou forsaken me? upon that Panurge suddenly replied: I know the mystery,
do you see this diamond? it is a false one; this then is the exposition of that
which the Lady means, Diamant faux, that is, false lover, why have thou
forsaken me? which interpretation Pantagruel presently understood, and withal
remembering, that at his departure he had not bid the Lady farewell, he was very
sorry, and would feign have returned to Paris, to make his peace with her; but
Epistemon put him in mind of Aeneas's departure from Dido, and the saying of
Heraclitus of Tarentum, That the ship being at anchor when need requires, we
must cut the cable rather then lose time about untying of it, and that he
should lay aside all other thoughts to succor the City of his Nativity, which
was then in danger; and indeed within an hour after that, the wind arose at
the North-north-west, wherewith they hoised sail, and put out, even into the
maine sea, so that within few days, passing by Porto Sancto, and by the
Maderas, they went ashore in the Canarie islands; parting from thence, they
passed by Capobianco; by Senege, by Capoverde, by Gambre, by Sagres, by Melli,
by the Cap di buona Speranza, and set ashore again in the Kingdom of Melinda;
parting from thencc, they sailed away with a tramoutan or northerly wind,
passing by Meden, by Uti, by Uden, by Gelasim, by the isles of the Fairies, and
along the Kingdom of Achorie, till at last they arrived at the port of
Utopia, distant from the City of the Amaurots three leagues and somewhat more.

When they were ashore; and pretty well refreshed, Panurge said, Gentlemen, the
City is not far from hence, therefore were it not amiss before we set
forward, to advise well what is to be done, that we be not like the Athenians,
who never took counsel until after the fact: Are you resolved to live and die
with me? Yes, Sir, said they all, and be as confident of us, as of your own
fingers. Well (said he) there is but one thing that keeps my mind in great
doubt and suspense, which is this, that I know not in what order nor of what
number the enemy is, that lays siege to the City; for if I were certain of
that, I should go forward, and set on with the better assurance. Let us
therefore consult together, and be think our selves by what means we may come
to this intelligence: whereunto they all said, Let us go thither and see, and
stay you here for us, for this very day, without further respite do we make
account to bring you a certain report thereof.

My self (said Panurge) will undertake to enter into their camp, within the
very midst of their guards, unespied by their watch, and merrily feast and
lecher it at their cost, without being known of any, to see the Artillery and
the Tents of all the Captains, and thrust my self in with a grave and
magnifick carriage, amongst all their troops and companies, without being
discovered; the devil would not be able to peck me out with all his
circumventions: for I am of the race of Zopyrus.

And I (said Epistemon) know all the plots and stratagems of the valiant
Captains, and warlike Champions of former ages, together with all the tricks
and subtilties of the Art of war; I will go, and though I be detected and
revealed, I will escape, by making them believe of you whatever I please, for I
am of the race of Sinon.

I (said Eusthenes) will enter and set upon them in their trenches, in spite
of their Sentries, and all their guards; for I will tread upon their bellies,
and break their legs and arms, yea though they were every whit as strong as
the devil himself; for I am of the race of Heroules.

And I (said Carpalin) will get in there, if the birds can enter, for I am so
nimble of body, and light withal, that I shall have leaped over their trenches,
and ran clean through all their camp, before that they perceive me; neither do
I fear shot, nor arrow; nor horse, how swift soever, were he the Pegasus of
Persee, or Pacolet; being assured that I shall be able to make a safe and sound
escape before them all, without any hurt: I will undertake to walk upon the
ears of corn, or grass in the meddows, without making either of them do so
much as bow under me; for I am of the race of Camilla the Ama-Zone.

CHAP. XXV. How Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon (the Gentlemen
Attendants of Pantagruel,) vanquished and discomfited six hundred and
threescore horsemen very cunningly.
AS he was speaking this, they perceived six hundred and threescore light
horsemen, gallantly mounted, who made an out-rode thither, to see what ship it
was that was newly arrived in the harbor, and came in a full gallop to take
them if they had been able: Then said Pantagruel, my Lads, retire your selves
unto the ship, here are some of our enemies coming apace, but I will kill them
here before you like beasts, although they were ten times so many, in the mean
time withdraw your selves, and take your sport at it. Then answered Panurge,
No, Sir, there is no reason that you should do so, but on the contrary retire
you unto the ship, both you and the rest; for I alone will here discomfit them,
but we must not linger, come, set forward; whereunto the others said, It is
well advised, Sir, withdraw your self, and we will help Panurge here, so shall
you know what we are able to do: Then said Pantagruel, Well, I am content, but
if that you be too weak, I will not fail to come to your assistance. With this
Panurge took two great cables of the ship, and tied them to the kemstock or
capstane which was on the deck toward the hatches, and fastened them in the
ground, making a long circuit, the one further off, the other within that. Then
said he to Epistemon, Go aboard the ship, and when I give you a call, turn
about the capstane upon the orlop diligently, drawing unto you the two
cable-ropes: and said to Eusthenes, and to Carpalin, My Bullies, stay you here,
and offer your selves freely to your enemies, do as they bid you, and make as
if you would yield unto them: but take heed you come not within the compass of
the ropes, be sure to keep your selves free of them; and presently he went
aboard the ship, and took a bundle of straw, and a barrel of gunpowder,
strowed it round about the compass of the cords, and stood by with a brand of
fire or match lighted in his hand. Presently came the horsemen with great fury,
and the foremost ran almost home to the ship, and by reason of the
slipperinesse of the bank, they fell they and their horses, to the number of
four and forty, which the rest seeing, came on, thinking that resistance had
been made them at theit arrival: But Panurge said unto them, My Masters, I
believe that you have hurt your selves, I pray you pardon us, for it is not our
fault, but the slipperinesse of the seawater, that is always flowing; we
submit our selves to your good pleasure; so said likewise his two other
fellows, and Epistemon that was upon the deck; in the mean time Panurge
withdrew himself, and seeing that they were all within the compass of the
cables, and that his two companions were retired, making room for all those
horses which came in a crowd, thronging upon the neck of one another to see the
ship, and such as were in it cried out on a sudden to Epistemon, Draw, draw:
then began Epistemon to wind about the capstane, by doing whereof the two
cables so entangled and impestered the legs of the horses, that they were all
of them thrown down to the ground easily, together with their Riders: but they
seeing that, drew their swords, and would have cut them: whereupon Panurge set
fire to the train, and there burnt them up all like damned souls, both men and
horses, not one escaping save one alone, who being mounted on a fleet Turkey
courser, by mere speed in flight got himself out of the circle of the ropes;
but when Carpalin perceived him, he ran after him with such nimblenesse and
celerity, that he overtook him in less then a hundred paces; then leaping
close behind him upon the crupper of his horse, clasped him in his arms, and
brought him back to the ship.

This exploit being ended Pantagruel was very jovial, and wondrously commended
the industry of these Gentlemen, whom he called his fellow soldiers, and made
them refresh themselves, and feed well and merrily upon the seashore, and
drink heartily with their bellies upon the ground, and their prisoner with
them, whom they admitted to that familiarity: only that the poor devil was
somewhat afraid that Pantagruel would have eaten him up whole, which,
considering the wideness of his mouth, and capacity of his throat, was no
great matter for him to have done; for he could have done it, as easily as you
would eat a small comfit, he showing no more in his throat, then would a
grain of millet-seed in the mouth of an Ass.

CHAP. XXVI. How Pantagruel and his company were weary in eating still salt
meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some Venison.
THus as they talked and chatted together, Carpalin said, And by the belly of
St. Quenet, shall we never eat any venison? this salt meat makes me horribly
dry, I will go fetch you a quarter of one of those horses which we have burnt,
it is well roasted already: as he was rising up to go about it, he perceived
under the side of a wood a fair great roe-buck, which was come out of his Fort
(as I conceive) at the sight of Panurge's fire: him did he pursue and run after
with as much vigor and swiftness, as if it had been a bolt out of a
Crossebowe, and caught him in a moment; and whilst he was in his course, he
with his hands took in the air four great bustards, seven bitterns, six and
twenty gray partridges, two and thirty red legged ones, sixteen pheasants, nine
woodcocks, nineteen herons, two and thirty coushots and ring-doves; and with
his feet killed ten or twelve hares and rabbets, which were then at relief and
pretty big withal, eighteen rayles in a knot together, with fifteen young wild
boares, two little Bevers, and three great foxes: so striking the Kid with his
fauchion athwart the head he killed him, and bearing him on his back, he in his
return took up his hares, rayls, and young wild boares and as far off as he
could be heard, cried out, and said, Panurge my friend, vinegar, vinegar: then
the good Pantagruel, thinking he had fainted, commanded them to provide him
some vinegar; but Panurge knew well that there was some good prey in hands, and
forthwith showed unto noble Pantagruel how he was bearing upon his back a fair
roe-buck, and all his girdle bordered with hares; then immediately did
Epistemon make in the name of the nine Muses, nine antic wooden spits:
Eusthenes did help to flay, and Panurge placed two great cuirasier saddles, in
such sort that they served for Andirons and making their prisoner to be their
Cook, they roasted their venison by the fire, wherein the horsemen were burnt:
and making great cheer with a good deal of vinegar, the devil a one of them did
forbear from his victuals, it was a triumphant and incomparable spectacle to
see how they ravened and devoured. Then said Pantagruel, Would to God every one
of you had two paires of little Anthem or Sacring bells hanging at your chin,
and that I had at mine the great clocks of Renes, of Poitiers, of Tours, and of
Cambray, to see what a peale they would ring with the wagging of our chaps;
But, said Panurge, it were better we thought a little upon our business, and
by what means we might get the upper hand of our enemies: That is well
remembered, said Pantagruel; therefore spoke he thus to the prisoner, My
friend, tell us here the truth, and do not lie to us at all, if thou would
not be flayed alive, for it is I that eat the little children: relate unto us
at full the order, the number and the strength of the Army: to which the
prisoner answered, Sir, know for a truth that in the army there are three
hundred giants, all armed with armor of proof, and wonderful great:
nevertheless, not fully so great as you, except one that is their head, named
Loup-garou, who is armed from head to foot with Cyclopical annuils;
furthermore, one hundred threescore and three thousand foot, all armed with the
skins os hobgoblins, strong and valiant men: eleven thousand four hundred men
at arms or cuirasiers: three thousand six hundred double canons, and
harquebusiers without number; fourscore and fourteen thousand Pioneers: one
hundred and fifty thousand whores, fair like goddesses, (that is, for me said
Panurge,) whereof some are Amazons, some Lionnoises, others Parisiennes,
Taurangelles, Angevines, Poictevines, Normandes, and high dutch, there are of
them of all Countries, and all Languages,

Yea, but (said Pantagruel) is the King there? Yes Sir, (said the prisoner) he
is there in person, and we call him Anarchus, King of the Dipsodes, which is as
much to say as thirsty people, for you never saw men more thirsty, nor more
willing to drink, and his tent is guarded by the Giants: It is enough (said
Pantagruel) come brave boys, are you resolved to go with me? To which Panurge
answered, God confound him that leaves you: I have already bethought my self
how I will kill them all like pigs, and so, that the devil one leg of them
shall escape: but I am somewhat troubled about one thing: And what is that?
said Pantagruel: It is (said Panurge) how I shall be able to set forward to the
jusling and bragmardising of all the whores that be there this afternoon, in
such sort, that there escape not one unbumped by me, breasted and jum'd after
the ordinary fashion of man and woman, in the Venetian conflict. Ha, ha, ha,
ha, said Pantagruel.

And Carpalin said; The devil take these sink-holes, if by G -- I do not
bumbast some one of them: Then said Eusthenes, What shall not I have any, whose
paces since we came from Rowen, were never so well winded up, as that my needle
could mount to ten or eleven a clock till now, that I have it hard, stiff and
strong, like a hundred devils? Truly, (said Panurge,) thou shall have of the
fattest, and of those that are most plump, and in the best case.

How now? (said Epistemon) every one shall ride, and I must lead the Ass, the
devil take him that will do so, we will make use of the right of war, Qui
potest capere, capiat: No, no, said Panurge, but tie thine Ass to a crook, and
ride as the world does: And the good Pantagruel laughed at all this, and said
unto them, You reckon without your host; I am much afraid, that before it be
night I shall see you in such taking, that you will have no great stomach to
ride, but more like to be rode upon, with sound blows of pike and lance:
Baste, (said Epistemon) enough of that, I will not fail to bring them to you,
either to roste or boil, to fry or put in paste: they are not so many in
number, as were in the army of Xerxes, for he had thirty hundred thousand
fighting men, if you will believe Herodotus and Trogus Pompeius: and yet
Themistocles with a few men overthrew them all: for Gods sake take you no care
for that. Cobsminnie, Cobsminnie, (said Panurge) my Codpiece alone shall
suffice to overthrow all the men; and my St. Sweep-hole that dwells within it,
shall lay all the women squat upon their backs. Up then my lads (said
Pantagruel) and let us march along.

CHAP. XXVII. How Pantagruel set up one Trophee in memorial of their valor,
and Panurge another in remembrance of the hares: How Pantagruel likewise with
his farts begat little men, and with his fisgs little women: and how Panurge
broke a great staff over two glasses.
BEfore we depart hence, (said Pantagruel) in remembrance of the exploit that
you have now performed, I will in this place erect a fair Trophee: then every
man amongst them with great joy, and fine little Countrey-songs set up a huge
big post, whereunto they hanged a great cuirasier saddle, the fronstal of a
barbed horse, bridle-bosses, pullie-pieces for the knees, stirrup-leathers,
spurs, stirrups, a coat of male, a corslet tempered with steel, a battel-axe,
a strong, short and sharp horsemans sword, a gantlet, a horsemans mace,
gushet-armour for the arme-pits, leg-harnesse, and a gorget, with all other
furniture needful for the decorement of a triumphant arch, in sign of a
Trophee. And then Pantagruel for an eternal memorial, wrote this victorial
Ditton, as follows.

Here was the prowess made apparent of
Four brave and valiant champions of proof,
Who without any arms but wit, at once
(Like Fabius, or the two Scipions)
Burned in a fire six hundred and threescore
Crablice', strong rogues never vanquished before.
By this each King may learn, rock, pawn, and Knight,
That slight is much more prevalent then might;
For victory
(As all men see)
Hangs on the Dittie
Of that Committie,
Where the great God
Has his abode:
Nor does he it to strong and great men give,
But to his elect, as we must believe;
Therefore shall he obtain wealth and esteem,
Who thorough faith does put his trust in him,
Whilst Pantagruel was writing these foresaid verses, Panurge halved and fixed
upon a great stake the horns of a roe-buck, together with the skin, and the
right forefoot thereof, the ears of three levrets, the chine of a coney, the
jaws of a hare, the wings of two bustards, the feet of four queest-doves, a
bottle or borracho full of vinegar, a horn wherein to put salt, a wooden spit,
a larding stick, a scurvie kettle full of holes, a dripping pan to make sauce
in, an earthen salt-cellar, and a goblet of Beauvais. Then in imitation of
Pantagruels verses and Trophee, wrote that which follows:

Here was it that four jovial blades sat down
To a profound carowsing, and to crown
Their banquet with those wines, which please best great
Bacchus, the Monarch of their drinking state:
Then were the reins and furch of a young hare,
With salt and vinegar, displayed there,
Of which to snatch a bit or two, at once
They all fell on like hungry scorpions:
For the Inventories
Of Defensories
Say that in heat
We must drink neat
All out, and of
The choicest stuff;
But it is bad to eat of young hares flesh,
Unless with vinegar we it refresh:
Receive this tenet then without control,
That vinegar of that meat is the soul.
Then (said Pantagruel,) Come, my lads, let us be gone, we have stayed here too
long about our victuals; for very seldom does it fall out, that the greatest
eaters do the most martial exploits, there is no shadow like that of flying
colors, no smoke like that of horses, no clattering like that of armor: at
this Epistemon began to smile, and said, There is no shadow like that of the
kitchen, no smoke like that of pasties, and no clattering like that of goblets:
unto which answered Panurge, There is no shadow like that of courtaines, no
smoke like that of women's breasts, and no clattering like that of ballocks:
then forthwith rising up he gave a fart, a leap, and a whistle, and most
joyfully cried out aloud, Ever live Pantagruel: when Pantagruel saw that, he
would have done as much; but with the fart that he let, the earth trembled nine
leagues about, wherewith and with the corrupted air, he begot above three and
fifty thousand little men, ill favored dwarfes, and with one fisg that he let,
he made as many little women, crouching down, as you shall see in diverse
places, which never grow but like Cowes tails downwards, or like the Limosin
radishes, round. How now (said Panurge) are your farts so fertile and fruitful?
by G -- here be brave farted men, and fisgued women, let them be married
together, they will beget fine hornets and dorflies; so did Pantagruel, and
called them Pygmies; those he sent to live in an island thereby, where since
that time they are increased mightily: but the cranes make war with them
continually, against which they do most courageously defend themselves; for
these little ends of men and dandiprats, (whom in Scotland they call
whiphandles, and knots of a tarre-barrel) are commonly very teastie and
choleric: the Physical reason whereof is, because their heart is near their
spleen.

At this same time, Panurge took two drinking glasses that were there, both of
one bigness, and filled them with water up to the brim, and set one of them
upon one stool, and the other upon another, placing them about five foot from
one another: then he took the staff of a javelin, about five foot and a half
long, and put it upon the two glasses, so that the two ends of the staff did
come just to the brims of the glasses: This done, he took a great stake or
billet of wood, and said to Pantagruel, and to the rest: My Masters, behold,
how easily we shall have the victory over our enemies; for just as I shall
break this staff here upon these glasses, without either breaking or crazing
of them* nay, which is more, without spilling one drop of the water that is
within them, even so shall we break the heads of our Dipsodes, without
receiving any of us any wound or loss in our person or goods: but that you may
not think there is any witchcraft in this, hold (said he to Eusthenes) strike
upon the midst as hard as thou can with this log: Eusthenes did so, and the
staff broke in two pieces, and not one drop of the water fell out of the
glasses: Then said he, I know a great many such tricks, let us now therefore
march boldly, and with assurance.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Pantagruel got the victory very strangely over the Dipsodes,
and the Giants.
AFter all this talk, Pantagruel took the prisoner to him, and sent him away,
saying, Go thou unto thy King in his Camp, and tell him tidings of what thou
have seen, and let him resolve to feast me to morrow about noon; for as soon as
my galleys shall come, which will be to morrow at furthest; I will prove unto
him by eighteen hundred thousand fighting men, and seven thousand Giants, all
of them greater then I am; that he has done foolishly and against reason, thus
to invade my country, wherein Pantagruel feigned that he had an army at sea;
but the Prisoner answered, that he would yield himself to be his slave, and
that he was content never to return to his own people, but rather with
Pantagruel to fight against them, and for Gods sake besought him, that he might
be permitted so to do: whereunto Pantagruel would not give consent, but
commanded him to depart thence speedily, and be gone as he had told him, and to
that effect gave him a box full of Euphorbium, together with some grains of the
black chameleon thistle, steeped into aqua vitae, and made up into the
condiment of a wet sucket, commanding him to carry it to his King, and to say
unto him, that if he were able to eat one ounce of that without drinking after
it, he might then be able to resist him, without any fear or apprehension of
danger.

The Prisoner then besonght him with joint hands, that in the hour of the
battle he would have compassion upon him: whereat Pantagruel said unto him,
After that thou have delivered all unto the King, put thy whole confidence in
God, and he will not forsake thee; because, although for my part I be mighty,
as thou may see, and have an infinite number of men in arms, I do
nevertheless trust neither in my force nor in mine industry, but all my
confidence is in God my Protector, who does never forsake those that in him do
put their trust and confidence. This done, the Prisoner requested him that he
would afford him some reasonable composition for his ran some: to which
Pantagruel answered, that his end was not to rob nor ran some men, but to enrich
them, and reduce them to total liberty; Go thy way (said he) in the peace of
the living God, and never follow evil company, lest some mischief befall thee.
The Prisoner being gone, Pantagruel said to his men, Gentlemen, I have made
this Prisoner believe that we have an army at sea, as also that we will not
assault them till to morrow at noon, to the end, that they doubting of the
great arrival of our men, mayspend this night in providing and strengthening
themselves, but in the mean time my intention is, that we charge them about the
hour of the first sleep.

Let us leave Pantagruel here with his Apostles, and speak of King Anarchus and
his army. When the Prisoner was come, he went unto the King, and told him how
there was a great Giant come, called Pantagruel, who had overthrown, and made
to be cruelly roasted all the six hundred and nine and fifty horsemen, and he
alone escaped to bring the news: besides that, he was charged by the said
Giant, to tell him, that the next day about noon he must make a dinner ready
for him, for at that hour he was resolved to set upon him: then did he give
him that box wherein were those confitures; but as soon as he had swallowed
down one spoonful of them, he was taken with such a heat in the throat,
together with an ulceration in the flap of the top of the winde-pipe, that his
tongue peeled with it, in such sort that for all they could do unto him, he
found no ease at all, but by drinking only without cessation, for as soon as
ever he took the goblet from his head, his tongue was on a fire, and therefore
they did nothing but still pour in wine into his throat with a funnel, which
when his Captains, Bashawes, and guards of his body did see, they tasted of the
same drugs, to try whether they were so thirst-procuring and alterative or no:
but it so befell them as it had done their King, and they plied the flaggon so
well, that the noise ran throughout all the Camp, how the Prisoner was
returned, that the next day they were to have an assault, that the King and his
Captains did already prepare themselves for it, together with his guards, and
that wiah carowsing lustily, and quaffing as hard as they could, every man
therefore in the army began to tipple, ply the pot, swill and guzzle it as fast
as they could. In sum, they drunk so much, and so long, that they fell asleep
like pigs, all out of order throughout the whole Camp.

Let us now return to the good Pantagruel, and relate how he carried himself in
this business, departing from the place of the Trophies, he took the mast of
their ship in his hand like a Pilgrims staff, and put within the top of it two
hundred and seven and thirty poinsons of white wine of Anjou, the rest was of
Rowen, and tied up to his girdle the bark all full of salt, as easily as the
Lanskennets carry their little panniers, and to set onward on his way with his
fellow soldiers. When he was come near to the enemies Camp, Panurge said unto
him, Sir, if you would do well, let down this white wine of Anjou, from the
scuttle of the mast of the ship, that we may all drink thereof, like Britains.

Hereunto Pantagruel very willingly consented, and they drank so neat, that
there was not so much as one poor drop left, of two hundred and seven and
thirty punchons, except one Boracho or leathern bottle of Tours, which Panurge
filled for himself, (for he called that his vade mecum,) and some scurvie lees
of wine in the bottom, which served him in stead of vinegar. After they had
whitled and curried the can pretty handsomely; Panurge gave Pantagruel to
eat some devilish drugs, compounded of Lithotripton, (which is a
stone-dissolving ingredient,) nephrocatarticon, (that purges the reins) the
marmalade of the Quinces, (called Codinias) a confection of Cantharides, (which
are green flies breeding on the tops of olive trees) and other kinds of
diuretic or pisse-procuring simples. This done, Pantagruel said to Carpalin,
Go into the City, scrambling like a cat up against the wall, as you can well
do, and tell them that now presently they come out, and charge their enemies as
rudely as they can, and having said so, come down taking a lighted torch with
you, wherewith you shall set on fire all the tents and pavillions in the Camp,
then cry as loud as you are able with your great voice, and then come away from
thence. Yea, but, said Carpalin, were it not good to cloy all their ordnance?
No, no, (said Pantagruel) only blow up all theit powder. Carpalin obeying him,
departed suddenly, and did as he was appointed by Pantagruel, and all the
Combatants came forth that were in the City, and when he had set fire in the
tents and pavillions, he past so lightly through them, and so highly and
profoundly did they snort and sleep, that they never perceived him. He came to
the place where their Artillery was, and set their munition on fire: but here
was the danger, the fire was so sudden, that poor Carpalin had almost been
burnt; and had it not been for his wonderful agility, he had been fried like a
roasting pig: but he departed away so speedily, that a bolt or arrow out of a
Crossebowe could not have had a swifter motion. When he was clear of their
trenches, he shooted aloud, and cried out so dreadfully, and with such
amazement to the hearers, that it seemed all the devils of hell had been let
loose: at which noise the enemies awaked, but can you tell how? even no less
astonished then are Monks, at the ringing of the first peale to Matins, which
in Lusonnois is called Rubbalock.

In the mean time Pantagruel began to sow the salt that he had in his bark,
and because they slept with an open gaping mouth, he filled all their throats
with it, so that those poor wretches were by it made to cough like foxes. Ha,
Pantagruel, how thou addest greater heat to the firebrand that is in us.
Suddenly Pantagruel had will to piss, by means of the drugs which Panurge had
given him, and pist amidst the Camp so well and so copiously, that he drowned
them all, and there was a particular deluge, ten leagues round about, of such
considerable depth, that the history says, if his fathers great mare had been
there, and pist likewise, it would undoubtedly have been a more enormous deluge
then that of Deucalion; for she did never piss, but she made a river, greater
then is either the Rhosne, or the Danow, which those that were come out of the
City seeing, said, They are all cruelly slain, see how the blood runs along:
but they were deceived in thinking Pantagruels urine had been the blood of
their enemies; for they could not see but by the light of the fire of the
pavillions, and some small light of the Moon.

The enemies after that they were awaked, seeing on one side the fire in the
Camp, and on the other the inundation of the urinal deluge, could not tell what
to say, nor what to think; some said, that it was the end of the world, and the
final judgment, which ought to be by fire: Others again thought that the
sea-gods, Neptune, Protheus, Triton, and the rest of them did persecute them,
for that indeed they found it to be like seawater and and salt.

O who were able now condignely to relate, how Pantagruel did demean himfelf
against the three hundred Giants; O my Muse, my Calliope, my Thalia, inspire me
at this time, restore unto me my spirits; for this is the Logical bridge of
asses: here is the pitsall, here is the difficulty, to have ability enough to
express the horrible battle that was fought; Ah, would to God that I had now a
bottle of the best wine, that ever those drank, who shall read this so
veridical history.

CHAP. XXIX. How Pantagruel discomfited the three hundred Giants armed with
free stone, and Loupgarou their Captain.
THe Giants seeing all their Camp drowned, carried away their King Anarchus
upon their backs, as well as they could out of the Fort, as Aeneas did to his
father Anchises, in the time of the conflagration of Troy. When Panurge
perceived them, he said to Pantagruel, Sir, yonder are the Giants coming forth
against you, lay on them with your mast gallantly like an old Fencer; for now
is the time that you must show your self a brave man and an honest And for our
part we will not fail you: I my self willl kill to you a good many boldly
enough; for why, David killed Goliath very easily; and then, this great Lecher
Eusthenes, who is stronger then four oxen, will not spare himself. Be of good
courage therefore, and valiant, charge amongst them with point and edge, and by
all manner of means. Well* (said Pantagruel,) of courage I have more then for
fifty francks, but let us be wise, for Hercules first never undertook against
two; that is well cack'd, well scummered, (said Panurge) do you compare your
self with Hercules? You have by G -- more strength in your teeth, and more sent
in your bum, then ever Hercules had in all his body and soul: so much is a man
worth as he esteems himfelf. Whilst they spoke those words behold, Lougarou
was come with all his Giants, who seeing Pantagruel in a manner alone, was
carried away with temerity and presumption, for hopes that he had to kill the
good man; whereupon he said to his companions the Giants, You Wenchers of the
low country, by Mahoom, if any of you undertake to fight against these men
here, I will put you cruelly to death: it is my will that you let me fight
single, in the mean time you shall have good sport to look upon us: then all
the other Giants retired with their King, to the place where the flaggons
stood, and Panurge and his Camerades with them, who counterfeited those that
have had the pox, for he wreathed about his mouth, shrunk up his fingers, and
with a harsh and hoarse voice said unto them, I forsake -- od (fellow
soldiers) if I would have it to be believed, that we make any war at all;
Give us somewhat to eat with you, whilst our Masters fight against one
another; to this the King and Giants jointly condescended, and accordingly made
them to banquet with them. In the mean time Panurge told them the follies of
Turpin, the examples of St. Nicholas, and the tale of a tub. Lougarou then set
forward toward Pantagruel, with a mace all of steel, and that of the best
sort, weighing nine thousand seven hundred kintals, and two quarterons, at the
end whereof were thirteen pointed diamonds, the least whereof was as big as the
greatest bell of our Ladies Church at Paris, (there might want perhaps the
thickness of a nail, or (at most that I may not lie) of the back of those
knives which they call cut-lugs or eare-cutters, but for a little off or on,
more or less, it is no matter) and it was enchanted in such sort, that it
could never break, but contrarily all that it did touch, did break immediately.
Thus then as he approached with great fierceness and pride of heart:
Pantagruel, casting up his eyes to heaven, recommended himself to God with all
his soul, making such a Vow as follows.

O thou Lord God, who h^^^ always been my Protector, and my Savior, thou
see the distress wherein I am at this time: nothing brings me hither but a
natural zeal, which thou have permitted unto mortals, to keep and defend
themselves, their wives and children, country and family, in case thy own
proper cause were not in question, which is the faith; for in such a business
thou will have no Coadjutors, only a Catholic Confession and service of thy
Word, and have forbidden us all arming and defense; for thou art the Almighty,
who in thine own cause, and where thine own business is taken to heart, can
defend it far beyond all that we can conceive, thou who have thousand thousands
of hundreds of millions of legigions of Angels, the least of which is able to
kill all mortal men, and turn about the Heavens and earth at his pleasure, as
heretofore it very plainly appeared in the army of Sennacherib, if it may
please thee therefore at this time to assist me, as my whole trust and
confidence is in thee alone: I vow unto thee, that in all Countries whatsoever,
wherein I shall have any power or authority, whether in this of Utopia, or
elsewhere, I will cause thy holy Gospel to be purely, simply and entirely
preached, so that the abuses of a rabble of hypocrites and false prophets, who
by humane constitutions, and depraved inventions, have impoisoned all the
world, shall be quite exterminated from about me. This Vow was no sooner made,
but there was heard a voice from heaven, saying, Hoc fac, and vinces: that is
to say, Do this, and thou shall overcome.

Then Pantagruel, seeing that Loupgarou with his mouth wide open was drawing
near to him, went against him boldly, and cried out as loud as he was able,
Thou die, villain, thou die, purposing by his horrible cry to make him
afraid, according to the discipline of the Lacedaemonians. Withal, he
immediately cast at him out of his bark which he wore at his girdle, eighteen
cags, and four bushels of salt, wherewith he filled both his mouth, throat,
nose and eyes: at this Loupgarou was so highly incensed, that most fiercely
setting upon him, he thought even then with a blow of his mace to have beat out
his brains: but Pantagruel was very nimble, and had always a quick foot, and
a quick eye, and therefore with his left foot did he step back one pace, yet
not so nimbly, but that the blow falling upon the bark, broke it in four
thousand, fourscore and six pieces, and threw all the rest of the salt about
the ground: Pantagruel seeing that, most gallantly displayed the vigor of his
arms, and according to the Art of the axe, gave him with the great end of his
mast a homethrust a little above the breast: then bringing along the blow to
the left side, with a slash struck him between the neck and shoulders: After
that, advancing his right foot, he gave him a push upon the couillons, with the
upper end of his said mast, wherewith breaking the scuttle, on the top thereof
he spilt three or four punchons of wine that were left therein.

Upon that Loupgarou thought that he had pierced his bladder, and that the wine
that came forth had been his urine: Pantagruel being not content with this,
would have doubled it by a side-blow; but Loupgarou lifting up his mace,
advanced one step upon him, and with all his force would have dash't it upon
Pantagruel, wherein (to speak the truth) he so sprightfully carried himself,
that if God had not succored the good Pantagruel, he had been cloven from the
top of his head to the bottom of his milt, but the blow glanced to the right
side, by the brisk nimblenesse of Pantagruel, and his mace sank into the ground
above threescore and thirteen foot, through a huge rock, out of which the fire
did issue greater then nine thousand and six tuns. Pantagruel seeing him busy
about plucking out his mace, which stuck in the ground between the rocks, ran
upon him, and would have clean cut off his head, if by mischance his mast had
not touched a little against the stock of Loupgarous mace, which was enchanted,
as we have said before: by this means his mast broke off about three handfuls
above his hand, whereat he stood amazed like a Bell-Founder, and cried out, Ah
Panurge, where art thou? Panurge seeing that, said to the King and the Giants,
By G -- they will hurt one another, if they be not parted; but the Giants were
as merry as if they had been at a wedding: then Carpalin would have risen from
thence to help his Master; but one of the Giants said unto him, By Golfarin the
Nephew of Mahoon, if thou stir hence I will put thee in the bottom of my
breeches, in stead of a Suppository, which cannot choose but do me good; for in
my belly I am very costive, and cannot well eagar, without gnashing my teeth,
and making many filthy faces. Then Pantagruel, thus destitute of a staff, took
up the end of his mast, striking athwart and along upon the Giant, but he did
him no more hurt then you would do with a filip upon a Smiths Anvil. In the
time Loupgarou was drawing his mace out of the ground, and having already
plucked it out, was ready therewith to have struck Pantagruel, who being very
quick in turning, avoided all his blows, in taking only the defensive part in
hand, until on a sudden he saw that Loupgarou did threaten him with these
words, saying, Now, villain, will not I fail to chop thee as small as minced
meat, and keep thee henceforth from ever making any more poor men athirst; for
then without any moreado, Pantagruel struck him such a blow with his foot
against the belly, that he made him fall backwards, his heels over his head,
and dragged him thus along at flay-buttock above a flight-shot. Then Loupgarou
cried out, bleeding at the throat, Mahoon, Mahoon, Mahoon, at which noise all
the Giants arose to succor him: but Panurge said unto them, Gentlemen, do not
go, if you will believe me, for our Master is mad, and strikes athwart and
along, he cares not where, he will do you a mischief; but the Giants made no
account of it, seeing that Pantagruel had never a staff.

And when Pantagruel saw those Giants approach very near unto him, he took
Loupgarou by the two feet, and lift up his body like a pike in the air,
wherewith (it being harnished with Anvils) he laid such heavy load amongst
those Giants, armed with free stone, that striking them down as a Mason does
little knobs of stones, there was not one of them that stood before him, whom
he threw not flat to the ground, and by the breaking of this stony armor there
was made such a horrible rumble, as put me in mind of the fall of the
butter-tower of St. Stephens at Bourge, when it melted before the Sun.
Panurge, with Carpalin and Eusthenes, did cut in the mean time the throats of
those that were struck down; in such sort that there escaped not one.
Pantagrnel to any man's sight was like a Mower, who with his sith (which was
Loupgarou,) cut down the meddow grass (to wit the Giants,) but with this
fencing of Pantagruels, Loupgarou lost his head, which happened when Pantagruel
struck down one whose name was Riflandouille or pudding-plunderer, who was
armed cap-a-pe with grison stones, one chip whereof splintring abroad cut off
Epistemons neck clean and fair: for otherwise the most part of them were but
lightly armed with a kind of sandy brittle stone, and the rest with slaits:
at last when he saw that they were all dead, he threw the body of Loupgarou, as
hard as he could against the City, where falling like a frog upon his belly, in
the great piazza thereof, he with the said fall killed a singed he-cat, a wet
she-cat, a farting duck, and a brideled goose.

CHAP. XXX. How Epistemon, who had his head cut off, was finely healed by
Panurge, and of the news which he brought from the devils, and the damned
people in hell.
THis Gigantal victory being ended, Pantagruel withdrew himself to the place of
the flaggons, and called for Panurge and the rest, who came unto him safe and
sound, except Eusthenes, (whom one of the Giants had scratched a little in the
face, whilst he about the cutting of his throat, and Epistemon, who appeared
not at all: whereat Pantagruel was so aggrieved that he would have killed
himself; but Panurge said unto him, Nay, Sir, stay a while, and we will search
for him amongst the dead, and find out the truth of all: thus as they went
seeking after him, they found him stark dead, with his head between his arms
all bloody. Then Eusthenes cried out, Ah cruel death! have thou taken from me
the perfectest amongst men? At which words Pantagruel rose up with the greatest
grief that ever any man did fee, and said to Panurge, Ha, my friend, the
prophecy of your two glasses, and the javelin staff was a great deal too
deceitful, but Panurge answered, My dear bullies all, weep not one drop more,
for he being yet all hot, I will make him as sound as ever he was; in saying
this, he took the head, and held it warm fore-gainst his Codpiece, that the
wind might not enter into it, Eusthenes and Carpalin carried the body to the
place where they had banqueted, not out of any hope that ever he would recover,
but that Pantagruel might see it.

Nevertheless Panurge gave him very good comfort, saying, If I do not heal
him, I will be content to lose my head (which is a fools wager,) leave off
therefore crying and help me. Then cleansed he his neck very well with pure
white wine, and after that, took his head, and into it synapised some powder of
diamerdis, which he always carried about him in one of his bags. Afterward,
he anointed it with I know not what ointment, and set it on very just, vein
against vein, sinew against sinew, and spondyle against spondyle, that he
might not be wry-necked, (for such people he mortally hated,) this done, he
gave it round about some fifteen or sixteen stitches with a needle, that it
might not fall off again, then on all sides, and every where he put a little
ointment on it, which he called resuscitative.

Suddenly Epistemon began to breath, then opened his eyes, yawned, sneezed, and
afterward let a great household fart; whereupon Panurge said, Now certainly he
is healed, and therefore gave him to drink a large full glass of strong white
wine, with a sugared toast. In this fashion was Epistemon finely healed, only
that he was somewhat hoarse for above three weeks together, and had a dry cough
of which he could not be rid, but by the force of continual drinking: and now
he began to speak, and said that he had seen the devil, had spoken with Lucifer
familiarly, and had been very merry in hell, and in the Elysian fields,
affirming very seriously before them all, that the devils were boon
companions, and merry fellows: but in respect of the damned, he said he was
very sorry that Panurge had so soon called him back into this world again; for
(said he) I took wonderful delight to see them: How so? said Pantagruel:
because they do not use them there (said Epistemon) so badly as you think they
do: their estate and condition of living is but only changed after a very
strange manner; for I saw Alexander the great there, amending and patching on
clowts upon old breeches and stockins, whereby he got but a very poor living.

Xerxes was a Crier of mustard. Romulus, a Salter and patcher of patines. Numa,
a nailsmith. Tarquin, a Porter. Piso, a clownish swain Sylla, a Ferrie-man.
Cyrus, a Cowheard. Themistocles, a glasse-maker. Epaminondas, a maker of
Mirrours or Looking-glasses. Brutus and Cassius, Surveyors or Measurers of
land. Demosthenes, a Vine-dresser. Cicero, a fire-kindler Fabius, a threader of
beads. Artaxerxes, a rope-maker. Aeneas, a Miller. Achilles was a scauld-pated
maker of hay-bundles. Agamemnon, a lick-box. Ulysses, a hay-mower. Nestor, a
Deer-keeper or Forrester. Darius, a Gold-finder, or Jakes-farmer. Ancus
Martius, a ship-trimmer. Camillus, a foot-post. Marcellus, a sheller of beans.
Drusus, a taker of money at the doors of play houses. Scipio Africanus, a Crier
of Lee in a wooden slipper. Asdrubal, a Lanterne-maker. Hannibal, a Kettlemaker
and seller of eggeshels. Priamus, a seller of old clouts. Lancelot of the lake,
was a flayer of dead horses.
All the Knights of the round Table were poor day-labourers, employed to row
over the rivers of Cocytus, Phlegeton, Styx, Acheron and Lethe, when my lords,
the devils had a mind to recreate themselves upon the water, as in the like
occasion are hired the boat-men at Lions, the gondeleers of Venice, and oars
at London; but with this difference, that these poor Knights have only for
their fare a bob or flirt on the nose, and in the evening a morsel of course
mouldie bread.

Trajan was a Fisher of frogs. Antoninus, a Lackey. Commodus, a Jeat-maker.
Pertinax, a peeler of wall-nuts. Lucullus, a maker of rattles and Hawks bells.
Justinian, a Pedlar. Hector, a Snap-sauce Scullion. Paris was a poor beggar.
Cambyses, a Mule-driver. Nero, a base blind fiddler, or player on that
instrument which is called a windbroach: Fierabras was his serving-man, who did
him a thousand mischievous tricks, and would make him eat of the brown bread,
and drink of the turned wine, when himself did both eat and drink of the best.
Julius Caesar and Pompey were boat-wrights and tighters of ships. Valentine and
Orson did serve in the stoves of hell, and were sweat-rubbers in hot houses.
Giglan and Govian were poor Swineherds. Jafrey with the great tooth, was a
tinder-maker and seller of matches. Godfrey de bullion, a Hood-maker. Jason,
was a Bracelet-maker. Don Pietro de Castille, a Carrier of Indulgences. Morgan,
a beer-Brewer. Huon of Bourdeaux, a Hooper of barrels. Pyrrhus, a
Kitchin-Scullion. Antiochus, a Chimney-sweeper. Octavian, a Scraper of
parchment. Nerva, a Mariner. Pope Julius was a Crier of pudding pyes, but he
left off wearing there his great buggerly beard. John of Paris, was a greaser
of boots. Arthur of Britain, an ungreaser of caps. Pierce Forest, a Carrier of
fagots. Pope Boniface the eighth, a Scummer Popes. Pope Nicholas the third, a
Maker of paper. Pope Alexander, a rat-catcher. Pope Sixtus, an Anointer of
those that have the pox. What, (said Pantagruel) have they the pox there too?
Surely (said Epistemon) I never saw so many; there are there I think above a
hundred millions; for believe, that those who have not had the pox in this
world, must have it in the other. Cotsbody (said Panurge) then I am free; for I
have been as far as the hole of Gibraltar, reached unto the outmost bounds of
Hermes, and gathered of the ripest. Ogier the Dane was a Furbisher of armor.
The King Tigranes, a mender of thatched houses. Galien Restored, a taker of
Moldwarps. The four sons of Aymon, were all tooth-drawers. Pope Calixtus, was
the barber of a woman's sineq uo non. Pope Urban, a bacon-pecker. Melusina, was
a Kitchen drudge-wench. Mattabrune, a Laundresse. Cleopatra, a Crier of onions.
Helene, a broker for Chamber-maids. Semiramis, the Beggars lice-killer. Dido
did sell mushroms. Pentasilea sold cresses. Lucretia was an Alehouse keeper.
Hortensia, a Spinstresse. Livia, a greater of verdigreece.
After this manner, those that had been great Lords and Ladies here, got but a
poor scurvie wretched living there below. And on the contrary, the Philosophers
and others, who in this world had been altogether indigent and wanting, were
great Lords there in their turn. I saw Diogenes there strout it out most
pompously, and in great magnificence, with a rich purple gown on him, and a
golden Scepter in his right hand. And which is more, he would now and then make
Alexander the great mad, so enormously would he abuse him, when he had not well
patched his breeches; for he used to pay his skin with sound bastinadoes; I saw
Epictetus there most gallantly apparelled after the French fashion, sitting
under a pleasant Arbor, with store of handsome Gentlewomen, frolicking,
drinking, dancing, and making good cheer, with abundance of Crowns of the
Sun. Above the lattice were written these verses for his device.

To leap and dance, to sport and play,
And drink good wine both white and brown:
Or nothing else do all the day,
But tell bags full of many a Crown.
When he saw me, he invited me to drink with him very courteously, and I being
willing to be entreated, we tipled and chopined together most theologically. In
the mean time came Cyrus to beg one farthing of him for the honor of Mercury,
therewith to buy a few onions for his supper? No, no, said Epictetus, I do not
use in my almes-giving to bestow farthings, hold thou Varlet, there is a crown
for thee, be an honest man: Cyrus was exceeding glad to have met with such a
booty; but the other poor rogues, the Kings that are there below, as
Alexander, Darius, and others stole it away from him by night. I saw Pathelin
the Treasurer of Rhadamantus, who in cheapening the puddingpyes that Pope
Julius cried, asked him, How much a dozen? Three blanks (said the Pope:) Nay
(said Pathelin) three blows with a cudgel, lay them down here you rascal, and
go fetch more: the poor Pope went away weeping, who when he came to his Master
the Pye-maker, told him that they had taken away his pudding-pyes; whereupon
his Master gave him such a sound lash with an eele-skin, that his own would
have been worth nothing to make bag-pipe-bags of. I saw Master John le maire,
there personate the Pope in such fashion, that he made all the poor Kings and
Popes of this world kiss his feet, and taking great state upon him, gave them
his benediction, saying, Get the pardons, rogues, get the pardons, they are
good cheap: I absolve you of bread and pottage, and dispense with you to be
never good for any thing: then calling Caillet and Triboulet, to him, he spoke
these words, My Lords the Cardinals dispatch their bulls, to wit, to each of
them a blow with a Cudgel upon the reins, which accordingly was forthwith
performed.

I heard Master Francus Villou ask Xeroces, How much the mess of mustard? A
farthing, said Xerxes: to which the said Villou answered, The pox take thee for
a villain: as much of square-ear'd wheat is not worth half that price, and now
thou offerest to inhance the price of victuals: with this he pist in his pot as
the mustard-makers of Paris use to do. I saw the trained bowe-man of the
bathing tub, (known by the name of the Francarcher de baignolet) who being one
of the trustees of the Inqusition, when he saw Pierce Forest making water
against a wall, in which was painted the fire of St. Antonie, declared him
heretic, and would have caused him to be burnt alive, had it not been for
Morgant, who for his Proficiat and other small fees gave him nine tuns of beer.
Well (said Pantagruel,) reserve all these fair stories for another time, only
tell us how the Usurers are there handled: I saw them (said Epistemon) all very
busily employed in seeking of rustie pins, and old nails in the kennels of the
streets, as you see poor wretched rogues do in this world; but the quintal or
hundred weight of this old iron ware, is there valued but at the price of a
cantle of bread, and yet they have but a very bad dispatch and riddance in the
sale of it: thus the poor Misers are sometimes three whole weeks, without
eating one morsel or crumb of bread, and yet work both day and night looking
for the fair to come: nevertheless, of all this labor, toil and misery they
reckon nothing, so cursedly active they are in the prosecution of that their
base calling, in hopes at the end of the year, to earne some scurvie penny by
it.

Come, (said Pantagruel) let us now make our selves merry one bout, and drink
(my Lads) I beseech you, for it is very good drinking all this month: then did
they uncase their flaggons by heaps and dozens, and with their
leaguer-provision made excellent good cheer: but the poor King Anarchus could
not all this while settle himself toward any fit of mirth; whereupon Panurge
said, Of what trade shall we make my Lord the King here, that he may be skilful
in the Art, when he goes thither to sojourn, amongst all the devils of hell?
Indeed (said Pantagruel) that was well advised of thee, do with him what thou will: I give him to thee: Grammercie (said Panurge) the present is not to be
refused, and I love it from you.

CHAP. XXXI. How Pantagruel entered into the City of the Amaurots, and how
Panurge married King Anarchus to an old Lantern-carrying Hag, and made him a
Crier of green sauce.
AFter this wonderful victory, Pantagruel sent Carpalin unto the City of the
Amaurots, to declare and signify unto them how the King Anarchus was taken
prisoner, and all the enemies of the City overthrown, which news when they
heard, all the inhabitants of the City came forth to meet him in good order,
and with a great triumphant pomp, conducting him with a heavenly joy into the
City, where innnumerable bone-fires were set on, thorough all the parts
thereof, and fair round tables which were furnished with store of good
victuals, set out in the middle of the streets; this was a renewing of the
golden age in the time of Saturn, so good was the cheer which then they made.

But Pantagruel having assembled the whole Senate, and Common Councel-men of
the town, said (My Masters) we must now strike the iron whilst it is hot; it
is therefore my will, that before we frolic it any longer, we advise how to
assault and take the whole Kingdom of the Dipsodes: to which effect let those
that will go with me provide themselves against to morrow after drinking; for
then will I begin to march, not that I need any more men then I have to help me
to conquer it; for I could make it as sure that way as if I had it already, but
I see this City is so full of inhabitants, that they scarce can turn in the
streets; I will therefore carry them as a Colonie into Dipsodie, and will give
them all that Country, which is fair, wealthy, fruitful and pleasant, above
all other Countries in the world as many of you can tell who have been there
heretofore every one of you therefore that will go along, let him provide
himself as I have said. This counsel and resolution being published in the
City, the next morning there assembled in the piazza, before the Palace, to the
number of eighteen hundred fifty six thousand and eleven, besides women and
little children: thus began they to march straight into Dipsodie, in such good
order as did the people of Israel when they departed out of Egypt, to pass
over the red sea.

But before we proceed any further in this purpose, I will tell you how Panurge
handled his prisoner the King Anarchus: for having remembered that which
Epistemon had related, how the Kings and rich men, in this world were used in
the Elysian fields, and how they got their living there by base and ignoble
trades; he therefore one day apparelled his King in a pretty little canvass
doublet, all jagged and pinked like the tippet of a light horsemans cap,
together with a pair of large Mariners breeches, and stockins without shoes;
For (said he) they would but spoil his sight; and a little peach-coloured
bonnet, with a great capons feather in it: I lie, for I think he had two: and a
very handsome girdle of a sky-colour and green, (in French called pers and
vert) saying, that such a livery did become him well, for that he had always
been perverse: and in this plight bringing him before Pantagruel, said unto
him, Do you know this royster? No indeed, said Pantagruel: It is (said Panurge)
my Lord, the King of the three batches, or threadbare sovereign: I intend to
make him an honest man. These devilish Kings which we have here are but as so
many calves, they know nothing, and are good for nothing, but to do a thousand
mischiefs to their poor subjects, and to trouble all the world with war for
their unjust and detestable pleasure: I will put him to a trade, and make him a
Crier of green sauce: Go to, begin and cry, Do you lack any green sauce? and
the poor devil cried: That is too low (said Panurge;) then took him by the
ear, faying, Sing higher in Gosolreut: So, so, (poor devil) thou have a good
throat: thou were never so happy as to be no longer King: and Pantagruel made
himself merry with all this; for I dare boldly say, that he was the best little
gafer that was to be seen between this and the end of a staff. Thus was
Anarchus made a good Crier of green sauce, two days thereafter Panurge married
him with an old Lanterne-carrying Hag, and he himself made the wedding with
fine sheeps-heads, brave haslets with mustard, gallant salligots with garlic,
of which he sent five horse-loads unto Pantagruel, which he ate up all, he
found them so appetizing: and for their drink, they had a kind of small
well-watered wine, and some sorbapple-cider: and to make them dance he hired a
blind man, that made music to them with a windbroach.

After dinner he led them to the Palace, and showed them to Pantagruel, and
said, pointing to the married woman, You need not fear that she will crack:
Why? said Pantagruel: Because, said Panurge, she is well slit and broke up
already; What do you mean by that? said Pantagruel: Do not you see? said
Panurge, that the chestnuts which are roasted in the fire, if they be whole,
they crack as if they were mad; and to keep them from cracking, they make an
incision in them, and slit them; so this new Bride is in her lower parts well
slit before, and therefore will not crack behind.

Pantagruel gave them a little lodge near the lower street, and a mortar of
stone wherein to bray and pound their sauce, and in this manner did they do
their little business, he being as pretty a Crier of green sauce, as ever was
seen in the Country of Utopia: but I have been told since that his wife does
beat him like plaster, and the poor sot dare not defend himself, he is so
simple.

CHAP. XXXII. How Pantagruel with his tongue covered a whole Army, and what the
Author saw in his mouth.
THus as Pantagruel with all his Army had entered into the Country of the
Dipsodes, every one was glad of it, and incontinently rendered themselves unto
him, bringing him out of their own good wills the Keys of all the Cities where
he went, the Almirods only excepted, who being resolved to hold out against
him, made answer to his Heralds that they would not yield but upon very
honorable and good conditions.

What? (said Pantagruel) do they ask any better terms, then the hand at the
pot, and the glass in their fist? Come let us go sack them, and put them all
to the sword: then did they put themselves in good order, as being fully
determined to give an assault, but by the way passing through a large field,
they were overtaken with a great shower of rain, whereat they began to shiver
and tremble, to crowd, press and thrust close to one another. When Pantagruel
saw that, he made their Captains tell them, that it was nothing, and that he
saw well above the clouds, that it would be nothing but a little dew; but
howsoever, that they should put themselves in order, and he would cover them:
then did they put themselves in a close order, and stood as near to other as
they could: and Pantagruel drew out his tongue only half-wayes and covered them
all, as a hen does her chickens. In the mean time I, who relate to you these so
veritable stories, hid my self under a burdock-leafe, which was not much less
in largeness then the arch of the bridge of Montrible; but when I saw them
thus covered, I went toward them to shelter my self likewise, which I could
not do; for that they were so (as the saying is) At the yards end there is no
cloth left. Then as well as I could, I got upon it, and went along full two
leagues upon his tongue, and so long marched, that at last I came into his
mouth: but oh gods and goddesses, what did I see there? Jupiter confound me
with his trisulk lightning if I lie: I walked there as they do in Sophie and
Constantinople, and saw there great rocks like the mountains in Denmark, I
believe that those were his teeth, I saw also fair meddows, large forests,
great and strong Cities, not a jot less then Lions or Poictiers, the first man
I met with there, was a good honest fellow planting coleworts, whereat being
very much amazed, I asked him, My friend, what do thou make here? I plant
coleworts, said he: But how, and wherewith said I? Ha Sir, said he, every one
cannot have his ballocks as heavy as a mortar, neither can we be all rich: thus
do I get my poor living, and carry them to the market to sell in the City which
is here behind Jesus! (said I) is there here a new world? Sure (said he) it is
never a jot new, but it is commonly reported, that without this there is an
earth, whereof the inhabitants enjoy the light of a Sun and a Moon, and that
it is full of, and replenished with very good commodities; but yet this is more
ancient then that: Yea, but (said I) my friend, what is the name of that City,
whither thou carriest thy Coleworts to sell? It is called Alpharage, (said he)
and all the indwellers are Christians, very honest men, and will make you good
cheer. To be brief, I resolved to go thither. Now in my way, I met with a
fellow that was lying in wait to catch pigeons, of whom I asked, (My friend)
from whence come these pigeons? Sir, (said he) they come from the other world:
then I thought, that when Pantagruel yawned, the pigeons went into his mouth in
whole flocks, thinking that it had been a pigeon-house.

Then I went into the City, which I found fair, very strong, and seated in a
good air* but at my entry the guard demanded of me my pass or ticket: whereat
I was much astonished, and asked them, (My Masters) is there any danger of the
plague here? O Lord, (said they) they die hard by here so fast, that the cart
runs about the streets; Good God! (said I) and where? whereunto they answered
that it was in Larinx and Phaerinx, which are two great Cities, such as Rowen
and Nants, rich and of great trading: and the cause of the plague was by a
stinking and infectious exhalation, which lately vapoured out of the abismes,
whereof there have died above two and twenty hundred and threescore thousand
and sixteen persons within this sevennight; then I considered, calculated and
found, that it was a rank and unsavory breathing, which came out of
Pantagruels stomach, when he did eat so much garlic, as we have aforesaid.

Parting from thence, I past amongst the rocks, which were his teeth, and never
left walking till I got up on one of them; and there I found the pleasantest
places in the world, great large tennis-Courts, fair galleries, sweet meddows,
store of Vines, and an infinite number of banqueting summer outhouses in the
fields, after the Italian fashion, full of pleasure and delight, where I stayed
full four months, and never made better cheer in my life as then. After that
I went down by the hinder teeth to comt to the chaps; but in the way I was
robbed by thieves in a great forest, that is in the territory toward the
ears: then (after, a little further traveling) I fell upon a pretty petty
village, (truly I have forgot the name of it) where I was yet merrier then
ever, and got some certain money to live by, can you tell how? by sleeping; for
there they hire men by the day to sleep, and they get by it six pence a day,
but they that can short hard get at least nine pence. How I had been robbed in
the valley I informed the Senators, who told me that in very truth the people
of that side were bad livers, and naturally theevish, whereby I perceived well,
that as we have with us the Countries cisalpin and transalpine, that is,
behither and beyond the mountains, so have they there the Countries cidentine
and tradentine, that is, behither and beyond the teeth: but it is far better
living on this side, and the air is purer. There I began to think, that it is
very true which is commonly said, that the one half of the world knows not
how the other half lives; seeing none before my self had ever written of that
Country, wherein are above five and twenty Kingdoms inhabited, besides
deserts, and a great arm of the sea: concerning which purpose, I have composed
a great book entitled The History of the Throttias, because they dwell in the
throat of my Master Pantagruel.

At last I was willing to return, and passing by his beard, I cast my self upon
his shoulders, and from thence slid down to the ground, and fell before him:
as soon as I was perceived by him, he asked me, Whence come thou, Alcosribas?
I answered him, Out of your mouth, my Lord? and how long have thou been there?
said he. Since the time (said I) that you went against the Almirods; That is,
about six months ago, said he: and wherewith did thou live? what did thou
drink? I answered, My Lord, of the same that you did, and of the daintiest
morsels that past through your throat I took toll: Yea, but said he, where
did thou shite? In your throat (my Lord) said I: Ha, ha, thou art a merry
fellow, said he. We have with the help of God conquered all the land of the
Dipsodes, I will give thee the Chastelleine, or Lairdship of Salmigondin;
Grammercy, my Lord, said I, you gratify me beyond all that I have deserved of
you.

CHAP. XXXIII. How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was recovered.
A While after this the good Pantagruel fell sick, and had such an obstruction
in his stomach, that he could neither eat nor drink: and because mischief
seldom comes alone, a hot piss seized on him, which tormented him more then
you would believe: His Physicians nevertheless helped him very well, and with
store of lenitives and diuretic drugs made him piss away his pain: his urine
was so hot, that since that time it is not yet cold, and you have of it in
diverse places of France, according to the course that it took, and they are
called the hot Baths, as

At Coderets. At Limous. At Dast. At Ballervie. At Nerie. At Bourbonansie and
elsewhere in Italic. At Mongros. At Appone. At Sancto Petro de Adua. At St.
Helen. At Casa Nuova. At St. Bartolomee in the County of Boulogne. At the
Lorrette, and a thousand other places.
And I wonder much at a rabble of foolish Philosophers and Physicians, who
spend their time in disputing, whence the heat of the said waters comes,
whether it be by reason of Borax, or sulphur, or alum, or saltpeter that is
within the mine; for they do nothing but dote, and better were it for them to
rub their arse against a thistle, then to waste away their time thus in
disputing of that, whereof they know not the original; for the resolution is
easy, neither need we to enquire any further, then that the said baths came by
a hot piss of the good Pantagruel.

Now to tell you after what manner he was cured of his principal disease; I let
pass how for a minorative, or gentle potion, he took four hundred pound
weight of Colophoniack Scammonee: six score and eighteen cart-loads of Cassia:
an eleven thoufand and nine hundred pound weight of Rubarb, besides other
confused jumblings of sundry drugs: You must understand, that by the advice of
the Physicians, it was ordained that what did offend his stomach should be
taken away; and therefore they made seventeen great balls of copper, each
whereof was bigger then that which is to be seen on the top of St. Peter's
needle at Rome, and in such sort, that they did open in the midst, and shut
with a spring. Into one of them entered one of his men carrying a Lantern and
a torch lighted, and so Pantagruel swallowed him down like a little pill: into
seven others went seven Countrey-fellows, having every one of them a shovel on
his neck: into nine others entered nine wood-carriers, having each of them a
basket hung at his neck, and so were they swallowed down like pills: when they
were in his stomach, every one undid his spring, and came out of their cabins:
the first whereof was he that carried the Lantern, and so they fell more then
half a league into a most horrible gulf, more stinking and infectious then
ever was Mephitis, or the marshes of Camerina, or the abominably unsavory
lake of Sorbona, whereof Strabo makes mention. And had it not been, that they
had very well antidoted their stomach, heart and wine-pot, which is called the
noddle, they had been altogether suffocated and choked with these detestable
vapors. O what a perfume! O what an evaporation wherewith to beray the masks
or muflers of young mangie queans: after that with groping and smelling they
came near to the fecal matter and the corrupted humors; finally they found a
montjoy or heap of ordure and filth: then fell the Pioneers to work to dig it
up, and the rest with their shovels filled the baskets; and when all was
cleansed, every one retired himself into his ball.

This done, Pantagruel enforcing himself to a vomit, very easily brought them
out, and they made no more show in his mouth, then a fart in yours: but when
they came merrily out of their pills, I thought upon the Grecians coming out of
the Trojan horse: by this means was he healed, and brought unto his former
state and convalescence; and of these brazen pills, or rather copper-balls, you
have one at Orleans, upon the steeple of the Holy Cross Church.

CHAP. XXXIV. The Conclusion of this present Book, and the excuse of the Author.
NOw (my Masters) you have heard a beginning of the horrisick history of my
Lord and Master Pantagruel: Here will I make an end of the first book; My head
aches a little, and I perceive that the Registers of my brain, are somewhat
jumbled and disordered with this septembral juice. You shall have the rest of
the history at Franckfort mart next coming, and there shall you see how Panurge
was married and made a Cuckold within a month after his wedding: how
Pantagruel found out the Philosophers stone, the manner how he found it, and
the way how to use it: how he past over the Caspian mountains, and how he
sailed thorough the Atlantic sea, defeated the Cannibals, and conquered the
isles of Perles, how he married the daughter of the King of India, called
Presian, how he fought against the devil, and burnt up five chambers of hell,
ransacked the great black chamber, threw Proserpina into the fire, broke five
teeth to Lucifer, and the horn that was in his arse. How he visited the
regions of the Moon, to know whether indeed the Moon were not entire and whole,
or if the women had three quarters of it in their heads, and a thousand other
little merriments all veritable. These are brave things truly; Good night,
Gentlemen, Perdonate mi, and think not so much upon my faults, that you forget
your own. If you say to me, (Master) it would seem that you were not very wise
in writing to us these flimflam stories, and pleasant fooleries.

I answer you, that you are not much wiser to spend your time in reading them:
nevertheless, if you read them to make your selves merry, as in manner of
pastime I wrote them, you and I both are far more worthy of pardon, then a
great rabble of squint-minded fellows, dissembling and counterfeit Saints,
demure lookers, hypocrites, pretended zealots, tough Friars, buskin-Monks, and
other such sects of men, who disguise themselves like Maskers to deceive the
world, for whilst they give the common people to understand, that they are
busied about nothing but contemplation and devotion in fastings, and maceration
of their sensuality; and that only to sustain and aliment the small frailty of
their humanity: It is so far otherwise, that on the contrary (God knows) what
cheer they make, Et Curios simulant, sed bacchanalia vivunt. You may read it
in great letters, in the coloring of their red snowts, and gulching bellies as
big as a tun, unless it be when they perfume themselves with sulphur; as for
their study it is wholly taken up in reading of Pantagruelin books, not so much
to pass the time merrily, as to hurt some one or other mischievously, to wit,
in articling, sole-articling, wry-neckifying, buttock-stirring, ballocking, and
diabliculating, that is, calumniating; wherein they are like unto the poor
rogues of a village, that are busy in stirring up and scraping in the ordure
and filth of little children, in the season of cherries and guinds, and that
only to find the kernels, that they may sell them to the druggists, to make
thereof pomander-oile. Fly from these men, abhor and hate them as much as I
do, and upon my faith you will find your selves the better for it. And if you
desire to be good Pantagruelists (that is to say, to live in peace, joy,
health, making your selves always merry) never trust those men that always
peep out at one hole.

The End of the Second Book of Rabelais.
FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in the First and Second Book of Rabelais.
Of the First book

THE Authors Prologue. Page 1. Of the Genealogy and Antiquity of Gargantua.
chapter 1. p. 9 A galimatia of extravagant conceits. chapter 2. p. 13 How Gargantua was
carried eleven months in his mothers belly. chapter 3. p. 18 How Gargamelle being
great with Gargantua, did eat a huge deal of tripes. chapter 4. p. 22 The Discourse
of the Drinkers. chapter 5. p. 24 How Gargantua was borne in a strange manner.
After what manner Gargantua had his name given him, and how he tipled, bibbed
and eurried the Can. chapter 7. p. 34 How they apparelled Gargantua. chapter 8. p. 37
The Colors and Liveries of Gargantua. chapter 9. p. 43 Of that which is signified
by the Colors white and blew. chapter 10. p. 47 Of the youthful age of Gargantua.
chapter 11. p. 53 Of Gargantua's wooden horses. chapter 12. p. 57 How Gargantua's
wonderful understanding became known to his father Grangousier, by the
invention of a torchecul, etc. chapter 13. p. 61 How Gargantua was taught Latin by
a Sophister. chapter 14. p. 67 How Gargantua was put under other Schoolmasters. chapter
15. p. 70 How Gargantua was sent to Paris, and of the huge great mare that he
rode on; how she destroyed the oxe-flies of the Beauce. chapter 16. p. 73 How
Gargantua paid his welcome to the Parisians, and how he took away the great
Bells of our Ladies Church. chapter 17. p. 76 How Janotus de Bragmardo was sent to
Gargantua to recover the great bells. chapter 18. p. 80 The Oration of Master
Janotus de Bragmardo for recovery of the bells. chapter 19. p. 82 How the Sophister
corried away his cloth, and how he had a suit in law against the other Masters.
chapter 20. p. 85 The study of Gargantua, according to the discipline of his
Schoolmasters the Sophisters. chapter 21. p. 89 The games of Gargantua. chapter 22. p.
93 How Gargantua was instructed by Ponocrates, and in such sort disciplinated,
that he lost not one hour of the day. chapter 23. p. 99 How Gargantua spent his
time in rainy weather. chapter 24. p. 111 How there was great strife and debate
raised betwixt the Cake-bakers of Learn, and those of Gargantua's Country,
whereupon were waged greatwarres. chapter 25. p. 114 How the inhabitants of Learn,
by the Commandment of Picrochole their King, assaulted the shepherds of
Gargantua unexpectedly, and on a sudden. chapter 26. p. 119 How a Monk of Sevile
saved the Closse of the Abbey from being ransacked by the enemy. chapter 27. p.
122 How Picrochole stormed and took by assault the rock Clermond, and of
Grangousiers unwillingnesse and aversion from the undertaking of war. chapter 28.
p. 131 The tenor of the letter which Grangousier wrote to his son Gargantua.
chapter 29. p. 135 How Ulrich Gallet waes sent unto Picrochole. chapter 30. p. 137 The
speech made by Gallet to Picrochole. chapter 31. p. 138 How Grangousier to buy
peace caused the Cakes to be restored, chapter 32. p. 143 How some Statesmen of
Picrochole, by haire-brain'd counsel put him in extreme danger. chapter 33. p. 148
How Gargantua left the City of Paris to succor his Country, and how Gymnast
encountered with the enemy. chapter 34. p. 155 How Gymnast very soundly and
cunningly killed Captain Tripet, and others of Picrocholes men. chapter 35. p. 158
How Gargantua demolished the Castle of the ford of Vede. chapter 36. p. 162 How
Gargantua in combing his head, made the great Canon-ball fall out of his hair.
chapter 37. p. 166 How Gargantua did eat up six Pilgrims in a sallet. chapter 38. p.
169 How the Monk was feasted by Gargantua, and of the jovial discourse they had
at supper. chapter 39. p. 173 Why Monks are the outcasts of the world, and
wherefore some have bigger noses then others. chapter 40. p. 179 How the Monk made
Gargantua sleep, and of his hours and breviaries. chapter 41. p. 183 How the Monk
encouraged his fellow Champions, and how he hanged on a tree. chapter 42. p. 187
How the Scouts and fore-partie of Picrochole were met with by Gargantua, and
how the Monk slew Captain Drawforth, and then was taken Prisoner by his
enemies. chapter 43. p. 190 How the Monk rid himself of his Keepers, and how
Picrocholes forelorn hope was defeated. chapter 44. p. 193 How the Monk carried
along with him the Pilgrims, and of the good words that Grangousier gave them.
chapter 45. p. 199 How Grangousier did very kindly entertain Touchfaucet his
Prisoner. chapter 46. p. 204 How Grangousier sent for his legions, and how
Touchfaucet slew Rashcalf, and was afterward executed by the command of
Picrochole chapter 47. p. 208 How Gargantua set upon Picrochole within the rock
Clermond, and utterly defeated the army of the said Picrochole. chapter 48. p. 213
How Picrochole in his flight fell into great misfortunes, and what Gargantua
did after the battle. chapter 49. p. 218 Gargantua's speech to the vanquished. c.
50. 220 How the victorious Gargantuists were recompensed after the battle. chapter
51. p. 226 How Gargantua caused to be built for the Monk the Abbey of Theleme.
chapter 52. p. 229 How the Abbey of the Thelemites was built and endowed. chapter 53. p
232 The Inscription set upon the great gate of Theleme. chapter 54. p 236 What
manner of dwelling the Thelemites had. chapter 55. p. 240 How the men and women of
the religious order of Theleme were apparelled. chapter 56. p. 243 How the
Thelemires were governed and of their manner of living. chapter 57. p. 248 A
Prophetical Riddle. chapter 58. p. 251

THE TABLE OF THE SECOND BOOK.
THE Authors Prologue. Of the Original and Antiquity of the great Pantagruel.
chap 1. page 1 Of the Nativity of the most dread and redoubted Pantagruel. chapter
2. p 10 Of the grief wherewith Gargantua was moved, at the decease of his wife
Badebec. chapter 3. p. 15 Of the Infancy of Pantagruel. chapter 4. p. 19 Of the acts of
the noble Pantagruel in his youthful age. chapter 5. p. 24 How Pantagruel met with
a Limosin, who too affectedly did counterfeit the French Language. chapter 6. p. 30
How Pantagruel came to Paris, and of the choice books of the Library of St.
Victor. chapter 7. p. 34 How Pantagruel being at Paris, received letters from his
father Gargantua, and the Copy of them. chapter 8. p. 50 How Pantagruel found
Panurge, whom he loved all his lifetime. chapter 9. p. 59 How Pantagruel judged so
equitably of a Controversy, which was wonderfully obscure and difficult, that
by reason of his just decree therein, he was reputed to have a most admirable
judgment. chapter 10. p. 67 How the Lords of Kissebreech and Suckfist did plead
before Pantagruel without an Attorney. chapter 11. p. 74 How the Lord of Suckfist
pleaded before Pantagruel. chapter 12. p. 81 How Pantagruel gave judgment upon the
difference of the two Lords. chapter 13. p. 88 How Panurge related the manner how
he escaped out of the hands of the Turks. chapter 14. p. 93 How Panurge showed a
very new way to build the walls of Paris. chapter 15. p. 102 Of the qualities and
conditions of Panurge. chapter 16. p. 110 How Panurge gained the pardons, and
married the old women, and of the suits in law which he had at Paris. chapter 17.
p. 119 How a great Scholar of England would have argued against Pantagruel,
and was overcome by Panurge. chapter 18. p. 126 How Panurge put to a nonplus the
Englishman, that argued by signs. chapter 19. p. 134 How Thaumast relates the
virtues and knowledge of Panurge. ch 20. p. 141 How Panurge was in love with a
Lady of Paris. chapter 21. p. 144 How Panurge served a Parisian Lady a trick that
pleased her not very well. chapter 22. p. 150 How Pantagruel departed from Paris,
hearing news that the Dipsodes had invaded the land of the Amaurots, and the
cause wherefore the leagues are so short in the Isle of France. chapter 23. p. 155 A
Letter which a Messenger brought to Pantagruel from a Lady of Paris, together
with the exposition of aposie written in a gold-ring. ch 24. p. 157 How
Panurge, Carpalin, Eusthenes and Epistemon, (the Gentlemen Attendants of
Pantagruel,) vanquished and discomfited six hundred and threescore horsemen
very cunningly. chapter 25. p. 163 How Pantagruel and his Company were weary in
eating still salt meats: and how Carpalin went a hunting to have some venison.
chapter 26. p. 166 How Pantagruel set up one Trophee in memorial of their valor,
and Panurge another in remembrance of the hares: how Pantagruel likewise with
his farts begot little men, and with his fisgs little women: and how Panurge
broke a great staff over two glasses. chapter 27. p. 172 How Pantagruel got the
victory very strangely over the Dipsodes and the Giants, chapter 28. p. 177 How
Pantagruel discomfited the three hundred Giants, armed with freestone, and
Loupgarou their Captain. chapter 29. p. 185 How Epistemon who had his head cut off,
was finely healed by Panurge, and of the news which he brought from the
devils, and the damned people in hell. chapter 30. p. 193 How Pantagruel entered
into the City of the Amaurots, and how Panurge married King Anarchus to an old
Lanterne-carrying Hag, and made him a Crier of green sauce. chapter 31 p. 204 How
Pantagruel with his tongue covered a whole army, and what the Author saw in his
mouth. chapter 32p. 209 How Pantagruel became sick, and the manner how he was
recovered. chapter 33. p. 215 The Conclusion of this present book, and the excuse
of the Author. chapter 34. p. 219

FINIS.

