THE LOGICIANS Schoolmaster:

OR, A COMMENT UPON RAMUS Logic.

By Mr. Alexander Richardson, sometime of Queens College in CAMBRIDGE.

Whereunto are added, His Prelections on Ramus his Grammar; Taleus his
Rhetoric; Also his Notes on Physics, Ethics, Astronomy, Medicine, and
Optics.

Never before Published.

LONDON: Printed by Gartrude Dawson, and are to be sold by Sam. Thomson at the
White-Horse in Paul's Churchyard. 1657.

The Bookseller to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe Author hereof, Mr. Alexander Richardson, was a man of transcendent parts,
and most sublimate intellectuals, whereby he attained unto such a perfection in
all Arts and Sciences, that there is nothing almost of liberal and ingenuous
literature, which he had not in-sight into; and that such as to be able to lay
down a systeme of it in most exact and methodical Precepts: and had his
Abilities been drawn forth to the full advantage, doubtless the Arts had
received a considerable improvement beyond what the world has yet been
acquainted withal. But so it is, that what by his want of Health, and what by
the singular modesty of his Disposition (known unto them that knew him) the
Commonwealth of Learning has been deprived of so great a felicity. Neither
yet did he envy others the Fruits of his own Abilities, but was always most
ready to impart and communicate what he knew; which those of his time (diverse
of whom are still surviving) knew very well how to make good use of: For though
he was but Master of Arts, (and not Fellow) of Queens College, yet did diverse
Graduates from several Colleges flock unto his Lectures, and what he freely
discoursed unto them in several Sciences, they as eagerly took from his mouth
in writing, and then communicated unto others; which found such general
acceptance, that happy was he who could make himself Master of Richardson's
Notes, which they refused not to purchase at any pains in transcribing. For
indeed they could easily perceive in him a reach beyond ordinary men, and that
his words carried further; he dived deep, even unto the bottom of Entity, while
others did but (...), and lick the Glass. But among many other Notes of his
those of his Commentary on Ramus Logic were most generally prized and made use
of by young Students: whereof (though long since printed) there are many Copies
in Manuscript still in being; and indeed it was his Logic whereby, as by a
Key, he opened the secrets of all other Arts and Sciences, to the admiration of
all that heard him. I have therefore adventured upon this Second Impression, and
have added to it his Prelections on Ramus his Grammar, Taleus his Rhetoric;
also his Notes on Physics, Ethics, Astronomy, Medicine, and Optics, which I
doubt not but they will meet with thy Acceptance proportionable to their worth,
whereby I may be Encouraged to offer to thy view such other of his Works, as I
can meet withal, which do yet sleep (as these have done hitherto) in the hands
of Private men.

Sam. Thomson.

ERRATA in the Logic.
Page 2, line 18, for impossible, read possibile: p. 10. l. 12, 22, 31. f.
(...) r. (...), p. 11. l. 1. r. concrescens: p, 27, l, 8, r, is it. 31, l, 10,
and 25, (...). 37, l, 4, r, congruens. 58 l. 24, r, his proper. 80. l.
antepenult, r, Ergo they are. 86. l, 8, No, r, Now. 106, l, 6 r. materiare.
111, l, 14, There, r, Therefore. l, 24, ret, r, res. 115, l, 8, r, of it. Ergo.
143, l, 9, honorum, r, bonorum. 167, l, 26, serum, r, servum. 179. l, 25,
painted, r, pointed 187, l, 27, formalae, r formulae. 220, l, 16, motum, 1,
mutum. 251, l, 16, r, from this effect. 256, l, 22, r, homo non est. 323, l, 4,
obtigit, r, contigit. 326, l, 10, f, 20, r, two. 330, l, 24, r, before we can.
334, l, 21, r, things mediately. 338, l, 2, r, otherwise if. 34^, l, 7, ano, 1,
ovo. l, 8, twenty, r, two.

In Grammatical Notes, etc.
Page 2. line 16. r. Courtier in Boots. p. 7 l, 25. yet, r, yea. 9, l, penult,
r, to make is. 10, l, 21, aggredi. 11, l, 27, for another genus, r, another
been. 13. l. 25, r, ratsa^s. 15, l, 15, quae, r, duae. 21, l, 1, which, r,
with. 25, l. 13. f, ^, r, a. 27, l, 8, r, Grecians have. l, 12, r, ow, as owe.
30, l, 7, r jurisprudentia. 31. l, 1, dele under. 37, l, 23, r, Dictio. 41, l,
15, f, et, r, est. 44, l, 3, r, adjunct's inesse. 45, l, 5, dele that. 53, l,
11, f, lecher, r, lechery. 56, l, 13, r, them one, 61, l, 21 rueri, r, tuorum.
75, l, 26, r, misti autem ediss. 76, l, 22, of four, r, of fewer. 82, l, 1,
Licinius, r, Lucilianus. l, 3, r, with worms. 85, l, 6, least, r, last. 88, l,
11, f, no, r, too special. 93, l, 6, form spinning, r, fine spinning, 101, l,
1, r, mere potentia. 108. l. 3. is r. est. l. 29. f. (...), r. (...). 111. l.
24. f. --, r, carbone. 113. l. antepenult, r, is most hot and dry. penult, r,
is most moist and hot. 126. l. 20. martor, r, marcor. 128. l. 27. this act, r,
this art. 129. l. 15, acts have, r, arts have. 131. l, 1. Now, r, No. 132, l,
7, r, Aristotle. 134, l, 22, r, there for the comely aspect, one. 139, l, 9,
est qua; r, est quae. 143, l, 7, r, both these affections. 144, l, 2, r,
Perscrutatio. 145, l, last, f, plurimum, r, plurium. 146, l, 4, r, Circumvecta.
l, 11, r, plurium motuum. l, 16, r, Sphaera nona. 148, l, 17, r, motu nonae.
149, l, 16, for 9. r, 6. 150, l, 4, plurimum, r, plurium. 151, l, antepenult,
r, per se, quia. 135, l, 10, radius, ^, radians unum. l. ult. r. propius.

The PREFACE or Entrance into the BOOK.
I Suppose I am to dispute with a man, and be about to lay down every thing to
his reason: if he grant that he have reason, I need no further proof of Ens:
for if a man have an eye to see things, there must be an Ens, which must be the
subject of it; for else it should be in vain: and as our outward eye were in
vain, if there were not some things to be seen thereby; so were our inward eye
of reason to no purpose, if there were not an ens to be seen. Now I will stand
more upon ens, because I will ground my Rules of Art upon it, but that Reason
is the proper adjunct of ens, we shall see more plainly hereafter. Yet let us
know in the mean time, that if there be reason, it must either see something or
nothing; now it cannot see nothing but per accidens, because it properly sees
ens, as I see a man not to be in such a place, because I see him not. True it
is, that Ens is the subject of all Arts, but more specially of Logic, Grammar
and Rhetoric, as they are general: for indeed Reason first sees both it self,
and the other Arts.

Ens est quod est.
Now having found that ens is, it is requisite that we should know what it is;
and I say ens est quod est. If we shall look at the Grammatical notation of
ens, it is a participle of the present tense, and therefore is as much as quod
est, even as legens and qui, or quae legit are the same: or as in Greek (...)
verberans, or qui verberat are all one, and that the very particle does show.
For if it be of the present tense, it is the same with the verb of the present
tense, so that ens and quod est are the same. Again, if there be ens, as we
have already proved, then vel est quod est, vel non quod est, vel quod non est
at neque, non quod est, nec quod non est, ergo quod est. For when I say non
quod est, then I put ens fictum impossible, ergo this can no way be ens, no
not in our fantasy; when I say quod non est, then I put ens fictum
impossible, and to that I give a quod but non est, so that in the end I say,
ens est, quod est, that is, neither ens fictum possibile, or ens fictum
impossible; and therefore if we will define ens fictum impossible, it is non
quod est, if we define ens fictum possibile, it is quod non est. Now if neither
ens fictum possibile, nor ens fictum impossible be entia, then ens est quod
est. And again, when I deny non quod est, I deny est, and when I deny quod non
est, I deny est, ergo, ens est quod est. Again, ens and bonum are all one,
therefore non ens and malum are all gone, therefore siens non sit, then it is
bonum and malum: ergoens est quod est.

Ens est primum vel a primo.
If ens be, it must be either first absolutely which is not from another, or it
must be from a first; that is from another, which is not from another: again,
contradiction shows it, for it is as if I should say, ens is non aliunde or
aliunde; that is, it is of it self, or not of it self; and this is
contradiction.

But objection may be made, that in the continual generation of things, one
thing is before another, as my father begot me, and another begot my father,
and so in infinitum, ergo it is not necessary that ens should be absolutely
first or from a first.

Answ. This is nothing, for am I from my father. This then he was before I was,
and I am after him, ergo here is prius and posterius, therefore here cannot be
eternity, ergo this ens is not eternal. Again, is not my fathers case as well
as mine to be from another, and so all men till they come to ens primum; Yes,
ergo all men are from others, till we come to this first absolute being, which
is not from any other: for then he should not be primum: ergo ens est primum,
vel a primo.

Ens absolute primum est quod est seipso.
First, if there be ens primum or a primo, there must be ens primum of
necessity, for if there be ens primum, ye grant it me, if there be ens a primo,
ye must also grant ens primum, therefore ens primum (...) primum, and maxim
intelligibile, therefore Atheists are here to be confuted, for they may sooner
doubt whether they themselves be, then whether God be, for if they be entia a
primo, they must first know him, that is primum, before they can know
themselves, for the cause is before the effect, Quod est seipso, it must be
being either seipso or aliunde, if aliunde, ne primum, for that from which it
is, is prius unto it, ergo est seipso.

Object. Bellarmine says that God is not seipso, neither any creature
whatsoever, for then he says, the same thing would be the cause of it self,
and the effect.

Resp. It is a mere sophisme, or rather an Amphibolia of the phrase. For when
we say God is seipso, we do not mean that he has causes, but we mean
privatively that he is not aliunde, and est seipso, and est (...) are the same,
it is quod est, and so est seipso.

Ens primum est (...).
If he be seipso, then he is without causes, that that is absolutely first must
have no causes, for then it is not absolutely first, ergo there can be no
scientia of him (...), for tunc scire dicimur cum causas scimus. Again, first
if he have no causes, he has no end, ergo he is not made for an end, ergo
there can be no art of him to guide him to an end. So that we find in this
respect that ens primum cannot be the subject of Art; Every Art is to guide the
thing whereof it is an Art to it (...) Again, every Art does lay forth the
causes, effects, subjects and the proper adjuncts of a thing, for if it have no
causes it can have no qualities, and God has none of these, ergo he is not the
subject of Art. Hence again, as this ens is beyond our reason, so he is beyond
our speech, either Grammar or Rhetoric, so that concerning this ens primum,
whatsoever we think or speak it is imperfect. Now bring it to our Logic after
another sort, and we shall see this ens to be beyond Art. Our Logic brings
us first to a first efficient, and in the resolution of any thing we go so far,
as in the end we find a first efficient. Now this first efficient has nothing
before it, ergo that is beyond our reason, therefore what that is we cannot
tell, and therefore if we shall make him an effect to look out his causes, we
shall not make him first, ergo he is beyond all Art: Then again, there is no
Art but is an eternal rule in the Idea of God, as a precept of that thing
whereof it is an Art, to guide it to its Eupraxie, therefore if there should be
an Art of him, there must be a former ens which must have the Idea of it, to
show how this ens primum was made, and whereby it must be governed: so that he
is not the subject of our reason; so that whereas I said before, that ens was
the subject of our reason; here I recall it, and say, that primum ens is beyond
out Logic: and therefore he being beyond all art, we will go them over more
briefly, till we come to ens a primo. First then, he is without efficient, for
he is without causes, ergo he is uncreated: for the first matter, though it
were without matter and form, yet it had an efficient, and an end, ergo was
created: then again, he is seipso, ergo he must be uncreated, hence also he
cannot be annihilated, neither generated, nor corrupted: again, hence he is
independe aliunde, and therefore supremum: again, hence he is without matter:
Now if he be without matter, therefore he is without genus, ergo is not a
species either subalterna, or specialissima. Again if he be without form as
without genus, then he cannot be defined, ergo he must be without limitation of
essence, ergo without limitation of quantity, ergo without limitation of place,
and because he is without beginning from any other thing, therefore he is
without any duration, and because he is without any matter, ergo he is truly
spiritual, for so we account things spiritual, according to the subtleness of
their matter, but he has no matter at all: Again he being without matter and
form, ergo can be no membrum, because every member contains a portion of
matter and form, neither can he be an integrum, because that consists of
members, which contain part of matter and form. Now in that he is absolutely
first, therefore he can be but unum, for else there should be more: again if
there should be more than one, then the one would say as well as the other, I
am as forward as thee, and so none could be absolutely first. Again he is no
genus, for that is an universal, or Synopsis of many together, whereas he is
but one: so that now he is not properly an ens, but an (...), and above our
Logic: again, in that he is absolutely first he must needs be without
accidents (to use their term) without adjuncts, for they are second things
arising from their substances, and in absolute primo ente there must be
nothing, but that which is absolute primum: so that here we see his most simple
being, and that he is beyond our Logic. Now if he be without all potentia,
both essentialis, and accidentalis, he is pure act; so that this act now of his
must needs be his esse, because he is pure act, for if he be agere, then his
esse and agere are the same: so that if any one does any thing. as every ens a
primo does by potentia, it is not pure act: some say the Angels do agere per
essentiam, but it is false, unless they mean that they act first by potentia:
now indeed there is nothing, but it does act per faoultatem essentiae. First
the form, that is the beginner of act, and when it acts upon matter internal,
that is habitual, or a faculty, when it acts by the matter upon some external
object, that is an act; for first there is the essence, the matter and the
form, then the faculty, the forms act upon the matter internally; lastly, the
act, which is of the form, by the matter externally: now these are not in God,
but are his very essence. Now we find then, that this primum ens must be actus,
and purus actus, because there is no potentia in him at all, ergo it must needs
be, that he is primus actus, ergo optimus actus. for primus actus, and optimus
actus are all one: Again hence it must needs follow, that if there be any act
of other things, it must needs be from him, and therefore if there be any thing
actu it must be from him: so then thus we have found him absolute in every
thing.

Ens a primo.
Now to return to the first Syllogism. If there be reason, there must be an
adaequatum subjectum of it, ergo ens a primo, for we have heard, that ens
primum is beyond our reason, so that there must be ens a primo, which is
adequatum subjectum rationi, and that now is liable to all our Logic, for it
has causes, effects, subjects, adjuncts, etc. and thus we will go on, and see
all the subjects of the Arts in the concretion of ens a primo, which the
Philosophers say, cannot be demonstrated.

That we might dig deep, and lay our foundation of Arts sure, I have showed
that there is a being, and that it is double, the one from whom Art is, the
other in whom it shines, now we heard that ens est quod est, which is nothing
but the true notation of ens resolved by Grammar quod est. Now for the
continual succession of things which some dream of, this it is, if all things
be effects, there must be so many causes, ergo in the end we shall come to a
first cause, that is not effectum: Further we heard that ens primum, was quod
est seipso, that is without any other: so that in propriety be is neither
essentia nor ens, but (...). Hence he neither has causes, neither is any
argument that does arise from causes, ergo is an individuum, but not a species:
he is without end, ergo he is (...): hence he therefore was never made, ergo he
made all things: he is without definition, distribution, and properties,
because he is without causes, ergo there can be no art of him, but he must be
the Author of art, as we shall hear hereafter. He is merus Actus, because he is
without all potentia, both substantialis, and accidentalis; again, he is primus
actus, ergo optimus actus, ergo whatsoever is well done of any thing is first
from him: again, he is infinitus actus, ergo able to do any finite thing, yea,
and infinite.

E^s a primo est, quod ut est a primo, sie est ex nihilo proter primum.
First we proved before, that there is ens a primo, for proprium, and
adaequatum subjectum rationis est, at ens a primo est proprium and adaequatum
objectum, rather than subjectum rationis, ergo, Est a primo, that we heard
before, for it cannot be of it self, for then it should be absolutely first,
ergo not the subject of our reason, ergo it is aliunde, ergo it is in the end
for him that is not aliunde, Propter primum, every ens a primo is made, ergo
for an end, ergo at last propter primum, as propter finem: Again, optimus actus
must do nothing in vain. It is a rule of Nature in schools, that God and Nature
nihil agunt frustra, which indeed is a general rule of Logic applied to two
special Arts, natural Philosophy and Divinity. Now then at last we shall find
every thing to be made, for that which was never made, ergo propter primus ens.

Object. But some things might be made for things that are made.

Answ. I suppose mediately, yet when all things are effects, ergo made for an
end, at length we shall come to an end, that is not an effect, as all creatures
are made for man, and man also being made, is therefore for an end, ergo for
God: Hence therefore we see that ens a prima is propter primum, ergo every ens
a primo has his vigor, or impulsus from his first efficient, whereby it is
set forth to his end, so that the Lord has shot out every ens a primo, as it
were an arrow out of his bow, to act his end: so that the vigor and impulsus
of every ens a primo, which it receives from God, is that it may shoot at it
end, ex nihilo, because there was only a first efficient before it, for if it
were ex aliquo, then there should be more firsts.

Object. But how can something be made of nothing?

Answ. God is infinite, both a part ante, and a part post, ergo he can make
things of nothing, which have an infinite distance a part ante, though not a
part post, for so every creature is infinite.

Ens a primo est concretuns.
Ens a primo must be both like, and unlike primum: so the world is one, ergo
like God, it is made of many simples, ergo unlike him: so every thing is one,
ergo like God, but is concretum, ergo is unlike him: so that every creature
must take a blow of God, as Jacob when he wrestled with the Angel took a blow
on the hip, though he overcame, whereby he was made lame. Again, our Logic
tells us first of simples, and then of the disposing of them, therefore ens a
primo must be concretum of simples, because it must be liable to our reason; so
that as before there was ens, because there was reason, so here this ens, which
is the subject of our reason must be concretum, because I must see it with my
eye of Logic. This concretum is of (...) and (...), the reason of it is this,
this ens though it be for God, yet it is mediately for man, as we may see
through all the creatures of God, ergo we thus conclude, that every thing was
made for man, and man for God; for we know that every thing consists of matter
and form, and the end of the matter and form of a thing is to make up the
effect, and thus we say, every thing is it own end. Now then in every ente a
primo, there must be an actus to carry it to man, and an actum, that is, that
that is carried, that that is (...) is actus, and (...) is the actum, or that
which is carried. So we know that Logic carries from the thing to man, and
speech from man to man, that which he has seen with his Logic. By actus I
mean that which does make the thing actually to be carried to mine eye: so that
it cannot come to me, but actu, by act, and it must bring the actum: now this
actus is (...); for as color acts the external thing to my external eye, and
is about the thing, so this actus does to my reason, and is (...), that is,
about every thing, and is an object of my eye of reason, though it arises from
the thing, and flies about it. Now this (...) does concrescere both with it
self, and with (...): so that Logic is concrescus with Logic, and with
Grammar, and Rhetoric, etc. And hence it is called commune, because it is
concrescens with (...), and with every concretion (...), So that it is
concrescens cum seipso, and cum omnibus aliis concrescentibus. Now that that is
(...), is the Logismos of the thing, or the (...) of it, and these are the
actus of the thing: for I see every thing by my Logic, and that sees nothing
but arguments, axioms, syllogismes and method; ergo, I can see nothing but that
that it does thus dictate to my reason; ergo, Logic does act the actum, or
that which is (...) to my reason. Now then there must be reason in every thing,
because I am to see every thing by my Logic, which is the rule of reason, ergo
all things must be liable to it, ergo it must apprehend the (...) in every
thing. Again, there must be (...) in every thing, because though all things at
the beginning were made for one man, yet by reason of sin since his fall, one
cannot see all things, therefore there must be a carrier from one man to
another, that which one man sees with his eye of Logic, he may utter it to
another: so that (...) is actus rei ad hominem, and (...) is actu rei ab homine
ad hominem.

Now this (...) is either loquentia or eloquentia: the reason of this
distribution is this, we heard before that speech was a carrier from man to
man: and because things that are reported, are not so easily received, as those
which are seen by our eye of Logic, ergo it was requisite that there should
not only be an (...), whereby things might be uttered, but also a fine
suggering of them with Rhetoric, for the more easy receiving of them.

Eloquentia is either more fine or more grave, that is, soluta, or ligata: the
reason is this, argumentum is artificiale, or inartificiale: now because speech
is an artificial argument, and so not easily received, the refore Rhetoric
serves to deliver the matter more soberly and gravely; and Poetry yet makes it
more fine, where all things must be done by measure and sweet sounds.

So that now we see how these general Arts are (...): and that they are not of
so great necessity in respect of the thing, as in regard of us for our good:
for, so as every thing is made for man, so he must see them for his good, by
that rule that they are created.

These now though they be (...) because they are circumstantial, yet they are
ab ente primo, because there are causes, effects, subjects, adjuncts, etc. and
speech in ente a primo.

Now the (...) is either quantity or quality, the reason is this, every ens a
primo is finite, ergo must needs have limits of quantity, if he have limits of
essence.

Quantity is either discreet, or continued, for if every thing be finite, then
it must be discreet, or distinct from any other. Again, as it is discreet, so
it is continued, so far as the form extends the matter, whereby we may see
how far it reaches, and where it reaches not. Now as there is quantity, so
also there must be quality in every thing, for there is no ens a primo that is
pure act, ergo it has a form acting upon a matter, and thence proceed all
quantities. Again, it being made for an end, must there fore act unto its end.

Qualitas est natura, and bonitas, every thing has nature, because it has a
matter and a form, ergo there is nature in every thing. And therefore Ramus
says, Forma est praecipua rerum natura: and the Philosophers call forma
principium actionis, and materia principium passionis.

Now this ens being of this scantling for quantity, and of this nature for act,
must be good for Gods glory: so that every thing has a goodness in it. Again,
were all things made for man, and must he see them with his reason? Yes: ergo
they are good for him: ergo he must have a will to embrace them as bona, as
well as an eye of reason to see them as vera, and so man also is made for God,
as his will acts goodness.

Now for the order of these, actus is before actum, for the one is actio, the
other is passio, and actio is before passio, and is more excellent then it.
Again, actus does concrescere with it self, and with the actum that is in the
thing: ergo, actus is more general; ergo is before actum.

Again, because we do not give names to things but with reason from some
argument of Logic in the thing: and again, because there must be an actus from
the thing to man, before there can be an actus from man to man, therefore the
Logismos in the thing must be before the (...) in it; ergo Logic is the most
general, and first in order of all Arts.

Of those things that are acta, quantity is first, because it arises nexly
from the matter and form of a thing: for first of all the matter and form limit
the thing, when they are put together, before they act any thing, and afterward
they act one upon the other. Now quality, that is the act of the form upon the
matter; ergo, it is after quantity, but before goodness, because that is the
end of Natures act. For seeing quantity arises immediately from the matter and
form of a thing, and Nature from the act of the form upon the matter: therefore
goodness must be the last, as being the end of all the former: and thus did the
Lord make all things, first making the causes effects of things, then imposing
speech on them, then number, then measuring them by Geometry, how far their
magnitude should reach, and where it should not reach, before it should act.
Now this act of Nature was to go no further upon external objects, but only be
acted by the form upon the matter; whereas the moral act of goodness was to go
further, for that is for God. Again, Nature is the next in most thing to
quantity, and Goodness is last. And thus have we seen all that is in ente a
primo, which is the ground of all Arts.

(...) est, qua omnes arts comprehenduntur pro subordinatione finium.
Now we are come to Arts, and first we are to begin with Encuclopaidia, and the
definition of it. First for the name, it is Orbis ille, and Circulus Artium.
The reason of it indeed is as much as Arts quite through, as we use to say when
there are many poor folk to be served, though they stand in a long row, Have
you served them round? But there is a further reason of it, A circle we know is
a round line, whose beginning and end meet together in a common point;
therefore this learning in a Circle must be showed to have a common point, and
that we shall easily find. The proper subject of Art is Ens a primo, because we
heard, that was made for an end. Now then from whence Ens a primo had his
beginning, from thence must Ars have his beginning: But from Ens primum it had
his beginning, ergo. Again, as Ens a primo has for his beginning Ens primum,
so it must have Ens primum for his last end, because Ens primum is not made for
any end, but is the last end of all things it self, ergo he must also be the
last end of Art: Then here we find, as Ens primum is the beginning of Art, so
also he is the end of Art; because he is the beginning and end of those things
that are the subjects of Arts; therefore there is one common point wherein they
begin and end: ergo having the same beginning and end, here is (...). Now
howsoever the phrase may seem otherwise, as we heard before, yet here we see
the wisdom of God in this name, though the Graecians did not know the reason of
it when they gave it. Now the Scripture seems to witness this truth. For the
Lord says, I am the beginning and the end: that is, of things, and again, I am
Alpha and Omega: these belong to Grammar, ergo to Art, ergo he is both the
beginning and end of things, and the Alpha and Omega of the Arts.

That this wisdom is round, we may also see in regard of the subject; for the
World is round, and that is the subject of Art: ergo Art is so, for Art is an
adjunct to it, and every adjunct takes figure of his subject. Again, if we will
take Art for Knowledge, Knowledge is in a man's head, and that is round, so
Encuclopaidia is every way in circulo: and thus we see the reason, why this
name should be given to a Chain, whose links are the Arts. Now if Ens primum be
the cause of entia a primo, then he has the Idea of them in him: for he made
them by counsel, and not by necessity; for then he should have needed them, and
they have a parelion of that wisdom that is in his Idea. Again, it must needs
be that this wisdom is his, because he governs them by the rules of Art, for so
every rule of Art is a Statute Law of God, by which he made the things, and
whereby he governs the things, whose Art it is. Now seeing it is so, therefore
this Law has God for the Author, and look what Idea was in the making of the
thing, the same Idea is in the governing of it: for if the Lord should make it
by one rule, and govern it by another, it would not serve the turn to guide the
thing to the eupraxie, whereunto it was made. So that hence it follows, that
every rule of Art is eternal. Again, our rule of Logic tells us, that every
rule of Art is most true, and therefore is from God. For so every rule is true,
as it answers to that Idea that is in him: and is most just, most wise; ergo is
from God, who is most true, most just, and most wise. Now it is in God as in
the fountain, and it is in the creature too, but there it is by a refraction:
for this wisdom coming to the creature, according as the creature is, such is
the Arts order and course. So that if ens a primo be divided into parts, this
wisdom also will be divided into parts: and as in a Looking-glass that is
broken, look how many pieces it is broken into, so many images shall you see:
So for the Arts, look into how many parts the thing is divided, into so many
parts will the Art be distributed.

Q. What is the next subject of Ars in the thing?

Answ. The Frame, as the term shows: for so (...) in Greek signifies fabrica
of (...), because it is seen in the frame of the thing: so that the frame of
the thing is taught in the Art. So when I say, Dial^ctica est ars been
disserendi, I do not define Logic, but I define the frame of reason: so that
the parelion is the frame of the thing, and thence are the Arts written, and by
the Art we see the frame: so then Encuclopaidia is the wisdom of God in the
thing, ergo the subject of Encuclopaidia is Ars, that is the Frame of things,

Qua comprehenduntur, or, continentur.
The Chain Encuclopaidia is not a genus to Ars, no more than a Chain is a genus
to the Links, but an integrum: for as a Chain is an integrum, and the Links
membra; so Encuclopaidia is an integrum, and the Arts are the members that make
up the whole. Now as the links must be linked together, before there be a
Chain: so the Arts must be holden together, before there be Encuclopaidia: so
that every Art is a link, and they must be linked together to make up the
whole. Therefore I say, qua continentur, as parts, continentur a toto.

For Arts may be holden together; for there is that community among the Arts,
for Ars in genere is genus to them all: Therefore as Tully says, they have a
certain commonkinred, as being species of one genus: but this holding together
is after another manner then links in a Chain: namely, pro subordinatione
finium: Therefore they are not holden together confusedly, and as they come to
hand, but every one must have his rank according to the generality of the end
thereof. So that if we link Grammar on the Chain before Logic, we do not
right: and so in like sort for the other Arts.

I say, qua omnes arts, because as a Chain that has not all his links, is not
perfect, because it wants some parts: so the Chain of Arts will not be perfect,
if there be any wanting; the rule of Logic teaches us so much: for
Encuclopaidia is a totum, ergo if any member be wanting, there will not be a
totum made up. And thus we have heard the definition of Encuclopaidia, Now the
subject of it is Ars, as the notation of it (...) shows: and this wisdom of
God is one in him, but is made various in the thing.

Ars est quae constat praecaeptis prime verissimique scientificis rei suae ad
(...) continuatis.
First for the word Ars. For the Latin term diverse have diversely sought for
the notation of it. Some say it comes of arctus a Sinew: some of arx a Tower.
Now those that say it comes of arctus a Sinew, give this reason, Because the
sinew is the strongest part in a man: for though the bones be stronger in some
respect, yet because they will break, whereas the sinew will bend, ergo the
sinews are stronger, so the arts in a thing serve to strengthen it for its
Eupraxie. If it come of arx a Tower, we know that it is impregnable for the
matter and building, and for the form also it is excellent, and so the
strongest thing in the world: so the Arts are for matter invincible, for form
most goodly,

Ars in Greek is called (...), which signifies Fabrica, of (...) Fabrico,
because it is seen in the frame of the thing. But, as we heard, the frame of
the thing is the subject of Art: and when I say, Logica est ars been
disserendi, I do not define Logic, but the frame of reason, as it has framed
man: so when I say Grammatica est ars been loquendi, I describe speech as it is
to be framed. And therefore when we call it (...), it is a Metonimie of the
Subject for the Adjunct. So that here we may see, that Art is the wisdom of
God, but yet as it is en^rgetick in the thing, so it is called Ars, So that
mark this, that Art is the Law of God, whereunto he created things, whereby the
governs them, and whereunto they yield obedience: for by their obedience we
come to see this frame; therefore this Art is Gods wisdom, as it is resplendent
in the things, which is but as a drop of water to the whole Ocean sea, in
respect of the infinite wisdom that is in him. Mark this well, for the Schools
run into many absurdities, whilst they have thought that Art is in a man's
head, and not in the thing.

Quae constat.
I make no genus of it, for it is genus summum in its kind, as Ens also is.

Ob. But the Schools say Art is an intellectual virtue, ergo has virtus for
his genus.

Answ. It is no genus of Art, neither is Ars quatenus it is Art in the thing a
virtue; but as it is scientia in man's head, so indeed it belongs to the
Ethics: for if virtue were a genus to Ars, virtue belongs to Ethics: and so
by this reason. Ethics should be the most general Art, and also by that reason
Ethics should be under Ethics: for virtus intellectualis is but a little part
of them, therefore this is fallacia accidentis, as they call it.

Again, to call it an habit as Aristotle says it is, and as the Schools make
it, that conceit is very simple, for habitus or quantitas habitualis belongs
to Logic, and is nothing but a special kind of adjunct: therefore Aristotle
does define homo to be genus rationale, whereas we know genus is but an adjunct
to animal, which is the genus of homo: so that it is not Art in the thing, but
the knowledge he has of it, which is adjoined to man. Now we have heard, that
Art is the wisdom of God, in ente a primo, and the frame of the creature is in
the antitype of this wisdom, and is a subject of Art. I say, Ars est quae
constat, though it be the frame of the thing. Now constare is to stand together
in parts.

Quest. How come Arts to have parts, being but that one wisdom in God?

Answ. Not in regard of God, but in respect of the frame of the thing where we
see it. For even as Gods Mercy and Justice are one, but various in respect of
the object: It is Mercy to him that comes before him in Christ; It is Justice
to him that appears before him without Christ: So Art is one in God, but is
various in respect of the various work it has wrought in the creation of
things, and that it acts in their government to their end. Again, those parts
must constare, for in the frame of the thing the subjects of the Arts do
constare, ergo this wisdom following them must constare in his parts: and as
one thing has his frame, and another his, differing from the other; hence the
precepts of Arts must be various, and must constare one with another; hence it
follows, that in Art we must have no rules but those that will constare, and
are essential to it. So that if we bring a rule of Grammar into Logic, or
econtra: or if we leave out of Logic some essential rule to it, it will not
constare: again, if the rules of Art be disordered, they will not stand
together: therefore when I say constare, I say two things, first that every Art
must have all the rules that are essential to it, and no more: and secondly,
that every precept must be placed in his due order, and rank. For as a Painter
that makes the picture of a man would make it very deformed, if he should set
the head where the feet should be, or contra: so were it as absurd for an
Artist to disorder his Art.

Constant praeceptis.
Every thing has his special acts before it can work that main act, for which
it was made, as reason must have two parts, it must see the simple causes,
effects, subjects, adjuncts, etc. and Axioms, Syllogismes and Method, that it
may been disserere, therefore there are many petty acts of reason to be
performed, which though they all conspire in one main act, yet are they not one
another: and here we see, that as Arts did arise from the frame of the thing;
so the precepts of Art are from the Acts of things: so that thus Arts constant
praeceptis or regulis, all is one, both are good, and regere is as large as
regula, and praeceptum as praecipere. But my reason why I rather choose
praeceptum is this, because regula is tropical, for it is often taken for a
Square or Ruler, whereby we rule any thing, and this is a grand Synecdoche. And
again, because the Lord has created, and governs his creatures by the
precepts of Arts, as by so many Statutes, or Commandments of the things act
for his (...), as at the Creation, when the Lord said, Let there be light, by
this rule, as by a Precept, did the Lord create light, and also governs it. It
is a Law as God governs reason, speech, quantity, etc. by the rule of Logic,
Grammar, Mathematics; and even as a King governs his Dominions by his Laws:
so the Lord governs his Creatures by the rules of Arts: and because the
Creation began with Commandments, therefore we will still hold it, and they
may be called Laws, Statutes or Commandments, etc. even as the Lord calls
his Laws for man Commandments. Again, I rather call the rules of Arts
praecepta than regulae, because they being shortly delivered are as so many
short directions for the guiding of the thing to the end thereof.

Prime verissimeque scientificis.
Every Precept of Art must be scientificum, that is making knowledge: scientia
(says our Logic) is the judgment of a necessary Axiom, and therefore must
be so true, so just and so wise, as nothing can be more true, more just, more
wise. Why? so are the Precepts of Art both in God, and in the Creature, for as
for deductions the Lord has shut them up in a brief rule of Art; for look how
many uses there may be of a rule of Art in the thing whose rule it is, so many
deductions will there arise from that rule. Now man not being able to take this
wisdom from God, which is most simple, therefore it has pleased the Lord to
place it in the things, and as flowers do send out a scent, or odor that does
affect our sense of smelling, so every precept of Art does spirare a sweet
science to our glass of Understanding, which is indeed that irradiation, which
we heard of in Divinity in the Creation of things: but it is called scientia by
a Trope, for as the scent of a flower is not properly odor, but that that does
affect the sense; and as when we see a strange thing, we say, look what a sight
is yonder, whereas sight is properly of the eye: so we call Art a scientia, or
sweet savor in respect of our knowledge of it, which is a metonimy of the
adjunct for the Subject.

Quest. Now how do they scientificare? how are they (...).

Answ. We have heard how they are in the things, and from thence they do come
by an irradiation, to the Glass of our understanding, and as the Sun beams
coming through a red or blew glass, etc. will bring the color of the glass
with them to our sense: so does the irradiation of Art from the thing bring the
color of the thing with it to our understanding, I mean that this irradiation
does bring the frame of the thing with it, according to which we see it. Now
then first it is called the wisdom of God, as it is one in him, then is it
called ars, as it is in the thing, and when it is brought by an irradiation to
our understanding, the first Act of it is to see the simples in the things, and
this is called our intelligentia, for it is that perspicacie whereby we look at
the invention that is in the thing: so that it is the first Act of our
intellectus. As it is received in an axiom, we call it scientia. It is our
sapientia as we can discourse with it syllogistically: and as we apply it
rightly in time and place, so it is prudentia. And it is Ars as we can execute,
it, and practice it in Analysi or Genesi, as Ars is rightly an intellectual
virtue, as we teach it to another it is doctrina, and his learning is
disciplina; lastly, as we set it down in writing or printing, it is liber.

And every rule of Art is true, as when I say, R^sa est flos, Socrates est
homo, though there be never a Rose or Socrates in the world, because the rule
is eternal, for it is in the eternal Idea of God, though the thing be not. Now
some Meta-Physitians, not distinguishing aright hereof, say the thing is
eternal, that is (say they) the thing was in Gods etern^^ Idea; nay the Idea of
God is eternal, but not the thing. I but Kickerman says, the thing is eternal
quoad essentiam, not quoad existentiam, but that is false, for existere belongs
to effectum in Logic, and every effect must have all the causes, ergo matter
and form, and these are not eternal.

Prime.
For there is no rule of Art, but is a necessary Axiom in its own place, and
so is firstly true. Now deductions are true but at the first, second, third or
fourth hand, according as they are drawn from the first rule, at the second,
third or fourth hand, and are so far forth true, as the first rule is true,
therefore when we dispute with any Adversaries, we bring our controversy to a
rule of Art, and if they deny that, we say contra negantem principia, non est
disputandum, though there is no rule of Art but may be demonstrated, and is
first because it delivers the first causes of the things.

Verissimeque.
Every rule of Art as it is prima scientia, so it is verissima: but for
deductions, as they are secunde, or tertiae scientiae, according as they arise
from the first rule, so they are secundo, or tertio true, to wit, so far
forth as the first is true.

Concinnatis rei.
Here is the subject of Ars, and as praecepta were the matter, and primo
verissimeque scientificis were the qualities before: I do not say fabricae, for
that is but one thing, whereas the rules of Arts are many. Again, Art is the
rule of the government of the thing, as well as of the frame of it, therefore
here is ens, or res in general: I do not say concinnatis to any one thing,
because as Ars in genere is to all the special Arts; so is ens in genere to all
the special entia. Now if you ask me what res is, I told you before in the
definition of ens, so that it was defined before, but here I take it as a
subject of Art.

Concinnatis.
I had not a better word, and therefore was fain to take this, though it does
not fit my purpose, as I would, for the thing indeed is made to the rule, and
not the rule to the thing, though we first see the thing, and by the Act
thereof observe the rule, Concinnatis to fit together, or to sing in parts, so
that every thing must be placed in order, and fitted each to other, for nothing
can be wisely done, if the precepts of Art be broken.

Ad (...).
For every thing is made, and governed to an end, and Art is the rule of the
making and governing of things to their end, therefore (...) is of every Art,
and is not to be taught in any particular Art.

Artis est praxis and prattomenon.
We have heard what encuclopaidia is, qua Arts comprehenduntur, pro
subordinatione finiam, and what Ars is. Now we come to the common affections
belonging to Art, and they are praxis, and prattomenon. That Art has his
praxis and prattomenon, I thus prove it: if the end of things be an (...), then
as there is that actio, or motus: so there must be a res motu facta the
prattomenon. But the end of every thing is an (...): therefore I prove it is an
(...), because laus rei est action, and if there should be any thing made,
that had not an end, it were in vain. Again, every thing is Gods work, and he
is pure Act, therefore every thing must agree to him, and so agere. And if
there be a praxis and a prattomenon of the thing, there must needs be a praxis
and prattomenon of Art, because the thing is fitted to the rule of Art, and not
Art to the thing. Now the reason why some have dreamed that every Art has not
his praxis and prattomenon is, that false distinction of Arts into theoretical
and practick, they call them theoretical which they do only contemplate;
practick when we can by art agere: But there is no Art but is both theoretical
and practick, for as we heard before, that we might both scire sapere, and
intelligere, etc. so we may contemplate, and (...), ergo this distribution is
fallacia accidentis, for they do not distinguish Art as it is in the thing, but
from their own knowledge of it.

Object. But we cannot guide Astronomy, neither can we (...) with natural
Philosophy, but only contemplate them?

Answ. It is Ars as it is in fabrica rei, not as it is in homine, but there is
praxis and prattomenon in every thing, as in the Sun we may see, his motion is
Praxis, his course that he makes is Prattomenon: again, man does not
contemplate only, but also work by the rule of Astronomy, and by Nature, as in
the sowing of corn, and planting of trees, etc. Now for practick they say they
are such as do only practive, and leave no work behind them: or they are also
poietick, and leave a work behind them. Of the first sort they make Ethics,
Oeconomicks, Politics, Music, Optics and others, Why? does not the Ethician
work a good moral action, or virtue, by his rule of Ethics? and has not the
good husbandman in working by the rule of Oeconomicks his Prattomenon as well,
as his praxis? and so of the rest. Is not the Commonwealth the Prattomenon of
a good Politician to be governed by him according to the rule of the Politics?
so for Music, is there not a song sung as well as the singing of it? and when
they set their song we see it plain, that there is an opus as well as a motus.
Now they had these from Aristotle, but they are false, and it is not
commendable in the Creator, that every thing should have his praxis and
prattomenon. Again, it does not resemble the Creator, who is purus actus,
unless there be a motus in it, and a res motu facta, as the rule of Logic
teaches in the doctrine of effectum, and not only Logic, but also Grammar
teaches so much, for there is scriptio and scriptum; so in Arithmetic there
is a numbering, and a thing numbered. So for Geometry there is a measuring, and a
thing measured: and so for all other Arts. And it cannot be otherwise by the
rule of Grammar, for every verb is a transitive, and that is either active or
neuter, and both of them govern an accusative case, which is the subject into
which they pass over, as amo patrem, Pater is the subject unto which amo
passes over: and sero a verb neuter has his subject in himself, as when I
say, I sow, it is as if I should say, I sow seed, therefore there is a
prattomenon of every Art, as well as a praxis. For if a man smells, he smells
something, and when he sees, he sees something, and drinking, he drinks drink.

Praxis est artis in agendo motus.
There is nothing that can act sine motu, but only God: and hence it is that
motus is general to every effect, and therefore is an effect by our rule of
Logic.

Praxis is Genesis, and Analysis.
These two belong to art in like sort, because they belong to the thing where
Art is, for if you grant a motus of every thing, it must either be from
principles to the making up of a thing, or to the resolving of it. Now if Art
make up a thing, it can also undo it, for the way is the same, only there is a
progress and regress: so if I by my rule of Grammar join a nominative case and
a verb together, I can also by the same rule undo them again, and see whether
it be true; and this we call construing of Latin, which indeed is distruing,
for it is Analysis, for we pull that asunder, which Tully has laid together,
and indeed none can well undo a thing, but he that has made it, or one that
knows how to make it: and therefore we do not send for a Joyner to pull down a
house, but for a Carpenter, ergo if every thing have his Genesis and Analysis,
Art must also have them, which follow the thing.

Genesis est progressus artis a simplicibus ad composita.
This Art has his Genesis, which is a progress, for Genesis begins at the
simples, and so goes to the composites, therefore must needs be a progress, now
every thing but God is composed of simples, therefore there must needs be a
Genesis of every Art which still follows the thing. So Logic first looks at
the invention of things, then at the axioms, syllogismes and method. So Grammar
first begins with letters, then with syllables, then with words, then with
sentences: and Arithmetic first considers simple number, then comparative,
etc. So Geometry first looks at lines, then at superficies, then at corpus: so
natural Philosophy first begins with simple natures, then with composites,
first with those that are without life, then those that live, first a simple
life, secondly those that live a composite life.

Analysis est regressus a compositis ad simplicia.
Analysis is an unwinding of a bottom of thread, which we wound up before: so we
analyze that which was genised before, so that it is a regressio, etc, for that
way that you took in genesi, the same way you take in analysi, only you begin
at diverse ends. So in Logic we take an axiom, and resolve it into arguments,
and so in Grammar we take a sentence, and resolve it into words, and so when I
ask what a word signifies, he that tells me the signification of it does
analyze it, and so for the other Arts as we heard before in the doctrine of
Genesis. Now the Schools thought that genesis and analysis belong to Method in
Logic, which happily they might have from Aristotle, who intituleth his books
Analyticks, and thence they make method to be double (...), and (...), but they
belong to every Art, therefore must be taught (...): and again, there is
genesis and analysis of one and the same axiom, as when I seek for a cause, or
any other argument to make an axiom, or when I resolve it into a cause, etc.
so that when I ask, what is Latin for such a word, I genise it, and englishing
it I analyze it, so that they belong not to method, which is a disposition, for
they may be of one word; again, they may be as well of any other rule as of
method. Now because they did observe the analysis and genesis in method more
usually, than of art in general, therefore they thought them to belong only to
it; now indeed if I take any rule of art from other rules of art, I practice
method, therefore they may be special practices of method, for as [said before,
they may be in any other rule of Art, as well as in it. And method is not
double because of them, no more than any rule of Art is double, because of the
double use of it, and these are the life of Art, therefore those that will be
expert for practice of any Art, let them practice these. Now for the general
Arts, I think none will doubt, but that they belong to them, but for the
special Arts there may be some doubt. If you draw any deduction from any first
rule of any special Art, it is genesis; or if you draw deduction unto a first
rule from it, it is analysis, etc. So when you examine the Suns course by the
rule of Astronomy, it is genesis, analysis contra. This analysis if it be
imitated (for so it pleases the Lord to let us resolve his creatures) that we
may work alike, that is called imitatio: so that those that have writ so much
of imitatio, are to bring it hither, and imitatio is general, as we imitate
some analysis of some thing that is genised. And indeed all our practice is
nothing but genesis imitative of (...): so a child when he writes a copy by his
Masters example does imitate him, for first he looks at the line then at the
sentences, then at the words, and lastly at the letters. So an apprentise when
he works according as his master reaches him, does imitate his example: and
thus as we see Gods wisdom making up the thing, so we see man's work in
imitating God.

Vbi genesis desinit, ibi incipit analysis.
For if genesis be progressus a simplicibus ad composita and analysis regressus
a compositis ad simplicia, then genesis definit ubi incipit analysis: at, ergo;
again it follows that analysis conjuncta is vere hermineutica, or
interpretativa, for when I have an example, and do resolve the prattomenon,
giving to every Art his own, I tell you all that is to be seen in the thing, as
in this example, homo est bulla, but this later consecution will come in better
in the doctrine of prattomenon.

Prattomenon est res motu artis facta.
Prattomenon is that that the Art has done by his praxis, for actio must go
before passio, and praxis is before prattomenon, and there is nothing, but it
is made for man, and therefore must have a Prattomenon, for else the motion of
it would be little worth: now to prattomenon there belongs two things, (...),
and (...), for when Art has acted, and acted a work, it rests not there, for
it is for an use, therefore there must go with prattomenon, an use thereof. Now
this use may be confused with the prattomena of other Arts; so that this rule
is here to be taught, that the Arts for their precepts are distinct, but not
for the use of their prattomena: for use holds the prattomena of Arts together,
as in this example, all flesh is grass, if it be examined. For in this there is
the prattomenon of Logic, Grammar, Rhetoric, natural Philosophy, and lastly
the prattomenon of Divinity. Hence we say the use of Arts is general, but we
mean the use of the prattomenon of Arts, for the precepts of Art are not only
distinct, but the praxis to, and the prattomenon also till we come to the (...)
of it: as we may see in a Shipwright, his rule of Art is distinct, his motus is
distinct, and his prattomenon is distinct, till you come to look at the
manifold use of his prattomenon. So first the Shepherd has his prattomenon,
then the Grasier he uses the prattomenon of the shepherd, the Butcher uses
the prattomenon of the Grasier, and the Cook uses the prattomenon of the
Butcher, and they that eat the meat the Cook has dressed use his Prattomenon.
So that if the Philosopher will dispute as we say, he disputes as a Logician
making axioms, or syllogismes, and so takes the prattomenon of Logic, and
uses it in natural Philosophy. So the Tailor takes cloth made to his hand,
and he uses it to this, or that end, to make such, or such a garment with it.
There is also that (...), for as the prattomenon of every Art may be joined
with the prattomenon of other Arts: so it must be provided that they be not so
confused together, but that they may be severed again. So I can take magnitude
from a body by the rule of Geometry, for whilst I take the prattomenon of any
thing, and carry it to the Art to which it belongs, that is aphares^s, it
has been taught in Schools to be peculiar only to Geometry, but it does not
take magnitude from the thing, but sees is there distinct, and pulls it from
another, and gives that prattomenon its proper use, and so looks at it by that
Art whose prattomenon it is, and so does every Art whatsoever, ergo it is
general to them all.

Posterior ars prioris utitur opere.
This is from the use, so we may see in manual Arts, the Shepherd has his
prattomenon, and the Grasier he takes and uses it, and then the Butcher uses
the Grasiers prattomenon, and the Cook he uses the Butchers, etc. and thus we
have heard of Art in general.

Ars est generalis, aut specialis.
I showed you before, that in ente aprimo there were certain concrescentia, and
they were either (...) or (...): now these that are (...) are more general than
the other, for they do concrescere with themselves, and with the rest. As
Logic, Grammar, and Rhetoric do concrescere between themselves, and
cumomnibus aliis concrescentibus in the thing, ergo accordingly must the Arts
of them, namely, Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric be general: and because the
other do not concrescere with the rest, but only in part, ergo they are more
special, for though number and magnitude may concrescere with nature, but not
with all other Arts, as Logic, etc. therefore they are not so general. Now
things are more general or special in use, ergo the Art which still runs on
with the thing must be distributed accordingly, not that I here distribute Art
into genus and species, for in that sense they are all alike, yea the most
special Art is as general, as that which is most general, therefore take heed
of that, for I do not mean so, but I mean that some Arts are more general in
respect of the general use of their prattomenon, and some are more special in
regard of the special use of it, as one Art may be without another, and by
nature is before it, as one is before two, for so Logic needs not any other
Art, but all the rest have need of it.

Ars generalis est, quae est (...), circaens.
This general Art has for his subject every thing, ergo I thus define it; It
is the splendour or light that brings the thing to man from man: now in that it
is of general use, it must needs be ubique. But is ens in genere the subject of
the general Art? yes, but at the second hand, it is firstly the subject of ars
in genere. Now there are general to ens in genere these two adjuncts, (...) and
(...), therefore the Arts of them must be general, and in every thing: so that
if you look at ens quatenus ens, it belongs to ars, quatenus ars, if you look
at the reason or (...) in the thing, it belongs to Logic, Grammar, or
Rhetoric, so that look at ens, as the Meta-physitians teach it, and you shall
find all their doctrine to be here, or in Logic, or in Divinity, about the
efficiency of God. Now I say it is (...), and (...) non ens by consequence, but
non ens is more special, and belongs to contraria negantia in Logic, but ens
fictum is more general. I say (...), or circa, not but that it is in the thing,
for the Logicum artificium of God is in every thing: but it is in the outside
of it, and flies out of it, and acts outwardly to me, and in that respect I
call it circa, or (...): I say (...) also, for there can be no Art of non ens;
for non ens is no creature, and Art is the wisdom of God and therefore is of
that that is something. Now the Poets fall into many figments, but they mean
thereby things, and so they belong to some special Arts: and all Esops Fables
and other fables are but Allegories belonging to natural Philosophy, or to
moral Philosophy, though there may be fables of any art, for fabula belongs to
rhetoric which is a general art.

Ars generalis est rati nis, or orationis.
This general art running according to the general thing, that is, which is of
general use, is either the (...) or (...): now the (...) is more general,
because the thing must first be carried to me, before I can deliver it to
another. Again, the (...) is of absolute necessity in every thing, and
therefore must needs be there, whereas the (...) is therefore general because
it may be every where, but is not; For it is impossible for us to see any thing
without there be reason in it, ergo Logic the art that made it is most
general, and omnium (...) and therefore by nature is first, for other arts
cannot be without it, that may be without them: and thus now we are come to
Logic.

THE LOGICIANS SCHOOLMASTER.
The first Book.
CHAP. I.
Dialectica est ars been disserendi.
WE have heard what Encuclopaidia is, and of Ars, and that the subject of it is
Res, that has an (...): We have heard moreover the affections of Arts, and the
Species of them, that they are general of the thing acting, or special of the
thing acted. Now then the first thing in nature is reason, and here remember
what we heard before, that we may see as God governed things in general by
Arts: so in special reason by Logic; and it is most general, because it is of
most general use, not in regard of his Precepts, for so it is as special as
any, but for use, because there can be nothing without Logic, yet Logic may
be without speech, quantity, etc. ergo, this is most general. Now true it is,
that this, as also the (...) proceed from the thing in nature; yet Logic is
more general than any of the rest in regard of his use, for it is in it self in
speech, in quantity, etc. so that look where any art is, there Logic is: but
it does not follow, that where Logic is, there Arithmetic, Geometry, etc.
should be. Again, it pleased the Lord to make man his Steward under him over
all the Creatures, ergo in this respect it is necessary he should behold all
the creatures, to the employment of the use of the principal Lord, therefore he
must first see them, therefore must be prepared with such a faculty, that he
may see all things by it. Now this is omnium (...). That there is such an Art,
I show it thus.

If there be reason, then there is an art of it, because reason is ens a primo,
and it is for an end, therefore there must be that art, that is of reasons act.
For the proposition I proved it before, for reason was for an end; for the
Assumption none will deny, but that there is reason, if they will acknowledge
themselves to be but men. Our Author calls this art Dialectica, which comes of
(...), or (...), signifying secerno, separo, seligo; as for example, if there
were many things together, I would sever them, and this name fitteth reasons
act very well; for Logic is like a fire among the Chimists, for as fire will
congregare homogenia, and segregare heterogenia: so Logic is the fire of all
Arts, severing in the same act that fire does, Logic from Grammar, and
Rhetoric from both, etc. and then it congregates to Logic that which is
congreans to it, to Grammar that which is homogenie to it, etc. so that when it
invents, it picks out homogenies, it disposes them, and lays them in several
places, therefore this name Dialectica is very fitly given to this art, that
works this wonderful effect. Wonderful I may call it, for the Chimists can do
great effects, but the Logicians can do greater, for they can see Gods Logic
in the things, and had not man fallen, he might have come to have seen all the
wisdom of God in the Creatures. Now if Logic does (...), that is, congregare
homogenia, and segregare heterogenia by the same effect, it may fitly be so
called: now this art is so called, says Diog enes Laertius, first by Plato, if
he were the Author, he was more ancient than Aristotle, and antiquity should
have honor with good reason, if we have any reason: nay, Geometry is so called
from its subject rather, not metiri from antiquity; but Zenophon in his fourth
book of remembrances says, that Socrates was Platoes Schoolmaster, and he
never writ any thing, but Plato always: so that Socrates might read it, and
Zenophon hear it, for he was his Scholar, for Zenophon and Plato fuere
aequales, and Diogenes Laertius might read it in Plato, as he had noted it from
Socrates: and the Oracle witnesses that Socrates was the wisest man in his
time, and he was more wise than Aristotle; for Plato that was Socrates
Scholar, was his Master; so that for this name we see how fitly it agrees to
this art, and also the confirmation of it from antiquity. Now Aristotle calls it
Logic, I do not deny but the name is good, but it is later, as Laertius
witnesses that Aristotle gave it first, but it is from the subject ^eason, as
the names of most arts are. Arithmetic of (...), numerus; Geometry of (...),
terra, etc. but it does not so lively name this art as Dialectica does, which
names the life, and delivers the quintessence of Logic: so that Logica, as it
is conjugate of (...), names it well, but does not set it out with that vigor
that Dialectica does: So thus we see the reason of the name.

Est Ars.
What art is we have heard before, this it is, every thing has an (...), which
is accomplished by many petty (...), which causes the precepts of art to be
answerable thereunto; so that Logicks main end is been disserere: been
invenire, and been judicare are the petty acts of it. Now if Logica, and
Dialectica show the (...) and frame of man's reason, and direct it to the chief
end, its happiness, where the (...) esteth, then it is ars: at, ergo.

Est ars been disserendi.
First disserendi, for the explanation of the word, dissero comes of dis and
sero, sero signifies first to sow and dis a sunder, or dissero, that makes
disserui* to sow asunder; whether it be so used I find not, I for my part ever
read it in this Logical signification, and that which I told you of concerning
dialectica, is true (...) his, that as there was things to be sown, and a sati^
secernendorum, and a sowing them asunder: so there are first semina, which are
arguments in invention: Secondly, a satio of them, that is, a disposing of them
Axiomatically, and syllogistically; and lastly, a disserio, that is, a
disposing of them according to true method and order; so that in this disserere
we have the nature of reason quite through, as we had in Dialectica. So that
this name delivers also to us very fitly the very soul of Logic; for as in
man's body there is a soul or a form per quam res est, id quod est, and a
caeteris rebus distinguitur; so there is of this art, or rather of the subject
of it, reason: and as in other things the Lord has wrought so cunningly, that
we cannot see their forms, but only the next acts to the forms: so here our
Author desires to give to us the form of reason; which because he cannot do,
therefore he delivers it by the final cause, the next act to the form: so that
when he says dialectica est ars been disserendi, he means it is such an art
that has such a form that does been disserere, therefore I conclude thus: if
this be the happiness, the act, and soul of reason, then it is defined fitly
Ars been disserendi, at. ergo.

Been.
Here it is an adverb, for Grammar here does declare some controversy, and an
adverb is a part of speech joined to the verb to show his signification,
therefore been is here added to make perfect the act of this disserere, ergo,
been disserere is not two things, but one thing, and this is a commendation in
defining arts, to break the forms of them, as little as we can, because the
form is but one argument; and if we put two or more words into the form, we
break it into so many pieces. Now for the reason of been in a Art, this it is,
Art is the rule of the frame of Ens a primo: so Logic is the rule of reason,
as it is Gods creature, ergo, as it is good, ergo, been is here put in well to
show the Act of the goodness of this reason. Now since the fall of man, his
reason is weakened, and darkened, and so there is a bona ratio, and a mala ratio*
though mala ratio is not ratio indeed, but the error of rario, and this act is
to guide reason, as it does been disserere, not (...) disserere, ergo, it is
well put in to sever them. For if Dialectica be ars rationis been agentis, then
it is ars been disserendi only, and not male disserendi, at, ergo. So Grammar
is the Art only been loquendi, though it discrie male loqui: now here among
the Logicians are many questions, and controversies against our Author. As some
except against the name dialectica, and makes it more special than here Ramus
takes it, and they distribute reason into three parts, Dialectica, Sophistica,
and Apodictica, which was the distribution of the Aristotelians, not of
Aristotle himself; but Simplicius that chief fellow, was the first man that
brought it up, and afterward it was generally received in Schools from him. By
Dialectica they understand all probable reason, and probality in Schools is
taken in two significations, sometime it is taken for a contingent true axiom,
ergo it belongs to one little particle of the doctrine of axioma. Sometimes it
is taken for axioma dubium, or quaestio, and then it belongs to the doctrine of
Syllogismes; so that we shall find probability in these two places; but to make
Dialectica so special, is to make a Camel go through the eye of a needle; is
(...) no more general then so? does it not go through all judgment, yea and
invention too?

Again, for Apodictica, which is de necessariis, that belongs to a necessary
axiom, for no syllogismes are necessary, but the axioms which they consist
of; but the syllogistical judgment is the same both of necessary and
contingent axioms, and a syllogism of contingent propositions is necessary as
well as that, which is of necessary axioms. Now for Sophistica, that is shut
out, for if I see the truth, what need I look farther: and whereas they allege
that it is of the apparency of truth, what care I for that? yet it is
counterfeit: so that they would have all Logic to consist in a necessary and a
contingent axiom, for no syllogismes are so: and that is the reason, that
Ramus denies that demonstration; for their necessary that they speak of, is in
axiom, not in syllogism. Again, Sophistica is general to all arts, and not
special to Logic, for all arts have their errors. Now the Schools distribute
Logic into Dialectica, Grammatica, and Rhetorica, which savours of a notorious
equivocation. (...) indeed signifies ratio, and oration, but this is only a
distributing of the name, not of the thing, as if they should say Logica
signifies ratio, or speech: many also there are that find fault with Ramus, for
the reason of this name, some say it comes of (...), colloquor; but that is not
because of their collocutio; but because of their reasoning in their speech
together: but again, what has Logic to do with words, and to name Logic from
speech has no reason at all, for it may be without it. There is also a great
question, whether Dialectica be Ars, as Scaliger will have it; because says he
opus post se reliquit; or if it be facultas, as Craelius holds, or whether it
be scientia, as others say. These are bables, we have heard that the wisdom of
God is Ars in the thing, it is called scientia by a metonimy of the adjunct for
the subject, which is properly the judgment of a rule of art: so that here is
a double trope, first a metonimy of the adjunct for the subject, the knowledge
of the art for the art it self: then a Synechdoche of the part for the whole,
the rule for the whole art, for facultas, that is the subject ratio: ergo,
Craelius speaks by metonimy of the subject for the adjunct; for the faculty is
reason it self; so that dialectica est ars: as for their distribution in
Schools, that ars does (...), and scientia only (...), or contemplare, it is
a babble, we see scientia is the knowledge of the Art, and ars is rei, as
A^ithmetick is of number, Geometry of magnitude, etc. and Logic of reason, so
that the scientia or Theory of Art is fallacia accidentis, to take it for the
art it self, and is as if we should say, a painted man is a true man, ergo,
when we say a man is a good Logician, we mean a man has that knowledge of
reason, and so for other arts; so that our knowledge of an art is no more of
the essence of it, then my knowledge of a man is of the essence of the man.
Again, when I say the knowledge of an Art, I say two things, knowledge, and
art, which are subject and adjunct, ergo, knowledge is but accidental to the
art. For been disserendi there are many adversaries, and one grand enemy, some
say it is rather ars been utendi ratione, but (...) is an adjunct to art, and
it is (...) not artis, as for example, we cannot say, the Merchant, or Mariner
uses the Shipwrights art, but his work, but this is the chief absurdity that
it breaks the form into pieces.

Kickerman cries out against Ramus for this definition, and says it is a
trope, ergo, ought not to be in art, he forgets his rules, for Rhetoric is a
general art, ergo, it may be every where, but says he, is it not better to
teach with proper words, then with tropical, they are fit for simple men, not
for judicious? I will confess it, and Ramus too, for Grammar is before
Rhetoric, ergo, should be preferred: yet Tropes may be as plain, and as
significant as other words sometimes; but I make no doubt, but that disserere
is ever used in other sense then this Logical signification: but if it be, let
him give me a better word; but he cannot, because he does not but says, logica
est ars dirigendi mentem in cognitione rerum* and so breaks all in pieces.
Again, what does dirigere here? It belongs to art in general, for dirigere is
as large as regere, and regere as regula, and regula as praeceptum; so that
here he cannot be content to horse me up to art in general, for the genus
only, but for the form too. Again for men's, he cannot abide Tropes; but what
means he by men's? (...) signifies properly the divine part of the soul of man,
and sometimes it is taken for the faculties of the soul, but here he must take
it for reason, ergo, here are two Tropes, first a metonimy of the subject for
the adjunct, the faculties for the soul it self. Secondly, a Synecdoche of the
part for the whole, reason for the soul. For cognitio it comes of con and
notio, to see things laid together, and it is the judgment of an axiom, and
belongs to it, which is but a little particle of Logic.

Lastly, for res, that is as general as ens, which is as general as ars, ergo,
thus he hoists me up, and down, first to ars in general; then down again to
natural Philosophy, for men's belongs thither, then to one piece of Logic: then
again up to ars; and thus much for the explanation of the rule: the practice of
it stands in this: God has made all things for man, therefore he must have an
eye to see them, and all of them must be liable to it, ergo, this rule tells us,
first, if we would look at any thing we must take it with us, for it is ars
been disserendi, and so we shall see it: so that if we would do any thing with
reason this pulls us by the ear and says it is the art to reason well: so that
here we may see the commendation of this art not only in respect of the
general use of it, but in that it teaches us how to work by it, as God has
done before us: so that it first teaches us Gods will and pleasure in things;
and then what he would have us to do in the managing and governing of them: and
here we may see, that all things at the first were made for one man.

Eodemque sensu Logica dicta est.
We have heard what Dialectica is, and have seen the reason of every word
therein. Now Ramus does commorari upon this rule, and tells us that eodem sensu
Logica dicta est: the reason of it is, because here he tells us of a
controversy betwixt him and Aristotle, which I prevented before, when I spoke
of their distribution of Logic into Dialectica, Apodictica, and Sophistica.
Now Ramus only sets down the rule according to truth, for thus it stands, if
Dialectica delivers the Art of reason, then Logic and it are all one, but this
is the Art that appertains to reason, and that is but one, ergo, so then if
Logica signify the same that Dialectica does, therefore there is the same
definition of them both, for they are one in individuo, as the Schools speak,
ergo in form, ergo but two names signifying the same thing.

Dicta est.
Meaning that that name of Aristotle's is the same with that Socrates gave; and
whilst Plato does interpret Logica to be (...), and Aristotle says it is
(...): they grant it to be the same with Dialectica, and for the distinction of
Logic into those three, they must needs hold that those parts contain as much
as the whole, but they do not by their own confession; so that this
distribution was made by Simplicius, which did not understand Aristole, or at
leastwise Logic, otherwise let them tell me any thing in Logic, that is not
in Dialectica, according to our Authors definition of it. For Ramus will not
deny but Dialectica and Logica are taken specially in Aristotle, as ratio is
sometimes used for argumentum, but that is by a Synecdoche, for he wanting
special names calls things by general words: as an exhalation he calls a fume,
whereas a vapor is also a fume, and often he uses it in his Politics,
Eodemque sensu, etc. that is, Logic is so defined, ars been disserendi, even
as Dialectica is, and whatsoever other conceits men have had concerning
Dialectica, they are out of the way, for if they will say there is a necessary,
a probable, and a sophistical argument, as many do speak, that belongs to an
axiom, not to an argument, and whereas they say syllogismus is necessarius,
that is Apodicticus, contingens and sophisticus, if we look at a necessary
syllogism in Barbara, why there may be a contingent syllogism, that is a
syllogism consisting of contingent axioms, for so they mean, nay I will make a
false syllogism in Barbara, that shall be true and good, as omnis homo est
lapis, omnis afinus est homo, ergo omnis asinus est lapis: and a demonstrative
syllogism, as omne animal rationale est visible, omnis homo est animal
rationale, ergo omnis homo est visibilis: so that these lie not in the
syllogism, for then a dialectical syllogism would not be an apodictical, or
sophistical, aut contra, but these lie in the axiom: for why? whatsoever is
necessary is true, and a contingent axiom does pronunciare aliquid esse verum,
though it may be false, ergo whither truth belongs, thither they belong; now
truth and falsehood follow upon affirmation, and negation, and they arise from
an axiom, neither does a man say aliquid esse, aut non esse, when he means an
argument alone, till there be a disposition, ergo those that make a
distribution of syllogismes by their matter deceive us: so that here we see it
is true that our Author tells us, that eodem sensu Logica dicta est.

CHAP. II.
Dialecticae parts duae sunt, inventio, and dispositio.
NOw we come to the second rule, having heard that Dialectica est ars been
disserendi; this rule needs nothing to make it plain, but that which went
before scilicet ars in general, to show this to be an Art, and the (...) of
every ens a primo, to show that this Arts end is been differere, both which we
heard of in the doctrine of Art, therefore this rule showing what is pictured
in this book needs no more explanation, therefore it is the first rule of all,
for it gives light to all the rules following, and takes light of none:
therefore does this second rule give light to the former? no, it rather
obscures it, for I must first know what Dialectica is before I hear it divided,
for how can I divide I know not what? therefore this rule will give no light to
the first, therefore never a rule following, and the first rule is a comment to
this. Dialectica, that is, that which was ars been disserendi, has two parts,
been invenire argumenta, and been disponere argumenta: why? because they are
portions of this Art tending ad been disserendi parts. Can Dialectica, this
Art be parted? If it be that wisdom of God that is one most simple being, how
comes it to be divided into branches? I have showed howsoever it is one in God,
yet he has made reason twisted in the thing, so that before it can been
disserere, it must been invenire, and been judicare: so that now reason as it
is the subject of Logic, namely as it does act, and is for an (...) and reason
according to his frame has these two operations, invenire and judicare,
therefore the Art being the Idea of this frame, that has two parts, must have
two parts, for Logic behold reason, not as it is a faculty belonging to
natural Philosophy, but as it acts. Now thus I argue. If reasons frame run into
two heads, or actions, that it may (...), then the Art must do so, now that
reason is framed to run into these two heads, thus I showed it, All things were
made for man, therefore he must have an eye to see them: now all things that
God has made are considered in themselves, or with others, for the world is
one consisting of many parts, and they are considered alone or with others,
therefore man's reason must run accordingly. God only is entire in himself
having no respect to any other thing, he is simple, and has no parts,
therefore he is not liable to Logic: all other things are composed, that it
might appear, that he is simple, so that every thing else is composed, or
disposed with others, yet first it must be in it self, in use: for if I say a
brick-wall, there must needs first be bricks, and what use have we of words
alone in Grammar, but in Syntax, and first we must see the Etimologie of them:
nay in every Art except Rhetoric there is no use of the first part without the
second, neither is invention ever without judgment, therefore when every thing
has his double consideration, there must be two parts of reason, for as things
are, so must reasons act be, for every thing must be so administered as that it
be liable to reason, and be considered alone before it be disposed: therefore
invention is first, so that any man that has reason will acknowledge the
necessity of this distribution: now these two parts are called Invention and
Disposition. First for the reason of the name Invention, man was to see all
Gods creatures, and so to see his order in them: now how should man see them?
were they written in his understanding? no more than Paul's steeple is in my
eye, for man came furnished into the world only with Logic, Grammar,
Rhetoric and Divinity, neither with the knowledge of these Arts, but with the
faculties of them, and therefore the Arts must needs be there, for we read the
Arts in the things: so that for Arithmetic, Geometry and nature, man was to
learn them by the creatures, as he was also to learn the knowledge of Logic,
Grammar, Rhetoric and Divinity. The reason is this, the Genesis of every thing
is Gods, and man must see the rules of Art, therefore man must see them from
singulars, by analysis: now then if man must learn these, and know them by his
senses observation, induction and experience, then he must seek, and find out
these, for they are not written in him: again, whereas every thing is in
disposition, it is requisite that man find them out, and see them severally,
therefore in this respect is this Art of reason called Invention, namely as he
is sent by God to find out these things in his creatures; now if man must find
them out with this act of his eye of reason, then is it fitly called invention,
at, ergo. And this teaches man thus much, that he is to seek out, and find
this wisdom of God in the world, and not to be idle; for the world, and the
creatures therein are like a book wherein Gods wisdom is written, and there
must we seek it out. Why is not this first Art called Disposition, because that
is more familiar, and easy to us, for all things are disposed; but we are by
this Art to sever them, and to look at them simply, so that this name teaches
man what he is to do in this act of his reason, namely, invenire argumenta, as
in mists to look at the elements, etc. Now Kickerman cannot away with this
distribution, and yet says nothing to this purpose against it, for I suppose
Invention to be an ambiguous name, and have equivocation with it, as I do not
deny, but it is taken sometimes for judgment, but that is tropically, yet
while my Author tells me what it is, that is sufficient to know his meaning how
here it is taken.

Object. But Invention is never without judgment says he, no inventions use
is ever without judgments use: so he may say Etimologie is never without
Syntax, I but, says he, you cannot invent without judgment, therefore they
are no parts of Logic? as for example, a chest is made of wood, by this rule
materia est causae ex qua res est, therefore here is syllogistical judgment,
which is concluded a definitione, and this is Aristotle's demonstration, as if
you should make a syllogism thus, That whereof the thing is, that is materia,
But wood is that ex quo the Chest is, ergo. But here is only Logicks practice,
and not any rule of Art taught us. The question betwixt Ramus and him is,
whether any rule of invention belongs to judgment. This it is, the rules of
invention give precepts of nothing at all concerning judgment, aut contra:
therefore these are the true parts of Logic: and whilst he argues from the
precept to the rule, it is fallacia accidentis, as if he should reason:
Socrates est animal, animal est genus, ergo Socrates est genus; whereas we know
the thing animal is not that Logical notion, neither Socrates, for they belong
to natural Philosophy, but genus is no adjunct attributed unto them, so this
invention is only of simple arguments, and of the simple consideration of
them, and therefore our Art runs along according to Gods order, and though we
cannot practice any rule of invention, but by judgment, yet it does not
therefore follow that they are the same, for it is as if he should say this,
homo, quae pars orationis? Nomen, here is the practice of Syntax, ergo
Etimology, and Syntax, are all one.

Inventio est prima pars Dialecticae de inveniendis argumentis,
We have heard of the reason of the name Invention, why it is given to the
first part, and that with great reason, for we must find by much seeking before
we can see things. Again, Logic being the first help to see Gods wisdom in his
creatures, and this use of invention being to be found in the thing, it is hard
to find, therefore it is fitly called invention from the act of it: So again in
dispute, a man is fain to seek a third argument to prove his question.
Judgment the second part is properly the act of our understanding, when it
looks at arguments disposed, therefore here it is a metonimy of the adjunct for
the subject, when it is put for dispositio: and again it is properly the
disposing of arguments together, which is of Axioms and Syllogismes.

Method does not look at the disposing of arguments, but at the placing of
axioms: so that if I would distribute Dilectica thus, Dalecticae parts duae
sunt, inventio, and dispositio: dispositio is judicum, or Methodus, judicium
est axiomatic^m, or syllogisticum: my reasons are these: the arts of reason are
performed by the internal senses, the best fancy invents best, and that is
performed by a hot brain: cogitation serves judgment axiomatical, and
syllogistical, and that is dry, and the best memory is an ayrie moist brain:
ergo, whilst I see from this reason in natural Philosophy, that axiomatical and
syllogistical judgment are thus combined, and the other severed, I think this
art should be thus divided according to their instruments, as nature has
severed them. Again, our Author distributeth the second part into axioma, and
discursus, and under discursus he places syllogismus and Methodus: now these
two cannot be joined together: for why? what has method to do with
syllogismus? Method does not dispose syllogismes, but axioms. Again, the use
of a syllogism is to make clear that that is obscu^e, and to manifest truth;
and the rule of truth belongs to axiomatical judgment if it be clear; if not,
then to syllogistical judgment: but we bring our question after again to an
axiom to see the truth of it, ergo, these two work about one thing, namely
about truth, therefore they should be combined together. So that syllogistical
judgment is to make clear that, which axiomatical judgment could not, yet the
doctrine of axioma is before, and syllogistical judgment has for his subject
axioma dubium. The exceptions against this rule are these: first, Kickerman
says, There is no invention, but there is judgment withal, that is confessed
to be true in use, as in Grammar the use of Etimologie is never without Syntax,
but the use is one thing, and the rule another: there is no precept of
invention, that belongs to judgment aut contra: then he says, Who can invent,
but he must also judge? for (says he) must not a man judge a cause before he
find it? this is also a fallace of use: we cannot find a rule, but we use both
invention and judgment, but by his argument, there should be no judgment, but
syllogistical: then again he says, invention was used for a third argument,
and not as Ramus takes it.

True it is, the Schools thought it only to belong to syllogismes, and that
there was but the use of an argument, not the doctrine of it, but thus I argue:
Is invention of a third argument, ergo, it is of an argument, ergo, then it
belongs not to judgment: for the doctrine of a simple conceit, as he calls it,
is distinct from the doctrine of judgment. Again, if it be a third Argument,
there was two before, ergo, there are Arguments disposed. Again, when a third
Argument is found out, do we not dispose pars consequen^ quaestionis in
propositione, and antecedens in assumptione. and so make the proposition an
axiom, and likewise the assumption: ergo, an argument is placed in an axiom as
well as in a syllogism by their own confession: therefore we see evidently
here, that the use of an Argument is common both to syllogistical and
axiomatical judgment. And I would ask, whether causa est cujus vi res est,
when it is disposed with the effect, be the same, and have the same definition
in an axiom, that it has in a syllogism? If they say it is the same, ergo,
common to both, ergo, the doctrine of causa, and effectum, etc. must go before
the doctrine of an axiom, and a syllogism, and Method, and must be distinct
from them all: for as method is distinct from ax^omatical, and syllogistical
judgment, and is before them, because an axiom may be without them, not
contra: So is the doctrine of arguments before the doctrine of axioms for the
same reason: and Kickerman confess^th as much, whilst he distributes Logic
into terminus simplex, complexus, and discursus: he says Authors of Arts are
called Inventors, as Hypocrates of Medicina, Aristotle of Logic, but did they
not all judge them? yes, but does it therefore follow, that invention and
judgment are not diverse things, so that this distribution stands firm and
sure, and as for his conceit to have invention taught in a syllogism, we shall
hear of it when we come there, for it is very silly. Now for his distribution
into three parts, it comes to one with ours, for his first part terminus
simplex, so much of it as is Logic belongs to invention, so terminus complexus
belongs to axiomatical judgment, and discursus to syllogismes, and he would
have it belong to method too. But first the absurdities are these, he does not
follow reasons (...), which Logic delivers, for conceptus simplex is properly
the judgment of a thing, when we see the truth thereof: so that this is not so
proper as invention. Now when I say inventio, I say that part that directs my
reason to seek out things secretly wrapped up in nature; again whilst he makes a
distribution of the precepts of Logic, by these precepts we must understand
the systema of Logic by a Metonimie of the material cause, and when he says a
systema of precepts, that is a far fetched trope: again we never have more
parts than two in a distribution, but there is some thing left out, for to
admit of his distribution: but is there not a community betwixt his terminus
complexus, and discursus, namely dispositio? ergo, here he wants the rul^ of
dispositio, and so makes his Art imperfect. Now he P^eads for the antiquity of
it, which we are not to admit of, but of truth: why? his Logic was not in
ancient time, is it therefore naught now?

The use of this rule is this, as we heard before, Logic took my reason, and
told me the marks to shoot at, so here it tells me that I must first invent, and
so I shall go orderly to work, and then dispose, for the Brick-layer must first
have bricks before he can make a brick-wall, and the Grammarian must have words
before he can make a sentence, and (as before) arguments are more general than
axioms, axioms than syllogismes, etc. for the one may be without the other,
not contra, as one is more general than two, two than three, etc. because one
may be without two, or three, etc. not contra: so first we must invenire and
then judicare, that we may been disserere, for there is nothing betwixt them,
but when we have stones then we may build, and whilst we find in the creatures
of God things considered, as they are in themselves, and then in respect of
others, therefore so must reason be distributed into his two acts, and now we
come to invention, which is prima pars Dialecticae de inveniendis argumentis,
first we have heard the reason of the name inventio betokening actively: the
reason inventing or finding out, and howsoever we may find it taken for the
whole act of Logic, yet it is a Synecdoche, and though we cannot but use
judgment in it, yet it is but inventio, ergo, est pars. He rather keeps this
word than membrum, though it be more general, because it is more in use: and
again, because in Schools membrum has been usually taken for the members of a
man, as head, arms, legs, or the like: so that not having told us what membrum
or pars is, he chooses the more usual Dialectica; we heard concerning
Dialectica before, therefore to hear it again were superfluous, it is
Dialecticae, ergo, it is the integrum to it, as inventio is the membrum. Now
indeed the Rhetoricians have taken invention to be a part of Rhetoric, and so
judgment, but when they come to explain them, they teach Logic: and their
dissertus is not only Rhetorician, but the Grammarian, and Logician, their
Orator is omnium horarum homo, a man for every turn, so that he is a man in
whom there is a confusion of all Arts: neither is Orator belonging to
Rhetoric, but he is a general man, that has all the Arts, and chiefly he is a
Logician: now the Rhetoricians did imagine, because they used invention, and
judgment, therefore they belonged to Rhetoric: so they might say of Law,
Arithmetic, Geometry, natural Philosophy, or any other Art: now then those are
the two parts of Dialectica only; and whereas men say commonly Ramus Logic
serves for Rhetoric, not for natural Philosophy, as some do, they speak
simply, for what use of Logic has a Rhetorician in any other Art, as in
Politics, is it not to prove some Thesis? therefore if he dispute here as a
Politican by the rule of Logic, so may a natural Philosopher do, so causa,
effectum, subjectum, adjunctum, and all other arguments are the same in all
Arts, ergo, to make a special invention to Rhetoric, and another to nature, or
any other Art, is simple. Now it is pars Dialecticae, we do not mean to make
pars a genus of invention here, for it is a Logical notion, and belongs to
Logic: but the reason of this definition is to bring in Dialectica, so that
when we will analyze this definition, we must not say pars is genus, but
Dialectica est integrum.

Prima pars.
Est prima pars, because it is more general than judgment, for it may be where
judgment is not, for simple arguments are before the composition of arguments
both in nature and working. The Carpenter must have his timber in several
pieces to square them before he can join them together. Quod precedit natura in
Dialectica, id prima pars est Dialec. at inventio: ergo,

De inveniendis argumentis.
As if he should say, inventio, that act of reason does invenire argumenta, de
inveniendis, why? he means the precepts of this act, for in this part de
inveniendis argumentis is the subject, but these precepts of invention are
first concerning a seeking: but to find what? it teaches me first to hunt, and
then to find a Hare, as if he should say, take the rule of causa, that Hound,
and hunt, and you shall find a cause: as if he should say, would you seek a
cause? first seek the artificiality, then the primative, then how it is simplex
and consent aneum etc. and so come to causa, so that invention is not taken for
judgment here, but for the seeking, and finding out of arguments.

Argumentis.
De argumentis inveniendis: Arguments to be sought out: why? because the Lord
has so commanded man to seek out his reason in his creatures, so that we must
seek an argument, which is a term in latin belonging to Law, as the
Rhetoricians thought, but it is more general to Logic: but because they used
(...), which in Greek is to plead like an Orator, and so arg^e^e in Latin,
therefore they thought them proper to them, yet argumentum here signifies any
thing of arguere, that can charge another thing, and so does (...) in Greek: so
here we see what invention seeks out, argumentum, and by it the thing, but at
the second hand, quatenus there is Logismos in it: so that invention takes not
the thing immediately, but by argumentum, so that argumentum is here as the
Schools speak, concretum, that is, it is argumentum, as it does arguere: so
that when we hear argumentum, we must consider two things, first ens the
subject of Art, and then the (...), and so by that the thing: as I see a Post
with my outward eye by the color, so that invention sees the thing mediante
argumento: then observe again that argumentum is the subject of invention: now
the Schools make a simple conceit, and so make a great ado about vox, as
Kickerman and Schaliger do to bring it into Logic, they say vox quatenus it
consists of letters, belongs to Grammar, but quatenus it signifies a thing,
it belongs to Logic: but as for example, homo, what arguments are homo, and
the thing it signifies? subjectum, and adjunctum, why? but these are but
examples thereof, shall these come into Logic, because Logicks use is here? So
the wall is white, is subjectum, and adjunctum, does that axiom therefore
belong to Logic? but let them but go to the definition of vox, and they shall
see it belongs to Grammar, quatenus it signifies a thing: but they may see it
in the general rule of ars generalis: for as ens is the subject of Logic at
the second hand, so also of Grammar. Now he prosecutes vox, and says it is to
be looked at ad modum significationis, or jure significata, or the like: ad
modum significationis is categorematica, or suncategorematica, as homo:
because, says he, it signifies that thing, which may be an argument: why homo
does not signify an argument, it belongs to natural Philosophy, and the
argument is but an affection to the thing that homo signifies, but what reason
is there that homo should come into Logic, because it names the thing that is
categorematica? it is fallacia accidentis: that meat you bought on Saturday,
you did eat on Sunday; but it was raw meat you bought on Saturday, ergo. But
for vox therefore it comes not into Logic, only there are conjugata and
notatio, which belong to Logic, not because they signify things, for there is
not in them any respect of the thing, and the name, but in conjugates how one
name is derived from another, and in notation the reason of the name from some
argument. Then he says vox categorematica is primae, or secundae intentionis,
which he knows not how to utter but by certain comparisons, as of a dyal, the
style is prima intentionis, and the shadow secundae: but this vox primae
intentionis is the word that names the thing, vox secundae is the word of Art.
Now true it is this distribution is an old said saw, but there is no such
thing, it is the same fallace ab accidente. Homo and genus do not signify the
same thing, homo is primae intentionis at the first hand, genus of the second,
but genus does not signify the same that homo does: again genus has his
signification, as well as homo, that appears thus, because it has a distinct
definition from homo, therefore they are distinct re: so that genus is primae
intentionis, to the thing it names, as homo is primae to that thing it names.
Again, are there not terms of Art as well in Grammar, etc. as in Logic? why
then does he bring it in here? as homo est nomen, here nomen is the name of the
thing, not the thing it self, ergo, homo, and nomen, are not voces primae and
secundae intentionis, for they are diverse things: so argumentum is concretum,
that is, it is evermore with the thing, not that it is the thing, as homo is
argumentum, and it does arguere, which is an adjunct to the thing, for so every
Logical notion is an adjunct to the thing it self, but here it is, because we
cannot sever the Logical notion from the thing, because it is never but in re,
that is the reason why argumentum is always in the concrete, whereas (...) may
be severed from the thing, but this rule bids us only find, but tells us not
what as yet: so that it runs most orderly.

We have heard the first part of Logic to be called Invention, in respect we
are set to seek out the simples in the work of God. De inveniendis argumentis,
because there is never a rule here, but it is a blood-hound to find a Deer:
Again, we heard it was an argument that was to be hunted, not the thing but the
argument, the (...) in the thing, for the thing does not belong to Logic, but
to every Art, and Logic does look at the thing, by the logismos, as the
outward eye beholds bodies, by light and color: and this is called argumentum,
a concrete, because Logic is never severed from the thing, nor the thing from
Logic, for we cannot see the thing but by reason, therefore because these are
inseparably together, for that cause the subject of invention is argumentum: so
that in argumentum we are to consider two things, first the thing as it is the
subject of Art in genere, and of the general Arts: and then that same
bird-lime, that is, in the thing, whereby it may cleave to another thing, which
bird-lime is the Logical notion; as when I say a chest is made of wood: in
Greek they have two names for it, (...) is the arguing, the abstract as it
were, (...) the argument: but our Author rather keeps the concrete, because it
is always with the thing, and cannot be severed from it: then the subject of
invention is ens at the first hand, but argumentum at the second. The term
argumentum (as we heard) is from Law, as the Greek names also be, (...) is
concione concionare, and thus we see how far Logicks rule reaches, and this
same argumentum was used at the first, for that which we call praedicatum a
(...) a barbarous word made first by Boethius, but it is more general, as we may
see by the third argument in a syllogism, which may be an antecedent in the
proposition, or assumption, as well as the consequent.

Kickerman says vox is the subject of this first part, and he has many
distinctions of it, as it is abstracta, or concreta; this is nothing but a
distribution of nomen into substantivum, and adjectivum, quatenus voces, and
therefore the old Grammarians did so teach it: if they look at the thing, they
belong to conjugates in Logic, and there we shall see them to signify the
same thing; one absolutely the other as it has respect to another, and they
are there, not quatenus they are words, nor quatenus they signify, if we go no
farther, but quatenus they contain, symbolize the nature of first arguments.
Again, he says, vox is univoca, or aequivoca: alas there is vox univoca in the
world, as homo his example is vox aequivoca: if we call a painted man a man, as
we may call tropically, but this belongs to a distribution, and is but an
example thereof, not a rule: as canus is sidus, or animal terrestre, or
m^rinum, is a distribution, ex adjunctis: so that to make a precept of an
example is great confusion: and the definition of a thing will take away the
ambiguity of the word. More distinctions he has, which all are nothing, but
several sorts of aequivocation, as if he should say, there may be aequivocation
of Grammar, and there may be aequivocation in Rhetoric, etc. he tells us
further; that a word must be certa, absoluta, etc. what has Logic to do with
this? let Grammar look to that, for it breaks the definition of vox est nota
qua, etc. if it name not the thing fitly; as if vox should say, vox est vota
qua unumquodque vocatur; will you call a man a spade, then he brings in
predicament, and praedicables. The world of Logicians does imagine, that
Architas Tarentinus was the first inventor of them, and taught them to his
Scholar Pythagoras, now the reason that brought them in was this, that they
might be furnished with matter to work about Logic. So that they were
storehouses for them to lay up things one way or other, either analogice or a
latere.

Kickerman approves that purpose of them, for says he, things do not belong to
Logic, now the Logic in a predicament is this, the order of things being
placed one before another, and so he says the predicaments are of great use,
for the finding of simples: Secondly they conduce for terminus complexus,
because we see what may be a subject, and a predicate in a proposition: then
another use of them (he says) is for discursus, for when we know what is
above, and below, we may quickly know what is in the midst; and they are also
of use for method.

For the first Invention of them, they are not storehouses, for there is
nothing but has an (...), therefore belongs to some Art: so that the Arts are
the true storehouses of things: so that his table of substantia is nothing but
a draught of natural Philosophy, but I must tell you untowardly, and that of
quantity nothing but a draught of the Mathematics, that of quality nothing but
a draught of natural and moral Philosophy. Other things he brings in, which are
not so as he makes, ubi to be a genus of intus and for as: ad aliquid comes
under relates. Quando belongs to adjunctum, etc. but because Logicks use is
there, they think they belong to Logic, by the same argument let them bring
all Arts in Logic: but says he, the things themselves belong to the special
Arts, but for the series they belong to Logic, that is, as if he should say,
for their Logical notion they belong thither, but when he says series, he is
presently in method: for his series is nothing but methods work; and if he
reason that Arithmetic, Geometry, Nature, etc. belong to Logic, because
methods use is there, that is fallacia accidentis, now the doctrine is one, and
the use is another, the doctrine is distinct, the use confused: then again,
whereas he says here you have genus summum, and subalternum, why we heard of
them in the distribution ex effectis: but because substantia is corporea, or
incorporea, here is a distribution as a genus into his species: therefore,
says he, this belongs to Logic: so let him bring in the daubers Art too; for
Logicks use is there. Thus do they make a confusion, not seeing things
distinct. Again, whereas they help to find out a subject, and predicate, they
have shut out some, namely incompleta, as a man's hand, which may be a subject
or a predicate, and when I say the world is made of the first matter, is not
the first matter here a predicate? so they shut out transcendentia, as ens: but
is not homo ens, therefore a predicate? Again, is not a predicate an argument,
ergo, artificiale, aut inartificiale? if artificiale, then fetched out of some
Art, therefore let me carry my subject to the Art whereunto it belongs, and
there will I find any predicate: again for the help of a medium, is every
medium a genus subalternum? Suppose we shall fetch a medium, that is genus
summum, or an individuum, but let me go to the Art of my subject, and if I will
take that which is above it, or below it, there I shall have it done to my
hand. Again, he says the doctrine of the predicaments serve for definitions,
and differences, etc. Why let me go to the Art, and there I shall see every
thing taught to my hand, so that the doctrine of predicaments quatenus they are
adumbrations of the Arts, are to be seen in their Arts. But to reason, that
because Logicks use is there, therefore they belong to Logic, is very absurd.
Again, if there be this predicament, to show the summum and subalternum genus,
and species subalterna, and infima, why is there not a predicament to know
causa? for by the same reason, there should be a predicament to find out
causas, and let them say what they can of the predicaments, we shall find all
in the doctrine of distribution, and definition, as substantia is corporea, aut
incorporea is a distribution, and belongs to natural Philosophy; and so the
next distribution of substantia corporea, etc. so if we take quantity, we shall
see we are in some special Arithmetic, or Geometry, etc. for the predicables,
genus, species, differentiae, proprium, accidens, these we know are special
arguments, the two first belong to distributio ex effectis: differentia belongs
to forma, for it is called forma, in respect of the thing formed; and
differentia, as it distinguishes the thing from all other things. If they
shall say, I, but here is distributio per formam, that is accidental to forma,
and belongs to distributio, so that forma is the better word taken from the
nature of it, for proprium is nothing but propriam adjunctum, and there it is
taught as it has respect to his subject, not as it is an act, and accidens is
also a special kind of adjunct.

Now the laws of Art require, that every precept deliver the principia thereof,
and therefore be either definitions, distributions, or properties, which they
after a sort seeing, made these to be helps to the predicaments; now for
substantia quoad res it belongs to natural Philosophy, quoad serim or ordinem
to method: for quantity it belongs to Mathematics? quality to moral
Philosophy, yea, and to natural too: for relates, they belong to Logic; but
there can be no series or order of them, for they are but examples of relates,
as causa and effectum are relates; but only examples, ergo, infimae species:
for actio it is nothing but motus; quando is nothing but the adjunct of time,
passio a subject, ubi a special kind of subject also of place, situs belongs to
Geometry, otherwise it is an adjunct, and habitus is a special kind of adjunct,
therefore there can be nothing beneath these, but examples: so that do but look
at his table, and you shall see him presently go out, as he says qualitas is
naturalis, and moralis: this is false, for naturalis, aut moralis are two
examples of that adjunct qualitas, and justice is no more a quality because it
is a virtue, then Socrates est genus, because animal is genus: so that
argumentum is the true subject of Invention, and not the predicables, and
predicaments, any further than they are arguments.

Argumentum est quod ad aliquid arguendum affectum est.
Now we come to the definition of argumentum; we heard that Dialectica is a
general Art, and is conversant about every thing, and about non ens gratia
entis, now then argumentum must be in every thing, therefore it is quod, any
thing whatsoever, and thus it is demonstrated, because Logic is a general Art;
so thus here we see argumentum est quod, which is as large as aliquid, quod
affectum est: we know this is a borrowed word, affection is a disposition
natural, as the eye is affected to see: but that we may see it the better, we
will dig deeper, there is an efficient working, then his working, which is
eff^ctio, which as it is about it, so it is affectum, ad effectum: as if my
hand be wounded with a sword, there is first an efficient, then there is
wounding which is effectio, then there is a wound which is effectum, then my
hand is the affectum to be wounded, so that affectus is nothing but a nature in
that thing, by which nature can perform that action: so argumentum is affectum,
as if he should say, that that is made, or factus ad, or effected to another
thing, or which has this (...) in it to work with another thing.

Why affectum? It is a property of an argument as homo est risibilis, when he
does not ridere: so that he defines argumentum in invention, from that power or
faculty: for as a man may have an affection to that thing he never does: so an
argument may have an affection to argue, when it acts not: so that he
teaches from that disposition of it to act, so that he delivers it not from
his act, for that is but the use of it, but from its true nature; as the common
Logicians call it praedicabile, that which may predicate, and says it is not
an argument, till it be disposed, but this is accidental to argumentum; then in
an axiom they call it praedicatum actu, which also is accidental to an axiom,
for it may be subjectum as well, and both are accidental ad arguendum. Why ad
arguendum? because the end of an argument is to argue, to play the argument, as
the eye to see: ad arguendum, because evermore when we fetch an argument to
show any thing, that is the arguens, and does agere, the aliquid is also an
argument, but it does pati: so that as quod was general, that is arguens, or
does argue, so it tells me that any thing may be argued: so h^mo est aliquid,
here homo is the aliquid, and is argued by his genus, which charge homo,
therefore there is nothing in the world, but is an argument, and may argue, or
be argued: but remember that both quod, and the aliquid, that is both the
arguens, and argutum do arguere, but the one firstly, the other secondly; the
one does agere, the other does pati, and so reagere. The aliquid tells me it is
the first, and then quod comes, and argues it: now would you argue, then
evermore look first, and that carefully, whether your quod will argue your
aliquid: as will you build an house with sand? that will not serve the turn,
for it is not affectum to it, neither has it that (...) in it: so that by any
means let us keep close to our rule, and we shall not do wrong. The fallacian
of the common Logicians of Coxismus, or petitio principii, or Cuculi cantus,
for they are all one. As the Cuckoo cries Cuckoo, the Cuckoo is Cuckoo, ergo
the Cuckoo cries Cuckoo, for here is no third argument; and this is commonly
the woman's reason, because it has so little reason in it, as they will say it
is so, because it is so. So that simplex conversio among Logicians is a breach
of this rule: as omnis homo est animal, ergo aliquod animal est homo: other
Logicians as Polanus, calls argumentum Thema, which is too special, for thema is
taken among Schools for a question to be judged by way of oration: again, every
argument is not taken as thema, then he says thema est simplex, which is
argumentum, or compositum, which is quaestio; and thus we see how our Logic
goes most orderly, and that it looks at ens as it is simmonted with another
thing.

Quales sunt singulae rations solae, and per se consideratae.
We have heard what argumentum is, and the first thing that we are to look at
in simples is this, the glue to be affectioned: as if we should look for a
cause, see whether it be affected to be so: we have heard the fallacians in
part before; as first, where there is no argument, but petitio principii, and
that either where there is no petitio principii, and that either where there is
no petitio at all, or where the same thing is uttered in a synonymie, or to the
same purpose. Again, it is a breach of this rule, when that is brought for an
argument, which is no argument, as baculus stat in angulo; or when the third
Argument is more obscure and doubtful, then the arguments of the question,
these and all other petitiones principii are breaches of this rule in general,
and not of any special ones. Again, it is a breach of the definition of an
argument, when we mistake the aliquid, though the argument be good, and so that
Heterozetesis is a fallace of argumentum in genere; as when I talk of Chalk, he
talks of Cheese. Now we come to the commoration after argumentum, quales sunt
fingula rations solae, etc. He has defined argumentum from that affection
that is continually in it; for the act is accidental, and may be wanting, for
potentia (as we hear in nature) arises from the act of the form upon the
matter. Now he says singulae, that is, argument by argument, the cause alone,
the effect alone, and so all the arguments from the beginning to the end. He
says rations rather than argumenta, first because there is an equivocation in
that word, many have thought it to belong to a syllogism only; and so when we
say, I deny your reason, there it is taken for an axiom. Now it is taken
sometimes for the faculty of reason, sometimes for the (...) in things. Here he
shows that it is taken for the same with argumentum. Solae, that is as they are
to be considered in invention without judgment, and that he explains further
per se, that is, they are in their definitions not respected with some thing
externally, these are tales, that is such as I have defined unto you: so that
he does here commorari, because of difference with Aristotle, or rather with
the Aristotelians, even as he stayed before upon the definition of Dialectica,
for they thought there was no argument but in judgment, and therefore have
question with Ramus whether an argument be to be taught before we come to a
syllogism. Ramus here propounds it, and determines it for his own part, that
it may be without judgment, and look at others, and you shall see them define
all arguments, from their use in a syllogism, as we may see in all topic
places of Aristotle, so that it is not so strait as they take it, and Ramus
would teach us here, that to argue is accidental to an argument and disposition
to: so that their mistaking makes him here to demurre and stay upon it: Now
indeed there must of necessity be a simple consideration of argumentum, for
though things in nature are disposed together, yet they were severed at the
first; and again we are to consider them so still, though they be together*
Consideratae, he uses this word, because thought, invention and judgment are
joined together in nature, yet he would here tell us, that we are to sever them
by our consideration, as thus, I can see heat without fire, cold without water,
etc. So that singulae ratione^ are solae, and per se consideratae non in usu,
for so they cannot be: but they are solae, and per se consideratae, in
consideration, for so they be, he says quales, because argumentum was defined,
from his quality, or property of affection, and properties are qualities.

Argumentum est artificiale, aut inartificiale.
This affection, or glue is artificiale, or inartificiale, as if he should say
argum^ntum has this affection ex sese, and it is in artificio rei, or it is
not ex sese, but from some other thing: so that every argument is affected, but
two ways, one as an artificial argument, the other as an inartificial: now the
reason of this distribution is this:

God has made all things for man, and at the beginning for one man, and they
are to conduce to one, but all things cannot come under one man's eye of reason:
therefore that he may be better furnished herein, God has provided these two:
the one whereby he may see by himself, the other whereby he may see by another
man's eye. Again, that which we are to see is either in artificio rei, or not in
artificio rei: so that all things are seeable, but not to be seen with one man's
eye, but by many. This word artificiale teaches us these things: first there
is no artificial argument, but you shall see it in fabrica rei, therefore
belongs to some Art, because Art delivers the frame of the thing, therefore
there is no axiom that consists of artificial arguments, but it belongs to
some Art. Now though we hear no arguments in Arts, but the causes, and
properties, yet notwithstanding we have all arguments indeed; for there is no
quality, but is proton in some general thing, as heat in fire, cold in water:
now this gives us great light, yet effects must be there if they be proper: and
the effect belongs to that rule where the property is taught, and dissentanies
belong to Art too; as nature is constans, or inconstans, argumentum est
artificiale, aut inartificiale: so that there are no axioms affirmed, or
denied, true, or false, but we shall find them in some Art, either as a first
rule, or a deduct by consequence necessary: so that hence is the greatest light
that can be to a Scholar, to analyze his example, and bring every thing to his
Art, where he shall see it in causa: so that if one would make a common place
book, let him make the Rules of Arts his heads, and let him take any example,
and see whether argument is more special, and so carry the axiom to that Art,
and to that rule of the Art whether it belongs. As homo est justus, homo
belongs to nature, justitia to moral Philosophy, ergo this axiom belongs to the
doctrine of justice: so that moral Philosophy bo^rows man from nature to
deliver it self.

The use of this is unspeakable, I cannot deliver it unto you, the use it self
will better testify it; for thus may a man try every thing whatsoever, yea
though it be a contingent axiom; as audentes fortuna juvat: audacia belongs to
Ethics, fortuna to Logic; and in audacia we shall find this, for it is that
which thrusts a man desperately: and here we may see what a true predicament
is, not the predicaments but the Arts are the storehouses; for whatsoever is
in artificio rei, we may see there, not only genus, species, etc. but all
other arguments, for they are too narrow, and false too; for that distribution,
substantia est creata, or increata, will not fail in any Art, and the three
first predicaments (as we heard before) are nothing but practices of method.
Now if it be objected, we must not have those things before we see them: no, we
must first see them, that we may lay them up in store. We have our eye first,
and then things appointed for us to see.

Artificiale est quod ex sese arguit.
Now here is that affection, that is in this kind of arguments, that glue that
was before, is here quod ex se: so that this makes that more special, which
before was more general: so that we shall still see what our eye of reason
sees: we heard before that we see the thing, as it is an argument; here we see
it, as it is affectioned to argue ex se. Ex se, what is that? as if he should
say, look into the artificium of the thing, there shall you see his artificial
arguing, ex se, that is it argues natura, or it is causa natura of its arguing:
so that these arguments concur for the being of the thing. So wood is
affected to argue a chest ex se, that is, it is in the artificio of wood to
argue a chest made of wood ex se: so then this artificial argument arises from
nature, from a vis ingenita, that is, in artificio rei: so the efficient argues
ex se, as if I should say, if there were not that cunning in the efficient of a
chest to make it, it would not be one. So that it is thus defined, quodex sese
arguit. Argumentum was the next genus, and he does not express it, but
understand it here, because we heard of it so lately before: then again he has
it here, but after another manner, because he could not deliver the form of it,
without the genus: for arguit is not here taken for act, but for potentia: as
we say animal vidit, though he does not actually see, but have the faculty of
it: so we say, Does he eat or drink: meaning, can he eat or drink. For if it
were taken for the act of arguing, then it should not be no where but in
judgment: so that quod arguit, is as much as argumentum, and ex se is the
form: if he had said artificiale est argumentum ex sese, he had said the same
that ex sese arguit: but it had not been so plain to a young Scholar, and he
had also newly done with argumentum before: so that this is the second thing
that our eye of reason is to look at, namely, an artificial argument, which can
ex sese arguere. Now fallaces may be in every rule. In the first, as if any
abuse it to deceive and abuse reason: for the second, if any go about to judge
before he see the invention, it is a fallace, and a preposterous course. So
argumentum is artificiale, or inartificiale; they break this rule that will
give testimony of a thing, whose artificial arguments they have not seen: so do
the Papists in their implicit faith, when they believe as the Church beleives,
not knowing what the Church beleiveth. So Scholars that take any thing that
their Authors deliver them, without any examination at all of the things they
read. Kiekerman says, an inartificial argument may be received before an
artificial. I do not deny it, but yet you must examine it afterward: Gods
testimonies only are undeniable, because he cannot lie; but no man's.

Artificiale est primum aut ortum.
We are farther to look at this glue, whereby a thing is put to another thing
in artificio rei, it is there firstly, or secondly: this affection or going to
the act is there at the first hand, or at the second hand: now it is the same
still, but is looked at, as it is originally, or as it is arising from the
first: as to make up me, there goes a soul and a body, and of the forms of the
four elements is the form of my body made, and of their matter the matter of my
body made: now the elements are firstly there, as making my body, and secondly
my body is in me, as a part in me: so a man is first consisting of body and
soul, and then is animal: now this wisdom of God is wonderful to consider, how
he makes things first of causes, effects, etc. and then ranketh them under a
general head. And if we go to the Creation, we shall see them evidently: first
he made a first matter, then the first forms, and then mists that had their
complements, and did differ one from another, then they might be compared
together, then they had names, and were ranked under general heads, as a part
to a whole, etc. and then they might be defined, and their limits showed how
far they reach; for here our Author leads us to see every thing there, and to
see how it is there, the reason of this distribution we shall see in every
thing whatsoever: as in an ink-horn, there must be the matter of it, then it
self, and it must have his adjuncts, etc. and then will it hold your ink; then
when it is this, it is not a tree, or a stone, though it may be compared, and
be equal, or unequal, like, or unlike: so that first we see what is in it
firstly, then we may call it round, deep, made of horn, then range it under a
head, then lay it out in its limits, and then give testimony of it.

Primum quod est suae originis.
This definition does somewhat stick in my teeth before it come out, for it is
a far fetched trope, and only one is suae originis* namely God: but he means
this clamminess or glue that is suae originis, is first there, the ortum is
not: as the son has the nature of his father, but is another thing than his
father: but first argumentum est quod affectum est ad arguendum, then
artificiale est affectum ex sese; so primum is argumentum artificiale primitus:
so that we must look at the argument, as it does argue, not as it is suae
originis, but quod originaliter arguit: he means that is there first, as we
shall see by the nature of the thing: as homo justus; here justitia is firstly
in homine, as an adjunct, for he must first have that virtue before he can be
denominated justus; then secondly, it is in him as he is denoninated from it:
so a chest is made of wood; here is the cause and effect, and this is firstly;
then from hence I may say a wooden chest, and this is secondly, arising from
the first.

Quod est suae originis.
As if he should have said, that has this affection to argue ex se primitus:
now then we may go wonderful deep, if we will go by these degrees, what may we
not see? if we would make a breef: Argumentum est quod ad aliquid arguendum
affectum est: artificiale ex se, primum primitus. The fallacians are many, as
they that think they are conjugates that are in name: as he has virtue, ergo,
he is studiosus: so homo dormit, quia somnit: here is nothing but causes, and
effects, and so synonimies; for conjugata are nomina: so again when orta are
taken for prima, or taught before, aut contra: so do the common Logicians in
the predicables, when they teach genus, species, differentia, proprium,
accidens: First see the orta contain the prima, whence they arise symbolice, as
it were in a cognizance. Here we learn this, we must first look at the
affection of an argument, then we must be ex sese, then primitus: now ortum
contains the same nature that primum does; and some say the effect arises from
the causes, and the subject and adjunct from the effect. But does the effect
argue with the affection of causa? it does not: or does the subject or adjunct
argue with the affection of an effect? No.

Estque simplex aut comparatum.
We have heard what the end of Logic is, and all shoots at this mark, to
reason well, that is, that we may handle our reason well; now that we may do
thus, we must have invention first, afterward judgment. Invention teaches us
to find out simples, Judgment teaches us how to lay them together, we may
compare invention or arguments, to the hook and nails in a thing; judgment to
the fastening of them together. Now invention beholds arguments. Argumentum in
Logic is a concrete, as the Schools call it, signifying the thing, together
with the affection that is in it to argue another thing: as a Tailor is a
Tailor quatenus, he has that affection in him to make a garment: so that
invention intends immediately the affection, and mediately the thing: for ens
quatenus ens, is general to ars quatenus ars, but ens quatenus it is affected
ad arguendum, so it belongs to Logic alone, and thus we go by degrees; for the
Lord does not let us see any thing immediately: now the very name invention
tells us what we must do, namely, seek out, it tells us the Lord has hid things
secret in nature, and we must labor for the simples, and so find them: now we
seek argumentum, which we heard to be of two sorts, artificiale, or
inartificiale: artificiale is that which is in artificio rei; whereas the
inartificiale does but carry to us what other men have seen by the artificials;
and because none can testify of a thing before he have seen it himself, ergo,
artificiale is before inartificiale: and also because he that sees
inartificialiter, can but testify so far forth as he sees the thing, which is
not at all, ergo, they that give testimony of that thing, whose artificial
arguments they have not seen, are sophisters, and break this rule: and this is
a sophisme of the Papists in their implicit faith, which do believe as the
Church beleiveth, neither knowing the artificial arguments of the thing, nor
the thing it self that they believe. Now the artificial arguments are in the
artificio of the thing, ergo, we must of necessity know all the artificial
arguments in things, if we will know the things themselves wholly. And here by
the way artificiale tells me, that every thing must be in some predicament, that
is, in some Art, quod ex sese arguit: this affection is in the thing, and it is
ex se, drawn out of the thing as it were: so that this hook whereby it lays
hold on another thing, is natural to it, for so he means. Artificiale est
primo, or secundo in artificio rei, as if the thing had a second kind of
making, nature, or being: so a thing is made of matter and form, primitus: but
when we consider how first singular parts are made of that matter, then
organically are made of the singulars, and the whole made of the organical:
here is the second invention, and here the matter is considered immediately in
the parts, mediately in the whole. This is something subtle, but yet evident
and plain: as first, imagine that thing justice in a man; here is subjectum,
and adjunctum: and this is the first invention: then from that quality in him,
I can denominate him a just man, and this is the second invention: so I look at
a thing whose matter is made of wood, and can conjugate a name to it wooden: as
a wooden chest, etc. so when I say a man is made ab humo, here is the material
cause, and effect: but at the second hand, when I consider how man is made ab
humo, and from thence denominate him homo, there it is that second Logic. So
that the first invention only looks at the thing, without consideration of the
names; the second invention looks both at the thing, and at the names. So when
I denominate homo from that thing justice in him, to be justus, I mean not the
name; nor the thing, but the name and the thing together: for orta a primis
perinde sunt ad id quod arguunt, sicut prima unde oriuntur, ergo, there must be
both the nature of the first arguments in them, and that affectio also. So in a
distribution, if we shall speak of distributio ex effect is, as in navi, alii
malos scandunt, alii per fores cursitant etc. here malos scandere, per fores
cursitare, sentinam exhaurire, are causes and effects firstly; but as these
nautae are distributed by their effects, here is the orta categoria, the
arising, arguing. So in a distribution ex causis of integrum into membra, the
first invention is matter, and form, the second invention is them two together
in the members making up the integrum. So in a distribution of the genus into
the species; as in animali, there is essentia corporea plena vitae, and sensus,
which are the causes of homo, and brutum: then there is a symbolum of them when
we jumble them together: so in a distribution ex adjunctis, homo is aeger, homo
is sanus, here is both subjectum, and adjunctum: but when I make a
distribution, and say, homo est aeger, aut sanus, this is the second Logic:
and this is nothing but the consideration of the community of a cause, an
effect, a subject, an adjunct, for that causes these distributions: so in a
definition there is firstly genus, which arises from matter and form; then the
second invention of them is the heaping of them together: so as they make but
one argument, namely, definitio: so in a distribution, though there may be more
arguments, yet are they also heaped together to make one argument, namely,
descriptio, quod est suae originis: this is true in respect of ortum, which
made Ramus so define it: but I had rather respect the definition of argumentum,
quod ad aliquid arguendum affectum est, and to say artificiale ex se, primum
primitus: and so we shall deliver it as it acts, which is best.

Primum est simplex, seu absolutum, aut comparatum: I rather say absolutum,
because absolutum and simplex are more opposed, and so, (...), and (...) are
opposed, now these simple arguments do look at those that are in artificio rei,
as they are in their own nature; for that is his meaning: as when I say the
wall is white, here I look at the wall as it is simple and absolute in its own
nature: and in like sort at whiteness as it is simple and absolute in its own
nature: so that the absolute argument looks evermore at the things as they are
absolute in themselves: as when I say a chest is made of wood, I look at both
of them, as they are simple in their own nature: now the comparate does not
consider the thing absolutely, but with another. So in a chest if I consider
the quantity of it, here the chest and its quantity are simple arguments: but
when I say it is greater than a less Chest, or contra, then they are
comparates: so that the comparison lies as it is respected with some other
thing: so that the comparative quantity, or quality is another thing, the
absolute greatness or littleness, likeness, or unlikeness, for that which is
absolve greatness may be comparative littleness, aut contra.

Absolutum est consentaneum, aut dissentaneum.
Object. But how are disagreers in artificio rei.

Answ. True it is, that the one part of disagreers is not, but the other is: so
that the absolute consideration has respect either to the thing wherewith it
agrees, aut contra, as ratio in respect of it self, so it is argumentum
simplex, seu absolutum, in respect of homo it is consentaneum, and goes to his
constitution, consider it with irrationale, and there it tells me, it will not
be that: so that which makes fire not to be water is in the artificio of fire:
so that which causes dissension is in the artificio of that thing that is
dissentaneum: so that the same thing is consentaneum, and dissentaneum;
consentaneum if we look at the thing wherein it is, dissentaneum if we look at
another thing, that it is not: so in black, and white, there is that in black
which makes it to be black; and there is moreover that in black which makes it
not to be white: so that the same thing in diverse respects is consentanie, and
dissentanie: so that white or black considered with the wall may be
consentanie, consider it with that which dissents from it, so it is
dissentaneum, and all these must we see if we will see any thing thoroughly:
First we must see the affectio in artificio rei, then primitus, then absolute,
then consentanie; then absolute, quod consentit cum re, therefore this is
clearly in artificio rei, and so is dissentaneum too; that consentit, hence we
see consideration to be general between things, and they are made so, for else
they would never make up one whole, as all creatures make up the world, for it
is concordia discors, and discordia concors, that makes all things. Now as
there is consention in all things, so also there is dissension, for else all
things should be one: thus the Lord made all things to show forth his wisdom,
and mighty power, that all things should consent together, and yet be many.

Consentaneum est absolute aut modo quodam.
For some things agree absolutely, others but after a sort, absolutum is
absolutely required for the being of the thing, the other is but complemental:
so that here he tells us if we would see any thing, first look what is in
artificio rei, then look what is primitus there, then what is absolute, then
what is consentanie, then what is simply required to the being of the thing.
Absolute, that is, so agreeing to the thing, that if the one be not there, the
other will not be there and contra, as if any one cause be wanting, there will
be no effect, if there be a concurring of all the causes, then an effect, if no
cause no effect, and contra, if an effect then all the causes, if no effect no
concurrence of causes: so that this absolute agreement does put a necessity of
each others being: now absolute, and modo quodam are definitions of themselves,
for he wanted words, and therefore delivered the definitum, by the definitio:
so that to ask a definition of absolute, or modo quodam, is as if one should
ask a definition of animal ratione.

Absolute ut causa and effectum.
The causes give esse to the effect, therefore without these esses the thing
cannot existere, ergo, there are absolutely required. In like sort in the
existere of the effect you may see the concurrence of all the esses, of all the
causes, therefore these are absolute consentanea: Hence we learn, that all the
causes must go to the making up of the effect. And again, if any effect, then
there must be all the causes; so then we see how the ones being depends
necessarily upon the other, ut causa and effectum, therefore the cause must
first be looked at, as if I would look at ens, or any thing whatsoever,
therefore our Author taking this course takes the very way of God in his
creatures. Can any man see any thing thoroughly, and not see the causes first?
he cannot: and is there any thing to be seen in a thing before the causes?
there is not: therefore that is always first in nature, and therefore first
also in reason. Now here are fallacians, as to think an effect may be from some
causes, and to think the causes may be removed from the effect, which is a
common fallace.

Aristotle's organon, Tullies offices, etc. here is Aristotle's and Tullies
casuality still, though they be dead. Now we see how orderly we go to work, if
we had not done so, we could not have come to causa, all the arguing of them
before, as of artificiale, primum, absolutum, consentaneum, simplex, are here
in causa and effectum So that there are many clasp^ as it were, as the cause is
in artificio of the effect, it is also there primitus, and absolute, and
consentanie, and simpliciter: so that this descent does very much clear truth,
we have our flesh, blood, bones from causa, then afterward we have our
complements from modo quodam consentanea, then we may see we are not this, or
that. See an imperfect garment at the Tailors, and you may ask what it is, but
let the Tailor make it up complete with all its cuts, and jagges, then you may
see it your self, and need not ask what it is for further knowledge of it.

De efficiente, procreante, and conservante.
CHAP. I.
Causa est cujus vires est.
REmember the purpose of Logic is to direct man to see the wisdom of God,
which that reason may do well it acts doubly, first by taking at simples, then
by laying them together: that which we take with the first eye is argumentum,
that is any thing so far as it has the affection to argue, first as it is in
artificio rei, which therefore is in an Art, now it is firstly there or
secondly: first it is there absolute by way of consention, respecting the thing
wherein it is, or dissenting from the thing wherein it is not, those that
consent are absolutely consenting, or modo quodam, absolute as the causes, and
effect, that proceeds from the causes; here we must begin, because the first
thing that comes to man's reason is the cause, so if we take the world, or any
part thereof, let us resolve it, and in the end we shall come to the first
causes, a first efficient, etc. So God is the first cause of all things, and
himself without all causes, ergo, the cause is first of all things, then the
first matter is first in his kind, the first form in his kind, and the first
end in his kind.

So Aristotle says, God is primum intelligibile: so then if we will see the
wisdom of God in the creatures, we shall see the cause, the beginner: then
again Aristotle does confess, that causa is primum motus. Again, what is the
initium of every thing, but his being, and that is from the causes, therefore
they are first; again, the next cause is the farthest thing we can go unto, as
if we work any thing, now if we take causes, and look into them, then we make
them effects not causes, as if I look at the causes of a garment, I find the
Tailor to be the cause, but if I look at his cause, I make him an effect, yet I
cannot make the first efficient an effect, etc.

The Greeks call causa (...) or (...) of (...) peto, because it is that which
is first granted or required, as the Geometricians require a petitum, or as our
Author should say there can be no demonstration of the first cause. Est
argumentum absolute consentaneum, etc. causa est: if a cause be absolutely
required for the effect, then there is a cause: then again Logic serves us to
behold the wisdom of God, and himself also through the creature: now all things
but God are made, and are composed, ergo, they must have causes, est absolute
consentaneum, because they are essential to the effect. No shipwright no ship,
no wood no ship, no form no effect, no end, no effect; and all these together
an effect, and contra.

Cujus vires est.
First here he tells us of a vis, then he says it is vis essendi, then vis
essendi rei: so that as there are four words, so four things, causa is here a
concrete signifying the thing causing, as argumentum was before signifying the
thing arguing, for our Logic that brings us to the first cause, does but show
him as he argues, not as he is in his being, causa is the thing arguing,
cujus, that is, est res causans, cujus vi, this vis and virtue is of the thing,
but Logic looks at it as it is in the thing, and then at the thing: for if the
thing had not vim esseficandi an effect, it could not be a cause, as wood will
not make a gown: so that it is here secondly required, that the thing causans
have vim causandi: and against this word is that common fallacian of non causa
pro causa, as he that will lay to the charge of a child that which a man can
only do: so when we ascribe to Nature that it cannot do, as the making of a
World, which is peculiar to God, est.

Est.
Esse is a general term, and may signify the essence of a thing, or the tying
of some thing to some thing that is not of the essence, as first when I say vir
est, secondly, vir est doctus, where I do not respect homo from his causes, but
as he has this adjunct doctrina, and the reason why est is so general, is
because this esse is from the causes, which are most general, for nothing can
be said to be this, or that, before it be, which is from the causes: by this
vis we must understand, that power, and faculty in the thing, that causes
another thing, as if he should say, the cause is affected to argue the effect
forcibly, for vis is here the same that affectio is in argumentum. Esse indeed
is general to all the causes, and existere is from them all, which appears by
this, we say mundus est a Deo, est ex nihilo, est formata, etc. so that est is
nothing but the act of the cause, to make the effect: so we shall see in a
knife, there are all the four causes, to be in it, and the three former for the
end, and therefore if we will not be deceived, here see that whatsoever is de
esse of a thing that is a cause, res not effectum: for we have heard what res
est, that is the subject of Art, but if we had said effectum it had been a
posteriore, for we have not the effect wrought: Again, we are but yet in causa
in general: by res he means res efficienda, not yet effecta. Now another
fallacy is of non causa pro causa, when we take that to be the cause, which
has the potentia efficiendi, but does not efficere, but is causa, quatenus it
has an hand in that effect: so that if one bring a cause, that is not a cause,
though it have vim efficiendi, yet is it not causa.

Itaque primus hic locus fons est omnis scientiae.
This is a deduction out of the first rule, following this, if the thing be
causae vi, then this is primus locus inventionis, for it is first in the cause,
before it be in the effect: then again it is primus locus in respect it is the
first argument we must look at. Locus, here Ramus tells us closely, that the
Aristotelians topic places are these arguments, the first whereof is causa.

Fons.
We know the fountain is the first place where waters spring, so all things
spring from the causes, yea subjects, adjuncts, etc.

Fons scientiae.
For if we know the causes, then we know the effects because they arise from
them, and subjects, etc. and again that is the principal part of knowledge.

Scirique demum creditur, etc.
For till we know the causes we know but the outside of a thing, and that which
may be removed from the thing without destroying the thing, but knowing the
causes of a thing, we know it as it is, the things being arising from the
causes, and thus knowing the thing, we know it intus, and in cute. Here Ramus
does commorare telling us what Aristotle meant by these words: And again too
tells us that Aristotle's demonstration is nothing but the scientia of an axiom
consisting of causa, and effectum, and he teaches it to every cause in general
efficient, matter, form, and end.

No Aristotle says, that a demonstration concludes the property of a subject
by the definition, because that lays forth the essence of a thing, but it does
not tell us all the esse, ergo, not all the scientia, for the esses of the
efficient and end do not go into a definition.

Vt merito dicatur a Poeta, etc.
Here he prefers the Poets authority before Aristotle, for Aristotle being more
employed in this doctrine might speak of it as a private man, but the Poet as a
public man, foelix meaning a contemplative happiness, not a practick.

Causa est efficiens, and materia, aut forma, and finis.
Every cause yields an esse, but all together make the effect, now it is of two
sorts efficiens, and materia, aut forma, and finis, for he cannot give it to us
in two words, but makes a distinct axiom, and couples the parts with a
conjunction copulative, by reason whereof they have a community, but where lies
it, this it is I may call the two first potential causes, the other two acting
causes: this the Schools tells us, when they call materia potentia, and the form
actus, and this is Ramus meaning, as we shall see in many examples, as when a
Tailor sets buttons on a doublet with thread, they are not done till all the
causes are there: so a house is not an house so soon as it has an efficient,
and matter, but when it has also a form, and end. Now our Author would not use
potentia, and actus; first because they are barbarous words, secondly, they are
improper, because they cannot be called potentia, and actus, but potentiating,
and acting: then again, the form and end are potentia, as well as efficiens and
materia, and contra: therefore he makes two couple of causes, for so we see the
efficient is the first mover, moving quite through with the matter singly, and
the form and end move them inseparably together, therefore they are thus
distinguished, efficiens est motus a quo in a line, the matter ex qua, and form
per quem, finis ad quem: but because there is a scope at matter, therefore
there is a distinction. For as the efficient, and end terminate the thing, so
the form and matter mediate the thing running quite through the same. So God
made a matter, and gave it a form, and so an end, ergo, reason must see them
thus. The same order there is also in Gods providence: so man also does imitate
God, when he does any thing orderly; the first care is for a workman, then a
matter, then a form, and then an end: though we may have cloth before a Tailor,
yet it is not a matter till it begin with the Tailor to bring an effect to
pass. So then the efficient is in nature before the matter, and the matter
before the form, for the form is an adjunct to the matter, and the form before
the end, the end being an adjunct to the form; and again a thing must be formed
before it can have an end. The first efficient had the first matter and forms
effect to him, the second forms are adjuncts to the matter. Now the first
efficient is absolutely first, for it has nothing before it: the first matter
is not res prima, nor causa prima, but first for matter, ergo, it is from the
first efficient only, ergo, never has any existency in the world, but is ens
incompletum: so the first form is from the first efficient, not of the first
matter, but only in it, ergo it is ens also completum: hence our souls are
not our forms, for then our forms should be res incompl^tae. Now the end is
last, and the first end is the last end; it is first because it is most
general, last because it is not made for another end, ergo it follows of
necessity that the last end is not made: so that the end as it is last, as the
thing is acted: so it is first as it is most general, for all the former causes
work to effect the end. As we say in Schools, finis est primus in intention,
posterius in executione: so God made all things for his glory; here his glory
is first in intention of him that works by counsel, but is acted last of all by
all things that he made. And here Aristotle's bonum quo communius eo melius, is
true of the last end of all things, which is God: for he is as we may say,
finis communissimus, ergo, optimus.

Efficiens est causa a qua res est.
We have heard of causa, and of his kinds, and that they are disjoined, by
which means there is made two couple of causes, the two first working jointly,
even as the other do. Efficiens, and materia, here is a second distribution,
and here the efficient is first; for it is first eujus vi res est: again, by
the rule of method it is first in nature, because it gives light to that which
follows; and that the efficient moves first we see it in every thing; he
lays hold on the matter, which in respect of the efficient is moved, and by a
natural appetite moves, and runs to make an effect of it self; and does effect
the effect, as well as the effi^^ent, and that from the natural appetite it
has to the effect: but the mover or efficient is before the thing moved, and
before the effect also.

Efficiens.
Efficiens, quasi exfaciens, moving quite through: for besides his first
moving, as being the first cause, he moves also together with the matter, form
and end; and his working with the rest is the cause of his name.

Est.
Every cause is required to the effect, efficiens est causa, ergo: again, first
there must needs be a mover to move the matter, before there can be a table
wrought: this appears plainly by the creation of the world: and because every
thing is an effect, therefore the efficient is the first cause: for take any
thing, and you shall see the vis of the efficient to run quite through the
same; so look into the world, and every part thereof, and you shall see Gods
finger in every thing, without which they could not be: so that efficiens est
causa, and because an effect cannot be without its esse, ergo it is of the esse
of it, a qua, from whom it is: as if he should say, it is terminus a quo, etc.
so as the world began with God: so in every thing in nature, the beginning of
motion is first from the next cause: so that efficiens est causa a qua, telling
us that this is the first being the effect has.

Res.
Here res is general as before to all the Arts, and it is the subject of the
general Arts. Ramus does not here break the rule of method not defining what
res is. Again, if he had said a qua est, we should have had reference to res:
again, if he had named effectum, it had been a posteriore, not having learned
what effectum est. Res est, this is general to every cause, ergo it is taught
in the definition of causa in general: but that he may not be so obscure, he
borrows some thing that went before, for else the perfect definition had been
efficiens est a qua. Now this teaches us to look first at the efficient in
every thing: for Logic tells us not only of an esse in general, but of four
several esses from which existere does arise; as efficiens est causa a qua,
materia ex qua, forma per quam, finis cujus gratia: why does he not say, causa
est cujus vi res sit? because something may be a cause, and yet is not; but if
it do causare then it is a cause. So if I say will do a thing, and yet do it
not, yet am I an efficient; for est does here commend to us the adsignification
of time, but the essence that so soon as it begins to move, so soon it is an
efficient, though the effect be not till the matter, form, and end be there.

Cujus et si vera genera, etc.
Here Ramus does commorari, telling us that those many species which the
Aristotelians make, are not species, but modi efficientis, because more of them
may be in one and the same efficient: as one man may be causa precreans and
conservans, sola, and cum aliis, per se, and per accidens, because they may be
in the same efficient. Even as actio and passio do not distinguish the thing,
but are diverse modi of the same thing. Here Ramus will find no species of
efficiens, neither are there any of the other three; for the matter that is
lowest, ergo it has nothing under it, but examples: and so is the efficient:
ergo he needed not say, Cujus etsi vera genera, etc. for how could rhat appear
to him, that is not? we know the effect is single, ergo as the single matter,
form and end, make that, so the thing efficient makes it, neither has it any
species.

Vbertas tamen per magna, etc.
There is great and plentiful use of the efficient, and as it is first of all,
so is it most general of all, for matter cannot be a matter, till the efficient
move it, and so of all other arguments: now these make cause the efficient to
be commended, or discommended, and according to these modi is the effect more
or less argued: as if a child kill his father, it is parricide: so if it be a
good thing that is wrought by one alone, he is more to be commended than if he
had done it, cum aliis, aut contra. Again, if a thing be done well natura, it
is better than if it had been done necessitate; and more commendable when a
thing is done by counsel than fortuna: now because these modi do urge and
press the effect more or less, ergo there is reason in them, and therefore they
belong to Logic: modi, that is, adjuncts not making these effects species, but
only distinguished by accidents: that fallacian, non causa pro causa, is
general to causa: and it is also particular to efficiens, making that causa
efficiens which is not: as the Heretics in Divinity were deceived, which said
that the Angels did make the world.

Primo quod procreat, qut tueatur.
These are first because they are more general than the rest, and also they are
more in use: for we shall have this first modus in use twenty times for one to
the other modi: so we respect God as causa procreans, and tueans, before we
respect him alone: then again this procreant cause brings the thing first to
his esse, and the preserving cause is the Keeper of the thing in his esse. Now
in reason he that is the procreating cause, should also be the preserving
cause: as God is not only causa procreans of the World, but also causa
conservans, and so should parents, as they procreant children, so should they
in like sort preserve them. The procreant cause is first, because things must
needs have a being, before they can be preserved: now they are distinguished,
because when a thing is procreated, it is not preserved, aut contra: and the
modi are joined with the cause, not with the effect, because they are first in
the efficient, as essential, for actio is before passio: so that here mark that
next after we see the efficient we are to look at these modi. As we are saved
by faith alone; here is efficiens sola. Our Author brings in an example of
Ovids, the 4. remedii: and Kickerman has a fling at Ramus for his examples,
and would have him bring his examples out of Divinity. But first Logic being a
general Art, it is therefore best to fetch his examples out of the most common
and general Writers, as out of Poets, and Historians, which the Gentiles and
Turks may receive, these being more generally known to the world, than are the
Scriptures: and again, Divinity is the most special Art of all. And so Ramns
finds fault (but justly) with Aristotle, for fetching his examples out of
Geometry, which is too obscure: for it is a fallace to fetch examples to prove
any thing, if the examples be not as well or better known to them to whom we
demonstrate any thing as to our selves. As they say in Geometry, A is not B,
etc. for so they say in Geometry, angulus A, and angulus B. etc. Now Logic is
a general Art, ergo it is best to fetch examples out of Poetry, etc. which
belongs to Rhetoric a general Art, the example is this; first proper, otia are
proper and conserving causes of love: then tropical, causa est procreans, cibus
the cherisher.

Otia si tollas, etc.
Thus ^e reasons, otia are the causes of love; for take them away, and love is
gone: hence it appears they were of the essence of love; so that because causa
is of the essence of the effect, ergo put idleness, and you must put love, aut
contra: for the essence will be wanting, and we have a rule sublata causa,
tollitur effectum, and it is general to all causes, for they are all necessary
to the esseficating of the effect: all the rules of causa in common Logicians
you shall have here, as posita causa ponitur effectum, yet not one cause but
all the causes must concur: many other rules they have, all which are inwrapt
in the definition of causa: now it holds contingently in every cause; for if we
put one cause, we put all the causes, and so it holds in the special causes,
that posita causa ponitur effectum, and contra: as take away otium from
Egistus, and you take away love: so that sublata causa a tertio tollitur
effectum: so in judgment it is also true; as give otium to Egistus, and you
may give him love, which argues from the efficient.

Sic pater and matter procreant, nutrix tuetur.
Before he showed us an example out of an Author, he wills us to look for the
use of them out of Authors. The matter of the first belongs to Ethics, the
matter of the second to History. Logic is a general Art, ergo his examples are
best out of Poetry, and Oratory, wherein the use of all Art is. Now the aliquid
before is love, which we should have heard of, against which Ovid makes a
medicine. In this example Dido is the aliquid, for here the aliquid is the
causa. Dardanus had two sons, Assaracus and Anchises, and of him came Aeneas:
now here she takes away the true causes, and says Caucasus begot thee: so
there Caucasus in duris cantibus is causa procreans, and Hyrcanae tigres are
preserving causes: but this is false, for here is non causa pro causa.

Object. But does he well to bring fallaces?

Answ. Yes out of Poets, for here non ens, or ens fictum, has the nature of
ens in it: neither are all fables lies, but by continued allegories they teach
us notable truths: now she challenges Aeneas with this for his manners,
because he forsook her.

Sic Romulus conditor Romanae urbis, etc.
He makes examples of his own, and there is genesis, teaching us that though
genesis be before analysis, yet genesis imitativa is nothing but the imitating
of a former analysis. Again, our Author makes choice of such examples as may be
paradigmaes, and whereunto any other example may be brought, as in the first he
makes an accident to be the cause of an accident, in the second he makes a
substantial effect to be from substantial causes naturally, but fainedly: in
the last he brings substantial causes working substantial effects ordinarily in
artificial things: and here we may see who first shot the arrow, before we can
see where it lights, or through what it flew, or whence.

CHAP. IV.
Secundo causa efficiens sola efficit, aut cum aliis.
WE are still in the efficient: the first thing that we can see in the
artificio of any thing, is the efficient, and the modi of it: the most general
modi was procreans and conservans before, now we come to the second modi, sola,
aut cum aliis, which are more general than per se, and per accidens in use, but
not so general as the first. Secundo sola, etc. this is next, ergo next after
the first: sola, that is where this modus efficiendi is considered, and the
force and virtue of this argument from the efficient cause stands in this modus
sola: for so we are to consider always when any efficient is brought to argue
any thing: see which modus is brought with it, as in the example before; the
effect is pressed with the modus of procreans, and with the modus of
conservans: as you would take away love, take away idleness, for it is the
procreant and conserving cause of love. Now as God is the procreant and
conserving cause of all things, so he is causa sola first, ergo that is before
causa ^um aliis, afterward he is causa cum aliis, working together with the
creatures, and we finding this in the first efficient, we may also find it in
the first, in the second, and in every one; because all things are simulacra of
the first. Now these belong to Logic, for there is reason in them, and any
thing deserves more or less, praise, or dispraise, as he does good or evil
sola, aut cum aliis.

Earumque omnium, saepe alia principalis, alia adjuvans, and ministra.
That is, earum omnium, quae cum aliis efficient, saepe alia principalis, alia
adjuvans, and ministra, for so saepe here is part of the axiom, and thus often
it falls out, that one among the rest in doing of things is principal, and (as
we say) ringleader to the rest, though sometimes likewise all be hail fellows.
So that as the Lord did at the first, work all things alone, and then with
others: so likewise do the creatures in nature, and here again as the Lord is
principal when he works with others, so also when creatures work together,
one for the most part is principal.

Alia adjuvans, and ministra.
That is, as it were a minister, and an instrument, Here we are to understand
there is the principal cause, which is helped, and does not help: causa
adjuvans is principally of living things, ministra is commonly of instruments,
which have not life, though both of them may be of either. Virgil 9. of his
Aeneidos. Nisus avocat ab Euriolo, etc. Me me adsum qui feci, etc. Nisus alone
did the deed, mea fraus omnis, there lies the argument, therefore he was sola
causa, ergo, in me convertite ferrum, O Rutuli. Euriolus was taken, Nisus
escaped, and he reasons not from the doing of it, for so both might have
deserved punishment, but from the manner of doing it, mea fraus omnis; and for
Euriolus thus he says, nihil iste nec ausus nec potuit. The syllogism is this.

He that has done this murder, is to be punished.

But I alone have done it.
Ergo, I alone am to be punished.
The Assumption is thus proved by denying audacia to Euriolus, whereby he might
have done it, and potentia whereby he might have accomplished it. Slaughter is
to punishment a subject.

Solitaria causa cum plerisque, and principalibus and sociis pro Marcellio
vary adhibetur.
In the former example we see sola causa delivered in a strange phrase, this is
causa cum aliis, and here dux is causa principalis, militum virtus, locorum
oportunitas, etc. are the helping causes: and fortune is another principal
cause, quae mavimam partem sibi vindicat, he reasons thus, thou art a valiant
fellow Caesar, but thou have helping causes, of which fortune is the chief. At
vero hujus gloriae Caesar, etc. here Caesar has no companion: so that Caesar
in pardoning Marcellus is solacausa. Nihil centurio, nihil praefectus, etc.
here he removes the species of efficiens that should be cum aliis, and he
removes also fortune, which is a chief help in war; this example belongs to
Polemica.

Instrumenta etiam in catsis adjuvantibus connumerantur.
That is whether they be cattle that have life, which are instruments for
husbandry, or whether they be things without life, they are counted among
helping causes: so a man writing with his pen, is principal, and his pen
instrumental: but here we are to know, that we must always analyze, as our
Author lays that down, which is to be analyzed, as when I say he did this
alone, though he had an instrument: here he is causa sola in respect he had not
another man to help him, he is causa cum aliis as he has an instrument.

Quo argumento impius Epicurus, etc.
The Epicure reasons thus, if God had no instruments to help him in making the
world, then he made it not, but he had no instruments, etc. therefore this we
know to be false, by a rule of Divinity, for to make the world was an infinite
work, ergo nothing being finite could help him. Now many times there are
fallaces from all these, as when causae non procreans is put for causa
procreans, non conservans pro conservans, non sola pro sola, non cum aliis pro
cum aliis: all which we are to determine by this rule.

CHAP. V.
Tertio causa efficiens per se efficit, aut per accidens.
THe modi are of most special use, and indeed Ramus was long in determining
about the doctrine of them, but this was his last determination. Now the former
are more general than these, because these are more special in use: and again
the other belong to these, these may be where the other are, but the other
include these: these modi per se, and per accidens are more particular than the
other, for their reach. Now natura belongs to natural Philosophy, as it were,
consilium to moral as it were. Tertio causa efficiens, etc. these we have heard
before, efficit per se sua facultate, that is, not only having it own nature
in it self, whereby it works, but the beginning of its motion from it self,
causa per accidens has it from another.

Sua facultate.
By facultas here we are to understand the same, that vis was generally in the
definition of causa, but he means here, that which has his principium of motus
of it self: if one do a thing per accidens, he does it vi, but not sua: so sua
facultate, that is, whose motus whereby it works is determinated in it self,
ut quae natura vel confilio faciunt: these two names should seem to belong to
natural and moral Philosophy, but we are to understand by Nature that thing
whose nature is to work such an effect: yea any thing be it natural, or
artificial, which has that principium of motus in it self to work any thing.

Vt quae natura vel consilio faciunt.
Counsel is that which does a thing by deliberation willingly, and wittingly,
as God, Angels, and men only work by counsel: causa natura is as a knife
cutteth sua natura, so all things are subject to nature: and when I find that a
thing works propria vi, and that beginning of motus is with the nature of it
taught, not from it nature, that is causa natura, as when another man crowds
me, and so I crowd another, and fling him down, I do it with my nature, not
from it. So in a Clock the lead goes down by a rule in nature, because it is
heavy, and that pulls the rope, and the rope pulls the wheels, etc. all these
move with their natures, though not from them.

Ventorum naturalis efficientia est.
In this example:

Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis
Affricus: and vastos tollunt ad littora fluctus.
Here these three Eurus, Notus, and Affricus, are natural causes of tempests on
the Seas, they are also causae cum aliis, and each of them is as principal as
the other.

Consilii exemplum est illa Ciceronis de se confessio.
Suscepto bello Caesar gesto etiam magna ex part, etc. those things that fall
under Logic, them does he define, as causa per se he defines to be quae sua
facultate efficit, but if he should define what nature and counsel are, he
should run into natural and moral Philosophy, for counsel belongs to Policy,
yet for the modus of it in working an effect, it belongs to Logic, for a man
may take counsel of himself, without Counselors, as Kings have. Suscepto bello
Caesar, etc. judicio meo, as voluntate: in these words lies the modus, which he
proves a disparatis nulla vi coactus, etc. Fallaces here are very common, as
when we take that for causa per se, which is causa per accidens, and contra:
Now the reason why he gives these modi to the efficient, and not to the effect
is, because they are modi movendi, and do not belong to the thing moved.

Per accidens efficit causa, quae externa facultate efficit: ut in his quae
fiunt necessitate, vel fortuna.
Causa per accidens is that which works an effect, but non sua facultate, but
is moved by some other thing, and yet notwithstanding it works after a sort sua
facultate, but not sua facultate if we respect the effect, as fire dries a
cloth by removing the moisture, and so leaves the cloth dry, which drought is
in the cloth.

Vt in his quae fiunt necessitate vel fortuna.
Necessitate cum efficiens vi cogitur ad effectum. Here we see a necessity in
invention, which is all one with coaction.

By fortuna we are to understand the special providence of God, or ignorance of
the next cause, for ignorance of the providence of God in all things, and of
the next cause, has caused that men say what fortune had I, when they are
crossed in play, or such like.

Now necessity answers to nature, cum efficiens cogitur: so that this
necessity here is a coaction, and yet is it efficiens though vi cogitur,
cogitur when as the work of it per se is rather of some other thing: now the
same thing in one respect may be causa per se, and in another respect causa per
accidens, for they are but modi, vi externa ad effectum, so that it does it not
natura, or consilio.

Object. Why says he effectum rather than res?

Answ. All comes to one, for he means res, neither does he define effectum
here. Here he means violence, not that vis in causa; this vis does not work the
effect, but works upon the cause, and is that facultas whereof he spoke before.

Qualis est Pompeianorum excusatio.
At mihi quidem (ait Orator) si proprium and verum nomen etc. Before he said he
was causa consilio of going with Pompey against Caesar, he says he was
compelled fatali necessitate, and hither belongs fatum in Schools,

Fortuna est causa per accidens quando praeter, etc.
Our Author before did tell us of fortuna in the ablative case, here he puts it
in the nominative, because fortune is a principal cause of that effect that
another does per accidens: the arguing we ascribe it to fortune, and say
fortune did it: so that our Author would have us consider, first that it was
fortune did it, secondly, that it takes away the title of doing it from him
that did it.

Per accidens.
That is working externa facultate, now whereas he says he does it per
accidens, he means fortune as it is commonly taken, when we make her blind not
seeing what she does, for hence it does arise, when we do not a thing by
counsel, but ^ab nab as they say, that causes us to make fortune blind.

Quando aliquid accidit.
That is, happens, for here it is principal, the improvidence as it were, he
neither sees himself a cause, neither does he see who is the cause, and
therefore he says accidit, not efficit, for he says I did it not; so again,
ask him who did it, and ^e will say, I know not: so that accidere is the
special efficere of this modus.

Praeter scopium efficientis.
Fortune may seem to be opposed to counsel, which evermore has a scope whereat
it levels, now when any thing happens praeter scopum, it is fortuna we say.
Now things in nature may have a scope, which is beyond their nature, and then
it is fortuna: so that praeter scopum is as much as if he should have said,
praeter scopum fortunae, if it be causa fortuna: or praeter scopum naturae, if
it be causa natura.

Sic Pheraeo Jasoni profuit hostis, etc. here his enemy going about to kill
him, healed him.

In hoc genere causarnm imprudentia connumerari solet.
Imprudentia is one modus of fortune, as here.
Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina feci?
Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi est, etc.
I unawares have seen that, which has done me harm. Then Ovid was causa per
accidens of working that effect he should not. So Acteon was causa inscius of
seeing Diana washing her self: and here Ovid reasons a simile, as Acteon was
torn in pieces of his dogs for seeing Diana unawares, so am I banished for
seeing that I would.

Scilicet in superis etiam fortuna luenda est, etc. He means Augustus.

So if a man go forth, and a tile fall from an house, and break his head, this
is causa fortuna, it is natura as it break his head, being harder than his
head, and fortuna as it hit him, and consilio it breaks his head if it be
flung, for it has a scope: true it is nothing but counsel has his end in its
intendment, yet there is no cause but has his end of the effect it works.

Hinc sumitur deprecatio, etc.
For our Author said before accidit, therefore we are causes, ergo, it ought to
be pardoned, deprecatio is from this manner of working fortuna: so they will
say he is a proper man, but has no luck.

Fortunae autem nomen ignorantia causarum confinxit, etc.
Here Ramus does commorari in the name, lest he should be mistaken, it is an
unchristian word, it is ignorance not only as it is opposed to counsel, but as
it is unknown to the thing that works by fortune. Many other modi there are
among other Logicians, all which may be brought hither, as causa (...) is
either causa necessitate, or efficiens in genere, (...) is causa per se, if he
shall say, anger did it, then there is a trope in it, as when I say, he writes,
I mean his pen writes: if I say he writes with his pen, then I make him causa
cum aliis: if I say he writes, he is efficiens. Now for the order of causes,
one efficient may be cause of another efficient, etc. and so causa causae be
causa causati, but this will fail, as when I look at a child, and commend him
from his grandfather, not respecting the mean causes, there is not causa
causae, but causa causati So when I say he came of Scipio, etc. Hactenus de
efficiente, and this we must always look at first in artificio rei: moreover
observe here in every thing the manner of working: for so God is said to do
some thing necessitate, as when we say he does that he would not, though he
would it in another sense, and fortuna, as man's fall was praeter sc^pum Legis.

CHAP. VI.
De Materia. Materia est causa ex qua res est.
WE have heard of the efficient cause, and his manner of moving in that work
of his: now these are essential to Logic, because in the very manner, there
lies the force of the argument, and whatsoever has reason belongs to
Logic, many distinctions there are among the Logicians, all which may be
brought to these, that of (...), and (...) they say is that efficient cause
that works internally; the Physicians call it causa evidens, and meat, and
drink, is causa (...) of a disease: (...) is that cause that works
externally; the Physicians call it causa continens: but here is no distinction
of cause, neither have these quatenus causae (...) and (...) any force to argue
the effect, but only quatenus efficiens, whereas we hear in every special
modus of Ramus that they did press the effect strongly: as did thou kill thy
father? or did thou it alone? etc. so also in causa per se, and per accidens,
there is great difference in arguing a conclusion; if he did it natura, there
is no rebuking of that, for it was from his nature: if he sinned by counsel,
the punishment is so much the greater: if he did it well consilio, he deserves
the more praise. Fortuna indeed is such a cause, as it is not a cause by Ramus
definition, for fortune is but Gods providence unknown: now if there be any
other respect of (...), and (...), it will fall to the same with causa cum
aliis.

Now we come to materia, that (as we have heard) had a community with the
efficient, which community was to move with it a great while before the form
and end come: so soon as the efficient moves, presently the matter moves, but
the form and end move not a good while after. Now because this difference
(which causes the distribution of causa) appears in greater things, ergo it is
also in less things: but our Logic tells us, that the efficient must go before
the matter, and how agreeable does our Logic go to Gods work in the creatures?
if we shall take a thing and resolve it into his causes, and make them effects,
and look at their causes, (for so when we look at their causes, we make them
effects: so that absurd is that definition of causa, to be either going before,
or concomitans to the effect) at last we shall come to a first efficient that
has nihil prius to him, ergo he was not made, ergo he ever was, ergo all other
things once were not, for they were made, ergo they now being were from the
first, ergo the first matter was not eternal, as Aristotle dreamed; but indeed
he would cross Plato in what he could; yet one may confute him by his own
rules, for he grants there is a primus motor, ergo he is movens, but not moved,
for then he should have some thing to move him, and so not be first, ergo it is
easy to make Aristotle believe he is immovable, because he is first, ergo he
must move others only, for he is infinite, ergo without limits of place, ergo
in every place, ergo nusquam inclusus, or exclusus, ergo unmovable.

Now the first matter is first in his kind, namely, the first matter, but not
the first thing: and we may conclude from this, that the first efficient was
before the first matter: for if both were first, neither were first: for if the
one should say he were first, the other would say nay, I am as forward as thee,
and so there would be none absolutely first: and again, one is before two, ergo
he that is absolutely first, can be but one.

Materia.
For his name, as efficiens was extrafaciens, moving all the rest, and not
moved of them, but as it were pater; so materia is quasi matter, out of which
the thing springs, as out of a mother: so that we may see the name to be given
a simili, but yet with very good reason; as the child is not a patre, but of
the mother; so the effect is from the efficient, but springs out of the matter.
Now that there is such a matter thus it may appear; there is nothing composed,
but its essence, and it self a distinct; for to make essentia and ens to be the
same, is peculiar to God. Again, whatsoever is finite, that may be limited in
his essence; now God only is infinite, and every other thing finite, ergo may
be defined, ergo it self and its essence are distinct, ergo it must have a
matter. Again, if every thing have not essence, as they speak of Angels, why
are not they finite? ergo they may be defined, ergo their essence and
themselves are distinct: again, if they have not a matter, what have they?
nothing but an efficient, and an end? then they should be imperfect, and be
either the first matter, or the first form: again, if they have a form, and no
matter, then this form must be another thing from them, and how is that
possible? for if the form and they be all one, then the cause and effect will
be the same. But Logic is a general Art, and because every thing has a
matter, ergo materia belongs hither, and the first matter had not a matter, for
then it should not have been first, but was incomplete.

Materia est.
For it gives esse, and as the force of the efficient was requisite for the
esseficating of the thing, so the matter much more, for not only its esse, but
its nature and self couches in the effect, and makes a bulk: and if the vis of
the efficient were essential, because there could be no essefication of the
effect without it, much more must the matter be essential; for if we take away
the matter, we take away both the force and the thing it self. Now we must
understand that ens and non ens are the subject of Logic: and as argumentum
was concretum, and also causa, so when I say materia, I mean a thing that was
made of a matter.

Ex qua.
That is, out of which it is raised, it is the mother of every thing, as we
often speak of the earth: because every thing indeed is made of the four
elements, but more especially nourished of the earth. Now the matter does not
only by his virtue cause the effect, but is interessed in it, and the effect
rises out of it, as if it were a child springing out of the mother, only it
goes further in that its essence goes to the making up of the effect: now
though the essence be from ^atter and form, yet the ens it self is from all the
causes.

Res est.
That effect as we shall hear hereafter; for in this doctrine of causa,
effectum is the aliquid, which we must call res, till we come to it.

Est.
Every cause gives an esse to the effect, and this esse is the bulk of it, and
from whence arises the greatness or littleness of the effect by the form; now
it is a great question in Schools, whether the matter does any thing? indeed in
respect of the efficient it is patiens, but in respect of the effect it does
causare, and so does agere. For if it be an effect in respect of every cause,
then every cause is after a sort the efficient of that effect: and if you ask
me what his action is, I answer, it does materia, or substantiare the effect,
as the efficient did efficere the effect: It is also passive in regard of the
form, but both together cowork to make the effect; though forma be principium
motus in the thing by the matter. Now this is the next thing to be inquired,
after we see who made it, then whereof it was made: both which we see in every
thing, and see them as they are done.

Now the common Logicians bring in distinctions of Materia: As Kickerman says,
it is proxima, or remota: but he may say so of every argument, as well as of
materia: he says man is made of the first matter, then of the elements, which
are more remote, but ex semine, that is nearer: alas we do not here consider
priority, or posteriority, neither do these any more press the effect; here is
no Logic still, but materia est causa, ex qua, ergo this will not fall in
Logic: and if you mark it, presently when he comes to materia prima, and to
the elements, he is in natural Philosophy, ergo here is no distinction of
materia in Logic, but of the particular thing, that belongs to a particular
Art.

Hoc argumento ficto apud Ovid. 2. Metam. Solis domus, auro, pyropo, ebore,
argento componitur.
Regia Solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,
Clara micante auro; flammasque imitante pyropo, etc.
Here Ramus brings an example out of Ovid, which is a common School book, and
here a fained cause argues a fained effect: ens and non ens are the subject of
Logic, but non ens gratia entis, for so Logic looks at them first, and gives
entity to ens fictum, and therefore Grammar and Rhetoric must follow it, for
they are attendants on it. The Regia Solis is here distributed into his parts,
and they are argued by their matter: it had his pillars of gold for their
matter, and pyropus another matter of the columns, the covering or seeling of
Ivory: the leaves of the doors made of silver. Observe how these causae cum
aliis in the matter do not force the effect any thing at all, ergo he does not
teach them here; for whether they be made of one matter, or of more matters,
all is one, ergo there is no Logic in that, ergo it does not belong to Logic.

Caesar 1. belli civilis. Imperat militibus Caesar ut, etc.
Here milites are the efficient causes of the ships; then he distributes the
ship into his parts, keels, ribs. Carinae primum, and statumina ex leui
materia, the rest was viminibus contextum, lined within with leather: so that
here is distributio integri in membra, and every part is argued by the material
cause.

CHAP. VII.
Causae primum genus est inefficiente and materia secundum sequitur.
WE have heard of the efficient, and of the matter, and this is the conclusion
of it: now we come to the second which is in forma, and fine: so that whilst
he says, Causae primum genus ejusmodi est, etc. he tells me it was a
distribution before, where the genus is subsistent in speciebus efficientis,
and materiae, for so genus is totum partibus essentiale, and is never but in
speciebus: so that the genus of them is comprehended in the doctrine of them
two parts.

Secundum sequitur in forma, and fine: he does not say, Secundus est forma and
fine: now as the efficient and matter were combined together, as moving
together a while without the form and end: so the form and end, though the form
be before, yet the end comes presently after, and is as it were the pedissequa
to the form: and indeed where we cannot find the form of a thing, we put the
end, as being next to it, and best expressing it. So been disserere, the end of
Logic, is put for the form of Logic; now as this distinction of the motion of
the causes is seen in greater matters, so is it also in less: for there is a
cooperation of the efficient and end together first, then of the form, and end
together also, though not without the efficient and matter. In forma and fine,
for the form is before the final cause; for before the form be induced, or
ingenerated in the matter, it cannot be good for his end, and the end is causa
in respect of the effect, not of the efficient. So we say a coat has a form
before it have an end, for it may be a coat, and yet not fit to serve me: now
then as the efficient began the motion, and the motion redounded out of the
matter, so it runs per formam, and finem.

Forma est causa.
(...) is the same that forma is in Latin, there is but a transposition of the
letters, and (...) properly signifies the face; and fas and facies in Latin
comes of facio, because when it is made it has the face of a thing: so a thing
when it has its form, it has a face, it will seem something: so that the
efficients esse is not facies rei, nor the matters esse, for they might be
otherwhere, ergo the efficient and matter are common causes: this is a
particular one, which is one reason why the efficient and matter go before,
being more general: so that when once he has the face of a man, then is he a
man; this word forma both in Latin and Greek is taken abusive for the outward
figure of a thing; it is a metonimy of the subject for the adjunct; for
figuration is not forma; as we may see in water put in a round glass, or in a
square glass, the same water having the same form will have a round figure, or
square figure, according to the glass wherein it is: now because the figure is
adjoined to the form, ergo they say it is forma, and in Schools they call it
forma accidentalis: now the figure follows the form, but it is not so
essential, but it may be changed, and yet the water is the same, because the
water is variable into diverse figures, as we heard before in water. The
Schools say, that no artificial thing has any other form, ergo ask them in
what predicament any artificial thing is, and they will answer in quality: but
thus they will make Geometry to give the forms of things. Figura is a quality,
ergo to make quality a form is very absurd: again, as before one and the same
thing had diverse figures, and only one form that makes the thing one: again,
is the figure of a table the form of it? then the table belongs to Geometry,
not to the Joyners Art: again, whether does the matter of the table belong to
substantia? ergo the form too, or else it is in diverse predicaments: again,
figura is an accident, but forma is a cause, and gives essence to the thing.

Est causa.
We heard before that causa was cujus vi res est, now forma therefore gives vim
esseficandi, it agrees with the matter in that their two essences constitute
the effect; then again by how much the form yields his esse in a more special
manner, then the matter, so much more the form is causa, the matter yields a
portion of it self, but all the form is there, for the matter is common to both
species, ergo must give matter to them both, ergo forma is a more inward cause
than the matter: again, forma is principium actus, and therefore it is called
actus, ergo est causa.

Per quam.
Through which, or by which the efficient was from the which, and the matter of
the which, the form by which: so here we may see what the form does; and if res
be per formam, it must needs follow that the forms force is there in general,
as the efficients, there is no more per quam, but all the form is there, ergo
forma tota est in toto, and it is in qualibet part partly: not wholly, and
this is plain; as for example, by another rule of Logic, the members we know
are essential to the whole, that is, containing a portion of the matter, and of
the form of the whole, ergo, every member contains a part of the esse of the
thing, ergo, it cannot contain the whole, ergo those that make anima
rationalis, sensitiva, and vegitativa, forms of men, beasts and plants, and
make it tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, break this rule directly; for
then they must be divided: but the truth is this, they are not forms, for if
they be, whereof are they forms? viventis: what is the matter of them? as in
animali: is corpus the matter of them? that cannot be, for it is forma
animalis, not corporis; why then what is he but composed of them, ergo they are
not the matter, and form, if there rise a third thing from them, then the thing
has another thing then either of them, ergo they are not the form, but contain
a portion of the matter and form. Again, the body has a form it self, for it
has his particular members, ergo they contain a portion of the matter, and of
the form of the body, ergo, it is composed of a form besides the form of the
whole, so that this it is, per quam, meaning it is quite through that portion
of matter that makes that effect: so that there is not only matter, but also
forma in every thing, and contra.

Res est, quod est.
There it essefies the thing, as well as the efficient, and the matter, id
quost est: so that this esse from the form does not only make it to be, but
makes it to be that which it is: so that hereby we shall know the form, and as
for the efficient and matter, for them a chest might have been a stool, or a
table, but the form only makes it that which it is, and no other thing; again
a body is the genus to a man, ergo not the matter, because he is corpus.

Now we hear what the form is, such a thing as is rei superstrata materiae, the
matter is substrata, and the form is laid upon it. Now question might be made
what a thing forma is. The efficient, and matter we see what they are, the
chestity, or tability, or these do deliver the form as well as they can, but
the end delivers it better, The way to know this is only by the other rules of
Logic, every member (as we heard before) contains a portion of the matter, and
the form of the whole; how can that be? it is true, because membrum is
essential to the whole. Indeed the doctrine of forma has troubled the Schools
very much, and how to name it I cannot tell, only it is causa per quam res
est, this it is. The first efficient in time made the first matter, then he did
superstruere a form upon it, so that the matter is the foundation of the form,
whereby it is retained. Now in the elements both the matter and form are
uniform, and therefore their parts are singular not making a mixture, but
taking hold one of another, for so the matter is principium passionis, and the
form actionis, and then again they both conspire to make up the whole. The next
things are mingled of the elements, where all the elements are in every part;
by this means there is a matter made of the matter of the four elements, and a
form made of the forms of the four elements, and this is the best way to see
the forms of any thing: a man's arm contains a portion of the matter and form of
the whole: and again, it is made of singular parts which still contain a
portion both of the matter, and of the form of it: so that in the end the forms
of things arise from the elements by mistion; and this is that which Galen and
Hippocrates mean when they call forma crasis: so for artificial things their
forms arise from the forms of their parts: so that to know the forms of things
this is the right, forma est causa per quam, etc. Now if we take this course to
see the forms of things we shall easily see the truth: look how many members
there are in a body, so many portions of matter and form there are, ergo, vita
vegitativa, and sensitiva, are not the forms, but that is it that arises from
the union of the elements forms: now by this means neither do we teach that the
forms of things perish, and are annihilated, as the Philosophers say, neither
are their forms diverse, but conspire together to make one; neither is life a
form, so that a bone is a bone, and has the form of a bone when life is gone.

Id quod est.
This is peculiar to the form, for let forma be done away from a thing, and
presently it is another thing: id quod est, namely that whereby it comes to be
ranged under a general head is from the form.

Ideoque hinc a caeteris rebus distinguitur.
Because forma est causa, etc. it is not distinguished by the efficient, or
matter, because all the force of them is not in the thing, as the forms force
is: ideoque, etc. then we see evidently, that so far forth as the form runs
with the matter, so far forth the thing is, id quod est; and so far forth
also is it distinguished from all other things, now this is a necessary
consequution from the first rule.

Object. How can it be a first rule arising from a first rule?

Answ. It is not simply and absolutely first, but first in his kind. So
Dialecticae parts duae sunt, is not the first rule of Logic, because the
definition is before, yet notwithstanding it is first in his kind; now the
reason of it is thi^, every consectary that makes a rule (...) must be a rule
of Art, for it is (...), and is a first property in his kind, though there be
more of them together: now it is here proton, and agrees to the parts
afterward, as risus first agrees to homo, and to Richard, William and John.
etc. It is (...), because it agrees (...), and (...); so that all real
distinction is from the form: and here is the doctrine of differentia with
other Logicians, it is nothing but a property: and is here ideoque hinc a
caeteris rebus distinguitur: so that that which is differentia constitutiva in
regard of the effect, is differentia divisiva as it makes it differ from other
things.

Et forma simul cum reipsa ingeneratur.
Again, here is another property, he says, forma simul* etc. here are two
things adjoined to forma, as properties, the first is that forma ingeneratur,
the second is that simul cum reipsa ingeneratur. For the first there is much
question how the forms come to things, the Philosophers say it is an heavenly
nature, and comes by influence of the Sun, Moon and Stars, as if it were a
quinta essentia from the elements, and must be extrinsice. Now these influences
they know not what they are, if they be qualities of the Sun, Moon and Stars,
then they cannot be forms, for the forms give essence, ergo, is no quality: if
they be not qualities, then they are substances, what substance are they? If
they be of their substance, then they are corruptible, shall it be from their
matter? then it should be celestial, for they are not made of the elements,
neither can matter make a form: and again, it cannot be of their matter, for
then they should be diminished, neither can it be of their forms alone, for one
thing cannot make a third distinct from it, ergo, it is not from them, but the
Sun, Moon and Stars send down fire, which makes a mistion with the other
elements, and so from their forms arises the forms of mists, for so mistio is
alteratorum unio, ergo, it is made one, and it is evident that the forms of the
four elements are all operative, that is, their qualities are in every thing.
But they hold as it were a meeting of many Stars together at the conception of
things, but as for their work, it is not so to be respected, for we see Esau
and Jacob born at the same time, and yet of diverse manners.

Ingeneratur.
Some are of opinion, that the form is in the thing before the thing be, but
now it is educted, and brought out; true it is, it was before in the parts, but
they were not membra: so that after that sort it was before, cum reipsa; how
can this be whereas the end comes between the form, and the effect?

Answ. This is a propriety, and every propriety is an adjunct to the thing, and
the adjunct is after the subject, so that this comes after the form.

Cum re.
As if he should tell us the form lies in the matter after an hidden manner,
but this property is before the end; ingenerari is another thing, then the
form, ergo, forma is before it, but it is together with the thing.

We have made an entrance into the formal cause, and have heard how that it is
after the efficient, and the matter: again whereas every cause gave an esse,
the form did that, and more too, the efficient gave a bare being, the matter
gave a being and part of his essence, and the form gives his whole essence, and
make it that which it is, and that reason of that makes it differ from all
other things, and this the common Logicians did consider, when they made
differentia to be divisiva, or constitutiva. Now here was their mistaking, that
they called it differentia, which does not arise from the essence of it, but
from this property, that forma simul cum reipso ingeneratur.

The Theory of the form is hardest of all humane learning, for it cannot be
seen with our senses, but only by the effects of it we come to grope at it,
because it is principium agens of every thing strengthened by the matter; but
the contemplation of that belongs to natural Philosophy; and thus we may seek
the forms of things. When I know that membrum is essentiale toti, and that the
matter and form constitute the effect, it must needs be, that so many portions
of matter, so many portions there are of forma, ergo, the Schools are deceived,
which think the form may not be divided, for it may, because it is portionated
from the members.

The organical parts of a thing are made of simular parts, and the simular
parts are made of the elements, both for matter and form, the elements of the
first forms; now if you ask me further what they are, I can only say they are
the works of the first efficient incomplete in themselves; so that if you will
penitus introspicere, this is the way, and look what element is most
predominant in the mist, so much more the nearer you shall come to see the form
ingenerated: if we speak of the forms of the elements, they were extrinsice,
and were ing^nerated in the matter, again, if we shall speak of the soul of
man, this is extrinsice infused, but the forms of other things are within, and
are educed out of the matter, but there is nothing new in this, for the matter
is so too.

Ingeneratur. True thus far as the form is not made but by composition of the
elements, when the forms are not made, but in nature there is that misture, or
in Art that composition, that there is a new form: as in a stone by the misture
is made one form arising from the forms of the four elements, by their action
and passion. So in artificial things, the form is a compound form made of the
forms of the parts, and because that thing is now that which it was not, ergo
this form must needs be that now, which it was not, ergo, ingeneratum: and the
whole work of the efficient whilst he does dolare, or hew a thing, is nothing
but his preparing of it together with the rest of the matter to make a new
thing. Forma is diversely ingenerated, if it be by composition, then it is
composed, if it be of simples, then it is made by shaving or cutting it.

Now whilst he says simul at once, it may seem by this that the form and
effect are together; he means not together in nature, for the form must be
before the effect, because it constitutes the effect, and the constituter is
before the thing constituted, therefore how are they simul? he means forma
simul ingenerat: thus, I suppose two go together, and yet one of them goes
before the other, here is a priority, and simul too, he that is before goes
first, the other follows, yet both move together: and as two hands laid
together do move together, and yet one before the other, so is it with the
formal cause and effect, the formal cause moves, and the effect also, but the
effect follows it in every step, and the final cause follows the form, as the
shadow follows the body, and the effect comes last: again, this is a property,
ergo, an adjunct, ergo, is after the subject, for the form is an effect before
it be a subject: so that the efficient does as it were make the form, and the
effect still follows as we may see in artificial things, so that so far forth
as the form is ingenerated, so far forth the effect is accomplished.

Anima rationalis est forma hominis, etc.
Here our Author does commorari, and stay upon the doctrine of forma, for it is
so deep, and subtle, as that it can hardly be perceived. This example is not
true, because anima rationalis may subsist from the body; now as there can be
no matter without a form, so there can be no form without a matter, therefore
this example will not serve his turn, yet he brings that he could get; many in
Schools have stumbled at this, and have gone about to mend it, but indeed they
have marred it.

Some say ratio belongs to Angels, ergo, it is not the proper form of homo, and
therefore they have added mortale, and say homo is animal rationale mortale.
Now if they join mortale to ratio, it is not mortalis. Again, animal ratione
mortale does detract from man, unless we speak of his body.

Et distinguitur a caeteris omnibus naturis.
That is not so, for the Angels though they be animae, and so have not animam
rationalem, yet they have rationem; again, does not the body of man distinguish
him from other thing? so I suppose we admit of the Pythagorians metam, (...). A
man's soul in a bird will not make it a man.

Geometricarum figurarum in triangulis, quadrangulis sua forma est.
He brings such examples as he could find, and those whereof greatest question
might be made; it has been a question among Logicians, that this forma is
peculiar to substances, not accidents; and hence have made a distinction of
forma to be substantialis, or accidentalis: but they are deceived, for Logic
is a general Art, and every thing that is made has causes, ergo, may be
defined, ergo, has matter and form; for otherwise we could not have a perfect
definition in Grammar, Rhetoric and Arithmetic, or in any other Arts that
have accidents for their subjects: ergo, accidents behold a form as well as an
efficient, ergo, he says in Geometry, take a triangle, it consists of three
lines with three angles, which by their unition in their angles, make up one
form, as well as one matter.

Phisicarum rerum, coeli, terrae, arborum, piscium sua forma est.
He does commorari here long for two causes: first, in respect the form is
deep, and needs illustration. Secondly to confute other Logicians, that say
accidents have no forms, unde praecipua rerum ut natura est, etc. if it be
causa per quam res est id quod est, then it is praecipua rerum natura. Nature
proper is res nata, that is, that springs principiis, that is matter and
form: so that the whole nature consists of them, and this is the proper
signification of it, afterward it comes to signify the principia themselves;
hence is materia and forma called natu^ae: so that in natural Philosophy, when
you read of nature, they tell you commonly some tale of materia or forma: then
again by a metonimy of the adjunct for the subject, it signifies the qualities
natural in things: all this shows forma to be praecipua rei natura. Praecipua,
first because it makes the thing to be id quod est, so does not the matter:
again, forma, why it is principium actus, from whence the qualities principally
arise: for as the Philosophers teach, though not truly in every point, materia
is principium passionis: forma actionis, and actio is better than passio, ergo
the form more excellent than the matter, but both matter and form do agere, for
they are causa; yet the forms begin, and the matter is but the sustentation of
it, and the forms act is the stronger by the matter, not only as it acts
internally, but when it acts upon external things by resistance by the way. Now
as it has chief interest in esseficating the effect, so it is praecipua rei
natura, so also there is of it praecipua rei explicatio, si possit inveniri.

Si possist inveniri.
He says it neither can be found out, nor that it cannot be found out. Si
possit inveniri: sure it is findable; I prove it thus, it is liable to Logic,
if it be objected to the eye, then the eye may see it; it may but hardly be
found, because it does not descry it self to the outward senses by qualities,
as bodies do: again, the form in nature is so subtle that we can hardly find
it, but see as it were the shadow of it, ergo diverse have thought the forms of
things to be divine. Some have gone so far as to think them to be influences:
but subtle it is indeed, and harder to find out, then either the efficient, or
matter, ergo we commonly call that the matter, which contains the form too,
because it is rather seen as it has a material cause, than as it has a formal.

Vt in artificiofis rebus facilius occurrit.
That is the reason why he that makes natures is more cunning than any man can
trace his wisdom: as we may see in the elements, ergo no man can make a thing
in nature; man may further nature, but he cannot make any thing: again, the
parts are so fine in the mixture of things, as it is beyond the acies of man's
eye to see them.

In artificiosis rebus facilius occurrit.
Why? because artificial things are the works of men, and one man may trace
another, though every man cannot.

Caesar. 7. Muri autem omnes Gallici, etc.
As for example, in artificial things this very description will declare how
hard a thing it is to find out the form, but we use to point at it by the
matter, and by the position of it. There stood great beams all along, two foot
asunder, put into the earth, and the distances between them were stuffed with
great stones: when these were so fastened, then there was a new order begun,
where they laid the beams against those stones that were laid before, and
filled likewise the distances with stones which were against the first lay of
beams: but what has he told us now? why says he, I am a Frenchman, and I
will tell you the form of a French wall, where if you do but look at the forms
of every part, and of them, you shall see a composed form: so that the Logician
does not look at the outward face of a thing, but at the inward essence: here
he is fain to deliver the form by many other arguments, and indeed it is a
description of forma.

Est in secessu longo locus: ensula portum, etc.
Here he has by the position of the parts of the haven, told us the form of it.

CHAP. VIII.
De fine.
Finis est causa cujus gratia res est.

WE have gone through the esse of a thing, we have but heard of three, when
the fourth comes, that makes up the perfection of the thing, namely finis.

Finis, for the name, it is borrowed from Geometry; for that that is terminus
there, is here called finis, and it is brought hither to signify that final
cause that serves to make up the effect: so that it is (...), if we keep the
proportion of the esses, but it is not the last part and member thereof, as
they make (...) the last member of some whole, as Method is the last member of
Logic. Finis is the (...) of the esse of a thing, not of the members of it.
Now it is called finis, because it limits the thing for his (...), and for his
essence, and it is the last thing that limits it, ergo it is called finis.

Est causa.
Because with force thereof the thing is, and the end though it do not enter
into the essence of the effect, by it own essence yet by it virtue it does
efficere, as does the efficient.

Cujus gratia.
Therefore the final cause is that that graceth the effect, and thence has the
thing his commendation, cujus gratia, for whose grace; for gratia here
signifies not only for whose sake, but for whose grace, as if the final cause
were that which does grace the effect, and so indeed it does. For as bonum quo
communius, eo melius, so communior finis has more grace than finis specialio^:
for that cause, that which is next the chiefest end is more noble and
excellent, then that which is more remote. Hence man is more excellent than any
other creature, because he is made immediately for God. So then the end graceth
it evermore: and the more excellent the end is, the more excellent is that
effect. This then is the esse that the final cause does give to the effect,
namely, that which is good for that effect: so that the goodness of a thing is
that vis in the effect, that it has from the end: As in a knife, the efficient
may be a slave, the matter likewise naught, the form though that be something,
yet were it not for the end, neither the efficient, matter or form would move,
ergo the final cause is said to be the happiness of the thing: so that a thing
is not to be accounted happy till it be serviceable to that end for which it
was made. A garment well made as touching the skill of the efficient, and of
good stuff for the matter, and fit for a garment, and so of a good form, yet
not fitting him for whom it was made, it wants his end, or happiness, and so
is not perfect: Again, this shows the difference between the formal cause and
the end, for the form may be as we see, and not the end. Again, we know there
are many things that have not their perfection but by growth, and yet have all
the causes, yet notwithstanding the end presently follows after the form: so
man was made by God; here God is the efficient, earth the matter, reason the
form; yet here is not his end, namely, fitness to serve God. And thus we have
heard the doctrine of the causes, which are the foundations whereon the effect
is builded.

Physicis rebus finis homo propositas est; homini Deus.
Of natural things man is the end: the grace of man is God, and God makes him
good, not as an efficient, but as an end.

Omnium artium est aliquod summom bonum and finis extremus.
That is that end which they reach unto, but that is not the summum bonum of
all things: for Logicks end is been disserere, Grammars been loqui, etc. these
are the furthest ends of Logic and Grammar, but not the furthest end of all:
they are indeed the proper end of them, but not the summum bonum: so that he
means by summum bonum the outmost or farthest end of them, and the end of
Logic lies in the precepts of it, as they act been disserere. This is the
difference between the end and the effect. A house is made to dwell in, though
it never be dwelt in: so for a garment, to be worn is one thing, and to be fit
to wear another. So if I go forth to speak with one, and he be gone, yet I
obtain my end: they commonly say he was frustrate of his end, but not frustrate
of finis, quatenus finis, but quatenus effectum.

Juno primo Aeneidos connubii finem assumit, cum Aeolo Deiopeiam pollicetur,
solatii scilicet prolisque gratia.
Sunt mihi his septem praestanti corpore Nymphae, etc.

Here Juno persuades Eolus to let his wind out, and she would give him one of
her Nymphs, which she presses upon him by final causes: first, that she may
spend all her years with him: and secondly, that she may make him the father of
a fair offspring.

In defensione Ligarii Cicero Tuberonem accusatorem urget, etc.
Et certe (ait) contra ipsum Caesarem est congressus armatus, etc. As if he
should say, Tubero thou had thy sword drawn at the battle of Pharsalio, thou
did strike his side: mark the variety of the phrases, and so of the ends.
What meant thy sword? what was thy mind? here was the propositum. What meantst
thou to have done? even to have killed Caesar. So that the final cause is not
accidental to the thing, but even substantial; and therefore we have it so
often in the definition of Arts used for the form, and that for this reason:
because it is the next argument to it, and presupposes the form: so that this
is the use of the final cause in the definition of Arts.

As Dialectica est ars been disserendi, here been disserere is the end, and it
is as if he should say, Dialectica has such a soul, as that it is able to
perform and execute this or that thing, for which it was made. So (...) is the
end of all Arts: I but what (...) in general, why, (...), and (...) is the
effect of all Arts?

Answ. But as every thing is (...), so (...) is the end of it ergo, if a man
will do any Logicum opus, he must (...): and thus we have heard the doctrine of
the causes.

CHAP. IX.
De effectis. Effectum est, quod e causis existit, siveigitur gignatur, sive,
etc.
NOw we come to see a thing made up: it is worth the consideration, to see how
we begin at the farthest thing, and at the first. There are four esses
distinct, which we must look at distinctly and orderly, if we ^ill see things
a^ight. First the efficients, then the matters, etc. now then let us see
effectum. Effectum: for the name it seems to be nominated only from the
efficient; for it comes of efficior, which comes o^ efficio, whence efficiens
comes: and howbeit it might be denominated materiatum, formatum, or finitum,
yet he rather names it of the efficient; but we are to understand, that it has
reference to all the causes, even materiatum, formatum, finitum.

Object. Why should there not be as many several kinds of effects, as there are
of causes?

Answ. Because no one cause alone can make an effect, for it is existent from
them all: the causes are distinct in nature, and their forces are their own,
ergo their doctrine must be distinct: but because essectum must be made of the
composition of the four esses, ergo it can be but one: so that I cannot say,
effectum efficientis, effectum materiae, effectum formae, or effectum finis,
ergo we must see effectum alone in one lump, as it is in nature. Now because it
has all the esses of the causes, ergo good reason that the efficient that is
(...), and works generally quite through with every other cause, matter, form
and end, should have the effect denominated from it, so that this child brought
forth by the four causes is denominated from the efficient.

Est.
All things are effects, but God alone, ergo, effectum est: therefore whereas
all things are made liable to our eye of reason, it is requisite that as we see
the causes that make up the thing, so the effect, which is a quinta essentia
arising from them.

Quod.
He means argumentum absolute consentancum: now we see plainly how the causes
are absolutely agreeing to the effect, but how is the effect absolutely
a-agreeing to them? yes, for if the effect be from them, it will vouchsafe to
acknowledge it self to be from them: and we see in nature, that if an effect
be, then all the causes are, and contra: again, that we may see it plainly, if
we take away the efficient, the effect will be imperfect: so put the effect,
and we put the matter and form substantially, and the esses of the other: so
take away the effect, and you take away them. Now if the efficient be rotten,
yet it is an effect, as this Logic is Ramus his effect, though he be dead and
rotten: for here we respect not time, but the esse. Again, he puts efficiens
generally a qua, materia ex qua, forma per quam, finis cujus gratia, and here
effectum quod: the reason why he used quod so often, is, because he would tell
us that Logic is general to every thing.

Existit.
Esse is of any one cause; existere is a compound of them all, not that
existere has respect of time and place, as some teach: true it is, time and
place attend every thing, when it does existere, but they are not of the esse
of the thing, but are only complemental; est is a causa qualibet, existere ex
omnibus, subsistere ex modo quodam consentaneis. Existere comes of ex and sto,
now it does stand upon its feet, and does estare out from all the causes, being
a fifth thing from them.

Ecausis.
Here e is as much as a, ex per, and gratia: ecausis, that is, ab efficiente,
ex materi, per formam, gratia finis. Causis not causa, and therefore it is that
all four causes must absolutely concur, or else the thing cannot existere, as
the first matter did not: ergo, if Angels do existere, they must have all the
causes: so the souls of men after they be out of the body, they cannot per se
existere without they have all the causes, for if any one cause be wanting,
they will be incomplete.

Sive igitur gignatur, sive corrumpatur.
Ramus does here commorari upon this doctrine of effectum, because the common
Aristotelians refer the doctrine of motus not to Logic but to natural
Philosophy: but Ramus teaches it here in Logic in the doctrine of effectum,
sive igitur gignatur, sive corrumpatur, etc, whether it be made or corrupted,
sive modo quodam moveatur, quidlibet, that is, whether it be augmented, or
diminished, etc. generatio, and corruption are substantial motus, augmentatio,
and diminutio quantitatis, alteratio, and loci mutatio qualitatis: and all
these are effects: then again, whereas the Aristotelians teach, that distruens
causa, is not causa, Ramus teaches that it is, for whether a man does (...) or
(...) by the same rule he does both, ergo, both of them are motus of his act to
the opus, ergo, causa distruens is a motus, and a cause, as well as opus
destructum is an effect, and privations though they be privations in respect of
their habits, yet they are effects in respect of their causes, ergo, they are
causes both alike: they teach as if a man had done nothing when he did sin,
whereas he spoils the Image of God in him: ergo, whilst they are more nice
than wise they become foolish. If the Lord should bring to nothing that which
he has done, it would be his effect, at least the corruption of nothing. Now
the effect is double, motus, and res motu facta, every thing is made motu, God
only is sine motu, and does not move when he works, for else he should not be
primus movens, but motus: but if we resolve all things, it must needs bring us
in the end to that which is immovable: for so Aristotle found out most things
by motus: now again, there are those that sever motus, and res motu facta, as
the Aristotelians, which makes Ramus to commorari; they say, somethings rest
motu only without a res motu facta, but that is not so, for there is nothing
that God has made, which does movere, but there is a res motu facta of that
motus: they conceit that some Arts motion has no opus post se relictum, as
when one plays on the Virginals, they say there is nothing left behind.

Answ. What care I for that, Logic looks not to that, but as there is playing,
so there is something played, which is res motu facta: and as there is writing,
so there is something written. These, namely motus, and res motu facta, are
never distinct asunder one without another, but only in that the one is not
the other.

Hujus loci sunt lauds, and vituperationes.
As if Ramus should say, if you would commend a thing indeed, let it be from
the effect, we may commend one from his fair building, but that is beggarly, as
Tully says, or a woman for her beauty, but this is childish, for the true
commendation is from the effect: so man is here to be dispraysed from his sin:
so the Lord is to be praised from his effects.

Quarum pleni sunt libri sacri, and prophani.
Why in Scripture? because Divinity stands in action, not in Theorie, and
therefore we have them so often commended that have done well, and contra.

Aenei. 6. facta variorum populorum, etc. Excudent alii spirantia mollius era,
etc.
The Romans are commended from their effects; first, regere imperio populos:
again parcere subjectis, etc. these are compared with the acts of other people,
and they are made minora to the effects of the Romans. Excudent alii spirantia,
etc. As the Corinthians will carve you any thing. Orabant causas melius, as the
Orators among the Athenians, Coelique meatus, etc. as the Caldeans and
Egyptians will do.

Huc dicta scriptaque referenda sunt.
That is, dicta and scripta in respect of Authors, but if we look at the things
written, or spoken, so they are testimonies. So Pericles and Hortensius are
famous for speaking well. Demosthenes and Tully for both.

Ad hunc locum referuntur consilia, and deliberationes, etc.
Counsels and deliberations are effects of them that consult, and deliberate,
etiam si omnio ad exitum perductae non fuerint. And this appears evidently in
that Parmenio and Philotas were put to death, being suspected of conspiracy
against Alexander. So also were Lentulus, and Cethegus, and other companions of
Cataline.

Sunt etiam effecta virtutum and vitiorum. Quid non ebrietas designat? operta
recludit, etc.
Now it is a common conceit that nothing is an effect, but that which is
substantial, but accidental causes as I may call them, may have accidental
effects. As drunkenness first operta recludit, secondly, in praelia trudit
inermem, it makes a man go to war leaving his weapons behind him, it will
make a man think himself as good as my Lord Mayor. Faecundae calices, here are
cups for drink, and drink for drunkenness, quem non fecere desertum, that is a
dizard, he means a Logician, contracta quem non, etc. it makes a man in
poverty a brave minded fellow.

CHAP. X.
De subjecto. Argumentum modo quodam consentaneum succedit ut subjectum and
adjunctum, etc.
WE have heard of the essential parts of a thing, and so have seen the thing
in his essence, and we see how Logic does direct the eye of our reason, to see
the most inmost thing in it. Now we come to see the complemental things, that
belong to a thing, not belonging or concurring to the existere of it: so that
the causes were as it were the simular parts, these are as it were the blood in
the sinews, etc. to make them full, and complemental: Modo quodam consentaneum,
as if he should say, the causes were required ad esse rei, these are but
required ad been esse rei: so that the causes looked at the inside of the
thing, and now we come to look at the outside of it.

Argumentum modo quodam, etc.
This is an imperfect transition containing only the proposition of that which
follows, modo quodam: as if he should say, if they be there it is well,
notwithstanding if they be wanting it is no prejudice to the essence of the
thing, for they are but circumstances, whereas argumenta absolute consentanea
are penetralia; again, argumenta modo quodam consentanea come after the being
of the thing, for accidens inseparabilis, as homini risus aequo hinnitus, are
but acts of the soul working in the bodies of their subjects,

Succedit.
Why? because they are after those that agree absolutely: we have heard that
the effect arises from all the causes, and cannot existere without them, ergo,
it must be a thing of necessity before it be subject, or adjunct, or before it
can have a subject, or adjunct, for that which has adjuncts is a subject, and
contra.

Vt subjectum, and adjunctum.
A subject is by nature before an adjunct, and a thing is first a subject
before it be an adjunct, and there must be a thing subjected to an adjunct
before a thing can be adjoined to a subject: again the subject is more general
than the adjunct, not that there are more subjects to one adjunct, for it is
quite contrary, for there may be twenty adjuncts to one subject, but I mean it
is more in use, and argues more strongly than the adjunct does, As when I say
the King is there, ergo, the Guard is there, is stronger than to say the Guard
is there, therefore the King, and here we see as before, priority and
posteriority. Now our reason is to behold things according to the course of
God, for whatsoever we see it was first in God, and when he has made a thing
then it is a subject, and it is capable of adjuncts before it have them, ergo,
subjectum is before adjunctum in the practice of God, and also of man. Now
subjectum as it is first, so must it be taught first. The name subjectum tells
me it is a thing laid undermost in regard of the adjunct, and it does support
it, and yet it is not of the essence of it, but only laid under it, and
adjunctum is to ride on it as a pack-horse: now as the efficient was most
inmost, then the other three, or the effect, so is subjectum here, ergo it is
by nature before adjunctum.

Subjectum est cui aliquid adjungitur.
He omits the genus, and the reason why he does not teach the genus namely
argumentum modo quodam consentaneum is because it is a definition it self, as
absolute consentaneum was, for there is no definition of a definition, but if
he had defined it, he had brought a definition to a definition, he wanted a
word to name the thing, and therefore gives me a description instead thereof,
cui aliquid, this aliquid is that ens we heard of in Art; so that this aliquid
is any thing, not simply, but quatenus it has an affection to be joined. A
thing being an effect, is fit to receive outward things; and subjectum is
defined by his relate adjunctum, for it is cui aliquid adjungitur, and
whatsoever is subjected to another thing is his adjunct, as whiteness is an
adjunct to a wall that is white.

Adjungitur.
Adjungitur, so that subjectum is the argument, and adjunctum the aliquid,
adjungitur, so that here he tells us that the adjunct is adjoined to the
subject, th at which is must needs be after the thing to which it is tied,
ergo, subjectum is before adjunctum, he says it is but adjunctio, not entering
into the essence of it, but that it may be taken away: so that as subjectum
does intimate a thing laid underneath, so the adjunct does intimate a thing
laid upon it: so that the adjunct does depend, and hang upon the subject as
upon a hook; or as one thing tied to another: thus have we heard the subjects
argument to be so, as if his adjunct be removed from him, or he from his
adjunct, yet he stands firm in his causes. Now for the manners.

Anima est subjectum scientiae, ignore antiae, virtutis, vitii, quia haec
praeter essentiam accedunt.
Anima is a spiritual thing, so are these adjuncts, scientia, ignorantia, etc.
of the same kind too, now these take hold one of another quodam modo, ergo, if
they be removed, yet the soul remains entire, ergo, it is but subjectum of
them, scientia, etc. Now are but adjoined to it, the anima his esse is not of
their esse, aut contra. Some are of opinion (as Scaliger) that the Angels and
men's souls esse, and agere, are the same, but then their actus should be
perpetual: again then they have no adjuncts, then no causes, then God, ergo,
they have their qualities. Again, it is a most sound, and sure argument that
they are creatures, not God, because they are finite, ergo, have causes, ergo,
are effects, ergo, have adjuncts.

Object. But how are these joined to the soul? it has two faculties; reason
and will, now the faculties of the understanding are the intellectual virtues,
when it can promptly, and readily perform its act, as when it is prompt and
ready in inventing, then it is inteligentia, when it is prompt in seeking out
truths, then it is sci^ntia, when it is ready in discoursing, then it is
sapientia, etc. so that these intellectual virtues are habits of the faculty of
reason, and lie in the promptness of its act: so by virtues he means moral
ve^tue, not intellectual, and that is of the will. For when the will can
promptly perform the act of bountifulness, or justice, then it is in like sort
liberality, or justice, and so for the rest, and the contrary makes (...) ergo,
these are but adjuncts, quia praeter essentiam accident, that is, these come
over, and above the ess^^ce. The soul is tanquam tabula abrasa, and these
virtues come afterward.

Corpus sanitatis, morbi, roboris, infirmitatis; pulchritudinis, deformitatis.
The soul had his spiritual adjuncts, the body has his proper adjuncts also,
and this definition of his teaches us to look at the proper adjuncts of
things. So sanitas is a proper adjunct to the body, for there arises an (...)
and a (...) and thence comes sanitas, and morbus: robur arises principally
from the bones and sinews, beauty arises from the freshness of blood, and the
analogy, and proportion of the parts, for if there be comely visage, and not
blood, it is not beauty, we call it good favor, but not fair, but here it is
opposed to deformity, and contains not only well favor, which stands in the
symmetry of the parts one to another, which belongs to Physic, but color
which belongs to blood.

Homo, subjectum est divitiarum, paupertatis, honoris, infamiae, vestitus,
comitatus.
Here homo has his adjuncts general both to soul, and body; now here we see
that subjects and adjuncts are not as the common Schools take them namely,
only substances to be subjects, and accidents adjuncts: for accidents may be
subjects, and contra, ergo, that distribution of ens into substantia, and
accidens, will not follow in any Art, but here, and they a^e special kinds of
subjects and adjuncts.

Locus est subjectum rei locatae.
Locus is a modus of subjectum, the Schools both ancient and of latter time
have maintained locus to belong to natural Philosophy, because (say they) it
arises from every thing in nature. Now first true it is, that there is
nothing, but it is res naturalis, even reason, speech, quantity, etc. are res
naturales, and it does not therefore follow because it is res naturalis, ergo
it belongs to nature, for it is a mere affection, and it is taken away, if we
take away the locatum: and as causa may be no causa, effectum no effectum; so
may locus be no locus. Again, cannot things in Art be in place, as well as
things in nature? are not Angels finite and terminated? and locus, if we take
it properly, is nothing but subjectum rei locatae: as in causa there was the
thing causa, as it causes: so there is locus as there is the thing receiving:
as when I say such a one is in my chamber: here I consider my chamber not as it
is in his building, but as it is receiving him. Again, if it should not be in
Logic, it should rather be in Geometry than in Nature, for limitation of place
is next and immediately from the limitation of quantity, and there we hear of
locus, as there is repletio loci: locus here is put for the space of that
place, by a metonimy of subject for the adjunct.

Est subjectum.
Here that which we heard of in adjuncts is res locata: because it does apply
that special kind of adjunct that answers to this subject locus. Now it is not
essential to the thing, ergo is but complemental: again, that which is now in
one place may remove to another place, ergo is not absolutely consenting to the
thing: and thus we see it must needs belong to Logic, as being but in respect:
they say only corpus is in loco descriptive, and not spirits, they are but in
ubi, or in loco designatione: but what is this but a rule of Geometry? where we
hear of completio loci by corpus: and therefore Aristotle brings locus to
quantity. Then again they question whether the space that contains a thing be
locus or no.

Answ. Space belongs to nature, and is nothing but the measure that does fill
the place, and is nothing but that quadrangula sex complent locum, or a pint
will receive a pint: and therefore to receive is to measure the space. I
confess you may name it in Nature, but not define it.

Sic Philosophi divinis entibus, licet part, and magnitudine carentibus
attribuunt locum.
So the Philosophers give place to the intelligences, whereas he making them to
move the heavens, says they are on the superficies of them.

Licet part, and magnitudine carentibus.
Here he speaks according to the common conceits in Schools, but I marvel how
he or any other can say so. Scaliger says, they are in divine predicament of
quantity, but not in this gross predicament of quantity, and they have a
figure. In what figure were Angels first created? An. In what figure was water
first made? they can take any figure as water can; but I think they were first
made in the figure of roundness. So Aristotle says they were made as puncta.
So is fire round, for that is figura capacissima, ergo, perfectissima. I have
thought also that the Ark was made for all the world like a man, and there was
the proportion of length proportionable to a man's breadth, and the height
proportionable to a man's thickness. Now for the wanting of parts it is not so;
for Angels may be divided, though their parts be simular: so are the elements
parts; and as some write, the wicked spirits may be struck, and so the Sun
light; but it will too quickly return into it self: and as the light may be
divided, so may they. And whereas they say, anima is tota in toto, and tota in
qualibet part, they wrong God, and the creature, for what is the reason? God
can have no parts, ergo no causes; other things whatsoever must needs have
causes, ergo must have membra, ergo we cannot say they are all in every part.
Yes, the reasonable soul is in my little finger? Content, but is that very
portion of it that is in my head also in my little finger? There is a
discontinuance, and the same thing should be here, and not there, which is flat
contradiction: but God is not in this or that finger, but also between them.
The Papists absurdity appears notably in this, in that they will have Christ's
body to be really in the Sacrament in the bread, and in heaven also, and yet
not in the air, but make a discontinuance: ergo it is in the bread, and not in
the bread; in heaven, and not in heaven; for if it is in heaven, there it is
shut up, and so in the bread.

Sic Geometrae locum, locique differentias in rebus geometricis.
That is, above, and below, angle, and base, etc.
At prius ignotum ferro quum scindimus aequor, etc.
Here he appoints several places to several things, and here locus is but
subjectum, and they adjuncta.

Sensilia sensuum, and res virtutibus, ac vitiis propositae, subjecta vitiorum,
and virtutum hoc modo nominantur.
Here are objecta, as the common Schools teach, because the sense is cast upon
them: so virtues and vices; though they have their subjects themselves in one
kind, yet here they are adjuncts, rebus virtutibus ac vitiis propositae. Now it
is a fallace of non subjectum, when we give that to subjectum which is not
subjectum. As Tully jested with Piso his little son, and said, who has hanged
my son to yonder sword?

Ejusmodi subjecto Cicero 2. Agrar. disputat, inter Campanos nullam
contentionem esse, qui nullus sit honor.
Non gloriae cupiditate (ait) afferebantur, etc.

Honor is the subject of ambition; the Campani had no honor among them, ergo
no ambition: where there is no honor there is no ambition, but inter Campanos
there is no honor, ergo no ambition. Here the proposition contains the
subject, and adjunct, and by removing the subject, he removes the adjunct.

Eodem argumento a Propertio dictum est.
Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat Arator, etc.

The Mariner he tells of the winds whereabout he is occupied, and vulnera are
adjuncts to Soldiers; yet here as he talks of them he is adjunctum: and thus
have we heard of the first complement of a thing, namely, to be a subject, or
to have a subject.

CHAP. XI.
De adjuncto.
Adjunctum est, cui aliquid subjicitur: quod argumentum etsi subjecto est
levius, attamen est copiosius and frequentius.

NOw we come to adjuncts, which are after subjectum, and because subjectum and
adjunctum have diverse natures, ergo they must be taught distinctly, and in
distinct Chapters; now therefore we come to adjunctum, which is the outmost
thing, and it is called adjunctum, because it is adjoined to the thing, and it
is put to another thing after it has its being. Now there is nothing in the
world, but may be a cause, an effect, a subject or adjunct; and therefore
Logic is general of (...): but in that he tells us, that it is but adjoined, he
tells us that it does agree but quodam modo, that is, conditionally; but many
adjuncts be removed from their subjects, since their causes are in them.

Answ. Sure there may be an alteration of them by the hinderance of the act of
the form upon the matter, or the act externally. So the Adamant stone if we put
but the juice of garlic upon it, it will not draw iron unto it. Again, the
causes may be altered in the subject, ergo the adjunct may be removed, ergo it
is but argumentum modo quodam consentaneum, and not absolute requisitum.

Cui.
Because any thing whatsoever may have the respect of an adjunct, as any thing
may be a cause.

Aliquid.
That is, that that is propounded, or that which we are to argue, or that that
is argued, so that that which the adjunct is adjoined to, is subjectum.

subjicitur.
Adjunctum does presently tell me, that there is some thing cui aliquid
adjungitur: he rather says subjicitur than adjungitur, because adjunctum has
reference to subjectum, and it is better to define them from the relation
between them, then a comparatis; because relats are mutual causes one of
another. Now here he shows that the adjunct is that that is builded upon the
subject: and as the subject did presuppose a thing already made, but must
support another thing; so adjunctum tells me it is a thing already made, but
must lie upon the subject: subjectum signifies a supporter, or a suppository as
it were: adjunctum, that is more common than subjectum, and subjectum lies
always under; but adjunctum it may either lie over, or under, or be tacked to
either side, yet it will fall off, unless it be nailed, or adjoined to the
subject. Now that which tacks it to the subject is that affection which it has
to subjectum, every thing will not be an adjunct to every thing, nor every
thing a subject to every thing. Solomon says, if we bray a fool in a mortar,
as wheat is brayed, he will not be wise: the reason is, for that his spirits
are so dry, dull and earthy. Now wisdom has so fine a hand, as that she cannot
take hold of such hard things, but they will hurt it, so that it cannot be
subjectum or adjunctum to any thing: and this shows that Logic is in the
things in nature, and not in man's brain only. So this rule wills us to look how
subjectum is able to support the adjunct, and when he sees how God has done
them for him, to use them to his turn. Again, this rule is of great use to see
how things are tacked together in nature, so as the one being taken away the
other will remain entire: then again, though the adjunct in nature cannot be
severed from the subject, yet by my eye of Logic I can sever them.

Quod argumento etsi sub: est levius, attamen est copiosius, and frequentius.
Our Author does commorari, and tells us with very good reason, that the adjunct
is more light to press the subject than contra.

Object. But this might have been before, if it be copiosius and frequentius;
now he teaches arguments according to their more strong manner of arguing; and
subjectus is fortius, for because the causes of the adjuncts are in the
subject, you may not therefore easily remove the subject, but you will destroy
the adjunct, nor contra: yet some adjuncts may be taken away; and yet take away
any adjunct, and there will be some imperfection in the thing: so that
adjunctum will be levius, if we weigh them in a pair of balance: which appears
many ways: as if Mr. Fanshaw be at London, his servants are there: this is
more strong arguing than to say contra. Subjectum est fortius, because it is by
nature before, and the adjunct is eatenus adjunctum, as it lies on the subject.

Attamen est copiosius, and frequentius.
For one adjunct can have but possibly one subject, but one subject may have an
hundred adjuncts: now such a kind of copiousness or frequentity, does not make
the adjunct more general than the subject, in respect the subject is of more
strength for the sustentation of the adjunct, than contra: and as it is more
copius, so frequentius, that is, more often in common use, because it is of all
arguments most familiar to men, even men unlearned: for the inmost thing is the
efficient, then the matter, then the form, then the end, then the effect, then
the subject, and lastly the adjunct, ergo because it is so plain as that a
plain man may see, ergo it is frequentius.

Itaque de ejusmodi signis ait Ovidius 2. de remedio.
He illustrates this by Ovids testimony, which said as much, Forsitan haec
aliquis, etc. meaning of signs: Sunt parva, because these are common
qualities, which may be in diverse things: so that one will not argue so
strongly: multa juvant, that is where there is a concourse of many together,
there is as it were a description, which argues strongly.

Animi corporis que and totius hominis bona, and mala, quae dicuntur adjuncta
sunt animi; corporis, hominis.
As he has showed before, anima, etc. to be subjects, so here he shows virtus,
vitium, etc. to be adjuncts: now he takes them bona and mala, because there are
tria genera honorum, namely, of the soul, of the body, and of man, so contra,
tria genera malorum.

Denique quic quam ulli subjecto extrinsecus accidit adjunctum ejus est.
Again, here is another modus of adjunctum quicquid extrinsecus accidit, that
is, comes unto it not as causes, effects, or subjects, but as it were adjoined
to it accidentally, ergo he says extrinsecus: for it was not our Authors mind
that qualities were from within, though of necessity they must be.

Vt ^utem locus est in subjectis, sic tempus est in adjunctis.
That locus we heard of before was subjectum, and because it was a general
affection, ergo it belongs to Logic, and it was nothing but the application
of a continet, to a contained: so time is nothing but the application of one
thing to another thing; as when I say he came on monday, or at three of the
clock, that is not time, but the adjunct of time: and here is the application
of the course of primum mobile, or of the Clock to his act: it is duratio, the
meting of a thing. Time may well be compared to a line; and as fluxus punctum
is linea, so fluxus nunc is tempus: he went in the turning of a hand, that is,
whilst one might have turned his hand: so that I measure it by the durance,
not by his length, or Geometry.

Rei.
For Logic is rei: and as causa is res, so tempus est res, or duratiorei, that
is of the subject praesens, praeterita, and futura: here he does distribute
this time, to show that this distribution of time belongs to Logic, and not
to any other Art. Much descanting there is about time among other Logicians,
which teach that it has a double respect, one to the thing measured, and so it
is properly time, another to the thing measuring, and that is not time, but as
one is measuring it: now for the logical notion of time it is all one whether
it be active or passive, and it is one and the same thing diversely respected,
and because active and passive go always together, ergo, the time must needs
be general to both; praeterita, praesens and futura. So for things that are
subject to our Logic are divided into past, present and to come, for only God
is not subject to time, because he is eternal, ergo is omne non esse ante post,
neither can we say be is now if we respect time, for what should measure him,
should primum mobile, or day and night? no, so that though he be at all times
according to our Logic, yet he is with out respect of time at all times, for
time is not eternal, ergo not omne non esse ante post. And Grammar, which is
the garment of Logic, does speak by the verb of time past, present, and to
come; now we give it in Grammar to verbs, not but that it may be given to every
thing, as well as to actions, and passions, but that we deliver it actively or
passively.

Again, primum mobile which God has made a common globe to all the world, and
is measured according to praeterita, praesens, and futura, ergo, time is in
every thing, and Angels, and men's souls are without respect of primum mobile,
and day and night: because they are beyond them, but they are not without
duration passive, because they were made creatures by God: so that though their
tempus be called avum, yet is it this tempus.

Object. May praeteritum being past be said to be? no, if we respect pr^sens,
for they are as we see here distinct things, but if we respect the thing, it
is, yet not in time, but in its essence: how in it essence? not as it does
existere in rerum natura, but as it is in a rule, that is external: so that
though Socrates now be not, yet this axiom Socrates est homo is now, and will
be to the worlds end: so praeteritum, praesens, and futurum all of them are,
for we do not respect the adsignification of time, but look at the argument as
it is a being: so that time future is a true thing, though the time be not yet
come: and that duratio past, present, and to come are, because the thing still
is: so that time is an adjunct. But here as locus must be a thing with that
affection of receiving, so time must be a thing with this affection of
measuring,

Omninoque qualitates subjectis praeter causas adiunctae, etc.
Again, another modus of adiunctum is called qualitates, which is adjoined to
this, or that, not being causes, here comes in their predicament of qualitas,
and qualitas is no genus of any thing, ergo, that distinction of qualitas to be
naturalis, or moralis is not at all, but a special use of a thing that is
taught in a general Art, for qualitas is but a logical term, and as adiunctum
is genus to them, so is qualitas. Every example is infima species in Logic: so
that calor is an adjunct to fire, and when I have said so, I have considered
the logical respect, and no more.

Praeter causas.
We have heard that there can be nothing but must have causes: and so the
existere of a thing is from the esses that the causes give, and then the
adjuncts come over, and above the thing. Now qualities are of two sorts, proper
and common, these are but special modi of these qualities: they may be proper,
because they argue at proper, common because they argue at common, or at
random, as we say. Now whatsoever has affection to argue, that belongs to
Logic, ergo, these, because they have affection to argue, rather as modi, that
as adjuncts; as modi efficientis before. So therefore they are distingushed
thus So risus does argue homo, not so much in regard of his adiunctity as of
its property. Now qualitates propriae have these properties with them,
convenient they come together with the subject, and are (...) with the whole,
and afterward with the parts, ergo, he says well convenient.

Omni.
This is somewhat hard, for omni non dicitur de uno, aut de duobus, but tria
simul omnia, that is, three will make an omne; and our Author teaches in
judgment, that a special axiom is quando consequens non omni, and there it may
be of one or two: but here it must be taken more general for one or two, etc.
but because the Schools thought properties convenire omni speciei only, and
thought that individua had no properties, as they also thought that forma was
only speciebus, and individua were distinguished accidentibus. But our Logic
teaches that every thing has a form, and therefore has properties, for
commonly properties arise from the form, ergo, he says, convenient omni,
whether it be omni speciei, omni individuo.

Soli.
Soli shuts out all others, else it is not a property.

Semper.
So that if they agree omni, and non soli, or soli and non omni, or omni and
soli, sed non semper, semper sed non omni and soli, they are no properties,
ergo, a property does argue with this virtue, that it argues omni, soli, and
semper; and so it is meet, because they will come into Art, and will make a
rule (...), for this it is, every Art ought to deliver the causes, qualities,
and act of a thing; for so there is in nature first the thing, then the
qualities, or faculties, then the act which points out the (...): so that if
one would make an Art of homo that part of natural Philosophy, he must speak of
risus, because he does some thing in nature by virtue of that quality: so heat,
and cold, first agree to elementum calidum and frigidum, and afterward to the
species, not by the immediate acts of their forms upon their matter, but by the
common acts of fire, and agree to produce heat, and water and earth to produce
cold.

Vt homini risus aequo hinnitus, cani latratus, etc.
He means the faculty, not the act: so neighing to a Horse: every beast has
his peculiar voice though we cannot discern it so well. Common adjuncts are
such as agree to that which is not (...), but is first in the parts, and then
in the general, as learning first agrees to Socrates, Plato, etc. and then to
man, and this is the difference between proper and common adjuncts, the proper
adjuncts agree first to the generals, and then to the singulars. The common
agree first to the singulars, and then to the generals.

Hoc genere argumenti Faunium Chaeriam, Cicero pro Roscio Comaedo cavillatur.
Nonne ipsum caput, and supercilia illa penitus abrasa, etc.
He had not an hair, for he shaved them off, ergo, he reasons from thence, that
he was a knave, and it may be true, because they are hot headed that are bald,
this is a new modus, and he reasons from signs, which are common qualities,
they do not agree omni, soli, and semper, and yet a knave does omni soli, and
semper commonly.

Sic Martialis 2. lib. Zoilum ludit. Crine ruber, niger ore, brevis pede,
lumine luscus, etc.
The cause of these not making a good man is this, the cause of a red head is
color, ergo, there is much heat, and where there is much heat there will be
much fancy, and where there is much fancy, there will be much iuggling. Niger
ore that comes from melancholy, that lies in the muscles about the mouth;
brevis pede, that may have some reason with it, for such a one will go apace;
lumine luseus, for when a man thinks he looks on him then he looks asquint, and
when one would think he looks asquint, then he looks on him.

Siv vestitus, and comitatus res adiunctae sunt, quo circumstantiae genere
Dido, etc.
Oecan^m intera surgens aurorarelinquit etc.

So that not only accidents, but substances may be adjuncts; a man may be an
adiunct as he is a servant. So Dido going a hunting is argued first from the
time a^rora, then the attendance of young men, then their hunting instruments,
etc.

Est vero adi^nctorum ad subiecta quibus occupantur usus item magnus.
There is another kind of adiunct, which are occupantia, as we heard before of
subicta occupata. So Plato proves that those Cities are m^serable, which want
Physicians, and Judges, quia multa quoque and int^mperantiam, and iniustitiam
in ea civitate versari necesse est.

Sed consentaneorum categoria sic est, unde quidvis alteri consentane^m vel
id^m, vel un^m di^i possit.
We have now seen both what goes to the esse, and been esse of a thing; now he
calls it categoria the arguing, categeria signifies to plead against, and they
that gave it that name first to argue, did discern truth by the contrary, which
is borrowed from the Lawyers: and we know when we would see a thing, that if we
take the contrary, it will make it mag is illucescere: afterward it came to
signify not that gainsaying one of another, but one man's pleading alone for
his client, then it came to signify the arguments that he used in his speech
for his client: and lastly, it came to signify any argument, and thence comes
argumentum, the predicaments are called so, namely categoria, and so Ramus
would have us consider every argument to be a predicament.

Id^m vel unum.
Moreover he does commorari a while telling us that id m and unum, as the
Aristotelians teach are nothing but these consentanie arguments: so id m genere
does arise from idem causa: so gemelli are idem tempore, that is adiuncto: so
all modi of theirs arise from hence tanqu^m a primis, and simplicibus fontibus.
We shall hear of idem genere, and idem specie, and idem i^divid^o, as if he
should say, but all of them, huc sunt tanquam ad primos, and simplices fontes
referendi.

CHAP. XII.
De diversis. Argumentum primum consentaneum expositum est, etc.
WE have heard of consentaneum, and why he should put in primum rather than
simplex I see not, for if he meant to have repeated them, he should have put in
all, ergo primum would be put out, now the use of a transition is to hang
things together, when the one part is newly gone before, as it were half
forgotten, then we must have an imperfect transition, otherwise a perfect one:
this method observed for memories sake: now it remains that we consider what
the thing is not, and thus we go orderly to work. Before, we saw what went to a
thing, for the making of it up: now we cannot well see what a thing is not,
till we see what it is, for nonens is seen gratiaentis: now this respect
arises not by way of argument: but by seeing what it was.

Dissentaneum sequitur.
This is opposite to consentaneum: sentio is general to them both, seutire is
taken for intelligere, consentire is said of things that have the same
judgment, mind and reason; dissentanies are of them that have not the same
judgment, ergo, seem to have no reason in them in respect of consentanies,
ergo, Aristotle denied diss^ntanie arguments and made them follow. Sequitur,
ergo, it is by nature after, secondly, it is next to consentanies because they
are simple arguments.

Quod a re dissentis.
That differs from the thing it argues, are still general: so that because the
creatures of God are discreet, and many, ergo, there is dissension, and because
reason was made to behold the creatures of God, ergo, it was necessary that
they should be handled in Logic.

Sunt autem dissentanea.
Here he calls them dissentanea in the plural number, for that which was res
before, is become dissentaneum, as it has a dissentany to argue it, secondly,
because here dissension agrees to them both as they are compared together.

Aeque manifesta
Here dissentanies are made paria, arguing equally for manifestation, qua aequa
manifesta, ergo, this property contains thus much, that one dissentanie is not
before another, for the manifesting of it, as causa was before effectum, etc.
Is not invention before judgment, and they are opposite? Ans. True for
doctrine, but invention does not clear judgment more, nor contra.

Alterumque ab altero aequaliter arguitur.
As there was not a priority, and posteriority, so they have equal force to
argue, contrary to consentanies; so that manifestation is for the clearing of
them, and arguing because they have the same doctrine, but then what use of
them.

Tame^ si sua dissensione, clarius elucescant.
Here it is, why they come principally into Logic, as black is not so black
till it be set by white, etc. magis carendo quam fruendo, we see things, for
when we have a thing, and see not the privation of it, we make not much
reckoning of it, sua dissentione, this is a discretion from the other
prop^rties: so then we see why a contrary makes a contrary most clear, namely
this, ergo, when we would show a thing that is obscure, we show it by a
contrary, quia sua dissentione clarius elucescant.

Hitherto of the properties, which would not be in consentanies, for one was
more manifest, ergo, before another, and more strongly arguing. Dissentanea in
the plural number, because one argument serves for them both, ergo, one name,
and because they a^e equally manifest: again, to set one before another is to
say it is stronger than the other. Again, they would not be aeque manifesta.

Sunt diversa, vel opp^sita.
We are to look at the dissension of things, now there is a more weak and a
more strong dissension, the one turn but a little aside, others turn clean
back, and are foes, ergo, accordingly does he divide these: now remember it is
ens, as ens that Logic considers, and many times it falls out, that one thing
might be taken for another, but for diversity, and commonly our distinctions
are diversa. Diversa is a more light dissension, and opposites contain them: so
that diversa will give great light to opposita, but not contra, ergo, diversa
are before. Diversa a divertendo, of turning a side, because they agree one
with another commonly in dissension, only they divert a little the one from
the other, and this is it that the name commends unto us: they may agree in
nature, but are made to divert ratione, ratio we know belongs to Logic, and it
is the same with argumentum: so that he means they differ but only in some
logical respect: they are the subtlest of all arguments, because of their
little dissension. Sola ratione, ergo, they do not of necessity make a denied
axiom:

Quo de genere sunt illa frequentissima. Non hoc sed illud: quanquam, tamen.
This is not a rule of Art but a commoration, as if he should say, these
arguments have not been in Schools before, but I have observed them by my
experience, and then again they are subtle, ergo, I will help you, when you
find, ergo, these notes commonly commend unto you diversa: so forma, and
facundia are made to disagree in their adjunctive nature in respect of Ulysses:
so that they differ not in their nature, but only in logical respect, as if he
should say they may both be adjuncts to one subject, but yet differ in Ulysses.

Priamus was ready to perish, and yet withheld not his hands, a man perishing
should hold his hands, but Priamus did not: so that causa, and effectum which
might consent are here diversa, not in respect of Priamus, but of themselves.

Paula secus in Eunucho.
He means there is a difference of modus. Suppose I be worthy of this reproach,
yet thou should not tell me of it, here is subjectum and adjunctum, the
diversity is in respect of the cause, they are diversa in respect of him that
offered it.

Item alia aliusmodi.
Scelus tu illud vocas Tubero. Here is a little difference too, this fact was
called scelus by Tubero, Tully tells him, others gave it other names, alii enim
errorem appellant, alii timorem, etc. but no man besides thee call it scelus.
Here these names are made diverse in respect of him that called it scelus: as if
he should say, call it any of the rest, but call it not scelus, and thus we
have heard diversa. If I say though he be rich or poor, yet he is honest here
is a diversity, for so a discreet axiom may be affirmed: they are diverse,
because riches commonly make unhonest, and also poverty: so we may make
diversity between the cause and effect, or in giving many causes to one effect,
aut contra, or one subject to an adjunct, aut contra, or many subjects to one
adjunct, aut contra, and according to these ways also, there may be several
modi thereof.

CHAP. XIII.
De disperatis. Opposita sunt dissentanea, que ratione, and re dissentiunt.
IN looking at things we first see the causes that give esse, then the
complements, that give been esse to the thing, then we see what it is not, and
easily do by seeing them arguments that give esse: and first we are to see the
diversity, which though they be conformable, yet they do divert somewhat one
from another, and they are first, because they give light to all the rest that
follow. Now we come to see their opposition, that is, those things which have
their causes, effects, subjects and adjuncts, are not only dissenting in a
logical respect, but are distinct reals. Opposita, gain sets, it comes of ob
and pono, as it were set against: ob is as it were a bolt to bar one thing from
another: so that their nature is to be barred, not only ratione, but it is
principally in their realty, and herein do diversa differ from opposites.
Diversa are made to disagree in that wherein they might agree, whereas
opposites dissent in their nature.

Sunt dissentanea.
We heard they were called dissentanea by reason of their disagreeing, they do
not sentire idem, but quot capita, tot sensus sunt among them, whereas
consentanies are of the same judgment, and these names do well fit arguments,
because they are as it were the senses of things. Dissentanea that is, such as
think asunder, are severed, and distract our thoughts.

Que ratione, and re dissentiunt.
Ratione, that is, as diversa did, because they do not only disagree quatenus
argumenta, that is, as they have logical respect in them, but quatenus they are
res, as black is not white, they are opposites, and there is a bar that black
cannot be white, and contra, which opposition is in their dissension, being
clean of another judgment: so that there is dissension betwixt them in sensu
nostro in beholding of them.

Re.
As if we say black is not white, we say not only, that black is not the
cause, not the effect, subject, or adjunct of white, but that they are diverse
things in nature, ergo, this must be observed, that the bar is not only the
bar of rational respect, but of reality.

Itaque eidem attribui secundum idem, and ad idem, etc.
Surely if they be barred from coming one at another, and that in nature, then
non possunt eidem attribui. As first when I say blackness is not whiteness: and
again when as I say blackness and whiteness cannot be given to the same
subject: here the one dissension is in essence, the other is in accident, ergo
this idem must be understood of the essence it self, and likewise the subject.
Non possunt takes away all possibility of joining in one, ergo, whatsoever
make^ them consent, breaks this rule, for whereas this rule says, sunt
dissentanea, they make them consentanea, and again, whereas this rule says,
non possunt eidem attribui, they say, they may.

Attribui.
The attribute is always the consequent part of the axiom: so that if we give
them to subjects, they cannot be given to one and the same subject: they may be
the consequent, but not the antecedent part: so that contraries must be
attributed, for when I say homo est animal, aut brutum, I give them both to
animal, but not eidem. Now antecedent contraries will have contrary
consequents, est enim par ratio, now they do dissentire ratione, and re, ergo,
cannot any ways be consentanies, ergo, cannot be made by any means to agree.

Secundum idem.
According to the same, diverse think this is put in in respect of relates,
because of the example that follows, pater and filius ejusdem: but it has a
more general respect of opposites in their whole nature: else it should have
been taught more specially in the doctrine of relates. Now two contraries may
be given eidem, but not secundum idem, and adidem, and eodem tempore: eidem,
that is, eidem genere, not eidem specie, as a man may be well, and a man may be
sick, but not the same man: so that secundum idem has respect to the same
individuality as it were, or species: so homo may be aeger and sanus, but not
secundum idem, for that identity cannot be: now ratio is given homini secundum
idem, for herein omnis homo est idem, and ad idem, still there is idem, for if
we consider them not about idem, they are not opposites: then again there must
be the same respect: and also ad idem, that is the very same point, for
whiteness in the wall, and whiteness in my hand, are neither attributed eidem,
nor secundum idem; eodem tempore; for if they be diversis temporibus, then they
may both agree eidem, as homo nunc sedens potest deinceps ambulare: so all
these respects came from being dissentanea ratione, and re: so that all these
must be respected: so that black and white in general are not opposites, but as
they are considered in their dissenting and opposite nature: so that this is
the true nature of opposites. If ex indocto fit doctus, here is a difference of
time, and by this rule we may answer almost all the fallations that are made:
that fallation a divisione is from hence, therefore this is a consequution from
the definition going before, and principally from the word re. Sic Socrates
albus and ater eadem part esse non potest.

Itaque ex altero affirmato alterum negatur, and e contra.
Et e contra follows from hence, for Ramus left it in his edition, and if
econtra be not put in, the rule is not (...), for if we have an example where
ex altero negato alterum affirmatur, that has otherwise no rule here, ergo we
must say and e contra, for they that leave it out, as most have done since
Ramus, here is their mistaking, because they think it is not a necessary
consequution, but contingent. Now Ramus does not teach us consequution that
belongs to syllogisms, but arguments use, and if it be but contingently true,
yet it may belong to Logic, as well, as if it were necessary: and it is very
common in speech to say, it is not this, or that, but another thing: again the
meaning of these two is this, ex altero affirmato alterum negatur, that is,
they both cannot be affirmed, for he teaches invention here, and not
judgment, and e contra, that is, they cannot be both denied. They may be both
denied, as a stone is not virtuous or vicious, are these opposites? yes by our
rule, if and e contra be left out, but here they are neither of them
attributed: so that I do not mean negation in an axiom, but the not giving of
them to a thing, if both arguments be denied, they may be paria, as when I say,
if it be not Thomas, it is not William, as if I should say, it is as much
reason it should not be Thomas, as not William: so also if both be affirmed
they may be paria, as when I say it may be Thomas as well as William, for all
is one for that, and thus we must look at all these consectaries, because most
fallaces are from hence, and they are very subtle.

Opposita sunt disparata, aut contraia.
They are of two sorts, that are barred disparates, that is unmatchable, or
contraries such as are directly set one against the other, now the disparates
are when the sides are not matching one another, for there is more against one,
ne Hercules quidem contra duos, ergo, here the fight is not so violent, but the
duellio is more strong, so that according to this opposition of things in
nature must our Logic proceed.

Disparata sunt opposita.
Disparata are first because they will give light to the stronger dissension,
as being contained in it: these destroy one another, but not with that violence
and force that contraries do, they are called disparata, because here is impar
congressus, and they are unmatchable: but contraries are well matched striking
down right blows, whereas disparates steal one behind another. Sunt opposita,
that is, dissenting re and ratione.

Quorum unum mult is pariter opponitur.
Here first unum opponitur multis, and then par opponitur to every one of them,
and not unum uni: now that we may see it more thoroughly, this it is, whereas a
thing is said not to be another thing, with the same reason that it may be said
not to be a third, or a fourth, etc. that is, unum multis, and again opposed
together, and that we may see this more particularly, here is the reason
disparates are always under some more remote genus, whereas contraries will
come under one next head, be it genus or what it will be, and that is the
reason why they are unum multis, and pariter.

Object. Why does he say unum mult is rather than multa multis? for sometimes
there are multa multis.

Answ. First, because when there are multa multis, there is one more especially
opposed to all the rest, then any of the other, ergo, he says unum multis:
secondly, because where there are multa multis, there is unum multis: thirdly,
because in use we find unum opposed multis more frequent than multa multis.
Homo is opposed to brutum as unum uni, but to Leo, and equus, as unum multis;
again, he is opposed to brutum as Leo, and equus, as unum multis, but not
pariter, Pariter alike, that is, there is not another kind of argument, when
homo is opposed to Leo, then when he is opposed to equus, and here we may see
that if opposites be only of two branches, then are they not disparates: then
again, if they be of two sides only then are they contraries, ergo, if there
be any distribution in Art where the parts are not opposed one to one, there
will be a genus lost.

Vnum multis.
He does not mean always in use, as if one disparate might not argue another,
but he means as they are in nature, ut viridum, cinereum, rubrum, etc. are
disparates.

Quae singula extremis, and inter se disparata sunt.

For color is simplex, aut mistus, simplex is white and black, mistus the
other colors, so that these come not under the next genus, sic liberalitas,
and avaritia inter se disparantur: because prodigality may be where these are
not, habit is virtue, or vice, virtue is this, or that, or liberality: vice is
avaritia, or prodigalitas, so that these are unum multis, that is, not having
one next genus, but a more remote genus of opposites, and avaritia, and
prodigalitas are opposite in vice to liberality, and here is many to one, and a
like.

Virgilius 1. Aeneidos. O quam te memorem virgo: namque haud tibi vultus, etc.
She is a Goddess, or a Virgin, she might have been a third, but he looks not
at that. Not a woman, for she had not the countenance of a woman: again not a
woman, for nec vox hominem sonat: ergo, Dea, and thus we see how one thing is
not another.

CHAP. XIV.
De relatis. Contraria sunt opposita, quorum unum uni tantum opponitur.
WE have heard of a thing in his essence, and in his complements, and so also
we have seen it is not, for that if it be declining but in a respect, it is a
diverse; if it decline re, then it is an opposite: a diverse when it is
considered with another thing in agreement, yet still severed in respect: and
again when one thing is not another, by common opposition, that it makes with
another, that is a disparate: then again it is a contrary by some peculiar
nature in him directly against some other thing: so in a man we consider his
causes, flesh, nerves, sinews, bones, etc. then his complements, then we
respect him as one diverting, or turning a side from another thing: then we
look at his common nature whereby he is opposed to many things at once in the
same nature, and so he is a disparate: a diverse he is, as when I say, though a
man was there, yet his horse was there also: again there is that whereunto he
is opposed directly, as he is not brutum: and so he is a contrary. Now though
there was not in one thing any thing to make it more plain, yet set them
together, and the one will make the other more manifest, therefore this
opposition is either where one fights against many; and these are disparates,
or where the fight is more strong, and those are called contraries.

Contraria, by reason here is but one to one, ergo these stand contra, that is
face to face, when one did fight with many, some stood aside, some behind, but
these face one another, so that if the one turn away, the other will turn to
him again. Sunt opposita, that is, they have bars in their nature, namely ratio
and res.

Quorum unum uni tantum opponitur.
So that this battle is a duellio, a battle of one against one, and so they
fight, that the one things force is benr only against the force of the other
thing. Vnum uni tantum, for disparates may be unum uni, but not tantum, unum
uni because they come to communicate in one next nature, as homo and brutum in
animal; or else the one so denies the other, that it takes away the entity of
the thing affirmed. Vni; but we shall hear afterward that contraria negantia
are nothing in themselves.

Answ. They are something gratia entis, and our reason gives something to it,
and apprehends it as some thing in respect of the contrary, and here we may see
the force of our reason that can make of nothing something. Now something is
made of nothing diverse ways, first by our reason, secondly, by our fancy, or
by the hallusination of the eye. Logic makes only two kinds of nothings, the
contradicent, and the privant. Homo is a contrary to brutum, but to Leo and
equus he is a disparate, because (...) is opposed to equus in the same nature
that he is opposed to Leo.

Contraria sunt affirmantia, vel negantia.
This distribution of contraries runs on, as the former did, for as the least
dissension began first: so we still proceed to the greater: now by affirmantia
and negantia, he means things positive, or privative, for there is either a
thing opposed to a thing, or a thing opposed to nothing, and the fight between
something and nothing is stronger than the former: for when one thing fights
with another thing, then let them fight as long as they will, or can, yet they
leave something behind them, but the other leaves nothing at all: so that
contraries are where both are things in nature, or where the one is nothing,
and are called negantia of the later part: as the other are called of both
parts affirmantio.

Affirmantia, as if he should say, they are things in nature, or things
positive, as a Father, a child, etc.

Affirmantia quorum utrumque affirmat, etc.
He does not say affirmatur, but affirmat, because he would willingly describe
them from their act, for he would deliver the nature of the arguments, ut
relata and adversa. There is likewise among these a difference of contrariety,
for there are some affirmantia that may be reconciled, and ^^^e to agree, there
be some also that will (...) ^gree, but perpetuo adversantur. The (...) if you
set them face to face will be (...) ^riends, but set them back to back, and
(...) be foes: but set them adversa how you (...), and they will be foes: so
then relates have not so strong a fight betwixt them as adversa. Now they are
called relates by reason of a certain reference they have one to another
continually, yea indeed they are by reason of their reference, for the causes
of the one relate are in his correlate, for the cause of the fathers relation
is not in him, but he receives his whole relative being from the correlate: so
that in Divinity we know there is nothing added to the Godhead by giving to it
the persons mutually. Sunt contra, here is one to one, for though a father have
many children, yet the relation is but one, namely, betwixt father-hood, and
son-hood; and though many stand on the one side, yet there is but one relation:
so in the high mystery of the Trinity, there is a double relation, first
between the Father, and the Son; secondly between the Father and the Son on the
one side, and the holy Ghost on the other side. So when I say Aristotle est
discipulus Platonis, these are relates, yet when I say Aristotle est
discipulus, this is subjectum and adjunctum: so cosen and cosen are relates,
if we respect the relative quality, and not the men. Now that term of relates
is used confusedly, as we say he is his father, meaning his procreant cause,
quorum alterum constat.

Quorum alterum constat e mutua, etc.
Constare is to stand together of causes, e mutua alterius affectione, so that
these relates have not their causes from the thing in whom they are, but from
their correlates: as when I define a husband to be him that has a wife, or a
wife to be her that has a husband; these are definitions e relatis, and so e
causis. But what causes do relates contain? all the causes, both efficient,
matter, form and end. E mutua, e is a sign of the effect, quod e causis
existit: so that this is their nature.

Atque inde nominande sunt relata.
They are called relates in regard of the reference they have one to another:
so that we may here see what relates are, and how they belong hither: they that
think all arguments are relates, why they are so, as the cause, and effect,
etc. but so I cannot call them species of argumentum consentaneum, for here
they are examples, ergo, lowest of all. Again, if I say argumentum est
artificiale aut inartificiale, and so go on, thinking that all these are genera
to causa and effectum, I deceive my self as they are relates; but if all
arguments should be relates, as the arguments are taught in Logic, then all
the examples of all arguments should be relates, as God, and the world: but
when I make them relates, I analyze Logic even as I make the definition of
Dialectica an example of definitio, so that (as I say) if relation were a
common affection to all arguments, all examples also should be relates, which
they are not; again, if causa and effectum were relates, then they must be
together, for relates must be simul natura, ergo, this is fallacia accidentis,
they thought the words of Art (as they call them) were relates, ergo, the
doctrine of relates must go generally with all arguments. We know again that
the causes, efficient, matter, form, and end, and the effect are distinct
things, and do not constare e mutua alterius affectione, ergo, are not relates:
again, causa est cujus vi res est, and the effect quod e causis existit. Now
each relate contains the efficient, matter, form and end of his fellow, ergo,
if they should be taught generally, then in the efficient alone, in the matter
alone, in the form alone, and in the end alone there should be all the causes.
Some would have relates taught as consentanie arguments, because they do agree;
it is true, but they do disagree also, and if they should be taught in
consentanies, their dissentio also should be taught there, or else they should
make a double doctrine of one thing, and this kind of teaching had been a
posteriore; again, where should they have been taught? they are mutual causes,
ergo, not causa and effectum, but both causes and effects: again, the doctrine
of causa efficiens, materia, forma, and finis are distinct: here they are
confounded together in one. Now the Aristotelians have a predicament of
relates, and have also their series, but their gradus of them will not stand,
for relates have no species, but are lowest save only examples: and they go
clean out, and say relates are of this nature, or that nature, as if they
should say relates whose species are in this Art, or in that Art. As in
Oeconomie in a family they are free, or bound, free husband, and wife, bound
children, and servants, etc. but now the husband and wife are not relates,
because the bound, and free are relates: all these are special examples of
relates containing nothing under them, so that relates cannot possibly be a
predicament according to their own doctrine, no more than causa and effectum,
and by that course that they take, I can prove that Socrates est genus in going
backward, and saying he is substantia, he is genus, etc. Now because the whole
relation stands in their mutual causation, for that cause they are called
relates.

Vt pater qui filium habet, etc.
So we say, is he such a man's son? here is a metonimy of the adjunct for the
subject, son put for man; when I say Paul is a servant of Christ, here I mean
Paul's calling: servant has a double respect in it, one as it is in Economy,
another as it has logical relation, which we may see thus, for if he be
Christ's servant, then Christ is his master.

Relata dicuntur simul esse natura.
The reason stands in this, the whole being of the one relate is contained in
the other, ergo, they are simul, for if they be mutual causes, they must be
mutual effects, ergo, as one is the cause, so the other is the effect, and
contra, ergo, they must be simul.

Natura.
Because their nature springs from them mutually, for nature is arising from
causes, here we may see in the Trinity, that one person is not before another,
there is no respect of priority, or posteriority in the rest of contraries,
because there is no force of arguing from thence, we heard before that all of
them were aeque manifesta, that is, aeque intelligibi^ia, and not as
consentanies, where the cause clears the effect more, then contra, because
the causes are more simple and single: so likewise the subject is not beholding
to the adjunct, but contra; again, the ^ause and subject did more argue the
effect, and adjunct, than contra Again, from hence it is, that qui alterum
perfect norit, norit and reliquum, for they are mutual causes, and our
scientia est e causis.

Pro Marcello.
Ex quo profecto intelligis, quanta in dato beneficio sit laus, cum in accepto
tanta sit gloria. Dare and accipere are relates, as if he should say, if it be
glorious to receive, then it is much more glorious to give; now his principal
dri^t of arguing is a minore, but yet the arguments are relates: so that a
thing is not given till it be received; and again he that knows the one knows
the other.

Tum serum sis t^ genitum, blandeque fateris,
Cum dicis dominum, Sosibiane, patrem.
Sosibian is a servant to his father, because he is his master.

Sic portorum Rhodiis locare honestum est, and Her macreonti conducere.
If it be honest to let out, then it is honest to hire, for they are mutual
causes, and in usury I think both taking on usury, and letting out to usury are
unlawful, by reason of this relation, as Jeremy speaks. So discere and docere
are relates,

Jamilla (inquit) matura uxor generi, noverca, filii, filiae, pellex.

Here he plays with the names: and indeed all names of kinreds are relates.

Ovidius 1. Metamorphosios.
-- Non hospes ab hospite tutus.
Non socer a gener^, fratrum quoque gratia rara est, etc.
Atque argumentum talis relationis contrarium nihil habet, etc.
Indeed here is no contrariety in these examples, neither consention in that
respect, but they are paria: happily he could find no example of them in their
disagreeing nature, and so would here commend unto us their use to be more
often in the consentany affection, then in their dissentany nature, as when we
say, how could that be, why he was his son.

CHAP. XV.
De adversis.
Adversa sunt contraria affirmantia, quae inter se vel^ti e regione perpetuo
adversantur.

WE have heard what a thing is, that is, what goes to the being, and what to
the wellbeing of it: and how thereby it dissenteth from other things by a
diversity, or opposition: diverse might consent between themselves, but they are
made to divert one from another. Again, for opposition it is re and ratione
dissenting either by a disparate nature, or by a contrary nature.

Contraries are either of one thing to another thing, or of one thing to
nothing, the former kind also is of things that might agree, or of them that
will never be at peace: now therefore we come to adversa, and these have their
name of turning not aside as diversa, or as one to many as disparates, neither
as relates, which have a double aspect, a conjunct aspect being set face to face,
and an opposite aspect being set back to back. But adversa are in an oppsite
aspect; hence a line drawn from the point of the one aspect through the center,
to the point of the other aspect will be a right line: so that here is no
peace, they are overthwart neighbors continually. Sunt contraria, contraries
were opposed one to one, so that a thing is not an adverse, but as it is
opposed to some other thing.

Sunt affirmantia.
That is, they are things positive, whereof the one thing is not nothing, but
both are something.

Contraria quorum utrumque affirmat sunt affirmantia, id est vere entia:
At haec contraria hujusmodi sunt,
Ergo, adversa sunt contraria affirmantia.
Adversantur.
That is, according to their nature set one against another, by a right line.

Perpetuo.
2. Relates might be friends, though they would be foes, but adversa can never
be reconciled: this dissension of adversa does arise from a particular form;
for homo is adverse to brutum, as brutum is animale irrationale, and as man is
animale rationale, and these can never be reconciled, and every thing has his
contrary, though we cannot see by reason of the forms subtilty; for
contrarieties arise from the forms.

Inter se.
This shows that contraries are not opposite but when they are set one
against another, as blackness in a shoe is not opposite to whiteness in a band.

Veluti e regione.
As if he should say, if one stand here or there, the other will face him, and
if the one remove, the other also will remove: so that they are two overthwart
neighbors directly opposed one to another continually. Disparates were behind
one another, or on the one side one of another, never before one another.
Relates also might be friends, but these will always be foes. In that he says
veluti e regione, he shows that they differ from disparates, and perpetuo
shows that they differ from relates.

Virgilius Aeneidos 11.
Nulla salus bello: pacem te poscimus omnes.
Salus and bellum are adversa.
Sic albor and niger, calidum and frigidum, virtus and vitium opponuntur.
Indeed we make them things, though their original be defects, for vice is sin,
and we consider it as it acts, and so it is ens.

Paradox 2. contra Epicureos.
Illud tamen arcte tenent, accurate que defendunt, voluptatem esse summum
bonum, etc.

Here he reasons that pleasure cannot be the goodness of a man, because it is
the goodness of a beast; and man and beast are contraries.

Sic libertas and servetus, apud Tibullum 2. lib. Sic mihi servitium video:
dominamque paratam:
Tu mihi libertas illa.

Now I see bondage shall befall me, ergo, fare well liberty.

Pro Marcello.
Nunquam enim temeritas cum sapientia commiscetur, nec ad consilium casus
addmittitur.

He makes temeritas and sapientia, adversa; consilium and casus contraries, but
indeed they are disperates, for temeritas is a special kind of modus
efficiendi, namely necessitate, aut fortuna, and consilium belongs to causa
natura, aut consilio, so that they are not under one next genus.

CHAP. VI.
De contradicentibus.
Contraria negantia sunt, quorum alterum ait, alterum negat idem, eaque sunt
contradicentia, aut privantia: contradicentia sunt contraria negantia, quorum
alterum negat ubique, etc.

WE have heard what a thing is, we have also heard that a thing is not this or
that, as a diverse, or as an opposite: as an opposite either by a general
nature, which are disparates, or by a more particular nature, which are
contraries: we have heard that one thing is opposed to one thing, or one thing
is opposed to nothing; one thing is opposed to one thing, either as a relate,
or in adversa: now we come to show how a thing being from his causes, is not a
nothing.

Contraria.
Where there was a fight of one to one.

Negantia.
Here one of them is nothing, ergo, it cannot properly be said that here is one
to one; yet our Logic here makes nothing something, per oppositum ens, and in
very deed it is requisite that ens being from his causes, that it should not be
another thing, so it should not be nothing. Negantia, not that he speaks here
of the negation, that we shall hear of afterward in an axiom, but he means a
not being. Ramus had not a better word, ergo, he keeps this delivering it in
the active voice, desiring to commend to us the act, or arguing, or the faculty
whereby arguments do act. Now nothing gives name to contradicentia, of contra,
and dicens, because the affirmer: that that is a thing we have heard of before,
it is common to affirmantia, ergo, because that is it which is only special:
here he means them by the negative part.

Sunt.
For as there is a something so there must be a nothing; because every thing
that is, (except ens primum) as it was not once, so may it not be again.

Quorum alterum ait, alterum negat idem.
That is, the one is a thing in rerum natura: alterum negat, that is, the other
is not a thing in rerum natura. He has not better words to utter them to the
act of our understanding, ergo, borrows these words, ait, negat, which are a
metonimy of the adjunct for the subject; but remove the Rhetoric, and you
shall see what he means.

Idem.
For it is by oppositum ens, that non ens is ens: and it is by reason of
nothings contradicent, that nothing is an argument. Here we see the force of
reason, that makes non ens to be ens, but it is by oppositum ens only: so that
if there were not an idem, they were not contraries, no not opposites.

Object. But might it not have been left out, being taught generally before?

Answ. No: there must be a denial of the same thing, for the whole entity that
we give to a negant, is per oppositum ens, ergo, it must have reference to idem.

Sunt contradicentia, aut privantia.
As the consentanies proceeded from causes to effects, and so to subjects and
adjuncts: so do dissentanies disagree less or more. The less dissenting
arguments must go before, because they are common to the other, and are
contained in them: now opposites are not this or that, by a lesser or a more
earnest opposition; contraries are of one thing to another, or of one thing to
nothing; and here is a sharper contention: and again, among these the
contradicent, though it take away the same thing ubique, yet it leaves
something in room of it. Sunt contraria negantia, which we heard before.

Quorum alterum negat ubique.
Quorum alterum, namely the denied; negat ubique, that is in every subject, and
puts another thing in room thereof, as visus, non visus, non visus denies visus
in my eye, hand and foot, and in every part of my body, yet it does not take
away every thing, but there may be some thing that should be there.

Negat Vbique.
Good reason, for when it pursues the contrary in every part, it cannot be so
strong a fight, as where the contrary fights with the other in the same
subject; ut justus non justus, for the use of them, we seldom find them
directly opposed, but in an axiom we chiefly find them: as when I say, it is
so, it is not so: or we shall find them often by way of mocking, as when we cry
at a thing, and say, If it be not, it is not: here is the antecedent negative,
and the antecedent affirmative.

Sic in defensicne Murenae, etc,
Nihil ignoveris, says the Stoic, imo aliquid, non omnia. Here be
contradicent axioms, making one axiom to consist of contradicent arguments. So
that by this example we may see where they are used. They are called
contradientia, because the contrariety is in the denial of the word affirmed,
quasi contrarietas in dictione, but it is in re indeed: so that this is
contradiction, when two talk together, and the one denies that which the other
said, as Dives, non Dives, bella, non bella, puella, non puella.

So Cicero counts Atticus an Epicure by profession, that mortui non sunt
miseri, because non sunt: now when we find contradiction in a speech, we show
it by the rule; we find many arguments among the Papists to be of this kind,
and also among our own men, The fallaces are general to opposites, and there
are non-contradicents, for contradicents when men contend about nothing.

CHAP. 17.
De privantibus. Privantia sunt contraria negantia, quorum alterum negat^in eo
tantum subjecto, in quo affirmatum suapte natura inest.
NOw we come to see a thing in his being and with his complements, may not be
that absence of a thing where it should be for privans is nothing else; privans
will neither let the habit of the thing it denies be there, nor any other
thing but it self, ergo, there is the greatest contention that can be, and
between something and nothing in the same place, there is the greatest distance:
and nothing pulls out something, as it were by the roots, and makes that
something to be an absolute nothing.

Privantia.
They are so called, because of the privant that pulls the habit out of his
house, as it were.

In eo tantum subjecto.
He does not mean that privantia are always adjuncts to some subject, for they
may be of the same thing: as when I say, sight is not blindness: but this he
means, that the habit is denied, and the denyer takes away the very same thing
without leaving any deputy thereof: as cecity denies the very entity of visus,
where it should be, and plucks up as it were the first causes of it.

Suapte natura inest.
He does not understand by nature, as if it were a thing considered in natural
Philosophy, but in that thing where unto it might be consentany, ergo, by
nature is to be considered that, that any way, or by any Rule of Art should
agree to the thing. so that simplex natura is as much as consentaneum, or that
which is confentanie, as a cause, effect, etc. to the thing.

At que hic affirmatum, dicitur habitus negatum autem privatio.

He keeps the common terms, it is called habitus, because it should be
habitual to the thing whereunto it is given,

Negatum autem privatio, because it pulls out the habit by the roots.

Sic motus and quies, sic ebrius and et sobrius.
Our Author brings such examples as are received in Schools, otherwise ebrietas
is a vice: and indeed all vices are privantia. So sin is a habit, as it causes
the subject to act imperfectly; so non es ebrius quia sobrius: he takes away
the privant by putting the habit.

Sic cecum esse, et videre.
Existat igitur ex hac familia aliquis, ac potissimum caecus ille.

Let blind Appius come, because whilst he cannot see, he will take the less
grief at her.

So pauper, and dives, mors, and vita, and indeed this shows what sin is, that
brought death, a privant cause, a privant effect,

Item tacere, et loqui: so mortalitas is the privation of immortality, though
it seem to make it a privant.

Sed dissentaneorum categoria sic est, etc.
Our Author told us before, that there was a categorie of consentanies, showing
us where Aristotle's ten categories are: and here are categoremata of
dissentanie also, and a categoria of them. Now because we cannot see categoria,
or arguing without we first see the arguments, ergo we are here first taught
the categoremata for the categorias sake.

Vnde quidvis ab altero differ quolibet modo potest.
Vnde quidvis, that is, any thing, as if he should say there is nothing, that
is, not another thing, or nothing, but it is some of these ways.

CHAP. 18.
De paribus.
Argumenta simplicia it a fuerunt in consentaneis et disentaneis: comparata
sunt, quae inter se comparantur etc.

WE have heard of a thing as it is in it self complete, and as it is first in
the causes, and afterward with his complements: and seeing it thus, we see how
it is not another thing. Notwithstanding we come now to see that there may be a
comparison betwixt it and another thing, happily to match it, or to be
unequal, like or unlike: now whilst we see things thus we see the inside and
outside of them. The arguments are called comparates, for this afection in them
rests as it were to argue so soon as they are sundred; as for example, lay
one thing to another, it may be greater, though less to another, etc. so that
these do not look at things as they are absolute, but as they are laid
together. The reason of these arguments in nature is this, there are more
things in nature than there are degrees of quantity or resemblance of
similitude, ergo, some of them must be matches, some greater some less, and as
the reason of that question one being asked, whether there were any two men in
the world that had a like number of hairs upon their head? He said yes, because
there were more men in the world than any man had hairs on his head: so it is
here, there are more things in nature, than there are degrees of quantity, and
they are finite, ergo some have the same quantity, and some have not: and
again, because some things are like others, and some unlike, ergo, there must
be a looking at that.

Argumenta simplicia, etc.
Here is a transition containing the doctrine of that which went before, and
this is the conclusion.

Comparata sunt, etc.
Therefore it is imperfect wanting the proposition, the name comes of con and
paro, to bring together, or lay together: so that howbeit the denomination of
Comparates may seem to rise principally from paritie, yet we must take them
more generally, because imparia, similia, and dissimilia, are also compared,
but are unmatches, for as our English word Matches may be taken for equal
matches, or unequal, so may the Latin word comparata be taken for paria, or
imparia, etc.

Quae compar antur.
So that this word delivers the reference that one thing not being another,
has to it by way of reference.

Inter se.
That is, the one being compared with the other, and the other with that, and
both comparates, the cause was of the effect, the subject of the adjunct, et
contra: dissentanies had one denomination too, but comparates though they have
the same denomination, yet we do not consider them absolut ely as dissentanies
are, but as they are laid one to another, and the other to it.

Quae tamet si ipsa comparationis natura aeque nota sunt, attamen alterum
altero, etc.
Here he tells us that comparats are like unto dissentanies in this, that they
are aeque nota natura, as dissentanies are aeque manifestae, but though they be
so, yet herein they dissent from dissentanies, that the one in respect of one
man may be more known and more notable than the other: so that though they be
aeque nota natura, yet quoad nos, the one may be better known to a man than the
other, ergo, here we must always take heed, that when we make comparisons
(which do not conclude, but illustrate as they say) that we take our comparison
from a thing, as well or better known to him to whom it is made, than the thing
we go about to prove, otherwise we teach sophistically, and break this Rule.

Saepeque notis brevius judicantur, aliquande partibus before distinguntur,
Again, this is general to all comparats, judicantur, that is declared,
showed, painted, ergo, he says rather judicantur, than demonstrantur.

Notis.
He means this, comparats use is double, they are either shorter either with
notes, or made full with parts.

Quae propositio, redditioque nominantur.
The parts of a full comparison are these, where the proposition is the
argument arguing, and the redditio the aliquid.

Atque omnino comparata etiam ficta arguunt, fidemque faciunt.
Whereas a fained cause cannot argue a true effect, aut contra, a feigned
subject a true adjunct, and so in dissentanies, why in comparats we may faign
one, and will argue another true one, and here is the ground of all Fables,
which are full comparisons, similia, hence we say comparates do magis
illustrare, than concludere: so that these are the three properties belonging
to comparates in general.

Comparatio est in quantitate, vel qualitate.
He does not sa^ comparata, are quanta, or qualia, but comparatio est in
quantitate, vel qualitate, looking at the categoria, or arguing; now it is not
quantitas or qualitas, but in quantitate or qualitate, as if he should say,
things that are compared, are laid together in their quantity, or quality, for
we are not to understand any Arithmetical or Geometrical quantity or quality
here, which is always the same, but it is Logical quantity and quality, that
is, that quantity and quality which we consider in one thing with another: so
that if you would know what this Loigicall quantity is, it is nothing but
equality or inequality,

In quantitate
That is, when things are compared in their equality or inequality, for parity
and imparity, similitude or dissimilitude belong to Logic; now comparatio in
quantitate is first because quantity is by nature before quality, for this
parity and imparity must needs be considered in the thing arising from the
nature thereof, before we consider the quality in nature arising from the
quantity; as for example, I must first consider the greatness of a wall, then I
shall see that quality whiteness to be extended according to the greatness of
the wall.

Qua res comparatae, quantae dicuntur.
Qua, that is, it is that affection of things that are laid together, for that
he means when he says qua,

Res comparatae, etc.
Quantity is an affection Logical to res: now in that he thus defines them, he
does not mean quantae in respect of the word, but in respect of the nature of
the thing: for this it is, we know every thing has this logismos, or Logical
affection, whereby it may be called quanta; so qualities may be compared
together, and be made greater or less, by reason of the finite nature of them.

Est que parium vel imparium.
Now because there are more things than degrees of quantity, for that cause it
comes to pass, that some things are equally matched, and some unequally: so
then, when we compare things together, and they be matches, those are paria:
this parity is of those things which chance to be equal.

Pari sunt quorum est una quantitas.
First he calls them paria, as if he should say matches or fellows, or as we
call them paires, as a pair of gloves or garters, etc. else it may be they are
imparia or dissimilia, for so sometimes that word imparia is used for
dissimilia, quorum quantitas est una. He does not mean that the things are one,
but their quantity is parity, ergo, he says, quorum quantitas est una: here he
does not mean that their quantity is one, but it is called parity.

Argumentum igitur paris est, cum par explicatur a pari.
This follows from the definition: by explicatur he means arguitur, but he
says explicatur, because it is the nature of those to unfold one another.

E^^sque notae sunt par, aequaie, aequore, etc.
Because others have not taught these kinds of arguments before, ergo, he
pleases to stay a while upon them, and would teach us to judge of them by the
phrase, as it were, but we must look at the matter.

Par levibus ventis.
Here Crusa, Aeneas first wife, is compared to the winds

Et nunc aequali, etc.
Here the age of one is compared with the age of another.

Again, the Empire of Rome shall be equal to the whole earth, and their
courage to the height of heaven.

Cujus res gestae at que virtutes es, etc,
Now follows full comparisons, his gallant deeds are compared with the whole
course of the Sun, the proposition is here with what limits the earth is
confined, with them is the earth limited.

Littora quot conchas, quot amaena rosaria flores, etc.
Here are many propositions to one reddition, as many shells as are on the sea
shore, etc, so many are mine adversities: quae si comprendere coner, etc. again
his repeating of them would be as if he should tell the drops of the Icarian
sea.

Hujus vero loci sunt consectaria illa e contrariis quidem orta, etc.
These kinds of arguments though they seem to have in them contraries, yet by
laying them together, and seeing their contrary consequence they come to be
comparates. As Sosibian is a servant to his father because his fat^er is his
master.

Ex adversis sunt frequentiora.
For the fo^mer examples were only true in relates, and privants, but ex
adversis sunt frequentiora.

If one accuse him whom I defend, then I may accuse him, whom he defends.

Quod cum fateantur satis magnam, etc, If vice make miserable: shall not virtue
make happy.

Contraria enim c^ntrariorum sunt consequentia, etc.
This rule holds not when it is genus, but when it follows from it, then it
will be true, as I cannot say the father is good, ergo, the son is evil,
because goodness and evilness do not follow from fatherhood, and sonhood, for
consequentia is here as arising from contrary causes, or from causes in the
thing, or as adjuncts.

Dic quibus in terris (and eris mihi magnus Apollo) etc.
This is a common argument among the common sort. One propounds a riddle, and
the other not being able to answer, propounds another, and this also is common
when one says give me this, and I will give you that.

Paria vero ficta sunt illa, etc.
Now we come to ficta paria. As Zenophons wife would not rather have her
neighbors husband than her own: so she should not rather desire his garment,
or gold, etc. and as Zenophon would not rather have his neighbors wife than
his own, so he should not rather desire his neighbors horse, or ground, rather
than his own: and here we see the use of the third property.

CHAP. XIX.
De majoribus. Imparia sunt, quorum quantitas non est una. Impar est majus aut
minus. Majus est, cujus quantitas excedit.
WE have heard how things may be compared with things, and this comparison was
either in quantity or quality, which quantity was a logical quantity, not a
geometrical quantity, for it was of things where Geometry cannot be considered.
Again, this is general to every thing, not special to Geometry: and the reason
hereof we heard to be, because there are more things in nature, than there are
degrees in quantity; it was parium, or imparium. Paria were pairs, matches and
equals, and imparia are such as agree not in any one of these three: but the
aliquid here as it is greater to one, so is it less to another. Imparia
therefore are such as are not pairs, but the one is greater than the other.

Quorum quantitas non est una.
We have heard concerning quantity, that paria were quorum una est quantitas,
imparia sunt quorum non est una quantitas, that is, as parity was the quantity
of paria, so imparity is the quantity of imparia.

Non est una.
Because the ones quantity is called majus, and the others minus: so that as
paria had but one quantity, so imparia have two, one majus and another minus.

Impar est majus, aut minus.
Having showed what imparia are, here he distributeth them into majus and
minus, as if he should say, imparity is either in majority or minority, and
here is all logical quantity, and they that will make a predicament of quantity
should indeed bring in this quantity, and not the table of Arithmetic and
Geometry: the reason why this quantity is general, is because all things
whatsoever are finite in essence, ergo, in quantity. Majus goes before minus,
because it contains in it the quantity of the minus, and exceeds: so that
the majus gives light to the minus, not contra. Majus is so called, because it
is evermore considered in comparison of one thing to another: and therefore is
not called magnum aut parvum, maximum aut minimum.

Majus est, cujus quantitas excedit.
Here majority is the quantity of majus, and this majority exceeds, because
that the majus is active in comparison of the minus, for the stronger acts upon
the weaker, rather than contra.

Propriae notae sunt, etc.
Our Author does commorari upon this doctrine, because others have taught them
confusedly, therefore to keep us in order, that we may not be mistaken, he
pleases to set down these notes, for our further help.

Tostitur emedio, etc.
Verbosa simulatio prudentiae, which is the third argument is argued a majori,
domina illa sapientiae.

There is not only contempt of the babbling Orator, (which is the aliquid) but
of the good Orator.

Hinc sumitur Logica quaedam gradatio, etc.
That is, as a modus belonging nither is that logical gradation, etc. as the
people and the Senate are compared, the Senate and the public garrisons, and
they and the Generals, etc so that here is a climbing up the majus, in one
respect, being made the minus in another respect.

It is better to be the son of Thirsites, and an Achilles, then contra: the
majus is before, the reason is this, that that is of his progenitors is not his
own, but that which he has of himself,

Aeneas persuades his fellows to stay and bear these, because they have born
greater.

Thou openest thy fountain to thy enemies, give us leave to open our little
springs to our friends.

She gave thee great thanks, yea as big as great mountains. Now the majus is,
quam abs te esse datum.

Ficta vero majora etiam plurimum valent.
As we heard before generally, that ficta comparata, might argue vera: so here
ficta majora may argue ficta minora.

If a Duke should love her, he could not keep her much less can thou.

If Jupiter should do it, I could not hope to do it, much less if Aeneas should
bid me.

CHAP. XX.
De minoribus Minus est, cujus quantitas exceditur.
MInus is a logical quantity that may be in every thing, as I have said before
of majus: and minority is the quantity of minus, ergo, it is exceeded by the
majus, because the majus contains the minus, and much more, double, treble, etc.

Minus autem sepa indicatur, etc.
As majority has been abused by Authors, so has minority, ergo, he would help
us by notes, lest we should be deceived. Saepe, not always, as we shall hear
afterward.

Nemo non modo Romae, etc.
Rome is compared with every corner of Italy, and the argument is drawn a
minore. Catilin had sought out all the rascals in Rome, and all in every corner
of Italy, which is the minus.

Catalin would fain have been Consul to trouble the State, here Consul is the
majus, and exul the minus.

Ovid. 1. Reme. amoris.
Here the body and soul are compared, the body is minus, the soul majus. If
thou will labor for the good of the body, much more for the good of the soul.

At que hujus ejusdem speciei sunt hae formalae, quae fiunt negatione parium.
Hither we refer those manner of speeches, which are made by denials of equals.

Omnes ex omni aetate, etc.
If all the Lawyers of the Commonwealth were here, they are not comparable to
Servitius Sulpitius: who is the majus.

Aliquando not a nulla est.
He was so far from finishing his work, which is the majus, that he had not
laid so much as the foundation; which is the minus.

We ought to be moved with the voice of Poets: why? stones, woods and wild
beasts will be ordered by music, the minus.

Gradatio illa est a minoribus.
As in majoribus there was a climbing up from the lesser to the greater: so
here there is a falling down from the lesser to the greater.

Facinus est, vincere civem Romanum, is less than verberare, and verberare less
than necare, and necare less in crucem tollere.

Finguntur etiam minora.
As we heard before of majora that were fained: so here we hear of fained
minora.

Ante leves ergo pascentur in aethere cervi, etc.
The remembrance of kindness is compared with these fained comparisons.

O horrible thing, etc. that is the majus: to spew in thy own house at supper
is a beastly thing, that is the minus: in caetu vero populi Romani, etc. that
is the majus.

CHAP. XXI.
De similibus.
Adhuc compaeratio in quantitate fuit, sequitur comparatio in qualitate, qua
res comparatae quales dicuntur: nempe similes aut dissimiles.

THis is not that quality in an adjunct which was absolutely considered:
sequitur comparatio in qualitate, before he told us of comparata in quantitate,
here he says comparatio in qualitate, because all is one: but the categoria is
that that Logic looks at rather, then the categorema, ergo, he says here
comparatio. By comparata in qualitate, we are to consider the things compared;
by comparatio in qualitate we are to understand the arguing or categoria of
them, and categorema is more in use than categoria, because Logic is evermore
concreat with the thing, ergo comparatio in qualitate is all one as if he had
said comparata in qualitate.

Sequitur comparatio in qualitate.
Or as I may say, comparativa qualitas, qua res comparatae quales dicuntur, as
if he should say, by which res comparatae are comparata: so that whilst he
says res, he tells us we consider Logic together with the thing.

Quales dicuntur.
Because he does define by conjugates, ergo he says dicuntur, for conjugata
are nomina, and so dictiones are nomina: quales, that is, similes or
dissimiles: so that by quales we do not consider any absolute quality in any
thing, but that which has reference to some other thing.

Nempe similes, aut dissimiles.
As before we heard the ratio of comparata quantitate, so here we shall see the
reason of similes, aut dissimiles in qualitate, which is because there are more
things than qualities; and hence it comes to pass that some things are like to
others, because they have the like quality: and some again are unlike, because
they have not the like quality. Again, similia must go before dissimilia, as
quantity went before quality, because it did arise immediately from the limits
of the essence: now qualities are the acts of the form upon the matter, and
there is no act till the essence be limited, ergo, till the thing has
quantity, ergo, quantity is first. Now similia are first, as the names show;
for when we see unlikes, we know them to be dissimilia, by seeing them not to
be similia: again, the dissimile is as it were the denial of simile.

Similia sunt, quorum est eadem qualitas.
Here we may see whither similitude belongs, namely, to Logic, and they are
fitly called similia, because they stand in comparison with a thing.

Quorum est eadem qualitas.
From quality he does define these qualia, and he says eadem, not una as in
quantity, which was quorum quantitas est una, yet the quantity of these is one,
and the same: but he says here eadem, because as we know una belongs to
quantity, and eadem to quality.

Similitudo proportio dicitur, etc.
Here he does commorari, because the Schools have abused this property,
teaching that it does belong to quantity: so we also abuse it in our common
speech, as when we say he is a well proportioned man, when we mean that his
members are correspondent, or like one to another. Vt similia proportionalia:
this also follows, which also shows that proportio belongs hither.

Notae similitudinis, etc.
There are no Topic places of Logic wherein the Schools have been so mistaken
as in these, therefore he sets down the notes to help us the better.

Servius Sulpitius and his son are compared as similia.

Augustus cure of Ovid is compared with Achilles cure of them only whom he
wounded.

The day of Tullies return to Rome from banishment was like immortality.

He was made Verres, my Lord bore-pig (this shows that their orignial was from
a base beginning, in that they gave themselves such names) as it were by
drinking of Circes cup, which turned Ulysses company into swine,

They behold Pompey as a man come from heaven: non ex hac urbe, etc. there is
also a dissimilitude, the commandment and doing are similia.

Similitudinis parts deinceps explicantur.
Hitherto we have heard short and contract comparisons; now we shall hear them
at the full, either where the parts are disjoined, or where they are linked one
in another.

Di juncta quando termini quatuor, etc.
He calls them termini, because they make as it were two axioms, in both which
there is a consequent, and an antecedent part: two termini go to the Protasis,
and two to the Antapadosis.

Here the sick man, and his meat, and the wicked man, and his tasting of praise
are made similia.

Nocte pluit tota rediunt spectacula mane
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
These are the first verses that Virgil showed himself by, and set them on the
gates where Augustus was to come out to be made Emperor, and verses then were
rare, only one Ennius (as Tully witnesses) had made some, which were no good
ones, yet they were read for their matter: Virgil was at this time poor, and
had not been thereabout long, being as it were a groom in Caesar's stable, and
Augustus seeing them, demanded who made them, and none would challenge them,
but one Batillus a simple fellow, praemium que magnumerat adeptus. On the next
morning Virgil seeing that, sets on the gates again. Hos ego versiculos feci,
etc. and Sic vos non vobis, four times, then Augustus called Batillus to
perfect them, and he could not, then Augustus promised a great reward to him
that could: so Virgil perfected them, and hereby mocked Battillus: the quatuor
termini are these, first Virgils labor, and the reward that was given
Batillus, the other two the oxes plowing, and others reaping the corn, etc.

Aliquando nulla prorsus est nota.
As we have heard before in minoribus, so here sometimes there are no notes at
all, but they are understood: as when we use allegories. As white Dazies are
not esteemed, and black Violets gathered: so a white boy sometimes may not be
esteemed of, and a black boy regarded. Remember that always in those full
comparisons that the proposition is the third argument, and the reddition is
the aliquid.

Continua est quando, est primus terminus, etc.
This only it has special, first it has only three terms, then only one of
them, namely, the middlemost is used twice, ergo, this is more composite the
disjuncta similitudo, for there was but one reference of two terms to two, but
here is a reference of three terms, where the middlemost has a double
reference.

Ficta similitudo.
As we heard before in general, that ficta comparata might argue true ones, so
it is true especially, for indeed all fables for their matter are nothing but
belong to Logic, and are full comparisons.

If Horace be asked why he used to play on the fiddle in galeries, and why he
came not into the City, he will answer by a feigned similitude of the Lion
being sick, and the Foxes excuse of not coming to him.

CHAP. XXII.
De Dissimilibus.
Dissimilia sunt comparata, quorum qualitas est diversa.

THese have their names of dis, and similia, because there is a dissimilitude
with them, but a little difference, dissent, or rather a diversity; and as
dissentanea of dis, and sentio, contain diversa which might be consentanies,
but for their little difference in logical respect: so dissimilia contain
similia, but with a diversity.

Sunt Comparata.
He should say comparatae in qualitate, for otherwise comparata is not their
next genus, ergo, that should be put in.

Quorum qualitas est diversa.
Therefore it cannot be said to be the same, now he says it is but diversa,
not opposite: show wing that similia are very diversa, but by way of
comparison: so that we shall find dissimilia to differ only ratione, but
handled comparatione.

Dissimilitudinis propriae notae sunt.
He still tells us how to distinguish them.

Heu domus antiqua, etc.
The house and the master might be subjectum and adjunctum, but here they are
dissimilia: dispar here is not impar, but dissimile, but they that gave it to
dissimilia at first mistook the matter: and use has changed it.

The three Countries of France were unlike in speech, in order and in laws.

It was all his labor to look with one countenance, to sound with another
voice, to go with another pace, etc. these are effects handled with a
diversity, and made comparates.

Neoptolinus, and Achilles, father and son, causa and effectum are made diverse,
and are handled with a comparison.

Wit and age adjuncts are handled by a dissimilitude.

A day for sacrifice and a day for counsel are Dissimilia.

I thought, O Meliebus, that Rome had been like Mantua: here is an example of
similia, if we look at both: but Virgil meant not so.

Nota plerumque nulla est.
And yet there is a full comparison. Brutus the first Consul of Rome put his son
to death for betraying Tarquinius. Manilius put his son to death for kiling one
who challenged him to fight.

CHAP. XXIII.
De conjugatis. Hactenus prima argumenta sunt exposita, sequuntur orta de
primis, quae perinde sunt ad id quod arguunt, sicut prima unde oriuntur.
HItherto we have heard of that that goes to the being of a thing, and to the
well being of the same, and how many ways it may not be another thing, and yet
it may be compared with it, to see whether it be a greater, or less, like, or
unlike, etc. and having seen things thus, now we come to consider how they may
be named, and likewise how they may be ranged under some general head, and then
be limited in their essence, and accordingly as we see good, may we give
restimony thereof. And hitherto we have heard of those arguments that are
firstly in the thing: now we come to consider how these first may argue,
secondly by reason of the first.

Hactenus prima argumenta sunt exposita, etc.
This is an imperfect transition containing the conclusion of that which went
before, and the proposition of that which follows, this course that our
Author keeps is most natural, for when we see a thing in all the arguments
before, then it is requisite that we give it a name.

Sequantur orta de primis.
They are called orta because we shall see in the particulars every one to have
a being from the first.

Quae perinde sunt ad id quod arguunt, sicut prima unde oriuntur.
And for their arguing they carry themselves ad id quod arguunt, that is, to
the aliquid, sicut prima unde oriuntur: so that this is their definition, so
that look with what affection the first argue, with the same affection also do
these argue: so that the difference of the first, and orta argumenta is not so
much in the force of the arguments: as in that these argue after a new manner.
These orta are of two sorts, either such as arise more simply, or such as arise
more compositely: more simply as conjugata and notatio, for they arise but from
one argument alone: more compositely as distributio, and definitio, for they
arise from more arguments at once, therefore conjugata and notatio go before
distribution and definition, for a distribution does arise from consentanies,
and dissentanies: a definition may arise from orta which are after consentanea
and dissentanea. The first kind of orta are conjugata and notatio.

Conjugata, sunt nomina, etc.
So that these lie principally in the name for their arguing, ergo, they have
this in particular: as to spring simply from the first, so to denominate
things. Conjugata are before notatio, because they arise only from
consentanies, notatio from both consentanies, and dissentanies: now for
conjugata, they are yoked words, sunt nomina, so that these lie in the name.

Vary deducta.
Vary, not so much in respect of their ending, as in respect of their use.

Ab eodem principio.
That is, proceeding from one and the same beginning, principium is the thing
signified, as the thing justice, etc. as if he should say, conjugates are
nomina vary deducta, that is pulled in sunder, but have the same
signification: signifying the same abstract as justitia, the concret as justus,
the act as just: so that he does not mean vary d^ducta, as if they were
derivatives, but in respect of the thing: so that here we may see how nomina
belong to Logic, namely, as they are things.

In conjugatis symbolum est consentaneorum argumentorum.
By conjugates he means a casting together: as if he should say you have
consentanies only in conjugatis: so that in them is the symbolum, badge and
token of consentanies only, and good reason, because these are denominations
from one and the same thing continually, ergo, cannot be possibly from
dissentanies, for then they should be from diverse principia.

Libertas quoniam nulli jam rest at amanti, etc.
Liberty is not to him that is in love, ergo, a lover cannot be free, here the
thing libertas is not the cause of liber, but curtu sis liber, looking at the
effect together with liber. Now conjugates arise only from agreeing arguments,
ergo, there is nothing that goes to the casuality, effectity, subjunctity, or
adjunctity of a thing (as we may say) but we may denominate from it. As I may
call a chest made of wood, a wooden chest: for indeed the reason of the name
conjugata is from yoaking the thing unto the man, or unto the act.

C^cero 3. de natura Deorum cum Dionysio tyranno loquitur. Jam mensas argenteas
de omnibus delubris jussit auferri, etc.
Dionysius coming into Greece, robbed their Temples, they used to have fine
things in their Temples dedicated to their Gods, which they called (...),
thence came (...) accursed, because they dedicated them to their Idols: now he
took these things, and there was engraven in them, bona Deorum, ergo, he said,
he would be so bold as uti eorum bonitate.

I will not use him as a Consul, because he used me not as a consular, that is,
as one that has been a Consul.

The cause was consularis, and senatoria, ergo he needed the help of the
Consul, and the Senate, res consularis, and senatoria are the adjuncts to
consul, and to senatus.

CHAP. XXIV.
De Notatione. Notatio est nominis interpretatio: nomina siquidem sunt nota
rerum, etc.
NOw we come to notatio, conjugata did nominate the thing from some thing that
was in it, but did not name it properly, but so as it might agree to another
thing that had the same consentany argument in it, from which that name was
fetched, but notatio is the name of a thing, that is proper to it, he called
the first conjugata; for as we were taught by them to give the thing a name
which may be common to some other thing: so here notatio teaches us to give
the thing a name arising from some property in it: so that it be not common to
other things; neither is the name and the thing the same, as we heard in
conjugates, justitia, justus, and just, were the same, only they were
delivered diversely.

Est nominis interpretatio.
That is, not the laying out of the name, but the reason of the name: so that
the arguments arguing are nomen, and notatio nominis. Notatio is after
conjugata, because it arises from dissentanies also, and comparats, whereas
conjugates arise only from consentanies.

Nomina siquidem sunt nota rerum.
So says our Grammar, vox est nota, qua unumquodque vocatur. Now as there are
nomina, so ratio reddi potest, si vera notatione fiant. The denomination comes
from something, as homo ab humo, for as humus signifies the earth, so homo
names not man earthy, but it is a new name drawn from humus.

So terra is called vesta a vi stando.
And fire is called focus a fovendo.
Cicero 4. in Verrem. O Verrea plaeclara! Quo enim accessisti, quo non
attuleris tecum istum diem! Etenim quam tu domum, quam urbem adiisti, quod
favum denique, quod non eversum, atqu^ extersum reliquiris? etc.
They made a holy day in Sicily for the honor of my Lord Boar-pig: now he was
a sweep-stake, ergo, his holy day was named of his manners, Verres a verendo,
because he swept all where he came.

Ovid 1. Fastorum.
Prima dies tibi Carna datur, dea cardinis hac est, etc. Carna was so called,
quasi dea cardinis, because she was conversant about doors and hinges.

Tu conjugis, bonae foeminae, locupletis quidem cert^ Bambalio quidem pater,
etc. As Bambalio was so called, because he used to stammer and stutter in his
speech.

Ex dissentaneis autem est notatio.
Vt Lucus, quia umbra opacus, parum luceat, and ludus,
qui est longissime a lusu, and Dis, quia minime dives.
Et comparatio autem est notatio*
Vt Pyropus quod flammam ignis imittitur.
Est vero ut notationi ad suum nomen, sic nomini ad notationem sua affectio.
Ramus does commorari here, and shows how the name may argue the notation, as
well as the notation may the name, though that be not so common as animi
plenus, ergo animosus, et contra. And thus we have heard how nomina belong to
Logic.

CHAP. XXV.
De Distributione. Reliquum est ex ortis aliunde argumentis, argumentum
distributionis and definitionis.
NOw we come to second orta, which arise manifoldly from more arguments: and
this he desired to deliver unto us, when he said distributio and definitio. Now
distributio must come after conjugata, and notatio, in respect of his double
arising: then again it is requisite, that after we have seen the first
arguments in things, that we next name them from some thing in them, and then
that we see a thing as it is common with another: and again, when we see the
distribution of it into his parts, we may soon see the limits of it, and how
far it reaches, and so give testimony thereof. Now a distribution does arise
from any consentany arguments, or common, because that a cause may be common to
more effects, and contra: and a subject to more adjuncts, and contra: Hence it
comes to pass, that a thing may be distributed, a common cause into special
effects, aut contra, a common subject into special adjuncts, and contra. And
this we see to be very true in nature by many examples: so that distributio is
nothing but taking a common cause, or subject, and dividing it into special
effects, or adjuncts, aut contra.

Reliquum est, etc,
This is an imperfect transition, and indeed contains a distribution: as if
he should say, ortum is reliquum or primum A distribution is from common
causes, and a special cause, and that is perfect: or from some conflux of
other Arguments, which the Schools call properties, and that is descriptio.

In qua utraque pars affectio reciprocationis est.
That is, this is a property to them. Now he says affectio, because argumentum
est quod affectum est ad arguendum. As if he should say, these arguments are
affected to argue with a mutual receiving of themselves, as the whole contains
just as much as the parts, et contra, the definition, as the definite, et
contra. So that this reciprocation for all the world is like unto two Juglers
pots, where the one will hold just as much water as the other, and neither more
nor less: so then the whole is not the parts, nor the definitum the d^finitio,
only there is this mutual affection of reciprocation betwixt them; that is,
they have that affection as that the parts simul sumptae will reach no further
than the totum, aut contra; the definition than the definite, aut contra: as
when I say, a man is sick, or well, here the parts may agree to other things
than to man, Answer. True, but we must understand it as if it were said, homo
is either homo aeger, or homo sanus: now this reciprocation in a distribution,
is of all the parts together with the whole.

Distributio est cum totum in parts distribuitur.
Having showed the general affection, he now comes to tell what distribution
is: it is called distribution in the active signification in respect of the
parts; now distribution is the categoria, and the parts and the whole are the
categoremata.

Cum totum in parts distribuitur.
Here is first a totum, which shows that it is always some common thing, and
the parts are special things contained in the whole: so that that which is new
here, common, as a common cause, a common effect, subject, or adjunct, etc. and
here this common is called a totum, as it contains the parts, then again, this
distribution is as it were a pulling the parts in pieces, and not a joining or
gathering of them together, though iuductio be an inversa distributio: but he
rather uses this word distributio, because it is more general, and more in
use, and the arguing from the whole to the parts is more in use, than contra.

Totum est quod continet parts.
It is that which holds together the parts: continet, because all the parts
are in the whole, as in one, as being the common head wherein they are.

Pars est quae continetur a toto.
For the container is the totum, and the parts the contained: so that the
doctrine of distributio is but to teach us how to range and carry every thing
to his home: It is a great question among the Physicians, whether a wen be a
part of a man's body, or no. Answer. It is morbus, ergo, no part: it is in toto,
but not contained a toto, for the whole contains the members by reason of its
form, if we speak of integrum, but the form reaches not to this.

Atque ut distinctio totius in parts, distributio: sic collectio partium, etc.
Many Logicians have made this to belong to argumentatio, but they are
deceived, for they belong hither, and it is the same to do and undo, to
divide the whole into parts, and to colligere the parts to make up the whole.

Distributio sumitur ex argumentis toti quidem consentaneis, inter se autem
dissentaneis,
Here he shows from whence distribution arises, namely from consentanies, in
respect of the parts with the whole, and also from dissentanies, either
disparates or contraries, in respect of the parts between themselves.

Itaque tanto accuratior erit, quanto partium, etc.
This is a deduction from that that went before; for if the former be true,
then this also: now the greatest dissension is of contraries, and the greatest
of all is between something and nothing, ergo, to distribute into tricotomies,
and quadricotomies, etc. is to skip over something that should be taught. And
thus much for distribution in general.

CHAP. XVI.
De distributione ex causis. Distributio prima est ex absolute consentaneis,
causis nempe, and effectis.
COncerning this doctrine of distributio, we have heard the generality: the
ground from whence a distribution does arise, is, for that the first arguments
are common: as a common cause may be distributed by the effects, in like sort a
common effect may be distributed into special causes: and so for the subject
and adjunct: so that beside that community, there is nothing new in this second
invention. In a distribution we observed a whole and a part: the whole contains
the parts, and the parts are contained of the whole, ergo, if either the whole
contain not all the parts, or all the parts be not contained of the whole,
there will be no distribution. Now these arguments did arise from consentanies,
in respect of the whole, but from dissentanies inter se. Itaque tanto
accuratior erit, etc. ergo, a distribution into a dicotomy, which is of
contraries is the best; yet if it cannot be had, we must be fain to make a
tricotomy. Now we come to the species of Distribution.

Distributio prima est ex absolute consentaneis, causis nempe, effectis.
A distribution is a derivative argument from cause, or from modo quodam
consentaneorum ut subjectorum, et adjunctorum. Now the use of distribution is
this, that we may range every thing in his own order and place, for when we
have seen a thing in his esse, and been esse, and then that it is not this or
that; and have also compared it with other things, to see whether it be equal
or unequal, like or unlike, and likewise have given it a name; in the next
place it is requisite, that we set it in his rank, for so the Lord has ranged
every thing in the world, as man under his genus animal, for the Lord has made
all things liable to our Logic, ergo, they must be ranged under some head,
that we may see how they agree, and how they disagree.

Distributio prima est, etc.
Distributio is double (as I said before) ex absolute consentaneis, et modo
quodam consentaneis: so that he calls that distribution which arises from a
general cause, and a general effect. Distributio prima: It is prima in a
double respect; first, because causa and effectum are prima: secondly, as they
are before subjectum and adjunctum. He takes distributio here in the active
signification, and according thereunto must the species be prosecuted, for he
does define them from the parts dividing. For the notation of the word (which
gives great light) it comes of tribuo and dis, as if it signified that
distribution that justice gives: it is a term belonging to Law, as many of our
Logical terms do: and here it signifies a severing of the parts, and a
giving to every part his due, as when a common cause is distributed, and then
to every special effect his own cause is given: so that here is nothing in
this new invention, but this distribution, the rest is the first invention: as
when I say, a man is sick, and a man is well, here are two subjects, and two
adjuncts: but when I say of men, some are sick and some are well, here is a
distribution. Now the reason why he joyneth both causa and effectum together,
saying, ex absolute consentaneis, causis nempe, and effectis, is because that
in a distribution as there are parts, so there is a whole; distributio being
both active and passive, though it be principally denominated from the parts:
so that where the cause is the whole, there the effects must be parts.

Distributio ex causis est, quando parts sunt causae totius.
So that here the effect is the whole, and the causes are the parts: now he
prosecutes the doctrine of distribution by the parts, because he goes according
to the act of things, and the parts here constitute the whole: again, a whole,
the very name does deny a distribution; for if it be whole it is not
distributed: but the parts show a whole, ergo, we must apply distribution to
the parts; hence distributio ex causis is not when the cause is a whole, but
when the causes are parts. Hence a Distributio ex integro is before a
Distributio ex genere, because there the parts are effects.

Distributio ex causis is here the first invention, in that he says ex causis,
the second invention in that he says Distributio. Again, there is the first
invention, when he says, quando parts sunt causae; the second invention, when
he says, quando parts sunt causae totius; so that take the common effect, and
make it a whole; the causes, and make them parts, and this is the second
invention.

Hic distributio integri in sua membra praecipue laudatur.
This now is a special modus of distributio ex causis, there may be a
distribution of the effect, by the efficients, by the materials, by the
formals, and from the end: but he does not stay upon them, but presently comes
to the distributio integri in membrae, because it is of greater use, and of
more practice.

Hic.
That is, in the distributio ex causis: so that membra are parts, but all parts
are not membra: and integrum is totum, but every totum is not integrum.

Praecipue laudatur.
Why? because it is of so great use: secondly, because it is more secret, the
other more familiar.

Integrum est totum, cuipartes sunt essentiales.
The integrum, the entire as we call it, is totum, that is, quod continet
parts, ergo, the membra must be contained of the integrum, giving thereunto
both portion of matter, and portion of form: Hence nails and hairs are not
membra of a man's body, because they give not a portion of matter and form to it.

Cui parts sunt essentiales
So then if the members be essential to the whole, they give essence to it,
that is, they afford causa: now essentia stands principally in the matter and
form, ergo, he means these parts give matter and form to the whole.

Membrum est pars integri.
Therefore it is contained of the whole, ergo, gives essence, but how gives it
essence? thus, which few Logicians show, as for example, in a man's body, every
member has his own matter and form, and all the members together make up a
common matter, and a common form of the whole, so that a man is made of a soul
and a body, then the soul is made of matter and form: the body also is made of
Organicall parts, and they give matter and form to it: then the simular parts
contain the matter and form of the organicall, and the simular parts are made
of a portion of the matter and of the forms of the elements: so that we may see
the form of man's body arises from a manifold comparison, now the integrum is
(...), hoc aliquid, yet is it totum, though it be always singular.

Why is integrum before membrum, seeing it gives essence to it?

Answ. Integrum is made of the parts, and is a totum, ergo, must go before.
Again, it is here before in this new invention, because it does here continere
parts, ergo, is the agent: again, when we consider distributio, because the
whole does distribute, and the parts are distributed, ergo, it is requisite,
that we first see the whole; hence it is rather called distributio, then
inductio, because it is more frequent to dispute from the whole to the parts,
than from the parts to the whole. Now if integrum be cui partis sunt
essentiales, and membrum be pars integri, then whatsoever is true of a part, is
true of the whole, not contra, because membrum is essentiale toto, non contra.
And by this rule it stands that Christ's sufferings are to be given to him as he
is whole Christ, both God and Man: then again, by this Rule we see, that that
which he has felt being head, the whole has felt: which if we consider well,
we may see how Christ's righteousness is made ours, because he is the head, and
that which the head suffers the whole suffers, ergo, that is the wholes that
the head has done.

Sic Grammatica in etymologiam and syntaxin. etc,
For why? Grammatica is the whole Art, Etymology and Syntax are the parts there
of. Dialectica in inventionem, and judicium dividitur.

Kickerman cannot away with this example, for (says he) Dialectica is the
habit, invention and judgment are Arts: now the parts must be of the same
nature with the whole, because they constitute the whole. Alas poor man, this
it is, the rule of Logic is the rule of man's reason, ergo, the rule must run
along, not according to the nature of reason, for that belongs to natural
Philosophy, but according to the act of it. Now by invention and judgment I do
not mean the act, but the rule of the act that teaches me invenire: invenire
is the (...) of this part of invention: now Dialectica is the whole, ergo,
invention and judgment must consist of precepts containing the matter and form
of the whole. Been disserere is the end of Logic, ergo, these two parts must
shoot at this mark; then again the form of Dialectica been disserere arises
from the parts, so that as our Author teaches them they contain a portion of
the matter, and a portion of the form of Logic. This it is, Logic looks at
the motus of reason, and invention and judgment contain the motus, ergo, they
are the parts.

Haec distributio principalis est, cum rei longioris explicatio suscipuur.
You have heard what is required in a perfect definition of the integrum into
the members: and here are many, yea, most fallaces of any arguments, as if we
leave out any part in a distribution; again, in distributione ex integro, if
the parts do not contain a portion of the matter, and form of the whole: again,
when we distribute in Grammar, vox est literaaut syllaba, it is not a perfect
distribution, because these parts are not dissentany inter se, for a letter
contains portion of the matter, and form of a syllable, and so is essential to
it. Had distributio principalis est, si rei longioris, etc. if you mean to make
any long discourse of any thing, divide it, for it gives great light, and help
to your own memory, and to the people, hence distributions are the chief things
in Art; hence many call their books partitions. Kickerman calls his systema,
which belongs to distributio: and the respect of a distribution is but from a
part of the Art, ergo, his name is to strait: ergo, remember this rule by any
means, for it is of great use, both for the good of the teacher, and of the
learner.

Virgilius 1. Georg.
Quid faciat laetas segetes: quo fidere terram Vertere (Maecenas) ulnusque
adjungere vites, etc.

Here Virgil distributes his whole work; this is a distribution of the integrum
into the members, not of the subject into his adjuncts (as some will have it)
for it is a distribution of his book. First he will teach how to plow, then how
to set vines, then how to order cattle, then how to order Bees.

Cicero pro Mureno.
Intelligio (judices) ires accusationis parts fuisse: and earum unam in
reprehensione vitae, etc.

His oration was divided into three parts, first the reproving of Murenus for
his life; Secondly, his seeking of honor; Lastly, the accusing of him of
ambition: so Preachers divide their speech, not their text.

Quin etiam aliter tractatur hoc argumenti genus, vel a partibus ad totum, vel
a toto ad parts. Catullus.
Quintia formosa est multis: mihi candida, longa, Recta est: haec ego sic
singula confiteor, etc.
Again, he shows another modus, when we bring in an induction of the parts to
make up the whole, or when we argue from the whole to prove all the parts. As
Quintia was fair to many, here is the totum, to me she is candida, long and
recta, but there other things wanting in her to make her beautiful, namely,
venustas, and mica salis: wit to make merry jests without offense, and good
carriage: so here we see how he by withdrawing a part, denies the whole.

Lesbia formosa est: quae cum pulcherrima tota est, Tum omnibus una om^es
surripuit Veneres.

Here now contrary to the other example, he gathers all the parts of beauty in
one, and so concludes the whole.

CHAP. XXVII.
De distributione ex effectis, ubi de genere and specie. Distributio ex
effectis, est quando parts sunt effecta.
THe original of a distribution is from firsts arguments coming to have a
generality, because they are common to many, distributio ex effectis est, etc.
that is, when special causes may be given to one common effect, for as integrum
though it be singular, yet is it totum, because it is made of the portions of
the matter and form of the members: so here the effects are made of their genus.

Now he says distributio ex effectis, because it arises ex effectis, for
there are the causes distributing, and the parts distributed: so that here we
may see why these arguments are rightly called orta: quando parts sunt
effecta: so as the whole does symbolice contain the causes, so the parts do
symbolice contain the effect: as if he should say, effecta we heard of in the
first invention, but effecta here sunt parts, this is the second invention.
God as he made all things, so has he ranged and ordered them one under
another: so that in this definition, this is all, the parts are the effects,
and the cause is the whole. Mariners are general causes, but they have special
effects, for some climb the shroud, some run up and down, some pump, etc. here
are the effects of the efficient cause: so we may distribute from the matter,
as of wood is made a wooden chest, or table, or stool, etc. so from the form as
we may from the genus, but this always consider in general, that the parts be
part of the whole, and that they be homogenie parts, for if we shall divide a
whole into parts, and particles, there will be no distribution, as if a man's
body be anatomized; because the particles will agree with the parts.

Distributio generis in species hic excellit.
He does here hasten to genus, as being the principal thing in this place: and
it is as if he should say, that distribution which we usually hear of, and
which we have so often in Schools of genus and species, they are but modi of a
distribution ex effectis: and it is true, and whilst the common Log^cians see
not this, they know not the truth of them, nor their original* and this makes
them to begin with genus and species in their Logic: so they know them not in
their cause, but only in their second nature.

Hic excellit.
As if he should say, this is the chiefest modus in this distribution.

Genus.
Genus signifies firstly a stock or kindred, now because all the species come
from one root, as a family comes from one stock, ergo, it is called genus, or
as the parents are causes of their children, so is genus cause of the species:
so the Hiraclides are they that come of Hiracles

Species.
This signifies in the original the countenance of a thing, n^w we come to see
nothing but singulars, ergo, individua, and species infimae are properly
species, it comes of an old verb specio, or spicio; species it is that which is
looked on: excellit that is of principal use, and this is the reason thereof,
the Lord has ranged all things under his own general, but this kind of ranging
is more general than the rest, and the genus giving essence to the species, it
draws the species with it wheresoever it goes; hence it is that wheresoever
the genus of any thing is taught, there a so must the species be taught, and
this was the father of predicaments, so that there is nothing, but is under a
genus, but genus generalissimum

Genus est, totum partibus essentiale.
Totum est quod continet parts, for the parts we heard were holden together in
the whole, for before whilst the members did contribute every one a portion of
matter and form, they made up the whole, now genus is totum, but contrary to
integrum, for there the integrum had his whole matter and form, from the
members: but the genus comprehends the species in a common matter, and in a
common form.

Totum essentiale.
By this we are to understand that which gives essence, that is, matter and
form: so that integrum did contain all that the members had, but the genus does
not contain all that the species have: so that though all the essence of the
genus be in the species, yet the whole essence of the species is not in the
genus: when I say totum essentiale, I say two things, first, that genus is a
totum: secondly, that there is nothing in the genus, but is also in the species.

Object. But how can it be said that genus gives essence to the species,
whereas they have more in them than the genus.

Answ. To contain is to hold together, now because the species agree in one
common matter, and a common form, as in uno puncto, ergo genus does contain
them: so that reciprocation here is to be understood so far forth, as by their
hypostatical union the specius are made one in their genus; hence it is that
whatsoever is (...), with the genus must agree with the species: therefore if
any in distributing shall make any part as large as the genus, as Logicians
distribute genus into perfectum, and imperfectum, they make species totum and
not genus: so ens is substantia, or accidens will not come into any Art, for
the parts are consentanies inter se being subjectum and adjunctum.

Partibus.
Pars est quae continetur non in toto, sed a toto, t^t^m est quod continet, as
being the common punctum wherein the parts meet together, he says also
partibus non parti.

Species est pars generis.
Pars we heard before: generis: so that as membrum was pars integri, not
generis, so species est pars generis, not integri: so that they which divide
parts into integral, or simular, understand not Logic, for a part simular is
nothing but species, which is pars generis, as a pan of water, and a drop of
water is genus and species: a bone and a part of a bone is also genus and
species; now they call it simular because they have the same denomination. Why
so? genus does predicare re et nomine, as they say pars generis: here observe,
that species has reference only to genus, and so genus to species; even as
causa is effecti causa, and subjectum adjuncti subjectum, for they are relates,
ergo, can repeat no other thing, but one another. So again, genus is totum, not
speciei, but specierum, ergo, when we give a double face to him, we make him
like Janus with a double forehead, for they make the same species to be
species to two things: species therefore is generis species, as one son is but
son of one father.

Now this is their trouble, that they cannot distribute a species into
individua, because (say they) individua do but differ numero: what is that?
Differ numero is properly to reckon up, or make an induction of the individua
to make up the species: again, when we distribute that species into all his
individua, there is a distribution, for there is a totum, and parts distributed.

Objection. But in a distribution we should have but two species.

Answer. Why, is it not requisite that there should always be a decotomie, for
indeed if we could find it out, every thing is decotomised, but the Lord has
not revealed it unto men, but has kept it secret to himself.

Objection. Singulars have no differences, but are distinct only by a conflux
of common accidents.

Answer. Then singulars should not differ in essence, ergo, I should be the
same with you, and you with me; the first matter indeed was imperfect, but
every thing else is an effect, ergo, has all the causes, ergo, the form, If
they ask me what it is, I answer them, that my soul is my form as they hold: or
else thus, as my members are not another man's members; so my form arising from
the parts of my body, is not another man's form, but is really distinct from it.

Objection. But (say they) the reasonable soul is general to all men.

Answer. There indeed may be some scruple, but when we consider that the forms
of the body and the soul make up the form of a man, we shall see every man to
have a distinct form, by which we shall know them each from other.

Sic animal genus hominis and bestiae dicimus.
He means that genus is a general totum, and comprehends the species under
it: for as a Hen covers her chickens with her wings, so genus covers the
species with his essence: then again, make an axiom, as homo est animal, and
you shall see the species to be the subject more often than the genus, ergo, he
says subjecta.

Genus est generalissimum, aut subalternum.
Here he distributes genus unto us, showing us that there are two kinds
thereof: the one is generalissimum, for so indeed every genus is general, and
has his subsistencie only in singularibus: and because all genera do subsist
in singularibus, ergo, all but singularia are genera: hence it is that they say
in Schools, ens and unum confunduntur.

Species sub alterna, aut specialissima.
Genus generalissimum, cujus nullum est genus.

Generalissimum is so called, because it is most genus, because that can be
nothing but genus. Subalternum genus is genus, but not only genus, nor always
genus.

Cujus nullum est genus.
There must needs be an end: for as there is a lowest whereat we must begin, so
there must be an highest above which we cannot go, for there cannot be an
infinitus motus in creatures: so the Lord has in great wisdom ranged things in
their order. So the common Logicians have made ten predicaments, or genera
generalissima: but the first four have Logicks use in them, the rest are
arguments, but if we would know the genera generalissima, every Art will tell
us them best: now we may ascend to ens too: so that ens is the definitum indeed.

God is (...), so in Logic argumentum is genus generalissimum; vox in Grammar,
etc. and all these are species of ens.

Nullum genus.
Here he denies any genus to stay our reason, that so we may not go too far:
for since genus arises from the matter, we shall at last come to that which is
no genus, but a matter only, ergo, we must distribute this into his matter,
and form.

Subalternum genus, ut subalternaitem species, quod species hujus, illius autem
genus est.
Subalternum genus, may also be subalterna species: so that these being one and
the same, only differing in respect, therefore one definition may serve for
them both.

Species specialissima, quae est individua in species alias, ut materia and
forma singulares.
Species (as before) signifies firstly a singular thing, and other species are
called species at the second hand, but individua are properly called species quae
speciuntur. Now he says specialissima, that is indeed, and properly, as
generalissimum had no genus above it, so species specialissima has no species
under it: individua is here an adjunct to species specialissima: now he says
individua, because he speaks of division, ergo, here he tells us, that we can go
no further, to find any inferior species, we may only divide it into members,
if we will.

Genus vero, and species notae sunt causarum and effectorum.
He does commorari here, because the Schools have not commonly received, that
genus contains the matter and common form of the species: but we know a perfect
definition lays out the quiddity of a thing, that is, the matter and the form:
now the form is there, but where is the matter? why, the genus contains the
quiddity, the essence, the causes, ergo it is an argument unswerable that the
genus contains the matter.

Hinc universale est insigne, ac praestabile, quia causam declarat.
The common Logicians never looked after any distribution, but of the integrum
into the members, and of the genus into the species: now integrum is commonly a
singular, ergo, in opposition to it they called genus an universal: then again
the integrum is made of the matter and form of the members, now they are
singulars, ergo, there can arise nothing from them, but that which is singular.
Now the genus is common to the species, therefore by reason thereof it comes to
be universal, and we must apprehend it in our minds.

Object. It is a great question whether universalia be realia, or only
intentionalia.

Answ. True it is, that every universal is subsistent in singularibus, so that
there is truly animal: but we must look for him in individuis, for genus is
totum partibus essentiale: but if we make an abstraction of it from the
singulars, then it is not real: but here is a fallace, for the universal still
remains a thing, though I thus consider it in my mind: for I would dispute with
them thus, If it be but a phantasme, then can it give no essence. Again, when
we define, do we not lay out the thing? ergo, if genus were only mental, it
could not give essence: so causa, effectum, and all other arguments are things
real in nature, howsoever my Logic takes hold of them.

Insigne.
True it is, that every whole is general, because it is totum, but genus is
universale insigne, ac praestabile, and so it appears: for because it gives
esse not only in a distribution, but also in a definition, ergo, it is of
great use even set in the forefront of the Aristotelians, quia causam
declarat, and our knowledge is e causis.

Distributio generis in species valde quidem excellit, sed difficilis est and
rara inventu.
Valde excellit, that is in use, sed difficilis est, and rara inventu, the
reason is this, the genus is totum universale, and gives matter and form to the
species: now the form is hard to be found: so that in common Authors we find
this definition seldom, but in Arts it is more often: yet if we should examine
it strictly, we might cavil; as when I say animal is homo, or brutum, here
animal and homo have the same form, only homo and brutum do differ in form.

Ovidius 1. Metamor.
Neu regio foret ulla suis animalibus orba,
Astra tenent coeleste solum formae que deorum, etc.
Here animal is the genus; astra, pisces, bestiae, and volucres, are the
species, being argued by their several subject of places, and man is argued a
comparatis, and from his adjunct authority.

Cic. 1. Officiorum, virtutem dividit in species quatuor.
So Tully distributes virtue into four parts, and gives the definitions of the
species for the species themselves.

Distributio generis in formas specierum eadem est, etc.
The reason follows: ut animalium aliud loque^^^ aliud motum: We may see our
Author could not tell what to make the form of homo, for one while he says
animal is rationale aut irrationale, here he says loquens, aut mutum.

Object. But how can this distribution of generis in formas be true, when as
the forms of the species are not in genere?

Answ. Because the genus contains the matter and form of the species, and the
special form is a membrum of the species, ergo, the genus being in individuis,
and giving esse to them, may be said to contain their special form, even as I
may be truly said to hold a stool in my hand, when as I have but a part of it
in my hand.

Genus and species non solum tractantur hac simplici divisionis formula,
sedetiam separatim alterum ex altero.
You have not genus and species always used after this simple manner, but one
to argue another: for when I say homo est animal, there is a distribution,
though there be but one species.

Pro Archia.
Ac ne quis a nobis hoc it a dici forte miretur, etc.

Because he was a Rhetorician, therefore he should speak for Poetry, for they
are both Arts: here he reasons a genere ad species; for ars is the genus, and
eloquentia and Poetica are species.

Contra genus tractatur per species.

Ovid. 4. Tristium.
Materiamque tuis tristem virtutibus imple:
Ardua per praeceps gloria vadit iter, etc.
Glory goes through an headlong journey: why? if Troy had not been the cause of
Hectors glory, he had not been glorious: so that the art of War, of a Pilot at
Sea, of Physic, etc. had not been known but by adversity.

Exempla igitur specialia suo generi accomodata, sunt hujus loci.
That is, when examples are applied to their genera sunt hujus loci, that is,
they are species: now the very name commends a similitude to us, neither is
there an example, but there is a similitude: as when one sets a child a copy to
write by, it is a simile for him to make a simile by; and when one example is
brought to argue an example, it is a simile, but when it is brought to argue a
genus, then it is a species.

Ad Atticum 7. Vrbem tu relinquas? etc.
The question is, whether the City is to be left: it is lawful, Themistocles
did so: it is not lawful, for out people did not forsake Rome, neither did
Pericles forsake the City.

CHAP. XXVIII.
De distributione e subjectis. Reliqua distributio est quodam modo
consentaneorum, ut subjectorum and adjunctorum. Distributio e subjectis est,
cum parts sunt subjecta.
DIstributio has his denomination from the parts, because it is active in
respect of them, and passive in regard of the whole: then again, because of the
consention of the whole with the parts, ergo it is ex consentaneis: now there
may be a common subject to more adjuncts, and contra, ergo, he says, Reliqua
distributio est quodam modo consentaneorum: and to use any more particular
description of them is to no purpose, seeing we have heard what subjectum and
adjunctum are.

Distributio e subjectis est, cum parts sunt subjectae.
So that if we shall but sever them, we shall see nothing but subjectum and
adjunctum: if we keep them together, we shall see the arising affection.

Vt apud Catullum. Virginitas non tota tua est, ex part parentum est, etc.
The maids virginity is divided into three subjects; not as integrum into
members, but three were owners of it, as three men may be owners of one ship.

Sic Cicero 5. Tusculanorum. Sunt enim tria genera a bonorum, ut jam a laqueis
Stoicorum, etc.
So bonum: the totum is showed by his subjects: it is corporis the subject, or
of external things belonging to the whole man, or animi.

Some, as Kickerman and Doctor Downham, would have this distribution ex
subjectis, and the next, to be imperfect, even as definitio is perfecta, aut
imperfecta: but they are much deceived, for when a perfect definition may be
had, we use no description, ergo, it serves only where a perfect definition
cannot be had: it is not so here; for if we have a perfect definition, either
integri in membra, or generis in species, we must not therefore leave out
these, if they be (...), aut contra; as we see axioma is affirmatum, and
negatum must come into Logic, though it have his species afterward. Again,
these distributions cannot be reduced to the perfect ones, either of integrum
or genus.

CHAP. XXIX.
De distributione ex adjunctis. DIstributio ex adjunctis est, quando parts
sunt adjuncta: ergo, the whole is subjectum.
Vt hominum alii sani alii aegri, etc. This distribution will not be
distributed (as I said before) into genus and species.

Sic Virgilius 1. Georg. Quinque tenent coelum zonae, quarum una corusco, etc.
The heaven is distributed by his adjuncts: it is temperate or intemperate, to
dicotomize it, intemperate is hot, or cold: hot is the middle zone, cold are
them between the Tropicks: temperate are the other two.

Caesar. 1. belli Gallic.
Gallia est omnis divisa in parts tres, etc.

Caesar divides the Country of France into three parts, according to the
inhabitants thereof.

CHAP. XXX.
De definitione.
Definitio est, cum explicatur quid res sit, eaque vicissim definitio argui
potest.

HItherto we have heard of a distribution; now we come to a definition: for
having heard what a thing is, and how it differs from others, notwithstanding
it may be compared with them, and be equal or unequal, like or unlike, and then
be named: lastly, be ranged under some head: having I say seen all these things
clapped close together in the thing, now it remains that we should lay out the
limitation of it, and circumscribe it. This is the last of all, because it may
arise from any of the arguments going before, and also from orta which follow.

Definitio est cum explicatur quidres sit.
We heard that the arguments arising manifoldly were distribution and
definition: now definition arises as it shall fall out, either from agreers,
or disagreers, comparates, or orta, ergo, it arising from more arguments than
any of the rest, it is requisite that it should be after all the rest: though
in laying down an Art it will have the first place, because if it be a perfect
definition it lays out the essence of a thing immediately: if it be a
description it lays down the quantity, etc. A definition is as it were a box,
that lays up all the rules following in the Art, even as the body does the
members.

Definitio.
For the name, we know finis is terminus, and belongs to Geometry: we heard it
borrowed from thence into Logic to signify a cause, here it signifies the
(...) so that definire is to set down the extreme, or utmost points of a thing,
ergo, it must be reciprocal with the thing defined, else can it not define it:
for if the definitum be larger than the definitio, then it out-reacheth the
limits of the thing: if it be less, then it lays not out the essence fully.

Cum explicatur.
So that definitio does lay abroad: explicatio is a laying abroad the quiddity
of a thing. In that he says definitio does explicare, he means all the
arguments before were clapped together in the thing confusedly, but the
definition does lay them abroad: as in this word Dialectica there is a Synopsis
of all Logic, but when I say, it is ars been disserendi, here the definition
lays out all more at large: the definite is like a Pedlers pack, wherein his
points, pins, knives, etc. are shut up altogether, and the definitio is like
the laying of them out, or showing of them, to the end that he may sell them.
The one may likewise be compared to a garment folded up, the other to a garment
spread abroad at large.

Quid.
That is, the essence: for as in a perfect definition we may gather the other
arguments of a thing, from the causes: so in a description we may gather the
causes from other arguments: this entity therefore or essence, the definition
always looks at: another difference of the definitum and the definitio is,
that the definitum is ens, and the definitio is essentia.

Res.
That is the ens the subject of the general Arts, that is aliquid in the
definition of argumentum.

Eaque vicissim definitio argui potest.
As the definite called before res may be argued a definitione, so contra:
though the definitio be more often brought to argue the definite, than contra:
ergo, it has the name definition, not from definitum, but from the definitio.

Object. Kickerman says, Ramus will have definitio both an argument and an
axiom.

Answ. No, we make it an argument when we speak properly, we make it an axiom
when we speak Synecdochichos.

Definitio est perfecta, aut imperfecta.
This distribution is now to good purpose, for the Schools have not agreed at
any time of any perfect definition, as they say homo est animal rationale, this
is not a perfect definition, ergo, some do add mortale, some capax disciplinae,
some both; so that indeed we cannot give a perfect definition of any thing,
ergo, because it is so hard to find the special form, it is requisite to have
an imperfect one to grope out the form thereby, else we should be undone, if we
could no way look at the essence of things, and here by the way we see the
quiddity laid out perfectly by a perfect definition, and imperfectly by an
imperfect definition.

Illa, proprie definitio; haec, descriptio dicitur.
Where we may see that perfecta definitio is properly the species of this
definition, and that the definition before was synecdochichal; now that explio
catio of the thing is perfect or imperfect: the one called definitio, the other
descriptio; the one containing the limitation of the essence, the other the
limitation of the quantity: so that whatsoever has an essence distinct from it
self must be limited, ergo, may be defined: ergo, have their perfect
definition, though we cannot see what their form is.

Definitio perfecta est definitio constance solis causis essentiam
constituentibus.
The reason is, because it stands of more parts, namely the genus, and form,
laying out the composition of the thing.

Ecausis.
As if he should say, they do give existere to the definite.

Solis.
Because no other arguments come in a perfect definition.

Essentiam constituentibus.
That is, materia and forma, but materia is included in genere: so that
definitio is ortum doubly, now there are four causes which give esse, but two
of them only give essence, so that the effect has his substance from the
matter and form, not from the other causes.

Quales causa genere, and forma comprehenduntur.
Ramus does commorari upon this doctrine, showing that a perfect definition
does lay out the substantial quiddity of a thing: now the reason why he says
genere, and not materia simply, but materia as it is in genere, is this,
because the genus contains not only the matter, but also a portion of the
form, the general form: ergo, it must be the next genus that we must bring in a
perfect definition, for if the genus be more remote, then the form of the next
genus must be left out: but if we take the next genus, then we bring in all
above it.

Et forma comprehenduntur.
That is the special form: the reason in nature is this, we find that the totum
is not subsistent but in singularibus: now we find moreover that singulars have
that whereby they are singulars beside, for else one singular could not be
destinct from another, ergo, every singular must have his peculiar form, and
also his matter, not as it is a first argument, but as it is symbolice in
genere.

Vt in aenimali, and pars formae.
He means of the general form, for anima vegetativa, and sensitiva are the
forms of vivens, and so of animal.

Totam formam hominis.
As if the form of man did consist of these as of parts: but it is not so, the
truth is this, there is in some things a simple life, in some things more
lives, as anima vegetativa is firstly in planta: now animal has that, and
somewhat more, namely, sensitiva; and man has both them and also reason, so
that one of the species has nothing but that which the genus has, namely,
vivens and planta, for planta is vivens, quae vivit vitam tantum vegetativam,
and so is vivens, only tantum makes the difference from others. Now from this
discourse he gathers, that a definition is universale symbolum, not that
singulars cannot be perfectly defined, as well as universals, but he means it
is a symbolum containing universally the causes constituting the essence: so
that the individuum has the matter and form of every genus above him, ergo, it
is universale in this respect, having his peculiar form added to them.

Naturam.
Here we may see what nature is in things properly: some make the form only to
be nature, some the matter only, and some both form and matter: here we see
the essence and nature are all one: in the first signification natura signifies
res nata: secondly, it signifies res underes nata est, that is, the causes: so
that here know that the causes being put, all things attending them follow, for
so natura is taken for the properties of a thing. E qui dat formam, dat formam
consequentiam: so that a perfect definition does deliver whatsoever comes
within the mame of nature.

Tales definitiones sunt artium.
No not tales if we should exactly try them by this rule, but they are the best
examples. Now ars is not the next genus to Grammar, neither is been loqui the
form, but the end of Grammar, but he tells us hereby, that there is a soul of
Grammar, which is in every rule, which is as it were the simular parts of the
Art, tending to this (...), been loqui.

CHAP. XXXI.
De Descriptiono.
Descriptio est definitio ex alliis etiam argumentis rem definiens.

THis we heard to be generally called definitio: so that it does quodam modo
definire: but as definitio in general before was a trope, so descriptio is not
a definition, but as it does explicate quid res sit, not definiendo from the
essence, but describendo from the quantity: so that the definitio lays out the
flesh, bones etc. and descriptio lays out the complements. The definition was
internal, the description is but external, limiting the thing as it were with
chalk. The description may be compared to the Carpenters chalking, the
definition to the thing chalked; and by how much the thing it self lays out
the quiddity of it better than the chalking does, by so much is a perfect
definition more excellent than a description: so that here remember that
howbeit a description cannot see the arguments laying out the essence of the
thing, yet the intendment of it is to do it.

Est definitio.
That is, rem definiens, that is, quidditatem rei explicans.

Ex aliis etiam argumentis.
That is, others beside the causis: so that a description must have a genus
with it, if it be not a genus generalissimum, that has no genus: again he
says, ex aliis, not telling us which, because any of the arguments a foregoing
may go into it, even a distribution, yea a testimonony also, as we may see in
the descrption of fama: so that it may arise from in artificials, yet must it
not be taught after them, because artificials must have nothing to do with
inartificials.

Atque haec succincta brevitas non est in hac specie perpetua, sed saepe
illustriorem, and magnificentiorem explicationem desiderat.
Our Author does commorari upon the use of a description, showing that it is
not always so brief as before* but sometime we shall lay it out in all the
simples in the thing.

Sed saepe illustriorem, and magnificentiorem, etc.
That is, when we deliver things that are magis illustriora, et
magnificentiora, it is requisite we should lay them out more at large than
those that are of less moment.

Sic gloria describitur in Miloniaena.
Sed tamen ex omnibus praemiis virtutis si esset habenda ratio praemiorum,
amplissimum esse praemium, gloriam, etc.

Glory is argued from his genus praemium: praemium from his subject virtus,
then a comparatis amplissimum; Lastly, ab effectis.

Sic 4. Aeneid. fama discribitur.
Extemplo Libyae magnas ut fama per urbes,
Fama malum, quod non aliud velocius ullum, etc.
Fama is the aliquid argued by her effect of going, then the subject of place,
urbes, and magnas an adjunct to urbes, urbes Libya the integrum, extemplo an
adjunct of time: malum a genus, and malum is argued by an adjunct, swiftness, a
minore. Monstrum another genus, horrendum an adjunct, mirabile dictu a
testimony, nec dulci declinat somno a disparate.

Tales sunt descriptiones plantarum, animalium in Physicis; item fluminum, etc.
That is, when we lay out their whole quidditie at large: and thus have we seen
all the artificial arguments that are in any thing: and so have seen the thing
both within and without. Lastly, we shall hear that, having seen all in a thing
that we have heard before, then may we safely give testimony of it as we see
occasion, and not before.

CHAP. XXXII,
De testimonio Divino.
Exposito artificiali argumento, sequitur inartificiale. Argumentum
inartificiale est, quod non suae natura, sed assumpta artificialis alicujus
argumenti vi arguit.

WE have heard of artificial arguments, and there can be nothing that shall
be in the artificio of any thing, but we have heard it: so that if we look at
any of the creatures of God to see the root, the causes of it, and then the
whole circumference and limitation thereof, we may by these arguments taught
before, see it thoroughly. Now whereas one man cannot see all things, though at
the first all things were made for one man, the Lord has in wisdom ordained
that we should receive somethings by reports from others; for as the world was
to increase both in men and other creatures, it was impossible that one man
should see all things intus and incute: so that whereas at the beginning all
things being made for one man, and he afterward could not see them, yet still
it is so far forth true whilst all men see all things. It is called
inartificiale for the contrary reason that artificiale was so called, namely of
being in the thing, whereas this is not in the nature of the thing, but externe
altogether: so that we may see his force by this, having no farther to do with
the thing, then only by witnessing of it.

Exposito artificiali argumento, etc.
This transition contains the conclusion of all that went before, and the
proposition of that which follows: and here again we may see how artificial
arguments go before inartificials, because inartificiall arguments have no
ground but as they are backed with artificials. And this doctrine we may see to
be true by the practice of common people; for if a man give testimony of that
he knows not, others will say he does he knows not what: For as no man can
give testimony of that he knows not; so no man ought to receive a testimony,
but as it is backed with artificials, otherwise he knows not the thing
sufficiently as he should; and if he first hear a testimony of a thing, and
afterward come to see the thing, he will then say he knows it, not because one
testified so much, but because himself saw it to be so. It is called Argumentum
inartificiale, because it never comes into Art to make up a Rule, though it may
come in as a commoration to prove a rule syllogistically; but method is the
disposition of axioms, not of syllogismes: now a testimony of a thing belongs
to that Art to which the thing witnessed does belong: as Aristotle's authority
against the creation of the world belongs to Divinity, there to be confuted in
the doctrine of the creation.

Argumentum inartificiale sequitur.
It is an Argument, for it is effected ad arguendum, but after a new manner,
for it is externe: but as it is grounded upon the Artificials, so it is
effected to argue.

Argumentum inartificiale est, quod non sua natura, sed assumpta alicujus
artificialis, argumenti vi arguit.
It is of power to argue, as we heard before, but not vi sua: For when a man
bears witness of a thing, we receive it, presuming that he is familiarly
acquainted with the thing that he witnesses: so that arguit, but not sua
natura: for alas, what harmony is there between the witnesser considered in his
own nature, and the thing witnessed, considered in its own nature? None at all:
so that we must look at either of these for their natures.

Sed assumpta, etc.
So that by the force of some artificial Argument taken unto it, it does
argue, ergo, this teaches us not easily to receive every testimony hand over
head, but first to look whether the testis be well acquainted with the thing
witnessed, otherwise as it may be an error in him to give testimony of a thing
he knows not, so may it be no less error in us that receive such a testimony.
This we see reproved in common matters among men, and it teaches us to receive
the testimony of a man, not so much because ipse dixit; but because we are sure
he knows the thing thoroughly.

Vi assumpta.
Nor that it is ortum argumentum, for orta did argue with the same force that
the first did, from whence they did arise, but a testimony does not argue with
the force of an artificial, be it primum or ortum, though it be backed with
artificial. The cause, effect should be in the witnesser, but they are not in
the witness: if the testis have seen any one argument, we are so far to receive
his testimony, and no farther: if he have seen more arguments, or all of them,
then are we much more to receive his witness.

Itaque cum exquisita rerum veritas subtilius exquiritur, per exiguam vim
probationis habet.
This being the nature of an inartificial, it has little force to argue of it
self: for all his strength is aliunde.

Veritas.
Truth belongs to an axiom, here he means, if we would see it to be ens, or
the entity of it, surely this argument can stand us in no great stead: the
testimony only swims in our brain, but we do not see the thing in its subtle
parts: as if he should say, the artificial arguments do argue subtly, the
inartificiall more grossly.

In civilibus autem et humanis rebus plerumque hoc argumentum praecipuam fidem
e moribus arguentis efficit, si prudentia virtus, et benevolentia adfuerint.
He stays upon the use of an inartificiall argument. In the matters of the
Commonwealth, or in matters concerning private men, this argument has his
special credit; because in this kind they are most received, we know all the
matters in our Courts pass by writings or testimonies of men; and in these
civil matters we look more after the men, then after the thing: there are
Artificials here in these matters, but we look not at them; still we are to
understand that the witnesses know the artificials: the reason is, because they
are things done in time long before, which therefore cannot be decided but by
writings or men's testimonies.

Praecipuam fidem habet.
That is, it does urge most in respect of the subject, whereto it is used.

E moribus arguentis, efficit, si prudentia virtus, et benevolentia adfuerint.
This inartificiall Argument has not praecipuam fidem from it self, but as it
proceeds from him that is prudent, virtuous and benevolent. Prudentia is that
skill a man has to bring his Rule, or any deduct from his Rule to practice,
that is, if he be not simple, and silly, to tattle and prattle he knows not
what, then praecipuam fidem habet: so that prudentia does require discretion,
and judgment to know and deliver a truth. That commandment, Thou shall not
bear false witness, is here taught.

Again, if he have not virtue joined with his prudentia, that is, if he make
not conscience of witnessing the truth when he knows it, we ought not to
receive it: so that as he must be able to judge of the truth, so must he have
conscience to utter it.

Lastly, because notwithstanding though he may be judicious and virtuous, yet
it may be that even the best man may be carried with an affection either of
love or anger, ergo, he must have good will to speak the truth howsoever, ergo,
it is left to a malefactor, that if any of the Jury seem not to have these
things, he may except against him.

Id uno nomine testimonium dicitur.
Of the second part: for testis and testimonium are the arguments arguing; it
is so called in respect of the thing witnessed, because that is nearest. Now
some Logicians, as Kickerman, place testimonium in judgment, not in invention,
for (says he) it is an axiom, but he is decived, for the testis and the
testimony are arguments, and make but one axiom: why, one argument may be an
axiom, as a wise man is worthy respect: here a wise man is an axiom; but when
it is a testimony it is not an axiom: True it is, that the testis speaks rem
testatam axiomatically most commonly, and that is the reason our Author speaks
so often of veritas here in this chapter; but as it is a testimony, it is no
axiom.

Est divinum vel humanum.
Here is a distinction of testimonies, I dare not call it a distribution, for
these parts belong not to a testimony, but as diverse modi, we know that divinum
testimonium is given from him from whom nothing is hid, but that he sees all
things, the humane is not so: so that testimonium comes to be respected these
two ways. Now if question be made, that divinum testimonium is beyond all
controversy; surely if God say it we are to receive it: for God is good, and
knows all, and no evil dwells with him, neither does he wish evil to his.
Man may say with the Academicks, hoc tantum s^io, me nihil scire, ergo, if a
divine and humane testimony be compared together, the humane is to give place
to the divine: neither is there any divine testimony, but if we look after it,
we shall see it in the thing: so that a divine testimony is most absolute, not
quatenus testimonium, but in repect of of testis: hence do we plead so for the
truth of the Scriptures, We say that we believe that which the Church
delivers, because God says it to our hearts by his holy Spirit, this is
divinum: The Church of Rome says we are to believe it because the Church says
it, but that is but humanum, ergo, not so excellent. Again, they are not
content to make the Church a witness of the Scriptures, but most absurdly the
cause of them. But God, as he is the Author of them, so he is the witnesser by
his Spirit: and it is one thing to consider God as the cause of them, and
another to consider him as the testis thereof.

In divinis testimoniis numerantur non solum deorum oraculi, sed etiam responsa
vatum and fatidiorum.
Our Author brings divellish examples, not divine: and he might have done much
better if he had brought testimony out of Scripture; but the reason why he does
not is this, we know Logic is a general Art of all things whatsoever, ergo,
the Scriptures not being received among all people, and he regarding that which
was more common in use, as the Poets Fables, and such like, and that which was
more generally received, ergo, he omits the Scripture. Now here in the examples
following we shall see that these oracula were oracula diabolorum, and responsa
vatum were of liars. So that we must understand by divinum testimonium, that
which is divinum in truth, and not only in name: for as there are many called
Gods, and yet but one true God; so there are many divine testimonies, and yet
but one true divine testimony.

Cicero 3. Catilin, Nam ut illa omittam (ait Orator) visas nocturno tempore ab
occidente faces, ardoremque coeli, ut fluminum jactus, etc.
Strange signs were seen about the time of Catilins conspiracy, burning heat,
flashings appearing in the heaven, so that the gods did by them witness these
things. So when God does at any time show forth his justice, as he did in
Jerusalem by the sword hanging over it, and by the strange bringing forth of
the lamb by an heifer standing at the Altar to be sacrificed, or by comets, and
such like, they are testimonies of some judgment to come.

Deinde paulo post.
Quo quidem tempore cum Aruspices ex tota Hetruria convenissent, etc.

Here Tully makes many divine testimonies of Catilins conspiracy, and of the
state of Rome.

Tandem cum dixisset, ut ex Aruspicum responsis ludi facti, and Jovis signum
majus factum conversumque ad orientem, tum ait:

Nonne illud vero ita praesens erat, ut nutu Jovis optimi maximi factum esse
videatur?

Tully makes this among the rest a sign of Catalins conspiracy: they had made
Jupiters image a very little one, and therefore they took it down, and made it
bigger, and it was set upon the stool looking toward the Senate, even at that
time when these fellows of Catalin went through the Town, and thereby it did as
it were command the Senators to look after these wretched fellows.

Brevis est illud Tibulli.
Quod si vera canunt sacris oracula templis,
Haec illi nostro nomine dicta refer:
Hoc tibi conjugium pr^mittit Delius ipse
Faelix, ac alium desine velle virum.
He would persuade her to marry, because Apollo had foretold that it should be
fortunate with them.

CHAP. XXXIII.
De testimonio humano legis and sententiae.
Testimonium humanum est commune, aut proprium.

KNowing that a humane testimony does rest upon the artificial arguments, it
cannot be so strong as divinum is: yet it may be true. Est commune, aut
proprium, because the more witnesses it has, the stronger it is: that which is
testified by one man alone is weaker, because one man may sooner be deceived
than many: he may see only one artificial argument, they may see more, yea
all: so that as a divine testimony is to be preferred before an humane, so a
humane that is common, is to be preferred and received before an humane that is
proper.

Commune ut lex, and illustris sententia.
Lex a law, a rule which is received either by the whole world, as the law of
Nations; or of some peculiar Countries, as the laws of a private state: and
this has less force in it than the former, ergo, if the witnesses stand of
more together, and of one alone still holding all of them prudent, virtuous and
benevolent, we are to receive that which is witnessed by more men, sooner than
the other. Now then where the Church of Rome reasons with us, it is not better
to go to the Church, than to a private man? yes, but they must be prudent,
virtuous and benevolent: again, they must see the artificial arguments of that
witness, for else if one man shall bring testimony from the word of God, we are
rather to receive his: else we prefer an humane testimony before a divine.
Again, if it be an humane testimony, and a humane testimony that we compare
together, let not a private man stand up to stir with his mere testimony
against a whole assembly.

The reason of the Creed being generally received in all Churches, is this,
because it has a divine testimony, ergo, next to the testimony of the Church,
we are to prefer the common testimony, and then the private, as it does not
jarr with the common one.

Illustris sententia.
For though it be not a law, yet is it generally received, as notable for
truth: now he calls it illustris, opposing it to obscura, which though it may
have truth in it, yet is it not so famous to be received. We say vox populi is
vox Dei, because all truth comes from him.

Legis autem and non scriptae, and scriptae, testimonium est. Pro Milone.
Est enim (judices) non scripta, sed nata lex; quam non didicimus, accepimus,
legimus; verum ex natura ipsa arripuimus, etc.

For there are some laws that are customs, and they are not written: indeed in
civil affairs, it so comes to pass that we cannot see all, but are fain to
leave some things to custom: yet there may be some laws written in our hearts,
which we call natural.

This is witnessed, that it is lawful for a man to defend himself by the law of
Nature.

Et ibidem.
Quod si duodecem tabulae nocturnem furem quoquo modo, diurnum autem si se telo
defender it interfici impune voluerunt, etc*

Why a man may slay his adversary by the Law of the twelve tables, which in the
night time allows it.

Sententiae illustres sunt proverbia.
That is, old says, as they call them, because they are generally received,
are called proverbs: ut pares cum paribus facillime congregantur: birds of a
feather will fly together.

Sparctam nactus es, you have an office look to it. This was occasioned thus,
when they had chosen their King at Sparta, they used this proverb to him,
Spartam nactus es, hanc exorna. Illustres sententiae are genus to proverbia,
and dicta sapientum.

Sunt item dicta sapientum.
These were private testimonies at their original, came to be general
afterward because of the common receipt of them. Nosce teipsum. Socrates was
counted the wisest man that lived in his time: and whereas the Mathematics and
natural Philosophy then flourished, he was the first that taught civility: and
the subject thereof is the knowledge of a man's self, ergo, he taught his
Scholars this lesson. Nosce teipsum. He means to know Moral Philosophy,
Ethics, Oeconomicks, Politics, etc. Ne quid nimis: too much of any thing is
good for nothing.

Proprium testimonium est, ut Platonis illud, 1. ad Quintum fratrem.
Atque ille quidem princeps ingenii, and doctrinae, Plato, etc.

That State is happy where Philosophers are Princes, or where Princes are
Philosophers: Plato says it, that is testimonium proprium.

Talia sunt in Poetis. 6. Aeneid.
Discite justitiam moniti, and ne temnite divos.
Sic Homerico illo versu.
Ajax autem ex Salamine duxit duodecim naves.
The Athenians and the Megarenses had fought so long, that there was a law made
at Athens, that none should speak of Salamis. Now Solon put a rope about his
neck, and ran through the City, saying this verse, (...), etc. by this means
the Athenians rising together got Salamis from the Megarenses, and it was
belonging to Athens, because of the King thereof.

Vivorum testimonia non sunt non tantum cum quaeritur de fundo, aut caede, etc.
He does not make a distinction of testimonies to be dead or alive, but he
means by mortuorum those when they were alive, that are now dead: he makes many
kinds of private testimonies, as obligations, confessiones, insiurandi, etc.

Obligationis exemplum est, 5. Philip. Audebo etiam oblig are fidem meam (P.
C.) vebis populoque Romano, etc.
Augustus Caesar was yet a young youth, who went to school when his father
Caesar was slain, and Antony made great stirs, thinking he should be in Caesar's
place. Now the Romans offer the Soldiers this Augustus to be their Captain,
that they might set him up against Antony, telling them that he would both
overcome their enemies, and also that he would be a good Governor.

Pignus autem obligatio quaedam est, ut apud Virg. Elog. 1.
Vis ergo inter nos quid possit uterque vicissim
Experiamur? ego hanc vitulam, ne forte recuses, etc.
So a pledge or a pawn is a special kind of obligation: they that put out money
to usury can tell that a pawn is an obligation.

Confessio est libera, vel expressa tormentis, quae proprie quaestio dicitur.
Tale fuit argumentum contra Milonem quod a Cicerone deridetur.
Age vero, quae er at aut qualis quaestio?

Confessio is when a man is a witness against himself, and it is either
voluntary, or expressa tormentis, quae proprie quaestio dicitur, that is a
Commission. How did the Commission go out? where is Ruscio and Casca? did
Clodius lay wait for Milo? he did. Then when it was answered that they should
be hanged for saying so, they answered again, that Clodius did not lie in wait
for Milo, hoping for liberty.

Hunc etiam referri potest argumentum, quo utimur, cum affirmationis nostrae
approbationem, and experientiam proponimus.
That is, this may be added to confession, when by experience we tell a thing.
Would any body lend Volcatius twenty shillings, let him try, tecto recipiet
nemo, no man will so much as receive him to house. If you were in my case, you
would find it.

Jusiur andum etiam testimonium est, 6. Aeneid. Per superos, and si qua fides
tellure sub ima est, Invitus, regina, tuo de littere cessi.
This is the last, and is humanum, because it is his witness that swears it.

Ob. But is not that Divinum, when God swears by himself.

An. No, because it is in respect of our weakness. 2ly, because we here
consider God as if he were man. If there be any faith under the earth: now
there is none.

Reciprocatio hic obscurior est, ut quia testatum verum sit, testis sic etiam
verax.
Here is a reciprocation in a testimony, but it is more obscure, than that
which we heard of before in the doctrine of a distribution, and definition, ut
quia testatum, etc. the reason is here because that whatsoever the witnesser
shall be, such shall the witness be: if he be prudent, virtuous and benevolent,
his witness will be prudent, virtuous and benevolent, that is as if he should
say, if the testis be true, then will the witness be true.

Obscurior est.
Because a man may bear false witness when he speaks the truth, and likewise
because the simple man may sometimes speak the truth as well as the prudent man.

THE LOGICIANS SCHOOLMASTER.
The Second Book. De Judicio.
CHAP. I.
Quid Judicium. Adhuc prima Dialecticae artis pars fuit, in Inventione; pars
altera sequitur in Judicio.
WE have hitherto heard of simples, which simples may be composites, but yet
we respect them as one joined to another, as man is made of many arguments, but
may be considered as a simple: now we come to consider how one thing is joined
with another thing. The glue which we heard of before, was that affection of
one argument to another, which the common Logicians call categoria: but when
they are put together in disposition, they belong to judgment: so that here we
shall hear of nothing but laying of simples together, that is, of arguments
with arguments; and that is either of two sides, of one argument to one, as in
a simple axiom: or of three sides together, as in a syllogism: or lastly of
axioms one after another for the help of memory, which is method: so that when
we have seen this, we may see the reach of our reason, and the rule of it.

Adhuc prima Dialecticae artis pars fuit, etc.
This is a perfect transition, for it is long since we heard this distribution:
our Author says in inventione, and then sequitur Judicium: so that he teaches
us that the first part of Logic is conversant about the invention of
arguments, and shows us that the first part of Logic came to be called
invention by a metonimie of the subject for the adjunct: so judicium came to
name the second part of Logic by a metonimie of the subject for the adjunct:
or if you will, Invention and Judgment came to be the parts of Logic by a
metonimie of the effect for the cause, for so invenire and judicare are acts
performed by the first and second part of Logic, which if Kickerman had well
considered he would not have reproved Ramus for this distribution.

Sequitur judicium.
Judicium is properly the act of our understanding, as it does discern and
determine truth and falsehood: for it comes of judex a judge: and when an axiom
is made, our judgment comes to judge it: so that the name will in the end
hardly be found large enough for this part of Logic. I would rather distribute
it thus, Dialecticae parts duae sunt, Inventio, and Dispositio, and then
Dispositio est judicium, aut methodus: and judicium est axiomaticum, aut
syllogisticum. My reasons are these, first because in method I see no more
judgment than in invention, but it is properly of the order of axioms. Again,
judgment is for truth, and falsehood, and that is the drift of axiomatical and
syllogistical judgment, ergo, they two are to be coupled together. Again, I
observe this in nature, that there are three internal senses, fancy,
cogitation and memory, for the common sense is all one with fancy. Now these
serve reason, as the two affections love and hatred serve will; for as there is
the affection of love to embrace that which will wills, and the affection of
hatred to hate that which will nilleth: so there is to serve reason, first a
fancy that serves invention; cogitation and memory that serve disposition. Now
these three are distinct in nature, because their organs and instruments by
which they work are distinct, for the organ or instrument of fancy is heat, the
instrument of cogitation is drith, and moisture of memory. Now the opposite to
heat is cold, therefore cogitation and memory communicate in cold: then cold is
a dry or moist cold, the dry cold is the instrument of cogitation, the moist
cold is the organ of memory, but this cold must be but in a degree, for if it
be too cold all is mard. Now then cogitation and memory communicating together
in cold, there must be a genus, wherein judgment and method must also
communicate, and that is dispositio: so that as these organs are by nature
severed in man, so nature must sever our reason into invention and disposition,
and disposition into judicium and methodus: and that these are distinct in
nature many reasons do show, for when a man is first born, then is his
invention best, his judgment is best when he is past juvenis, he remembers
best when he is a child, and then best for invention, because his head is then
hottest; afterward best for judgment, because then his brain is dryest: first
of all best for memory, because his head then is moystest: again, man in the
morning remembers best, because then his brain is moist by reason of the fumes
that ascend to the brain, when he sleeps; at noon he is fittest for
cogitation, because his brain is then dryest; at night he invents best, because
then his brain is cold: and as in the Su^^ course, her heat is moystest in the
morning, dryest at noon, and coldest at night: so is it with man's reason: so
that the internal senses are thus divided: yet here do we rather admit of a
dicotomie, because else we should leave out a genus, namely dispositio. Again,
because the ends of invention and judgment are various: now it may seem
strange, that Logic teaches these parts thus divided: for if it be true, that
a child has his memory first best, then his cogitation, and then his fancy,
why should not method be taught first, then judgment, and lastly invention?
The reason is this indeed, if a child should have use of his disposition first,
it would hinder his growth, for a child has least use of his reasonable soul
for a long time, because it is an hindrance of the acts of the vegetative and
sensitive soul, by reason hereof if he should be moystest, he could not grow to
that stature which is fitting: or if he should be dry, it would not extend his
moisture again afterward; that his fancy is moystest, it is for the been esse
of the body, for moisture is most praedominant in him, till he come to the
(...) of his age, and then his moisture cannot extend it self by reason of his
heat, and then he becomes most judicious: so that these are contrary to the
order of method, for the good of man. Again, a child has his faculty of memory
principal, that then he may gather things into a storehouse, and afterward he
must come to judge them: ergo, it is necessary that he should have the best
memory first, not so much for the act of his reason, as for the growth of his
body (he is for anima vegetativa a plant: for sensitiva an animal) and yet
there is no one act of any of these faculties above, but a^l act together: yet
so as one is predominant: ergo, we say old age brings wisdom. Now wisdom is
sapientia, that is syllogistical judgment; or prudentia, that is, the
application thereof upon every occasion. Again, syllogistical judgment is for
axiomatical judgment, for when an axiom is doubtful, we use the light of a
third argument, and so going back to the rule of true and false axioms, we
judge it to be true, or false: again, axiomatical and syllogistical judgment
communicate in the disposition of arguments, whereas method disposes axioms
immediately, arguments mediately; again, method has nothing to do with
syllogistical judgment no more than with axiomatical judgment, ergo, we hear
how these should be distributed from the organs of them in natural Philosophy,
and from the very act of reason. Now for Kickerman who makes a tricotomy, he
desiring to make a perfect Art leaves out a genus.

Dispositio, est secunda pars Logicae de disponendis argumentis ad been
judicandum.
This term dispositio commends to us the whole drift of the second part of
Logic, that is, a disposing, severing, or putting arguments asunder, it is
pars Logicae, taking it for the doctrine of Logic, it contains a portion
thereof, which has nothing to do with invention, I mean for precept, but only
for use, for invention and judgment are as opposite as white and black.

Pars Logicae.
For indeed it belongs to no other Art, no not to Rhetoric for doctrine, but
only for use, for as for their order of exordium, narratio, etc. it is nothing
but method: ergo, it does not follow, that because the Rhetorician uses
disposition, ergo, it belongs to Rhetoric. The Orator, the Grammarian, etc.
are general men, yet their Arts are distinct.

Logicae.
Because Logic is the rule of reasons act, and there is also this second act
of reason to let us see how God has disposed all things in nature: for so all
things but God are composite, yet there are simples too; yes, but not in use
subsistent in themselves, but ever with others: ergo, Gods simplicity is a
property that cannot be communicated to any other thing.

Secunda.
For there cannot be a disposition, till there be things to be put together, as
a Brick-layer cannot lay bricks together, except he have bricks. Again, we know
Grammar has two parts, first Etymology of a word alone, and Syntax of more
words together: so here there must be of things, first a simple consideration
of arguments asunder, and then a disposing of them together.

De disponendis.
Our Author says de disponendis: so that this it is, the whole of these rules
following is to dispose things with things: or seeing God practice first in
this rule, we imitate him: for if man be Gods steward over his creatures, it is
requisite he should know them, that he may take them to his comfort.

argumentis.
Surely it does dispose arguments but mediately, not immediately, first it
disposes axioms, then arguments under axioms, for else I do not see how method
will come under this definition, ergo, we are to understand it thus, de
disponendis argumentis, that is, of disposing axioms immediately, arguments
mediately, as they make up the axioms.

Ad been judicandum.
This should be left out, for it belongs not to method, for it is ad memoriam
recolendum rather, ergo, we may leave this out, yet he stays upon it, and
gives the reason thereof, certa enim dispositionis regula unumquodque
judicatur, this is true, but I deny that every rule of disposition tends ad
been judicandum, therefore Aristotle in his Problems says, that a man of great
judgment has no great good memory, and the reason is this, because their
instruments are contrary; so that certa, but not omni dispositionis regula unum
quodque judicatur. Now from this Judicium, and dispositio pro eodem dicitur:
yea but not rightly, and as I take it, here Ramus was mistaken: they that made
this distribution of Logic first, as Tully, Aristotle, Plato, they knew not
method, but shut it out of Logic, otherwise they would not have called this
part judgment, And that they knew not method it is plain, because they never
spoke of method.

CHAP. II.
De axiomatis affirmatione, and negatione. Judicium, est axiomaticum vel
dianoeticum.
DIsposition has two parts, judicium and methodus, this is the true
disposition: these do communicate in a disposition: for why? here in judgment
we dispose arguments with arguments, in method we dispose axioms with axioms,
ergo, both of them dispose. Again, their instruments are consenting in cold,
ergo, both of them are contrary to hear, for that will sever things. Drith and
moisture cleaving together, ergo, these are the parts judicium of disposing
arguments to judge them, method of placing axioms to remember them. Judicium is
first, because method disposes only that which judgment frames, even as
invention is before disposition: and this is wonderful to consider, for there
can nothing be well and soundly remembered, but that which is first judged, and
nothing soundly remembered, but that which is thoroughly invented And it is true
with me, if I understand a thing rightly, I never forget it, else I never
remember it: so that if a man forget any thing, he has not judged it well,
because he has not invented it well: to see a thing in the cause, that is, the
argument, for there causa is general, that is, our intelligentia, to make
axioms is our scientia, to discourse is our sapientia, to apply every thing in
time and place is our prudentia, to work the like our Art, these are the things
that make a man a scholar, and a wise man, ergo, a man that shall take this
course in his studies shall be an exquisite man every way, ergo, in the study
of any Art this must be the way for him that desires to be a scholar, first
to see the rule of his Art, then the arguments, then the sapientia, then the
prudentia, and so he shall remember it for ever.

What Disposition is we have heard, and how there are two kinds of it; now
judicium est dispositio ad been judicandum; so that the use of this second part
is of great use for the perfecting of judgment, for if we read things without
judging them, we shall many times swallow that for truth, which we shall in the
end find to be sophistry.

Axioma est dispositio argumenti cum argumento, qua esse aliquid, aut non esse
judicatur.
Axioma, The word in his proper signification is, worthiness, or dignity, and
by a metonimie of the adjunct for the subject, it signifies such a truth as is
worthy the receiving, or believing: now axioma dubium is not worthy this worthy
name Axioma, because it is not per se manifestum, but we are fain to demur upon
it, so that some axioms are not so plain as others: others also there are which
are so plain, as he that cannot see them, or doubts of them, deserves the
whip, Now because this first part of disposition is of a clear truth, ergo, he
calls it axioma, as if he should say an honorable truth: putting us in mind
thereby, that though this name be common to all axioms, yet it is principally
to them which are per se manifesta. Again, he rather takes this name, because
others will not so well fit his purpose. Again, the other names enunciatum,
enunciatio, etc. belong rather to a syllogism.

Axioma est dispositio.
That is acknowledged, that there is such an axiom, as is plain, palpable and
manifest: yet are there others also laid together with such a subtle hand, as
we cannot easily see them, the thread is so fine as that we cannot see it
without a candle or torch. To see the cause in nature why Iron goes to a
Lodestone, is hard: and axioma dubium, and subtillitas, in their tropical
signification are all one: such are those argutiae arguing in a fine manner.

Objection. If man had stood, should he not have needed syllogistical
judgment, had there been no use of that?

Answ. Yes, for he should have first invented before he had judged, and though
his reason should have been so clear, as that he should have seen many things
in nature, yet not all: For these Rules are eternal.

Again, some things lie upward, which are plain, some also lie downward, which
are not easily perceived: Again, if we will acknowledge that in Art many
deductions (...) may be drawn from a first Rule, and that we may apply a first
Rule a thousand ways, why then we must acknowledge syllogisticall judgment.
Before he told us that dispositio was pars Logicae de disponendis argumentis:
here he says Judicium is dispositio argumenti cum argumento, here there is
dispositio argumenti cum argumento, because Judicium is dispositio, but to
dispose one argument with another is peculiar to an axiom.

Here question may be made, whether it may not be dispositio argumentorum cum
argumentis, or argumenti cum argumentis, or argumentorum cum argumento? Yes,
but if it be argumentorum it is argumenti, ergo, this is more general: so that
he says argumenti cum argumento, as in a simple axiom: or argumentorum cum
argumentis, aut contra, as in a composite axiom: so here is the playing at
two-hand ruff, for here are but to sides in an axiom, ergo, in this respect
he says, argumenti cum argumento, argumenti in general, because all the kinds
of arguments may be disposed in an axiom.

Qua esse aliquid aut non esse judicatur.
So that the drift of judicium is to look at an aliquid, so does invention; but
yet it goes further, and judges it esse aut non esse. Now aliquid, a thing,
that is ens in genere, being an aliquid, is judged to be this or that: so that
here we may see that what the common Logicians teach, that in an axiom there
is a subject and a predicate; and the predicate is so called because it is
foretold in the subject, and contra: as when I say, homo est animal, animal
tells me somewhat of homo, and homo tells me somewhat of animal: and the
aliquid, which is the subject, is she ed esse, aut non esse: hence it is, that
an axiom shows aliquid esse, aut non esse, because every thing that is, is
composite, and the simples are imperfect: he does not say, aliquid esse verum,
aut falsum; for if I say, homo est lapis, I say a thing to be, though it be
false; and when I say, homo est animal, I say a thing to be, and it is true.

Now diverse bring in here quaestio, and they say it is simplex, which is the
same with an Argument; or Composite, which is the same with an Axiom: as if
there were no use of an Axiom, but by way of question: but we know that a
question belongs to a Syllogism, and to make it as general as Axioma, will
not be either (...), or (...).

Latin enunciatum Enunciatio, Pronunciatum, Pronunciatio, effatum dicitur.
Our Author s^ays upon the naming of Axioma, because few Logicians besides
himself have received this name, therefore lest his Scholars should think it
strange whereabout he goes, and whether he had forgotten himself, he tells
them, that he means by axioma that which others call Enunciatum, etc.
Propositio properly belongs to a Syllogism, and is the thesis, and the
assumptio is the apothesis. Why says he Latin, because axioma is graece: as
if he should say, I use this word as best sitting my turn, for no Latin term
utters this thing so well. Again, the reason is (as if he should say) I had
rather use this term, because the Latins fetching the tongue from the Greeks,
have not names so fitting the things as they, because enunciatum, enunciatio,
etc. have an adherencie of words, and they do name Logic by Grammar, whereas
we know an Axiom may be when it is not uttered.

Enunciatum, enunciatio, etc,
Enunciatum signifies the thing concrete, and enunciatio signifies the
axiomation (as we may say) of it, the disposition of it, and so of the rest.

Axioma est affirmatum, aut negatum: affirmatum, quando vinculum ejus
affirmatur: negatum quando negatur.
We have heard that there are but two sides of an axiom, and to this end qua
judicatur aliquid esse, aut non esse. Now this axiom is distributed first into
his adjuncts, therefore affirmatum and negatum attend upon the esse and non
esse, which the axiom does deliver. Homo est animal, here aliquid esse
dicitur, and it is affirmatum: homo non est animal, here aliquid non esse
dicitur, and it is negatum: so homo est lapis, here aliquid dicitur esse, and
affirmatur: homo est lapis, here aliquid dicitur non esse, and negatur: so that
the affirmation and negation of an axiom is not of the esse and non esse of
it. If he said affirmatum, qua esse aliquid, here he does not mean esse, but
esse, that is affirmatum: as when I say, homo est lapis, Esse, and non esse are
other things then affirmatum and negatum: but when a thing is so, it ought to
be affirmed, and when it is not so, it ought to be denied. Here I say, he
distributes an axiom into his proper adjuncts, ergo, this distribution is not
imperfect, as we said before; because then the species which follow should be
left out, for some there are which say a distribution is perfect or imperfect,
even as a definition is perfect, or descriptio; but that is false: for we use
not a description, when we can have a perfect definition, but we use a
distribution ex adjunctis, when we also have a distribution generis in species.
Again, it is not imperfect, because it cannot be a distribution of genus into
the species, or of integrum into the members imperfectly; for then affirmatum
would signify a simple axiom, and negatum a composite axiom. Again, if this
distribution were left out, there would want a rule of Art, which is (...).

Now before we heard of Arguments that were affirmantia and negantia, here he
says, axioma est affirmatum aut negatum, for the band is it that denies or
affi^ms the arguments one of another, ergo, the axiom is denied, aut contra:
yea when there are Arguments affirmantia and negantia disposed in an axiom, it
is affirmatum aut negatum: as when I say, darness is not light, the band denies
light of darkness.

Affirmatum quando vinculum ejus affirmatur.
Why have we not yet heard of vinculum? If here be his first place, why does he
not describe it?

Answer. Because we heard that Dispositio was pars Logicae de disponendis
argumentis, and that judicium was dispositio argumenti cum argumento qua esse
aliquid aut non esse judicatur: and in disposition we have this band, for
though there be a positio of arguments, dis that is a sunder: yet there is a
composition too: so that we have it both in the general definition of
disposition, and in the special description of Judicium.

Vinculum.
Now indeed vinculum is vox aequivoca, for it is the band of an axiom, of a
syllogism, and of method: the band of method is called transitio, which ties
two several doctrines together, as two banks that have water running between
them are tied together by a bridge, ergo, in this case it cannot be defined.

Vinculum affirmatur.
Then we see that the affirmation of the axiom is from the band, and not from
the arguments: and when we say homo est lapis, and homo non est lapis, we have
a vinculum in both: though indeed where the arguments agree, there should be an
est, and where they disagree, there should be a non est.

Negatum quando negatur.
For if it be ^ffi^matum, quando vinculum ejus affirmatur, so negatum contra:
so that here evermore look to the vinculum: now this distribution does not
require that we should always affirm and deny too the same axiom and so look
at it, neither shall we always find it so, though it may be so; because these
are but adjuncts to an axiom, and where the same axiom is affirmed or denied.

Hinc nascitur axiomaticum contradictio, quando idem axi^ma affirmatur, and
negatur.
So that in contradiction there is this peculiar, that the same ^xiom must be
affirmed and denied: so that the true place of contradiction is here: he says,
Hinc nascitur: whence? from the affirmation and negation of the same axiom. Now
the reason why the same axiom may be affirmed and denied, is because these are
not essential to an axiom, and the axiom is the same whether it be affirmed or
denied: the same it is also for esse, and non esse, but not for affirmation and
negation: it is the same man that was in the morning cold, and warm at noon.
Now here in disputation we are carefully to observe, that there be a
contradiction, where we make one.

Idem axioma.
That is, the same arguments must be both affirmed and denied, one of another:
and this we must carefully look unto, else may we contend de lana caprina.
Again, he said idem.

Object Homo est doctus, and homo non est doctus, are these the same arguments?
yes, and the same axiom, but differing only in quality; they are subjectum and
adjunctum: but when I say homo est doctus, and understand it of homo, which is
not doctus, ^s Thirsites, it is still the same argument, but the arguments are
disparates.

CHAP. III.
De vero, and falso.
Axioma deinde est verum, aut falsum: verum quando pronunci^t utires est;
falsum contra.

IVdicium was either axiomaticum or syllogisticum: the axiomaticum was that
which showed a thing to be, or not to be, and it was first distributed into
affirmatum and negatum: now again, an axiom is distributed secondly into verum
and falsum, which is by nature after the other, because an axiom is not true,
or false, till it be affirmed or denied: as when I say homo and animal, I do
not say that any thing is true or false, till I affirm that homo est animal, or
deny him to be animal: so that truth and falsehood do arise from affirmation and
negation: therefore verum and falsum are but adjuncts to an axiom, because
they arise from adjuncts, and therefore secondly they are after affirmatum and
negatum, because they arise from them. Now we are in our rule of judgment,
which must guide our reason: to what end? to see the truth and falsehood of
things, ergo, axioma is verum or falsum: and after our reason sees a thing to
be verum, then may our will as bonum embrace it; for ens verum and bonum are
all one, and here we may see whither verum belongs properly: sometimes indeed
it is taken tropically for a like, as when I say this i^ a true picture; but I
mean that this picture is like such an one; here a similia: but the axiom is
this, that this is the picture of such a one, it is true, so that in the end it
will come to be proper: another signification we find of verum, as when it is
opposed to fictum, but this is not proper, and the meaning is, that ens est is
a true axiom: so that every signification at the last will fall out to be the
same with this that is here taught. Aut falsum. If there be verum, it must have
his contrary, which is falsum. Now though there is not falsum in nature, yet
because God so created the things so vera, as they might be otherwise, ergo,
there is falsum. The same axiom might be true and false, as we shall see in
contingents, ergo, there is both verum and falsum.

Object. Why may there not be the doctrine of a false syllogism, as well as of
a false axiom?

Answ. The axiom is not a false axiom, quatenus an axiom in Logic, but
quatenus we look at the matter of it, for its truth or falsehood in natural
Philosophy: so for a syllogism, if it break the rule of a syllogism for form,
then it breaks the rule of Logic: but if it do peccare for his matter, then it
breaks some rule of some other Art: so that Kickerman is much deceived, for a
false syllogism is a false syllogism as it breaks the rule of a syllogism, but
the doctrine of a false axiom does not break the rule of an axiom, ergo, this
is fallacia accidentis, and there is an equivocation in the word axiom, and in
the word syllogism.

Verum quando pronunciat utires est.
Because verum and falsum are but adjuncts, why we handle them together with
their subjects, and we define them also by their subjects: so that truth indeed
belongs hither ergo, it is not the end of Logic, as some would have it, for
then all the parts o^ Logic should conspire in this: neither is it the (...)
of Logic, for that is method. Now in a true axiom there is required first a
pronunciatio, that is, an ax^omatical disposition: secondly, it must be utires
est. Pronunciatio properly signifies an uttering or showing forth in words, but
here he takes it for the same that axi ma is, as he told us before: ergo, he
means by pronunciat, quando axiomatur, or axiomat: so that we must not dream
that he means, as if an axiom could not be if it be uttered.

Vtires est.
Here mark that the truth arises from res radically: now he tells us, verum
axioma est quando dispositio fit uti res est: so that this refers us to the
reality or essence of the thing. What difference is there between ^he res and
the axiom? Much, for axiom is an adjunct to the thing; truth is first in God,
then secondly, all things are so far forth true, as they answer to the idaea in
God, for so God created all things, and so they were very good, that is, they
answered to his idaea of them in himself: so that res is true at the second
hand; and because Logic is concrete evermore with the thing, therefore he
refers us to the res: so that here we may see what truth is properly, when the
axioms do pronounce as the things are; so that first look at the truth in
things, which has it from God, then at the truth of the axiom which has it
from the thing: he says quando pronunciat, because the same axiom may
pronounce one way, and another way, but when it pronounces utires est, then is
it verum. Scaliger thinks he has found out a great subtilty, who says there
is verit as in oratione, and that is when it answers not to the Idea in God,
but to the apprehension in man: now truth lies not in the speech, but in the
thing: he makes this comparis^n, there is Cardan, and his picture made in wax
by a signet: he says the picture is so far forth true, as it answers to the
signet, so speech is so far forth true, as it answers man's apprehension. Now
the picture is not true, for we must look at truth, as it is in Logic, which
does pronunciat uti res est. But wher^as he says speech is true as it answers
the thought, that is to say, they are similia: but the axiom here is, whether
this picture be like Cardan, neither are we to look at man's thought, but at the
thing indeed, speech is the very image of the thing, and so when I say the
thing is as a man speaks it, I mean they are fimilia.

Falsa contra.
Why did he not say falsum quando pronunciat non uti res est. He shall not
need, for it had been a vain repetition of the words going before, because
falsum is contrary to verum, and contraria contrariorum sunt consequentia: so
that falsum being contrary, whatsoever we hear of afterward affirmed of verum,
we must understand the contrary of falsum, therefore whilst some ask why Ramus
did distribute verum into contingens, and necessarium, whereas falsum is also
so: it is sufficient that he says falsum contra. Again, he prosecutes it no
farther: because when we find an axiom false, we are not to look at it any
farther, but there let our reason rest, ergo, he goes according to the act of
our reason: but for verum our reason goes further, to see whither it be
contingens, or necessarium, so far as our reason is to look after it

Axioma verum est contingens aut necessarium.
These follow upon truth, not upon the thing immediately: and good reason, for
as verum and falsum hanged upon affirmation and negation, so do these hang upon
verum, so that it is contingens verum, and necessarium verum, and not
contingens or necessarium axioma next and immediately, and such axioms there
are in nature, for the Lord has so joined some things together in nature, as
they may be severed, others he has so coupled, as that they cannot be
disjoined.

Contingens.
It is therefore called contingens, because the truth thereof is but tactu, the
arguments do but attingere one another, not fasten one in another, as
subjectum, and adjunctum are but touching one another.

Contingens quando sic verum est, ut aliquando falsum esse possit.
This shows that truth and falsehood are but adjuncts to an axiom, because they
do but contingere to it; so that a contingent axiom is of such a thing as may
be true at one time, that is, pronunciare uti res est, and at another time
falsum, that is, pronunciare utires non est. We find in common Logicians the
term probabile, which they often use for axioma contingens, but it has
equivocation with it, for sometimes it is taken for a doubtful axiom, which may
be general both to contingens and necessarium, and there it is properly, ergo,
when they use it for a contingent axiom, it is a hard metaphor, for who would
go about to prove that I sit here, which is contingens, so that probabile
belongs to a syllogism: therefore how simply do some define Logic, Ars
probabiliter disserendi: by probabiliter disserendi, they mean thema probabile,
that is, axioma dubium, and so they join probabile with a syllogism, which
properly belongs to the question.

Quando sic verum est, etc.
Here mark how contingens is defined by time: we heard of time before in the
doctrine of adjunctum, ergo, it has nothing to do here, ergo, aliquando has
not so much to do with time, as it looks after contingens, which may be verum
and falsum at several times: for when a thing is once true, it cannot also be
false, but diversis temporibus. Again, when we hear of contingens falsum, there
let us leave it; and now falsum is contra, but because every thing is first
true before it be false, ergo contingens must be defined quando sic, first
verum est, and falsum afterward.

Vt aliquando.
He says falsum esse possit, non est: for when it is true, it must not of
necessity afterward be false, yet he gives the potentia, and says falsum esse
possit, though it never be false. As audentes fortuna juvat: the arguments are
causa per accidens and the effect.

Fac enim id hodie esse verum; eras falsum esse poterit.
He stays upon the doctrine of a contingent axiom, because it is a question in
Aristotle, whether futurum contingens be true or false? this we shall answer by
and by: only take this, that he does not tie us to the present time, but it
may be future, or to come: it will rain to morrow, this is a contingent axiom.

Itaque veritatis hujus contingentis judicium, opinio dicitur.
Truth was an adjunct to the thing, and judgment was the subject to truth:
contingency is an adjunct to the truth: and the judgment of the truth of a
contingent axiom is but opinio: so that opinio is the judgment of that axiom
that is contingent: that I sit here is but opinio, for I may not sit here, so
that if one tell it to another, he may be deceived of it. So that if a man
teach contingent true axioms in any Art, he shall be deceived: such are many
of Aristotle's rules, and of the Aristotelians, as when they say genus is
praedicabile, why it may be subjicibile too.

Que praeteritorum, and praesentium homini certa esse potest, futurorum per
naturam non admodum potest.
See here that the opinio, and judgment of this axiom praeteritorum, and
praesentium may be certa: here we learn what our opinio may be of things past,
present and to come; so that opinio is here distributed into certa and incerta:
certa is duplex, praesentium and praeteritorum. Incerta only futurorum

Quamvis Deo tempora omnia praesentia sunt.
It is altogether certa to him: so that in a word we may see all Aristotle's
dispute, that all truth is certa, but not to all; and here we see, that
notwithstanding the certainty of a thing, yet it may be contingent, and not
necessary, so Gods decree of man's fall was certa, but not necessary, either by
the necessity in an axiom, or by coaction in invention. Quamvis Deo tempora
omnia praesentia sunt, here this would be put in, and cui ipse revelavit: for
the opinio of truth belongs hither, and not to Divinity.

Itaque Martialis Priscum merito cavillatur.
Saepe rogare soles, qualis sim, Prisce, futurus,
Si fiam locuples, simque repent potens:
Quenquam posse putas mores narrare futuros?
Dic mihi, si fias tu Leo, qualis eris.
Priscus would often ask of Martial, what he would do if he were made rich and
mighty suddenly. And Martial would ask him, what a one he would be, if he were
a Lion: he cannot tell.

Necessariu^, quando semper verum est, nec falsum esse potest: and illud
affirmatum appellatur (...) de omni.
We have done with verum contingens, verum as it should happen: now we come to
necessarium; necessarium in Logic has many significations: we heard of it
before in Invention, where it signified violence, force, coation: but here it
is more proper, and it is not opposed to nature as that before, but is that
which concurs with nature, and commonly is true by nature.

Necessarium quando semper verum est, nec falsum potest esse.
Here we observe first the axioma necessarium is verum: secondly, it is semper
verum: thirdly, it is without all possibility of being falsum: now contingens
and necessarium arise firstly from the arguments, which when they are but modo
quodam necessarium, are so joined together as they may be severed, they make
but a contingent axiom: but when they are absolutely agreeing, and so as they
cannot be severed in nature, then they make a necessary axiom.

Quando semper est, erit, aut fuit.
For by est we are to consider not so much the adsignification, but the
connection of the arguments: again, here is a perpetuity of truth required, so
that it must be without all possibility of falsehood, a contingent axiom, though
it never be false, yet it may be, but a necessary cannot be; so that by
potentia we are to understand the habit, not the act. Now this potentia is in
the arguments, as it cannot be that homo should not be animal, it is not in
potentia naturae, that this should be false: so that a necessary axiom
requiring a potentia, and that potentia is in the things, we must be careful to
discern it.

It is a common opinion, that whatsoever God decreed is necessary.

Answ. Though it be true that Gods decree shall most surely come to pass, yet
does it not put a necessity, for then this necessity must lie in the things,
not in the Author of the things: so when we say his decree must come to pass,
we mean it must be of necessity, that is, by coaction, and this also is false,
for the Lord does all things by counsel: so that here we are to look at the
potentia in the arguments, and not to any external potentia. The not discerning
of this necessity ex hypothesi, as they call it, and certainty, makes them take
many things for necessary, which are not. So that to imagine such a thing, is
to say, that God does not things consilio: again, to say so, is to make the
Stoics faetum, for their fatum was this, because Jupiter said so: so that if
they say it cannot be otherwise, it is the Stoics fatum directly.

Et illud affirmatum appellatur (...) de omni.
Aristotle does in his demonstration labor much to show that the rules of Art
must be (...), and (...), first, says he, they must be concluded from the
prima and proxima causa, so that he did dream of a demonstration in a
syllogism, as when we conclude a property of a subject by the definition: his
meaning was that the rules of Art should be most true, and arising from their
immediate causes, but there is no syllogistical Art for demonstrations, but as
we may dispose many arguments, cause and effect, subject and adjunct, etc, in a
simple axiom, having one and the same doctrine: so we may dispose a syllogism,
either of contingent axioms, or of necessary axioms in Barbara, as he would
have, and yet the doctrine of an explicate is the same: ergo, the doctrine of
demonstration is vain. Again, he says, we conclude from the cause (...),
whereas indeed all our concluding is (...).

Object. But it is (...) in respect of the third argument.

Answ. True, so also I will conclude (...) from any other arguments as well as
the cause: so that all the doctrine of Aristotle's demonstrations is here in a
necessary axiom, and in (...) and (...). Now an axiom is necessary here, not
that there is any necessity in respect of the rule of Logic, but in respect of
the matter of it.

Object. A contingent axiom may deceive, ergo, his doctrine should not be in
Art; as also an inartificial argument is not in Art.

Answ. The doctrine of them is belonging to Art, as well as any other rules,
for they are eternal: so that an axiom is contingent, or necessary in respect
of the matter of it, ergo, we shall not need to speak of them in a syllogism;
ergo, to distribute a syllogism according to the matter, or form of it (as
Kickerman does) is very absurd. Syllogismus dialecticus is nothing but a
syllogism of contingent axioms: syllogismus apodicticus is nothing but a
syllogism consisting of necessary axioms: and syllogismus sophisticus is so
called from the form of it; and here observe evermore, that if the sophistry
lie in any of the arguments alone that are disposed syllogistically, then it is
a fallace of the arguments in invention, as non causa pro causa, non effectum
pro effecto, etc. If the so phistry lie in form of the syllogism disposed, then
it breaks some rule in the doctrine of syllogisms: (...) is a necessary axiom
affirmed: so that this is the difference in general of a necessary axiom, and
an axiom (...), that the axiom (...) is always affirmed: so that an axiom
necessary (...) has three things in it, first, it must be semper verum,
secondly, it must be without all potentiae of being false, which are general
both to contingens, and necessarium: Lastly, it must be affirmatum which is
peculiar to it self. He calls it (...), because it is omnino verum: and de,
which includes not only a necessary truth, but also affirmation: for if we
praedicate an adjunct upon his subject negatively, it will not be (...), but
(...) signifies omnino, (...) signifies affirmed: so that it does not require
that an axiom should be general, for a proper axiom may be (...), as if he
would define the Sun, Moon, and Stars, so that (...) requires that it be verum,
that is verum necessarium, and that it be de, that is, affirmatum.

Impossible contra, quod de nullo unquam verum esse potest.
This axiom is opposed to necessarium, and also to (...): and it is contrary to
that quod de nullo, etc. so that because he says de, therefore it is opposed
to (...), neither is it (...); but (...), for (...), and (...) are contrary.

Impossible.
Impossible is a false axiom, and here we may see how falsum still runs along
with verum Possibile and impossible are not species of falsum axioma, for both
contingens and necessarium are possibilia, and it is general to them both: so
that this is quod verum esse potest unquam, and de nullo: not that this axiom
is always denied as (...) is affirmed, but it is contrary to an axiom (...),
because that is always affirmed; and contrary to it, mark the contrariety, it
is nunquam verum, opposed to semper verum: again, nunquam verum esse potest, is
opposed to nec falsum esse potest, here it is contrary to a necessary one:
lastly, it is de nullo opposed to (...) de omni, here it is contrary to (...).
Now affirmatum, and negatum, verum, falsum, contingens, necessarium, possibile,
and impossible, etc. are (as they call them) words of Art, for indeed they
belong to Logic: but these when any thing is brought as an example to them, it
is nothing but an application of the species to the genus: now they call these
modals, because the modus is the genus, and the axiom is the axiom. When I say
homo est animal, est necessarium: why here are two axioms, which they are not
aware of; and in this syllogism, Qui dicit te esse animal, dicit verum, qui
dicit te esse asinum dicit te esse animal: ergo, etc. both the proposition and
assumption may be denied, for in the proposition he disputes from a species to
the genus: in the assumption he will prove hic homo est asinus, because that
homo est animal, verum est: here again the assumption is false, for he disputes
a specie ad genus.

Axioma artium sic (...) esse debent, sed praeterea homogenia, and catholica.
Here he makes a special application of homogenic and catholic axioms, unto
the axioms of Art, as if they did belong only to them: and it is true, for
though the doctrine of axioms be general to every thing, as Logic is, yet
these laws are peculiar to the axioms of Art: and they are general, because
they belong to all axioms of Art: and there is no rule of Art, but it must be
(...), and (...), and contra: if it be all of these, then is it a very rule of
Art; if it be only (...), or (...), then it is in a rule of Art, and is but a
piece of axiomata artium, therefore every rule of Art must first be true,
because (...) is the rule of truth, ergo, a contingent axiom cannot be a rule
of Art, for it may deceive us, as often as teach truth: and it must be
affirmed, because it must teach, for a negative axiom tells us only what a
thing is not: for though this axiom, lapis non est animal, will never fail, yet
not teaching me what lapis is, I may take it for a stick, or any other thing.

Axioma homogenium est, quando parts sunt essentiales inter se; ut forma
formato, subjectum proprio adjuncto, genus speciei.
Axioma a rule of Art, which must be worthy credit above all other rules:
homogenium, that is, belonging to that Art, yea, and to that particular part of
that Art, and to that particular point of that Art; as invention is not
homogeny to judgment, ergo, homogeny here must be considered, not as it is in
the same Art, but as it is in the same rule.

Quando parts sunt essentiales inter se.
That is, when the arguments are essential inter se: so that here is required
an essentiality, as the causes are essential to the effect: what all of them?
no, only the material and the formal; so that integrum and membra, genus and
species, the subject and proper adjunct, because the causes of it are to be
found in the causes of the subject: why these? because they arise from matter
and form, are essential, both as it is active, namely, as the causes give
essence to the effect, and also as it is passive, namely, as the effect is
essentiated of the causes.

Vt forma formato, subjectum proprio adjuncto, genus speciei.
He says, forma formato, not materia materiato, because though the matter give
his essence, yet the form is but one, which makes the thing one, whereas there
may be many matters, Genus speciei: mark how that the genus and form make a
definition, ergo, the definitio and definitum are essential inter se ergo, that
makes a rule of Art; here he leaves out integrum and membra, which I much
marvel at, for had he put in them, then we had had all the arguments that could
makes these rules of Art.

Id appellatur (...), per se.
The rule of justice that we give to every thing, that which is per se true,
and homogeny, as longitude is in the superficies, but not per se, but per
aliud, for so per se here is not opposed to per accidens, but to per aliud.

Axioma catholicum est, quando consequens semper verum est de antecedente, non
solum omni and per se, sed etiam reciproce: ut homo est animal rationale.
A catholic axiom: this name is somewhat improper, for it does not contain all
that is in a catholic axiom, as (...) does; (...) is primum, (...) de toto: so
that this is (...) first true of the whole, and afterward of the parts.
Kickerman says, that Aristotle takes (...) and (...) for the same: but he
neither says so, nor means so.

Quando consequens semper verum est, etc.
By consequens he means an argument; now can an argument be true? here he takes
verum in a more large sense than before: he means when the parts do so truly
predicate one of another, as that they make a true axiom (...).

Non solum omni and perse sed etiam reciproce.
That is, when one part contains the other: so that one would think
reciprocation might be an affection of subjectum, and proprium adjunctum in
invention: it is true, that one contains as much as the other, but the subject
and proper adjunct are not the same thing, as the definitio and definitum are.
For homo and risus are not all one, but here reciprocation is between subjectum
and adjunctum, because notwithstanding they be diverse things, yet the one
contain as much as the other: so that this reciprocation is more general than
that before: so that the rules of Art are these three, namely, definitions,
distributions and properties: and every rule of Art must be most true, most
just and most wise, because the axiom must stay up the thing to guide it to his
end.

Tres hae sunt leges documentorum artis propriorum: prima (...), lex veritas;
secunda (...), lex justitiae; tertia (...), lex ^apientiae dicatur.
So that these three properties are required in every rule of Art.

Atque ejusmodi axiomatum ita catholicorum judicium verissima and prima
scientia est.
So that the judgment of such catholic axioms, is prima verissimaque
scientia, and all others are but second or third truths, as they are deducted
from the first, second or third, and are per se so far forth true, as their
first rule is true: hence whatsoever we read, we shall find it, if we mark it,
to be either a rule of Art, or some deduct: so that the heads of Arts should be
the heads of common place books, and so might we bring all that we read unto
them, and try them.

Now some say, that (...) contains (...) and (...), ergo, they might be left
out.

Answ. It does not follow, for these three are distinct things, for as it is
reciprocum, it is not in the same respect (...), etc. Again, an axiom may be
(...), and yet not (...), etc. so also an axiom may break the rule (...), and
yet not break the rule (...), etc. so that if they were left out, we should
have no rule to show such axioms to be false.

CHAP. IV.
De axiomate simplici.
Atque haec de communibus axiomatis affectionibus, species sequuntur.

WE have hitherto heard of whatsoever is (...) to an axiom in general: for
though (...), and (...) belong only to the rules of Art, yet because they may
be simple or composite axioms, ergo, they are generally to be taught to them
both: the judgment moreover of such axioms was prima verissimaque scientia.
Prima, because that was first, and per se true, and most true, because all
other deducts do so far forth approve themselves true, as they agree to the
first, and these first rules are few, therefore they come nearest to God who is
but one, and are next to his wisdom: others, which are deducts, may be many,
and they come next to the first rules: we have among us a distinction of
doctrine and use, doctrina is properly the first rule of Art, and use is the
application thereof, or the special deducts gathered from the first. Others I
find take doctrina for the first part of Divinity, and Use for the special
practice of a rule of Art, but they are deceived, and speak improperly: and all
the rules that Kickerman says are wanting in Ramus, are nothing but the
practice of a rule, that is (...), and they are infinite. As posita causa
ponitur effectum, this arises from the definition of causa, and it is only
true, where the cause is brought as a third argument in a syllogism, and
otherwise we have no use of it, and having handled all that is general to an
axiom, now we come to the species, Atque haec de communibus, etc. This is a
transition not from one part of an axiom to another, for those things that we
heard of before touching an axiom, are but adjuncts to an axiom, therefore must
not be severed from their subject: but because these have taken up two
Chapters, and so continued the doctrine of axioma long, why we may have
forgotten our selves, thinking we have heard of the species already? no, says
Ramus, we come but now to the species.

Axioma est simplex, aut compositum.
Disposition we heard did dispose arguments either firstly, or at the second
hand, in an axiom they are disposed either one with one, or one with more, or
more with more; if one be disposed with one, so that there be but two sides, as
it were playing at two hand ruff, then it is a simple axiom: and from this
simple disposition of the arguments, it is called simplex, compositum contra:
so that this double disposition of arguments makes this distribution, whereas
affirmatum, negatum, and the other adjuncts before, rather looked at the band,
then at the disposition of the arguments: so that axiomatica dispositio is
simplex in respect of the simple disposition of the arguments that are disposed
therein.

Simplex quod verbi vinculo continetur.
Simplex is first, because there cannot be a composite axiom, but there will be
a simple axiom, and the composite is as it were a manifold simple.

Verbi vinculo.
He defines it from the band, not that it arises from thence, but because a
verb falls out to tie an axiom to one.

Continetur.
For Invention did handle arguments severally, but in axioms they are laid
together with a cyment or verb.

Object. Why does he call it a verb? we have not heard of Grammar yet, does he
mean that verb which is taught there?

Answ. No: but his meaning is, that the parts of this axiom are tied together
by that which if it be uttered is a verb: so that verbum here is a metonimy of
the adjunct from the subject, verb being put for that whose name will be a
verb. If a man would lay bricks with bricks, to have them hold together, he
must have mortar; and if he would fasten two pieces of wood together, he must
have a nail, or a pin of wood: for as the mortar is to the bricks, and the nail
or pin to the wood, such is this vinculum here spoken of to the arguments.

Vinculo.
He calls it vinculum, because the vinculum holds the arguments together in a
kind of composition: imitating God therein, who has tied things in nature with
an affection: and indeed to speak the truth, it springs from the affection that
is between the two arguments disposed.

Itaque affirmato vel negato verbo, affirmatur, vel negatur.
Before we heard in an axiom, that affirmatum was Quando vinculum ejus
affirmatur, negatum contra: why then a simple axiom having the band affirmed
must be affirmed and contra: so that this is nothing but a special application
to this kind of axiom, of that which was before taught generally to all axioms:
and that which is special here is, that it is the verbum that is denied or
affirmed, which was vinculum before: and this commendation indeed is chiefly
for contradiction: for if there be contradiction here, the verb must be
affirmed, and denied: ut ignis urit: ignis est anteced^ns, urit consequens:
here he calls the argument going before the verb antecedens, and the argument
following the verb, consequens: others call them subjectum, and praedicatum,
but he is not pleased with their names, because subjectum is properly an
argument in invention, therefore if it should be used here, it would breed
confusion: and not only subjects and predicates are disposed here, but all
other arguments, therefore he rather keeps the general terms showing so much:
again, they are fitter, because here we are in disposition, ergo, there must be
an argument to go before the vinculum, and another to so low. Now we use these
terms also in a composite axiom, but they are more proper here. The
Aristotelians used their terms subjectum and praedicatum only in a simple
axiom, for they had no composite axioms, but a connex, as we shall hear
afterward.

Atque hic prima est inventarum rerum dispositio causae cum effecto, ut in
primo exemplo, etc.
Prima by nature, not otherwise, because we cannot make a composite axiom of
more arguments with more, but there will be more lines: here in a simple axiom
there is but one line, and in a syllogism there will be a triangle, the
demonstration may be this.

A simple axiom.

A composite of one to more

A composite of more to more.

A Syllogism.



Quomodo argumentum quodlibet enunciari potest (exceptis plenis comparationibus
and distributionibus) consentanea quidem affirmando, dissentanea negando.
Ramus does commorari in telling us the use of a simple axiom, and he tells us
all arguments may be disposed therein, but plenae comparationes, and Plenae
distributiones, for so he means, else homo est animal is a distribution, and
yet a simple axiom: but otherwise these will evermore be a composite axiom.

Consentanea quidem affirmando, dissentanea negando.
Not but that consentanea may be denied, and dissentanea affirmed, for we heard
before that the same axiom might be affirmed and denied, but thus they ought to
be disposed, consentanea affirmando, dissentanea negando: now here by
consentanea he does not mean only causa, effectum, subjectum and adjunctum,
but also those that do arise from them, even all that may any way agree: as in
like sort by dissentanea he means also all them that do arise from them, or
that do any way disagree: but here we are to know, that this is not any rule of
Art, but only a commoration, applying that here in special, which he taught
before. Now this disposition is easy: but here sometime the band, and the
consequent part grammatically uttered will be the same, as ignis urit: now we
come to the affections of a simple axiom, which belong not to a composite.

Axioma simplex est generale, aut speciale.
This is a distribution of the subject into the adjuncts, and though a
composite axiom may be general, or special, yet there we do not look after it:
so that composite axioms in a syllogism may make a simple syllogism, being
considered not as composite, but as the arguments are simply disposed.

Generale.
This term comes of genus, not that this axiom consists always of those
arguments genus and species; but he means that commune which we hear of in
Grammar, and yet notwithstanding the antecedent part may be common, and the
axiom may be proper, ergo, he rather keeps that term generale, then commune,
though it be a hard trope. Now in a general axiom we are to observe these three
things, first an antecedent that is common, secondly, a common consequent,
thirdly, a general attribution of them, for else it might be a special axiom:
so that generality and speciality belong to an axiom, and are not to be sought
for in the doctrine of arguments.

Atque hic contradictio non semper dividit verum and falsum, sed contingentium
utraque pars falsa potest esse.
He is careful to teach us contradiction, because there is a mean matter,
because there is no dispute where there is no contradiction, ergo, he teaches
us the contradiction of a simple axiom, and now of a general axiom which will
not always divide truth and falsehood, sed contingentium utraque pars, etc.
that is, when we contradict a general by a general.

Item non contingentium.
Why says he non contingentium? because these non contingentia are such as
fall out, peradventure impossibilia, as in this example. Omne animal est
rationale, nullum animal est rationalia, he could not well call them
necessaria, nor possibilia, because they may be denied, whereas an impossible
axiom should be affirmed.

Axioma speciale est, quando consequens non omni antecedenti attribuitur: and
hie contradictio semper dividit verum a falso.
It is called axioma speciale, not in respect it has a species always
disposed in it with a genus, but in respect it is more special than the general
quando consequens, etc. Consequens indeed is the chiefest part in an axiom, and
is commonly the argument that is brought to argue: not the antecedent, he does
not say consequens commune: because it may be either common, or proper, it is
no matter whether of them it be.

Non omni antecedenti.
Omni and non omni are contradictory, now omnis dicitur de tribus ad minimum,
says the Schools, ergo, if omnis be given generally to all in a general axiom,
then non omnis may be given to one, as it is a special axiom: omnis indeed is
the sign of a general axiom, but where it cannot be had, there the axiom is
special: non omni, that is to the antecedent that cannot have omnis put before
it.

Attribuitur.
Attribuitur, in an affirmed axiom, it may seem that there is attributio: but
in a denied axiom rather abnegation: but attribuitur both here and in a general
axiom must be taken more generally for the same that disponitur is, whether it
be by way of affirmation or negation.

Et hic contradictio semper dividit verum a falso.
So that if our contradiction with any body be a special axiom, then we may be
assured, that the one part is false, and that there is contradiction in it.

Speciale est particulare, aut proprium.
Particulare does intimate a common, for nothing can be parted but a common,
and it is so called, because though the antecedent be common, yet it takes but
part of it.

Particulare quando consequens communi antecedenti particulariter attribuitur.
Here is a fault in the print, for if it should be communi, because the
consequent (as we heard before) may be common or proper: but the antecedent
must be common; but here is a particularis attributio. Now a general axiom is
before a special, because it is more large. Homo est doctus is a particular
axiom, for antecedens is common, now it differs from a general, first in that a
general must have a common consequens, this may have a common or proper;
secondly, a general must have a general attribution, this is a particular one.

Huic autem axiomati generaliter contradicitur.
Therefore in like sort generali axiomati specialiter contradicitur, and then
dividit verum a falso, for contradict a general by a particular, and it will
divide truth and falsehood; so that a general axiom has a double contradiction,
one when we contradict a general by a general, and another when we contradict a
general by a particular.

Axioma proprium est, quando consequens antecedenti proprio attribuitur.
This axiom does require first a consequent be it proper or common: secondly a
proper antecedent: thirdly an attributio. Now he means by proprium, not that
the antecedent should always be a proper name, for an axiom of genus and
species may make a proper axiom.

CHAP. V.
De axiomate copulato. Axioma compositum est, quod vinculo conjunctionis
continetur.
AXiomatical disposition was where there were two sides arguing, and they were
either one argument to one, or more to one, and contra: but we have already
heard of a simple axiom: now we come to a disposition, where there is one to
more, aut contra, and it is called a composite axiom of this composite
disposition. Axioma compositum est, quod vinculo conjunctionis continetur. This
axiom contains more simples in it, though we consider but one side with one.

Quod vinculo, etc.
That is, whose parts are tied together with a conjunction, so that the trial
of the axiom lies in the conjunction, not that it ties the arguments firstly,
yet it does tie them too, as when I say a man is just, and true, for the
principal tying lies not in Is, but in And: so that though there be a verb, yet
that is not here considered as the band. Now if a simple syllogism stand of
composite axioms, then Is is the band.

Vinculo conjuctionis continetur.
So that the parts are held together by this vinculum, yet here he does not
mean a grammatical conjunction, but the thing that is signified by the
conjunction: vox est nota in Grammar: so that metonimically he means that thing
whereof the conjunction is a note, for he has not a fitter word, and therefore
though Grammar be after Logic, yet because it is commonly taught in Schools
first, therefore Ramus borrows from that. Now then by vinculum conjunctionis
we are to understand, that which the conjunction signifies, and that is nothing
but the glue, or affection that knits things together.

Itaque e conjunctione affirmata vel negata, affirmatur vel negatur.
Here he does deduct this consecution helped from a former rule: affirmation
and negation were, where the band was affirmed or denied, ergo, if a
conjunction be the copula of a composite axiom, then that being affirmed makes
the axiom affirmed, and contra: this he staid upon to teach us to discern of
contradiction, which is of use especially in common talk, for if there be no
contradiction in controversies, there will be no dispute.

Contradictionisque pars vera, pars falsa.
Here evermore contradiction divides truth from falsehood: so that if one part
be true, the other will always be false, and contra.

Enunciatum compositum est pro sua conjunctione congregativum, aut segregativum.
The axiom stands upon the band, for we have heard of the arguments before, and
that which is here new is the disposing or banding them together. Now according
to the nature of a conjunction that ties two sides together, are axioms to be
divided, for there are some conjunctions that belong to a syllogism tying
three sides together.

Congregativum, that is, where the parts are gathered together to argue one
side: segregativum, that is, where the parts that make one side are severed, to
argue the other side. Now the reason of this is plain, for some things there
are that may agree in nature, and some things that must be severed, ergo, as
God has ordered his creatures, so must our Logic behold them.

Congregativum enunciat omnia consentanea affirmando, omnia etiam dissentanea
negando.
Enunciat, that is, it does dispose omnia consentanea affirmando, he means by
consentanea, not only causa and effectum, subjectum and adjunctum, but paria,
or comparata, or orta, otherwise it should enunciare none but consentanea and
dissentanea, dissentanea negando, by dissentanea he means all argument wherein
there may seem to be any dissension.

Est vero copulatum aut connexum.
Things disposed together, where there is two sides, are either disposed, that
is, yoked together, as Oxen go together one by another, or as Horses are tied
tail to tail one following another in a team. So that if the arguments be
disposed, that is, yoked together as Oxen, then it is a copulate axiom, and if
one argument go before another, and the later follow upon the former, then it
is a connex: so that as one thing in nature is disposed together with another,
or as one thing follows upon another, so must our reason see them. A copulate
is first, because there is not such a precedence and consequency of the
arguments as in a connex, but both go together, ergo, a copulate is next to a
simple, and thence it is that a copulate axiom is so often in a simple
syllogism.

Copulatum, cujus conjunctio est copulativa.
The axiom is delivered altogether passively, the arguments were active,
because the vinculum is affirmed or denied, and does not affirm or deny, cujus
conjunctio est copulativa, whose vinculum is a conjunction if it be uttered:
copulativa, that is, coupling the arguments together, as,

Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis Affricus --

Hic igitur negatio erit and contradictio.
Non una Eurusque Notusque ruunt, creberque procellis Affricus. Non does not
here deny that Eurns did blow, or that Notus did not blow, or that Affricus did
not blow; but that all of them did not blow; for if one or two of them had
blown, and not the third also, it had been false.

Verum enunciati copulati judicium pendet ex omnium partium veritate: falsum,
saltem ex una part falsa.
That we may therefore judge aright whether a copulate axiom be true or false,
why, that it may be true, it must have all the parts true together: falsum may
be of one part false: hence in bonds and obligations, where there are many
conditions, if we break one we break all.

Huic generi affine est enunciatum relatae qualitatis, cujus conjunctio est
ipsa relatio.
Here Ramus does commorari, for he could not well tell what to say, for whereas
he told us before that a conjunction was the band, here he says, what shall we
do with those axioms where there is no conjunction, but relata qualitas. Why,
says he, you must understand here that there is a conjunction: so that a
species of a copulate is that axiom where there is a relation of quality, for
though there be not a conjunction, yet here is the same in effect with a
conjunction: as if it were thus; sopor est fessis gratus: sic tuum carmen est
nobis gratum.

Relatae qualitatis: he means also relatae quantitatis for so there are
examples: as, how many fishes are in the sea? so many, says Ovid, are my
miseries: Now I have marvelled that he left out quantitatis, I had rather have
said enunciatum relationis: not relatae comparationis, for dissentanea come not
in here. Relatae qualitatis, where there are similia: he does not mean that
relation in arguments, but a pronoune.

CHAP. VI.
De Axiomate connexo.
Axioma connexum, est congregativum, cujus conjunctio est connexiva.

AXioma connexum, is where the parts are knit one to the tail of another, as in
a t^ace of Horses: and that there is such an axiom, it appears because of the
tacking of one thing to follow another in nature.

Est congregativum: As gathering things one upon the tail of another.

Cu^us conjunctio est connexiva.
Not that it is always so, but relation of time may be here also: as misery
draws a lie, and vanity and falsehood follow after, cujus negatio non si, saying
the consequent does not follow upon the antecedent.

Conjunctio etiam haec interdum negatur apertius negando consequentiam.
Our Author does commorari in these composite axioms, because other Logicians
have either taught nothing at all of them, or very little: this conjunction is
sometime denied more openly, negando consequentiam, that is, not by denying the
consequent part, but by denying the consequent part to follow upon the
antecedent, as si est homo, non est brutum, this is not a connex: so that we
must look always that the consequent follow upon the antecedent, as si est
miser, non est ideo vanus, this is a conne.

Pro Amer.
Non continuo si me in sicariorum greg^m contuli sicarius sum.

I am not presently a cutter, if I betake my self into the company of cutters:
here the connex must be, non ideo sicarius sum, for he must have some time to
learn to be a cutter.

De Fato.
Nec si omne enunciatum verum est aut falsum, sequitur illico causas esse
immutabiles.

So that the denial is non sequitur illico causas esse immutabiles: the reason
follows:

Affirmatio enim significat si sit antecedens non ideo consequens esse.

That is, it follows from the antecedent, as if he be a man he has reason,
for the consequent is affirmed, because the band is affi^med.

Negatio itaque and contradictio statuit, si sit antecedens non ideo consequens
esse. Quare cum, etc.
It may be a true axiom, though never a part be true. As, si homo est Leo, est
etiam quadrupes, that is a necessary true connex: but it is neither true that
homo est Leo, nor that he is quadrupes, and so neither part is true: so that
the truth of the consequent part of a connex axiom hangs on the antecedent
conditionaliter.

At si connexio sit contingens, and pro sua tantum probabilitate ponatur,
judicium ejus tantum opinio fuerit.
So that he does declare unto us how to judge of necessity and contingency,
which lie in the necessary or contingent following of the consequent upon the
antecedent. Vt Pamphile, si id facis, hodie postremum me vides.

C^nnexo axiomati affinis est ista consequentiae relatio.
A cosen connex, or a cosen to connex axiom, is that axiom which is uttered
by cum, etiam, or tum, etc. so that these have the reference of the former: as
appears in the example ut,

Cum Tullius sit Orator, est etiam p^ritus been dicendi.

CHAP. VII.
De axiomate discreto.
Axioma s^gregativum, est cujus conjunctio est segregativa: id^oque argumenta
dissentanea enunciat.

A Composite axiom was so called because it had a joyner to his b^nd, that is,
a conjunction: now the band may join the words, not the matter, ergo, a
conjunction in a copulate axiom may couple the words, though it sever the
matter, and if the band be not uttered, then that thing that the word does
notify is the logical b^nd. Now as axioma was congregativum, which gathered
the parts, either yoaking them like Oxen, as in a copulate, or tying them as
Horses one after another, as in a connex: so segregativum does sever and sunder
the parts of the axiom, and therefore his conjunction is segregativa: so that
where things are severed in nature, there must our Logic see them distinct.

Ideoque argumenta dissentanea enunciat.
Axioma segregativum cannot enunciare consentanea, but dissentanea: here he
means all arguments where there is consention and dissension; for dissimilia
may be disposed in a discrete axiom, though they be not dissentanies: so again,
though it does enunciare dissentanea, yet it does not follow, but that it may
enunciare consentanea, as animal est homo, aut brutum: so that they are
dissentanea quatenus, the parts disjoined do dissentire inter se, and they are
consentanea quatenus, the parts together argue the whole: so that the parts are
not disjoined from the whole, but inter se.

Enunciatum segregativum, est discretum aut disjunctum.
This segregation of things is either a more easy discerning of them, whereas
they might otherwise agree, which may appear to our eye, though it be not so
palpable in the things: or it is disjunct where the parts are severed re and
ratione, so that these axioms do serve for the deliverance of diversa and
opposita.

Discretum, cujus conjunctio est discretiva.
Discretum of discerno: so that when things are so severed in nature, as we may
see them disjunct with our eye, though not so plainly in the things themselves,
they make a discreet axiom.

Itaque e dissentaneis praecipue diversa enunciat.
This axiom does enunciare dissimilia too, therefore if he had said dissimilia,
he had included diversa: as though there be matters which might be judged by
the outward senses, yet are they to be referred to the mind too.

Cujus negatio, and contradictio est.
So that the denial does take away that discretion which was laid down before.

Discretum enunciatum judicatur esse verum and legitimum, si parts non solum
verae, sed etiam discretae sint; falsum vel ridiculum contra.
Now for the judgment of this axiom, it is verum and legitimum: so that two
things are required in judging a discreet axiom: first that the parts be true,
else it will be a false axiom; secondly, that they be lawful, else they will be
ridiculous, because the parts will not be diverse. As to say, though he be a
man, yet he is a living creature: here both parts are true, but here is no
discretion and therefore it is ridiculous.

CHAP. VIII.
De axiomate disjuncto.
Axioma disjunctum, est axioma segregativum, cujus conjunctio est disjuncta.

THe discreet and disjunct sever things, but the former does it only ratione:
now the disjunct looks at an opposition between the things disjoined: it is
called a disjunct axiom, as disjoyning or pulling the parts out of joint: so
then the former may be compared to the laying of two things that are distinct,
but not pulled out of joint.

Est segregativum.
Therefore severing the matter, for the parts are so divided, that they cannot
agree, or be united, because they are opposite sine ullo medio.

Cujus conjunctio est disjunctiva.
Disjoyning or pulling in pieces the things disposed, as there is either day or
night, these are privantia, ergo, contraries, ergo, opposites.

De Fato.
Omnis enunciatio est vera, aut falsa.

This is a disjunct in like sort, where veritas and falsitas are disjoined: now
for the judgment of this axiom, here one part only is true, and not both,
which arises from the nature of opposites. Itaque eidem attribui, etc. but if
we consider the affection between the whole and the parts, there both will be
true: as argumentum est artificiale, aut inartificiale, but because the whole
with the form make up the species, therefore we say in effect, argumentum est
artificiale, aut inartificiale: and if there composite axioms be disposed in a
simple syllogism, then the verb will be the band: for we have nothing to do
with the dissension of the parts, but to see how the parts of the question are
disposed with the third argument.

H^c significatur e disjunctis uni um verum esse.
In a distinct axiom one part only is true, because they are dissentanea: as
homo est bonus aut non bonus, these pa^ts are but contingent separated, bu^ the
disjunction is necessary.

Cujus negatio
Non omnis enunciatio est vera, a^t falsa.

So that the denial takes away the contradiction.

Et contradictione significatur, non necess^rio alterum verum esse.
So that though the parts may be contingently true, yet the axiom may be
necssary.

Veruntamen quamvis absolute vera disjunctio necessar a quoque sit: tamen nihil
necesse est parts separatim necessarias esse.
Therefore est is not the band, for it does tie but contingent truth, but the
conjunction is it, because it ties necessary truth.

Itaque si disjunctio sit contingens non est absolute vera, and tantum
opiniabilis est: qualis est frequenter in hominum usu.
So that this disjunct contingent is not usual in common speech, ut si
quaeratur, etc. whereas both, or neither of them might come.

Tantum opinabilis.
Because opinio is the judgment of a contingent axiom: and thus we have heard
all the kinds of disposition on two sides.

CHAP. IX.
De Syllogismo, and ejus partibus.
Atque ejusmod^ judicium est axiomaticum, axiomatis perse manifesti sequitur
dianoeticum.

NOw we come to a disposition, where there are three sides, so that they play
as it were at three hand ruff: Now mark the reason of this distribution of
dispositio into axioma and syllogismus: some things there are that are laid
together in nature without a mean, ergo, we may see them at the first hand uno
intuiti: some things also have a mean, which we must use before we can see
them, ergo, according to the things in nature, and according to the act of our
reason in beholding these things, so must our Logic proceed, and as the medium
shall either combine or sever them, so we may conclude them affirmatively or
negatively, and herein stands the force of those rules, though they be not
always true, quae convenient in aliquo tertio convenient inter se, and contra,
because that medium is the holder of them two together, aut contra: for there
the medium will be a bar to sever them; as otiosus est amator, Egistus est
otiosus, ergo, est amatur, because otium is as glue to pull on amor, for it
argues love as causa, and it pulls on Egstus as an adjunct. So this rule sublata
^^usa tollitur effectum, and contra: and all these rules of consecution are
because the effect brings the cause with it: and any other argument as well as
causa may be a mean whereby two things may be glued together: for this third
argument is not so much a medium in regard of the other two disposed with it,
but in respect of our seeing them, and we may see as well by any other
arguments as by causa.

Atque ejusmodi judicium est axiomaticum, etc.
An axiom is such a thing as appears to be true at the first sight, or at the
second hand: now our reason is to be so glued, as that it may be able to see
any truth, ergo, if the truth appear at the first sight, an axiom will serve
us, else we must have a candle to make it clear: so that here we may see, the
purpose of syllogistical judgment is not to make things more true, or more
false in themselves, but to make the truth, or falsehood more manifest unto us:
so that clear per se belongs to an axiom; but perspicuity in regard of us
belongs to a syllogism: and here we may also see, that axioma probabile, as
they call it, and axioma subtle belong hither: so that all third arguments are
not used to make the things more true in themselves, but to make the truth more
manifest to us, ergo, Cardan, whilst he argued against Scaliger, that he that
disputed of subtilty, might dispute of all things, was in the right, but when
he would go about to prove, that all things were to be taught in subtilty,
there he was out, for after we have discoursed a point syllogistically, we are
fain to go back again to the rule of an axiom to judge the truth, or falsehood
thereof, ergo, here we may see that axioms and syllogisms are confederate, and
not syllogism and method. Now the same axiom may be manifest to one man, but
dark to another, ergo, syllogistical judgment waits upon man, and if the truth
or falsehood be nice or fine, that it cannot be seen with one act of our eye,
then we must use a third argument: and subtle, if we define it aright, is
axioma non adeo manifestum.

Sequitur dianoeticum.
Dianoia signifies reasons discourse, the laying about by our (...), for when
at first she does not see a truth, then she commands cogitation to coagitare,
that is, to look after it: so that dianoia is nothing, but the running about of
our reason for the finding out of truth. Some Logicians have compared
axiomatical judgment to a calm sea, for there our reason is quiet, being
satisfied with the truth, and syllogistical judgment to a troubled sea, that
is, full of storms, winds and tempests, for there our reason beats every corner
to conclude that which is doubtful, and from this act it is called dianoia; and
the judgment of reason in such an Art is called dianoeticum, it running after
this, or that: but our Author divides it afterward into syllogismus and
methodus, which how it should be true I see not, namely, how method should be
dianoia: for the three internal senses in nature are distinct, ergo, these
parts ought to be distinct according to them, as we heard before. Now method
makes all things one, and so we remember all things as one, and the things be
judged before I come here, here I only lay things together to remember them.

Dianoia est, cum aliud axioma ex alio deducitur estque syllogismus, aut
methodus.
This very definition tells me, that dianoia is nothing but syllogismus, and
they are both one: so that here are deductions of axioms out of axioms, which
surely belong to syllogistical judgment only, for I do not mean that it is
ordering of one axiom before another, but a drawing of deductions from their
first rules: true it is, that a former axiom gives light to that which follows,
but that light is by virtue of syllogistical judgment, so that method placing
axioms, does indeed need axiomatical judgment, as that also needs invention
before it can place them, but it does not therefore follow, that the doctrine
of axioms should be in method.

Syllogismus est dianoia; qua question cum argumento ita disponitur, ut posito
antecedente, necessario concludatur.
Syllogismus signifies properly the sum of an account in the species of
numeration, especially in Addition: and summa and syllogismus are the same; and
the Logicians have borrowed it of the Arithmeticians, because though Logic be
the first Art in order, and nature, yet Arithmetic was observed by men before
Logic, ergo, Plato set over his Academy (...) for it was taught among them as
Grammar is now taught among us: for as for Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric, they
had them by nature, ergo, they studied the Mathematics first, ergo, they
called them Mathematics, for the word is general to all Arts, and indeed that
was the reason that Aristotle in his Logic brings demonstrations out of the
Mathematics: so that this metaphor syllogismus was a priore to them. This
syllogismus est dianoia, qua question cum argumento, etc. it is indeed a
contract of larger discourse, and here in this rule observe first a question,
secondly, an argument, thirdly, a disposing of them together, fourthly, a set
or constant position of the arguments and the question: Lastly, a necessary
conclusion from them, first if it be a clear truth that ought not to be a
question, else it should.

Qu^ quaestio.
What question? shall he go ask any body? yes, a third argument if he will; but
quaestio here is a law term signifying a commission: so that if he doubted he
might see at the Law for the truth: so that this judgment is a Courtly kind of
seeking out truth with two arguments before the judgment seat of a third
argument and it is not quaestio which is made with an interrogation, which
whilst some Logicians did not consider they fell so in love with quaestio, as
that they made it the subject of Logic, and divided it into simplex which is
the same with argumentum, and compositum which is the same with axioma. Then
there must be an argument, he does not call it tertium argumentum here, as he
does afteward, but only argumentum: though there are always three arguments,
because here he considers it in respect of the whole question, not looking at
the parts of the question as they are in Invention: and argumentum must be
brought indeed as an evidence, or witness, rather than as a Judge, for I my
self am the Judge thereof.

Cum argumento.
Therefore here, says Kickerman, must argumentum come in: yea, here indeed it
must come in, but it must, ergo, be taught before, for it must be before it can
come in, ergo, to say it must be here taught, because it comes in here, is
fallacia accidentis, so that an argument belongs to judgment, as it may be
disposed, not as it may be in it self. But says Kickerman further here is a
question before an argument, ergo, the doctrine of a question must go before
the doctrine of an argument, indeed it so falls out here, but yet the parts of a
question are not before an argument without he will make Pigs fly with their
tails forward.

Disponitur.
He would have further rules of consecution from the third argument, that he
might know how to use them; but indeed the rule of syllogismus is the rule of
consecution, ergo, those maxims, as they call them, are consecutions from the
rules of invention, and are prosyllogisms. Now here is a disposition whereof
Kickerman was not aware, whilst he would distribute Logic into a simple
conceit, a double conceit, and into discursus: for if disposition be general
both to his double conceit, and to his discursus, then he leaves out two rules,
the definition and distribution of disposition, ergo, let us hold the right.
Ita disponitur, because in a simple syllogism there is the disposition of the
part of the question with the third argument, consequens in propositione,
antecedens in assumptione, and in a composite syllogism there is the whole
question placed with the third argument alone in the proposition, ergo, the
question as the better man must have the third argument for his companion, for
he is the Gentleman, ergo, he says, quaestio cum argumento, and ^^t argumentum
cum quaestione. Again, the third argument is for the questions sake, ergo, it
is he that is the more lofty, but this is not quaevis quaestio, but that
quaestio quae ita disponitur, ut posito antecedente necessario concludatur. He
calls it an antecedent, ergo, a syllogism consists of two parts, an antecedent
and a consequent. An antecedent is so called, because it goes before, and a
consequent because it comes after: again, an antecedent and a consequent are
not yoked together as two Oxen, as in a copulate axiom, but one before another
as Horses trace, as in a connex hanging upon the former by a necessity of
consequence. Now this question is so posita cum argumento, as that the question
does follow on them two, for the third argument never comes into the consequent
part. Here positum is as it were put case, as put case there be an antecedent,
tum necessarium concludatur.

Object. Does every syllogism conclude necessary truth? Yes, not but that it
may be contingent, but he means necessario, that is, that this consequent will
follow necessarily upon the antecedent, for the Art or rule of a syllogism: as
otiosus est amator is contingent, Egistus est otiosus, is contingent, ergo, est
amator, this consequent does necessarily follow upon the antecedent: so that
necessario goes not with the conclusion, but with the inference of the
conclusion.

Nam cum axioma dubium sit, quaestio efficitur, and ad ejus fidem tertio
argumento opus est cum questione collocato.
That is, when a matter is to be demurred, and staid upon, quaestio efficitur,
as before, and ad ejus fidem, etc. what is that? that is, ad ejus fiat dictum,
that is, that you may build upon this truth tertio argumento opus est: so that
fides properly belongs to the will, and to the resolution of the will, which is
the extremity of reason, so that fides is in the will, ergo, belongs to
Divinity; for when the Lord assures man by his Spirit, that he is reconciled
unto him, his will says presently fiat dictum; so that the third argument must
give testimony of the honesty of the parts of the question, which two parts
entering into the band, the controversy is ended. Collocato: here he tells us in
general of the placing of the argument, but when it is to be placed, and where,
we shall hear hereafter.

Syllogismi antecedens parts duas habet propositionem, and assumptionem.
He does not define antecedence and consequence, for there is antecedence and
consequence in an argument, as the cause is before the effect, etc. and in an
axiom, and also here, ergo, they are voces ambiguae, ergo, are not to be
defined here.

Propositio, and assumptio.
Propositio is oftentimes used generally for axioma, but it names an axiom
only as it is used in a syllogism: and to use it more generally, is to abuse
it, or at least to use a catathristical synecdoche: assumptio belongs hither
only.

Propositio est prima pars antecedentis qua questionis faltem consequens cum
argumento disponitur.
We have heard of a question, and an argument, which is a third in respect of
the two in the question; but he calls it not a third before, because in a
composite it is disposed with the whole question, not with the parts, then the
dispositio of the argument cum quaestione is not at random, but so as there
will be an antecedent and a consequent, which antecedent being put, the
consequent will follow of necessity; that is, the inference of the conclusion
will follow of necessity, so that necessity here follows upon the inference of
the conclusion, not upon the conclusion. Now the parts of the antecedent are
the proposition and assumption, for so it is requisite, that every syllogism
stand of three parts, because they play at three hands: and there must be two
parts of the antecedent, because the argument being but one can play but twice,
namely, with the two parts of the question, and therefore if it should play the
third time, it must play with it self, and thence it is, that it never comes
into the conclusion: now in a composite syllogism there is silently contained
the antecedent part of the question in the assumption, though it be not
expressed. Now the common Logicians call the proposition the major propositio,
and the assumption the minor propositio, and the reason of it is this, because
the majus extremum, namely, the consequent part of the question was put in
proposition, and the minus extremum in the assumption: for as touching a
composite syllogism, Aristotle did not teach one word of it. Now Ramus keeps
these terms propositio, and assumptio, and he had reason, for use has taken up
these words in good Authors for these things, as in Tully, Cornelius Agricola,
and other Logicians that follow the more pure latin, and there is reason for
it, for that which they call propositio there, is a thing propounded to him
with whom we dispute, and then the former being granted, I do assume as it were
out of the bowels of the proposition, the assumption: so the Greeks call
propositio, Prothesis, and assumptio, Hypothesis: though I find some of them
that call the proposition thesis, whereas the question is the thesis. Now
propositio is that which is propounded, and carries a show of truth with it,
ergo, we seldom deny the proposition, but rather the assumption, or else
distinguish of it, ergo, our chiefest care must be of the assumption, to
discern truth and falsehood in that.

Est prima pars antecedentis.
As if he should say, that the disposition of the question with the argument,
must have a proposition, and that must be placed first: so that that which we
shall hear of more particularly hereafter, here we hear it more generally,
namely, that it must be prima pars.

Qua questionis saltem consequens, etc.
In this proposition there is a disposition of the question with the argument,
saltem consequens, he speaks this, because whether our syllogism be simple or
composite, the consequent part of the question is in the proposition. He says
saltem, because the whole question is in the proposition of a composite
syllogism: ergo, the consequent part, therefore observe this generally in every
proposition, there is the consequens quaestionis disposed with the antecedent;
therefore whereas we heard before that a syllogism was qua quaestio cum
argumento, etc. here we hear that propositio est qua quaestionis saltem
consequens cum argumento disponitur.

Assumptio est secunda pars antecedentis, quae assumitur e propositione.
Assumptio, the second part of the antecedent part is called assumptio, because
adsumitur, it is taken to the proposition, for the proposition being settled, we
take the assumption out of it being more general: I was wont to compare the
proposition to a Cow, and the assumption to her Calf, that is taken out of of
her, and goes by her side.

Est secunda pars antecedentis.
Propositio is before, for in the question the consequent part is more general,
or at least equal to the antecedent, quatenus it is an axiom, by reason whereof
the proposition that contains the consequent part of the question with the
third argument, is more general than the assumption: and it is the principal,
namely, the third argument: as, si Socrates est animal, est substantia: at si
Socrates est homo est animal, ergo: again, here lies another reason, qua
assumitur e propositione, ergo, the proposition must be more capacious, or at
least equal, as where the proposition and assumption shall be reciprocal, for
we cannot take two out of one.

Assumitur.
Because when the proposition shall be granted, then I will take my assumption
out of it: so that this is generally to be observed, that the assumption is
taken out of the proposition; this is the dianoia of it, qua aliud axioma ex
alio deducitur: it is as a case of boxes where one is taken out of another: now
if the assumption be not taken out of the proposition, then it is not ad idem,
ergo, baculus stat in angulo.

Syllogismi autem pars consequens est, quae complectitur parts quaestionis,
eamqueconcludit: unde complexio and conclusio dicitur.
So that we must take heed that we have not more in the conclusion than the
parts of the question: for as it was a fallace if the assumption were not taken
out of the proposition: so is it also here, if any thing come into the
conclusion beside the question. If there should be any other thing, it would be
either an heterozetesis, when the question is not concluded, as the Schools
say, it is not adrem; or else apoluzetesis, i. concluding many questions in
one, ergo, an heterozetesis, and apoluzetesis err against this rule.

Eamque concludit.
The third argument can never come into the conclusion: in a simple sillogism
the third argument is brought as a candle, to see how it plays with the
consequent part of the question in the proposition, and with the antecedent in
the assumption, and then the question is concluded: in a composite syllogism we
repeat the third argument in the assumption, as if he should say, mark this,
this is it that shows the truth of the question. Concludit: that is, shuts them
together in the axiom: but if they dissent it severs things.

Vnde complexio, and conclusio dicitur.
These are logical terms, which he brings to show us how the same thing may
have diverse names: and hitherto we have heard generally de Syllogismus and ejus
partibus. Now there are certain properties that belong to a syllogism, which
are called (...), hidings, for many times in our dispute we hide some parts;
now the reason of that is indeed the distraction of our understanding, for many
times we hasten to be at the conclusion without any reason; sometimes we touch
the reason without the conclusion: and again, many times we touch all the
parts, but disorderly, therefore this being in use we must have a doctrine
thereof.

Si qua pars syllogismi defuerit, enthymema dicitur.
This by the common Logicians is made a special kind of argumentation, but they
mistake it, for it is nothing but a syllogism wanting a leg, as if a man
wanting a leg were not a man, so is this a syllogism, though it be lame. Again,
in Grammar we say, quod subintelligitur non d^est: ergo, here though a part be
not expressed, yet is it, not wanting: and the very name tells me as much. It
comes of (...), in mente, because I keep a part of it in my mind: and even as
in Arithmetic syllogismus is the totum; so enthumema is the reservation, or
keeping of one in my mind, and setting down a cipher: so that that retention
(...), does not make a distinct species of argumentatio.

Si quid praeter illas tres parts accesserit prosyllogismus.
Many times we shall see the proposition backed, the assumption backed, and the
conclusion backed with a third argument, then it is prosyllogismus: so that
sometimes as we are too strait, so here we are too large: diverse Ramists have
also thought there should be proaxioma; as Tully that famous Orator of Rome
declaimed against Verres: here they say, that famous Orator of Rome is a
proaxioma, and it is so; for if any thing be added in an axiom beside the
antecedent and consequent part, it is but for illustration of that part
whereunto it is joined: but in a prosyllogism there is a third argument that
proves something backing either the assumption or the conclusion: as Paul an
Apostle writes to the Romans: for here Apostle is part of the axiom, and from
that name he is enjoined to write: that they call Sorites is nothing but many
prosyllogisms one backing another, and one backing the principal.

Partium etiam ordo saepe confunditur.
Whereas the parts should be in order, the proposition first, then the
assumption, and lastly the conclusion; sometimes we shall have the assumption
first, then the proposition, then the conclusion, and contra, and alterne, and
inverse: as Socrates est homo quia animal, etc. As for dilemma it is nothing
but syllogismus disjunctus, and inductio is nothing but a collectio, or a
reasoning from the parts to the whole.

Attamen, si qua dubitatio propterea fuerit, explenda, quae desunt: amputanda,
quae supersunt: and pars quae libet in locum redigenda est.
If any parts be wanting, so that some scruple may arise thereof, set it down;
if there be more than needs, take them away for the time; if any parts be
disordered, set them at rights, first the proposition, then the assumption, and
lastly the conclusion.

CHAP. X.
De syllogismo simplici contracto. Syllogismus est simplex aut compositus.
WE have heard of a syllogism, and what it serves for, namely, to manifest a
doubtful axiom: now we come to the species of a syllogism, est simplex, aut
compositus. (...): we have heard the reason of the name, that it is a brief of
that which is more largely delivered: now for this cause the Stoics called it
a fist, for it is not generally of Logic, but belongs to a syllogism. These
names simplex and compositum we have heard of more often in Logic; we have
heard of argumentum simplex, aut comparatum: and we have heard that axioma est
simplex, aut compositum, and now that syllogismus est simplex, aut compositus:
but it is the community of name, not the community of the thing: and for want
of fit names, we may borrow the same often, if so be the definitions show the
difference of them: in a simple axiom there is one argument simply disposed
with one; in a simple syllogism there is also a simple disposition, but of the
consequent part of the question in the proposition, of the antecedent in the
assumption, ergo, from the breaking of this question thus, as there is a simple
disposition, it is called simple, but in a composite syllogism the whole
question, and the third argument are disposed together, ergo, according to
these two kinds of disposition there are these parts of a syllogism; now the
reason why there is this disposition in nature is this, the third argument
which is well called so here, because here the parts of the question are
broken, the truth must either be such, as is so doubtful, as we must be fain to
pull the parts of the question in sunder to see it, and then we make a simple
syllogism: or if the question be not so doubtful but that we may soon perceive
it, then we make but a composite syllogism: hence it is, that the common
Logicians never dreamed of a composite syllogism, but only of a simple,
desiring to make all things more clear, but there are often more fallaces lie
lurking under a composite syllogism, then under a simple one: hence in Schools
we say, dispute catagorice, for in a composite the third argument being
disposed with the whole question, does not so clear it, as in a simple it does;
yet none is to except against it, the composite syllogism clears the whole
question, the simple clears both the parts of the question.

Simplex, ubi pars consequens quaestionis disponitur in propositione: pars
antecedens in assumptione.
This then is particular first in a simple syllogism, that the consequent part
of the question is disposed with the third argument in the proposition, now
whether before or after, we shall hear hereafter, for that is more particular;
before in the definition of a syllogism it was quaestio cum argumento, then
quaestion is saltem consequens, here it is pars consequens in propositione,
pars antecedens in assumptione: and whether this be before or after, we shall
hear hereafter: so that is general to every simple syllogism. Consequens in
propositione, because that evermore is the more general part of the question,
as we heard before, and the continent should hold more than the contentum, and
the assumption assumitur e propositione, ergo, the consequent must be there,
and the antecedent, therefore in the assumption he does not say, consequens
disponitur cum argumento, for that is general before in the definition of a
syllogism.

Estque affirmatus e partibus omnibus ^ffi^matis.
Ramus now teaches us the common properties of a simple syllogism, which agree
not to a composite, but quatenus the proposition thereof may be a simple:
affirmation and negation we heard of in an axiom, but here the syllogism is not
so nominated from the band as before, but from the propositions affi^med, or
denied, general, special, or proper; so that affirmation is here when every
part, proposition, assumption and conclusion are affirmed.

Negatus, e negata antecedentium partium altera cum complexione.
Now we are here to observe, that in these general properties come in all those
modi, Barbara, Celarent, Darii, etc. for they are nothing but generalis
affirmatus, negatus, etc. so that if we observe but these rules, we shall
swallow up many rules, and such words or modi, as would make a man afraid to
read them, lest there should be some charming in them.

Negatus e negata, etc. for ex omnibus negativis nihil concluditur: for if the
third argument disagree from both parts, it will never glue them together; but
here in general this is a certain truth, that the conclusion will follow the
worse part, particularity cannot indeed hold in a contract, but for negation it
will: now follows another property.

Generalis, e propositione and assumptione generalibus.
This is not as the generality of an axiom, quando commune consequens
attribuitur generaliter communi antecedenti: but here it is when the
proposition and assumption are general.

Specialis, ex altera tantum generali.
Because the other part may be either particular or proper; if he had said, ex
altera tantum speciale, it had not been so convenient: again, whilst he says,
ex altera tantum generali, he tells us there cannot be a concluding ex meris
particularibus, because the conclusion would not follow, for in the particular
axiom there may be a separation, as aliquis homo est doctus, aliquis homo non
est doctus: here would be four termini.

Proprius, ex utraque propria.
Here mark, that as in the special syllogism, so in the proper, he makes no
mention of the conclusion, because howsoever the parts be general, etc. the
conclusion will be particular: now by the rules following I will presently know
in what mood any syllo, gism will be concluded.

Simplex syllogismus, est contractus partibus vel explicatus.
Our Author brings in a distribution here, that has not any warrantry from any
other but himself, he hought long how he might make a dicotomy, which he might
have done thus: a simple syllogism is more single, or more composite, this he
thought of, but if he should have brought it in, then there would have been
confusion, for then he bad severed the explicates: because there the third
argument follows twice: whereas there are certain properties agreeing to them
both, which have nothing to do with a contract. Again, I have seen in some of
his additions a tricotomy into contractus, explicatus, primus and secundus: but
this also would breed confusion; for by this means those properties that are
general to both the explicates would be left out: but in the end he settled in
this, though Machelmeneus a French man, who says he was his Master, reports
that Ramus desired him to mend this distribution: and I am sure, though he were
his Master, the Scholar was better than the Master. Ramus says it is
contractus, or explicatus: which we are to justify thus: he follows use, and
use contracts this kind of Syllogism more often than it explicates it: not that
it is always contracted, but sometime it is explicated, as Ramus tells us: yet
this is always true, that when it is explicated it may be contracted. Paul
contracts it, has God forsaken all Israel? God forbid, I am an Israelite: this
is it: Paul is not forsaken, Paul is an Israelite, ergo, all Israel is not
forsaken: so that contractus is a species of syllogismus, because use does most
commonly contract this kind of syllogism: therefore because it is true more
often, then it is false, therefore let the truth be taught generally, and the
exception come more afterward, because that is more special in use, the
explicate is never contracted, ergo, this opposition of them may seem to make
them opposite species.

Contractus, quando argumentum pro exemplo ita subjicitur particulari
quaestioni, etc.
Here these things are to be considered: for the argument is brought as an
example always, then secondly, the question is particular, thirdly, it is
subjected to the particular question as an example thereof, and here lies the
contradiction, here the third argument is brought as an instance as we call it.

Subjicitur.
That is subjected as inferior to both the parts of the question: it must be
subjectum of the consequent part of the question in the proposition, and
subjectum of the antecedent part of the question in the assumption, if we
explicate it: so that remember that before in the definition of spllogismus
symplex, and apply it unto this: so that that which is here required is first a
particular question then a third argument as a question is subjected, and this
is when it is contracted.

Vt utramque partem antecedens, and assumptione affirmatum intelligatur.
For that is understood, intelligatur, that is, even when it is contracted: so
that here is the reason why this syllogism is first. Aristotle and all his sect
that follow him make this figure last: but a syllogism is a disposition, and
according to the disposition of the third argument, such is the syllogism, if
therefore it go before in both the parts of the antecedent, why to go before is
before to go behind, ergo, this must be the first. Kickerman says Aristotle's
order is best, because the last figure is most general for use, he has reason
for it, for it is more large for his reach, but not so simple for disposition,
and how can we conclude, till we know where to place the third argument.

Hic enim argumentum quaestionis, etc. Ramus does here commorari.
Nec aliter explicatur.

Ramus was here deceived, for sometime it is explicated, yet for one that is
explicated, we shall have it contracted.

CHAP. XI.
De prima specie syllogismi simplicis explicati.
In syllogismo explicati propofitio est generalis, aut propria, and conclusio
similis antecedenti, aut partidebiliori.

WE have heard that a simple syllogism did break the question, and the third
argument was laid to each part, that is, to the consequent part in the
proposition, and looked into that by the light of the third argument, and to
the antecedent in the assumptions. Now simplex was by use contracted, or laid
out more at large. Use is artium magister, says the Schools, and because it
was more often in use contracted than explicated, ergo, it was requisite that
he should teach us the use of contracting it. This is in nature first, if we
shall look at placing the third argument, for to come before is before to come
behind, and to come behind is before to come before and behind. Now in a
contract the question is always particular, and the antecedent part of the
question in like sort does always agree with the third argument, because the
assumption must always be affirmed, so that do but consider those two things,
and you shall presently know any contract syllogism, and thus much of a
contract, now we come to an explicate.

In syllogismo explicato propositio est generalis, aut propria, and conclusio
similis antecedenti, aut parti debiliori.
The things here to be considered are first in the proposition, then in the
conclusion: the proposition must be general, or proper, not particular, for
then it is a breach of this rule, and this fallace is very common even in
common talk, as for example.

I hat that ties us unto Christ is the act of our faith.

The imputation of Christ's righteousness is not our act of faith says one.

Therefore it does not tie us unto Christ.

Here the proposition is not general, for we are made righteous, not for our
says alone, but for that we are in Christ by faith: faith ties us as an
instrument, but we must take heed that we give not that to the instrument which
is due to the principal cause, for even as my arm is tied not to my sinews, or
nerves, but is tied to the whole body, and is a member of the whole, being tied
unto them by the whole: so we are as members of Christ's body tied to his
Church, and are part of the matter and form of the whole, the matter is
quatenus, we are spiritually made of the semen of the word: the form is the
union of the Spirit holding all the members in semine, in that word unto
Christ, now there is no fallace more common than this, for if we have a reason
we bring it, never looking after the conclusion how it will follow, ergo, let
us now well consider it, that we be no more deceived, for thus one says.

We are adopted to be the Sons of God by the act of faith without Christ.

But the imputation of Christ's righteousness does not make us to be adopted
Sons of God.

Therefore this is as if I should say, that where by I am nourished or live is
my hands, ergo, this is true, but yet I do not live only by my hands, for then
I should feed on them; and so if we look at the invention we make that causa
sola, which is causa cum aliis.

Et conclusio similis antece denti aut parti debiliori.
That is, if that be strong, that is general, it will be like it, ant parti
debiliori, that is particular, negative or proper. Now for negation we heard of
that generally before, that is, ex meris negativis nihil concluditur: so that
it is generally true, that if the syllogism be negative, the conclusion thereof
must be negative: but particularity and property are here to be understood: so
that whether in a contract, or explicate, negation is general, and by pars
debilior we are to understand both negation, particularity and property, but
more especially particularity and property; particularity is debilior, then
generality, because there we cannot so fully determine of a thing. Now negation
is more weak than affirmation, because it is more general, as when I say a man
is not a stone, for here I go far from the point of telling you what a man is,
for yet he may be any thing but a stone.

Species duae sunt: prima ubi argumentum semper sequitur, negatum in altera
part.
For whilst a syllogism stands in the disposition of the question with a third
argument; and a simple syllogism is from breaking the parts of the question,
disposing the consequent in the proposition, the antecedent in the assumption,
ergo, the species must be by reason of the disposition of the third argument
going before only, or going behind only, or going both before and behind,
ergo, they are very species of disposition. Now there are species duae, for
there are no more places for the third argument: it cannot go after, and come
before, as it may come before, and go after, the reason is this, the consequent
part of the question is the majus extremum, ergo, if that should be in the
assumption, then how could the assumption be taken out of the proposition,
whereas the minus extremum was there, for so the assumption would be bigger
than the proposition; and by this means the third argument in the proposition
should be greater if it came after, then the majus extremum that should there
go before it, whereas we heard before that the consequent part of the question
is either more general, or at least equal to the third argument: and again, it
should go before in the assumption, though it be greater than the minus
extremum: so that there are no more places, it must either go before both, and
so be less than both the parts of the question: or follow both, and so be
greater than both: or else it must be a mean betwixt both.

Prima ubi argumentum semper sequitur, etc,
For here is a more simple disposition than in the second explicate, secondly,
it is denied in altera part, meaning in the one part of the antecedent part,
either proposition or assumption: they must never both be denied, nor both
affirmed. The rule of negatus told us that one of the antecedent, and the
conclusion must be denied but not all.

Semper sequitur.
That is, the consequent in the proposition, and the antecedent in the
assumption: so that if the question be negative we may conclude it here, or in
all the rest: but particulars where the third argument agrees with the
antecedent may be only concluded in a contract, as,

Turbatus non been utitur rati^ne.
Turbatus is a man addicted to his affections, and the Stoics held that
sapiens and turbatus were disparates, and the reason is, because sapientia is
not turbatio. Sapientia is properly the readiness or promptness in
syllogistical judgment: now where will rules without reason, that is not good;
for the affections that attend upon will do trouble the reason, as love heats
fancy, and hatred cools, both which are enemies to reason. Vsus rationis, the
third argument is a genus of sapientia, for it is general of all Logic: and
the intellectual virtues are the habtual promptnesses of reasons act: and this
syllogism may also be concluded in the second kind of an explicate.

Qui been utitur ratione non est turbatus.
Sapiens been utitur ratione.
Sapiens igitur non est turbatus.
Hoc judicium ita fit a Cic. 3. Tus.
Quemadmodum (ait) oculus conturbatus non est probe affectus ad suum munus
fungendum, etc.

The proposition is here adorned with a prosyllogisme a simili: and sapientis
animus it a semper affectus est, ut ratione optime utatur: there is the
assumption: nunquam igitur est perturbatus, there is the conclusion: and this
is called a general of the first kind, because here are only negative
syllogims, and therefore the conclusion is always negative, ergo, that is the
first kind of generals, when the conclusion is like to the proposition, for
here general is an affection of simplex syllogismus explicatus: but when I say
generalis est primus, aut secundus, here is a distribution of the genus into
the species: now it is general, because the third argument is given to the
parts of the question generally.

Res mortalis est composita.
This is a general of the second sort, because here the assumption is denied:
here composita agrees to res mortalis as a cause, ergo, the proposition is
affirmmed: and because it will not agree with the antecedent anima, ergo, the
assumption is denied.

Cicero 1. Tusc. In animi autem cognitione (inquit.)
Here the assumption is first, being backed with a prosyllogism, a testimonio
nisi enim in Physicis plumbei sumus, and here Tullies eloquence is showed in
the variety of words signifying the same thing, and this belongs to natural
Philosophy, where we hear that el^mentum is composed ex elementis Quod cum ita
sit, etc. here is the conclusion. Est enim interius, etc. that is, res mortalis
here is the proposition, and these are both general, for here compositio is
general to the consequent part, and the conclusion is so too. Now we come to
the species of specialis prima, aut secunda.

Lividus non est magnanimus.
This is special, because the proposition only is general; it is primus
because it is negative in the proposition like unto the conclusion, the
question is, whether maximus be a snake or a slow worm, for a snake is very
slow: and lividus is properly that which is black, and blew, and metaphorically
it signifies poison: it signifies also one that will not do good himself, and
yet envieth at others that do well: magnanimus, that is, courageous: these are
disparates. Maximus Ovids friend is magnanimus: so that lividus non est
magnanimus belongs to natural Philosophy.

Ovid. 3. de pont. Eleg. 3.
Livors iners vitium, mores non exit in altos, etc.

Here is the proposition utque latens ima, etc. there is a prosyllogism to it,
a simili. Men's tua sublimis, here is the assumption, and here are prosyllogisms
to that; Maximi were so called first of Fabius Maximus who was more than
Alexander Magnus, supra genus eminet ipsum a comparatis: ingenium for
magnanimity, a metonimy of the adjunct for the subject, then a minore. Ergo
alii noceant miseris, here is a dissimilitude. Ac tua supplicibus, etc. here
are prosyllogisms for the conclusion which is wanting.

Specialis secundus.
Saltator est luxuriosus.
Specialis because one only part is general, secundus, because the assumption
is denied, as the conclusion is. The question is, whether Muraena be a dancer.

Cicero pro Muraena.
Nemo enim fere salta sobrius, nisi forte insanit, etc.

Here the proposition is first with a prosyllogism, neque insolitudine, etc.
here is a distinction into the specials: intempestivi convivii, etc to mihi,
etc. here is the assumption, and there is a distribution of the integrum into
the members: lastly, the conclusion, and cum ea non reperiantur, here is again
a repetition of the assumption with the conclusion.

Ovid 1. Trist. Eleg. 2.
Carmina proveniunt animo deducta sereno.

Ovid excuses his verses tripliciter, my verses cannot be good: why? from the
cause, carmina proveniunt, etc. nubila sunt su^^^is, here is a prosyllogism of
the proposition ab adversis: secondly, carmina s^cessum etc. the proposition,
the assumption is me mare, etc. Again, all fear should be removed from good
verses: the assumption follows enwrapt with a contrary, ego perditus ensem,
etc. haec quoque quae facio, etc. here is a deprecatio instead of the
conclusion, which is general to all the three syllogisms.

Proprius primus.
Agesilaus non est pictus ab Appelle, etc.

Here the third argument disagrees with the consequent part, for Apelles lived
not in Agesilaus time.

Proprius secundus,
Caesar oppressit patriam.

Here we see our Author does not bring examples of proper syllogisms out of
Authors, because Authors commonly slide away in generals; but yet he might have
brought some out of History, for there commonly we have proper syllogisms.

CHAP. XII.
De secunda specie syllogismi simplicis explicati.
Secunda species, explicati syllogis est quando argumentum antecedit
propositione, sequitur affirmatum in assumptione.

WE have heard the reason of the disposition of a simple syllogism, and the
reason why the contract must go first, because it places the third argument
and that before, whereas the first explicate is the second, because it places
the third argument both before and after, ergo, here is a more composite
disposition than before, ergo, Ramus places this last, whereas Kickerman would
have it first, because it is more general for use, but quatenus it is a
syllogism it is more special: but he meant it was more general, because it
concludes more questions, but that is no reason, for so adjunctum in Invention
should be taught before subjectum, for adjunctum est frequentius, and copiosus:
but we cannot know what to place before and after, till first we know what it
is to place before, and what it is to place after.

Secunda species syllogismi explicati est, etc.
There are two things to be considered in this definition: first, that the
argument does antecedere in propositione: secondly, that it be affirmed in the
assumption: for the placing of the third argument, we must know, that the place
of it is double: first, it must be the antecedent in the proposition; secondly,
it must be the consequent in the assumption, and it had his name medium from
this syllogism principally, for in a contract it was placed before the parts of
the question, in the first explicate after them: here it comes between them
both, and because this kind was most common, and a figure best known in
Schools, ergo, hence came the third argument to be called medium: Secondly, the
assumption must be affirmed, and herein it agrees with a contract; and here we
see what syllogism may be concluded in an explicate: first, an affirmed of all
sorts, whether generalis, particularis, or proprius: secondly, a denied of all
sorts but not every denied; for if the antecedent part disagree with the third
argument, then it will be concluded in the first kind of an explicate, and
therefore argumentum antecedit the consequent part of the question, sequitur
affirmatum, the antecedent in the assumption, as we heard generally in a simple
syllogism; as for example, the question is, whether profit attend honesty, the
third argument is justum: for the proposition, if it be not well gotten it will
not thrive: for the assumption, the truth of that appears, because justitia
generalis, or virtus and honesta^ are all one.

Affirmatum generale Omne justum est utile.
Cicero 2. officiorum, it a concludit.
Summa quidem authoritas Philosophy, etc.
Here the proposition is first, being backed with a prosyllogism a testimonio;
then the assumption, and then the conclusion: and this is generalis, quia est
ex propositione, and assumptione generalibus quia ex omnibus partibu*
affirmatis, and the rest following are so for the reason out of their
definitions.

Neg. gene.
Timidus non est liber.
Hoc ita concluditur, and judicatur ab Horatio 1. Epist.
Quo melior servo, quo liberior sit avarus, etc.
The question is, whether a covetous man be free: no, for he will make himself
a slave for a farthing: the proposition is argued in the example with a
prosyllogism, and that is argued by another prosyllogism from his effects, nam
qui cupit, etc. there is the assumption^ porro qui metuens vivit, etc: there is
the conclusion backed with a prosyllogism.

Consslii expers, consilio reginon potest.
Terentius in Eunucho.
Here, quares in se neque consilium neque modum
Habet ullum --
Love cannot be governed by counsel: why? because it is expers consilii: any
affection whatsoever if it be in excess it will hear no reason, love
especially, for it is hot, and that intoxicates the head, and sets fancy on
work, and will hear no judgment: the proposition is first, here quae res. In
amore haec omnia insunt vitia, here instead of the assumption the causes of
love are reckoned up. Incerta hac situ, etc. there is the conclusion backed with
a prosyllogism a contrario.

Affir. spec.
Consules virtute facti, studiose rempub. tueri debent

The question is, whether Cicero was to be causa quae ^ueatur Rempublicam: yes,
because he is made Consul for his virtue.

Sic Orator diligentiam suam, etc.
The proposition is first, being argued with a prosyllogism a minore, qui non
in incunabilis, that is, not by being born of them who have been Consuls; sed
in campo, that is when they go to the fields, not to their progenitors, and
that he shows by a contrary to himself; then the assumption, nulli populo, and
with a prosyllogism the conclusion, me ipsum, etc. he does commorari upon the
assumption by a digression: and upon the occasion of the prosyllogism he
repeats again the conclusion.

Quod optatum redierit, gratum est.
The question is, whether Lesbia be welcome to Catullus: yes, because she is
the subject of his desire, it is a connex axiom; but we are to look at it as it
is a simple axiom, as the verb is the band that ties it.

Ca^ullus sic concludit.
Si quicquam cupidoque optanti obtigit unquam.

The proposition is first, then the assumptio argued a minore carius auro:
lastly, he does commorari upon the conclusion, Lesbi animi cupido: where there
is also a comparison added a minore.

Neg. spec.
Deceptor amantis puellae non est laudandus.
Phillis apud Ovidium.
Fallere credentem non est operosa puellam.
Now follows a negative special, Demophoon non est laudandus, from his
effects the proposition is first, fallere with a prosyllogism, simplicitas,
etc. then the assumption, sum decepta, then the conclusion with an execration
by a testimony of the gods: and now in these kinds of simple syllogisms, the
question is made much more clear and evident then in composite syllogisms,
because here we sever the question into his parts, and lay the third argument
with each part, to see the truth thereof: whereas in a composite syllogism we
dispose the third argument with the whole question, and do not sever it at all.
Now then, that we may know readily where any question may be concluded, it is
but this, look at the question, whether it be affirmed, or denied, general,
special, or proper: if it be a general affirmed, it can be concluded only in
the second kind of an explicate, not in the first explicate, not in a contract:
if it be a general denied it may only be concluded in the first explicate, and
also in the second explicate, if the third argument agree with the antecedent
part of the question: if it be a particular affirmed it may be concluded in a
contract, not in the first explicate, but in the second explicate, if the third
argument agree with the antecedent: if it be a particular denied it may be
concluded in a contract, and in the first explicate, if the third argument
disagree with the antecedent part of the question, and in the second explicate:
so that this is the most general: if it be a proper affirmed, it can only be
concluded in the second explicate, not in the first explicate, nor in a
contract: if it be a proper denied, then it can be concluded only in the first
explicate, or in the second explicate, if the third argument does agree with
the antedent part of the question, not in a contract.

CHAP. XIII.
De Syllogismo connexo primo. Adhuc syllogismus simplex fuit: syllogismus
compositus, est syllogismus ubi tota quaestio est pars al^era propositionis
affirmatae, and compositae: argumentum est pars reliqua.
WE have heard of a simple syllogism, and how it came to be simple: now it is
called a composite, by reason the whole question is placed in the proposition
with the third argument, now which goes first, and which goes last, we shall
hear in the specials. Again, this proposition must be affirmed, meaning the
parts affirmed, and also composite, the assumption and conclusion are always,
or at least may always be simple, and it is called composite, not so much in
respect of the proposition, but of the disposing of the whole question with the
third argument. Here we must not bring any part of the question into the
assumption, for if we bring in one part, we wrong the other part: and if we
bring in the whole question, we commit a tautology, making the proposition and
assumption the same; but the third argument must come into the assumption,
because it is the light to clear the question, ergo, it is first placed in the
proposition with the whole question, then alone in the assumption: as if I
should say, this is it that is two foot long, do you mark it: or as if I should
show you corn, and a bushel together in the proposition, and then afterward
show you a bushel alone, and tell you that it is a lawful one.

Tollere autem in composito syllogismo, est specialem contradictionem ponere.
That is, wheresoever we shall hear of this term of art, tollere, we mean to
put a special contradiction: why does he say, specialem contradictionem?
because that if the third argument be a general in the proposition, we must put
the special contradiction to it in the assumption.

Syllo: compositus, est connexus, aut disjunctus.
That is a composite either where the proposition is a connex axiom, or where
the third argument and the question are disjunct. Our copulate axiom will come
into a simple syllogism, but not into a composite, our discreet axiom making
but a discretion between the arguments, comes seldom into a syllogism, so that
these only conclude, because in a connex axiom the arguments hang one upon
another, following one the other: so that there we look at the two arguments
simply agreeing: so in a disjunct the parts there argue as contraries, and one
contrary will conclude another, because there the band severs the arguments
contrary to a copulate axiom: now connexus is first, because a connex axiom
comes before a disjunct,

Syllogismus connexus, est syllogismus compositus propositionis connexae,
So that here is nothing to be considered, but only the proposition, that it
be a connex.

Est que duorum modorum
Because here are 20. places, the third argument may go before the question, or
it may go after the question.

Primus modus syllogismi connexi est, qui assumit antecedens, and consequens
concludit.
Here we may conclude affirmed questions in the first modus as in a contract
the third argument was placed before, ergo, it was set first: so here in a
connex that must be first where the argument goes before. As,

Si dii sunt, divinatio est.
Cicero 3. Officiorum.
Atque si etiam hoc natu a praescribit, ut homo homini, etc.
If a man must wish well to a man quia homo, he must seek the profit of a man,
but prius, ergo, the proposition is obscured with a prosyllogism.

Sic Aencidos 4. Dido judicat Aeneae remanendum esse.
Mean fugis? per ego has lacrymas dextramque tuam te.

If I have well deserved of thee, go not from me: first the proposition is
backed with a prosyllogism: te propter, etc. the assumption: cui me, etc. the
conclusion.

Frequenter hic non assumitur idem, sed majus ut 1. Catil.
Si te par^ntes timerent, at que odissent tui, etc.

You shall often have in this kind of syllogism the assumption omitted, and a
prosyllogism in room of it. If Catilius parents could not away with him, he
should go from them: at nunc te patria, etc. a majore.

Concludendi modus hic idem est, quando propositio est lata temporis: quo
genere nympha, etc.
Cum Paris Oenone poterit spirare relicta.
We heard before that such axioms, where there is cum, and tum, that is his
meaning by relation of time, that it is a connex axiom: and so here a connex
syllogism.

When Paris has left Oenone, then let Zantlous run back to his spring, at,
ergo. Here the proposition is first, then the assumption, then the conclusion.

CHAP. XIV.
De syllogismo connexo secundo.
Secundus modus connexitollit consequens, ut tollat antecedens.

HEre is a connex, and here the third argument must come after, and the
question must go before, ergo, it is secundus, and here we see there is a
double taking away, tollit antecedens, ut tollat consequens.

Si ulli rei sapiens assentietur usquam; aliquandi etians opinabitur, etc.
Nunquam autem opinabitur;
Nulli igitur rei assentietur:
The Academicks thought that a man should not have an opinion of any thing, and
therefore should not assent to any thing, and from them came the Scepticks.
Nunquam epinabitur, is a general negative, and aliquando opinibatur, is a
special affirmed.

Ovidius 2. Trist.
Si saperem, doctas odissem jure sorores, etc.

There is the proposition with a prosyllogism from their effects. At nunc
(tanta meo comes est insania morbo, etc.) there is the assumption, the
conclusion is wanting. As the first kind of a connex did conclude affirmative
questions; so this second kind concludes denied questions.

Hae duae syllogismi species sunt omnium usitatissimae.
That is, these two kinds of syllogisms are so plain, that every fool, as we
say, may make them.

CHAP. XV.
De syllogismo disjuncto primo.
Syllogismus disjunctus est syllogismus compositus propositionis disjunctae.
Modi duo sunt; primus tollit unum, and reliquum concludit.
WE have heard that a simple syllogism is better for the clearing of a
doubtful axiom than a composite, because there the question is broken in
pieces, and the third argument, which is the candle or light, is laid to each
part. In a composite the third argument is laid to the whole question: so that
there the question cannot be so clear: and there in the proposition we say in
effect, this is the third argument, and then repeat it again in the assumption,
and say this is it, mark it well Now it is connexus aut disjunctus; and
connexus we heard of before, and now it remains that we speak of syllogismus
disjunctus.

Syllogismus disjunctus, etc.
We have heard the reason of the name syllogismus, it is an Arithmetical term
signifying the sum in Addition, because we gather in it as in a sum, that which
has been more fully delivered, it is called disjunctus, even as a disjunct
axiom was so called, because the matter was severed, though the words of
Grammar were not: so a disjunct syllogism is where the third argument is a
thing disjoined from the question. It is composite because the proposition is
composite, yet not every composite proposition makes a disjunct syllogism, but
where there is disjunction between the question, and the third argument, ergo,
in these kinds of syllogisms we evermore conclude from opposites, as in a
connex we conclude commonly from consentanies.

Modi duo sunt; primus tollit unum, and reliquum concludit.
In a disjunct syllogism it skilleth not where we place our question, whether
before or after the third argument, secondly, observe in this first modus of a
disjunct syllogism, that we take away the third argument in the assumption, and
conclude the rest, thirdly, that in this first kind we conclude affirmatively,
and lastly, that here we conclude simple questions, ut, Aut dies est, aut nox
est, etc.

Ciceronis pro Cluentio judicium tale est;
Sed cum esset haec illi proposit a conditio, etc.
Sic idem 2. Philip ratiocinatur.
Nunquam ne intelliges tibi sta^u^ndum esse utrum illi, qui istam rem
g^sserunt, homicidae sint, an vindives libertatis? etc.
The question is this, either Brutus and Caius were freers of the Country, or
traitors to the Country, the proposition is first with a prosyllogism.
Attendite enim paulisper, etc. first be thine own judge, for Antonie would be
drunk; again, there is another prosyllogism to the proposition, plusquam
homicidae, etc. and that he proves with another prosyllogism, they killed
Caesar a father of the Country. Tu homo sapiens and considerate, quid dicis?
this is the assumption, being backed with a prosyllogism, non homi^idae, which
he proves from a testimony, from the effects of Antonie The conclusion is last.
Sequitur ut liberatores tuo judicio sint quandoquidem tertium nibil esse
potest. So that all the parts are here laid down orderly, only they are
obscured with prosyllogisms.

Si parts d^^junctae propositionis sint duabus plures, judicandi,
concludendique ars erit eadem.
That is, it may so fall out that there may be more third arguments brought to
conclude the question: as in disparates before can conclude truth, we must
bring all the disparates together, and we must take away all but our question.

Sic Cicero judicat, Rabirium cum consulibus esse oportere.
Atque vidimus (ait) hac in rerum natura triasuisse, etc.
The question is, whether Rabiriue was to be with the Consuls, the proposition
is first: the assumption follows with a prosyllogism. Latere with a
prosyllogism a simili cum Saturnio esse, etc. with a prosyllogism also: then
the conclusion backed with a prosyllogism, virtus, and honestus, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
De syllogismo disjuncto secundo.
Disjunctus secundus e proposi^ione partibus omnibus affirmata assumit unum,
and reliquum tollit.

THe second disjunct is called secundus in respect that it concludes
negatively, as the first concluded affi^matively, and as before the third
argument was first taken away, and the rest concluded: so here contra we assume
the third argument, and take away the rest: and further we are to consider,
that the proposition must be affirmed partibus omnibus, yet we may say it is,
or it is not arguing from a contradicent.

Sic Juno cum Jove de Turno concludit 10. Aenei. Quid si qu^d voce gravaris,
Mente dares, at que d^c Turno rata vita maneret;

O husband that you would grant but in mind that Turnus might not be slain:
either he must die, or I am deceived. The proposition is in those words, quod
ut O potius, etc. the assumption taking away the Irony. Et in melius tua, quod
potes, orsa reflectas, there is the conclusion.

Ejus modi syllogismus efficiture propositione copulata negata, quae negata
complexio dicitur: quaeque disjunctionis affirmatae vim obtinet.
A syllogism whose proposition shall be a copulate axiom denied, because it is
the same with a disjunct affirmed in value, ergo, it may make a disjunct
syllogism, this is seldom found in use, but because other Logicians teach it,
ergo, our Author would not leave out any thing, that belongs to the Art of
reason, as,

Non and dies est, and nox est;
At dies est:
Nonigitur nox est.
Here non denies the one, and puts the other, for in a copulate axiom we heard,
that non denied the coupling of the parts, and this is called negata complexio,
because here the proposition may be denied, whereas before he said generally e
propositione partibus omnibus affirmata.

Complexio dicitur.
By complexio he means the whole Syllogism, by a Senecdoche of the part for the
whole, and now we have heard of the kinds of disposing arguments immediately:
so far as the act of reason reaches: now we come to method which is but one
rule, yet indeed it is the golden rule of all Arts,

CHAP. XVII.
De Methodo secundum Aristotelem.
Methodus est dianoia variorum axiomatum homogeniorum pro naturae suae
claritate praepositorum.

MEthodus, for the name it signifies with the way, or order, when any thing is
done the right way, order, or manner, then it is with the way: so that it does
by name commend unto us the nearest and right way of performing any thing,
ergo, it is fitly so called, for a right line is but one, and it is most short,
inter eosdem terminos.

Est dianoia.
That is, a discourse of the mind, for axiomatical judgment is said to be of
the mind quiet, and calm, and dianoia is said to be of the mind troubled, for
there is an agitation of the brain to and from, that we may come to see the
truth more plainly. Now I do not see in method how aliud axioma ex alio
deducitur, if he mean that one axiom is here more general, and another more
special; there may be a fallace in that, for the more general does not contain
in it the more special. In a man's body of all the members the head is first,
yet none will say that it contains the rest of the members in it:
notwithstanding there is something in this I must confess, for the former rule
in an Art gives some light to the rule following, as Dialectica est ars been
disserendi, gives light to the second rule of Logic, for I must first know the
whole, before I can distribute it into its parts, but how this is any discourse
I do not see: Again, I have showed that among ancient Logicians dianoia is
only given to syllogisms, and not to method, and in truth I hold dianoia and
syllogismus to be all one. Again, method is for memory, not for the judging of
things: and that argument before concerning the distinct organs of the parts of
Logic, is instar omnium to prove it. It may be said fitly, that it is
dispositio axiomatum, for in axiomatical and syllogistical judgment there were
arguments disposed, by which indeed axioms did arise, but method does not
dispose any arguments, but axioms, ergo, this in like sort is a mean argument
to show that axiomatical and syllogistical, judgment should go together,
disposing arguments immediately, and method should be above, for it meddles not
with arguments, but with axioms immediately.

Axiomatum.
Axioma signifies properly such a truth as is worthy credit without any
discourse, ergo, it agrees to that which is per se manifestum, and therefore
axioma dubium is not worthy that name axioma: but method is dispositio
axiomatum: first of them that are clear without any light of a third argument:
and doubtful axioms are not disposed by method, but as they are cleared before
the tribunal seat of a third argument: and indeed method is principally a
disposition of the axioms of Arts. Axiomatum not of things:

Object. Is there not order in things?

Answ. True it is, that method as the rest of Logic is an adjunct of the
things, yet it disposes them gratia axiomatum, for as invention is immediately
of arguments, and they are of things: and as judgment is of axioms, and
syllogisms, and they likewise are of things: so method is of axioms
immediately, and of things immediately: so that we must lay up nothing by the
rule of method but axioms, and this must be our care in reading any thing to
take the axioms, and to carry them to their places in Arts.

Object. Are not syllogisms to be remembered, ergo, is there not method of them?

Answ. Yes, but we take the parts asunder, and make them axioms first, for the
proposition, assumption, and conclusion are axioms, and belong to some Art,
therefore look whither the more special argument in the axiom belongs, and
thither the axiom belongs: and if we would remember the reason why such a
thing is so, or not so, see where your rule is, and look at the former axioms,
and you shall find arguments for the proof of any thing, and may so keep them:
as for example: otiosus est amator, Egistus est otiosus, ergo Egistus est
amator. The proposition belongs to moral Philosophy, for vitium is a vice, love
is concupiscence the sin, and it is the affection of love disordered, ergo,
this breaks the seventh Commandment, ergo, this axiom belongs hither, for love
is the more special. Egistus est otiosus: this indeed belongs to the history of
Egistus: but because we have it not, therefore we may carry it to otium: so the
conclusion belongs to moral Philosophy, to concupiscence. Again, syllogisms
serve but for the clearing of the truth of axioms, and then afterward we return
again to the rule of an axiom to judge whether it be true or false, and this is
all that is required for disposing arguments, ergo, method is dispositio
axiomatum only. Again, we never remember any thing, but we make an axiom of it.

Object. But we remember words.

Answ. Though it be true that some remember words very strangely, yet they
remember them as axioms, for the word, and the thing signified by the word make
an axiom.

Object. But I suppose they know not the meaning of the words.

Answ. Yet the sound oreecho of the word in his head, which is an adjunct unto
the word, and the word it self makes an axiom still: so that method is only of
axioms: and commonly they that so remember words have little judgment, and if
all the axioms of all things were laid down methodically, we should remember
all things methodically.

Variorum.
For method is not in one axiom, therefore here take heed that we be not
deceived, taking that to break the rule of method, which is a breach of (...):
as if this term invention be made a part of Rhetoric, it is against (...): but
if the doctrine of this rule Inventio est prima paus Dialecticae, etc. be
taught in Rhetoric, that is a breach of method: contra, the definition of
Logic placed in Grammar or Rhetoric, is (...), but a breach of method Again,
he says they are various, not such as shall be contrary one to another, for
the difference of the axoms of Art is but in a diversity, as it were, not in
opposition, because in respect of the object they all tend to one thing.

Homogeniorum.
That is of the same kindred: this homogenia is not that in an axiom, for that
is between the arguments in an axiom, this is between the axioms themselves: so
that let us beware that we put not heterogeny axioms in an Art: for they that
have done so may be compared to ignorant Painters, that paint a horses head
upon a man's body. Again, when we are to make a speech of any thing, we must be
careful to speak within our compass, and not to bring in things that are
heterogeny to the subject we speak of,

Pro naturae suae claritate praepositorum.
For method is the rule of order, ergo, there must be a praepositio and a
postpositio of axioms here: ergo, if we will draw any Art out according to his
true feature, we must set every thing in his own place, nature observes this
course in every thing, as we see whilst the earth would rather ascend then
there should be vacuum: and whilst the spirit of God his mighty power that
governs all things, does place every thing in order, we see he does it by the
rule of method continually: as he places the fire in the highest place above
the other elements, then the air, etc. dulcenatale solum, etc. to every man,
and to every thing, because by the rule of method that is his place: and if
things be displaced, they will sooner perish. The reason in nature why the load
stone desires to stand North and South, is because of the rule of method, it
being most agreeable to the nature thereof so to stand: so that every thing
desires by this rule, not only its proper place, but its proper situs also in
that place.

Pro naturae suae claritate: this proposition must be guided by this rule,
namely, the clearness of their nature and good reason for the former axiom does
disery some light to the following. Again he says, pro naturae suae, so that
clarius natura must go first, not that which is simply clarius, because that
that is by nature clarius, is clarius, and notius then any other: and whereas
we have a distinction of notius natura, and notias nobis, they are the same
Notius natura is in Genest, notius nobis is in Analysi: for howbeit in analysi
we begin at the lowest, which is notius nobis, yet in the end we come to notius
natura, and then that which is notius natura, is notius nobis: and we know in
genere before we know in specie, as we know homo before we know Thomas, or
William, etc. Hence it is that many of our great Doctors know the rules of Art,
but know not how to practice them: so that indeed they know them not. Again,
because prius natura commonly contains something in it that we must know
before we can understand the next rule; so Arts teach us: as Logic first
teaches Invention, then Judgment. In Invention it first teaches an argument
in general, then in specie: now if we would know which is natura prius in every
thing, that we may do thus, if one rule give light to another or if one rule
may be without the other to clear the truth of it, then that is first:
otherwise it needs the help of another, it must come after that other: as one
is before two, for I cannot know two before I know one: secondly, two cannot be
but there must be one, whereas one may be without two.

Vnde omnium inter se convenientia judicantur, memoriaque comprehendentur.
Here he tells us a double fruit or end that arises thereof: for the first end,
unde omnium inter se convenientia judic antur, true it is thus far, if an Art
be set in order, we do there judge of the parts, but this is by axiomatical
judgment, not by methodical, for I make but one axiom of two, as if I judge the
definition of Logic to be before the distribution, here the distribution is an
adjunct to the definition, and here I make of these two one axiom of a subject,
and an adjunct, and judge them by the rule of axiomaaical judgment. The second
end memoria comprehenditur, is true: so then the judgment of all the parts of
an Art for their convenience, is nothing but the seeing of their consention:
for one axiom laid to another is subjectum and adjunctum, and so we make but
one axiom of them: now method makes all things one, and we remember all things
as one: and therefore it is that the world is one, namely, by method; and the
reason why we forget any thing, is because we make one thing more things, for
every sense is of one thing indeed. The reason why we remember a man whom we
have seen before, is because we remember the disposition of the parts of his
body, nose, mouth, eyes, etc. and so turning the glass of our understanding
unto him again, we know him; and if we would remember any thing for our own
present use, let us carry them home to their places, and we shall not forget
them: and here we may see that we do not remember by taking the species of
things into our brain, and there lay them up as in a chest, or let them hang as
birds in a lime twig, and are received by fancy first, as if it did fashion
them, then cogitation considers of them, and memory keeps them.

Answ. There is no reason to show that these should be true, for these outward
species that come to my external eye, vanish away quickly, for the species of
the understanding they being made of the animal spirit must also soon vanish:
but by the rule of method we place the things in their order, as God has done,
and when our eye has seen them once in their place, she knows where to go to
find them again: so that as my outward eye being once turned from the thing it
beheld before, does not receive any species from it: so my eye of reason has
not any species of any thing any longer than it looks at it, so that I may
fitly compare our inward eye of reason, to our outward eye, or to a glass.

Atque ut spectatur in axiomate veritas, and falsitas, in syllogismo
consequentia, and inconsequentia: sic in methodo consideratur, ut per se
clarius praecidat, obscurius sequatur; omninoque ordo and confusio judicatur.
Ramus does commorari upon this rule, and shows it by comparing it with other
rules, for as the drift of an axiom is truth and falsehood, and of a syllogism
consequence and inconsequence: so that syllogistical judgment is but to clear
things to us, and we must go to axiomatical judgment, to see the truth and
falsehood: so that rules of consequution are here, and maxims as they call them,
rules of consequents, as sublata causa tollitur effectum, etc. these are but
uses of the arguments of invention, and they follow by syllogistical judgment,
we making the first rule to be the third argument: as here, if causa be cujus
vires est, then sublata causa tollitur effectum. At. Ergo. Sic in methodo, etc.

Omninoque ordo and confusio judicatur.
By judgment here we are to understand axiomatical judgment, as I said before:
but order is here, which we judge by the application of the rule of method to
any thing, and so we syllogize.

Sic disponitur ex homogeniis axiomatis primo loco absoluta notione primum,
secundo secundum, tertio tertium, and ita deinceps.
According to this rule of method shall be disposed homogeny axioms, first that
which is absolute, that is, that which takes not light from any other: then of
them that take light from others, secundo, secundum, tertio tertium: so that
the definitions of things in Arts are absolute prima: but in truth there is not
any definition of any Art absolutely first, but that of Encyclopadia: there are
also magis and minus nota compared with others, which are in the second and
third places.

Ideoque methodus ab universalibus ad singularia perpetuo progreditur.
So that here we must know that that which was before natura prius, is here
universalius, not genus, species, or any such thing, but he means that method
proceeds a natura notioribus ad natura ignotiora, and this is the genesis of
method. Now Kickerman not seeing this well, and seeing Aristotle say in his
Ethics that he must proceed a generalioribus ad specialiora, did imagine that
every Art must have his praecognita: but Aristotle means, that having spoken de
summo bono, which was the most general end, he was to speak of things more
special tending to that end; and alas what is absolute primum in an Art, but
the first rule? ergo, can there be any thing to be praecognitum? Again his
praecognita are either the Art it self confusedly taught, or the exposition of
some special rules thereof, and for postcognita, why the examples are infimae
species, ergo, lowest, ergo, we cannot go further than examples for postcognita.

Hac ^nim sola, and unica via proceditur ab antecedentibus omnino, and absolute
notioribus ad consequentia ignota declarandum, eamque solam methodum
Aristoteles docuit.
So that things are to go before or after by their nature: and this Aristotle
and every one does consider, for when a man cloatheth himself, first he is to
cover his head, then to put on his doublet, hose, etc. and it is preposterous
if a man should first put on his shoes, then his stockins, or breeches; and in
making himself unready he must analyze, that is, first put off his shoes, then
his stockins, etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
De prima methodi illustratione per exempla artium.
Sed methodi unitatem exempla doctrinarum, and artium praecipue demonstant,
praecipueque vindicant.

OUr Author stays long upon method, his reasons are, because all Logicians are
very silent in the doctrine of method: and they that have spoken of it are
mistaken therein, for they make method to be nothing but genesis and analysis,
whereas they are the practice of a rule, or of as many rules as are in the
(...) of a thing, ergo, they are not method, though there may be a genesis and
an analysis of the rules of method, as well as of any other rules of Logic, or
other Arts. Now whilst other Logicians knew not this, they have run into many
questions about the multiplicity of method, whereas it is but one: as may
easily be showed by reason. For if all things are made one by the rule of
method, though there are many things in the world, then there cannot be more
methods, for then there should be more worlds.

Exempla doctrinarum, and artium praecipue demonstrant, praecipueque vindicant.
Ramus says, that method (as it is true) is not better seen to be one, then in
the rules of A^ts, for as (...), and (...) are only belonging to rules of Art:
so method is almost, and principally of the rules of Arts, though their order
may be in many other things.

Quibus quamvis omnes regulae generales sint and universales, etc.
In the rules of Art all are universals, not that there may not be proper
axioms in an Art, but he means such as are (...), and (...): otherwise if he
should not mean thus, this generality would be only true of the rules of the
general Arts, not of the special Arts: but though all be general, carum tamen
gradus distinguntur, as they are compared one with another, as the definition
of Logic is before the distribution, being more general than it. and so the
distribution is more general than the next, and so for the rest.

Again, the most general rule in disposition is more special than the last rule
of invention, because inventions use is more general than judgments, though the
rule of disposition may contain more in it, than the rule of invention
contains in it.

Quantoque unaqu^que genelarior erit, tanto magis praecedet.
That is, as it is pro naturae suae claritate praeponendum, so must it be
placed.

Generalissima loco, and ordine prima erit, quia lumine and notitia prima est.
This being the course of nature to proceed from the highest to the lowest, for
so we must place things: the reason follows: now indeed Ramus himself took no
great pain about Art in general, and therefore imagined that every definition
in Art was absolutely first, whereas in very truth none of them are absolutely
first, but only that rule of Encyclopaedia.

Subalternae consequentiae sequentur, quia claritate sunt proximae: atque ex
his natura notiores preponentur, minus notae substituentur, *tandemque
specialissimae constituentur.
Among subalterns some are more general, and some are more special, Ramus here
speaks Allegorically, alluding to genus and species subalternae, and
specialissimae in Invention: and here special rules are all one with others in
themselves, though not in comparison with them:

Definitio itaque generalissima prima erit.
Ramus means the definitio, and the definitum, not d^finitio the argument: now
this must be first, why? one would think it should rather be last; because a
perfect definition intends to lay down the whole essence of a thing: and
before a man can know a piece of a thing, he must know it in the whole as it is
comprised in a brief, from the nearest causes thereof.

Distributio sequitur: quae si multiplex fuerit, etc.
For so we heard that a definition was manifold integri in membra, generis in
species, etc. because as the definition laid out the whole in one lump at once
from the causes, which are the utmost things: so in a distribution there is the
whole, but laid out distributively in his parts: so that this is the difference
of them: and the following rules do prosecute every part according to their
place.

Praecedit in parts integras partitio, etc.
The reason of this is, because the membra make up the whole, and are causes
thereof, as the definition was of the thing defined. Again, the distributio of
generis in species is from the effects, and they are after the causes, ergo,
distributio ex causis must go before them; again, a distribution of the
integrum into the members in an Art is common to a distributi^n of the genus
into the species: as for example, in Grammar vox is divided as integrum into
litera, and syllaba, and both letters and syllables are general to vox numeri,
and sine numero, which are the species of vox.

Sequitur divisio in species, etc.
But if there be a distribution of the subject into the adjuncts, they must go
before distributio generis in species, as affirmatum, and negatum axioma, must
go before simplex and compositum, because the adjuncts are (...) with an axiom
in general. Again, if we set a distribution of the genus into the species
before a distribution ex adjunctis, we must handle the species distinctly,
ergo, there would be no room for distributio ex adjunctis to come in: but we
must know that we seldom have these distributions of the same Art, for where
there is distributio integri in membra, there is seldom distributio generis in
species, though there may be either of these, and likewise a distribution ex
adjunctis.

Et transitionum vinculis, si longior inter eas intersit explicatio,
colligandae sunt, etc.
He gives us here a note by the way, that if the distribution went long before,
that then we should use a transition from one part to another: so that here we
see the use of a transition, and that it belongs to method, and it is as it
were a bridge to go from one thing to another: and it serves auditorem
reficere, ac recreare.

Omnes definitiones, distributiones, regulae Grammaticae repertae sint, atque
unaquaeque sigillatim judicata, etc.
Ramus supposes every rule of Art already invented, and judged, how shall we
dispose them? not by any rules before, but only by method which is behind, for
we speak of order: as first the definition of Grammar, then the distribution,
because parts simul sumpta are equivolent to the whole: and let an Art be laid
down thus, and we shall see every thing plainly and evidently.

CHAP. XIX.
De secunda methodi illustratione per exempla Poetarum, Oratorum, Historicorum.
Atqui methodus, non solum in materia artium and doctrinarum adhibetur; sed in
omnibus rebus, quas facile and perspicue doc ere volumus, etc.

AS Aristotle says in the first of his Ethick (...), etc. so every thing may
orderly be laid down, quas facile, etc. therefore Poets, Orators, etc. observe
this rule, howbeit they do not usque quaque ingredi, and insistere as Art
requires.

Virgilius in Georgicus, etc.
Hactenus avorum cultus and sidera coeli,
Nunc te, Bacche canam:
Poetry is a general Art, ergo, a Poet is a general Author, therefore Ramus
brings examples out of Poetry to show this general Art of Logic, Virgil for
example handles Georgicks, that is, husbandry, and divides it into four parts,
in his first book he handles that which is (...) with husbandry: but his
distribution is not so good as it should be if it were an Art; for Virgil does
as Kickerman uses to do, namely, divides it into its common properties, and
into its special properties: common as Astrologia, Meteorologia, then he comes
by a transition to trees: then by a more imperfect transition in the beginning
of his third book de bobus, etc. for a transition is perfect or imperfect; a
perfect one consists of a conclusion of that which went before, and of a
proposition of that that follows: an imperfect transition consists of
either of these severally and alone.

Sic igitur Poeta generalissimum primo loco, etc.
That is, this must be our care when we do any thing especially if it be of
importance, that we miss not this method: but that we place every thing in his
due order and method according to nature.

Sic Ovidius in Fastis, etc.
So Ovid in his Calendar first sets down the general definition of his works,
and then he distributes it into twelve parts, according to the twelve months of
the year: reprehending Romulus for making but ten months, but it should seem
that the Romans had their time divided, as well in the time of Romulus, as
afterward, ergo, he did invent all the twelve months, ergo, Ovid was deceived,
in thinking that Numa Pompilius did make January and June: now he calls June
Janus, because that month was dedicated to Janus, whom some think was Iavan,
some Noe: and the first day of this month was his holy day.

Oratores in prooemio, etc.
So that here we may see this one method that as it is used in Arts, so is it
used in Poets, and Orators: now the exordium is nothing but a commoration: the
narration a description of that thing whereof he is to speak, the confirmation
a distribution, etc.

Sic Livius summam, etc.
This example is for History.

CHAP. XX.
De Crypticis methodi.
Haec igitur in variis axiomatis homogeneis, etc.

RAmus has showed us what method is, and that it is but one: now this exact
order thereof is then, when we desire to teach any thing plainly.

At cum delectatione motuve aliquo, etc.
If a man be to deliver an Art, he must exactly observe this method in every
point: but many times it falls out in discourses that disorder must be used, not
for the doctrines sake, but because of the perversity of the hearers, for they
often go out of their way by reason of their weakness; now this way is
especially when we reject homogenies, as Orators use much to do, and draw in
heterogenies, knowing that variety does delight.

Sed praecipue rerum ordo initio invertitur, etc.
So as we shall see a rule come in like a morris-dancer, as Aristotle places
many out of order.

Itaque ad illam perfectae methodi, etc.
So then, as we heard in a syllogism, that there was an inversion of the parts,
a superfluity, and a defect: so here in method, haec imperfectior forma non
solum detractis rebus mutila est vel superaditis rebus redundat, sed ordinis
sui quibusdam gradibus inversis praepostera est.

Quod Poeta facit, etc.
This crypsis is more often in Poets than in Orators, or History, though it be
used much in History: now populum docendum sibi proponit, i. belluam multorun
capitum, but indeed he deceives them, yet it is only for delight. This order
is very usual in Poetry, and very pleasant in a tale, or fables, because when
we read them we cannot rest quiet till we come to an end of them.

Sic (ut Homerus ait) Homerus Iliada disposuit.
Nec gemino bellum Trojanum orditur ab ano, etc.
He does not begin the Trojan war from twenty Eggs, in one of which Eggs Helena
was, and Castor and Pollux in another: Semper ad eventum festinat, etc. for in
the first book of his Iliads one would think that he brought in the history of
the ten years, but indeed thereby he takes occasion to bring in the history of
the years before So Virgil fetches Aeneas from Sicily, which is a little from
Carthage, etc.

Sic commici Poeta, etc.
For there every thing must seem to come by chance, not of purpose. Oratores
vero, etc. they refer all to victory: they are like Lawyers, and therefore
think they may lie at pleasure: therefore they will place their strongest
arguments first, that their Auditors may chew the cud upon them: and then they
put out their mean arguments in the middle, whilst their Auditors are
meditating on the first; and then at last by that time the Auditors have well
thought of the first, they bring out one or two strong ones more, to make their
Auditors believe that they in the middle were like to the first and last.

FINIS.
GRAMMATICAL NOTES.
THis we are to know, That God made all things for man, and at the beginning
for one man, for there was but one: but since the Fall, because all things
cannot come under one man's eye, immediately, therefore God has providded
Speech, to be an Hobson, or Carrier, between man and man; that thereby he might
see all things, and that so Gods Ordinance, of making all things for one man,
might still continue. Logic does act and bring the thing to my understanding
and afterward Speech is the carrier of it, therefore, it is necessary that
there should be a constant rule of speech, that one man might understand
another; but whereas these things, being uttered by Speech, are therefore hard
to be received, because they are inartificial Arguments: therefore God has
provided Two arts of Speech, one of propriety of Speech, and another of the
decking and sweetning of it. So that the Lord does here, even as Physicians use
to do with their Patients, to wit, when they have a bitter Potion to give, they
use to sugar the top of the Pot wherein it is. So that Grammar may be compared
to a plain Garment wtithout welt or guard, or it is like a grave Citizen.
Rhetoric may be compared to the lace, or jags on the garment, and is like a
fine Courtier: Poetry may be compared to some fine cut, and is a Courtier --
going on his feet: so that according to the double use of Speech it is divided
into two parts: the first whereof is Grammar.

The name Grammatica is a Greek word, which therefore we see was first named of
the Grecians, and is derived of (...) a letter, of (...) a line of (...) which
signifies, (1) to engrave seu insculpo, and hence comes our English word,
ingrave: (2) (...) signifies to write, because, the first writing was by
Hieroglyphics, for at the first they used Hieroglyphics, making the images of
Birds or Beasts, as an Horse for swiftness, a Bear or Lion for strength: a
Lions head and a Ring in it they use still over men's doors, signifying thereby
watchfulness. For in Philosophy, we find that a Lion sleeps with open eyes,
and this was the first kind of writing: The second was in wax Tables, or Tables
laid over with wax, where they have a style made of steel, (and our English
word steel comes of stilus) and hence also stilus signifies a pen; Now they
wrote in these, by lifting up the wax, and so was the letter made: hence came
exarare to signify to write, i e. to plow up, as they did the wax, and so shut
up the Tables; and these, as Tully speaks, had every one his letter-carrier
to his Friend, and hence came letter-carriers, or tabellarii, and the Friend
had keys to open the ^ables, and so read the letters: The next kind of writing
was in the rind of the bark of a Beech, and there thy wrote with ink, and
rolled them up. Now this rind was like unto parchment, and thence came liber,
(which is properly that rind) to signify a Book; and our English word Book
comes of that word Beech, Buck, and to this day most of that which we call
Beech, is called Buckmast. Now concerning the invention of ink, which was here
first used, we read not of it; only this, that some call it atramentum
sutorium, and therefore it seems they learned to make it by Cobblers and Dyers.
The next kind of writing was in Parchment made of Sheep skins and Goat skins,
which was invented in Phrygia, at Pergamus in Troy, and thence came Pergamena,
to signify Parchment. The last kind of writing was in Papyr, which was first
invented in Egypt which was made of a rush, called Papyros, hence came it to be
named Papyrus, and Papyr in English: hence is (...) of biblos that rush.

Printing was invented a great while after any of these, not past some 300
years ago; it was invented at Gaud in Picardy, where there was a Knight that
had his Seal fell into his ink as he was writing a letter, and he taking it up
something nimbly for foiling his fingers let it fall in again, and afterward
lying on the papyr, there it left the print of the letters, and he seeing that,
did by that means invent Printing: and thus much for (...). From that comes
(...) a line, and before Moses we know there was no writing but only by
Hierogliphicks, so that lines are not so ancient as hieroglyphics, except we
mean such lines as we write from one side of the papyr to the other: Now for
writing by letters, Moses was the first, or rather God, as we may well think,
seeing he has brought all sounds to so few letters; though Josephus makes
mention of two pillars that were before Moses, wherein were written the
principles of the Mathematics, and that he saw one of them, yet I think he was
either deceived, or they were after Moses, and hactenus of (...).

Now follows (...) litera, for every letter has lines except one, which has
only one, and that is (jod) which signifies a space because it leaves out a
space: And hence is Grammatica a Greek word, understand (...), and it will be a
literal art, or the art of letters, because their language which they were to
learn being natural unto them, they needed not to go any further than to learn
their letters and to spell them, so they called it Grammatica literaria: as if
the whole art of Grammar consisted only in the knowledge of letters. So that
this name is as much too strait for the thing, as a Child's shoo is for Hercules
foot; but yet we knowing the meaning of the name, may still keep it, knowing
that was the error of them which gave it, not of those who shall afterward
hold it. Grammatica is too strait, for the letters are the least part of
Etymology; and truly, if we look at the names of all Arts, we shall find that
they were named before they were perfected, as Dialectiea, coloquor: an
adjunct. Rhetorica, a fluent Speech,

Now this Art of Grammar is but one in nature, for at the beginning there was
but one Speech, (as but one man) till an hundred years after the flood. Again,
Speech is but one, in regard of the faculty, and also in regard of man; so that
all the languages in the world are but as so many idioms of the same Grammar,
and not diverse Grammers; for one definition of Grammar, and one distribution;
one definition of vox, and one distribution of vox, numeri and sive numero
serves to them all: And as in Greek those several Dialects do not make several
Grammers, but only diverse idioms; so do all languages whatsoever make several
idioms, not several Grammers. Now this variety of languages came by the
building of Babel, for whereas they built a Tower, both that might be famous
for memory, and understanding that God would destroy the World either by Fire,
or Water, therefore thus in their foolish conceits, they went about to prevent
the power of God; first laying brick, and using slime for mortar to prevent
fire, and a -- of Reed and Palm Tree leaves, which are very broad and like a
target, which are there to be seen until this day, that they might swim upon
the -- made of this Reed: And Herodotus writes that there were eight Ascents
in it, and the two lowermost were Furlonges high, so that if the rest were so,
it was a mile high; and on the top (he says) there was a Temple built, which
was dedicated to Jupiter Belus, Son of Nimrod: This Tower they built, being
loath to disperse themselves abroad over the face of the earth, as they were
commanded Genesis the first, to replenish the earth: therefore it pleased God
to work that Confusion of Tongues among them to sever them, and so make
diversity of Countries; for according to their Tongues commonly Countries are
severed. Of these Tongues were first the Mother Tongue, then the deducts from
it; the mother Tongue is Hebrew, first, in respect of its self, for it is most
natural, for there is not any natural notion, but it has its natural word.
Again, in Hebrew are the fewest words and yet signify the most things. Again,
it is plain by the Scriptures, for the History, in Genesis shows, that the
words are Hebrew words, as Adam HEvah: But objection, Why might not God have
given them from the Du^ch's? No, for there is no Dutch name so effectual as the
Hebrew names be; so the Lord called the Heavens Shammajim, and there is no name
in the world that signifies so; and the Sea Jam, there is no tongue that does
term it so from the same reason, and until the building of Babylon, their names
were Hebrew names, and the Towns which they built before Babylon, had also
Hebrew names; therefore, that Speech was the first.

We have heard the reason of this name Grammatica, which is the definitum, now
follows the definition of it: i. e. Ars generalis in sermon, and so Grammar
is Ars been loquendi. First, he calls it Ars, for that which is, and is for
an end, must have a constant rule to guide man to that end. From this genus
many questions may arise; as, How can Speech be eternal, seeing it is proper to
man? Here we are to know that Speech is a Creature of God, and therefore 'twas
in his eternal decree, as all other things: and though it be true that there
was but one Tongue from the beginning of the World till the destruction of
Babel, yet in Gods decree all the rest are eternal, and so is the rule of
Speech, and they were in the eternal notion of God. Again, their words do vary
continually, therefore they were not eternal; for if one that died 500 years
ago were now alive, and should speak, we could not understand him. Answ. Though
it be true that words by reason of many sounds do daily change, yet the rule is
eternal; though they be not spoken from eternal, yet the variety of Speech does
not change the rule of Grammar. as in reason, this axiom homo est animal was
true before homo was, and will be for ever: So in Grammar is the rule eternal,
as likewise is the rule of generation and corruption eternal, and ever true and
the same, though men daily be generated and corrupted; so is Grammers rule
external, though, etc. and it is because God would show his mighty power and
wisdom, that there are as many several Grammers, as there are several ages, and
more too; and there is nothing more wonderful under heaven then to consider the
great variety o^ ^^ands and colors, and complexions of things, which all are
from their contrary forms.

Ars.
In Latin some think the word comes from artus a s^new, others of arx a tower,
ab arcendo; and both w^ll well agree to our purpose, for artus a sinew, we know
the strength of those things that have sinews li^th in them, yet they are
stronger then the bones, for the bones by reason of their hardness will break,
w^ereas sinews will rather give back, and bend, and are more tough: So the
rules of art are most strong an^ sinewy. If we derive the word from arx a
tower, it my be very well so, for as there is both great strength and much
beauty, both in the matter and form, so the rules of Grammar are most strong,
and make a most sweet harmony.

Generalis.
Because though it be not everywhere, as Logic is, yet it may be; now Logic
is everywhere, because every thing was made for man; therefore he must have an
eye to see every thing, for otherwise he could not use them aright. But
Grammar, because when I see a thing by Logic, I may keep it to my self,
therefore it is general only (...) secundum quid, therefore it is taught after
Logic. Again, wheresoever there is Grammar, there is also Logic; where there
is Logic, there is not always Grammar, for Logic may be only in mente,
therefore it is more general.

Orationis.
This general art of Speech is twofold, both Grammar and Rhetoric; but the
difference is this, that Grammar carries the matter in a budget neither too
big nor too little, like one of these Irishmen with Breeches without pockets.
Rhetorica carries it in a fine bag full of laces, yet not altogether full, for
there are more words then matter; therefore both Grammar, Rhetoric, and Poetry
are all equally general for subject, but not for use. For Grammers use is
before the use of them, and may be without them even as a garment may be
without a lace or jag. But here by the way, because these are general Arts,
therefore they have no proper subject, but their use may be everywhere, and
therefore Keckerman, whilst he makes Rhetoric a special art, tells me he
never knew the right distribution of the arts, for it is the art of Speech, and
that may be everywhere, therefore Rhetoric is general and may be used in any
thing; therefore Tropes upon due consideration may be used in any art. Now if
it be demanded, whether it be better to use Grammar, or Rhetoric in teaching
of Children? I Answ. Grammar is better, 1. Because it is more general than
Rhetoric: 2. Because it keeps us more close to the matter, which is a very
good thing in teaching; yet not withstanding sometime Rhetoric is better,
because it delivers the proper word together with some sweetness, for Tropes do
arise from some arguments in Logic; so that we cannot condemn Rhetoric,
neither is it possible we should always use Grammar, seeing there be many more
things then proper names; for God making all things, and Man being to name
them, and had not names sufficient for them: therefore for want of words, gave
the same name to diverse things by Tropes; and therefore Talaeus says
necessitas tropum genuit: Yet at the beginning one thing had but one name, but
afterward the same word came to signify many things, as we see in Hebrew,
where one word signifies twenty things, and but one properly and
Grammatically, and all the rest Tropically. And I find that words are used
improperly these ways: First, in respect of the Trope: Secondly, when we
deliver the same things, in diverse languages, there they use diverse phrases,
which must be compared together, as (...) is good in Greek, in Latin it is to
make Children, which is not usual. Now if you will know whether is better,
bring them to Logic, and there see which phrase is more special, that is to be
preferred: to make it general to the efficient cause in general, to beget or
procreate Children is proper to the first modus of the efficient, therefore it
is the better phrase. So vaccas agere in English is to drive Kine, though they
say in some parts, do the Kine into the field: And there is another kind of
Trope, which is caused by reason of the phrase; therefore one that teaches
young Scholars must have a special care, That first his Scholar knwo the nature
of the thing, and then the name of it, which stands by this rule, v^x est nota
qua unumquodque vocatur, and by this means we shall teach them, first what
every word signifies in propriety, and then the thing as it is named in other
tongues, and then the phrase, and then compare one phrase with another, and
thus by the way we shall estimate which phrase in every language stands with
best reason. As that of (...), and in English to beget Children, where to beget
is peculiar to nature, and belongs to those things which have only a
vegetative life, and therefore our English phrase is better: So (...) is to put
to the hand, and in Latin is agreed, to put to the foot, or to go to, which is
more general, therefore the Greek phrase is better: So in English we say to go
to, and to go in hand with, which phrase neither the Greeks nor the Latins
have. It is a Metaphor fetched from the motion of the hand, which is the chief
organ of motion, and is as much as I should say, put our hands to, and this is
more special; so that bring them to Logic and ^here you shall be able to judge
which phrase in every language is best; and so consequently which Tongue is
best. And this way I can prove our English best, except the Hebrew: For those
that invented the Greek Tongue, were great Scholars, and were very good
Rhetoricians, and so made their Speech more eloquent, whereas our inventors of
English were not so.

Been
Is here an adverb joined to the verb to show his signification, and is not
another word from loqui, and the reason of it is this, a man may loqui, but not
been loqui, as bonus vinum was as good as their Wine, but not good Grammar; as
a man may dispute sophistically or ignorantly, and so break the rule of Logic:
so likewise he may male loqui and break the rule of Grammar. Again, since the
Fall of man as there is a bona and a mala ratio, so there is a been and male
loqui, and Grammar gives not precepts of that male loqui which was attracted by
sin, but only of that been loqui which is a Creature of God. Object. But many
have thought that this been is nothing but that (...) in the definition of art
in general, and therefore should not be repeated in every special art. Answ.
But they are to know, since the Fall, as we said before, there is a been and
male loqui, and art gives precept only to the been loqui, and therefore been
must be added for distinction sake: Again, they confess themselves, That been
in the definition of ars, is the same that expedite and that is an habit in
man, whereas this been is essential unto Grammar as it is an art: Again, here
been is joined with the form not with the genus, and therefore is another genus
which is more special, over and above that which was before; for so we are to
understand that the species contain more in them than the genus does: Now for
those who to avoid been will put more words into the definition, let them know
that into how many words they divide the form, into so many parts they cut it;
which ought not to be, because the form is but one Argument. Now it is a great
question among many Scholars which language was the first (and that was indeed
the Hebrew) Goropius would have the Dutch to be the first, and he argues for
it subtily, and has many notations of words, as fast backwards is staf,
because when we have a staff, we stand fast: so litera is of let and er which
signifies to wander, because when we write we let our Pen wander about.

Been loquendi.
Here because the form is not easily found out, and when it is found out, we
have not one word to express it in, therefore we are to imagine the form to be
included in this Gerund in di: for because we have not a word to deliver the
form in, hence we are fain to take the next argument to forma, which is finis
and include it in that: and we are to know that in very deed every precept is a
member of that Art whereof it is a precept, so that every precept has a
certain vigor, or life, or soul as it were, which soul taken up from all the
precept, is the form of the Art. And again, howsoever it may be objected that
Grammar is not in every thing (for many things have no names) and so is not a
general Art, yet the work of Grammar is in every thing: So also though man only
can speak, yet Grammers work is general, and so we are to understand it, to
answer in proportion to Logic, for as I see every thing with my eye of reason,
so it is requisite that after I have received it, I should carry every thing to
another, and that I must do by Grammar: and Grammar has a double reference,
one in regard of him that speaks, and another in regard of the thing he speaks
of, or the matter in hand. i e. We that here are to look out at the thing he
speaks, and his meaning: and in very deed ens a primo is Gods creature, and
has every Art in it: so that though Grammar, that is speech, is proper to man,
yet Grammers work is in every thing: the reason is this, Every thing in nature
is distinct, and I apprehend them so with my Logic; and they being so, must
needs have distinct names, otherwise I cannot carry them to others distinctly
and as they are. So that Grammar is general, (...), for so Adam by seeing into
the nature of every Creature, could see their names, though we cannot do it: so
he named the fire Esh, because of the noise it makes in green wood: so water
maiim which signifies quid, that is the essence, for so Thales thought that
every thing was made of water: and in the second verse of the first Chapter of
Genesis, it is said, The Spirit of God moved upon the waters, where water is
put for the first matter: so we call it in Latin aqua quasi a qua the efficient
cause: so he called darkness lajil which signifies rest, because it is the
time of rest: So God called the day jam because of the jumbling noise that is
made in it: so the earth erets from rashat tero to ware: and there is no name
but it has a reason of it, and that Logic tells me when it handled notatio,
for ens a primo has that in it which is in every general Art.

Loquendi
Loqui and dicere signify the same thing, but come to be distinguished thus,
because that Rhetoric to which dicere does belong, was seen most especially in
pleading before Judges, hence they gave it that name dicere; which comes of
dico, and dico comes of the Greek word (...), which signifies the decision of
a Controversy; and (...) of (...) bifariam, or as some say (...) divido, which
may well be, because in pleading of controversies, they divide their speeches.
Loquendi, not Ars Scribendi, for if they take it for the Orthographie of a word
it is accidental; neither are the letters the same in every tongue, therefore
not the same writing of them: Again, the letters may be changed, though not
well, for the Hebrew letters are given with great reason, and the other are
taken from them: if they take writing as general as speaking, it is the same
with Grammar: now the cause of it was this, Man receives into his
understanding the notions of things, these notions are expressed and made known
from him to another man by words, now because man was not to live always,
neither by reason of the distance of place could speak unto every one, hence
was the necessity of writing.

Been.
For a man may loqui and yet not been loqui, i. e. according to bona locutio,
whereof Grammar gives precepts: but he that speaks according to the rule of
Grammar, whether he know he does so or no, it is no matter, he does been loqui,
i. e. he speaks such a speech as is pure according to the custom of the
place where the speech is spoken: for in nature there is great variety of
speech by reason of the heat and cold in men, which is according to the place
wherein they are: hence many consonants in Dutch and our English tongue; so
thar variety of sounds is not always from the party named, but the party
naming: and he that has more heat, intentionally is more apt to pronounce,
hence Englishmen are almost to learn any tongue.

Id autem Latinis Latin.
Here is a Commoration where he comes into the Latin Grammar, as if he should
say, in Latin after the Latin manner: for there are not so many Grammers as
there are kinds of Speech, but it is as if he should say, Grammar is either the
Latin, Greek, or Hebrew Grammar; which is a distribution of the adjunct into
the subjects: for as there is but one Greek Grammar, yet many dialects: so the
several Grammers are but so many several dialects or idioms of the general
Grammar.

Parts Grammaticae qua sunt Etymologia and Syntaxis.
Here is a copulative axiom, and the Arguments are Grammatica the integrum,
and Etymologia and Syntaxis the membra, which are yoaked together. There are
two parts of Grammar, first, because two of Logic: for if Grammar be the
carrier of Logic betwixtmen, then it must be answerable to Logic to carry the
simples and composit; for otherwise we shall not carry well. Again secondly,
Speech is a garment to cloth our reason, and as we would think a Tailor a fool
that should make a garment with one sleeve for him that has two arms: so for
Grammar, if we should make it with one sleeve to cover Logic that has two
arms. Et contra as we count that Tailor an idiot, that makes many sleeves for
him that has but two arms; so for him that makes many parts of Grammar to
cloth Logic that has but two parts; though now a days I know not how many
sleeves and hang-bys they make. For Orthography and Prosody they are not part
of Grammar, but common adjuncts, and run through whole Grammar as blood through
the whole body.

Etymologia.
Comes of (...) verus (...) sermo, i. e. veriloqutio, and in very deed
according to the notation it belongs rather to Logic than to Grammar, for it
is nothing else but notatio, and so the Grammarians use to give examples, as
lepus from the adjunct, quafi levipes, but the Grammarians, it being before
used in Logic, brought it into Grammar and so use has received it; even as
some will have Dialectica to come of (...) colloquor, and so belong to Grammar.

The reason of this distribution is for that every speech consists of words,
for that as Syntax answers to judgment, so Etymology to invention: the
occasion of it was this, In ancient time when Grammar was first invented in
Greece, it was only observed in letters and syllables; the next observation
among the Greeks, was to look at the notation and reason of words, and so came
to call that part of Grammar Etymology, and afterward the Grecians found out
the whole Art of Grammar before any other Nations.

Syntaxis.
Comes of (...) consuo or construo: because in the beginning they laid the
words together according to the matter, so they did in Greek and Hebrew till
the Orators took that liberty to them to change: and because as Logic lays
things together; so does Syntax utter them, if Grammar be right it must tie
nothing together but that which Logic does tie: Hence is Logic before Grammar
in genesi, but Grammar before Logic in analysi, so is Grammar before Rhetoric
in genesi, but Rhetoric before Grammar in analysi: hence do we remove the
Rhetoric to see the Grammar and Logic in analysi.

Etym logia est prima pars Grammaticae, quae vocum singularum proprietates
interpretatur.
This definition is not so good as if he had said est de voce, or praecipit de
voce, though praecipere be too large, for it is in Art. And Etymology does
interpretari not only the properties of words, but also letters, and fyllables,
which are the causes of words.

Est prima pars.
Here prima and pars are Logical terms, therefore not genus to etymologia. The
word interpretari belongs to analysis, and is all one with it. Etymologia
ergo est prima pars Grammaticae, quae est de voce, here is a definition ab
integro and subjecto.

Etymologia est.
If there be vox, then there is etymologia, but there is vox. Ergo.

Prima pars.
For there is a simple consideration of a thing therefore there must be a
simple consideration of the name of a thing, whereof etymoligia must give
precept. It is prima because I must consider a word, first simply in its own
nature before I join him with another.

De voce.
So that the subject of Etymology is vox (oration, and sermo, belong properly to
Syntax) as argumentum of invention, and Grammar goes no farther then vox: so
that all we shall hear of in this part of Grammar is of a word alone. Hence not
the thing chest, but the name chest is a noune: for the three general Arts all
take their notions from ens, and yet ens it self may belong to Physics. Logic
takes notion of it as it has causes, effects, subjects, and adjuncts: Grammar
as it does notify it by its name to another. Physic as it consists of
principles. And for that distinction of vox to be primae or secundae
intentionis, it is a toy: as animael say they, is primae intentionis genus
secundae. But I would ask them is animal and genus the same thing? No, for they
belong to diverse Arts: And genus in his own Art is as well primae intentionis
as animal is, and it is a mere fallacia accidentis.

De voce.
Simplici not de vocibus. And for one word to be laid to another word is but
accidental to it, so that Syntax does not handle vox. He says vox, not dictio,
though sometimes they be the same, yet it is dictio, as Rhetoric takes the
notion of it; and here we may note two things, namely that first when we look
at, or consider a thing Grammatically, we first give it a vox that is a name,
for that is the most simple consideration of a thing. Secondly, It is not only
vox which is spoken, but which is written also.

Vox est nota qua unumqu^dque vocatur.
Some call it dictio, some vocabulum, but vox is best, because it names the
thing from his special use, a vocando.

Nota.
Here nota is not general to vox, for nota is a Logical term, and belongs to
adjunct, so that this definition is from the subject and the conjugate, and he
means (as if he should say) vox is that whereby notice of the thing is given
us. It is nota; here he does not consider vox as it is a quality in man
proceeding from such causes, but as it does notify the thing whereof it is
vox: So our eye of reason, as it is a part of man, and faculty of the soul,
belongs to Physics, as vox does: but as it does act for that Eupraxie, for
which it was made, so it belongs to Logic. In that he calls it nota, we see
it is another thing than the thing it self whereof it is a note, and vox is
nota, i. e. a notifying and making known the apprehension of man's mind, even as
wax having the picture of the seal is to the seal it self: and (...) was man to
name things. And here is a fallacy very useful, to say this or that is a true
speech, when it is not the speech in property, but the Logic clothed in the
speech, that is true or false.

Vnumquodque.
For Grammar is a general Art. Ergo, ens is his subject more remote, so that
here he does but specialize ens: so that vox is but the subject of Grammar more
special, unumquodque more general: and as affectio is to argumentum, so is
vocatio to the thing called: so also that which was the aliquid in argumentum,
as Grammar takes his notion of it, is unumquodque: And that definition of
nomen, of a thing that may be seen, felt, heard, or understood, is erroneous;
for I can see, feel, or understand a thing, and yet name it not. But does res
belong to Grammar? No, but things attending ens, for otherwise ars in general
is about ens, and words are terms given unto things, so their doctrine must be
general. So that every thing has its name, which notatio in Logic shows.

Again, Here we may see that verbs, adverbs, and conjunctions are voces; and
hence we may see the definition of a Noune to be too general, and secondly,
their error in calling nomen not vox.

Vocatur.
Here I am told how this nota is used, which is for the calling of a thing, and
the naming of it; hence when we are asked what part of Speech such a thing is,
we are to know that the thing is no part of speech, but the name of it: so it
is fallacia divisionis, when they ask, what part of Speech a whole Speech is.

It is a great question which Scaliger in his Book, De causts linguae Latinae,
whether words be ex thesi, or ad placitum?

But for Compound words they are ex thesi, as first words also in propriety of
speech; for we know that speech is the creature of God, yea and that words
signify this or that thing, it is also from the providence of God: so God
taught Adam to name the Creatures: and so God wrought the Confusion of Tongues:
Now man was to name them, and God by man; because that speech was to be the
carrier betwixt man and man.

Again, Man was to be the Lords Steward over his Creatures, and therefore he
must know their names; and Adam did name things with reason, and according to
his apprehension, which we may see by men now adays that name things so, as,
according to their apprehension, they can give a reason thereof. So that words
are given with respect to the thing named, and the reason of the things named
is in the thing, so that words are not ad placitum; so we give to little things
little names, so in English things that are glib have their names run much upon
(l) or other semi-vowels: if greater things, then their names run upon grosser
letters.

Now the Art of Speech is ars bexe sermocinandi, for that is general both to
Grammar and Rhetoric. And the wisdom of God concerning Speech is double, pure,
and ornate, and these are in the things, which Rhetoric shows, in that there
is reason in every Trope, and figura teaches us to figurate the Speech as the
thing is; and if it be great, we give it a great name: if little, we give it a
little name.

And hence do arise the three styles of Tully, That for a lofty thing we have a
lofty style, for a mean thing a mean style, for a little thing a low style, and
that with good reason, for Speech is the garment of Reason, and therefore ought
not to be too little, or too great for it.

And for their Rules these Arts are eternal though changed by man, which is
(...), and distinguishes things by their names, and Rhetoric is the same to
all the world.

And so for Grammar, the Rule for variation is eternal, though the variation of
words be according to the variation of men, and this consists either in single
words, or in construction of more words, where always note, that as the word
governed does depend upon the word that governs it, so do the things.

Vox constat syllaba; syllaba constat litera; litera est ex sono individuo.
For sonus is the material cause of it, the form is from the figuration of it
with the instruments of the mouth: For the word litera some think it comes
from litteratura, and therefore write it with a double it, whereas it should be
with a single t; some think it comes of lineatura, and so of linea, from the
matter: some think it comes of litura a blot, which Scaliger believes not,
because it is from the destruction of it: but this reason is more witty than
sound, for man is called mortalis of his death, but I think it comes of litura
a blot, because when we set black upon white, we do as it were blot the white
paper: and so sometime bloting and writing are confounded.

Linea comes of linum, linen, made of flax, (because thread was the first thing
that was considered for a line) and not of lino, which signifies to blot out,
so as delinere is the same with delere.

Litera est vocalis aut consona.
The reason in nature is, because there are two principal sorts of the position
of the mouth: the first is when we make a sound without any more ado: the
second is, where there is a more special kind of the use of the Organs in the
mouth; which letters either make a complete sound in themselves, or an
incomplete; and even as in nature the first matter was incomplete, yet makes
things which are complete: so the Consonants, which in themselves are
incomplete, with vowels make syllables, which are complete.

This word vocalis signifies vocal, i. e. sounding of himself; for he needs
no other, though he be joined with another. Now for vocalis, they usually
define it litera quae per se syllabam potest efficere: this is a priore but not
generally true, for in our English tongue our w, oo, ee, never make a complete
sound, neither in Hebrew, and yet there they make a complete sound, though they
be not without a consonant.

Now for my own part, I would define a vowel to be litera quae completum sonum
edit, or quae plene sonat, or rather quae constat sono completo; but in Hebrew
I am content with Mr. Junius, qua movetur syllaba, for a vowel is in a
syllable, as the soul in a body, and as the soul moves it self and the body
also, so does a vowel move it self and the consonants also: and the Hebrews may
seem to have held the vowels to have been some spiritual thing, and therefore
did not figure them with characters or bodies, but with pricks only: and hence
at the first they wrote without pricks: and afterward when they used pricks,
they did not set them in the letters, neither do they always now, but above
and under the letter, because they would show that the soul does move all
parts, as if they should say, anima est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet
part: and as the Angels by the rule of Divinity, were made puncto temporis: so
the Hebricians thinking the vowels to be spirits, figured them out punctis:
also, because they thought spirits had not quantity. Vocalis is commonly
defined litera quae per se syllabam potest efficere.

Quae Syllabam.
This word syllaba has been often enough repeated before, and therefore needs
no repetition here again. Vocalis is litera, and litera is before a syllable in
nature, therefore this is a posteriori.

Per se.
This is not general, for in ab, eb, ib, ob, ub, these do not per se syllabam
efficere. Again, this potentia is not general at all times in use; for this
vowel, a, in this syllable ab, cannot make a full sound. And again, for per se,
in english our w, oo, ee, do never per se syllabam efficere; now from the
definition it follows that so many syllables so many vowels; now for
consonants the very name shows that they cannot make a complete and full
sound, and therefore they require a more special position of the mouth, for
their prolation: and hence is our order in writing a, b, c, d, not good; but
first setting the vowels and then the consonants, yet some have thought that
some liquids make a full sound, which is not true, for that they always have a
vowel going before them, as mut^s have ever a vowel coming after them: thus for
all Grammers do agree, but here is a Question, Whether a letter or a syllable
be brevis or longa? and in old time we know they used to write a longae with a
double aa, so in Greek * and o, e and o, only differ in time: but to Answer to
the Question, We must needs confess that the vowel is the motor, but yet a
short vowel by reason of the consonants joined with it may be made long and
contra, and therefore I think it more proper of a syllable than of a letter.
For thus I reason, One letter should have but one character, Ergo* yet we will
speak of them here. The reason therefore of length and shortness in speech is
this, The Lord has appointed speech to be the carrier from man to man,
therefore it must be such as will easily be received, therefore must be ordered
by time and tune: for as every act is ordered with time, so must speech be:
Again, little things are to have little names, therefore short names: great
things great names, ergo, long names: now for a semi-short, or the like, they
belong to Music and not to Grammar. Now in our short time we may be as long as
we will, as men when they are angry will be as short in the long, as at other
times they are in the short. Brevis is simplicis temporis, longa is duplicis;
that is, look as your short is, your long must be twice as much.

A Vowel is either diduct or contract, diduct is with the mouth drawn wide, and
that is either with a greater rictus, as a, or with a lesser as e and i: a is
first, for it is the first in nature, and it is the first letter that we speak,
though it have a greater yawning than either e or i: Now the lesser yawning was
common to both e and i, which shows the affinity betwixt them: hence did jed
in the Hebrew stand for both e and i, and they call them cosen vowels: so also
in Latin we write indifferently turrem or turrim. Contract is of the drawing
together of the mouth, for the form of the letter is from the form of the mouth
in the pronunciation of it. C^ntracta is either a poach-mouth, or a hens-tayl:
i e. either wide or round: now in a contract it is required first that the
mouth be drawn round: secondly, that as in a diduct the tongue was lifted up to
the palate: so here contrarily it should be pressed down; and it is o, or u,
and y. The difference of these is in a more full or lesser orb in the
pronouncing of them, and in Hebrew o and u, are usually set in letters, namely,
in vau, and this shows how they do coincidere, which is in use: so th s in
Greek is changed into us, in Latin, as papyros into papyrus: yet o is with a
more full orb, u with a more contract: and the figuration of the Latin letters
is from the Greek, and the Greek from the Hebrew: yet this is not always, but
there are some exceptions: For e in the Hebrew seems to be from the Assyrians,
so the single th in the Greek seems to be from the Assyrians: yet they might
have it from the frame of the mouth, but so it would be the same with u, and in
the Greek u is like half an o: now the o must have a full globe, and the tongue
is drawn into the solum; and this letter, if we mark, sounds more inwardly in
the mouth, whereas u and y make as it were a whistling through the lips, and so
sound through the lips: The Grecians o short, which is the same with camets
hatuph: the Greek long o is as two long oo: so in English we have our short o,
with o alone; and our long o sometimes with oa, as coal: sometimes with ow, or
owe: or more seldom with ou, as ought: but it were better if we had the Greek
o, or some other character: now for u, this has a more contract mouth for the
prolation of it, and seems to whistle through the lips; u also has the tongue
brought back in the mouth, and it sounds almost in the very opening of the
mouth: in Hebrew gibbuts sounds like u, or as we do in tu and the like:
Surech sounds as * in Greek, u is their u short, ov is their long u, and is
rather a vowel than a dipthong; for there is but one position of the mouth in
it.

Caetera desunt.

RHETORICAL NOTES.
CHAP. I.
Rhetorica.
THe name is of (...) fluo, as a stream does, but tropically it signifies to
speak fluently: the reason of this Art is, that Speech being the Carrier from
man to man, which is but a testimony, therefore not easily received, God has
therefore provided a kind of sugar, that thereby it might be the more easily
received: and Rhetoric is as honey to a bitter Potion, or lace to a garment.
It is

Ars,
Because it consists of Precepts fitted to an Eupraxy.

Dicendi.
It comes of Dico, which comes of (...) in Greek which signifies a decision
or determination of a Controversy, and belongs to ju isprud, so that dicere
is properly to plead in Courts or places of Justice; and because Rhetoric at
the first was in such places of most use, therefore is this word given unto it.
which in propriety is too strait for the Art to which it is given: but because
Use has received it, we are content with it, knowing that it was the error of
them who first gave it, not of those who afterward used it.

Been.
This Been is not the same with that in the definitiof ars, for that in ars is
whereby a man does a thing expedite, or ex habitu, and is not in Art, but in
Homine; but now this been dicere, or been loqui, or the like, is a been dicere,
or been loqui beyond that in the definition of ars, for the species is beyond
the genus, by a form, which Ramus teaches in the definition of forma: but the
reason why been is put in the definition of every Art, is because every
Creature of God, by reason of our sin, is made evil unto us and obscured, so
there is good or bad: so Speech is good or bad: and the Art takes hold only of
that which is good. For it is the wisdom of God, and therefore for difference
sake it is requisite that been should come under into the definition of every
Art. And here it is an adverb joined to this verb, to show this thing that is
the good function of this action been dicere. So he does been dicere which
uses word in tempore, and he does male dicere, which uses them intempestive.

Cujus virtus.
Here he does commorari, to show the effects of Rhetoric, and indeed so every
art has great effects being wisely used.

Ideoque Plato.
Now Plato being an honest man in Greece, and those that were called Sophistae,
abusing this Art, and making the common people by it believe, That God was
evil, and truth falsehood: he was angry with them, and so called it The Art of
Cookery, of Flattery, of Painting, of Enchanting: though indeed it was by the
fallacies of the Arguments in Logic: and thereupon that name Sophistae, which
before was a name of honor, became afterward a name of reproach. Now (as I
said before) it was not Rhetoric, but false reason of Logic; only the
Rhetoric set a gloss upon it, and these names are as it Plato should say,
though this be a kind of Music which in it self is good, yet thus it ought not
to be used, but is unneedful, and therefore he calls it a kind of sauce, and
painting out of a thing: or as if he should say, a cup of poison fweetned with
honey. And Aristotle following his Master Plato, said it was in a good
Commonwealth unneedful: but indeed Rhetoric is a kind of Music, which is
good and needful. The Romans of long time would not admit of Rhetoric, and
among the Turks I think that they will never receive it: and indeed rude
people, yea, and all kind of people are easily deceived by Rhetoric; not in
regard of judgment, but of the affection of love, which embraces it, and
voluptas is the object of affection. Now indeed here lies the fallacy, in that
a Speech being seasoned with Rhetoric, passes by the understanding, and so
the Will takes hold of it, and whilst the Will does hastily embrace it, the
reason cannot examine it: and so in Tropes, it is respected of Rhetoricians to
bring sounding words to tickle the ear, but the understanding is not well
pleased, because it does not understand it: and Rhetoric is the art of
affection as it sweetneth the speech, for the affection of love is so greedy of
it that it will not let the understanding take it, therefore Rhetoric is said
to be the art of affection, Grammar of things to be understood; but this is
nothing, for they are both of Speech and so are Arts to entertain bonum.

Now for the Turks, I think they will never embrace it, for they are as God's
rods to whip his Christians withal. We have already heard what Rhetoric is:
now follows the distribution; and that is into Elocution and Pronunciation:
for according to the double act of this art must this art be distributed, for
we have already heard that Speech is God's Creature given unto man to be a
Carrier from man to man; and that because one man's eye cannot see all things,
which being only a bare testimony, is not easily received, and therefore must
be sugared or sauced, that it may be more sweet and pleasant, and also more
evident. Now Speech is adorned by speech, or by gesture, for though Speech be
considered in gesture, yet not the Speech properly, but the sound or tenor of
it: For in that Oration, where both speech and gesture are answerable one to
another, that is most plain, and takes the most effect in the hearts of the
hearers: and gesture is a kind of dicere, and therefore when they use pleading
in Courts, they use gesture, that there may be a more pleasant dicere
consisting of these two parts: so that Speech is adorned either with speech or
gesture. The First of these is called Elocutio of eloquor, which though for
notation it be the same with pronunciatio, yet in definition and in use they
are distinct. This is first because elocutio may be without pronunciatio, as
are Tully's and Demosthenes his Orations: and secondly, Pronunciatio may be
improperly of that which is merely Grammatical; therefore elocutio must go
before, so that according to the double sweetning of Speech must Rhetoric have
these two parts.

Elocutio est exornatio.
Here exornatio is not a genus to elecutio, therefore I define elocutio to be
prima pars Rhetorica, de exornatione orationis.

Est exornatio.
We know that the garment is one thing, and the cut another, so that Grammar
and Rhetoric are distinct Arts; and we may easily discern between them: For I
may compare Grammar to plain dealing, or to one that speaks plainly: and
Rhetoric is one that is eloquent, or as it were one that sets jewels or pearls
in Grammar, for the making it the more evident, to be received more easily.

Orationis.
Oration is properly the subject of Grammar, as ratio is of Logic. But because
Rhetoric also is the Art of Speech as well as Grammar, therefore mediately, or
at the second hand oration comes to be the subject of Rhetoric: namely, as this
oration is adorned with tropes and figures. Hence it follows that Rhetoric is
a general Art, because his subject oration is general: yea, as general as
Grammar. For howbeit in precept it be taught after it, yet for use the one is
not where the other may not be; neither is it after Grammar for subject or
common use, but only in a kind of precedence of doctrine, even as Logic is
before Grammar, only because if we use Grammar which is the latter, Logick's
use must be the former; as oration should not be before Ratio. Now because
Rhetoric is a general Art, hence it follows, that it may be used in any art,
if so be we have not a word without a trope, that is so usually and familiarly
known, as the tropical word is: or if it be not of so great use as the tropical
word is: for tropes do arise from the arguments in Logic; so that they do not
only set a luster or resplendency upon the word used, but also show the
argument from whence it is drawn. Which thing if Keckerman had well considered,
he would not have found fault with Ramus for using a trope in that word
disserere, both because Rhetoric is general, and secondly, because that word
disserere is of a thousand times more use then any other word.

Object. But Rhetoric says he, is an Art only of the Affection, and not of
the Understanding?

Answ. So I can say of Grammar, for only Logic is that which my understanding
takes hold of: and oration is to the ear, yet also to the understanding, as it
carries the reason with it. Now indeed Rhetoric slips down more speedily than
Grammar does to the affections, and is more volupe: and voluptas as it tends
to bonum, is the object of affection. And so these Sophistae of Greece, when
they would deceive their Auditors, did so adorn their speech, as that it would
move so speedily to the affections, that the understanding could not examine
it: and thence it is, that this Art has been most abused, of any art, and of
least request. For it is of the nature of Music, that it steals away the
affections from that where about they ought to be occupied.

Eaque perse plurimum potest.
This is a rule of propriety, for it agrees only to this part of this art, and
not any other part whatsoever of any other art: so we know invention is not of
any force without judgment, but is seen only in judgment. So for Etymology
and Syntax in Grammar; but elocutio can do much by it self without
pronunciatio. Now the true reason of this propriety is this, because there may
be exornatio orationis which is written, as there is pronouncing: and scriptio
orationis may be without the pronunciatio of it: for elocutio is orationis, but
pronunciatio is oris, and there may be oration where there is not os, but not
contra.

Vt in Curione, qui.
Here he does commorari upon the commendation of this propriety; which he
illustrateth a specie of Curio, who was a Roman, that had very pleasant, and
eloquent words, but his pronunciation was very mean, hence his elocutio was
commendable, but not his pronunciatio, for there he was maxim nudus, though
for eloqution he was orator optimis proximus numeratus.

CHAP. II.
Elocutio est Tropus aut figura.
HEre Elocutio is not a genus to Tropus and Figura, but is used tropically by a
metonymy of the subject for the adjunct. Therefore I had rather say, Ornamentum
or exornatio orationis, est Tropus aut Figura: and by that means give them
their genus. Here exornatio orationis is a definition it self, and therefore
cannot be defined, for there cannot be a definition of a definition: therefore
I do not define exornatio orationis, but only distribute it into Tropes and
Figures.

Now for the demonstration of this distribution. We have already seen that
Rhetoric is an Ornament of Speech, therefore must run along answerably, with
it, therefore distribute it according to it, therefore a Speech is either of
one word alone, or more together: as if he should say, Rhetoric must adorn
Etymology and Syntax: so that as Tropus is to Etymology, so is figura to Syntax.

Tropus est Elocutio.
I would define it thus, Tropus est ornamentum orationis, etc. Or, Tropus est,
quo verbum, etc.

Tropus of (...), because words that are tropical are turned from that which
they naturally signify, to that which they do not naturally signify. It is
Ornamentum, because besides its luster, it carries an argument with it.
Orationis, because it is only in oratione; and is in it as a jewel or jem is in
a Ring; and here the art lies in the word.

Qua Verbum.
He uses verbum rather than nomen, because nomen properly signifies that part
of Speech which is declined with gender and case, though for notation it comes
of novimen, of novimus, of novi, of nosco, because we know things by their
names. But verbum properly is as general as vox, and so it is here taken, but
by a synechdochy of the genus for the species is put for a verb. Again, Dicti
has more ambiguity with it than verbum, and vox is peculiar to Grammar. Again,
not only nomina but verba are also tropical. Again, Verbum in a Sentence is the
chief word, for it is vinculum, so that there can be no Sentence without it,
therefore used with good reason.

Verbum immutatur.
Here is a metonymy of the subject for the adjunct, for the word is not
changed, but only the use or signification of it.

A native significatione.
That is a Grammatica, or propria significatione: though it be not always so
at the first hand: for sometimes words are changed from one tropical
signification to another tropical signification: and there they are firstly
from the other tropical signification, and a natia a significatione at the
second hand.

In aliam
Not quamlibet, but such an one as shall be according to Logic; as that which
properly signifies a cause, may tropically signify the effect, aut contra:
and so of the rest of the Argumens which argue one another. [In aliam,] i. e.
into such an one as use has brought up that it may be put for.

Tropus vero Aristoteli.
Here he does commorari about the commendation of a Trope, his Argument is a
contrario, as if he should say, If it be so pleasant when it is abused, much
more when it is rightly used.

Ideoque Platonis oration.
Plate had two Scholars, Aristotle and Zenocrates: Aristotle was of a quick
wit, and therefore Plato said, He needed a bridle for him: Zenocrates was more
dull, but of a greater judgment; therefore he said, He wanted a spur for him.
Now Plato left his School to Zenocrates, which made Aristotle malign at him,
and upbraid him with his faults: and among the rest he challenges him with
Tropes, which is a good fault; though truth it is that proper words are better
even in an Oration, if they can be so conveniently had: though afterward
Aristotle commended Tropes, if they were pleasant and not far fetched from home.

Et certe Tropum.
Here he sets down the procreant and conservant cause of a Trope; and for
necessity, though Grammar be as large as Logic, yea, as large as our thoughts;
yet at the first it was not: yea, they used to say, The heart cannot comprehend
her own thoughts: and again, because things at the first were so many, that
they could not readily give the proper name of every thing, hence arose Tropes:
afterward these Tropes were sweet and pleasant, and therefore they would let
them go no more.

Nam ut vest is frigoris, etc.
Man at first needed not clothes, but now by reason of sin (the temper of his
body, and external cold together cause cold) he needs clothes which he uses
not only for heat, but also for ornament. So for Tropes though necessity
brought them in, yet decency does hold them.

Delectat autem ideo, etc.
Because it is witty to let pass those things which are before our feet.
Secondly, Because our cogitation is refreshed by them: for variety delights,
as there is in Tropes, and even as if we see Speech in his holy day garment.

Haec igitur prima sunt.
These are the first sauses and remedies to make Speech look red and white.

Sedtamen verecund. etc.
Here is a propriety, a Trope must be bash^ul and shamefac't, not brought in by
another, or come in rushing perforce, but gentle and led by the hand, or I pray
you ceme in: Now to all kinf of Tropes there be certain general affections; and
those are either in one word alone, or in the continuance of more words
together: Those which are in one word alone, are either such as are too hard
and harsh; or too bold and proud, such as are pulled in by the ears and are
more sausy: now these are general affections of Tropes; and the reason of them
is this, We have heard what a Trope is, namely, where a word is changed from
his natural signification into another: now because that for want of words we
cannot readily give a fit word that is tropical, therefore we are forced to
bring them in more harshly sometimes and more proudly: now that which is more
harsh, is called (...), abusio tropi, which comes of (...) abutor; that is, a
word which is abused more unkindly, or a word hardly entertained: it is called
of the Grammarians (...), of (...) and (...).

Tunc ego, etc.
If I might only hope for this grief: here is an harsh Trope; for Spes is
expectatio boni; and metus or tim^r expectatio mali; so that here is either a
synechdochy, or a catachrestical Ironie. Now, for Hyperbole, that has no
affinity with catachresis, for an hyperboly is very usual and commendable,
neither is there any harshnesse in it, but it is a little too proud: but
catachresis is harsh, and not used but of Poets only; not of Orators, at
least, very seldom.

Gladium vagina, etc.
This is also harsh; for we rather say, Vagina and gladio vacua, than gladius
est vagina vacuus: Vacuum here is a metaphour, h. e. (exutum.)

Hyperbole est audacia tropi.
Of (...) to be carried above: and this affection signifies that for which it
was fetched very kindly, but proudly, and so as it does inhaunch and increase
the matter to very good purpose: and this affection is very commenadble and
usual especially in Scripture: Meiosis, diminutio, which is contrary to
hyperbole is nothing else but a synechdochy of the species for the genus.

The Second affection of Tropes in the continuance of more words is called
Allegoria, which is continuatio troporum, yet those Tropes must be of the same
kind of Tropes; as they must be all of them either metonymies, metaphors,
ironyes, or synechdochyes: not one a metonymy, another an irony, and another a
metaphor, and another a synecdochy: it has his notation of (...) and (...).

Sedin Allegoria tenendum.
That is, In an Allegory look from what thing we first fetch our Allegory, with
the same thing must we end. As, if I begin with a ship, I must end with a ship;
for if I begin with a ship, and end with a plow, inconsequentia foedissima
fuerit. So also we see in the Gospel, how the Allegory of Dives and Lazarus is
continued; how they were there feasted, and afterward how they were to feast in
another place, where Dives had such a dry feast, as he desired but the tip of
his finger to cool him withal: but how Lazarus was taken into a joyful feast,
yea, even into Abraham's bosom; where we may see even by this rule, what is
meant in this place by Abraham's bosom; namely, that Lazarus sits in Heaven
next unto Abraham: So is the Allegory continued from the thing he does fetch
it: And this rule is of great use in Scripture, for the understanding of the
Spirit of God in many places, which otherwise might seem dark. Now for him that
gave his fellow a box on the ear which felled him, and yet said nisi tetigi;
what affection is this? it is a kind of hyperboly of his own commendation, as
if he could do more with a touch, then others with a great stroke.

CHAP. III.
Troporum genera duo sunt. Primum est metonymia and ironia.
THis distribution of the kinds of Tropes is in respect of the things whence
they are borrowed, and those from the Arguments of invention. The second
distribution is from simple arguments.

Metonymia est tropus causae ad effect. subj. ad adjunct: vel contra.
Here is definitio ex distributione, as if he should say, is absolute vel modo
quodam consentaneorum, which is showed by the induction of the species. But
because not every cause is put Tropically for every effect, nor e contra;
neither every subj. for every adj. nor e contra, therefore he chooses rather to
keep himself closely by these species, then to speak generally.

Metonymia.
Of (...) and (...) a change of the name, which is true of every Trope, but
because use has received, we content our selves with it, knowing what is meant
by it: or if ye will make it a synecdochy of the genus for the species. And
this trope is first, for that the arguments whence they are borrowed, are
first; and the reason why the cause is put for the effect, is, because it gives
esse to the effect: so the reason why the effect is put for the cause, is,
because it has its esse from the cause. So why the subj. is put for the
adjunct, because the adjunct in esse is in the subj. et contra; so that this
Trope is of consentany Arguments.

Metonymia causae est efficieintis aut materiae.
Here also is a definition of the metonymy of the cause ex distributionne.
There is not any Trope of the other causes, neither form nor end; not of the
form, for that is the effect it self, where the form is, and therefore Ramus
said, Distributio generis in species and formas eadem est. Neither of the final
cause, for that cannot so determine, because one thing may have many ends.

Object. So the effect may have many efficients?

Answ. But then according to the several modi of the efficient, there will be
several effects: but there are no modi of the final cause.

Efficient. cuminvent. and author.
Here Inventor and Author are the two modi of the efficient. The first examples
be of the Inventor, as

Tum Cererem, etc,
Ceres is corrupted with water; here is Ceres the Inventor of Corn: put for
Corn,

Cerealiaque arma.
Here Arma is a Metaphor.

Quos amisimus Cives.
Those Citizens which we have lost.

Mars pro bello. Aut dulcis musti, etc.
Or he that does concoct the humor of sweet Muskedine with Vulcane, i. e. fire:
and this is he that is called Tubalcain often in Scripture.

Sine Cerere and Libero, etc.
Without Bread and Wine lusts wares cold. And here is an Allegory, for the same
Trope is continued: yet it is better to use venus than Coitus, but Liber and
Ceres are more than the severity of the judgment seat will bear.

Est preterea hic valde usitat, etc.
Here is Author, the second modus of the efficient; and this is valde usitatum:
yea, of much greater use, than is the Inventor: so Martial calls the history
of Livie, Livie.

Metonymia materiae.
This is a definition it self, neither needs it more to be added to it, for
there is not definitio definitionis, yet I may say it is quando nomen materiae
traducitur admateriatum significandum.

Non domus and fundus, etc.
Aes and aurum, pro aeneis and nureis nummis.
Aes and ferrum duelli.
Brass and Iron are signs of War, not of Peace. pro armis aeneis and ferreis.
So is silver put for silver household stuff so plate for the dishes made of
plate.

CHAP. IV.
Metonymia effecti, cum ex effect, etc.
HE here makes the effect to answer only to the efficient, and in Latin it does
so; but in Hebrew sometimes it does not, as in Genesis, chap. 1. verse. 2. The
earth was wtthout form, and void: and sometimes it is found so in English, also
in Latin; as 'twas called Lavinium, because 'twas built either from the
material cause, or the subject of place. Now this is a common metonymy; neither
does he lay down all the modi which belong unto it. So spes is obscura, obscura
is a metaphor, afterward a metonymy, i. e. incerta. So is caeca pro ignorante
a metaphour. So pale Death knocks equally at poor men's shops, and Kings
turrets: Death is said to be pale, because it makes things so.

Pallentesque habitant, etc.
Morbi efficient pallentes: senectus a metonymy of the adj. for the subject;
for the man that is old: it is tristis because it causes sorrow. Here
sometimes the efficient is put for the effect without any more ado; as in
these examples that went before: sometimes the adjective is given to the
substantive, which notes the vis of the efficient, and not the efficient it
self, as in this example that follows.

Praecipitem iram.
Many modi there are of this metonymy of the effect which he omitteth: as this,
when a man carries a Sword in his hand, we say, this man carries Death in his
hand* here is Death put for the instrumental cause: so mors in olla.

CHAP. V.
Metonym. subj. est, etc.
WE have heard before the reason of the name of Metonymia, and that it is
distributed according to the Arguments whence it is borrowed: namely, to be of
Arguments consentanious absolute, or modo quodam: absolute, as the cause and
the effect: of the cause was of the efficient or matter; yet of these two
causes the matter is more usually put for the effect: as, this Chest is wood:
i. e. made of wood. Now the reason why it is so usual that the matter is put
commonly for the effect, is this, because the genus does arise from the matter,
and does predicate in quid of it.

Cum nomen, etc.
That is, when that Noune which properly signifies a subj. is delivered to
signify the thing adjoined. Here he says nomen, not verbum, as he did in the
definition of a Trope, to show that he likes both of them indifferently, and
therefore uses them promiscuously. Here we are to understand that this
definition is not (...), for every subject is not put to signify his adjunct;
or contra: as witness is not put for wall, yet this is the best definition
that can be given, and is (...) with his modi that follow.

Vt cum ponitur Continens, etc.
Neither is this generally true, for every continens non pro quaque re contenta
ponitur, but is to be limited with his two modi that follow: The first whereof
is, when the place is put for the inhabitants thereof: and this is the first
special modus of that modus of continens pro re contenta.

Invadunt urbem, etc.
The City was not buried in sleep and Wine, but the People in the City: So urbs
pulcherrima for cives pulcherrimi. So

Quod in me carcerem effudistis.
They cast a Prison upon me; for the Prisoners.

Testis est Italia.
Here Tully calls Italy, France, Sicily, Spain, to witness, for the Italians,
French, Sicilians, and Spaniards; and here is also allegoria. Now the second
special modus of that modus of continens pro re contenta, is, when the place is
put for the things done in the place: so the market is put for the Rhetorical
actions done in it: so by Academia where Plato taught, Lyceum where Aristotle
taught, and Tusculane where Tully taught, is meant the Learning made famous
therein. There is yet another special modus of continens pro re contenta,
which I marvel that he left, as this, Reach me the cup, for the drink in the
cup: and, Give me thy purse, for the money in the purse: here is continens pro
re contenta, and yet neither of the special modi aforegoing.

Ex hoc genere est illud.
This is not a third special modus of continens pro re contenta, but a second
from it, and here the possessor is put for the thing possed, as our neighbor
Vcalegon burns, for his house: Vcalegon comes of (...) non curo, therefore he
that dwells near such a careless neighbor, had need to be careful for fear
of fire. This modus is very useful in prose, as, he is with me, that is at my
house.

Sic dicimus hominem devorari.
We say, the man is undone, or eaten up, when his Goods are taken from him, and
this is another modus: The next modus is, the Captain for his Army: The last
is, the Advocate for his Client.

CHAP. VI.
WE have heard the reason of this Art of Rhetoric, namely, that it is to
sweeten speech with, otherwise being inartificial it is of little force in the
hearers ears. For whereas every thing coming to mind, does first come to the
outward senses, then to the inward senses, and hence to the understanding, and
so to the affections, and last of all to the Will. Rhetoric comes to the
understanding, yet presently, before it can examine it, the affections lay hold
of it, and so, tickle the Will that it may approve it: and hence it came to be
abused, 1. with sophistry to the understanding; 2. for tickling of the Will.

We have heard also that it has two parts, namely, for that Speech is so;
either writing, or uttering of it: hence is the double consideration of speech;
the first whereof is called elocutio, which may be in writing alone without
pronunciation, but pronunciation cannot be without elocution; hence it
follows that these are several parts: And secondly, Elocutio is before
Pronunciatio: now elocutio is either in one word alone, adorning etymology; or
in more words together adorning Syntax: that which is in one word alone is
called tropus; and the reason of the sweetness of a Trope is, because it does
not only give a splendor, but besides that it carries us to another Argument
from whence it was drawn: for every Trope signifies two things to the hearer:

First, A kind of sweetness with the thing it delivers: and secondly, the
argument whence it was drawn. Therefore though at the first necessity found it
out, yet afterward variety did so delight that it would not cast them off. Now
these Tropes are not of any words as we will, but of consentanies with
consentanies, dissent. with dissent. etc. and therefore the distribution of the
doctrine of Tropes must run along according as the arguments are distributed:
yet we have not fit words to distribute them withal, for if we should have said
that a Trope is either simple or comparate, then we should have left out those
Tropes which do arise from orta argumenta, as, synecdoche integri, and membri,
generis and speciei. Again, not every simple argument is put for every simple
one; neither every comp. for every comp. so that in this distribution there
would have been a double error, therefore he contents himself with the special
words Metonym. and Ironia, commending unto us a totum which we are to imagine
by these specials as they have a community one with another, which is in regard
of the arguments from whence they arise.

1. For a metonymy of the cause, that is either of the efficient or of the
matter: The reason of these two Tropes is, because these two causes in
constituting the effect, are precedent a good while before either form or end.
Now here, first the efficient is put for the effect, for that often times
gives names to the effect: and this metonymy has two modi, the first when the
Inventour is put for the thing invented; the second when the Author is put for
the thing effected: so, we call Ramus his Logic, Ramus: and the reason hereof
is this, because at the first we had not readily a name for it; for the thing
being new we could not hastily give it a name, but gave the Author's name, till
we had a better for it: So, for the matter we call Money silver, because at the
first we had not readily a better name. Now there are no Tropes, of the formal
and final causes; and the reason is, because they were so confused with the
effect, that at the first we cannot readily sever them, both because forma
simul ingenita cum effecto: and secondly, because these two causes do work so
near to the effect a good while after either efficient or matter.

2. A metonymy of the effect is, when the efficient is signified by his
effects: here he seems to make the effect only to answer to the efficient;
but it does answer also to the matter at least, though not in Latin, yet in
Hebrew and English: Luz was called Bethel before it was Bethel. Now this
metonymy of the effect has two modi: The first, when the effect is given to
the efficient adjectively: the second when given to the efficient not
adjectively, but abstractively: as he said, Death was in the Pot, because
Colliquintida was in it. Now as the cause is put for the effect, and contra;
so, the subj. for the adj. and contra.

3. In the metonymy of the subject the modi are either contin. pro re contenta,
as locus pro incolis, and ad res locatas; or possessor pro re possessa; or Dux
pro exercitu; or Advocatus pro Cliente.

4. Now follows the metonymy of the Adjunct.

Cum ex adj. res subj. signify.
That is, when the name of an adjunct is given to the subj. whereof it is an
adjunct: So we use to say, Saving your Honor: If it please your Worship:
Honor and Worship being put for the subjects thereof: for, because the term of
the cause, effect, subject, and adj. did not at the first come readily to our
hand, therefore we were fain to put cause for effect, subj. for adj. aut
contra. So, the names of Virtues and Vices are put for virtuous and vicious
men: as Lecher for a lecherous man; Covetousness for a covetous man, etc. and
this is the first modus of this metonymy.

The second modus is, when the sign is put for the thing signed; as, pubes for
inventus; for pubes is properly the budding of the beard; when he begins to
be adolescens.

The third modus is, when the adjunct of time is put for the subject; as time
for the unmannerly Citizens in that time: so aspera saecula for the People that
were then asperi; so is togae for Peace, and here [cedant arma togae, conced.
etc.] are two Hyperboly's.

CHAP. VII.
Ironia est Tropus a contrar. ad contr.
SO that this Trope is only from those Arguments of contraries, and not of
disparates, because they are too many. This definition is too general, for
Relates are not so put one for another, because they are of more use in their
agreeing affection, than in their disagreeing, but only is special to adversa
contradicentia and privantia.

(...).
Cavillator, a wrangler: simulator, making that to be, which is not:
dissimulator, making that not be, which is: illusor, a mocker: irrisor, a
derider: this is the proper name of this Trope, and the use of it chiefly is ad
jocandum. Now here, because there is so little reason that one contrary should
be put for another; therefore it is hardly perceived, yet is to be distinguished
either by word, or gesture, or by both.

Heus bone vir.
So,

Meaning male adversa.

Curasti probe.
That is, Non curasti, contradicentia: So integritas tua, i. e. your
uprightness, your shame-fac't-nesse, your good done deeds; and so for the
adversa. The modi here are (...), and (...), which are contradicentia; as let
me not speak of your calamity: So may there also be of privantia, as when we
say of a rich man, This man indeed is very poor.

CHAP. VIII.
WE have already spoken of those Tropes which do arise from simple Arguments:
now follow those that do arise from Comparates and Orta.

Tropi primum genus.
Here is a perfect transition; wherein by the species the genus is commended
unto us. For because Rhetoric does not trace Logic in every step, but only in
some few, hence it cannot be so exactly distributed, according as the Arguments
of Logic are: hence was he fain to couple these two species metonym. and irony
together, whose community is in that they both arise from simple Arguments.

Secund. seq. in metaph. and synecd.
Here the one is from Comparates, the other from orta, which whilst Ramus does
couple them togegether with this conjunction, he commends unto us a genus,
which he could not name for us. We have heard before, Logic was compared to
the body, Grammar to the garment, and Rhetoric to the lace laid upon it, which
because it is an ornament unto it, it is not all over the garment, but only in
some parts, for it must be rare, for it would not be an ornament if it was all
over; so that we cannot so fitly distribute it according to Logic. Metaphora
of (...) and (...), to carry over, for this Trope does carry us from one simile
to another.

Metaph, est quando ex sim. etc.
Hence this Trope does only arise from similia, because the quality wherein
they are compared makes them, and if that a mistaking should be, it is not
great. There is no Trope that does arise from comparates in quantity, because
there is no proportion, for it belongs only to similia.

Itaque metaph, est ad unum verbum contr. sim.
This is a deduction fetched out of Logic from a contract similitude, which is
in one word.

Tropus nullus est florentior.
Here he does commorari in the commendation of this Trope fetched from that
Argument in Logic whence it arises. For whereas other Arguments do prove that
which they are brought to argue, similia do only illustrate: so that a Metaphor
is more excellent than any other Trope in clearing, and making bright, and our
speech more pleasant: and, indeed, a metaphor makes us see, as it were,
superficie tenus, if it be taken wisely and brought to the senses, especially
to the eye which is the most acute sense.

Nam and odor urbanitatis.
The sweetness of your Civility.

Mollitudo humanitatis.
The softness of your Kindness: These metaphors are fetched from the senses,
and are good (indeed,) but yet those that are to the eye, are more pleasant;
for they put into the mind things which we cannot see: and indeed the Will
receives things from the understanding, and that from the senses inward and
outward, especially the eyes.

Nihil est in rerum natura, etc.
There Is nothing in nature, but a simile may be drawn from it, for Logic is
general of every thing.

Cujus ego Patrem, etc.
Whose Father I account a God, and a Parent of my Fortune, and my name, i. e.
as a God, and as a Parent.

Honos alit arts.
That is quasi alit, for alo is properly to nourish, as meat does.

Omnesque incenduntur.
Are set on fire, this Trope here is fetched from fire which burns up things
which are combustible.

Spem front serenat.
He makes clear his hope by his countenance; serenare is to make clear as the
day is when the Sun shines forth bright.

Magnoque irari fluctuat aestu.
He chafeth with the great heat of his angers; from the Sea: and this is a fit
metaphor for an angry man, both for his gesture and speech, and these are to
the sense of the eyes.

Vt sementem seceris, ita metes.
As thou sowest, so shall thou reap: as you begin (for so signifies sementis,
the beginning of the Harvest) so shall you end.

Latrant.
So, some Orators bark, and do not speak: this is taken from Dogs, and this is
laid to the ear.

Ad illius hanc orationem adhinniit.
He laughed or gigled; from an horse: This also is especially to the ear,
though we may also see the gesture.

Hyperbole vero and Allegoria, etc.
Now in Metaphors, Hyperboles, and Allegories have most praise: and hence it is
that other Rhetoricians have made them proper only to a metaphor: and an
Hyperbolical metaphor makes a lofty style; when we give life to things which
have not life, this is a special modus, and the reason of it is this, because
if the grace of a metaphor be for the making plain of a thing unto us, then
much more these, for the acts of living things are more apparent unto us, and
therefore more pleasant.

Geminique minantur.
So,

Two Rocks threatened into Heaven: minari is properly from that affection of ira.

Pontem indignatus Araxes.
The River Araxes scorneth the Bridge: This is taken for a mighty Prince.

Parietes medius fidius, etc.
The Walls of this Court, O Caesar, by my faith, me thinks do give thee thanks:
This is taken from men. There also are most excellent Allegories; as, Virtue is
fastened with deep roots: this is taken from Plants, which cannot be weakened by
force, nor be removed from their place. Here he continues his Allegory from
the same thing wherewith he began it.

Memoria vestra, etc.
Our assayes shall be cherished by your memories, and shall grow by your talk,
and shall wax old by the monuments of writing. So also that, he is set on fire
with wickedness, his eyes did burn, and cruelty burst out of his countenance;
this is from the nature of fire.

O Navis, etc.
This is spoken of the Commonwealth, taken from a ship.

Quaere Coracem, etc.
Let us suffer this Crow to bring out his young ones out of his Nest, i. e. Let
us suffer this Orator Corax, (which was one of their Sophisters which abused
Rhetoric) let us suffer him to bring out his Sophistical Scholars into the
Court.

Neque tam fui timidus, etc.
I was not so fearful that in the Troubles of the Commonwealth I would not do
so and so: here it is fetched from a ship at Sea. I fear the cloud of thy
forehead, and thy stinking breath infected (as it were) with brimstone: This
is taken from Coyns and Metals.

CHAP. IX.
Metaphora igitur ejusm. fuit.
WE have heard of a Metaphour, now follows Synecdoche, of (...), to take up
shortly, by the whole a part, or by the part a whole.

Pars est membr. vel spec.
Here follows Logic, desiring to trim Logic fitly.

Synecdoche membri, etc.
Not every part for every whole, nor contra, but sometimes, as, the member
being put for the whole, and yet not every member for every whole, but only
some; and it is as if he should say, Pars is either that which is a member, or
that which is a species: so that here is not every distribution, sc. of the
subj. or adjunct, for they will be a metonymy of the subj. or adjunct.
Synecdoche membri, when by one member the whole is signified.

O tecta ipsa misera.
O miserable covering! of how unmeet a Master (if I may call him a Master) are
ye held? here the covering for the house, that it covered.

Haud aliter, etc.
No otherwise your Poope, Puppis is the further part of a ship.

Pubesque tueri.
Pubes here is a metonymy, as before.

Prosa mucronem pro glad, etc.
So also prose will suffer that the point of the sword be put for the sword;
but not the poope for the ship, nor the mast for the boards. Here also is a
kind of Allegory.

Nullo me modo posse.
I tell thee I cannot be safe with thee in the same house, seeing I am in great
jeopardy that I am in the same City: here is parietes pro domo, maenia pro
urbe: So oculi and aures, pro oculatis and auritis hominibus.

CHAP. X.
A Synecdoche of the species, is, when by the species the genus is signified.

Certe, etc. parricida.
Which is properly when one kills his Father, but is generally put for
homicida: This is the first modus.

The second modus is when infinitum numeri dicimus pro magno: as, a man may
bring out 6 hundred such.

Cujus ex Ludo, etc.
Out of whose School came as many Princes, as out of Trojan's Horse.

The third modus is the singular number for the plural: as, Romanus for Romani;
and in both the examples following: for what is so necessary, as to hold the
Weapons to defend Thee, for Us.

Allegoria hic freq.
Here also is a kind of Allegory, as we may see in the examples following: as,
Catones, Philippi, Laesis pro Civibus honoratis, and pauperibus. There were two
Catoes that were wise, the third was weak: and thence the proverb was tertius e
coelo cecidit Cato. So Venus and Mars; for Vulcan took them with an iron Net in
bed together, and went and told the other Gods. So Tyhys for a Pyrate, or the
Sea: Argos was the ship that Jason sailed in to Colchis for the golden Fleece:
so, great Achilles, for any noble man: so, Troy for any other place.

Hunc Caepuae, etc.
So

When we saw this man at Capua with a stern spirit: Magii, Blossii, were Romans
of stern spirits.

CHAP. XI.
Whereas before the part might briefly contain the whole, so now contrary;
these do arise from the cause and effect in Rhetoric, and this is opposite to
that which went before, and is integri or generis: integri, when of the whole
is signified the member.

Pabula gustassent.
They had tasted the pasture of Troy; for part of it. Bibit is a metaphor;
Germania a metonymy of the subj. for the adjunct.

Res vides quomodo, etc.
You see how the case stands: Orbis pro globo, and pro part orbis.

CHAP. XII.
SYnecd. generis is, when the word that signifies the genus is given to the
species: as, virtus pro fortitudine; Homo for Catiline: so, for what hope do
you keep such an animal, pro bestia: Yet we must take heed that we put not any
genus for any species; as, quadrupes pro equo: and this is the first modus.

The second modus, as Tydides for Diomedes; and Pelides for Achilles.

The third modus, Poeta pro Virgilio; Orator pro Tullio.

The fourth modus, as, the plural number for the singular; as, we have deceived
the people, and seemed Orators unto them. Here likewise is a kind of Allegory,
as in the example that follows.

CHAP. XIII.
THus much of the Tropes; at whose excellency if you look, the metaphor is
chief, because it lays out the thing more plainly and pleasantly than the
rest: the next is an Irony, because dissentanea sua dissentione Clar.
elucescunt. The next a metonymy, for that arises from Consentanies: Last a
synecdoche, for that arises from Orta: for the example, it is plain.

CHAP. XIV.
WE have heard that Elocutio was in one word, or in more words: in one, as a
Trope, and that was the first part of Eloc. The second follows in more words,
which therefore does not adorn Etymology, but Syntax: and this is called
figura, which is a borrowed word from Geometry, and signifies the figuring of
a Speech, or the making of it comely, so that it lies in the shape of a Speech
to please especially the ear, or the eye: for so does Rhetoric especially
please these two senses: or a figured Speech you may fitly term a well-set
Speech.

Est clocutio.
That is an ornament of speech.

Qua orationis habitus.
That is, the habit of a Speech is changed from a Grammatical to a Rhetorical.
There habitus is a word fetched out of Natural Philosophy, from a man that has
a good habit, i. e. a comely man of person, or one well set: so that the
ornanent lies here in the well set of the Speech which causes this figure.

Arecta and simplici consuet.
For whereas Grammar is the garment of Logic, and would cover every thing as
Logic lays it down, the Nominative case before the Verb, and the Accusative
after the Verb: Figura comes and sets this speech otherwise, and so changes
the habit of it; so that I may compare Grammar to a trubkin, and Rhetoric to a
fine handsome fellow: and in Rhetoric I may compare a Trope to one cut or jag,
and a Figure to all the jags, or the whole shape thereof: They called figuram
(...), because it is the habit, or attiring, or well set of the speech: this
name seems first to have come from Players, by reason that in Comedies and
Tragedies we know the same party being in diverse habit, played diverse parts:
hence it is that some would have it a Player, or a poor man in princely attire,
or a Frenchman: Tully did despair in his art in his Book called Orator,
increasing the number of Figures, and in his Book De Oratore does diminish it:
and in his Tropicks he says, it is no error in a thing that is infinite, to
pass some thing; but it is in art an error to omit any thing.

At hujus infinitatis, etc.
Here Taleus in effect does confess that which Tully said before: or at the
leastwise would commend unto us the difficulty of this doctrine of Figures. We
have heard what Rhetoric is, and the parts of it; how that 'twas the sweetning
of speech, and had his good use at the first; till afterward Sophisters did
annoint their Paradoxes with it, which made it evil, even as a bad Ditty under
a good Song: It had two parts; for that speech may be either only written, or
also spoken: now the first of these can do much of it self, and is called
elocutio, which co^mends unto us ornaments either in one word which is tropus,
or in more words which is figura.

Object. But a Trope may be in more words?

Answ. It cannot, only thus, sometimes in Latin more words may signify one
thing, and yet in another language it may be delivered in one word; for
otherwise tropus is but in one word, unless it be a continued Trope, and then
there is a Trope in every word. Now figura is in the fashioning of the speech,
and so is turned from his Grammatical vis and (...), and so as it would make
the speech more pleasant: Now this fashion is either outwardly, or inwardly;
for figura dictionis is in the outward word, but figura sententiae is in the
inward matter principally, yet in the outward also, and therefore is mere
compos. and therefore to be handled after figura dictionis: and hence is this
distribution of figura, when the words only, or also the matter is adorned; and
the reason is, that as tropus did sweeten the word and brought it to signify
two things; so does figura sweeten the sentence both within and without: this
care the Lord had in framing this art, that thereby the truth might be more
easily received.

Fig. dictionis est figura.
So that figura is his genus: where there is fugurated a Speech resounding
sweetly in themselves: so that it is in the fit sounding and correspondency of
words among themselves one upon another; so that there are these things to be
considered, 1. A figuration, 2. a sound 3. between the words 4. fit, and lastly
sweet, and as it were a certain harmony of well tuned strings, and every word
is as 'twere a well tuned string, and all together consenting make a sweet
harmony.

Quo uno nihil, etc.
Yes figura sententiae is cognatior animo, but yet none is cognatior nostris
auribus quam figura dictionis.

Numero enim excitamur.
This is true of Poetry and Music, for we know Music, how when Alexander the
Great heard it, was thereby stirred up to Wars, and again when the found of it
was more remiss, he ceased from it; so that this figure is to make speech more
pleasant: and as 'twere makes us dance to hear it, and is as the Apothecaries
Box. Now this figura dictionis is either in the measure of sounds, or in the
repetition of them: now the measuring of sounds is, when we give every one his
true dimension, and hence Music is therefore pleasant to the ear: and also
Bells delight us much if there be good proportion in the sounds of them
observed in the ringing of them: So, the Nightingale is very pleasant, both for
the variety and proportion of her sounds: But now the Cuckoe is nothing
delighting because she always fings one tune, and she is like the Ass in
Aesope, that would play Music: Now here Poetry is nothing but this Rhetoric,
which is in the measuring of sounds, and this is very pleasing to the ear. And
here we may see in what harmony man at the first was made; I mean in what
consent with other things, seeing that he is now so delighted with this
dimension, for before the Fall this kind of figure was without doubt much more
pleasing. Now since the Fall we know some men are not delighted at all with
Poetry; which if it be from their nature that they despise it, it argues a
distemperature of it, otherwise it is wisdom in others. Dimension is before
repetition, because it needs dimension, as we shall see in some figures
hereafter.

CHAP. XV.
WE have heard of figura which is outward, or both outward and inward: The
outward is always in the sounds, and is either in the dimension of sounds, or
in the repetition of them. Dimension is as 'twere fine music in right number
and quantity: Repetition as 'twere an echo, or sweet tinckling; so that these
are like to music measured by time. Now this figura dictionis is distributed
by his form, which is dimensio sonorum, or eorum repetitio; and hence it is
that dimensio sonorum, etc. are not defined, for they are definitions
themselves: neither does he define dimensio, for it belongs to Grammar for
the time of it.

Dimensio est Poeica vel orat.
So that here comes in Poetry, so that it is not a distinct art by it self, and
therefore not to be handled by it self, but is a branch of Rhetoric: Poetry is
before, because Oratory is borrowed from it: again Poets were long before
Orators: and the first Poets we read of were the Pythagorians; and after them
was Homer which is one most ancient, and this Poetry was the first measure that
was in speech, and this was invented for the rudeness of the people that it
might every way answer the ear from the one end to the other. Poetica of (...)
facio, because they made things which were not as though they were; as
Chimaeraes monsters, and in ancient time all the truth was so delivered.

Poetica quae perpetuis, etc.
Which is tied with perpetual Laws, i. e. even from the one end to the other,
or which is managed from the one end to the other with laws of certain spaces;
which is not so in Oratory: so that I may compare Poetry to neatness and
lepidity, and Oratory to gravity: for to be so tied as Poetry, is too nice, and
is such an one as he which would not let an (...) lie on the Cape of his Cloak,
which is not manly but womanly. Or like to him which was fellow-Senator with
Hortensius, who putting one of the cuts of his garment out of frame, caused him
to be very angry: and Poetry may also be compared to a fine Frenchman of the
French fashion, or to a Courtier: Oratory to a grave Alderman.

Et fere in fabul. argumentis, etc.
For the most part it is used in fables; and fabula is the subject of Poetry
which is ad hominum mores imitandum, and exprimendum. And now the first Poetry
was those Sylvestres Musae which were called Pastoral Shepherds, and this is
very ancient, as we may see in Abel which was a Keeper of Sheep, and also in
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Now this keeping of Sheep at the first was very
usual, and being an Office of no great Work, but that the shepherds had great
leisure, they fell to study and seek out the Nature of things, as of their
Sheep, and plants, and the like: Others among them not so well minded fell to
love, and to play hob and tib, and so made love-songs, and Ballads: after these
shepherds there were others which made songs and Ballads of the Acts of
Noblemen, among the rest Homer being but poor and did beg, and when his Father
died, his Mother married a Schoolmaster which taught him: He did make songs;
and rapsodia signifies songs tied together: Now afterward Homer went to
Travel, and as he went on the Sea by studying got the Rheum that he became
blind, and came back again and made songs, and used to sing them at Cobblers
shops: and afterward he that was Governor in Greece caused Homer's songs to
be gathered together into one Book by Aristarchus, and those which Aristarchus
said were Homer's verses were put in, and those which he said were not, were
left out: hence it is that when we see any one which is a curious Judge in any
thing, we call him Aristarchus.

Hinc Tragaed. Comaed, etc.
These are branches of Poetry, if we respect the verse, but if we look at the
matter, they will belong to other arts. It is called Tragaedia, because a Goat
was given to it for a reward: Comaedia, (...) a crossway, because it was used
in compitis, for they used to play their Comedies in streets, making their
stages upon Carts, that they might go about and be seen.

In quibus (...) and (...).
That is fallings out: agnitio knowing of it suddenly: for Poetry works so
craftily, making things that are not as though they were, and so makes our
knowledge of it more sudden.

Numerus Poet. est Rythm. aut metr.
This distribution falls not out every way well; for in Rythmus, if we mark it,
we shall often find repetition of sounds: for it is

Certa clausula terminat.
So that there is of an epistrophe in it: yet this distribution cannot be
amended, but only the fault noted. Rythmus of (...), as metrum of mensura.
Rythmus is a Poetical number containing a certain number of syllables ending
with a certain clause.

Object. But why are not the feet dactylus and spondaeus taught generally to
them both?

Answ. No Rythmus only looks at the arithmetic of syllables, i. e. at the
number of them; and not at the geometr. i. e. the quantity of them. Rythmus is
before, because it is more ancient.

CHAP. XVI.
WE have heard of dimensio Poetica in Rythmus, which dimensio though it has
been used only in fabulosis argum^ntis, yet notwithstanding it being a branch
of Rhetoric which is a general art, we are to know it may be used in any thing
whatsoever. Now follows Meeter which is very ancient, though Aristotle
denies it, and thinks Homor to be the first in Greece, which may be true;
for the Graecians had but little learning amongst them at the first, but what
they got from others: but in Judaea it was common, and so ancient, that Wriers
do ascribe it to Moses to be the first that wrote Heroical verse, and they were
Psalms that he wrote so; and some also write that he had a Daughter which was
a very fine Poet: And David also and Solomon wrote verses in Meeter, which were
long before the Graecians: And for Homer, his Father-in-law was a Schoolmaster
which taught him, and afterward his Father bound him Apprentice to a Merchant,
and so he traveled the Seas, did see Ulysses his travels and wrote his History
of Troy about that: and when Homer traveled, even as he was entertained where
he came, so he did describe those people. Metrum and Rythmus are the same, and
only two names for one thing. Metrum of mensura, it is a metonymy of the adj.
for the subject, the measure put for the matter measured which it handles.
Metrum is a dimension Poetical containing certain feet placed in certain
places: so that there are these Three things to be considered in this
difinition; 1. A Poetical number: 2. Certain kinds of feet: 3. Those feet must
be placed in certain places. 1. I say Poetical number, for that is the genus,
as we heard before: 2. Certain kinds of feet, as in a Phaleucium, Spondaeus,
Dactylus and Choraei tres: in a Sapphick, Choraeus, spondaeus, dactylus, and
Chorei duo. 3. They must be placed in certain places.

Now for the place, note only this, That in an Hexametre in quinto loco be
dactylus tantum, and in sexto spondaeus; and this is all for place. Now because
pes is mentioned in the definition of metrum, hence it comes here in the next
place, being an adjunct unto metrum, to be defined.

Pes est dimensio.
Pes is called dimensio, which is general both to Rythmus and metrum, but this
dimensio is finita, i. e. limited with certain times of syllables, not with
certain syllables.

Estque bissyl. aut trissyl.
Et uterque simplex aut mistus.

As Spondaeus which is bissyllabus, because it contains but two syllables:
and simplex, because they are both of one and the same time, to wit, either
both short, or both long: Spondaeus comes of (...) a be sted, which is a
metaphour. Pyrrhichius is of a short, which comes of (...), which signifies
swift, because of the speedy running of it. Now indeed this foot should have
been set before spondaeus, because one long has as much time as two short,
therefore two long have as much time as four short; therefore the short ones
are more simple dissyllables. Mistus is Jambus, and this foot had it is name
from the inventour thereof. Choreus signifies a measure used in dancing, and
comes of (...). Trissyllabus simplex is molossus, of three long, which should
have come after Trochaeus: it is called Molossus from that Country so called
where 'twas found out, and where the people were much delighted with it: The
same Country was also called Epyrus of him which was their first beginning,
which was Pyrrhus. Trochaeus of (...) curro to run like a Trope. Now for
dissyllables simple there can be no more but those mentioned; but for the rest
many more feet there are which may be observed; and yet not material, whether
they be here brought in or no. Trissyllabus mistus because of so many syllables
is more various: here 1. is dactylus, which signifies a finger, where there are
three joints, the first is stronger, the other two be weaker. Anapaestus of
(...), a repeated foot.

Mistia e dissimil. continuis, etc.
Creticus, so called of the Country Creete. Amphibrachus of (...) and (...),
because it is short at both ends: Here the parts of Meeter being declared, now
the common adjuncts or affections follow, and these are two, First, if a word
end with a vowel, or m, or both, and the word following begin with a vowel,
they are taken away, so that this property consists of two parts: the first
is, if a vowel end a word without m, and the next word begin with a vowel, then
eliditur, as, sera nimis vita est, The second part is where there is a vowel
and also m ending a word, and the next word begins with a vowel, all are
taken away, as, nullum ille, here i and m are taken away. Now the second
property is this, that ultima syllaba of a verse, habetur pro indifferenti. Now
for the kinds of Meeter, they are many, yea, and as many more as he has set
down, much like the tunes of music: and as in Speech there are many kinds of
words, so are there many kinds of Meeter: yet those which are ordinary in
Schools, and of most use, are simple or composite: Simple is of two feet, and
is called Adonicum of Adonicus the Author; when Sappho being a fine Woman
loved and made sapphick verses, which were so called of her, and after his
death, at the end of every third verse, she in memorial of Adonicus made Carmen
Adonicum: this consists of two feet, for if it should be of four, it would be a
foot, and not a verse: now this Sappho was a very fine Musicioner, and she did
excel Pindar in it. Carmen Compositum is of more feet than two, and is either
tetrametr. or polymetr. here he is fain to make shift as he can with such words
as he can get; for otherwise tetram. is polymetr. though the schools use to say
three is the least number of multitude, and say tria sunt omnia. Tetram. is
that which has four feet, and this is the first; for there is no verse of note
that is of three feet: Polymet. is pentam. or hexamet. Asclepiad. of
Asclepiades is the name of a Poet that found out this kind of verses.
Pentametra are Phaleucium, so called of the Author: Sapphicum of Sappho, as
before: or Elegum, of Eligo to choose, for these were a choice kind of verses.
Hexametrum epicum is of 6 feet.

Verune pentam. ab epico nunque separatur.
Here by pentam he means elegum, by a synecdoche: Now here are not all the
kinds of Meeter by many, yea, the common Grammers have ^ambicks, which here are
not set down, though the matter be not great.

CHAP. XVII.
WE have already heard the doctrine of Poetical number: now follows
Oratorical, which did not at the first observe measure: The first that used to
write were Poets, which wrote in verse; yet Orators used to speak in prose, but
not to write prose of a great while after the Poets.

Numerus oratorius est numerus, etc.
That is, it is not tied to such a strict number of syllables as Poetry is,
neither to the same feet in many sentences together: dissimilis poetico, for it
does not quite through observe the number of feet as Poetry does; neither does
it use the same feet together: dissimilis sibi ipsi, because we should not
always use it, lest the people should think it to be a set Speech; neither
should the same feet be perpetuo used, but in diverse clauses diverse feet. Now
this oratorical number at the first did arise from Poetry; for the Orators
seeing the Poets much to delight the people by their Poetical number, they also
did endeavor to find out a kind of oratorical number, whereby both their
matter and speech might be of more grace, and comeliness unto the people: Now,
indeed, this oratorical number has a kind of deceit in it, but it is bonus
dolus, and not malus dolus; even as the Physicians use a kind of deceit,
whereas they giving to their Patient a bitter Potion do sugar it at the top,
that the bitterness of the Potion may not so sensibly be felt. Now the deceit
is this, namely, in that because this dolus does sweeten the matter, therefore
they think the matter is deceiptful, which is fall^cia adjuncti, and therefore
they did use number in prose, but at liberty, not Rhythme, or Number. The
inventor of this oratorical number was Thrasymachus; but he tied himself too
strictly, and came too near unto the Poets: next was Gorgias, but he was also
too sweet, and therefore did make the people mark his speech, and not the
matter, and therefore did wrong the matter: He was a notable Sophister in
Aristotle's and Plato's time, and was Isocrates his Master: but this Gorgias by
this means did much wrong the matter; even as if we see a Gentleman in a very
fine suit, we shall so much look at the suit, that we shall not look to the
properness of his person: Now Isocrates which was Gorgias his Scholar did
excel them both, and indeed he is the sweetest of all for figura dictionis, for
he is very moderate: but Demosthenes and Aeschines were sweeter for figura
sententiae; for Demosthenes was strong, and therefore his speech was more
violent, as it were, casting out thunderbolts. Now for the grace of oratorical
number. Hyperbaton transmutatio (of (...)) is permitted, that it may be lawful
for the sugaring of speech to transpose their words in a sentence into such
places as they will make the best sound; for otherwise (as Fabius says) a
speech will be rugged, hard, and dissolute, and yawning, if we shall place the
words as they do arise; so that in Greek and Latin we may for sweeter sound use
by porbaton, but yet notwithstanding in our English tongue we must not: for use
has placed them Grammatically, and therefore they may not be changed.

Differenda igitur quaedam sunt and praesumenda.
Some words therefore (says he) are to be put back, and some to be put before:
and even as in building of Stones, every stone must not be laid as they come
next to hand, but as they will best lie together: so nothing will make a more
sweet speech than a fit mutation of the order of words. This oratorical number
has no rythme in it, but only in a certain repetition that is in epizeuxis and
epistrophe, as we shall hear hereafter, but is only in the observation of feet,
which Tully esteemed of so much worth, as that he affirmed the speeches to
exclaim, when the words fell fitly: and so our Sermons do much delight; yet in
them we must take heed we be not too curious, lest we draw the peoples minds
from the matter to the words, and so rob God; for so the speech will so delight
the ear and the affections, that the matter will not enter into the heart: and
without question Demosthenes had never laid his thunderbolts so, had they not
been cast from him with number: and therefore (says Tully) as wrestlers and
sword-players do shun every thing warily, and do not strike vehemently, that
whatsoever is profitable unto fight, the same may be comely unto the sight: so
an Oration does not make any deep wound, unless the stroke be fit, neither
does it well enough fly the force, except it know what is comely in the flying
of it: therefore as their motion is who are (...), unskilful at that play of
Olympus; so is their Oration who do not shut up their sentences with numbers.

CHAP. XVIII.
THis is the commendation of Tully of oratorical number in feet, which ought to
be much more acceptable to us than to the Author himself, who being enwraped
with the Schools and Comments of Rhetoricians thought this act to be most hard
which is in twenty orations observed by Ramus and showed to be most easy; so
much more excellent was the Orators nature and use than his art. Now here was
but one rule which was generally taught before, namely, That oratorical number
be unlike both to Poetry and it self: here he does commorari and tells us that
therefore in prose we must not use verse; yet sometimes you may for authority
or pleasure, as Tully of old did using the example of the Athenians: The next
rule is, that we make not the beginning or end of a verse, the beginning or end
of prose; neither that we begin or end our Oration with any sentence like to
verse: though indeed in the beginning there is less care, because there it
comes new, and therefore the people are ready to pass it away, and in the
middle of an Oration there is no consideration at all, but in the end must be
greatest care of all: hence Orators use to place some good Arguments in the
beginning, the worst in the middle, and the best at the latter end: now the end
is most to be regarded because it does most appear, and is best understood by
the people; so that though the beginning and middle, which peradventure they
have forgot, were not good, yet the conclusion being good, they will judge all
the rest to be good also: now in Oratory we are to observe the last six
syllables of a clause quae bissyllabis tantum pedibus definiri potest: neither
must we be too curious in observing the syllables of every clause. Now he comes
to the specials, and there he tells us that all syllables long, make a slow and
a rare clause; yet if they be all long, it is not amiss in a grave matter: but
all short are more rare than all long; for there it is too swift, and that
speech does not become the gravity of an Oratory, but long and short together
are more usual. Here note, that, as in Poetry, so also in Oratory, nihil sit,
extrema illa longa sit, an brevis.

Now this Oratorical number is learned two ways, either by taking a well set
sentence and displacing the words to see how they will sound, or to take some
sentence which is dissolved, and to place it better. Now there must be such
variety of feet in Oratory, as that of Licinius, that sweet words are framed as
Carvers work by art, and pavement engraven with -- or the like; and the
oratorical number does as well regard the sound of the letters, namely, that
one word do not end with a vowel, and the next word begin with a vowel; neither
that Rhetorical sentences run upon one letter, as, O tite, tute, tate, etc. but
that the consonants sound well as it does respect the measure of the syllables.

Sum de Graccho apud Censores.
Their Censors were two, which were to look to the manners of the people, and
had authority to correct them, and from their Office they had their name.

Causam judicii long aliam statuo.
For Tully judged all these sounds by his ear, but indeed it is by the
affections also.

Causam afferre Tullius nullam potest.
Yes, the other were more familiar to the people, and he knew what pleased them
best; now if there be consonants ending a clause, they must not be too stiff;
neither is it requisite that a verb should be last in a sentence, if there be
other words that will sound better: Tully's clause was esse videatur, Jambus
and Chorei duo: And thus much of Poetical dimension.

CHAP. XIX.
WE have heard of figura dictionis in dimensione soni, both Poetica and
Oratoria, where we are to note that Talaeus should have taught hyperbaton, and
that same literarum bonitas as general affections to all dimension, for the
hyperbaton is general to every tongue besides the French and our English
tongue; and therefore indeed most part of the Syntax of our English tongue
lies in the placing of the word.

Figura dictionis in repetit, est similis aut dissim.
That is like, or somewhat unlike: for so we heard in Logic that dissim. sunt,
quor. qual. and diversa; so that a dissimilitude has a dissension but only in
a diversity: so that it is somewhat unlike. Similis is either simil. soni, or
dictionis, and both of them either continue or disjuncte, i. e. either without
any thing coming between, or that has something interposed: Contin. is either
in eadem dictione, or diversa: in eadem dictione appellatur epizeuxis of (...),
because they are so near that they are not severed but only by a parenthesis,
which is no part of the sentence.

Hic solum numerus non vox iteratur.
It should be sonus not numerus, for that we heard of before: and again, he
says quae est in soni repetitione, therefore it should be sonus.

Interdum parenthesis interponitur.
Here he does admonish us of a Caution that might fall out, and that is of a
parenthesis, which though it be in the same sentence, yet is not part of it;
therefore does no harm to this figure. Now figura dictionis in diversa
sententia est anadiplosis, or climax.

CHAP. XX.
ANadiplosis is when the foregoing sentence ends in the same word that the
same sentence begins withal. It comes of (...) and (...) reduplicatio. He
says

Quando sonus idem.
Because where is the same word, there the same sound also, not contra: though
there may be the same word, and the same sound in this figure as well as in the
rest; therefore because he had not one word to comprehend sonus and dictio he
took the more general.

CHAP. XXI.
CLimax signifies a gradatio, or a climbing up the ladder of stairs, or the
like: it is a manifold anadiplosis; so that it is not an opposite species of
anadiplosis, but a property of it, as (...) is of Tropes: so that the
difference of them is this, That anadiplosis is in one word twice repeated, and
climax is in more words often iterated: and here in a climax note that always
the word is not the least of the former sentence that begins the second; I mean
it is not always in place, yet it is in sense, as torvaleaena lupum sequitur, not
sequitur lupum.

Caetera desiderantur plurimum.

NOTES OF PHYSICS.
PHysica est ars been naturandi.] (...) is natura, (...) understand (...) is
ars naturalis, or the art pertaining to nature; it is ars as appears by the
definition thereof and this affection.

Been naturandi.] i. e. to do the work of nature well, for Physica is the rule
of natures acting, so do Angels whilst they do their act; and it is the rule
whereby God made them. Neither is it only of contemplative things, but of the
practice, as may appear by the branches of it; as hortulana, agricultura. Si
natura Physica, at natura, ergo.

Natura est, quae est orta a principiis.
Natura est, quando aliquid natura fit. Nature is every thing, quatenus it is
ortum a principiis, as all is but God himself. Some think that corpus is
Physics object, but if we take corpus generally for that which has the three
dimensions, it is too large and belongs to Geometry, if it be taken more
specially as it is orta a principiis, it is no special: for natura est
spiritualis aut corporea; but because every thing is res nata, ergo every thing
is a natura. Neither is generation and corruption so large as natura or
principia, for they are both of the form only, neither were the Angels
generated, and so shall not corrupt, but created and so eternal per se. Neither
is nature and propagation reciprocal, but propagation and inconstant nature;
and so what is the reason that Parents love their Children -- but because of
the continuance of their progeny by their continual propagation? And this
shows that man was made to be unchangeable.

Some Philosophers say that Sciences have their subjects, but Arts have not:
but let them look to the distribution of ars generalis; and there they shall
see that Logic has an object, namely ratio, and Grammar, namely oration: and
nature comes of nascor, quasi res nata or orta, for nature will comprise any
thing in it but God. And so Aristotle does entitle his Books De ortu and
interitu, which do appertain to every thing but God; and hence comes ortus.
Kickerman would have a special art of Spirits, scilicet (...), and let him, but
yet 'twill be a branch of natural Philosophy. And for the Spirits, this is that
deceives them, they think if we give them matter, we must make them bodies:
but this is an inconsequence, for accidents have their matter, and yet are not
bodies: and matter belongs to Logic which is general, but corpus is special
to Geometry. But for the Angels, are they not many? and have they not any
community? Ergo then they have a genus. They say analogice, if they mean
symbolice, it is true. And they must have forms, for they are distinct: if they
have matter without form, then they do not exist; et contra; if they have
neither matter nor form, then they are infinite. And natura begins where
creation ends: So that it looks not at materia as 'twas created of nothing,
for so 'twas a miracle; but as it is now a nature and fit to essificare other
natures.

Principia sunt Materiale.

Principia sunt Formale.

These are first to be considered in Physics: and materia and forma belong to
Logic, and are adjuncts to the thing that is materia and forma. Now because we
know not what to call them, we are fain to borrow these words materiale and
formale: and then I say two things, First, the thing which is materiale and
formale: Secondly, That affection they have to be called materiale and formale.
Hence it follows (though it belong to Divinity) that, because every nature does
arise ex principiis it is not eternal; neither are these principiae eternal,
because they are from an ens primum. And from these principia do arise all
qualities, as Aristotle is right, and yet wrong; for he says, that they come
from the form: but they are qualities of the thing, and as the thing was made
of matter and form, so the qualities arise from the thing made of them both.
And principium materiale, is the thing whereof materia in Logic is the notion;
and so formale. And for materia to be prima and secunda in Logic, there is
nothing such, but the thing materiale is primum aut secundum: and for materiale
primum it cannot be defined, for it has nothing but the efficient before it:
only it is that which is primum substratum in natura, and formale is that which
is primum superstratum in natura; so that one is as 'twere the subject, the
other the adjunct. And so anima is in corpore tanquam adjunctum in subjecto,
And, (by the way) anima est tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, is false;
for anima is finite, and if it should be tota in qualibet part, then it should
be so by the same reason that we say God is totus in qualibet part, and so is
God: so that it is but pars in part: again it has limits of quantity, ergo it
has some figure, ergo partem extra partem, ergo position of parts. And primum
materiale is made of nothing, and so is next unto nothing, so that nature looks
at it as it does constitute things. And from these we may prove Divinity, for
every thing is made of nothing, and so by the same power may be resolved into
nothing: so that nature teaches nothing contrary to Divinity. And from these
are all qualities: and all qualities have their quantity according to their
subject; so Learning, when I say, Such an one is great Scholar. But Objection,
Some will say, What to be measured with a yard? No, but if a good Logician,
then so far forth as his Logic reaches.

Pricipium est materiale, formale.] From these principia may we conclude any
thing. And by how much more form and less matter any thing has; so much more
action there is. But

Quest. How then is it continued, if there be so little matter to comfort the
form?

Answ. The continuance of motion is no hurt to any thing; for it is but to
extend the matter, and bring it in frame: and hence it is that there is more
action in some things than in other things. So the Angels do most act, for they
have most form: yet we are to think that they have the three dimensions; and
many of them cannot be together, for there should be penetratio dimensionum,
ergo essentiarum. And there in the definition of Nature, we heard of ortus,
because that is general to every nature to be orta a principiis. But interitus
belongs only to inconstans natura. So that it is no good consequence to say,
such a thing had ortum, ergo it must have interitum: and the reason is, because
Angels and the highest Heavens have their principla congenita, and ergo, nature
cannot dissolve them. The Earth has less form than Watter; for if it had the
form of Water upon it, it would occupy more room. So that it is not from the
matter, but from the form. And every nature has these two principia; the
principium passionis is from the matter, actionis from the form. And from
these come limits of essence and of quantity, which reaches so far as the form
extends the matter: so the matter of earth reaches so far as the form extends
it, otherwise the matter of it might further be extended. And here is that
question amongst Physicians, Whether Hairs and Nails be parts of man, or not?
For if the form extends it self so far, (which it does not) then they should
be parts. Scaliger says, the Angels have quantity, but not praedicamental, but
spiritual quantity; which is nothing but their subtle quantity: and because
they have quantity, hence they must be under some figure, and they have their
place, and that is one.

Passionis. Actionis.
By virtue of the form there arises actio, by virtue of the matter passio:
Yet they arise from them both, but more especially from the one, than the
other: for every thing is effectum: ergo, it has causes, ergo these causes do
agere, ergo the effect does pati: so that every nature does pati. And again,
every nature has principia, from whence comes actio. Hence are these most
general, yet passio before; because it comes more principally from the matter,
as also because every thing does pati in its very generation before it be
perfect, And the materiale does pati, and the formale agere, yet the materiale
does agere also, so Aristotle says, materia does appetere formam, ut foemina
virum.

Crassities, Tenuitas.
Crassities comes from the contraction of the matter, as tenuitas from the
extension of the form in the matter: and one and the same thing may be crassum
and tenue: and as there is a certain limitatio of every thing by reason of its
principia, so there is a certain limitation in regard of extension and
contraction in them.

Tenuitas vocatur and subtilitas.
Subtilitas we call slenderness: subtilitas is the form spinning of the matter
by the form; crassities contra. So take a Portion of the first matter, and put
the form of fire upon it, and it will spin it finer than the form of air will
do, and so the rest. So that the act of the form on the matter extending it,
causes subtility; crassities is contra. Again, every thing has porositie in
it, and so it rents: and it is requisite there should be porosity in every
Element, for that there must be apposition of elements: and that there must be,
as in the earth, that it may bring forth fruit. And that which Kickerman calls
impurity in the elements, is nothing but this apposition of them. And for the
doctrine of the three Regions of the Air, it comes in the Meteors, as not being
so distinguished as it is an Element. but as the Meteors be in it.

Gravitas. Levitas.
Gravitas and Levitas do arise from the continual act of the form: for where
there is a great deal of form, and little matter, there is most levity. So in
the highest Heavens, because the principia were together, and there is much
acting of the form, hence is it most light, and has the highest place. And
gravity is a privation as it were of levity, as opacity is of light. And so the
same matter may be more light by the action of the form, not more grave. And
so the first matter was most grave, because it was without form: and as it was
every thing imperfectly so 'twas in loco, and was quantum imperfectly; though
limits of place and quantity be so far as matter and form reach: and 'twas
without form, ergo imperfect. And for so many legions of Spirits in a man's
body, we are to imagine them to have distinct places; so when we pull a thing,
we would have it in two places, ergo it rents. And acts are either internal,
when the form extends the matter; and hence is subtilitas and crassities, and
this is the true arising of subtilitas, some say it arises from heat, and
rarity: but there may be subtility where these are not, as in the highest
Heavens: and this is plain in the Elements which have one common matter, and
yet by their forms they are more or less extended: neither is heat the cause of
extension, for the earth will be more extended, if the form of Water be in it.
Again, when the form extends the matter beyond its reach, till it rent, this is
rarity: Gravitas is from more matter, and less form, levitas contra: The
external act is of the matter and form. Raritas and Densitas. Rarity is the
extension of the matter by the form, that it rents and becomes porose, and so
is every thing, for if Angels can extend themselves, then it is from their rarity
and density, and ergo from porosity: and so for Adam, and the patriarchs, and
the rest, they being in the highest Heavens, there must needs be cessio
corporum, and there must be no vacuum, ergo there is a caelestis aura that does
cedere. Scaliger says when the air is extended it is porosus, and yet he cannot
tell what it is that is in the pores of it; for if it were air, then it should
still be one continued body with it: but all the Elements are together by
apposition; so that there are other elements in it. And raritas and densitas
are not qualities, says Aristotle, but the distance of the parts, and as it
were a kind of ratio. And these may be of the same thing as the air may be more
rare, and more dense. And these are internal acts. The external, act the power
of action and passion: For where there is much potentia actionis, there must be
much potentia passionis, and so antipathy: where if there be much action, then
there must be patientis fuga, or else it perishes. Now where there is much
action and affection to his like as is cause, effect, subject or adjunct, this
is Sympathy.

Multiplex and discontinuum unum mundum efficit ordine, et hinc ascensus.
descensus.

Multiplex and discontinuum unum mundum efficit contiguitate, and hinc nullum
datur vacuum.

The world consists of many parts, which are not continua, but contigua: yet
we may call the world one, as he that made it is one; scilicet in method or
order, not in continued quantity. And by reason, that all things are one by
method, hence there can be no vacuum: First, because there would be a crypsis
of this method: again, vacuum is non ens; but only ens a primo is part of the
world, ergo not non ens, for nothing cannot be a part of something. Nature is
manifold, but it is made one by method: as every rule of Logic are diverse in
themselves, but make but one act by method, so nature being manifold in it
self, is made one by method. And here are a great many Controversies answered;
as, That the world is not one by continuity but method, we know is the wisdom
of God, according to which God created and governs things; ergo the things do
appetere their place, as God has placed them: hence it is that things ascend
and descend. Some say it is for their own preservation: which indeed is the
final cause, but the efficient cause is method. And as a Painter, when he
paints a thing, should make a deformity, if he should set things out of order:
so nature, if things should not be rightly placed, so that there be no crypsis
of method. And here comes in the world, which is multiplex and discontinua
natura: here also by reason of this method there comes to be contiguity of
every thing; so that there cannot be vacuum: for then the world should not be
one, and so we should make two worlds, and make nothing something. And though
Gods wisdom, Power, and other Attributes, be, and in God, yet he would have
them appear instar omnium, and to be sufficient for all things: and so he made
them many, to show the variety of this wisdom. Now again, as they are many in
themselves, yet they must be but one, to show that the variety of this wisdom
is but one in him. And they are in one method, and so make one world. So we say
in Logic, and it is sometimes true, That the cause and the effect be like: and
so is God and the world. So the world is but one: and is round, as being the
most capacious figure of all: now it is one, not in continuity, for then it
should but have one quantity, and so one form, but as before in contiguity as
it were (...), i. e. an heap, but an orderly heap, and so is but one in method.
And hence every thing desires its place and order by the rule of method; which
commands that natura prior must praecedere: ergo the outmost things must first
be made; and ergo they must have more form than matter, that they may ascend:
and so by order, from the highest nature, goes down to the lowest: And for
those Philosophers which make Nature to be God, I doubt it, and methinks it is
like their opinion which made the Godhead the form of every thing. But we must
not wrong God, but acknowledge the principia to be causes of things, and give
them their effects, for they say in that such qualities -- such a thing, it is
from God: But as a man does write with pen, so God has made a creature which
works of it self, even as the Pen writes, but is governed by God even as the
pen by the writer. So that natures work is when the two causes do work
according to Gods Logicum artificium: and Nature is the cause of natural
effects; and is to be distinguished from God. So that here we see the
disposition and order of every thing. So when I see a Tree bring forth fruit, I
conclude there is Logic; and yet neither tree nor fruit has reason: ergo
there is one greater that has reason: which methinks were sufficient to
convert any Atheist. And from this order of things comes contiguity: for there
must be no vacuum, as before, since that would be a breach of method. So we see
Water and Earth will go up even into the element of Fire for the preservation
of the unity of this world. And if there should be a vacuum it must needs be
something or nothing, then in the world or out of the world; if out of the
world, then it were not all things; if in the world, then a part of the world,
then as before in ens it should be ens; if in the world and not ens, then the
world must be two. And from method it is that the Lodestone desires to stand
North and South; and so does every thing, yea naturally, not guided by counsel
desire natale solum. And when we do transplant trees, it is a monster and
against nature; and so that one woman should nurse an other woman's child: And
one woman may have three children, though she have but two dugs, so that she
have milk for them. And from sympathy it is, that the iron goes to the
lodestone, for it is his food; ergo his preserving cause; and the stone may act
through a Table. For descensus. What is the reason that fire comes down?
Common Philosophers ascribe it to plate, which belongs to subjectum; but it is
place, which is order, and belongs to method: and that is the next cause,
though the final cause be as before, ne detur vacuum. So when I cast a stone,
that it flies, it is propria forma; the reason why it flies from me is that it
does pati, and ergo does fly his enemy. The common Philosophers ascribe it to
the air, which in very deed does hinder it as themselves shall confess; for
cast a stone upward, and when it falls down again, what is the reason it
moves faster when it is near the center, than when it is farther off, but because
when it is near the center there is less resistance of the air than there was
above? So what is the reason we take force to strike with an Ax, and that goes
farther, than if we set it upon a thing and lay great weight on it? because the
wood can resist the Ax well enough. Now we lift up our hands, because all the
vital spirits in the legs and other parts of the body come to enable that part
which acts most; and the higher it goes the more forciblly it comes, for
that it is more able to resist the air; as also there is a double motion,
natural and violent: and it will come down more easily, because it is a natural
motion; not upward so well because it is violent unto it. So a thing that hangs
down, that part moves most which is farthest from the center, for that it
suffers violence. So what is the reason, that put salt Beef into the Sea and
it will be fresh; but put fresh in, and it will be salt? because it is the nature
of salt to constringe; and that is the reason salt Beef occupies less place
than fresh does: now its pores being filled with salt, the salt water cannot
get in, but only the fine water pierces in, and so takes away the salt: but if
it be fresh the pores be so open, that the salt water enters in, and so it
becomes salt.

Materiale est (...) in natura primum substratum: and this is fons passionis.
Formale est essentia in natura primum superstratum, as before: and this is fons
actionis. And from these principia many things in nature may be made manifest.
As from hence, things natural have finitness of essence, which belongs to
every nature: and thence limits of quantity, as the Angels have; and thence
they are always under some figure; thence also have they limits of place; and
so Zanchius says, an Angel is in his own place. Again, if every natural thing
have these principia, then it is principiatum; ergo it is in tempore, and had a
beginning: hence nature must have an efficient; ergo not eternal: and this
efficient only can turn the constant nature into nothing; but they are not
resolvable per se, because they are proxima to nothing in their kind: otherwise
if nature should resolve them, it could work a miracle, which is above nature,
for nature found them created, and must so leave them, for creatio and
annihilatio are not effects of nature, but above it: Hence the soul of man
could not be created by nature; for then either of something or nothing; not of
nothing. For creatio is above nature, if of something, then resolvable again.
Again, if every thing in nature be of these principia, hence is generatio ex
aliquo, and corruption in aliquid; from these principia comes actus and
potentia; actus est ex acto formae in materiam; potentia est ex actu formae per
materiam: From these inward acts come (1) levity and gravity; and there are two
causes of levity, the first is a form more active; the second is less
proportion of matter: The causes of gravity are contra: again the causes of
subtility are more proportion of form, and more active, and less proportion of
matter: again rarity and density are degrees of porosity; and every thing is
porose; so Angels do contract themselves, by retracting (as I may say)
themselves into their pores; neither need we to fear vacuum ergo, in the
highest heavens; for there is a calestis aura to prevent it: so also the
highest heavens are porose, neither is there any door to open and shut, but God
does that at his pleasure: so also fire can extend and tontract it self, and
that because of rarity and so porosity; much more ergo the Angels. And
extension and contraction comes from porosity: which will plainly appear in the
Elements which are together by apposition; for one is in the pores of an other;
and this is that which Kickerman calls a misture; and indeed besides this
apposition there is a kind of imperfect misture in them, so that I may call the
Earth or any of them a Mere. Potentia is ex actu formae per materiam. I call it
rather potentia than Qualitas; because the other is always in act, but this
sometimes does not work. This potentia excitatur ad actionem by passio; and
this passio is either amica or inimica: amica is that sympathy which is between
consentanies; inimica that antipathy between dissentanies: and these are ex rei
alicujus preservationis appetitu. Now from both these comes motus which is
either naturalis, or violentus: naturalis ex amica passione; violentus ex
inimica* Naturalis is flower at the beginning, and swifter at the end; because
it is nearer to that which it does appetere, and so moves faster: and this
shows that there is an appetitio of consentanies, and as I may call it a kind
of raptus. Motus violentus is swift at the beginning, and flower at the end;
for it makes haste, till it be out of the reach of its enemy, and then it
thinks it may go more slowly: and according as agens acts, so does patiens
pati: now this patiens is ergo debilior, or fortior: if debilior, then
resistentia, and as I may say, oppugnatio: if fortior, then also resistentia
and patientis fuga.

Natura est constans, aut inconstans.
God made all things for his glory; ergo he made some things constant, to show
his immutability and constancy: and some inconstant, to show the variety of his
wisdom, scilicet that it was (...) all sufficient and infinite. Things ergo
constant, not in regard of the Creator, for he can resolve them: but per se in
respect of their own nature, and so are not subject to interitus; neither does
it follow that if they had ortus, ergo interitus; for these constant natures
never have any privation, ergo no contrariety. Ergo no interitus, so that their
matter and form were simul ingenerated, and the one never without the other.
Nature is manifold, but made one by method; and here comes in the world as a
general affection of nature: and every nature is a member of the world, and so
a part thereof: so that the world is not one, as before, by continuity but
contiguity: and for the preservation of this worlds unity it is that things
ascend and descend, rather than from their gravity and levity; for as every
thing does appetere sui ipsius preservationem, so totius conservationem also;
and hence they come down and go up, for else the world would be two, for there
would be vacuity: so that gravity and levity are not properly causes of ascent
and descent: for a heavy thing though it be out of its place and be high, yet
it is not there heavy by method; and so alight thing though it be in place of an
heavy thing, yet it desires not to ascend to prevent vacuum. It is praeter
naturam that a man swimeth on water, and sinketh not.

Constans, cujus principia congenita in ipsa primum.
The constant natures cannot be resolved; as the highest heavens: because they
are to be a perpetual habitation of perpetuals: And these are most strong:
hence the Devil is so strong against man if God did not restrain him. Hence
they are in Aevum; for though they had a beginning, yet no end: and these have
most form, and least matter, and most action in them.

Constans vel Coelum, aut intelligentia.
Coelum. It has least matter of any thing, except Angels; hence is it so
extended, and more pure than any of the elements. The Schools call it quinta
essentia: and I am content that they should call the highest heavens so: for
it is not miscible as the Elements are. The Elements are subjugated, for their
essence is in every thing, but it is cut and so mingled in little parts: then
there is a proportion of every one of them; then the forms take hold one of
another, and so they are united, and this is the unio alteratorum; for they are
but only altered, and a third thing made of them. And this proportion is
according to arithmetic proportion. And the highest heaven is most firm, which
may be because of its solidity. Coelum is constant because it must contain all
the rest, yea the inconstant: Again, it must be constant, as before, because
the inhabitants are so.

Object. It has no inhabitants?

Answ. It has: for there are two deformities in things, first, to be without
form; secondly, void: Ergo this must not be void; ergo the Angels are in it.
Now these highest heavens have their principia congenita in them: otherwise the
matter should be before the form, and so there would be a privatio, and not an
habit; and then nature might resolve them, and so they should not be constant.
But here may arise Two doubts:

Object. 1. If these principia be congenita, then how were they before the
effect?

Answ. That which Ramus says of the form, that simul ingeneratur cum effecto,
is true in them: now this is a property of the form; and a property we know is
an adjunct to the thing, whereof it is a property: and the subject is before the
adjunct, ergo, forma before this property, and this property before the effect,
and ergo the form is in them before they be effected.

Object. 2. If these principia be congenita, then why should the Material Cause
in Logic be handled before the formal, since here they are both simul?

Answ. As the form was before the effect, so was their matter before their
form, and every effect is motu but in God. So in the Creation of an Angel both
matter and form moves together, yet first the matter, and then the form: So
first we apprehend the substratum, and then the superstatum: as imagine, in
such a point the matter and form begins, and after as the matter runs on, so
the form runs along with it: So we may see it more plainly in the generation
and corruption of the Elements: for even as the one corrupts, so presently
follows that which is generated: So when I hold both my hands together and move
them, they both move, and yet the one moves first: so for the creation of
Angels. So that there is a priority, and posteriority, and yet a simul: and
nature where it finds them, there it must leave them: and it finds their
principia congenita, ergo it cannot resolve them; hence cannot they be divided.
Again they must be most valid and strong, that they may prevail over the
inconstant natures; as also that they may do the work of the Lord as it should
be done. Yet there is resistentia and raptus betwixt them and the inconstant
natures. Again, they are actuosissimae, for they must prevail with the
inconstant natures: hence they have most form and least matter: hence they are
most light, and so have the highest place: Again most subtle and rare, hence
is their great extension and little contraction: most subtle; hence their
matter most pure and finely spun. Our Divines say the matter of the highest
heavens and of the elements is all one, but I would rather call the highest
heavens a quintae essentia with Aristotle, for it is not commiscible as the
Elements are.

Object. But they have one genus namely nature, ergo the same matter?

Answ. There is a community of them, but not in their next genus, ergo not in
their matter: Coelum or Intelligentiae.] As of the inconstant natures, some
have life, and some have not: so likewise of the constant, some live, and some
do not. Coelum is first, for it is the others place, ergo their subject, which is
before the adjunct. This Coelum first consists of parts which shine most
brightly, for there is neither Sun, Moon, nor Stars, and there must not be
darkness: but these parts are, as I may say, perfused with a most excellent
light. Which is after a sort resembled unto us in gems and precious stones.
These parts are foris, or intus: foris is tectum or solum: tectum est quod
tegit omnia and est extimum. Neither is our Savior Christ's body highest of any
thing; for there is this tectum above it. And this must needs be the greatest
and best figured, that is, most round; and it is in spatio tanquam in loco; yet
differing from other things, because it is not externally limited by any other
thing but only in spatio. Solum is that which is gone upon. Intus is aura
coelestis which is most pure and most desaecated from other things.

Intelligentiae.
In Divinity they are called Angels of their office and place: and their matter
is the fame with the highest heavens: as those creatures which live in the
earth have most earth in them, and those that are in the water, air, or fire,
have most water, air, and fire. And the Angels have least matter, and most
form of any: hence are they most subtle: hence in their greatest condensation
so fine, that we cannot see them. And these have reason whereby they see most
accutely all other things; for they are made for God and man's use. They have
Will also, for where there is Reason, there must be Will. And thirdly, they
have local motion; which is by extension as the Sun beams. And in the good
Angels there is no superiority and inferiority: but in the evil, Beelzebub is
said to be the chief: which is but only the opposing of him to Christ of Bagnal
Zebub. They are most active of any thing, having most form and least matter of
any thing: and they are cum ratione and voluntate, active, because they have
the greatest charge of any creature: cum ratione, that they may do wisely; cum
voluntate, that they may do it cheerful: and so they are said to do the Will of
God speedily, willingly, and wittingly. They have least matter: hence can they
so extend it; and hence they are so subtle. Again they are most active per
materiam: hence most swift in motion: which motion is by extension, and so by
this celerity contracted again. Some Philosophers hold, That the Angels move
the heavens; and their reason is, because their motion is so wonderful. But so
they may say, the Angels move a Plant, because it brings forth an apple which
is so wounderful. Now these Angels having so subtle matter; hence in their
greatest condensation, they are far beyond the edge of our eye to see them:
hence are they called spiritual from their subtility. And as the highest
heavens are Olympus, i. e. (...), most shining, so are the Angels: Olympus was
a very high hill, and there was thundering and lightning in the top of it: now
they thought it was above the clouds, and so the Sun made it so bright. Again,
the Angels are so strong: hence it is that the enemy can break down trees and
houses, and cast down steeples: so the Soul of man is swift, and is not as some
think in one part principally, but in every part of man: and according as the
body increases, so does it extend it self. Hence also an Angel being so
strong, can carry a man, as he did Philip. The Angels do understand a thing as
we do mediately; else they should do it by a miracle, for they cannot see Gods
idea but when he pleases: and God has genised every thing, ergo they must
analyze it, and that by the same Logic that we do: yea, and they do labor and
observe by induction of singulars as we do. And they can see and hear; so they
attend in the Church at Sermons: and so Paul means in the Corinthians, when
he says, We should use decency for offending the good Angels: for so he
means it: neither can do be understood of the Ministers, for he did not need
to speak it of himself. Again, did not the Serpent speak to man and woman in
the garden? Yes: but that was with a Serpents tongue. Yea but with that he
would not speak.

Inconstans natura is elementum elementatum.
Elementum est ex prae existente or rather praesubsistente materia. Hence comes
generatio and corruption; for the constant natures have only an ortus, but not
an interitus, because their principia were congenita: but these inconstant
natures have both generation and corruption, and hence are they called
inconstant. And here because the matter was before the form; hence it may be
resolveable again: hence it is that the constant natures do prevail with the
inconstant, when there is a fight betwixt them. Generatio est novae formae
acquisitio. Corruption est veteris formae amissio. In these inconstant natures
the matter was before the form; hence was there in them a privatio: Yet the
matter was capable of a form hence the form being once ingenerated must still
continue in the matter. For alteratio qualitatum, we heard of it before; for
it is also general to the Angels. Now because the matter was subsistent without
the form; hence it may be separated from the matter: Yet because simul
ingeneratur cum re ipsa; hence it cannot be separated ex toto, but ex part
tantum. So that here the form does as it were rise upon the back of the
matter. And as there is never in nature a formale without a materiale, so by
consequence there is never a materiale without a formale: and the matter is put
without the form as it were (...), as the Schools rightly teach.

Elementum aut elementatum. I choose these terms rather than any other, because
I would show the course and order that nature observes in her working.
Elementum est natura inconstans, quod ex materiali principio immediate oritur:
For elementarium, or that which is made of the elements is ex materiali
principio, but mediately and at the second hand: even as method in Logic
disposes arguments at the second hand, as they make axioms. First for the
names, Elementum, some say it is quasi alimentum, because our nourishment is from
them: and true it is, that that whereof we are made, by the same we are
nourished: but here it signifies that which is lowest and most simple next to
the materiale principium. Now it is natura because orta principiis: yet
inconstans, because the matter was before the form. Immediate. Because it was
made immediately of the first matter: hence no other thing was immediately of
the first matter: hence all the secundum materiale must needs be in the four
Elements, otherwise it should not be perfect: again, this was not a good
definition. Again, because it is immediate: hence there is nothing mistus, but is
mistus immediate ex elementis: so our nourishment before it does nourish us in
the liver, is turned into the four humors, whereof every one has some element
predominating in it, and so is turned into the elements again. No other thing
is immediate ex principio materiali, so that the four elements must needs take
it up all: hence again the elements are most simple of inconstant natures, ergo
they must have one common matter, and every one his peculiar form. Now from
this community of matter hence they are opposite one to another, because they
may be in one subject (but natura constans and inconstans have not one common
subject) and that rule of opposites does evidently demonstrate that there is a
primum materiale principium, because the elements are opposite by reason of
that common matter: for the form is in the matter as the adjunct in the
subject: hence it is that substances are as well contraries as accidents, for a
quality can but alter a quality, not a substance. Again, because it is
immediately ex materiali principio, hence there is no misture but only a
putting together of the materialia and formalia principia: and here in the
elements there is such a proportion of matter and form, that other qualities
beside those before do arise: even from the portion of the matter and form
there is greater action and less passion, or contra: hence also because we
know not their forms, we are fain to distribute them from their qualities,
hence these are the prima materialia. Neither could there be a misture without
many formalia: now the elements are most simple: hence the elements have fewer
qualities, than the elementaria have, because their composition are most
simple, and so not having so many forms to act neither such a composite matter
to pati and reagere: Hence having few qualities they are so soon corrupted: so
fire will soon corrupt the air: hence is also the easy transmutation of the
elements, which made Keckerman think the elements were imperfecta: but they are
perfecta, though they be sooner corrupted than mista. Now in the elements
themselves there is so much sooner corruption by how many fewer qualities there
are betwixt them: so fire cannot turn water into it self, but by the means of
the air, that is first expelling the cold which is contrary, and then driving
out the moisture, which shows that there is air in it.

Elementum est calidum aut frigidum.
This distribution into calor and frigus, takes the elements in order, and here
in there is contrariety: and these qualities are firstly in the elements; for
the constant natures are not hot nor cold; because they having such abundance
of form and so little matter, hence the matter cannot resist and pati the
forms act. Calor is when the form has such a portion of matter that it can
actupon it, and the matter pati and reagere, yet not so as it takes away the
forms act, but makes it rather the greater: and hence est calor: for because
the form of fire is more active than the form of air, hence it is most hot. Cold
is contra. So that I may say, Elementum is when the form acts upon the
matter: Calidum is the strong act of the form upon the matter: Frigidum is the
weak act of the form upon the matter: So fire is hot and dry: hot because of
the strong act of the form upon the matter; dry, because this heat acted by the
form drives out the moisture: So we see when fire does heat any thing it
expels the moisture and so leaves it dry. So the fire causes heat in it self,
and outwardly also when it is condensated: so in -- its parts are united and
ergo it will burn which shows it must needs be hot: and from this heat
follows the quality of brightness; which is chiefly in the fire for that is
(...). The lowest element is most opacum; the middle elements are indifferent,
inclining to light because of the fire and to opacitie by reason of the lowest
element. Some say raritie is caused by heat, and so they say the fire does
rarifie. But it does as well condensate. Indeed the fire by reason of the forms
act on the matter is more subtle than the other elements; and hence will more
easily enter into the pores of them and so raraifie them. But put leather into
the fire and it will condensate that and make it shrink by reason of the
moisture in it; and so the earth is left dry. So it rarifies the air in getting
into the pores of it, and drives away its form, and so makes it (by extending
it) the more subtle, and carries it with it. So in a gun, the fire's form
acting upon the matter cannot be kept in such a little room: ergo it bursts out
of the gun and breaks the air. So air is very subtle in its parts and will
enter into the very pores of the thing and by reason of its moisture and heat
will make a thing swel, and so rarifies it and makes it occupy a greater place.
Water we say being rare becomes air and air being dense becomes water: the form
of the one getting uper hand, then the form of the other contracts it self and
so becom^ condensate; as the other form extends it self and so becomes rare,
not that it becomes rare, but that by the act of the form it is made to occupy a
greater place. Heat is common to both fire and air; but fire is first, because
it is more formal and less material for the same portion of the matter takes a
greater place has a more active form and here ergo the matter does less
reagere and the body of the fire may be bigger than the body of the earth but
not in proportion, so a pottle of fire is more than a pint of earth. Calidus is
that in which there is more formale than materiale: ignis is that which has
most materiale and least formale in constant natures: hence it is the highest of
al other elements and there keeps the highest place. Yet I cannot say it is
merely light, for the highest heavens are above it ergo lighter than it, also
it is of a most equal temper and light yet so as not burning but per accidens.
Neither did Cardane need to think that the heavens should burn up, if there
was that element of fire, for it does urere and comburere only per accidens; as
it is condensated for the higest heavens it cannot burn, for the parts cannot
burn, for the parts cannot be separated, because they are congenita. Again the
highest heavens are most subtle and solid ergo will not burn: but in carbone
the fire is apparent, for it is condensated, and because of its subtility it is not
per se seeable, but only in materiae crassitie. So we see in our fire that when
our shins are burnt fire comes unto them, for t^s not air, as some think for
why then should we not roast meat in the air? And yet the fire coming to our
shins is not seeable though feelable, ergo much less seeable in its own
element; yet it will appear in a glass being held at our shins; so in a glass
window being gathered together and beams sent down by the sun and in hot
countries where the beams come down perpendicularly they make a great heat. Some
think these beams are not real but be sent down by the sun, and beget lumen in
the air, but then what becomes of that lumen when the sun goes down: but gather
the sun beams into a glass and they will burn, ergo they are fire; again air
will not burn, ergo it is not it. The fire is that where the form does most
extend the matter of all inconstant natures and so is most moist hot and dry.
The air is that which is most and hot; here the form is not altogether so
active and ergo the matter is not so extended; again here the act being less,
hence it is not so hot as the fire, neither is the matter, ergo so acted upon,
and ergo is neither so dry as the fire: again it is most moist for the form
cannot dry it because of the heat in it, and hence it is most diffuse, and ergo
most moist and most moistning; hence it is that air will so replere any thing
that there be no vacuum.

Frigidum is water or earth: cold is in both these by reason their forms are
not so active, and their matter is more abundant and more --, and this appears
in diverse extending of the same matter having diverse forms. So if the same
matter have the form of water it will be cold; if of air it will be moist; if
of fire it will be hot: ergo these qualities are from the greater and lesser
act of the form. These elements are cold because they have more matter or less
form. So they say the Moon is cold, because she takes up vapors and yet not
able to take them up to the fire leaves them and they become cold. so put
lukewarm water to scalding water and it will be more cold; because it dulleth
the forms act of the scalding water. Now in the elements there is one common
matter to them all: now that one is more subtle and another more dense; it is
from the forms act upon the matter; neither the forms act alone nor the mattes
alone: but both together cause these qualities; which indeed are rather acts
than qualities So the fire does act continually. Now as the form does act
inwardly upon the matter; so we say it is habitual: as it is acted by them both
outwardly and so more sensibly, so we call it an act. So the vegetative foul
does continually vegetate. And in these I say there is more matter and less
form: hence the form is clogged with the matter that it cannot act, and so it is
dull; as a beetle against a wool sack. Frigidum where there is more matter than
form; that is, the proportion of the matter is greater than the proportion of
the form. Hence it is probable that the first matter was equally divided into
four elements, and that one had at the first as much as an other, but
afterward according as the form did extend or contract them; so came one to be
greater than the other, aut contra. But here it may be Objected, Is the water
greater than the earth? or was it as great as the earth? Yes, the water was
greater than the earth for quantity: so at Noe's flood we read how high it was
above the highest hills: again we know it overflowed the whole earth, though God
now for the preservation of his creatures, which were to live upon the earth,
has divided the waters, and has placed some of them above in the firmament,
and some of them below on the earth; and but for the waters in hollow places in
the earth, the diameter of the earth would be a great deal less. And that the
hills are so many cisterns to hold water it is plain, because water comes out of
hills, and the earth is full of water, so the river Niger runs under the
earth; so the river Aesopus runs under the mediterrane sea; so that though
some object, that the sea is but in some parts some 2 miles deep, yet there are
many waters under the earth. Frigidum est aqua et terra. Water first, where
there is more matter and less form, but not in proportion with the earth. Hence
because of the abundance of their matter these elements are seeable: the other
elements being hot are not seeable, and that with great reason, namely that we
might more perfectly and more clearly see the things that move in them which we
could not have done so well had they been seeable: as in water we cannot so
perfectly see fish. Water is most cold and moist by reason of the forms act
being more active than the form of earth. But how then is it most cold?
Because, though the form act more than the form of earth, yet the matter does
so strongly reagere, that it is more sensibly cold because of the greater action
and passion; even as when a ball or a stone is cast forcibly unto me, if I meet
it with my hand it does more sensibly agere, than if I take it gent ly in my
hand. It Is also moist, because it being exceedingly cold is also moist, and
moisture causes softness; so that softness is a quality arising from moisture
and is properly of the air and secondly of the water. The earth is most dry:
because the form of it is so little active, cannot extend it ergo to make it
fluid, and so it makes it dry. Fire is more fluid than the earth but not so
dry: air having heat which does extend, moisture makes it most moist but not
dry. Again it is cold but not actually as water, because the form does not act so
much upon it, as the form of water upon water. Again hence the earth is most
solid and least porous of any of the elements. Again the earth is most dark and
opake of all the elements; the air and water are capable of light and opacitie:
because the creatures that live in them, have a sensible life, and should have
light and darkness night and day. Thus much of the elements simply considered
as they are elements: now there is not only an apposition of them, but a kind
of imperfect misture; for they cannot give sapor and such other qualities as
they have, but as they are mista: Ergo we shall hear of them again in the
meteors, as also of the regions of the air, and of mare, and of other rivers
which are meteors.

Elementarium.
Elementare est quod ex elementis est. Ergo for its matter it is made
immediately of the materiale principium: and for the form of it, it is made
proxime ex formis elementorum.

Obj. But then the forms of things should be composed?

Answ. So they are: even as the body is composed of many parts, which are
composed of many similar parts, which contain both matter and form. Again,
Mistio est miscibilium alteratorum unio. Ergo it is mistio that makes a thing
unum: then must the forms be mista, and so composite, for that makes the thing
unum. Now for those that say the forms of things are from the influences, I
would ask them, What it is that unites the matter and form together: for in
Logic we know there is nothing betwixt the matter and the form? Some say that
spirit is the vinculum of the soul and body: yea, but the soul is not the form:
and again, what shall unite them in a stone where there is no such spirit?
Object. 2. Some deny the forms of the elements to be in the mist: But if they
be not; how do they return into the elements again: and again it is granted by
all that the qualities are there, ergo their forms must be there: and the
elements are actu in the mist; yea, and are agents there as we shall hear
hereafter in mistione. Now the greatest objection I find against this, is this;
say they, How can things without life cause things to live? There may be a
vivens of them, because anima vegetiva, and sensitiva are nourished by
nutriment: for spiritus vitalis is the vegetative soul, which is nourished by
humidum radicale, and has air predominating in it; and spirit us animalis is
that sensitive soul which is nourished by moisture and heat, and has fire
predominating in it: and the common people do use to say that these do
vanescere in auras: and the spiritus animalis is made of the vital spirit, and
the vital spirit is made of a natural spirit which arises from the meat which
we eat: ergo if these can nourish and keep life, they can also cause life. If
they shall say the vital spirit is not made of the natural, then it must be
made of nothing, and so should be eternal in nature. Keckerman says, the
elements are corpora incompleta; which is most false, for they should not exist
but in composites; but they do in themselves, for they are effects. I rather
choose this word elementarium than mistum, because mistum is but an adjunct to
it. Elementarium est quod est ex elementis; and so the first matter, but at the
second hand: and hence it appears that the elements go into the mistum. But the
greatest Objection that ever I met with concerning this, is that, How can
things which have not life, cause life? Yes: For life is but an act, and a
composite act: Again, life is preserved and maintained by the elements, ergo
may be caused by them; so the animal spirits are made of the vital, and the
vital of the elements, not only as they are acts, but also as they are membra,
for there is no other soul in Plants and Beasts, for they are next to the
reasonable soul. Now if they shall say these spirits vital and animal be not
made of the elements, but of some other thing, I would ask them, Of what, of
the spirits which are in the meat? Then the forms of Plants and Beasts must be
made of the forms of Herbs, and of such things as they feed on. if they will
say, they be made of the influences; they are then either accidents, which
cannot be forms, or substances: if substances, then they should be portions of
the matter and form of the Stars, and then the stars should not remain the
same thing. Mistio, they say is alteratorum unio; so that in the framing of the
forms of things there must be an alteration and another form distinct from any
of these forms from whence it did arise: even as in a Chest made of boards, I
cannot in propriety of speech call them boards, but a Chest made of these
boards: So in the things that are mist I cannot say, the elements forms are
their forms, but it is a mist form composed of the elements which are incomplete
in the mist. So that true it is there is an alteration, but a generation also;
though generation will not serve the turn, because there is not a corruption of
the elements, which make the things: neither indeed do generation and
corruption go always together, for when a chicken is made of an egg, there is
not a corruption but a perfecting of the egg, neither is there acquisitio novae
formae, but veteris perfectio. And the elements are members of the
elementaries: but a part of fire is not a membrum of fire, but part of the
matter and form of fire. Now here is the chief question, How these are in the
mist. First of all, the elements by the mutual action and passion of their
matter and form are holden together, and make one simple thing: and now these
have one common matter, but distinct forms, and so are opposite, which will
ergo fight together, and one fly the other, except there be something to hold
them together: hence it appears there must be more things than one in a mist.
Now contraries will soon destroy one another, except they have some stickler,
as I suppose air comes to earth and makes it clammy; then the water comes to
temperate earths dryness, that it cannot overcome the airs moisture; then the
fire comes to water to maintain airs heat: so that there is a discors concordia
and a concors discordia; and then all the forms must so act as one does not
dominare over another, as it is in things imperfectly mixed, which do not ergo
long continue: so that the forms act must here needs be abated. Again the
matter is but one, ergo it is natures care to keep every little particle of the
matter with its form there temperately acting. And being so close and so
divided, hence it is that they are far beyond the acies of our eyes to see them;
which is plain in natural things; and so in artificial things, we see sometimes
cloth made of wool of so many colors, which are so finely mingled in the
cloth that we can hardly distinguish all the colors. And these parts in the
mist are so diminute, that indeed they come next to penetratio corporum.
Elementarium est proxime ex elementis. For we find that they are resolved into
the elements; ergo made of them: again they are nourished by the elements, ergo
made of them; both for matter and form. Which is thus proved, for they are
both in mistis, and of the matter is not made form, nor of the form matter:
again, those things which have life, their life is maintained by the elements;
and if it be a good reasoning to say, the body is nourished by the elements,
ergo made of them, it is as good to prove the form to be made of their forms
also: again, natural, vital, and animal spirits are the souls of Plants and
Beasts, and are made of the elements; the natural are made in the liver, the
vital in the heart, and the animal in the head; and if animal be an univocum
genus to homo and brutum, it must be all in them, and the same in them both,
for univocum is idemre and ratione.

Mistio is more than alteratio; and yet we cannot call it generatio, because
there is not corruption which is veteris formae amissio: but both matter and
form are turned into the elements, and for the matter they have one common
matter, and they have a camposite form arising from the forms of elements an it
still remains in the same part of the matter that it was in the simple. Now
in the mist the forms must subigere, which is by action and passion, so that
there are contraries in every mist: and in mists there must not be a proportion
of the elements in quantity but in act. Consider ergo in every mistion 1. that
there be a proportion of the elements according to act, 2. that these parts are
so imminute and almost indivisible that they cannot be seen; though all the
parts in the mist are not equally minute: for the more formal elements as they
are more subtle in themselves so also more minute in the mist. And good reason
it is that these should be so because these must act and subdue one another: so
to earth which is the -- as it were, comes to air, and there exceeding drought
and exceeding moisture fight together, and the air does as it were rarifie the
earth; now these two being contraries will soon destroy one another if there be
not a stickler to take up the controversy betwixt them, scilicet water, as
before, and to it fire; and so these make a knot of good fellows. Now these
parts thus fastened one upon another, according as they hold together such shall
be the continuance of the mist. And these acts of the forms of these minute
parts may be compared to so many pins or nayls which hold things together: as in
the mist we see that fire cannot get out because it is nailed in by water, nor
air for it is pinned in by earth. Now for that question how the forms become one
since it remains in the same matter, wherein it was before. It Is made one by the
mutual act and catching hold one part of another, and so in them makes one
form. And according to the qualitys of their acts shall the continuance of the
mist be; as when we see two men of equal strenght wrestle together, they will
strugle together a great while before either of them fall: so in the elements.
from this mistion comes temperature, as we may see in hot water being but
indifferently warm is neither so cold as to cool, nor so hot as to burn.
Temperamentum is the respect or reference of these qualities in the mist; for
the forms of the elements remaining in the mist and acting there must needs
have qualities to proceed from them. Yet these acts of the elements in the
mist, are not in eodem gradu in the mist that they are in the elements: for
they are restrained one by another neither all mista in that proportion that
one should answer another exactly, for then there could be but one kind of
misture. Temperametu^ est ad pondus vel adjustitiam. For that ad pondus there
can be no such found in the world, for this would never corrupt temperamentum
where there is excess of one quality or two; of one quality is simple, which is
calidum, where the hot elements exceed the cold; or frigidum, where the cold
elements exceed the hot; of two qualities is composite, but these 2 qualities
must not be contraries, for they would destroy one another, but they must be
more remiss and from the exceeding act not in extremity of these qualities, as
in pepper, ginger, etc. have the things their denomination. Now there cannot be
a temperature wherein three do exceed; for then the fourth would be destroyed.
And here we see there are nine temperatures: first that ad pondus, of which
sort indeed, as before, there is none to be found, yet we do imagine it for the
better understanding of the rest; then that wherein one only quality exceeds,
and that is of 4 sorts; or that wherein 2 qualities exceed which is of 4 sorts
also: Now these temperaments have their degrees which though there be infinite
of them yet four only observed. As in grammar from the letters arise varieties
of sillabls and so words; so from the temperament in nature arise so many
similars: for these temperaments are firstly of similars, ergo the similars
being many have not the same temperature with the whole, sor first it is of the
fimiliars, then of the organical, and lastly of the whole. Now there is also
temperature of one thing in regard of another, as of a man with a Lion we say
the one is hot or cold in respect of the other; for because mistum attends
elementarium, according to the variety of the composition diverse qualities
arise. Now in things composed of similar parts only, as worms eels, they ergo
having their life a-like in every part, hence they live after they be cut, and
they have the like temperament: but these things that have organical parts,
when they are cut in pieces, their parts will not live; for the life has one
principal seat and is not in every part a-like. Now in comparing the
temperature of things together if one exceed the other above the common rate we
call it a (...) otherwise (...) under (...) is putrido rottenness, when the
(...) is in heat and moisture where the heat is only able to set it up and make
it rotten, and so nature is dissolved and this is general to the elementaries,
and to the air and water so far forth as they be mingled with vapors; so we
say in sickness-time the air is infected. Now temperature ad pondus proves
another reason: because in nature it would be fit for no office, as not to cool
because heat is equal to it, not to dry because moisture will hinder it or
contra. There must be inequal proportions of the elements, and consequently
more temperaments, because things are made to diverss ends, so that ergo they
must have elements predominating in them whereby they may be fitted to such and
such ends. secondly Temperament must be unequal, because they must be mutable,
and there must be dissolution. Ergo the temperature must be unequal and one
element too strong for an other. And these predominating elements do so much
destroy themselves to our sense as they do by our act, though they do to our
sense also, as I can taste ginger and find it hot. Where one only does
predominate it is either heat, cold, moisture, or drith: for as before according
to that for which the thing was made such elements shall it have predominating
in it for the attainig of that end: so we say the heart is naturally hot, for
to turn the chylus into chymum, so the brain cold per se but accidentally hot,
which heat is brought from the heart to it by the vital spirits: so that
according to things ends so must they be made, as bones have drith in them
predominating, because they are the foundation of the body, even as the earth
is the foundation of the world. So again we say the four humors caused in the
liver are fluid, and ergo have air predominating in them, because it is their
office to run up and down to nourish every part: and for the humors first our
meat and nutriment comes to our stomach and there is turned into chylus, and
hence it comes into the liver and is turned into chymum, and the humors are
made of the succus of this nutriment in the liver; and of these humors is made
semen and that part of the semen which has most drith in it makes a bone,
which is a similar part, and so of the rest. Now in some things there are two
qualities predominating in respect of a double use of the thing: and these
predominting qualities must evermore be disparates, not contraries, for then
they would destroy one another. Now man of all things comes nearest to the
temperament ad pondus and ergo he is most sure to mark others temperature being
compared with man's temperature. Crasis and temperamentum are all one. But now
the degrees of temperature are not infinite, but they distinguish them into
four only: and where any element is predominate above these degrees there is a
(...) which in living creatues is called morbus, which Adam was not subject
unto, and yet had the art of medicina, ergo morbus is not the object of
medicina; hence is putredo, now putredo and (...) differ in that, one quantity
must drive out another so as that there be a dissolution; but (...) may be
without any dissolution: again the common philosophers make putredo only, where
moister predominates: and thirdly putredo is where only external qualities
uniting with internal do make a dissolution, as by external heat united with
internal heat do make a dissolution, as by external heat united which internal
heat water is expelled; and so in wood the heat and the moisture that hold it
together being taken away by the fire falls into ashes. And by reason of this
putredo things come to stink, which we call faetor: yet where this putredo is
but in any degree (for there be degrees of it) there it does not stink So
moisture external will putrify as wood in water, which we call martor, for we
have no proper word: so drith will cause putrefaction; so wood will rot, which
we call caries: so will cold also putrify by quenching heat: so rust is a kind
of putrefaction, which caused by external moisture united with internal and so
makes things, as it were' sweat and becomes rusty. And these are the effects of
putredo, and these are general, etc. The rest is wanting.

ETHICAL NOTES.
DIvinity is the rule to make a man happy: And this man in his life has a
double respect: First, As he is a man alone: Secondly, As he is sociate; and
sociate is either in a Family, or in a Commonwealth. Hence must the
distinction of the proles of Theology go accordingly; and all these must tend
to happiness: now these are proles of Theology arising from the second part
thereof; namely, from the second table of the law, which by reason of man's
Fall is almost dashed out of him: yet there is so much left in him as is able to
show him that he was made able to please God, and secondly, to live well. So
that this work of being a good Divine is wrought in man from several causes,
for the sanctified man because be has Faith, he keeps the rules of Ethics,
Oeconomicks, and Politics by the spirit of Sanctification: but the only civil
man which wants Faith, does therefore fail in a Divine, and so all is
spoiled; yet he keeps the rule of Ethics by the spirit of restraint, which
spirit keeps him from those enormous sins which otherwise he would have
committed. For we are to imagine every one of us by nature committing all kind
of sins, in that measure as he which is the most sinful commits the greatest
sins that he is given unto. So that no man is at liberty in this kind to do so
much as one civil act without the spirit of restraint, and therefore much less
an action of Faith.

Ethica est ars been gerendise.
Ethica is derived from (...) mos, custom or manner: it is more frequent in
the plural number (...) manners; and hence were the Gentiles called Ethnici,
because they were otherwise mannered than the Israelites, which were the
Children of God: its ars because it consists of precepts most true, just, wise,
etc. yea, and in very deed before the Fall this act of Ethics was the very
rule of Divinity: Been gerendi se: so that it is the rule of the good carriage
of a man's self; and here by se I mean vir bonus. Gero properly is to carry
himself, ergo not to ride, but to go on foot: i. e. so to carry himself as no
man can justly except against him.

Vir bonus est qui bonis instruitur.
Because we cannot give a perfect difinition of this art, ergo we are fain to
bring the subject of the art into the definition thereof, and so need not to
defineit any more: notwithstanding if we please we may thus define it from the
notation; Vir bonus est qui bonis instruitur. So that this teaches him how he
may be an honest man, namely, if he has this bonum, both internum and externum.

Bonum est quod est appetendum, Or, appetibile ad been se gerundum.
This bonum here is that which Tully calls (...) and (...) and honestum. Quod
est appetendum, or appetibile: I give it no genus because as all other acts
have their genera generalissima, so here bonum is the genus summum: I say
appetibile because it is the nature of bonum to be desired, for it is the
subject of the Will, and ergo the affection of Love it does desire it. Now that
this bonum must contain all both inward and outward bona, I prove it thus:
Quicquid requiritur ad been gerendum se is here meant, but both bona corporis
and animi are required ad been se gerendum, ergo both are necessary.

Bonum produces these two qualities, gratia and authoritas.

Gratia est qua apud homines plurimum vales.
And this is that which causes good estimation among men.

Authoritas est qua apud homines plurimum potes.
For he that will be a good Ethician must not only be an honest man, but such
an one as has those things which do attend bonum both corporis et animi: now
as I said before this gratia makes good estimimation among men; and from this
arises authoritas, whereby he can do much with men.

Bonum est viri totius aut partis.
Because as there must be internal virtues for the beginning of any act, so
there must be external bona for the performance thereof. So Adam at the
beginning had not only all things made fit for him, but also Lordship over them.
Which Lordship contains both favor and authority: Thus did the Philosophers
account bona to be viritotius aut partis.

Bonum totius hominis est quod externe advenit, seu confert ad been se
gerendum.

And this is Libertas

And this is Facultates.

Libertas est qua expedite seu libere te been geras.
But this a servant cannot do, and ergo Aristotle requires in his Ethics that
he that would be a good Artist in this kind should be a freeman and one that is
suijuris. And so we see in common experience that those which are not free
cannot do as they would.

Object. But cannot a servant be a good Artist in this kind?

Answ Now indeed not as he is a servant and ergo if Adam had stood we should
not have had any servants for there had been no need of them but every man in
his own place should have performed his own duties. Again one may be a servant
to such a master as will permit him no opertunity for good exercises, but
otherwise as this bondage came in by sin and is a slave thereof so he that is
so tied cannot been se gerere.

Facultates sunt quibus te geras.
And of this sort are riches. Friends and the like; and these are also
necessary to a good man: because many being free from servitude yet for want of
these they cannot do their will, ergo we se Adam at the beginning had not only
liberty but an help meet for him.

Object But cannot a man been se gerere without a wife?

Answ. Not unless he have other friends instead of a wife. And thus we se also
by experience, especially in Scholars, which notwithstanding being very
desirious of company, yet for want of books or company to confer with all or
some such like thing oftentimes come short of their desires. So that wesee
these outward things are of a good use for the car raige of a man's self. But
here Question may be made,

Are riches good, seeing the Stoics thought them not so, and most now a-dayes
say they are indifferent and good according as they are used?

Answ. The common answer to this is that they are good according as they are
used. But I am not of that mind, for that they are per se and simpliciter good,
as the Scripture testifies. as also because they were made for a good end,
whereas if they were indifferent they should have been made for an evil end:
again they are the gift of God and therefore they are good per se and in their
own nature, though Astriotle seems to make them indifferent, arguing that if
they should be simply good, then they should make the man good. But this is a
fallacy, for the default that they are not good is not in the riches but in
the want of other things which should conduce ad been se gerendum. And it is as
if he should argue thus, He that has invention only without judgment is not a
good Logitian ergo this invention is not good, which is an inconsequence.

Facultates are Divitiae. Opes.

Divitiae sunt quibus per se been seu commode te geras. Opes sunt quibus per
alios been te geras.
For divitiae are a man's own proper substance; and they draw opes which are the
use of an other man's good: and this is the difference of them. Hence the Poet
says, Aspicis, ut veniunt ad candida tecta columbae? But may not a poor man
been se gerere?

Answ. No he cannot perform this action of morality after such a sort as he
which has facultates. Yet that a man may been se gerere I do not require
abundance of riches, but only so much as is requisite for this end.
Notwithstanding a poor man may be a good divine, because the Lord does not
exact at any man's hands more than that which he gave him. But Adam he had all
things; and such a man Ethics look at. Now for Opes, for Adam was not absolute
having all the creatures til he had a wife also, and ergo a man's parents
brethren and friends do conduce ad been se gerendum, parents for his bringing
up and friends to help him in his place and calling.

Bonum partis est quod inhaeret aut interne conducit ad been te gerendmu.
And as the other was extrinsece agens, so this is intrinsece agens. And this
also we may see in Adam, who was endued with strength of body and comely aspect,
The heathen Philosophers have stumbled at these things in making felicity to
consist in riches honor and the like: yet Aristotle thought they did only
conduce unto happiness, thouhg he was deceived with the same fallacy he was
before.

Partis is Corporis, aut Animi.

Because bonum is externum aut internum.

Bonum corporis est quod est innatum or connatum corpori.
For it is not acquisitum as bona animi are.

Object. But these bona corporis are natural, ergo how are they required ad
been te gerendum?

Answ. We have them to some end and therefore to manage the carraige of our
selves, ergo the Poet says, Gratior est virtus veniens a corpore pulchro.

This stands in (...)

This stands in aspectu grato.

(...) est qua valide te geras.

And validity lies in the body: and he that will perform any virtue as
justice wisdom or the like must have this (...): so that if a man be sick lame
or deformed or have no constitution of body, that action, whatsoever it be,
loses his grace, and is ridiculous in respect of him that performs it. I
remember Socrates found fault with the games of Olympia, because there the body
was only exercised and the virtues thereof and not the virtues of the mind; and
so he said an Ox or Lion might be practiced. But he was deceived; for the case
is not equal, for the bona corporis in man are ad been se gerendum whereas
there is no such thing meant in the strength of an Ox or Lion.

Aspectus gratus est quo decenter te geras et (...).
So that this adds decus to the action: and we se by continual experience,
that where men are not much known, therefore the comely aspect of one man is
much preferred before another: and ergo though a man had all the bona that went
before and wanted this he would but be a mocking stock. So that as a precious
jewel should be placed in a precious matter and not in dust, so should virtue
in a comely man. Euexia is more general than sanitas and tells us that all the
members of a man's body do concur to th^s good action. Pulchritudo is properly
that good color that is of a good crasis and belongs to a woman and ergo is
more special than aspectus gratus.

Bonum animi est bonum quod facultatem animi perfecit, eodemque sensu virtus
diciter,
I say quod facultatem animi perfecit. perfectio and bonum are all one; for
then we say a thing is bonum when it is perfectum. God has endued man's soul
with faculties, which when they can act readily then they are called bona and
habits. perfecit. because these faculties of understanding and will are not
perfected till they can work readily, and then they have their perfection: so
that look what faculties of the soul have such readiness of act they have their
perfection, and they are called bona animi.

Aemulatio est qua alterius exemplo excitamer ad bonum.
Virtus animi has her stirrer up to that which is good, and in her course her
spur, and limits, and carriers. For a man that is expert in the eupraxie of any
quality is stirred up by some of these, so that this aemulatio is not a virtue
of it self but is a provoker of bunus Ethicus unto virtue. Qua excitamur or
excitaris. Because every man at the beginning was made for an eupraxie for God;
and in the fall though he were no way able to perform it; yet there remain such
relics as to leave him without excuse, and so stir him up to good by others
example, and amongst the rest this is one provoker and indeed the first of
them. Alterius exemplo this is the cause that provokes us to bonum; not
envying the good examples of others, but grieving that we cannot excel them.
Ergo, this arises from a kind of ambition: but it is good not desiring the
evil, or the staying of him, but his going on.

Calcar est quo currens excitatur ad bonum persequendum.
Now as we have heard, that there is an impetus or first setting on to begin,
so there is a spur in cursu to set him on to go lustily forward.

Calcar est mediocre aut ingens.
Mediocre est quod mediocriter incitat.
It is from the notation: and if calcar in genere be quod incitat, then calcar
mediocre est quod mediocriter incitat.

Mediocre est Laus.

Mediocre est Fama.

Laus est mediocre calcar a paucioribus propter mediocrem viriutem additum and
subditum.
First, We do not give laus to any one till we see he do something of the act,
and so it differs from aemulation. I say mediocre calcar; because this spur
does not gag so deep as ingens calcar does. Propter mediocrem virtutem. For
laus is of that virtue which is not yet come to perfection, but is a degree
unto it. Apaucioribus; because it not yet being perfect, is not known so well
as that of fama is.

Fama est calcar mediocre quod plurium ore versatur.
Now when virtue is but mean, and so not known to many, we give laus unto it:
if it be known of many, then it has fama given unto it. And this is the
difference betwixt laus and Fama.

Calcar ingens est quando virtus venerit ad (...).

Calcar ingens est Honor.

Calcar ingens est Gloria.

Honor est quo virtus perfecta honoratur.
I say quo virtus perfecta honoratur: because here the act is come to its (...)
or perfection. So we see in Arts and Trades, that we do not give honor to any
Art till the man be his Trades or Arts-master. Now gloria is the highest spur,
and differs from honor, in that it is more general than honor, even as fama
is more general than laus.

Cancelli aut carceres sunt quibus virtue intra suos limits coercetur aut
continetur.

Cancelli sunt Pudor.

Cancelli sunt Paenitentia.

So that whilst these two are in man, they are as bridles to keep us from
evil, and to do good.

Pudor est quo a transiliendis limitibus coercetur.
Now I say so because pudor is a shame-fac't-ness to commit evil, and to omit
good, and that always before the act; whereas verecundia is that blushing
after act, and that is natural, and is but in some men, not in all; and
therefore it belongs not to moral Philosophy: So that a man should be
shameful lest he do evil: and ergo, Aristotle faith in his Politics, That he
is not a man that will not be shameful: and yet in his Ethics he says that
pudor and poenitentia are not beseeming a good man, because he must do nothing
that he must be ashamed of, or grieved for: But admit this were true, yet he
grants that a young man may be ashamed and often play the slip: but indeed
there is no man, though he be a perfect good man, but he shall need these to
keep him to good, and from committing of evil, and if he had them not, he were
not vir bonus. Now Aristotle means that a good man should not have them
actually after that evil is committed, but only poenitentia: but take them as
bridles before the act of evil to keep him from committing of evil; and so they
are requisites to a good man.

Poenitentia est qua a virtute omittenda and vitio committendo deterremur.
Some think that poenitentia does not belong to Ethics: but it does as it is
thus taught, and thus may the more civil man have it.

Object. But a good man ought to do nothing whereof he should be ashamad?

Answ. True: but if virtus be sensim acquisita, then there are many degrees to
the perfection of it, and so may there be many slips, which we must be aware
of, and ergo, must have this to keep us from evil.

Virtus est Intellectus: Voluntatis.

If God has endued man's soul with these two faculties of Understanding and
Will, then also the bona of this soul must be distributed accordingly, and so
be bona intellectus, or voluntatis: at; Ergo. Now when these faculties do act
readily, then we say they have their perfection.

Virtus intellectus est qua facultatem intellectus perficit.
Even as virtus in general was before, so is this in special described unto us.

Qua rem agendam perspicit Intelligentia. Sapientia.

Here now begins the doctrine of Intellectual Virtues, the first whereof are
these:

Intelligentia est quae principia rei agendae perspicit.
It is named ab intellectu, as if it were the act of the whole intellectus, but
it beholds only the principiae of things, and looks between the Arguments in
them. Some Philosophers make intelligentia only of the principia of common
rules of invention in Logic, as this: The whole is bigger than the part, etc.
But if this were so, then there should be no intelligentia of other Arts, but
it is the readiness of the act of invention both in making Arguments, and in
using them; that is, both in analysi and genesi.

Scientia est virtus intellectus.
Whereby we readily see the truth: we call it the judgment of a necessary
axiom. But it is the act of the judgment for truth; and these are for the
seeing of things. Now these follow that we are to use after that we have seen
intelligentia and scientia.

Sapientia est quae rem agendam ad usum contemplatur.
For when we see the intelligentia and scientia, then by our sapientia we
gather an hundred conclusions, and this is one in contemplation only, gathering
these deductions, and yet practicing them.

Prudentia est qua res agenda ad usum dirigitur.
For as before there was the readiness of the other virtues, so ars is the
doing and executing of those things that are to be applied in their right time,
and fit place, and so they may be prudent, and not good artists. Now all these
are necessary for the virtues of the Will; ergo are taught before them: for vir
fortis, justus, etc. must be intelligens, sciens, sapiens, etc. Now for the
cardinal virtues, only prudentia is here, and the rest come after; because they
are virtutes voluntatis.

Virtus voluntatis est quae facultatem voluntatatis perficit.
That a man may behave himself well, he must be bonis instructus, and they are
totius hominis, aut partis, i. e. Corporis or animi. And all these are
necessary that a man may been se gerere; and he must have the virtues of the
mind as intelligentia etc. that he may be perfect in the practice of all arts:
and whereas the common Philosophers require only prudentiam and justiam
universalem indeed all these are requisite. Now follow the virtues of the will
and these are the chiefest of all and are only in bono: but now bonus may have
gratiam, authoritatem, bona corporis and intellectus but he must be bonus that
has bona voluntatis, though in infimo gradu, and ergo these virtues do most
conduce ad been se gerendum. So that we see as in divinity summum bonum is the
subject of the will, so also in Ethics will has his object bonum. Now we are
to know that Ethics look at such an one as Adam was before his fall, for he
was endued with all bona both interna and externa, both intellectus and
voluntatis so that he is our pattern. Now virtus voluntatis has always
adjoined unto it conscience, so had Adam a conscience to accuse and excuse. But
what is conescince?

Answ. It is so much of the Law as yet is in man; or it is the lecture of the
understanding reading the Law that is in the will. Now for all the distinctions
in Schools of conscience as it is good or bad etc. they are false; for
conscience is neither good nor bad: but when we do a thing and afterward know
it to be evil then we call it an evil conscience, or if there be no effect of
virtue we call it no conscience: So that this it is, if a man do evil and his
conscience be against it, they say it is a bad conscience and yet this
conscience is good.

Si adsit, excusantem and haec Voluptatem Praemii expectationem.

That is if it be according to moral virtue it brings with it delight; (not
that voluptatem which we shall hear of hereafter,) and expectation of the
reward, for the very natural man will expect it.

Si absit, accusantem et haec Dolorum Paenae metum.

That is if virtue be absent there it will whip him; and hence is grief and
fear of punishment; which is opposed to pleasure and expectation of reward. So
Adam had his conscience when he hid him in the garden.

Prosequitur affectu, amoris, auream mediocritatem; odii extrema.
This virtus voluntatis does prosecute with the affection of love auream
mediocritatem; and with the affection of hate, the extremes. Now these extrems
are to come into act, because they are the object of hatred, which is an
affection.

Est in gradu infimo vel -- mediocri supremo

This is a property of the virtues of the will; not that the virtues of the
mind have not their degrees, but we look not at these but at them and these of
virtue have both affection before.

Virtus voluntatis esterga Deum: Hominem.

Here still we must run on with Adam, and this act going on according to
divinity.

Sanctitas est virtus voluntatis Deum immediate respiciens.
For so all virtues do look at God, but this immediately. I say it is virtus
volunatis, because it is an act of the will.

Quae rectus de Deo sensus.
That is sanctitas consists in the right understanding of God, or in the
right worshipping of him, as God is the subject of of our worship, not as he is
the object of our understanding.

Atheismus est defectus sensus dei.
Rescrutatio gloriae est excessus seusus dei.
Rectus cultus Dei.

This virtue is a definition it self it is that (...) or (...).

Prophanatio est defectus cultus Dei,
It is all carelessness of the worship of God.

Superstitio est excessus cultus Dei.

Caetera desiderantur

ASTRONOMIAE.
Caput primum.
AStronomia est ars caeli mobilis.

Caelum mobile est quod perpetuo motu fertur in gyrum.

Zodiacus norma est longitudinum et latitudinum.

Equator declinationum in coelo.

Coelum hoc in plures sphaeras est distinctum.

Hae vero sibi invicem ita contiguae sunt, ut superior semper interiorem se
undequaque conclusam contineat, non secus ac in ovo gallinaceo, luteum albumen
and putamen, alterum alterius complexu tenetur, nec tamen ulla alterius motum
impedit.

Sphaera est unius motus vel plurimum.

Caput secundum.
SPhaera unius motus est primum mobile.

Primum mobile est sphaera vicenis quaternis horis ab ortu per occasum ad ortum
circum verta super polos mundi.

Itaque hic motus per aequinoctialem describitur, and quindecim gradus una hora
conficit, diemque naturalem describit.

Hujus motus dicitur (...).

Caput tertium.
SPhaera plurimum motuum est, quae fertur, and motu primi mobilis, and simul
nisu suo. Quo propior primo mobili, eo proprio motu fertur tardius. Estque
duplicis, vel multiplicis.

Caput quartum.
SPhaera duplicismotus est, sphaera nova, quae praeter motum primi mobilis, suo
fertur oblique ab occasu ad ortum, circa polos Zodiaci. Centum annis fit ejus
progressio uno gradu.

Caput quintum.
MOtus multiplicis sphaera est, quae praeter motus illos priores, suum porro
habet and stellis insignitur.

Stellarum declinatio est ab aequin octiali.
Estque sphaera octava, vel planetaria.
Sphaera octava est quae perpetuo motu fertur polis in peripheria duorum
circulorum, quorum diameter est minutarum 24 circa puncta aequinoctialia mundi:
fitque hic circulus juxta Copernici traditionem annis 3434. Hoc motu Ecliptica
octavae sphaerae ab Ecliptica mundi in Austrum et Boream mutat; hinc nonnunquam
ad Aequatorem punctis solstitialibus accedit nonnunquam discedit: unde eorum
maxima elongatio mutatur, nec semper eadem manet, nam quae tempore Ptolomaei
fuit 23 gradus 35 minuta, nostro aevo a Wernero et Copernico deprehensa 23
gradus 28 minuta cum semisse; maxima itaque declinatio est 23 gradus 52 minuta,
minima 23 gradus 24 minuta; est ergo maxima hujus mutationis differentia 24
minuta. Porro motu novae sphaerae fertur ab occidente ad orientem annis centum
fere gradum. Hinc initia hujus dodecadem oriorum and septo recesserunt ab
initiis Zodiaci mundi eorundemque do decalem. Initia sunt poli sphaerae octauae
est autem octavae sphaerae a terra undequaque distantia decies millium and
quadrag^nta diametrorum terrae dodrantis perpetuo: numerantur vero pro diametro
terrae 1720 milliaria Germanica. Sphaera octava est quae proprio motu super
duos circulos, quorum diameter est minutorum 24 and poli sunt puncta
aequinoctitialia quae discribuntur ab initiis Arietis and Librae octavae
sphaerae. Hic motus, vocatur motus trepidationis, and motus accessus and
recessus. Quidam volunt diametrum circulorum in quibus vertuntur poli octavae
sphaerae esse quatuor gradus 18 min. 43 sec. Revolutionemque facere annis 7000.

Caput sextum.
In octava hac sphaera funt stellae fixae. Suntque immutabilibus semper spatiis
disjunctae a se invicem, veluti in paralelis provehuntur, in suo orb,
dignoscuntur scintillatione. Stellae hae igitur proptur motum novae sphaerae
progrediuntur singulis centum annis fere gradum, alias tamen tardius, alias
celerius, quod alias versus Orientem, alias versus Occidentem, alias versus
Meridiam, alias versus Arctum, ex motu novae and octavae sphaerae. Soli deo
stellarum numerus notus est; Veteres autem annotavere visu and effectu insignes
mill viginti duas.

Caput septimum.
Stellae ob immensam distantiam minutissimae quidem apparent, sua tomen mole
terram multis partibus excedunt, suntque magnitudine sextuplices.

Primae magnitudinis sunt, quae caeteras omnes splendore vincunt, terraque
majores sunt centies septies cum undecim sexagessimis quartis; est enim
diametri earum ad diametrum terrae proportio quadrupla super-parciens tres
quartas, quae 19 ad quator. Cum ergo per 18 proprsitionem Element: 12 sphaerae
sunt inter se in tripla ratione suarum dimentientium, diametris cubice
multiplicatis majoreque cubo per minorem diviso colligitur differentia seu
excessus. Harum sunt 15.

Secundae magnitudinis sunt etc. (^) est enim proportio diametri earum ad
diametrum terrae quadrupla super-parciens viginti quinque sexagessimis, quae
est 205 ad 60. Harum numerus 45.

Tertiae magnitudinis sunt, quae terram septuagies bis cum triente fere
superant; proportio enim diametrorum quadrupla est sesque sexta, quae est 25 ad
9. Sunt autem numero 205.

Quartae sunt terra majores quinquagies quater and semisse, vel paulo plus;
proportio enim diametrorum est tripla super-parciens quatuor quintas, quae 19
ad 5. Et sunt 477.

Quintae, quae vincunt mole sua terram tricies semel: proportio est tripla
superparciens tres tricessimas octavas, quae 119 ad 38. Quarum numerus 217.

Septae, sunt minimae superantque terram paulo plus decies octies: proportio
dupla super parciens quinque octavas quae 21 ad ^. Numerus harum stellarum est
49. -- His addiderunt (...) obscuras 9, and nebulosas (...) 7.

Caput octavum.
STellae partim in certos asterismos sunt digestae, partim sunt (...).

Asterismus est stellarum plurimum vicinarum certa ratione ab aliis
distinctarum effigies, cujus similitudine and nomen sortitur ut agnosci
facilius possint.

(...) autem constant certo stellarum numero vel incerto: qui certo stellarum
numero vel incerto: qui certo stellarum numero constant sunt 48. Hipparchus and
Prolomaeus appellant (...), Proclus (...), Plinius signa and sydera, Vulgus
constellationes. Haec partitio ex Phaenicia in Graeciam. Phynices autem a
patribus sanctis post diluvium.

Caput nonum.
PRimus ac situ utilissimus est Ursa minor, sive Plaustrum minus; est autem
asterismus fiellis in modum ursulae formatus, quarum una in extremitate caudae
est tertiae magnitudiuis, fatis lucida, stella Polaris dicitur, quod Polo
proxima sit, nam tantum quatuor gradibus distat. Haec igitur a propinquitate ad
Polum notu facilis est. Dicitur Tartaris, Seles micol, ferreus clavus. Hinc
paulo alia in medietate caudae, deinde alia in initio caudae. and deinceps duae
in sinistra ponetibia and duae denique in sinistro humero.

Proximus est Vrsa major, qui est astrismus constans stellis 27; quarum septem
lucidiores secundae magnitudinis versus polum. Plaustrum majus vulgo vocaur.
etc. etc. etc.

MEDICINAE LIBER PRIMUS.
Caput primum.
MEdicina est ars been sanandi.

Medicina est] quia sanitas est, ad finem dirigenda.

Est ars] quia sanitas ob finem.

Sanandi] qui est sanitatis.

Bene] quia sanitas bona, and been agier a sanitate oportet.

Sanitas est affectus corporis per se ad actionem suam probe efficiendam.
Sanitas est] Quia corporis sua constitutio ad proprium munus.

Affectus] qui ex corporis constitutione fit id aptum vel ineptum ad munus suum.

Corporis] quia corpus seeds est sanitatis, and non proprie dicitur anima sana
per se, qui orta ex corporis constitutione.

Ad actionem suam efficiendam] quia corpus propter functionem aliquam, ergo
(...) ejus ad actionem efficiendam.

Probe] quia corpus a natura, ideoque propter functionem optimam in suo genere.
Natura enim tendit in optimum.

Caput secundum.
SAnitatis sunt sua signa, and suae causae.

Sua signa, quia sanitas ipsa abstrusa plerum que latet, itaque sua signa
habere debet, ex quibus eam possimus expiscari.

Et suae causae, quia immutari possint ergo suae causae sunt, quibus immutari
possint.

Signum est quo proditur sanitas.
Quo proditur, quia signo men's ad sanitatem recta ratione ducitur.

Signum est sanitatis praesentis vel absentis, quia sanitas vel praesens vel
absens esse possit.
Signum presentis sanitatis est, quo praesens sanitas indicatur, and dicitur
demonstrativum, (...), quia signum est quo proditur sanitas.

Signum absentis sanitatis est, quo absens sanitas indicatur, quia signum est
quo proditur sanitas.

Signum absentis sanitatis, est praeteriti vel futuri.
Quia omnis sanitas absens est praeteriti vel futuri.

Signum sanitatis praeteriti temporis, quo praeterita corporis sanitas memoria
repetitur; et dicitur commemorativum.

Signum sanitatis futuri temporis, quo futura saniras praevidetur; et dicitur
(...).

Signa potro sunt vel comitantia, vel assidentia; quia signa sanitatis sunt,
vel quae perpetuo adsint, vel non adsint.

Comitantia sunt, quae sanitatem perpetuo comitantur.

Perpetuo] quia comitantia sunt sanitatis comites perpetui.

Assidentia, quae etiam adesse possint, quia assidentia modo adsunt, modo
absunt.

Hic excellit symptoma.

Symptoma est, signum ex sanitate profectum.etc. etc. etc.

OPTICAE LIBER PRIMUS.
OPtica est ars been videndi.
Res ad videndum proposita, est visibile.
Visibile est per centrum oculi perceptibile.
Visibile generale prius apparet quam speciale.
Visibile recipitur vel vere, vel hallucinanter.
Vere, quando visibile recte ad oculum se habet.
Hallucinanter, quando aliter.
Liber secundus.
VIsibile est primarium, vel secundarium.
Primarium, quod emittit radios.
Radius est linea e quovis radiantis puncto speciem ejus una perferens.
E^rad^^s a radiante obverso in oppositum fit radiosa pyramid.
Pyramid radiosa est cujus basis in radiante obverso, centrum vero punctum in
opposito.
Itaque
Si radians suerit sphaericum, pyramid erit conus.

Et
Si radians fuerit angulosum erit recti termina pyramid.

Et
Pyramid fastigiatur in centro oculi, quando radianti opponitur etiam ferit
oculos impressione quadam.

Itaque
Omne quod videtur, sub angulo videtur.

Et
Quia una basis utriusque pyramidis, utriusque oculi radius unum conspicitur.

Radius perpendicularis caeteris est robustior.

In radiosa autem pyramide axis est radius principalis.

Axis est radius a centro basis ad verticem perpendicularis.

Itaque
Fortius a re visa imprimitur, valentius etiam accipitur.

Itaque
Certissima comprehensio visibilis sit per axem.

Per alium radium tanto ce^tior, quanto axi propinquior fuerit.

Quovis e puncto Radiantis, Radiantis axis provenit in adversum.

Itaque
Et pyramid e Radiante obverso quaqua versum in oppositum.

Radii autem immittuntur sine intermissione.

Itaque
Et pyramides.

Radiorum locus est intervallum ad quod permedium porriguntur radii.

Quo hoc intervallum majus est, eo pyramidis angulus in opposito minor, quo
minus eo major.

Itaque
Radians quo remotius, eo apparet minus, quo proprius eo majus.

Et
Si angulus illinc minor hinc major quam pro oculi acie, visu non percipitur.

Medium est corpus perspicuum, illustratum, situm inter radians and oppositum.

Radii medii tincturam capient.

Liber tertius.
RAdii sunt simplices vel geminati.
Simplices quorum quilibet in pyramide unus.
Itaque
In eodem medio cum opposito constituti.

Liber quartus.
GEminati qui angulum rectilineum faciunt.
Suntque catoptici vel mesoptici.
Catoptici, ubi a densa corporis superficie versus partem unde veniunt
reverberantur.
Radii catoptici angulos faciunt in superficie densi corporis, quorum alter
incidentiae, alter reflectionis appellatur.
Angulus incidentiae quem faciunt advenientes, in superficie densi corporis.
Angulus reflectionis, est, quem faciunt iidem radii inde reflexi.
Angulus reflectionis aequalis est angulo incidentiae,
Verum oculus specularem tantum reflectionem percipit.
Speculum est densi corporis polita superficies.
Radius perpendicularis a speculo in seipsum reflectitur.
Reflectio radiantis speciem debilitat.
Liber quintus.
RAdii mesoptici, qui per aliud medium penetrantes franguntur.

Refractio fit in superficie perspicuum terminante.

Radius tamen rectus hic e radiante corpore recte transit, tanquam medium esset
unicum; neque quicquam novae soliditatis occursu patitur.

Obliqui igitur hic tantum refringuntur.

Radius igitur obliquus hic angulum facit, cujus alterum crus est super alterum
intra communem mediorum superficiem.

Itaque
Quo obliquior est angulus, eo major est ejus infirmitas and debilitatio.

Perpendiculum fractionis est quod a puncto incidentiae in alteram partem
educitur.

Perpendiculum est index loci, in quem radius deserens suam rectitudinem
refringitur.

Radius autem hic vel ad perpendiculum infra rectitudinem frangitur, vel a
perpendiculo ultra eandem progreditur.

Si radius obliquus inciderit in medium densius, versus perpendiculum
frangetur; si in rarius a perpendiculo.

Itaque
Imago refracti visibilis, abaqua in aerem videtur major visibili.

In aqua tamen pauca and valde clara sensus falli potest

In obliquo conspectu mesoptico locus imaginis est perpendiculi a re visa in
communem mediorum superficiem concursus cum radio visionis recto.

Itaque
Res visa per radios refractos extra suum locum apparet.

Extra suum locum apparere est, propius vel remotius, quam absit videri; seu
superius vel inferius, dexterius sinistriusve.

Hinc
Fieri potest ut per fractos radios videatur quid piam quod per rectos in
conspectum venire non potest.

Hinc
Si res aliqua in vas iniiciatur, and ab oculo recedat vas quoad res in fundo
posita cerni non possit; eavidebitur loco ab oculo remotiore, si aquae in vas
infundantur.

Et
Stella super finitorem apparebit, quae adhuc est infra,

Liber sextus.
Visibile primarium est lux and color.

Quorum alter alterius actus est ut conspiciatur. Lux quod lucendo radiat.

Itaque
Cr jus radius lucis speciem perfert.

Et
Quae per se medium suum collustrat.
Si medium ab altera luce majore illustretur, minor ea obscurabitur.
Ab omni puncto concavi luminosi radii perpendiculares in centro confluunt.
Itaque
In concavo luminoso luminis vis maxima est circacentrum.

Itaque
Coelestis circa terram.

Lux a sole universam mundi fabricam complet.

Itaque
Diametrali intervallo conspici potest.

Stellarum lux magnitudinem distantiae eam assequi potest ut evanescat.

Itaque
A nobis plurimae non cernuntur, qui ab ipsis semidiametro hoc est 180
milliaribus absumus.

Et
Quae cernuntur tam parvae apparent, ut lucida coeli puncta esse videantur.

Itaque
Multo minus diametrali intervallo conspiciuntur.

Liber septimus.
Radius perpendicularis in seipsum reflectitur.

Itaque
Reflectio unit plures radios; nempe a pluribus punctis in unum concurrunt.

Itaque
Multiplicant virtutem ejus.

Itaeque
Lux reflexa est fortior incidente.

FINIS.

