ORDERS FROM THE LORD OF HOSTS, FOR Regulating the Hosts of the LORD.

Set down in a SERMON Preached at the LEAGUER before NEWARK, on Friday the 27th
of March, 1646.

By order from, and at the desire of the Committee of Lords and Commons,
Commissioners from the Parliament of England.

Upon occasion of a public Fast and solemn Humiliation, appointed to be kept
that day throughout the English and Scottish Armies before Newark, to seek a
blessing from Heaven upon the proceedings of the said Forces in the present
Siege of that Garrison.

By Edward Reyner Preacher of the Gospel in the City of Lincoln.

LONDON, Printed by R. W. for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread Eagle at the
West end of Paul's, 1646.

I have perused this Sermon tending much to the advancement of Military
Holiness, and Order, and (with these) the success of this present War; and
do therefore conceive it very useful for the public, especial the Armies.

JOSEPH CARYL.
April 16th 1646.
To the Right Honorable, JOHN Earl of Rutland, EDWARD Lord Montague, M. WILL.
PIERREPONT Esquire Sir WILL. ARMYNE Baronet, Sir EDWARD AYSCOUGH Knight, and THOMAS
HATCHER Esquire Commissioners from the Parliament of England, residing with the
Forces before Newarke.
Right Honorable,
THis Sermon, for the substance of it, was preached by your appointment, and is
drawn forth to public view by your importunity. I have been often assailed by
friends to publish some pieces, which cost me more pains, but could never be
overcome till now. I am sensible of the curiosity and criticalnesse of the
Times, and of my own tenuity and insufficiency. I am able to bring nothing out
of my poor Treasury which may seem new. Those small abilities God has given me
to profit others, lie another way, rather through the Pulpit then the Press;
therefore durst I never yet appear in the one, though often in the other.

Concerning this Copy I may say, here is not all, and yet more then was there
delivered.

Not all, because my time for preparation was very small, and my Notes so
short, that they cannot possibly give an account of my Sermon; and my memory
not so good as to recollect all that God was graciously pleased then to suggest.

Yet is here more, because I have now added some things for amplification of
particulars, which God brought to my hand while I was writing, as he did many
things before to my mind, while I was speaking.

Such were my straits of time for preparation to that exercise, as one part of
this Sermon was, subitane thoughts in the morning of that day they were
preached: which I did not intend should have seen more light, then came in at
the chamber window, where I quartered that night.

The Notes are not so warm to me now in writing, as they were then in speaking;
nor will they, I fear, be to any in reading, as they were, I hope, to some in
hearing. Speaking and Writing have their several graces and glosses; and take,
as God is pleased to set them on by his presence and influence, which he
usually sheds abroad more abundantly in the public Ordinance. The same things
(experience shows) which while spoken, seemed stirring passages, afterward
when read, move little.

Besides, the subject of this discourse is now become very trite, and worn I
suppose almost out of request; of which so much has been already said, as
nothing can be added.

But your Honors acceptance of my poor pains then, and earnest desire since,
to have a Copy thereof, have forced me to put this into your hands; do with it
whatsoever God shall put into your hearts: either to bury it in silence (which
would please me best) or to give breath and life to it by the birth of the
Press, if your wisdom judge it worthy, and that it may be for public use.

The Lord guide you with his council, that the public affairs may still
prosper in your hands, and bring you to his glory when you have served your
generation, according to the will of God. So prays

Your Honors humble servant in the Gospel of Christ, EDW. REYNER.

TO THE Honorable, Col. EDW. ROSSETER, Commander in chief of the PARLIAMENTS
Forces of the City and County of LINCOLN.
Noble Sir,
THe next interest to that, the Committee of Lords and Commons now with us, may
challenge in this Sermon, is deservedly yours, because preached in your
Quarters, to you and your Soldiers, and for your sakes especially; to bring
God and you near together, even God into your Camp, and your Camp unto God; to
direct and excite your duty to God, to draw down and engage Gods presence with
you, and that the Countries Cause and Cure (in the great work you are now
about) may prosper in your hands. For if you can say to our enemies as Abijah
did to his: 2 Chro. 13 12.
Behold God himself is with us, for our Captain, and his Priests with sounding
Trumpets to cry Alarm against you, you may say on (as he did) O enemy fight not
against the Lord, for you shall not prosper. If your Camp be reformed, and you
cannot bear them that are evil in it, surely the Lord will pitch his Tents in
the midst of yours, and make you glorious by successes.

When poor Lincolnshire was in a low and sad condition, making approaches daily
nearer desolation, God raised you up as Gideon a mighty man of valor to save
us; giving you not only Decertandi fortitudinem, but Decernendi rationem,
Valor to fight, and prudence to advise. For courage without counsel, is like
a Hand drawing a Bow, without an eye to set the Arrow right.

Sir, the mixture of amiable clemency, and insuperable valor, of modesty and
magnanimity, of piety and soldiery, of courteous condescentions and sublime
resolutions, which God has made and tempered in you, is very remarkable. Me
thinks I see those virtues which the Orator prescribes in an Emperor, worn as
Gold-rings on all your fingers, Scil. Haesunt vittute^ Imperatoria, labor in
neg^tin, forticu^o in pericul^, industria in agendo, celeritas in conficiende,
consiltum in previdende. Cicero pro lege Manil.
Diligence in business, courage in perils, industry in acting, celerity in
effecting, counsel in foreseeing.

This I speak, not to flatter you in print (for I remember Elihu's speech, Job
32.21, 22.) but to give you (as I apprehend) your due; and to provoke you to
give God the glory of all you are, have, or do; and to add to all your
excellencies habitual and practical, Humility and Self-denial, as the grace
and ornament of them all.

Be often thinking that the Holy Ghost is putting these Queries to you, which
Paul did to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4.7.
Who makes thee to differ from another? what have thou that thou did not
receive? God is the author of all discriminating gifts, Graces, States,
Successes. Let the high praises of God be in your mouth, because the high acts
of God have been in your hand.

Go on, worthy Leader; in this your might; Scil. in having God for your
wisdom, courage, and strength. Ride on prosperously because of the greatness
of your trust, and the goodness of your cause. Perfect what you have begun.
Your business which before lay scattered all this Country over, and over
diverse other Countries also, you have now brought into a small compass.
(having driven your Antagonists as it were into a fold) The good Lord perfect
the work for you and us, and stablish peace again upon our borders.

Blessed be God for the mavelous things done for this sinking (well-nigh
ruined) Kingdom, and for our poor spoiled Countries by the Heads of our
Worthies, the sons of Honor that have sat in counsel: and by the hands of
you and others, the sonsof Valor, that have been employed in action; by whom
(as choice instruments in Gods hand) mighty things are brought to pass, even
as it were a new Resurrection of our Kingdom (and poor country in special)
out of the dust of ruin and trampling upon, and a reduction of enemies into
our room. My feeble prayers are Militant for you and all yours, daily that you
may triumph; and want no counsel, nor strength, nor success which Heaven can
afford you. The Lord recompense into your bosom sevenfold, all your diligence
and faithfulness; your indefatigable pains night and day; extreme hazards,
looking death often in the face; and your sore hardship, serving the necessities
of war: He continue to bless you and all under your command, and make you
still a blessing to your native Country, and give you for your reward what he
has promised, to him that overcommeth. Rev. 2 17.
Even the White stone, and new name written, which no man knows save he that
receives it, and hidden Manna to eat.

So prays he who is affectionately yours to serve you in the Gospel, EDW.
REYNER.

Orders from the LORD of Hosts, FOR Regulating the Hosts of the LORD.
Deuteronomy. 23.14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy Camp to deliver
thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be
holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.


GOD requires his Israel should be a holy people, as at home, so abroad: not in
times of Peace only, but of War also. Because then, humane laws are silent --
Silent loges inter arma; and things are carried usually by force and violence,
not by reason or right. Men take liberty to commit outrages greedily and
shamelesly. Wherefore God gave this command for the purity and sanctity of
Isreal's army or soldiery, for the decent and well-ordering of Isreal's Camp, to
prevent all pollution and exorbitancy therein. -- Thy Camp shall be holy, etc.

In the Text you may discern.
1. A doctrine delivered. 2. Reasons added to confirm and enforce it.
The Doctrine is this.

The Camp of Israel must be holy.

The Camp.] The original word (...) signifies both Castra and Acies, or Turba:
That is Tents where the soldiers lay. And an Army, a Camp is an Host or Army
of soldiers, which is as it were a walking Town, City, or Country: it does
further signify Tents pitched for them, or an army lodged. The people of Israel
were the Hosts of the Lord, Gods Armies; and this is the precept of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, that their Camp shall be holy, that is, both the
place and the persons.

Shall be holy,] (...) that is, set apart for an holy use, and separated or
preserved pure from all pollution of flesh and spirit.

Holiness is either Moral or Ceremonial.

Moral, is twofold 1. Privative, that is, Immunity, or purity from sin. 2.
Positive holiness is 1. Grace, in Habit. 2. Obedience in Act.



When God is known, feared, served, obeyed trusted, and sin is hated and
eschewed; when there is the root of grace in the heart, and the fruit of
righteousness in the life, then is a person or people holy.

Ceremonial holiness was a freedom or purification from Uncleanness 1.
Legal, as Nocturnall pollutions, ver. 10.11. or contracted by leprosy, or
having an issue, or touching the dead, Numb. 5.2. Lev. 21.1. 2. Civil, as man's
excrements, which was legal also to the Jews. For God made a law against it,
that uncleanness by it should be avoided in the Host, ver. 12, 13.


My Text comes in as a Reason to press and persuade purity, from that (as from
all all other defilements) in the Camp and Host of Israel. Thou shall have a
place without the camp, etc. v. 12.

Thou shall have a paddle.] that is, an iron instrument to dig an hole in the
earth to bury their excrements in, v. 13.

Why so? For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, etc. Man's dung by
the law was counted unclean, and it defiled not only the place where it was
laid uncovered, but whatsoever thing it was used about, as to bake Cakes
therewith through want of other fuel, Ezekiel. 4.12, 13, 14.

All these kinds of Ceremonial uncleanness figured spiritual or moral
pollutions by sin, of our natures and actions.

The camp of Israel was to be holy both Morally, no wickedness might be
committed in it. Ceremonially, all legal uncleanness must be excluded out of
it.


Hereby God taught Israel holiness both of disposition and conversation, to
keep both their bodies and souls pure from all their iniquities.

God begins his charge (or to give orders) to the army of Israel at the 9.
verse. When the Host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from
every wicked thing: that is, from all uncleanness moral or ceremonial.
Therefore God gave command to the children of Israel,

That 1. The whole Camp of Israel should be purged of all Leapers and any other
way unclean persons, both Male and female, Numb. 5.2, 3, 4. Ainsworth.
There were three Camps (as one observes) 1. The Sanctuary called the Camp or
Tents of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 31.2. 2. The Camp of the Levites, Number. 3. 3. The
Camp of Israel, the 12 Tribes, Number. 2.
No unclean person might enter into the Camp of the Lords Sanctuary, that being
most holy, 2 Chro. 23.19. Nor stay in (but was to be put out of both) the Camp
which Pitched about the Sanctuary. And which went to war against their enemies.
2. A place should be designed without the Camp wherein to bury their
excrements, verse. 12.


Thus have I laid out the Doctrine, vid. The camp of Israel must be holy; and
the sense of the terms, scil. what is ^qant by Camp, and what by Holy.

Quest. But, why should Isreal's Camp be holy?

Answ. Take a short view, I pray you, of the reasons laid down in my text to
prove the point, and prosse the d^ty. The reasons are five.

Reason 1. Because God is present in the camp of Israel; the Lord of Hosts is
with his Hosts, even with the armies of Israel, where ever they go; therefore
shall their camp be holy, because He is a God of purer eyes then to behold
evil, Hab. 1.13.
and he cannot look on iniquity. He is not a God that has pleasure in
wickedness, wither shall evil dwell with him. Psalm. 5.14.
Mark the phrase -- The Lord walks in the midst of thy camp, (...) it imports
both the matter and manner of Gods presence.

-- The matter of it, That he is there present in the Camp.

-- The manner thereof, How he is God there?

1. He walks, not stands, is not idle there. God neither stands still in the
Camp, nor stays behind, but goes along with them. The Original word is very
emphaticall (...) in Hithpael. Verbs in that Conjugation (as the studious in
that tongue observe) do connocate a reciprocation or reiteration of action, and
intimate a frequency thereof. Tremellius translates the word, indefinenter
ambulare, to walk assiduously, continually, without ceasing (to express the
emphasis of the conjugation) so walks God in Isreal's Camp.

But whereabout, or in what part thereof?

2. He walks in the midst of their camp, not in the Front only, as not knowing
what is behind; nor in the Rear only, as not knowing what is before; but (...)
in the midst; the word signifies also the most inward parts of intrals, as
belly, heart, bowels, reins. God walks in the midst, that is, in the bosom,
heart, bowels, reins, of Isreal's army. He walks in and through all these.
Therefore the Camp of Israel had need be holy, even intus, and in cute, and in
cord, at the heart, to the bottom, and throughout.

Object. Did not God walk all over Isreal's Camp? was not be in every part, as
Van, and Rear, and midst, or heart, which is the Head Quarters: Totus in toto
all in all throughout the Camp? He fills Heaven and Earth, and not Isreal's Camp
only? Why then is God said to walk in the midst thereof?

Answ. For two reasons as I conceive.

1. To declare his perfect knowledge of, and acquaintance with all Isreal's
affairs, and behavior: what be their councels and actions, purposes and
projects, ends and aims, God is in the heart of them all: and privy to all,
even what they either do in the dark, or speak in their Tents, or think in
their hearts, Psalm. 139.1. to 6.

2. Because the Ark, which was the sign and pledge of Gods special presence
with Israel was placed in the midst of the Camp of Israel, Number. 2.2.17. and 10.
chapter 14.21. All the Tribes were as a great army round about the Tabernacle The
order of Isreal's Camp is described in Numb 2. thus, Judah, Issachar, and
Zabulon, encamped on the East of the Tabernacle, v. 3.10. Eph^^im, (...), on
the West, v. 18 to (...), on the North, v 23, to 32. The Levites encamped next
unto the Tabernacle between it and the (...), in 4 quarters, (...). 3. thus.
Moses, Aaron, and the Priests encamped before the Tabernacle eastward, v. 38.
The Gorr^o^^res behind it westward, v. 23. The Ro^^^thites on the Southside,
v. 29. The Levites of Merari on the north side, verse. 35.
(which marched and encamped in the midst) for the defense thereof.

Object. But the Ark of the Covenant is said in Numb. 10.33. to go before
Israel to search out a resting place for them, if before them, then not in the
midst.

Answ. Not as if the Ark went in the head of the army, for the Levites carried
it in the midst of the Tribes, Numb. 10.14, 21. But its said to journey before
them, because Isreal's journeyes were guided by the Ark and the cloud that
rested upon it, when to move, and when to rest. Whether to set forward, or to
pitch their tents. From the Ark God gave orders for all their marches or
motions, and rests in the Wilderness. So much of the first Reason, Isreal's
camp must be holy, because, the Lord walks in the midst of it.

Reas. 2. (Which should have been the first) because God owned Israel for his
Ammi or peculiar people, and acknowledged himself to be their God by Covenant
or special right and relation. Hos. 2.1.
(...) Jehovah, thy Elohim, thy Almighties. The Trinity of persons is thine, O
Israel. Now the Lord is a holy God, and a holy God desires after, and delights
in a holy people, therefore shall thy camp be holy.

Reas. 3. Because of Gods protection of Israel from their enemies, and conquest
over their enemies for them. God walked not in the midst of Isreal's camp,
tanquam otiosus spectator, as an idle looker on, but 1. As a Savior to deliver
them from the hands of their enemies. 2. As a conqueror to deliver up their
enemies before their face, or into their hands.


Are not these engagements to holiness and obedience throughout the camp of
Israel?

Reas. 4. Because any wickedness in the camp is nakedness. Compare v. 9 with
14. When the Host goes forth, keep thee from every wicked thing -- and here,
that he see no unclean thing in thee. (...), that is, the nakedness of any
thing. Nakedness is uncomely, filthy, reproachful, shameful, exposed to all
danger. Every wicked thing suffered in Isreal's camp did defile it, and divest
it, or make it unclean and naked to its shame and ruin.

Reas. 5. Because if there be any uncleannes or wicked thing in an army God
will see it, though never so secret: as he did Achans plundered stuff, though
hid in the earth in the midst of his tent. -- Therefore shall thy camp be holy,
that he see no unclean thing in thee. Josh. 7.21.
(...) that he do not see in thee the nakeednesse or filthiness of any thing:
(...) signifies not simply to see, but curiose inspicere, to look very
diligently. So does God for sin, even in an army. What evil is there, is
committed in the very sight and presence of God, (a great aggravation thereof)
for he has an All-seeing eye.

Reas. 6. Lastly, because sin in the camp will drive God out of the camp; the
sight of unclean things in Israel will make him turn away from Israel, (...)
from after thee, i.e. from following, accompanying, watching, keeping,
benefiting, magnifying thee, therefore shall thy camp be holy.

So much for the Analysis and explication of the Text. From the words we may
gather.

1. One general doctrine as the sum and scope of the text.

2. Some particular instructions, as inferences from the text.

The general Doctrine is this:

It is the duty and glory of an army to be holy, that is, to keep themselves
from every wicked thing, to suffer no uncleanness, filthiness, or
profaneness to come or stay among them. Therefore this was given as a law to
the Camp of Israel, to be holy; which stands still in force for the
morall-regulating of all armies, especially those which fight the Lords
battles, or under his banner; and go forth in his Name against their enemies.
God requires they should have a care of Holiness, not only in their persons,
and domestical, political, or Ecclesiastical relations and societies, but in
their martial combinations also: they should be holy not only as Masters and
Servants, as Ministers, and People, as Magistrates and Subjects, but as
Commanders and Soldiers; they should be not only a holy Family, or a holy
Church or Common wealth, but a holy Army also.

To this end God appointed the Priests to go along with Isreal's army, Deuteronomy.
20.1, 2, 3. 2 Chra. 13, 10, 11, 12. with the holy Trumpets. Numb. 10.9. and
31.6. as well to instruct and excite them to their duty toward God, as to
encourage them to fight the Lords battles against his and their enemies. John
Baptist teaches soldiers their duties, Luke 3.14. which are branches of
holiness and obedience, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, be
content with your wages.

Quest. Why should our Armies be holy?

Answ. The same Reasons conclude the necessity of Holiness for ours, that did
for Isreal's. I will not repeat them, only the first, and add some more.

Reas. 1. Because of Gods special presence in an Army that fights under his
banner, the name of it may be Jehovah Shammah, The Lord is there. Look upon the
Ark in the midst of the Camp of Israel. Now God will be sanctified in all that
draw near him, Lev. 10.3. Be sanctified, scil. by holy, upright, reverentiall
carriage, in all that approach his presence, as well Soldiers as Ministers, in
times of war, as of peace. He is the holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty;
therefore where ever he comes, sin must be gone or he will not stay. God
delights to manifest his presence where he sees holiness promoted. Gods goings
are glorious; as in the Sanctuary when it is purged and kept clean; Christ
walks in the midst of the Churches when those Candlesticks are of pure gold,
Rev. 1.12, 13. So in the Army, when it is well ordered, God walks in the midst
of it: when the Camp is holy, then God does wondrous things, and puts forth the
excellency of his power, wisdom, and goodness for his people: out-witting
their enemies, wherein they do craftily, and overpowring them wherein they deal
proudly and cruelly.

Because holiness becomes every Person, and thing, that is Gods, Reas. 2.
that bears the stamp or character of God upon them, or that relate to God, as
Gods Church and Temple, 1 Cor. 3.17. Gods House, Ps. 93.5. Gods Ministers, 2 Timothy 2.21, 22. and Gods Magistrate, 2 Samuel 23.5. and all Gods people, 1 Pet.
2.9. Titus 2.11, 12. So Gods Hosts, Camps, Armies; his Warriors, and
Soldiers. Holiness is an ornament as proper and comely for Soldiers and
Armies, as for any other of Gods Servants or Societies. They that fight the
Lords battle ought to be holy, as well as they that bear the Lords vessels.
Compare Esaias 52.11. with 1 Samuel 25.28. Its prophesied concerning the latter
times in Zach. 14.20, 21. That there shall be upon the Horses bridles, HOLINESS
UNTO THE LORD, in great Letters; much more upon the Riders hearts; and that
every pot in Jerusalem and Judah shall be Holiness unto the Lord: much more
should the drinkers be holy. Holiness is a Characteristicall distinguishing
Mark of those that are the Lords in all the premised Relations, from all
others. Besides, God will see and own, commend and reward Holiness in an Army,
in any corner of it, or person in it, as soon as he will spy any uncleanness
there, to detest it and punish it. God is as ready to observe what is good in
his people, as to mark what is amiss among them. Yea, he will overlook many
infirmities, where he sees some sanctity and syncerity.

3 Because though men's laws be then silent, Reas. 3.
yet Gods Law which commands Holiness, stands in force in time of war, as full
as in time of peace; and in Armies as well as any where else. God will not hold
soldiers guiltesse, if they take his Name in vain, if they swear, curse,
blaspheme, oppress, rob, be drunk, commit uncleanness, no more then any
others that offend. Though the Laws of the Kingdom be then laid aside, and the
Laws of Military Discipline be not set up; yet even then Gods Law has a strong
Tie upon all the Consciences of Commanders and Soldiers, to obliege them unto
holiness and obedience, under the penalty of eternal perdition. Let such as
think themselves lawless, or at liberty to live as they list now, because they
are Soldiers, and this is a Time of War; I say let such prove, if they can,
out of Gods Word (by which they shall all be judged another day) that God ever
gave a Dispensation or Toleration to an Army or any in it, whether Officers or
common Soldiers to be disordered, loose, base, outrageous or injurious in
their Courses; or to be in any kind or degree more vile and sinful then other
men; or to be less careful to fear God and keep his Commandments, to seek
after and set up Jesus Christ, to eschew evil and do good in times of War,
then of Peace.

Because there is death in the Camp. Reas. 4.
Soldiers Carry their lives in their hands, and look death in the face daily;
they had need be holy, if they would be happy, For without Holiness no man
(not a Soldier no more then any other man) shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.
Soldiers stand in most need to be very Holy Men, because they may be taken
away very Suddenly; and to have assurance of a better life because their
present life hangs in suspense night and day. They cannot be in a Capacity of
happiness or in preparation for death, until they be in a Posture of
Holiness.

Because a holy Army is victorious and succesfull. Reas. 5.
I do not mean when all and every one in an army is truly Godly, for the best
Armies that ever were, were never so good; but, Denominatio est a Potiori: when
the Commanders (Some of them at least) and a Considerable part among the
Soldiers are holy; Such as can pray as well as fight, and do take Care to
maintain Peace with God, while they are in war with Men; to decline
Tentations to sin, as they would do bullets or Thrusts that Come from their
Enemies. That a Holy army is victorions see the Experiment hereof -- in Israel,
in the days of Joshua 23.8, 9, 10. -- They did cleave unto the Lord their God
to this day, (says Joshua) therefore God drove out from before them great and
strong Nations, and as for them no man has been able to stand before them unto
this day. -- See the like in Judah, in the days of the Pious Kings, as David,
Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah. What glorious successes has God given when
Commanders have been Virtuous? -- in Marcus Aurelius his Army which had a
Legion of Christians in it, who by their prayer to God (at the Emperors
entreaty, when the whole Army was in danger to perish through drought) obtained
from Heaven both Lightning upon their Enemies, which put them to rout and
ruin, and plenty of rain upon themselves. Eccles. Hist. lib. 5. cap 5.
A remarkable preservation and victory. From that Time, as Eusebius reports,
they had a peculiar appellation from the Emperor, and were called, Legio
fulminea, The thundering Legion.

Yea, is not this to be clearly seen, as truly verified in our New-Modell
wherein are so many real godly Men, Commanders in chief, officers and
soldiers: how happy has God made them (and us by them) through many great and
glorious Deliverances, Successes and Victories, given them by the good hand of
our great God; such as the world can scarce parallel, and deserve to be sacred
to all Posterity. Though this New-Modell has been much despised by Men
(chiefly, I suspect for their piety,) yet highly advanced by the Lord as his
Host; chosen to fight his battles with prosperous and blessed success; to be
Humane-Saviours unto this sinking Kingdom. God crowns Piety with victory where
ever he finds it, especially in an Army.

6 Lastly, Reas. 6.
because there should be a suitableness between the Cause and the Manners of
the Persons which have the Managing of it. Great pity a good Cause should be
transacted by bad persons. The Cause our Army has in hand is holy, just and
good; what manner of persons ought all those to be in holy Conversation and
Godliness, who have undertaken it.

Now have I done with the General Doctrine of the Text.

It is the Duty and Glory of an Army to be holy.

In the next place, let us consider what particular Instructions may be
gathered from the Text. We may refer them to two Heads 1 for informing
Judgment. 2 for regulating Practice.


1 For information of Our Judgments, the Text furnishes us with these
Particulars.

1 That it is an Error to think, Instruct. 1.
it matters not what men's manners be, or how an Army is ordered, if they be but
good Soldiers, which they can scarce be in Gods sense, unless they be good
men. If the Camp should be holy, must not the Men in it be holy? What makes a
holy Camp, but holy Commanders, Officers and Soldiers? How can a Fabric be
good if the Materials be bad? You may as well say it is no Matter whether God
own an Army or disclaim it; be with them or against them; deliver them or
destroy them: be amongst them or depart from them; give Enemies up to them, or
give them up to their Enemy; whether an Army be clean and clothed, or be naked
and unclean, and the filthy Nakedness thereof appear, even in the sight of God:
or whether it prosper or perish.

2 Instruct. 2.
It informs us what is the one thing needful in an Army, for the defense and
success thereof; or what is the principal cause of all preservations and
victories in it, namely, Gods presence. God is in the midst of the Camp, how?
as the Sun is in the midst of the Planets, as the Heart in the midst of the
body. An Army without God amongst them, is but a dark dead Company, such as the
world would be, if it wanted the Sun, or a body without a heart.

As 1 The shield of their help for defense against their Enemies, to save his
people from them. 2 The sword of their Excellency for offense of their Enemies,
to assault and overcome them, Deuteronomy. 33.29. 3 The Captain of their Host, to lead
them on, and fight for them, Josh. 5.14. 2 Chronicles. 13.12.


3 Instruct. 3.
It lets us see, on the contrary, what is the cause of ruin to an Army, of
Surprizals, Blows, Foils, Defeats, Routs; Wickedness in it, is the Cause of
all disasters that befall it, of bad success to it. For sin in the Camp
produces 3 bad and sad effects. It

1 Makes an Army naked to their shame and reproach, As Aaron made Israel naked
to their shame amongst their Enemies, by making the molten Calf. Exodus 32.25.
And as King Abaz made Judah naked, 2 Chronicles. 28.19. So does Uncleannes and
Unholines make an Army Naked, that is 1 Unarmed men among their Enemies, ready
to be devoured by them. 2 Deformed in themselves, like a naked man, whose
deformity is great, for want of clothes to cover his nakedness, Revel. 3.18.
and 16, 17.


2 Makes God depart from an Army; deprives it of his counsel and strength,
rescue and protection. When Israel had sinned, and taken off the accursed
thing, I well not be with you any more, says God to them, except ye destroy
the accursed from amongst you. Josh. 7.11, 12. The abomination which the house
of Israel committed, made God go far from his Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 8.6. and as
far from his Army. Ponder well the woeful effects of Gods departure from an
Army. When God is gone, our defense and strength is gone; then welye open to
the Enemy, we become bread for them. If God cast us off, and go not forth with
our Armies, then he puts us to shame, makes us to turn back from the enemy,
Ps. 44.9. to 14.
and they which hate us spotle for themselves, he makes us a reproach to our
neighbor, a scorn and derision to them that are round about us. Look upon the
sad condition of the Host of Israel, when smitten at A^, because God (provoked
by Achans plundered stuff) withdrew his presence a little from them, therefore
the children of Israel could not stand before their enemies, Josh. 7.12. This
made the hearts of the people to melt, and become as water, Verse 5. And Joshua
with the Elders to fall to the earth upon their faces, and to put dust upon
their heads until the eventyde, Verse 6.

3 Yea, sin in the Camp sets God against his own people, Esaias 63.10. Lament.
2.5.
and makes him become their enemies, as says the Prophet, Israelrebelled, and
vexed Gods holy Spirit, therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and fought
against them. Judge. 2 14.
Sin moves God to sell them into their enemies hands, as he did Israel, into
the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand
before their enemies.

4 Instruct. 4.
Out of this Text we may gather and learn the lawfulness of war. It Is lawful
for Gods people to make war upon enemies in a just cause.

1 Else God would not own Soldiers or a fighting people for his people (as he
did Israel when they were an Army) nor in^^tle lumselfe to them as theirs by
special right. So he does here, The Lord thy God.

2 Else would not God honor the Camp with his special prosence, as to walk
assiduously and continually in the midst of it.

3 Else God would not do such great things for his people in a Martial way
(or in and by an Army) as to deliver them, and subdue their enemies for them
and to them. -- God would not have walked in the midst of Isreal's Camp to have
done this for them.

God has done wondrous things by Armies for us of late, even miraculous
deliverances, defeats, discoveries, victories, immunities, as he did for his
ancient Host the Israelites in the days of old. Are not these clear evidences
and pledges of Gods approbation of the thing? Would God so bless the designs
of War, if he did not allow the way of War.

4 Else God would have prohibited it, or dissuaded from it, and not have given
Laws and Orders for it (as he does here. -- therefore shall thy Camp be holy,
and verse 9. When the Hosts go forth, keep thee from every wicked thing.) but
against it. God would not have said, -- When the Host goes forth against thine
Enemies then keep thee from every thing, -- but rather disband the Host,
dissolve the knot of Soldiery, go not forth in bands and arms against your
enemies. This word had bin as easily spoken as the other, had it bin Gods mind,
Do not so wicked a thing as to wage war with thine Enemy? God would not have
said, -- therefore shall thy Camp be holy that he see no unclean thing in thee,
etc. but rather break up the Camp, let there be none, take other courses for
your defense and right, do not such an unlawful act as to take up arms. Did
God ever give Rules for regulating sin or any wicked thing?

5 Else, how can the Camp be holy in it self (which that of Israel is required
to be) if War be unlawful? If the ground of a Fabric be bad, how can the
superstructure be good? If a thing be naught in the matter of it, can the
dress or manner thereof ever make it good?

6 Else. God may see uncleanness enough in the Camp, in the unlawfulness of
the action (though there be no Leprosy, nor Issue, nor Excrements, etc. there)

7 Else God would not be unwilling to depart the Camp, which he seems to be,
and as it were thrust out before he will go, not by the unlawfulness of the
business of War, in the substance of it, but by accidental uncleanness in
the Camp. God would have been glad to have gone from them, had their Militia
been a bad business simply in it self.

These Arguments, the Text affords us to prove War lawful. Let me add.

8 Else God would not command it, as he did to Moses, Joshua, and others (his
Worthies) to avenge Israel of their Enemies, Number. 31.2, 3. and to fight his
battles. It is his Precept, 1 Samuel 15.3, 4.

9 Else, God would not teach it, as he did David's han^s to war, and fingers
to fight: Psalm. 144.1. It is his Art. Is God a Teacher of evil? how then can
he excuse himself from being the Author of sin?

10 Exodus 15.3. Ier. 48 10. 2 Chronicles. 13.12 Deuteronomy. 20.4.
Else, God would not profess and practice it. It is his Profession to be a
Soldier. -- The Lord is a man of war, says Moses to be a Captain, to lead
his people, and to fight for them. Would Godset up a bad Trade? Yea, God
chooses war as a way to declare his excellent power, wisdom goodness,
greatness; wherein to manifest himself both to his people, and to their
Enemies, to execute judgment on Enemies, to beautify his meek Ones with
deliverances and victories.

11 Else, God would not praise and reward others for it, who did worthily in
Military service, as David, 1 Samuel 25.28.

12 Else God would not own it nor manage the Affairs of it, if it was evil, 1 Samuel 17.47. The Battle is the Lords, says David, 2 Chronicles 20.15
and he will give you (Philistims) into our hands. The Battle is not yours
(said Iehoshaphat to his people) but Gods.

5 From hence we all may receive Direction, Instruct. 5.
touching prayer for our Armies; what to confess, what to petition, and what
to give thanks for, principally in regard of them.

1 What to confess; what we should bewail and mourn; for even the Nakedness
of our Army, the wickedness that abounds there; wherein we equal the Enemy.
Oh! what horrible blasphemies, execrable oaths, base drunkenness, swinish
filthiness, and what not, that any soldiers are addicted to, may be found among
some of ours. Let us lay these things to heart; the disorders of all ranks,
Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers in our Camp. For as the Sins of the
Country may prejudice the success of the Army; so the sin of the Army may
hinder the Peace of the Country. And for the sins, both of Country and Army, if
some do not mourn, Ier. 12.11.
all may sinart. God has opened to us a door of hope, in that sweet
refreshing, reviving Word of promise, 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. and 20 9.
If my people humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, etc. I will hear
their prayer, forgive their sins, and heal their land. This is the work of the
day, Ezra 3.4.
and therefore a word in season. It was the praise of the Priests after the
Captivity, that they did opus suum in die suo; they offered the daily burnt
Offerings by Number according to the Custom, as the duty of every day
required. We are called together this day, to seek God by fasting and prayer,
for a blessing upon the Design in hand; scil. the reducing of this strong
Garrison of Newarke; a business that has bin often attempted, but formerly
without success and not without loss. The Lord seemed then to cast us off,
and not to go forth with our Armies. Did we in either of our former
Expeditions (for this is the third) first seek God by solemn Humiliation, to
ask Counsel of him, and beg his presence, to make our peace with him, and
call him in to our Help, to go along with us, guide us and bless us? or
solemnly to interesse him in the business? If we did then go forth without
God, no wonder if we returned without victory. Blessed be God, who has put it
into the hearts of our Worthies, to put an opportunity into our hands, of
humbling our selves, and seeking the face of God this day, that he would be
pleased to shine upon our Councels and actions in this Siege-affairs, that the
result of all may be an end according to expectation.

If humiliation be the main work of this day, is not confession of sin a great
part of the work, or duty of the day? as at the solemn Nehem. 9.2, 3.
fast and repentance of the people in Nehemiahs time -- the children of Israel
stood and confessed their sins and the iniquities of their Fathers -- they read
in the Book of the Law one fourth part of the day, and another fourth part
they confessed. And whose sins should we confess in particular this day, if
not theirs, especially in whose hands lies the work that is now in agitation?
If we by our prayers this day, through the merits and mediation of Jesus
Christ, could make atonement for them, God would make a good end of this
tedious, costly, painful siege for us, if we could make peace with God for
them, God would make war against our Enemies, and fight our battails for them
and us.

Thus the Text directs us what to confess this prayer day before the Lord,
scil. the sins of our Army, what wicked thing or uncleanness we know to be
there. Disorders are the cause of all disasters there.

2 What to petition God for on behalf of our Armies, namely,

1 For holiness from God for them, that the Poet Lucans saying may be
falsified in them: Nulla fides piet asque viris, qui castrasequuntur. Let us
improve our interest in Heaven, for the purging and reforming of our Camp, that
virtue may be brought into request and fashion, and vice into dislike and
detestation, both with Commanders and common Soldiers, that th^re may be no
abominations among them, which might be provocations unto God (to depart in
displeasure from them) and procure desolations both to them and us. Let us
petition the Lord for a good choice both of officers and soldiers, scil. such
as will fight for conscience sake, -- and for good Discipline, that sin may be
severely punished in the Camp: and for good Ministers to go along with the
Army, and sound their Trumpets. Oh! that we could pray our Army into a posture
of Reformation.

2 For Gods presence to be with them, both in contriving and in acting; in
counselling and in effecting: in the whole work from beginning to the end. Let
us all beg this of God for them (as they shall be exhorted afterward to seek
it for themselves) let us enquire of the Lord for them in this Design, as the
children of Israel the when they went the third time in battle against the
Benj^^ites, I^dg. 20 2^.
Shall we yet again go out to battle against the childr^^ of Benjamin, or shall
we cease? Oh! that God would give us their Answer, as the Return of our
prayers. -- Goup, for to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand.

3 Here we are directed what to give thanks for chiefly, on the behalf of an
Army, namely:

1 For any Holiness, Reformation or good Orders in the Army, or in any
Company, or Officers, or Soldiers in it Esp^^ially when the Chief in Command
are chief in Godliness also.

2 For any deliverence granted to the Army ^^om Enemies, or victories over
Enemies; Give God the prayle and glory of all, who is the giver of all.

Now I have done with the Instructions, which serve for information of Judgment.

Those are behind, which conducc^specially to re^ulating of practice; They may
be directed and applied.

1 To all and every one here present, in regard of his personal Affairs.

2 To two sorts principally, in respect of their public Employments.

1 To all and every one. Here we may learn two lessons.

1 Get God to be with us, if we would prosper, The first Practical Instruction.
with us in every Condition, Relation, Undertaking; in every creature we enjoy*
or business we go about. ^e sure we beg Gods presence, and take him along with
us, for the presence of God is a Principal Gause,

2 Of Direction in our course. If the Lord bewith us, we shall hit ou^ w^y and
not go wrong: he will guide u^ by his counsel. When Moses sought of God his
way, he begd his presence for Guidance, Exodus 33.13, 15. If thy presence go
not with us, carry us not up hence.

2 Acts 18.10. Ps. 105 13, 14.
Of Protection, For God (where he manifests his prefer ^e) is, as a Sun to
guide, so a Shield to defend. I am with thee said the Lord to Paul, and no man
shall set on thee to hurt thee. When Israel went from one Nation to another,
from one Kingdom to another people (and God walked in the midst of their Camp)
He suffered no man to do them wrong yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes.

3 Of Provision. N^h. 9.20, 21.
Gods presence is the best security for Providentiall Supplies, against all
wants. When God was with Israel in the Wilderness, which could not afford them
any thing forty years did he sustain them in it, so that they ^acked nothing.

4 Of Consolation in the absence of G^eath^e-^owforts^, Acts 16.25.
as Liberty, friends, goods, etc. Gods presence made Paul and S^as sing in
prison at midnight. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
It makes a man say with Paul, I have all, I abound, even at what time he is
poor. What is wanting when God is present.

5 Of prosperity, how do all things prosper ^^^take in hand, so long as God is
with them. 1 Chronicles. 11.9.
The Lord was with Joseph and he was a prosperous man, Genesis 39.2. It is said of
David, that the Lord of Hosts was with him, so he waxed greater and greater.
This being discerned by others ( s^il. that God is with a man) protu^es him
Favor and Trust from others, Genesis 39.3, 4.
When, Potiphar, Joseph^ Master, saw that the Lord was with him, and made all
that he did to prosper in his hand, he made Joseph Over fear of his ^^^se, and
all that he had, he put into his hand. It is said in Verse 21, 22, 23. The Lord
was with J^seph and g^ve him favor in the sight of (...) of the Prison, who
committed all the prisoners to Joseph's hand, and. whatso^^^^ they did there, he
was the door of it: God i^ with thee in all that thou do, Genesis 21, 22, 23.
Said Abimilech to Abraham, Now therefore ^et us make a Cavenant. Genesis 26.28,
29.
Afterward Abi^il^ch and Phie^^ the chief Captain of his Armi^ said to
Isaac, we saw certainly that the Lord was with thee, and we said, let there be
now an Oath (...) Why do relations and conditions prove so uncomfortable,
journeyes, business so unsuccesfull, but because we (...), Gods presence, nor
care to take God along with us. Hence it is we do not prosper.

Quest. How may we obtain Gods presence with us in all our affairs?

Ans. Briefly thus.

1 Get into Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19.
in whom God is reconciledly present with his people, God out of Christ is a
consuming fire.

2 Humble your selves for former provocations, as Israel did before God renewed
to them the promise of his presence, when he had said to them. I will not go
up in the midst of thee, Exodus 33.3, 4, 6, 14.
for thou art astif-necked people, the people mourned, and put off their
ornaments; Then says God, Mypresence shall go with you, and I will give you
rest.

3 Pray carnestly for it, as Moses did, If thy presence go not, Exodus 33 15.
carry us not up hence.

4 Believe in Gods promise, for he has said, Heb. 13.5.
I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.

5 Set your selves continually as in Gods sight and presence, walk as under
his eye, keep him in your minds and hearts, for The Lord is with you; whise
you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 16.2.
carry him in your hearts, and he will bear you in his hands.

And now I have done with the first Practical Instruction, which concerncall*
Get Gods pref^^ce if you would prosper.

The second follows, He boly if you would k^^p it, The second Practical
Instruction to all.
be godly if you would enjoy God, when you (...) journey, or negotiate, then
keep your selv^^ (...) every (...) ^^hing, especially from those ^vi^ls to
which you (...) most inclin^^, (...) may be most tempted, Remember David, Psalm.
18.23.
It (...) upright before (...) and I kept my self from wine iniq^^ty^ (...)
God walk^ in the midst of thy house, and (...) and nalling, (...) (as he (...)
in the midst of Isreal's camp), to (...) and prosper thee: Therefore should thy
heam, and house, and family, and all thou have be holy: Then God will (...)
among you, his (...) no^unclean thing (...) clean actions, speeche^ looks
(...) thoughts of mi^^ (...) health reeding within thee, ^^^^cleanness either
in thy flesh or spirit esp^^^^ly that he see, (...) of uncleanness in thee;
which loves and likes filthiness, and takes liberty, yea, delight to lie in
the dung of sin and wickedness, If there be iniquity in thy hand, Job 11.14.
and cap. 22.23.
heart, or house put it far away, else God will turn away from thee. For God
will be gone, if thou would have sin to stay. Thou must either leave thy
fins, or lose thy God. Let your principal study and endeavor be to please God
in all things, and to be holy in all manner of conversation; then Gods presence
shall be with you, where ever you go, as it was with our blessed Savior, John
8.29.
who said, -- He that sent ^^e is with me, the Father has not left me alone,
for I do always those things that please him.

So much of the second Practical Instruction, which respects all, Be holy,
keep your selves pure, if you would keep God with you.

I come in the next place to apply these two Instructions to two sorts,
especially in regard of their public Employments, which hear me this day, To
wit, our Senators, and Soldiers.

1 A Particular Application.
To our Senators, the Heads of our Tribes and the Men of our Counsel. The
Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons here present, who consult
the Peace and Safety of these poor ruined Countries; and carry on our great
affairs with them advice. Would you have your Counsels wholesome and saving,
profitable and effectual? then

1 Interesse and engage Gods presence with you in all your consultations and
debates. Consist with God, severally, what shall, I and I, propound or offer,
that may mainly conduce to the Con^^^^^ we^l^, which is committed to our
Custody; as he Counsel of God jointly, what shall we conclude and resolve?
Make God your wisdom; eve^^o^e set God at Board-end, as present, yea,
Pres^dent in all your Counsels. For God stands in the Congregation of Privees,
and he judg^th among the Gods.

2 T^^e heed God see no (...) in you or among you, least he depart from you,
then wisdom will perish from the wise, and understanding cease from the
prudent. Counsels are blasted by men, when Counselors are described by God.
Oh, be careful to keep both your heads and hearts pure, and God will delight
to breath sound wisdom, and the knowledge of witty inventions into you, Prove. 8
12. Eccles. 9.15, 16, 17, 18 Prove. ^0.18.
how to save your spoiled, undone Countries. Wisdom (says the Preacher) is
better then strength, then weapons of war. No Statecounsell stands more need
to be good, then that which manageth the Affairs of Wars. With good advice make
war, says Solomon. If War be a building, then forces and weapons are the
Walls. But Counsel is the foundation. Happy be the Designs, which are carried
on the Wings of wholesome Counsel.

Now I have spoken to our Counselors, let me direct the same word of
Instruction.

1 To our Soldiers, to teach them these two Principal Lessons. 1 Be earnest
with God for his presence with you. 2 Advance holmesse in your Camp,


First Lesson.

Be very earnest with God for his special presence with you in your Camp, in
all your Military Motions, Postures and Designs; to have God stay with you in
your Quarters, and go with you, when you ^^^ch, and when you engage. Renew
Moses his request to God very often; upon every fresh occasion, If thy presence
go not not with us, let us not go forth against the Enemy; either in a party,
or in a body. When Israel were going to march on in the Wilderness toward
Canaan, they begd Gods presence for the whole Host, For when the Arc set
forward, and the Host rose up to march, Number. 10.35, 36
Moses said, seil. in the Name, and on the behalf of them all, Rise up, Lord,
and ^et thine Enemies be s^a^ered -- and when the Arc rested, he said, Return,
o Lord, unto the Ten thousand-thousands of Israel: as if he had said, Let God
go along with us, and dectare his presence among us. Whether we ma^ch or
^n^ampe.

This should be the earnest desire of good Commanders for themselves and their
Soldiers; as it was of Moses, Exodus 33.15. that Gods presents may go forth and
come in with them. of Soldiers not only for themselves, but for their (...),
as (...) was of Is^^^^ for
Joshua. Joshua 1.17.
As we have barkned unto Moses in all things (say they) so will we harken unto
thee, only the Lord thy God (...), a^ he was with Moses. Let me enlarge this
Lesson by two Particulars.

1 The Manner of his presence in the Camp. 2 Motives to seek it.
As for the Means to obtain it, The Manner of Gods presence in the Camp. As a
God of Counsel. Judge. 7.16.
that is, the Purport of the second Lesson;

1 The Manner, How is God in an Army, or how should you desire him to be with
you?

Answ. 1 As a God of Counsel to advise you what to do; to teach you the
Policies of War, as he did Gedeon his stratagem of Trumpets Lamps, and
Pitchers; Joshua his ambushment at Ai, Joshua 7. And David which way to set
upon the Philistines with most advantage, 2 Samuel 5.22, 23
scil, to fetch a compass behind them, and come upon them over against the
Mulbery Trees.

2 As a man of War, As a Man of War.
or Captain for, the Scripture sets forth the 1 Father, as General, Exodus
15.3. 2 Son, as Captain, Joshua 5.14. 3 Holy Ghost, as Ensign, Es^y 59.19.


1 To exercise you, Psalm. 18.4. Psalm. 18.32, 39.
or teach you the Art of War (as he did David) your hands to fight and fingers
to war.

2 To strengthen you, for, It is God, says David, that girdeth me with
strength unto the battle.

3 To encourage you, ^ Chron. 12.8.
he infuseth undauntednesse of spirit and heroic valor. God can make you
swift as Roes; bold as Lions like the Gadites, and put mettle and courage into
you, when you are exanimate.

4 To lead you forth and fight for you, as Moses told Israel. Deuteronomy. 1.29, 30. 2 Chronicles. 13.12 Isa. 58.8. and 52.12. Numb. 10.25.
The Lord your God, which goes before you, he shall, fight for you.

5. To gather you up, or be your Reye-ward as the Tribe of Dan was the
Gathering Host, that came last, and gathered up the weak ones and hindmost,
and such as were left behind. So God not only leads the Van, but brings up the
^ere the weak and feeble ones, God bears in his arms.

6. Isaiah 59.19.
To lift up a Standard against your Enemies. Gods Spirit is Ensigns. As a God
of power.


7. As a God of power.

To Protect you, that the Enemies weapons, those Instruments of of death, may
not, either hit or hurt you. For bullets fly by his Commission: and whoever
draws the bew, 1 King 22.34. 2 Psalm. ^^^7.
he directs the arrow. God gave David the shield of his salvation, Ps. ^^.35
and delivered him from the hurtful sword. Prosp^^ you, and (...) your enemies
to you, and cast victories upon you, as he gave David tho^e^ks of his Enemies,
Psalm. 18 40.
that he might destroy them that hated him.


You see the manner of God^ presence in an Army. Let me press upon you.

2 Metives to seek it, drown from the effects thereof. Motive to seek Gods
presence. Psalm. 144.2.
Gods presence in an Army is a ground to the Soldiers.

1 Of Safety, That God will cover their heads in the day of battle; and if
they fight, God (...) shield to them, if forced to fly, God will be their
Fortress old high Tower. In grettest peri^^here is safety where God is, or ^o
where. Its good for Soldiers to draw near to God, because danger (and death it
self, for ought they know) are near to them.

2 Of Courage, for this was ^sed as the great encouraging argument to the Host
of Israel, some time to time, to be both and very valiant, scil. That God was
with them, as by Moses, Deuteronomy. 1.29, Deuteronomy 20.2, 3, 4. Iosh^^ 14.12.
30. by the Priests by Hezekiah, 2. Cl^^^. 32.7; (...) This will mettle and
edge men's spirits to difficult designs, even to grapple with Giants as Caleb
(...) bold to do^.

3 Of Victory, for^^ (...) two God is. ^o marvel, For if God be with us who can
be against us? or, they that (...) with us, are more then they (...) (says
Hezekiah) is but an ^rme of flesh ((...)) but (...) Lord our God, as they that
have God (...) all-times in the^^^e of the Lord, g^s David did against Goliath,
1 Samuel 17.45, 46. 1 Chronicles. 13.12.
they are sure to prevail. Gods presence was the ground of Abijahs confidence
against Jeroboam and his (...), as if that was all in all.

4 Not only of victory and success, but of access o^ increase, that many
other will (...) when they perceive that God is with them, 2 Chronicles. 15.9.
as they did ^o As^ out of (...) abundance.

5 Deuteronomy. 11.25.
Of Terror to their Enemies, the fear and dread of an Army falls upon the
Spirits of their Enemies, and shakes, yea, m^ks them, when God manifests, his
presence to be with them. See it in the Cananites and Philistines, Josh. 2.9,
10, 11
1 Samuel 4.7.8. who said, We unto us, we unto us for God is come into Isreal's
Camp, Who shall deliver ut etc.

6 Of Glory and Honor, for hereby Gods puts a difference between his people,
and all the world besides, As Moses said to God. If thy presence go not with
us, Exo. 13.15, 16.
carry us not up hence. For wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy
people have found grace in thy sight? Expd. 8.22.
is it not in that thou go with us, so shall we be separated, I and thy
people, from all the people that are upon the face of the Earth

Its a gallant Army when God goes General.

Soldiers, get and keep God amongst you, so shall you be safe, courageous,
victorious, increasing, dreadful, ^lorious. Its dangerous to go upon any
Design and not to take God along with you, Numb. 14.44 45. The Israelites were
smittem, when they prefummed to go without the Ark. So much of the first Lesson.

The second Lesson follows.

Advance holiness in your Cam^sp. Consider what be the sins of an Army, and be
careful to keep your selves from them as

1 Covetousness, to be Greedy of Pay and Prey.

2 Injustice, to oppress, plunder, pillage, do violence to others. Unlawful
Spoils are plain robbery.

3 Pride and Emulations which have bred Great Conten^ons among Commanders and
Officers, Divisions, Factions, Sidings in an Army,
and many private quarrels besides. Pride and vanity in apparel and fashion,
too common among Soldiers,

4 Profaneness, as Swearing, Cursing, Blasphemy, Scossing at goodness and good
men, A theasme, to live as without God in the Camp, void of the knowledge,
sense or fea^e of God, New-coin'd Oaths, Sabbath breaking.

5 Filthin^sse in word or deed, as corrupt Communications, Drunkenness,
Adultery,

6 Cowardice, Pusillanimity, or baseness of spirit.

7 Treachery and Unfaithfulness, which discovers it self in 1 Betraying
Trusts. 2 Communicating Intelligence to the enemy. 3 Neglecting or not taking
advantages, when put into their hands. 4 Falling off to the enemies party.


8 Discontents, Mutinies.

9 Confidence in an arm of flesh, as multitude of men and horses,
fortifications which are but the works of our hands, unworthy to be our Gods.

10 Neglect of Piety, and exercises of it, as praying, hearing, reading,
conferring of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of heaven.

11 Want of Discipline, and execution of it in the Camp. Especially in
punishing offenders this may be a cause of all the rest.

If God see any such unclean thing among you, he will depart from you, and
give you up into the hands of your enemies.

God will not own you for his Host, if while you fight, pretendedly for him
with your hands, you fight palpably against him by your sins. God ordinarily
accepts the person, before he delights to use him, or does bless the action.
As in every Nation so in every Camp or Army, he that fears God, and works
righteousness is accepted with God, whether Commander or Common Soldier, very
likely God will use such a one as an Instrument of special service. When the
Camp is holy, then designs are happy, If the persons be pious, their
procedings are prospe^ous, because the Lord their God walks in the midst of
them, to deliver them, and to give up their enemies before them.

Quest. What be the means of purging and reforming an Arm^e?

Ans. Get good Ministers to got along with the Army, as the Priests did with
Isreal's Hosto, D^^t. 20.2, 3. to discipline the soldiers souls, and to Surgeon
their diseases in manners, Luke 3.14.
John ^aptist to teach Soldiers their duties, as to do violence to no man ^o
accuse no man falsely, to be content with their wages How can Sonldiers grow
better, that have not means to (...)? As for us (says Abi^a^ to Jer^^ohn, in
compass of his Army, when they had on both sides set the Battle in array) The
Lord is our God, 2 Chronicles. 13.10 11, 12.
and we have not forsaken him, and the Priests which mimister unto the Lod, are
the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business, and they burn
unto the Lord every morning and evening burnt Sacrifices, and sweet incense,
etc.

2 Have daily exercises of piety in the Camp, prayer at least, and reading of
Scriptures also (if it may be) evening and morning, as both the motions or
journeyings, and rest of the Arc, and cloud, and Host of Israel were
sanctified by prayer, before the people might either set forward or pitch their
Tents. Numb. 10.35, 36.
When the Arc set forth, Moses said, rese up Lord, and let thine enemies be
scattered, for prayer will raise God, and move him to go with his people
against their enemies, if he late before; and awaken him, if he was asleep
before; and stir him up to scatter enemies, if he permitted them to gather
before. Prayer in an Army awakens and raises God to the preservation of the
Arm, and destruction of the Enemies.

So when the A^ke rested, Moses prayed to God to return, and remain among
them, for in his presence is joy and safety, rest and security.

3 Let it be the care of the Commanders in chief, to choose both good Officers
and good Soldiers, for good Materians will make a good Bunding: How can an
Armiebe good if the Soulderie be bad? Holiness is the Head-prece both of
Commandere and Souldrers: Piety is the chiefest praise of born, as of Moses the
great Commander in Israel, That he was the servant of God: And the Centurion in
the Gospel, Luke 7.9.
that Christ found not so great says (as in him) no, not in Israel, and the
Centurion in the Act. 10.1, 2. Cornelius, who was a devout man, and one that
feared God with a^^ his house, -- and of them that w^yted on him conlimally,
one was adevout Soldier, ver. 7. here note. Devotion is the Commendation of a
Soldier: Religion shipires the principles and Spirit of true Valor; they
raise an (...) report of it, and slander it excedingly, they say, Religion
makes men Cowards.

4. Set up strict discipline in the Carsiple, Pumsh such us Transtesse, and
make some exemplary, that the rest may see or heart, and fear, and not dare to
do any such wickedness: Many Soldiers are no better then Discipline makes
them, Camp-discipline is (as one says) the Soul of an Army, which organizeth
the whole body, and keeps all within due limits and compass, as well for
Carriage and Manners, as for Postures and Quarters. The very name of a Camp
implies Discipline, as one says a Dista (...) eastra quasi casta eo quod ibi
castraretur libide.
Discipline is a fruit of Necessity, bred up by the exorbitancie of man's
Nature, and the evils incident to a Military life. It was exactly exercised in
Isreal's Camp, as appears in the censure of Achan and others.

Give me leave to distribute what remains of these reforming directions to the
Officers and Soldiers feverally

1 To the Commanders and Officers. You, our Worthy Leaders, who have showed
your selves the Sons of Valor, and been a wall unto us, both by night and
day, and adventured your lives to save ours. The Lord fasten these two things
upon your hearts, for promoting holiness in your Army.

1 Be Zealous for God, his Name and Glory, Numb. 25.11.
as Phinchas was with the zeal of God, who thrust Zimri and Cozbi through in
the Tent, for their fornication, God has made some of you a great Name, like
unto the Name of the great Men that are in the Earth, 2 Samuel 7 9.
and honored you to be Field-Saviours to Us; On show your selves tender of
his glory, that his Name may not be dishonored, nor Mercies abused, nor
Sabbaths profaned, nor his Laws violated, by any under your Command, so fat as
it is in your power any way to prevent or redress the same. Commanders in the
Camp should be a Terror to evill-doers, and a Praise to them that coe well
there, as Rulers are in the Commonwealth, Romans 13 3.
that Soldiers may be afraid of the power of Martial Discipline, as Subjects
are (or ought to be) of Magistraticall. Imitate Job, Job 29.25.
who when he sat chiese, and dressed as a King in the Armi^ (over his people for
he was a great Eastern Prince) as one ^hal comfort the Mourners, he chose
out their way for them, that is, ^. 11. (...)
he not only had them at Command, but regulated their course, tempering
severity with elemencie, comands with comforts and (...) you do, who sit
chief in the (...) way for them, as Job did for (...) would have them c^^^y
well this is the way to be both beloved and feared by them.

2 Be exemplary for piety and virtue, as devotion, temperance, righteousness
moderation, as well as for valor, vigilance, diligence to your Soldiers
saying to them, as Gideon did to his, in another case, Judges 7.17.
Look on us, and do likewise, carry your selves as we do. If Officers be bad,
it is rare to find the Common Soldiers good, for very example will spoil
them. 1 Samuel 25.28.
Remember Abigals speech to David, The Lord will certainly make my Lord asure
house, because my Lord fights the battles of the Lord, and evil has not
been in thee all thy days. Gods Military servants shall find a good reward at
Gods hands, if in them God has not found evil: This is the easiest and
honourablest way of Reformation to take vice away out of the Camp, scil.
rather by example then by punishment: It is a great dishonor to you that are
Commanders over others, and Conquerors over enemies, to be servants to sin,
yea, slaves to your lusts, and to rule your selves by your own wills, while you
order your Soldiers by Martial Laws, as it was for Alexander not to be able
to conquer himself, when he had conquered a world. I have done with the
Commanders and Officers, The Lord do them good by what has been said.

Let me speak a few words of advice.

2 To the Common Soldiers, to further holiness among you, I commend unto you
two things.

1 Mutual watchfulness and admonitions, that you would observe and consider
one another, to provoke one another to fear God, and depart from iniquity, to
mourn for sin, and close with a Savior, to tell one another of what you see
amiss, saying, as Lot did to the Sodomites, when any of your fellow soldiers
swear or drink immoderately, or do violence or mutiny, and the like. -- I
pray you brethren do not so wickedly. Why was all Israel involved in the guilt
of one man's sin scil. Achans) but because they did not warch over one another,
and over him in special. He was a Cain that said, Am I my brothers keeper?
Genesis 19.7.


2 Fellowship in soule-edifying duties: Your heart will cleave closer to Jesus
Christ in faith, and each to other in love, and be more dear and intimate
mutually, if you be Comrades in exercises as well of piety, as of military
postures, and of Arms, in praying, reading, conferring together, as in
quartering, watching, marching, or in going upon any design together. Holy
duties, and communion in them, are the means to make you holy men, a godly
Soldier, a praying, fighting Army, a thundering Legion so that the camp be
holy. When other Soldiers that are rude, and have no savor of the things of
God nor care of their own souls, will go drink till drenke, or sing foolish
songs, talk ribaldry, or play at Cards, and so game away their time and money:
Oh go you and pray together, seek God together, edify one another in faith
patience, courage, godliness, help one another heaven-wards, strengthen your
selves mutually against corruptions, tentations, and discouragements, to which
you are subject as men as Christians, and as Soldiers. The fruit and comfort
hereof will rem^in with you, when all vain delights and sports are vanished,
and leave a sting behind them in the conscience. I think Soldiers of all
other men should be good Husbands, both with their Money and Time to spend it
well.

1 With their Money, not to shufle and cut it away at Cards, nor cast it away
at Dice, seeing they get it with the hazard of their lives, it is the price of
blood. 2 Samuel 23.15, 16, 17.
David would not drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem (though he longed
for it) because his men got it with so much hazard, Is not this, said be, the
blood of the men that went in jeopardie of their lives? therefore he would not
drink thereof, but poured it out unto the Lord, as an offering of Thanksgiving
unto God, for delivering them out of that danger: If David would not drink the
water that was drawn with the hazard of his men's lives, will you game away the
money you carn with the hazard of your ^^vn lives every day.

2 With your Time, because yours is most uncertain and may be very short. That
which is past, cannot be recal'd, and that which is future cannot be assured;
only the present Time is yours improve it, I beseech you, to better purpose
then drinking or playing, you may be cut off before to morrow.

Oh! Remember you carry your lives in your hands continually. Should not a
Soldier be a Saint, because he is in danger of death and damnation every
hour, if he continue in sin un-repented and un-reformed. Such as spend their
Time in play or idly, can be in no good posture for death and judgment;
(...) they make a course to lie down in sorrow, and to be buried in a field of
shame.

Soldiers, consider, is there not as good fellowship in praying as in playing
together; in singing Psalms as base Ballads, in talking of spiritual matters
for the benefit of your souls; as in opening your mouth, and in multiplying
words without knowledge, say to one another, Come fellow soldiers, let us go
pray or seek God, or instruct, encourage, admonish, warm the heats of one
another by sweet-breathing of holy Counfail and bosom-experience. What? shall
we march and watch and fight and lie and dye together (for so we may, for ought
we know) and shall we not pray together, nor serve God together, that if we go
out of the world together, we may go to Heaven together. Should we not be holy
together in our militant state here, that we may be happy together triumphantly
to eternity hereafter? Shall we do duties together for man in the field, and
not for God, and for our own souls in our Quarters? Accustom your selves to
such spiritual exercises Now, as will be your delight when you go hence and
shall be no more. There is neither drinking nor gaming, much less swearing and
revelling in the grave whither your bodies are going, or in Heaven whither you
desire your souls may go. What will it profit you to win the Field and get
spoils, and lose your precious souls.

I will conclude this Application of my Text to our Commanders, Officers and
Soldiers, in a few brief Cautions and Mementoe's to them all, as an abridgment
of all.

-- Cautions three.

1 Take heed of sin, for God will not go among a Company of base, debauched,
disordered fellows: such are most obnoxious to a fatal stroke. Ier. 25.31.
Amos 9.10.
God will give them that are wicked to the sword. And the sinners of the people
shall dye by the sword, though they be such as use the sword.

One such person sometimes brings Gods judgments on a whole Army, as Achan did
on the Host of Israel, by plundering the goodly Habylonish garment and 200
shekels of silver and wedge of gold, Josh. 6.18. and 7.12. Eccles. 9.18. Non
prospere pugnant adversus malos, qui ^psi sunt mali.
which made the Camp of Israel a Curse, (...). One sinner destroys much good.

You that fight for God against Enemies, should keep your selves free from the
sine of Enemies; else the success will be doubtful. They that go against
Babylon should first go out of Babylon.

2 Take heed of self-confidence, trusting in your own strength skill, valor,
or weapons of War. This will blast all your designs and hopes. See the effect
of it in thee Champion Goliath.

3 Take heed of by ends or self-respects in the service, as paper praise,
booty, plunder, preferment. Its true, a soldier deserves his pay, as the
labourer does his wages; but to make this your sole or chief End, of Engaging
in so good a Cause as you have in hand; is to be very mercinary; even to make a
Trade of killing men for money; when you have gotten your salary, I fear it
will be said, Verily you have your Reward. Brave Gallant-spirits should scorn
poor low ends. Let the ends and aims you set up in your hearts, of all the
service you perform in this Cause, be pure and high, as Gods glory, public
good, and discharge of your duties for conscience sake in what you have
undertaken.

-- The Mementoe's are three also.

1 Remember (I beseech you all) to make your peace with God by faith and
repentance for your sins, before ye go forth to fight with the Enemy. Its not
sufficient to die in a good Cause, except you be in a good estate for your
souls, if you would avoid the second death.

2 Remember to commit your life, soul, and whole self and all you have into
Gods hands, when you go to charge the Enemy. Psalm. 31.13.
Trust God with all, and look at God as grasping you and yours in his hands,
that you may wholly attend the business in hand, and cast the care of all other
things wholly upon God. What quiet and comfort is this to a Soldier, to be able
to say when he goes to look his enemy (and for any thing he knows, even death
that King of terror also) in the fate, as Paul did, I know in whom I have
believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.
and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed to him,
(...), my pledge, or what I have deposited with him until the day of Christ.
If you will confidingly carry your lives in your own hands, and not put them
seriously by faith into Gods hands and custody, as Paul did earnestly his soul
in times of suffering, you may soon lose and scatter them, or have them taken
from you.

3 Remember, when you got to fight in this present war, you carry four
precious Jewels in your hands committed to you.

1 The Cause of God or his Truth, 2 The Peace of the Kingdom,

3 Your present lives, 4 Your future hopes even for eternity. What manner of
persons ought you to be, in point of godliness and boldness, diligence and
faithfulness, to discharge so great a Trust, and be able to give a good
account of them all.

Oh be vigilant and valiant, (...), quit your selves like man, be strong. The
Lord of Hosts be with you, and the God of Jacob be your refuge and your
recompense.

FINIS.

