A DISCOURSE In the Praise of Antimonie, and the Virtues thereof.

Written and Published at the request of a Person of quality.

By Constantine Rhodocanacis.

Printed in the year, 1664.

A DISCOURSE in praise of Antimony, and the Virtues thereof.
ALL expert Chemists have so commended this Mineral, that amongst all the
Students of the Art, there is not one, who does not much admire it, and not
without good cause: For amongst all Minerals, Antimony alone has received from
Nature a Body compounded, and tempered with an admirable proportion of
Elements. The Elements have given it so great and secret virtues, as if they
had endeavored to rank it in the number of those things, that have in them
something of Divinity. Seeing that this sacred Lead has power to make manifest
the secret virtues of other Metals: for it is a certain mild fire, that can
preserve not only the Bodies of Metals, but even those of Men. This is that
fire which resolves and penetrates the metalline Bodies. Let us hear what
Psellus says of it to Xiphilinus the Patriarch, who desired to be instructed
of him in some secrets of Nature. Shall I (says he) discover unto you the
virtues that lie hid in the inward parts of Antimony? or the sacred Lead, which
Hippocrates kept so secret under the name of his Tetragon? Where we may note,
that Psellus called this Mineral sacred, because he well knew it to be the
perfection of Nature; the illustrious light, and flower of Jupiter: for there
is in this Mineral a certain incombustible Sulphur, which uses to unite it
self to other Metals, and to purify their impure and combustible Sulphur.
Hence he is called the Governor of all Metals; the light, and blood of Gold;
because he does not only correct the imperfect Metals, but also upon the Test
purges Gold it self, and exalts his light and splendor. He is called also the
Star of Mars, because being joined to Iron, it melts to a bright Mettalline,
called the Star of Iron, and the starry Regulus thereof. He claims likewise to
himself the name of Mercury, and is called the shining Mercury, because there
is a very near affinity between these two Minerals. He is also called Venus and
Phosphorus, because he brings forth two Cupids, armed with different Arrows,
whereof some are tipped with Gold, and some with Steel, in testimony of his
affection both to Gold, and to Iron; wherefore his Father Saturn has adorned
him as his Son, with several titles. He is called moreover the Magnesia,
because Antimony has a certain magnetical, or sympathetick property, by which
he enclines to, and affects the Metals, that he may impart to them a greater
perfection: and this, much after that manner, by which the Loadstone enclines
to the Pole-starre, and tends toward it perpetually. And to comprehend all in
a word, Antimony with its magnetic quality, allures, as it were, all curious
spirits to the search, and study thereof; and effects this much, that when they
have once known it, they have a desire to appropriate it to themselves, and to
exclude all others from the knowledge thereof. And this is the cause, why they
imposed so many names upon it, and disguized this Mineral under the names of
living creatures: as when they bid us, Take the black Lion with sparkling fiery
eyes; and Basil Valentine calls it a Wolf, whose process I will here insert,
that such as can understand it, may learn thereby to make no contemptible
Medicines for the health of man. Take (says he) the hungry ravenous Wolf,
which is subject to warlike Mars, but originally is the son of Saturn, which
lies in the Mountains, and Valleys, ready to dye for hunger. Cast before him
the body of the King, that he may ea^e it, and when he has devoured it, cast
the Wolf himself into a great fire, and the Wolf will vanish away, and leave
the King behind him: Do this three times, and then the Lion, or King will
overcome the Wolf: and the Nature of the King delights much in the tincture of
the Wolf, because of the affinity that is between the Blood of these two. In
this operation, thou may observe a most pleasant thing, for when the Lion is
glutted with the blood of the Wolf, he will shine like the Sun, and his inward
virtue is very great, and very profitable for any work, thou would effect
therewith. Behold now the Mineral Key, which is delivered to us, that we may
not only open Metal with it, but withal, that we may open our Eyes, and may
be able to discern as well the Internal Qualities, as the Extern^l of the
S^cred Lead. This also is generally affirmed of Antimony, that it is very
beneficial to color withal: for there are drawn out of it several colors, or
tinctures, not only to paint and beautify the Eyes with, but also to stop
their defluxions: yea, and to mitigate all sharp humors, and inflammations, and
to take away their causes. Hence the Jewish women made use of Antimony for a
Cosmetic, to paint their Eyes, and Faces withal, for they endeavored to
render themselves pleasing to the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and Egyptians. In
this respect the Chaldees called Antimony Cohol, and the Arabians Cohl, because
it beautifies the face: as the Greeks also called it Stibi, from its color:
for the Women did black their Eyebrows with it, as the custom is in Turkey, at
this day. Galen also confesses, that the Greek-women used it to the same end,
and he teaches, that it is not only proper to paint the Brows, but also to
stop the defluxions of the Eyes. Whence he boasts, that he had found a most
excellent remedy to repel, and dry up all sharp Rheumes that offend the Eyes,
and this remedy was therefore called an Opthalmic, and a Prophilactic, or
Praeservative of the Eyes. This Remedy was usual amongst all those people, who
lived under the Roman government, and was esteemed infallible: not only to
stop defluxions, but to clear the Eyes, and to take away all spots, and clouds,
that hindered the sight. Hence it may appear, that Antimony; was used in the
days of Galen, and principally by the phrase Vpostimmizein in the Greek tongue,
from Stimmi, which signifies Antimony, because they did put the Stimmi or
Antimony upon their Brows, and painted them therewith. There were also many
Physical Remedies made for the Eyes, of Antimony, whereof some were dry, and
some moist Confections, wherewith the sight was strengthened, and sore Eyes
very readily cured. Hence it appears that Antimony cleanses our Eyes, as well
as Metals, and certainly if the effects of it are so wholesome, being
outwardly applied to the Eyes, what shall we think of it, if it be ministered
inwardly, and taken into the Body. Of a truth, it will no less strengthen the
stomach, if it be well prepared, for it cures all distempers of the inward
parts, strengthens the appetite, and gives ease in all stitches, and pungent
distempers caused by Choleric and Sharp-humors in the Gutts, or Stomach.
Antimony was the Phaenix of Hippocrates, but a Wiseman must extract the secret,
and supply himself with the knowledge of the Virtues thereof, out of its Ashes,
for there they lie hid. For this Mineral does so strengthen, and stir up
nature, that she can free, and discharge her self from Bilious humors, which
breed obstructions in the Gutts, and stomach, and from thence disperse
themselves into other parts of the Body; This Mineral stirs up four several
faculties in our Bodies, whereby the Excrements are expelled, and all peccant
humors cast out: for it purges by vomit, by stool, it causes us to sweat, it
strengthens the principal parts, and is a preservative against poisons. These
admirable virtues were the cause, why Hippocrates concealed this Mineral under
the name of his Tetragon: and verily nature has not produced any other
Compound, wherein there is such virtue and power to remove, and resolve
obstructions in the Gutts, seeing nature has not imparted this faculty to any
other Body, but has conferred it upon Antimony alone. Hence Basil Valentine
confesses this Mineral to be most conducing, and agreeable to the principal
parts of the Body, as the very Balsam, and Mumy of life: and he affirms, that
there is not under heaven, a more excellent medicine, than what may be prepared
out of Antimony, for it expels poisons, opens all obstructions, drives out
the superfluities of the Blood by sweat, and purges by stool, and vomit; most
justly therefore did Hippocrates call Antimony his Tetragon, because of its
fourfold faculties, and virtues: for it vomits, it purges, it sweateth, and it
preserves, and strengthens withal. Galen calls those shining filaments, or
streakes, which appear in Antimony, Plakas: which discover, and manifest unto
us, that Antimony is naturally full of Regulus, in which Regulus there are
excellent Virtues: For by his Plakas Galen understood the purer, and brighter
parts of the Antimony, in which parts those four medicinal faculties lodge,
which make up the Tetragon. Amongst all Symptoms of Diseases, the most vehement
is an extreme pain of the head, which procedes from abundance of Bilious slimy
humors heaped up, and impacted in the Gutts, where they cause Inflammations,
and such strong Obstructions, that sometimes the natural passage downwards is
stopped, that the very Excrements are purged out at the mouth: and in this
cause; Hippocrates requires, that the patient should vomit every sixth day,
should drink wine, and be purged with his Tetragon: in which Text Galen has
rightly observed, that by his Tetragon Hippocrates understood Antimony. For
this Mineral being well prepared, roots out the Causes of this Symptom, namely,
the Bilious humors impacted in the Gutts. It is plain then, that Hippocrates
by his Tetragon, meant Antimony, for this disease will not yield to any other
Remedies: for purge the Patient with common Medicaments, as Hellebore, and the
like, and make him vomit never so often, yet the pain in the Head shall still
continue, for those remedies cannot resolve, and expel the Bilious excrements
that cause it, and therefore the Patient must be purged with the Tetragon, for
it is the property of this Mineral to resolve Obstructions, and purge them out
both upwards and downwards, as also by sweating, and to strengthen the natural
parts, which have been weakened by the peccant matter. And seeing this Mineral
is Diaphoretick withal, it does by a gentle transpiration disperse, and expel
those noxious vapors and fumes, which ascend from the Stomach, and the peccant
matter, up to the heart, and the head, and cause those troublesome symptoms:
and these excellent effects made a famous Philosopher call Antimony the Healing
Mumie of life. Others there were, who called Antimony the Ramm, and not without
reason, for as the Celestial Sun begins to be exalted in the Sign of Aries,
even so the Terrestrial Sun, namely, Gold, is exalted and purged in Antimony,
as we may understand by the Aenigmatical process of Basil Valentine, formerly
mentioned under the names of the Lion and the Wolf. And there are those who
stick not to affirm, that in Antimony is hid the secret of all secrets, as
being the Marcasite of Saturn. But this moreover is worth our observation, that
there are two sorts of Antimony; namely, the Male and the Female: The Male is
more impure, earthy, and of less weight; but the Female is purer, more
sparkling and bright; much heavier than the other, and has more in her of a
Mettalline nature; whence we may conclude with Dioscorides, that that Antimony
is to be chosen for the best, which has in it certain shining filaments or
streaks; and which being broken, the fragments will easily crumble between your
fingers; and which has not much earth mingled therewith, nor any extraneous,
foeculent superfluities.

Moreover, there are made of Antimony several sorts of Medicines, namely, the
Crocus, or Mineral Saffron; the Flowers; the Glass of Antimony; the Antimonial
Cups, the Butter; the Mercurius vitae, or vomiting powder; the Regulus, the
Golden Sulphur; the Salt, and Oil made thereof by Resolution in a cold place;
as also several kinds of Tinctures. For our part, we know how to make four
different Tinctures of Antimony, whereof the one excells the other in virtue,
according to the purity of the matter, whereof they are prepared. The same we
say of our sweating powder: and these our Medicines cause no vomits at all, but
work only by sweating, and that kindly too; and without any molestation or
offense to the stomach: And at Cambridge there are many persons who can attest
this truth with me, as also here at London. We prepare also, besides the
Tinctures, and the Diaphoretick, another Medicament, which is a ruddy powder,
and we call it the Theion of Hippocrates, and our Panodon, because it purges
at all the Emunctories, or passages of the Body, by Vomit, by Stool, by Urine,
by Sweat, and an insensible transpiration. We prepare also the Salt of
Antimony, which has the same effects with our Theion, this only excepted, that
the Salt purges only downwards, by Stool and Urine, and in that respect is
better than our ruddy powder for such Patients, who cannot endure vomiting
Medicines. Of all, and each of these we shall now discourse, that such persons
who desire to have them, may know what they are good for, and how they ought to
be taken, and in what quantity.

Of the use and Dose of our Antimonial Tincture.
This Tincture is a good and a safe Medicine, and may be taken inwardly, or
applied outwardly with much benefit: for it cures the Leprosy, the French Pox,
the Scurvy, all Fevers, the Falling Sickness, the Dropsy, the Plague, the
Meazles, the Itch, and such other Diseases. In Meagrims, and pains of the head,
and the Hypocondriack melancholy, it avails much. It expells poisons, cures
those that are Asthmatical; kills Worms, and helps in many other distempers,
which cannot be cured with Simples. It cleanses the Blood, emptieth all
vicious humors of the Stomach; brings down the Courses, and makes Barren
Women fruitful; in the Gout also, and the Stone, it is a commendable Medicine.
The Dose thereof is alterable, according to the age of the Patient, wherein
also there must be a respect had to his strength, and to the violence of the
Disease. To little Children of 2, 3, 4, or 6 Months old, you may give one or
two drops in their Mothers Milk against Worms, Itch, Fevers, Convulsions,
Falling Sickness, or Meazles; but to Children of one, two, or three years old,
you may give four drops in Milk or Wine, and you may safely repeat this Dose
every third or fourth day. But if you would only use this Medicine as a
Preservative, to prevent diseases, then you may give it little Children twice a
Month, and it will strengthen them, and prevent the said diseases, by cleansing
their Bodies, and purging out all bad humors. But to persons of 15 years of
age, to 24, you may give 6, or 10 drops in sugared Wine. And to those of 25,
and so forwards to 50 years of age, you may give 10, 20, or 40 drops: and
always you may increase, or diminish the Dose, according to the age of the
Patient, with respect had to the strength of the disease, and his body. In the
Gout and the Stone, give 10 drops in Wine or Ale every day, in the morning
fasting: but if the Patient be very weak, give it only every third, or fourth
day, and so continue it to the end of the Cure; but let him withal use a
temperate diet. In the Leprosy, the French Pox, and the Scurvy, take this
Medicine every day in the Morning; but if the Patient be weak, then take it but
every second day, and that so long as you find it necessary. In the
Falling Sickness and the Dropsy, it is to be taken after the same manner. But
in intermitting Fevers, take it an hour, or so, before the Fit, or when the
Fit is quite over; and the Patients should always in their ordinary drinks
take some of our Spirit of Salt, in every distemper. But if it be a quotidian
Fever, then take the Tincture every morning. In pestilential Diseases, take a
Dose of it presently, and repeat it every day. But if you would use it only for
a preservative to prevent the Plague, then take it but once a week. In all
other inward distempers, you must take a Dose of it in the beginning of the
disease, and continue it once every day till your distemper be removed; and by
this means all maladies may be cured, without putting the Patients to any pain.
Our Diaphoretick powder is also effectual in all diseases, wherein we have
prescribed the Tincture: and may be administered from one Grain to 40, having
always a respect to the age, and strength of the Patient. The best Vehicle to
administer it in, is Malego Wine; and let the Patient keep in his Bed to sweat,
as he must do also when he takes the Tincture. And always in intermitting
Fevers give the Powder, as well as the Tincture, before the Fit.

Of the Theion of Hippocrates.
This is a most excellent Medicine against the Falling Sickness, Fevers,
Plague, Gout, Leprosy, French Pox, Pains in the Head, Meazles, and Melancholy;
and in one word, it is a commendable Medicine in all kinds of diseases. In
outward Maladies also, as old Sores and Wounds, it effects much, namely. if the
Patient be inwardly purged with it; Women with Child only excepted, for to them
it must not be administered, nor conveniently to any such, who are so far spent,
and weakened with diseases, that they have not strength enough left to take
Physic. The usual Dose to those that are not above 15 years, is from one
Grain, to 3, 4, and 5. To those that are of full age, and in the flower of
their youth, such a Dose is to be administered, as shall be able to make them
vomit; namely, 6, or 8 Grains; but if the Patient abhorrs a Vomit, then let him
take our Salt of Antimony, whereof we shall speak hereafter. To Infants, and
little Children, young of age, the Dose is from half a Grain, to one Grain. It
may also be administered to newborn Children, against Convulsions, and
Epileptick Fitts, but the Dose must not exceed the bigness of the Seed of a
Rape, and it must be given in the Mothers Milk. But if the Child be strong, and
above half a year old, you may increase the Dose, so as it may effect some
visible opperation, and purge out the bad humors; and by this means you may
also prevent the Meazles, and many other diseases which use to afflict
Children. Of a truth, by this Medicine all Maladies wherewith men are troubled,
may be easily cured, and at a cheap rate.

Of the Salt of Hippocrates.
This Salt of Antimony is in a manner better than the Theion of Hippocrates;
and of a truth, it effects great matters, and many grievous diseases are cured
therewith. It avails much against the Gout and the Stone, and is a very
desirable Medicine for such as are afflicted with them. The Dose of it is
variable: to those of full age, you may give one Scruple, or a little more; to
little Children, the Dose is from one Grain, to 12, according as they are less,
or more in years. It empties all bad humors, by a very gentle Purgation, which
is worth our notice. The proper Vehicles to administer it in, is Wine or Ale,
or any Broth whatsoever.

Glory be to God.
Constantine Rhodocanacis Chiensis.


