A REVIEW Of a certain PAMPHLET Under the name of one JOHN LILBVRNE.

By a well-willer to the Peace of Sion.

2 Corinthians. 10.12, 18. verses. For we dare not make our selves of the number,
or to compare our selves to them, which praise themselves: But they understand
not that they measure themselves with themselves, and compare themselves with
themselves.

18. For he that praises himself is not allowed, but he whom the Lord
praises.

Galath. 6.3. 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. Proverbs 26.12. See thou a man wise in his own
conceit, there is more hope of a fool [or a man may expect better] than of him.

Imprimatur. JOHN DOWNAME.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, dwelling at the Bible in Wood-street.
1645.

TO THE HONORABLE, AND HIS VERY GOOD FRIEND WILLIAM PRYN, Esquire.
SIR:
HAving cast my eye into the world, to observe the occurrences, and take notice
of the Controversies of the time, there fell into my hands some of your
writings, disputing the case of Presbytery and Independency, which having
perused with consideration, I received much satisfaction, though I met with
many cavils fallen from the pens of several Writers of differing spirits,
seeking to destroy the fruit of your endeavors: But I found none, that were of
sufficient strength to overthrow those positive truths by you asserted: In
particular, there came to my hand a Pamphlet of somewhat a later edition than
the former, full of bitter invectives, against the Truth and all government,
but what private fancy shall exalt. And this under the hand of one John
Lilburne, in an Epistolary way, directed to your self: At which being filled
with indignation, to see the strangeness of that spirit that wrought in its
endictment, and is now working in the world (excellently set forth by Jude in
his Epistle, 19. verse, Makers of Sects, (...), having not the Spirit) clearly
demonstrating what they would do, might they prevail for that liberty, so much
contended for. I was compelled, after much striving within my self, to review
what he had done, and to give in my judgment for the benefit of the Church of
God, which I have finished by way of Epistle, I recommend to your Patronage,
which if I obtain, I having the happiness I sought after, who am not my own,
but the Truths and yours in all

Observance,
From my Study this 27. of January 1644. SIR:
That I have not declared my self unto you, I hope you will dispense with, many
reasons have induced me to silence herein; hereafter, if God will, I shall take
occasion to tender my service, and acknowledge my engagement, and not mine
alone, but the engagement of the whole Church of God for your faithful
endeavors.

Fare you well.


The Epistle to the Reader.
Christian Reader:
HAving taken a short view of a certain Pamphlet that is cast abroad under the
name of one John Lilburne: Directed to Master Pryn, which is stuffed with so much
gall and bitterness, (and so little of that sweet ingredient of love,) (of
which I find not one dram in 189. lines) against the State, Parliament, and all
Synods, etc. I judge it to be of very evil consequence, and might produce
dangerous effects amongst weak souls, that are apt to take all for Gospel
such men speak, how wide soever it be from it: I conceived my self (upon this
consideration) bound in conscience to speak a word, if I were able to satisfy
weak and unstable souls. And for unmasking the subtilty of men deciphered in
the tenth verse of Judes Epistle: But these speak evil of those things which
they know not: and inverse the eighth likewise, notwithstanding these dreamers
also defile the flesh, And despise Government, and speak evil of them which
are in Authority. If any thing be added for thy establishment, in the Truth,
let God have the glory, and let him have thy prayers; who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus.

TO JOHN LILBURNE, Lieutenant Colonel These.
SIR,
HAving perused a paper in form of an Epistle, subscribed a Letter written by
John Lilburn, etc. to William Pryn Esquire, wherein you take occasion in your
Exordium, to intimate that honor God vouchsafed you to be a witness to the
Truth with Master Pryn, under the reign of Episcopal tyranny. [Yet there is a
vast difference between the grounds of suffering on the one side, and on the
other: Paul tells us of suffering as busy bodies [God grant this charge fall
not upon you.] And indeed it is not so much the suffering, as the suffering
like a Christian, that is acceptable with God, or esteemed worthy of honor
before men] from whence you draw an Argument to prove an affection in people
toward you, to the misleading of their judgments, causing them to build with
too much confidence, on what shall be spoken or written by you, without due
examination; never eying or considering what is said, so much as the persons
speaking: who they be, you give me not to understand, except in General [your
constant practice in cases subject to doubts] as if your charge did reach to
all, and not unto particulars, the latter of which I conceive comes nearest
Truth; It being the weakness of some not able to judge and determine of these
things, or the wilfulness of others that have judgment, yet willingly permit
the mists and fogs of darkness to over-cloud it: when as the more learned and
instructed receive things not upon bare affirmation [a mighty pillar for
upholding your foundation] but with judgment, what they find is most agreeable
to Truth in their understandings, setting by what upon search [not upon
phansie] they find not consonant to the Word, and this is done, without any
prejudice to, or pre-judging of the abilities of those that excel them. How
ever you are pleased to conceive of others in this particular, I heartily wish
you were not, or would not be ignorant of one thing.

To consider how much of this spirit rules in those that are contrary minded to
Master Pryn, or any adhering to him in judgment; and if I mistake not
[presumption laid aside] your self is not a little guilty in this charge.

2. The second particular I find in order to be spoken of, is, Master Pryns
bitter and unsavory language (as you say) against the Saints of God, and the
unspotted ways of Jesus Christ.

To this I reply, That what bitterness, etc. you may meet with (exceeding your
own) was not (I dare affirm) against the Saints of God truly so, walking in
the unspotted ways of Jesus Christ [neither can be collected from any thing by
him written] But against those phansies and strange Enthusiasmes, which those
that call themselves Saints by way of privilege and prerogative, [which yet I
see them not to be] and under that notion take a liberty to vent and broach
Doctrines and conclusions contrary to faith and good manners, tending directly
to Anarchy and confusion, against these his zeal was powered forth, as it were,
without measure, that he might oppose these tenants and doctrines of novelties
which creep in upon us daily by succession: And that such a spirit is not
altogether without president. Observe the temper of Paul against him who would
have perverted the Truth, Acts 13.10, 11. Not that from hence I would go about
to justify what flesh and blood may sometimes do through frailty, but to let
you see in some cases it is lawful to speak with Authority: And if you will
but clear your eyes and look on things and persons impartially, you shall
behold [as formerly you might] leading presidents from men of your own spirit,
before Master Pryn did undertake to engage himself in this controversy, at
which willing and wilful ignorance I stand amazed.

3. The third thing that comes next to hand, is M. Pryn's great confidence,
weak and unsound Arguments [thus you.]

To which I say, that whereas you would make void and of no effect, those valid
assertions of M. Pryn's, which are esteemed at so low a rate in your judgment,
till I find that you or any of ye produce others of more weighty
consideration, you shall give me leave to spare my weapons in this encounter.

4. The fourth Complaint making it is way, is, the robbing you of your liberty
in the public use of the Press.

This I judge an act of wisdom, and not of bondage [as you insinuate] For
might every one speak in public what the madness of his brain and his
deluded fancy leads him to, there would be no end of strife, but a world of
confusion, who would not plead conscience if that might protect them, yea, even
for the most (...) opinions, as well as you, backed with Scripture and reason
[as they suppose] (...) perverted to their own destruction: till you can assure
me of divine Writ, for this your bare word will never satisfy nor prevail for
such licentiousness.

5. The fifth Enemy with which you contend, is the Black-coats, who endeavor to
lay lower than the dust [a rare secret] a generation of men, whom they falsely
call Sectaries, [you fight against your own light, were there that abundance
of knowledge in you, as you pretend to, this Word would have been received
without damnation; but to remove that scruple, let me tell you, your tenants
and practice, and the doctrines of many in your way is schismatic, how far
short it falls of heretical time will demonstrate: To proceed, you say men that
have in the uprightness of their hearts without Synodian-like ends ventured
all for the good of the Parliament: How I shall be assured of all this, or any
man else, my soul enters not into this your secret, but gladly would find some
satisfaction, that I may be able to bear witness to the truth of this now
delivered. Let me expostulate the case a little with you: What have ye done
more than ye should, nay then in conscience ye ought to do, wherein have you,
or any of ye excelled others, that none can reach up to the height of those
sufferings ye lie under, show it me; Are there not thousands that are equal
with ye in this lot, and as many that excel ye, whose silence speaks them
praiseworthy: worthy: men that for religion are but babes in Christianity, in
respect of what ye seem to have ascended to; Is this for the honor of Christ
whom you profess to be your Lord and Master, thus to complain, and bespeak the
compassion of men from an argument of misery felt or feared, as the five
Independent Members have done before you: Have you thus learned Christ? What
though ye have cast all into the banck, must ye receive it presently with
usury, or ye are undone; have ye not the same God, the same cause to manage
as at first; Why grow ye weary in well doing; dare ye not trust God with his
own, or with what ye charge upon him as his? Which ye are so confident of,
for the rightnesse and onlinesse of the way, and have extolled even to the
heavens for the justness of it: Verily this presages a large measure of
selfishnesse in all your actions, that self stands so long upon the stage in so
few lines, to justify its masters integrity: And for your more than a third
part of this Epistle, that falls so heavy upon the Tribe of Levy, wherein have
ye received prejudice by them, or heard words from them, are they not (rather)
become your enemies, because they speak the Truth. If the Truth have suffered
through their unfaithfulness, it will speak its own privilege in Gospel
language, and not in bitter invectives beside reason: Doubtless, arguments
with wise men are the way to conquer, but with simple ones the language of
fools; had you charge against them, proceeded from judgment, your paper had
not been so empty of accusations, nor so froughted with froth and vanity.

6. The sixth Accusation falls heavy on the Synod, whom you compare for tyranny,
to the Spanish Inquisition.

Here your bare affirmation must stand up in the place of Arguments [an easy
confutation] Ipse dixit must suffice for the subjecting my faith to this or the
other man's fancy: when by clear demonstrations you shall resolve my
judgment in this particular, I shall answer as becomes Christianity, till then
my determination is that of Solomon, Prove. 27.22.

7. The seventh particular is matter of Complaint on your part, for being
reckoned amongst the number of State and Church molesters.

I conceive this charge stands upon a sure foundation; if disobedience to the
lawful power of civil Magistrates, and those Ordinances by them enjoined, to
be observed for a regular proceeding in matters Ecclesiastical, as well as
Civil, [having the advice of godly and learned Divines] so far as they are not
dissonant from the Word, and rests not in their power of necessity to command
and press the performance of, if they will discharge the precepts of God. In
this case ye are both Church and State disturbers, which has been excellently
proved by Master Rutherford, Doctor Steuart, and of late by William Pryn, as
yet not answered; which charge against you, and men in your way, and of your
spirit, has not fallen so heavily as deservedly.

Now to your Propositions, which come next to be touched at (for I intend no
large reply.)

1. To the first I answer, that your contestation will be nothing less, than
beating of the air, strife about words, contention without a ground, because I
find not any one to have denied ought in that Position, whereupon you can
ground a challenge of controversy: This is but the first peele of the Onion,
the second will smell more strongly. And for that,

2. I desire your proofs and arguments, your Scriptures heaped up in
abundance, engage themselves, but not in your war; I desire to be informed of
your meaning, when you tell us of complete and perfect Laws: Where are they to
be found; and what Kingdom of Christ it is you contend for, whether heavenly or
earthly, spiritual or temporal? And what kind of Governing and ruling of
Christ in this Kingdom, your souls so much long after? Your Scriptures speak
of a glorious kingdom which is on high, but condescend not in their
interpretation to a temporal Monarchy of Christ on earth [the opinion of the
Apostatized Jewes] which [seemes to me] you clearly hint at.

3. To third Proposition, I answer by way of concession, that Christ's Kingdom
is spiritual, as it is in the hearts and souls of his Elect, but that it
should subsist on earth without relation to outward administration, I find not,
nor can you contend for, without the disanulling of your own principles.

4. To your fourth, I judge not the ordinary power of Civil Magistrates to
consist in making laws for the Church, it being peculiar to those which are
within the Church, and belonging to the Church, as Pastors and Elders, etc.
(Secondly) the power of Magistracy is civil, the power of the Church is
spiritual: The civil Magistrate handles Church matters, as they have
relation to the body politic, in judging what is prejudicial to the
Commonweal; but the Church handle them as they may tend to edification: So
that I say, the civil power is above Churchmen [simply so considered] as they
stand members of a Christian Common wealth. And the Church is above the
Magistrate, as he is a member thereunto belonging, who is to be edified
thereby, or censured in point of scandal: And look as the civil Magistrate
has no power intrinsecally Ecclesiastical over the Church or its members,
which of its self is supreme under Christ's, the King thereof: In like manner,
the Church has no politic power above the Magistrates, who are supreme and
accountable to none but God: That I be not misconstrued in his particular be
pleased to take this caution, that my meaning is not as if they were no ways
accountable to the Parliament, the supreme Judicatory; neither do I intend to
make of no effect the public Declamtions of Parliament actions to the whole
Kingdom (which is necessary) for whom, and by whom they are entrusted with a
superlative power: But this, that they stand not bound in a particular way to
give account to every particular person, but in the General: That is my
meaning. And although the Church may be, and subsist without Magistracy, yet it
is very useful to the Church, when Christian, for the preservation of the
public Peace, in case of Schisms or dissentions, by punishing the disturbers
thereof, which is not in the power of the Church to do.

5. To the fifth and last, I am not of opinion that persecution for conscience
is an emblem of righteousness, and I think no man has ever pleaded for such a
wickedness, it any have, I profess they are so far estranged from me, that I
never saw or read any such doctrine of devils: yet for the clearing of this, I
judge a distinction or two not unseasonable.

1. I am to consider of conscience truly so, that is ms led and in darkness,
yet willing to receive informati n and instruction, that it may be enlightened.
And,

2. Between a man full of opinions and conceits, misled in judgment, pleading
conscience, and making it a refuge to shelter false hood, maskt over with the
garment of Truth; which is so far from being reclaimed, that obstinately he
persists and holds on in his imaginations to the destruction of himself, the
stumbling [if not perpetual falling] of many others.

3. I must consider of conscience, as it looks upon truths, represented to it,
to be errors, that such a conscience is none of Gods deputy, to which I am so
far bound to yield obedience as absolutely to reject truths as errors, because
I so judge: But as they come under the notion of error, and conscience so
esteems them, it may be tolerable, where there is hearty endeavor, to attain
better instruction.

Lastly, I am to look upon conscience, as it relates to the action, or the
manner of performing it; in the latter I confess there may be, and often is a
divine Majesty awing the conscience, that it dares not receive or undertake a
necessary Truth, nor a lawful action, by reason of a command that lies upon
the one, or the other, yet I am not to reject them, as altogether sinful, but
as inexpedient till these impediments be removed. And so I have done with your
Propositions.

8. The eighth thing to be considered of, is your condemnation and reprobation
of Synods and Councels, etc.

To this my Answer is, That there is a lawful and necessary use to be made of
them, with out derogating from Scripture principles, in regard it oftentimes
falls out, that in Church government we are to seek, in regard of the right
ordering many circumstances: As it was in the times of the Apostles, whom I
never find to have attained to that compleatnesse in external government, [as
is now pursued with so much eagernesse] but they did vary and change, according
to the Churches paucity or plenitude [except in substantials, which we have in
as large a measure, if not larger than they had.] But for absolute rules in all
things, from which none might vary those purer times were not guilty of such a
thing, for ought I can find, much less this degenerate and back sliding age,
into which we are fallen: In this condition we now stand in, what course may
better be taken (Scripture being silent) then to consult with, and lay before
us the practice of primitive Christians and their successors [whether in
Synods or Councels, aui altier] to draw from them some light to help us out in
what we are ignorant of, or may Hile in, through the want of light to guide us
in the due Performance hereof, and so much the more, because our contention
depends not upon things that are to be believed as necessary to salvation, [a
wonderful mistake amongst seduced soules] but relates to some circumstances in
and about the worship of God, what is most convenient to be practiced: And
experience might let you see if not wilfully blinded, that those dark times
attained to more simplicity of godliness, than this great light so much
applauded for incomprehesiblenesse did ever reach up to; Now I appeal to your
own conscience, whether there be not more reason to follow the steps of that
little light which was but like the dawning of a day, who had eyes singly fixed
upon the glory of their Creator, than run after new light, by many degrees
worse than darkness [of which there is too, much in these dayes] which is by
ast with politic ends and ayms in a larger measure than with Truth, and the
Churches peace, which has not been set before their eyes as the chief pearl
of price, but mastery. The necessity of Synods, etc. is farther asserted from
Acts 15. for the ending matters of strife, which arise in the Church, too great
for the decision of particular Congregations: There I find a Synod or Council
called by reason of an error, spread abroad in the point of Circumcision to
the subversion of many souls, as verse 1, 2. do demonstrate. Now if it, had
been, in the power of the Apostles to have ended this controversy, acting by a
spirit inspired from on high, what means that consultation of the Apostles and
Elders, verse 6. Unless to give us to understand, that though they had a power
as they were inspired by God, yet they did not put forth that power, but
referred it to public disputation with the Elders, as more authontique, and
as a way more effectual to draw the Churches to yield submission to what
should be determined of, which you may see; came to pass afterward, verse 21.
and if they had sat in the capacity of Apostles, I demand what light the
Elders could add to them, that they by immediate inspiration did not decide
the controversy, but to hold forth a pattern for after ages to look upon, and
to be guided by, and to let us know, that though there be a power in particular
congregations, in suo ordine, yet public determinations of a Synod of godly
men, is the surest way to end, strife in the Church of God.

9. The ninth charge flies in the face of Mr. Pryn, who (you say) has incited
men to wage war against the King of Saints, and his redeemed ones.

My soul is at strife within it self, to find out whom you mean by this King
of Saints, and redeemed ones, whether it be all, or any one of the quinque
ecclesian Ministers, and the people belonging to there independent Churches,
these redeemed ones: If this be your meaning [as I cannot imagine other wayes]
against these [and yet not properly against these, but against, their tenants
and notions] is Master Pryn entered into battle, to plead true Christian
lierties? part in behalf of those that are unjustly, charge as fighters
against it: But if you intended it of Jesus Christ, God and man, who truly is
King of Saints, and no other, my soul longs for a manifestation of this
warfare, that I may know (as well as you) when it was begun against Christ, and
his redeemed ones, where and after what manner this warfare is carried on: And
let me know by what means I may be assured these whom you style redeemed ones
are his, and none besides them (for your words be are this construction without
straying) I have looked into their lives, their conversations and beheld their
outward commerce and trafficking in the world (for take them amongst the
communion of Saints, and know them no more, nay, in a lesser measure than Judas
was known for a traitor while he remained with the twelve) and I cannot see
how you can stamp this impression upon them by way of privilege and
prerogative, before many of those on whom your eye is sixed with indignation:
For love, faith, obedience, and self-denial, wherein do they excel others,
that their superiors may not be brought to terms of equality with them, nay,
wherein have many of them (if any of them) outstript the very blindness of,
our progenitors, who will certainly rise to judge and condemn this Generation
of Professors, for the neglect of, and the not conscionably practicing,
according to that light they profess themselves possessed with, and to have
exceeded all mon in: Surely (...) darkness, which overshadows light is
comprehended of the light, much more will light that is of genuine nature
dissipate (and annihilate the false rising of fading vapors, that for a season
to outward view are glorious and excellent.

10. The tenth charge against Mr. Pryn, runs thus: In that he has stirred, up
the Potentates of the earth to pluck the Crown of Christ of his head his
Scepter out of his hand, and himself out of his Throne. Weightier accusations,
criminations, and criminations were never laid on any man's shoulders, then this
you would make Mr. Pryn to bear, where is your proof for this? I profess I
want light to dive into the bottom of this work of darkness, and none am I
able to procure from you, but ten degrees more of obscurity: I am not satisfied
in your menning, when you speak of the Crown, the Scepter and the Throne of
Christ, glorious yea, and transcendently excellent they be; but where shall I
find them, let me see: And when Scripture has spoken, and reason has given in
its voice, you can prove that these are to be found in the way of Independency,
and in no way else, or that they have more excellency cast upon them by reason
of that glorious in manifestation of them in this way above others: And if my
Arguments (when weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary) shall be found too
light, and unable to) gainsay yours, my heart, hand, and all shall give place
to you, and you shall have the right hand of fellowship in procuring a blessed
and happy union. For my own particular I have examined (as I am able) what ever
Mr. Pryn has done, and have not met with any grounds or reasons of this your
judgment: This I find, that to the utmost of my endeavors [human frailty
excepted] he has exalted Christ's Kingdom, and labored with the strength of
his abilities to keep the Crown on the head of Christ, and to make his Scepter
an everlasting Scepter.

But whereas you give us to understand what you have done, and do for Christ in
exaltation of him, and him alone, yet I find you and all of ye are silent of
your failings in the right performance of it, as if ye were already deified: I
beseech ye to examine well your inward man, and then tell me whether much of
the glory of God be not eclypsed through your infirmities; how have ye sought
the honor of God and preferred it above all things, when your own honor steps
in and robs God of his due? Is there not an eye looking too much to private
advantage, destitute of that singleness of heart which of right should take
place in those that assume the privilege of being Christ exalters? What else
portends that daily apostasy of so many of ye, that from glistering stars of
light (as I have judged) ye are descended almost to an expiring glimmering.

11. The eleventh Charge against Mr. Pryn, stands thus: That he should affirm
Christ has left no rule in his Word for the government of his Church.

I affirm the same in that sense by him delivered, but so speaking, as you
have laid it down, there is not to be produced any one passage, so much as
looking that way: This he has laid down as a Truth (which never was nor can be
disproved), that Jesus Christ in his Word, has left a rule for the
substantial part of worship and discipline, and some few circumstances, yet
left many things which belong to the well-being of a Church, (as they relate to
circumstantials, whether of time or place, etc.) which are to be ordered in the
several ages and successions of the Churches of Christ, according to the state
and condition thereof then existing, as may best conduce to the glory of God,
the Churches peace, and the good of the Commonwealth. But if you would have
perfection in all things belonging to Church government, that is a condition
fit for heaven, but not to be found on earth. For so long as man has the
transaction of divine things, and they must of necessity be conveyed through
earthen conduit pipes, they will lose much of their splendor, honor and
glory, which a state of perfection is only capable of.

12. The twelfth particular proceeds to sentence of Mr. Pryn's writings, for
which you should have taken him for a Papist or Jesuit, had not the title borne
his name.

I am now to seek, and have lost my self in fathoming this great deep: Mr. Pryn
turned Papist, or Jesuit, or both, and all the world ignorant of it, till John
Lilburnes learning (raked out of the ashes of ignorance) discovered tenants and
positions of Papists and Jesuits covertly conducted in M. Pryns writings, that
never infected any man; I beseech you befriend my understanding a little in
this particular, and if love have induced you to make known the worlds
ignorance, in not taking notice of so weighty a matter, and this man's errors;
that you would be pleased to propound these tenants and positions which have
begotten such a suspicion, to the infecting the strength of your imagination,
that I may be partaker with you in this knowledge, and be able to justify you,
and condemn him. Moreover, I will assure you, upon the faith of a Christian,
that all the abilities, the faculties of my soul and body shall all engage
themselves in war against him. But on the other side, if you be found an
accuser of the Brethren, you must remember to whom that property is ascribed:
If you deny me this, I shall henceforth reject your judgment as invalid as
your Arguments are unfeasable: And let me add, that if the mouth of Wisdom
had delivered, what you conclude on, there would have been a great deal of
ground to have searched with a critical eye what he had done, but not to
reject it, much less upon so slight and groundless confutation: I may, and
with more truth reply by way of retortion, that had your name been wanting,
your Pamphlet might have undergone the charge of Libell for ought I find
contained in it; and if my sentence may stand, I judge it worthy no better
commendations, it being the matter and not Anonymus, that makes a Libel. Now
for that piece of honor you are pleased to bestow on Mr. Pryn, as to account
him worthy to be canonized for a Saint in the Popes Remembrancer: I must tell
you I am ignorant of the crafty conveyance of this honor [your proper right]
upon the head of Mr. Pryn, so ill be coming his Profession; verily I should
have judged you, and men of your spirit to have been sooner accepted of the
Pope (for your madness) as instruments to advance his kingdom of confusion
(whose spirits has taken possession of many of you) before Mr. Pryn* to stand
for Saint in his Calendar, for fighting against that great Babel, who has done
more to help forwards the ruin thereof [for which posterities will call him
blessed] than you, or all of ye pacht together; so that I do admire and am
confounded in my own spirit at the consideration of this spirit, that has
breathed forth so much unsavourinesse, hard speeches and groundless
jealousies, which I find in so few leaves against an innocent person, as if
hell had opened its mouth to be delivered of its impuritie.

13. The thirteenth Charge lies in this, in that he has made Moses more
faithful than Christ.

My Answer is, that I find not any such assertion in all his Works, if you can
show it me, I will believe you, till that time, I assure you, you are ignorant
and unacquainted with the faithfulness of Christ and Moses, wherein it did
consist; which was not in making Laws for the Children of Israel, but in
delivering those Laws God gave him; so Christ, in what he did, had not respect
to the Leviticall Law of Moses, as a pattern for him to follow, which was
carnal and ready to vanish away, Hebr. 8.13. But this was spiritual and to
endure for ever. In which Christ did not any thing as of himself, but by the
Commandment of God. So that herein consists the compleatnesse of Christ and
Moses faithfulness in delivering what they had received in charge from God the
Father, which these Scriptures evidence, John 7.16, 17, 18, 19. John 8.26.28.
Hebr. 3.1, 2, 5, 6. Hebr. 8.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Exodus 25.40.

14. The fourteenth and last Charge, reflecting on Mr. Pryn, is his eyeing
particular interests more than truth, that has engaged him in this way he is
now in.

I am not ignorant but there is and will be something of man in every action,
as long as man remains in the state of imperfection, but that self ends and
private interests carry a greater stroke in his engagement, and prevails most
upon his judgment, rests on your part to be proved (when you can) who have
unjustly and unworthily charged him, have you had any experience of him in any
thing, from whence you can in any way of equity draw this conclusion, or is not
your own guilt charged upon his score? The day of reckoning will resolve this
doubt. What though some of ye (and that no mean ones) not being able to
disanull his Arguments, have fallen to question him about the truth of his
religion, whether there be such a thing in reality to be found in him save only
the bare principles of morality, shall I judge him the worse for this? No,
because I have found it the trodden path of Heretics to traduce their
unconquered adversary with slanders, when those arguments they brought could
not convince them; and I can judge no otherwise of this [though they be godly
persons that do it] them that it is that evil spirit risen from the dead, the
rather have I touched at this, by reason of them from whom it has proceeded,
men that profess perfection of Religion above others, I beseech them to be
wary of what they do, lest apostasy speak them worse than men of no religion,
Let him that stands, take heed lest he fall.

Thus have I run over your Letter with what speed I could, omitting many things
through other employments that stand in my way (viz.) Your Impudency in
charging Parliaments, Synods, and Councels to be of no value, your
dishonorable and undervaluing thoughts of them, your expressions of scorn and
contempt, your charge of the Parliament for breach of oath in enacting Tithes,
the proof of which by you is too ridiculous to be answered. And this done with
that audaciousnesse, as if your folly could reply upon their wisdom, and your
knowledge search the bottom of the greatest mysteries in Church and State, that
cannot pierce a shallow rivolet. I leave them all to be answered by a more able
pen (if they be thought worthy an answer) or to the decision of the lawful and
undoubted power of civil Magistracy.

Sir I am yours, if you know how to be Truths.


