A LADIES LEGACY TO HER DAVGHTERS.

In three BOOKS.

Composed of Prayers and Meditations, fitted for several times, and upon
several occasions.

As also several Prayers for each day in the Week.

By Madam Elizabeth Richardson, wife to the late Sir Thomas Richardson Knight,
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Harper, and are to be sold at his house in Little
Britain, 1645.

royal blazon or coat of arms VIRTVTE HONOS ACQVIRITVR

The Contents of the Prayers contained in these three Books.
BOOK I.
A Preface, or inducement to Prayer. Page 7 1. A preparation to Prayer. 11 2. A
Prayer to the Holy Ghost. 12 3. A Preface to any Prayer. 13 4. A confession of
finnes, etc. 14 5. A Prayer for the Lords day, before we go to Church. 16 6. An
entrance to Prayer. 18 7. A short thanksgiving at the first sight at the
morning light. 19 8. A private morning Prayer. ibid. 9. A thanksgiving. 21 10.
A Prayer for the afternoon. 22 11. A short Prayer for the night. 24 12. A
short Prayer in bed before sleep. 26 13. A Prayer before the receiving the
Sacrament. ib. A short meditation, direction, or preparation, etc. 29 14. A
thanksgiving after the holy Communion, etc. 32 15. A short Prayer for
conclusion to any Prayer. 34 16. A Prayer for the Lords day in the afternoon,
etc. 35 17. A Prayer to the Trinity for direction and acceptance from God of
all our Prayers. 38 18. Another Prayer for the afternoon for many several
blessings. 39 19. A Prayer of three petitions to the blessed Trinity, etc. 42
20. The conclusion to this book. etc. 45 21. A thanksgiving to Almighty God,
for his most merciful preservation of my noble kinswoman, etc. 47 22. A
Petition of the Author for her self. 48

BOOK II.
AN Exhortation concerning Prayer. Page 53 1. A short Petition to precede any
other Prayers. ib. 2. A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost, for the true spirit of
grace in Prayer. 54 3. A short preface before any other Prayers for the Lords
day. 56 4. A Prayer for the Lords day at first awaking. ibid. 5. A Prayer for
the Lords day in the morning, etc. 58 6. A Prayer to be said at the Church,
etc. 60 7. Another shorter Prayer to the same purpose. 61 8. A prayer afer the
Sermon is ended, etc. 62 9. A prayer for the Lords day at night, etc. 63 10. A
prayer for Monday to God the Father, at first awaking. 65 11. A morning prayer
for Monday to God the Father. 66 12. A prayer to God the Father for Monday
night. 69 13. The conclusion for Monday, to be said last. 72 14. A prayer at
first awaking for Tuesday. ibid. 15. A prayer for Tuesday morning. 73 16. A
prayer for Tuesday at night. 76 17. The conclusion for Tuesday, to be said at
night, etc. 79 18. A prayer for Wednesday at first awaking. 80 19. A prayer for
Wednesday morning. 82 20. An evening prayer for Wednesday. 85 21. The
conclusion for Wednesday night. 87 22. A prayer for Thursday morning at first
awaking. 89 23. A prayer for Thursday morning. 90 24. A prayer for Thursday
night. 93 25. The conclusion for Thursday night. 95 26. A prayer for Friday at
first awaking. 96 27. A morning prayer for Friday. 98 28. A prayer for Friday
night. 101 29. The conclusion for Friday night. 103 30. A prayer at first
awaking for Saturday. 104 31. A prayer for Saturday morning. 105 32. A prayer
for Saturday night. 108 33. The conclusion for Saturday night, etc. 111

BOOK III.
1. A Short Preface before any other prayers or petitions. 113 2. A short
thanskgiving at first sight of the morning light. ibid. 3. A prayer for help
in present temptation, etc. 114 Monday. 1. A thanksgiving to the blessed
Trinity. 116 Tuesday. 2. A prayer for grace and true faith 117 Wednesday. 3. A
prayer for charity. 119 Thursday. 4. A prayer for spiritual graces. 120 Friday
5. A prayer for defense, etc. 123 Saturday. 6. A prayer for the true spirit of
prayer, etc. 124 A short prayer to be joined to the former prayers, etc. 125 7.
A prayer containing 7 humble petitions, etc. 126 1. A sorrowful widows prayer,
etc. 133 2. A prayer for mercy in time of affliction. 136 3. A prayer for due
preparation before the Communion of the Lords Supper. 140 4. An humble
thanksgiving after the receiving, etc. 145 1. A meditation concerning death.
147 2. A prayer to live blessedly, and dye happily. 154 3. A prayer to be
prepared for a happy death, etc. 156 4. A prayer in sickness, etc. 159 5. A
prayer in the time of sickness to be fitted, etc. 161 6. My prayer of
thanksgiving, etc. 165 7. My conclusion, etc. 167 8. Another short prayer. 168

A LADIES LEGACY TO HER DAVGHTERS.
MY dearly beloved Daughters (of which number, I account my two sons wives, my
daughters in law, the Countess of Marlborough, and Mrs. Francis Ashbournham,
to be mine also) assuring my self of your loves and kind acceptance, I
present this little Book unto you all, which being mine, I hope you will
carefully receive it, as coming from my love and affection toward you, and
that you will please for my sake, the more to employ it to your good; to which
I will (while I live) daily add my prayers and blessing for your present and
future happiness: and that this my poor labor may prove a happy furtherance
to all your good endeavors toward virtue and piety: Therefore let me as a
Mother entreat and prevail with you to esteem so well of it, as often to
peruse, ponder, practice, and make use of this Book according to my intention,
though of it self unworthy; for you shall find your greatest happiness will
be in the true fear, constant love, and faithful service of Almighty God,
which never fails of comfort and reward, he being the only and most liberal
giver of all good gifts and blessings, both spiritual and temporal; to whose
infinite mercy and gracious guidance, I most humbly commend you all, and daily
will do the like in my prayers so long as I live. And further, most dear
hearts, consider, That these Petitions are presented to a most bountiful and
All-sufficient Lord, that vouchsafes in Christ to make us his adopted children,
and to be our Gracious Father, who gave his only Son for us, in whom he will
deny us nothing: And greater benefits then here are asked, cannot be received;
therefore give me leave, since I have such great interest in you, to persuade
and obtain of you all, often to beg these blessings of God, by these prayers
faithfully offered up unto his Majesty: Whereby you shall glorify his holy
Name, make your selves eternally blessed, and bring much joy and comfort to

Your most affectionate Mother, ELIZ. ASHBOURNHAM.

I Had no purpose at all when I writ these books, for the use of my self, and
my children, to make them public; but have been lately over persuaded by
some that much desired to have them. Therefore I have adventured to bear all
censures, and desire their patience and pardon, whose exquisite judgments may
find many blameworthy faults, justly to condemn my boldness; which I thus
excuse, the matter is but devotions or prayers, which surely concerns and
belongs to women, as well as to the best learned men: And therefore I hope
herein, I neither wrong nor give offense to any, which I should be very loath
to do.

This Book was written at Chelsey in the year 1625. by E. A. at the Duke of
Buckinghams house, a part whereof was lent me by the good Duchess, my most
honored Lady, when the great sickness was in London.

A Letter to my four Daughters, Elizabeth, Frances, Anne, and Katherine
Ashbournham, of whom three were then unmarried, only Anne was married to Sir
Edward Deering Knight and Baronet.
My dear Children:
I Have long and much grieved for your misfortunes, and want of preferments in
the world: but now I have learned in what estate soever I am, therewith to be
content, and to account these vile and transitory things to be but vain and
loss, so I may win Christ the fountain of all bliss, wishing you with me, to
condemn that which neglects you, and set your hearts and affections on
better subjects, such as are above, more certain and permanent; and fear not
but what is needful for this present life shall be supplied by him who best
knows our wants: and had it not been for your sakes (whose advancements love
and nature binds me to seek) I had prevented the spite of my enemies, and
forsaken the World before it despised me: But though I am so unhappy as to be
left destitute, not able to raise you portions of wealth, yet shall I joy as
much to add unto the portion of Grace, which I trust, and pray, that God will
give to each of you, to whose mercy I daily commit you, nothing doubting but
that he will receive you into the number of those fatherless he graciously
takes care of, if you omit not to serve and depend upon him faithfully, for he
never fails them that trust in him. God is as free and ready to give as we to
ask, and contrary to the World, he grows not weary of importunate suitors, but
often deferreth his blessings to make us the more earnest for them. Neither
has the Lord withdrawn his favor so from us as to leave us utterly desolate
to despair, but has graciously raised us comfort by honorable friends to be
careful and dear parents unto us, whom God preserve and show mercy to them
and theirs, as they have done to us. And here I send you a motherly
remembrance, and commend this my labor into your loving acceptance; that in
remembering your poor mother, you may be also put in mind to perform your
humble duty and service to our heavenly Father, who has created us to his own
glory and service; and all we can perform, comes far short of what we owe unto
him; yet is he well pleased, if we return (for all his mercies) but obedience,
and the sacrifice of praise and calling upon his holy Name. Now prayer being
the winged messenger to carry our requests and wants into the ears of the Lord
(as David says) he will praise the Lord seven times a day, and prevent the
light to give thanks unto God; and indeed, who can awake to enjoy the light and
pleasure of the day, and not begin the same with entreaty of the Lords gracious
direction in all things, and desire of his blessing upon us, and all that we
have or do? Or how can we possess or hourly receive so many favors and
benefits from God, and not offer unto him an evening sacrifice of thanksgiving?
Or who dares adventure to pass the dreadful night, the time of terror, and
yield themselves to sleep, the image of death, before they are at peace with
God, by begging pardon for their sins, and craving his protection and care over
them in the night? I know you may have many better instructers then my self,
yet can you have no true mother but me, who not only with great pain brought
you into the world, but do now still travel in care for the new birth of your
souls; to bring you to eternal life, which is my chiefest desire, and the
height of my hopes: And howsoever this my endeavor may be contemptible to
many, (because a woman's) which makes me not to join my sons with you, lest
being men, they misconstrue my well-meaning; yet I presume that you my
daughters will not refuse your Mothers teaching (which I wish may be your
ornament, and a crown of glory to you) who I hope will take in the best part my
careful industry, for your present and future happiness, toward which I
have not failed to give you the best breeding in my power, to bring you to
virtue and piety, which I esteem the greatest treasure; and sure I am, it leads
you to him that is the giver of all good things, both spiritual and temporal;
to whose infinite mercy I most humbly commend you, who I trust will fulfill all
your necessities, through the riches of his grace, and make you perfect in all
good works to do his will. And the God of peace sanctify you throughout,
that your whole spirits, souls and bodies, may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be the endless 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.
joy of your most loving Mother,

Eliz. Ashbournham.

A Preface, or inducement to Prayer.
THe great God, and Lord of Heaven Acts 17. 2^. 27. 8. Cap. 23. 14. 17. Rom 1.
19, 20.
and Earth, whose we are, and whom only we ought to serve, has not left
himself without witness: For as much as that which may be known of God, is
made manifest unto us, for the invisible things of him, that is his eternal
power and Godhead, are seen by His power Godhead. Romans 5. 5. 8 9.
the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent we
should be without excuse. Also the infinite love of God is shed abroad in His
love, Redemption. Jo. 3. 16. Jo. 4: 9. 10 3. 16. Jo. 15, 23. 10. 15.
our hearts, and set out toward us in the most gracious work of our
redemption, in that Christ died for us being sinners, and when we were enemies,
God reconciled us unto himself by the death of his only begotten Son, whom God
sent into the world that we might live through him, and be saved by his life,
Christ's love.
greater love then this can none have, to lay down his own life for us. Now
there are three special things amongst many that do always bind and urge us
to the acknowledgement of God, to the love of his Majesty, and the often His
benefits. Of our sins*
calling upon his holy Name, viz. First, the multitude and greatness of his
benefits toward us, for which we ought to give him continual thanks.
Secondly, the infiniteness of our grievous sins, Our m^^^;^(...) ne^^ssi^i^^*
for which we must of necessity daily ask mercy, and pardon from him. Thirdly,
our own manifold miseries and infirmities, for which we are constrained to
seek relief and remedy. The first of th^se David considered, saying, What
shall I render unto the Lord for all Psalm. 116. 12, 13.
his benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the
name 9. 1.
of the Lord, I will praise him with my whole heart all the days of my life.
All his Psalms are full of thanksgiving. To the second, Christ inviteth us
saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary and Matthew. 11. 28.
heavy laden, and I will ease you. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the just: He is the 1 Jo. 2. 1. 2. 1.
reconciliation for the sins of the whole 9.
world: And if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive,
and cleanse us from all unrighteousness. For the third, we are encouraged by
God himself, saying, Call upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver
Psalm. 50. 15. Isay. Matthew. 8. 17.
thee, and thou shall glorify me; for he will have mercy upon us, and heal all
our infirmities; and when we are in misery, he saves and delivers us. Now
for the performance of our duty in thanksgiving, the blotting out of all our
offenses, and the release of our miseries, with the continuance of Gods grace
and favor in all things, the chief and only way to find and obtain all, is
rightly to seek, and truly to serve the Lord by prayer, who is the author and
fountain of all goodness, grace and mercy; Every good gift coming from above,
even from him that freely says, Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you; for he that is Lord over
all, is rich unto all that call upon him in truth; and the prayer of the
faithful, avails much, if it be fervent; for faithful and devout prayer is a
continual intercourse and communion betwixt the Lord and us; and it is like
Jacobs ladder, by which our prayers make our wants ascend unto God, and his
mercy descend down upon us; for with the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth we confess unto salvation; but take heed in
sending up thy desires, prefer the good of the Col. 3. 2.
soul, before the pleasures or content of thy body; and set thy affections on
things that are above: First, seek the Kingdom Mat. 6. 33.
of God and his righteousness, and all other wants shall be supplied by his
mercy, according to his will, and our necessities. And when thou enterest into
the house of God, take heed thou offer not unto him the sacrifice of fools,
but before thou prayest, prepare thy self, Col. 3. 2. Eccles. 4. 17. 18. 22.
thy heart and tongue, as David did, lest thou tempt God to displeasure: Be not
rash with thy mouth, nor let thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God:
But ere thou presume to present thy self, Psalm. 108. 1.
or service unto the Lord, meditate upon these three things: First, of the
reverence we owe to the great Majesty of God, Psalm. 104.
in whose presence we are, and to whom we must speak; this brings humility and
lowliness of spirit, which makes us acceptable unto him. Secondly, of our
knowledge and belief of the Lords Esaias 65. 24. Job 15. 16
sweet and gracious promises, which causes boldness to come unto him, with
sure confidence of being heard. Thirdly, of our unworthiness, and what
apprehension we have of our own wants and miseries, and the great necessity of
Gods help and mercy to relieve us. This makes us to know and hate our selves,
and to love and honor God, in whom is all our help, hope, and happiness;
therefore with devout reverence, zeal, humility, and true faith, fly unto his
mercy, and cease not to call often (as David did) seven times a day upon the
holy Name of the Lord, Psalm. 119. 164. by whom we shall be saved, Romans 10. 13.

1. A preparation to Prayer.
O Everlasting fountain of all goodness, and wellspring of grace, without
whose special assistance, we are altogether unapt and unable to perform any
duty or service that may be acceptable unto thee: Vouchsafe therefore (dear
Lord) to help mine infirmities, who cannot of my self pray as I ought, but
let thy holy Spirit direct and teach me truly to call upon thy divine Name,
with a penitent and faithful heart, an humble, contrite, and lowly spirit, a
quiet, observant and recollected mind, freed from the vanities and cares of
this vilde world, or the love of this present life; so as I may dedicate my
self wholly unto thee a living sacrifice, faithfully and devoutly to serve
thee now, and all the days of my life. O Lord, make me to lift up innocent
hands, with a pure heart; and guide thou my lips with wisdom, and set a watch
of grace before my mouth, that my tongue may not offend thee at any time, but
duly praise thy glorious Name, now and for ever, Amen.

2. A Prayer to the Holy Ghost.
O Gracious Lord Holy Ghost, I humbly beseech thee to fit and prepare my heart,
and to direct and assist me in the right and true performance of this duty and
service now of prayer toward my God: Thou understandest my disability of my
self to any goodness: neither know I how to pray as I ought, except thy holy
Spirit teach me: Therefore I earnestly and humbly pray thee to give me thy
grace and true spirit of prayer, that so I may now and at all times offer up my
petitions and praises, in calling upon thy great and glorious Name, in a right
faithful and acceptable manner, to the glory of God, and the good and comfort
of me thy poor servant, in soul and body, with the furtherance of my salvation,
through Jesus Christ, my blessed and only Savior, Amen.

3. A Preface to any Prayer.
O My Lord, in all humility I come unto thee, the giver of all grace; thou
know my unaptnesse to any goodness, thou have given me an earnest desire to
please thee, make perfect thine own good work, and grant me a ready will and
ability to perform my humble duty herein aright, that so I may sincerely and
entirely love, fear and honor thee above all, and most carefully obey thy
blessed will in all things: Good Father, let thy manifold mercies cover my
infinite offenses from thy All-seeing eyes, and by thy grace cast all vain
thoughts, and sinful hindrances out of my soul, that thy sacred Spirit may
direct my spirit to pray with due reverence to thy Majesty, confidence in thy
mercy, with sure trust in thy promises, and fear of thy judgments. And that I
may offer up all my supplications unto thee, with unfeigned zeal, true faith,
humility and repentance: Sweet Lord, make me heartily thankful unto thee for
all thy blessings, and let all my petitions tend to thy glory; so as I may
find favor with thee, that thou will be graciously pleased to hear and
accept of me and my prayers, that they may enter into thy presence, and obtain
pardon of all my sins past, with grace to frame my life in true obedience to
all thy Commandments, the rest of my days to come, that so my last end may be
happy, and after death I may enjoy the felicity to live with thee, my Lord, for
evermore, through the merits and passion of my only Savior Jesus Christ, So be
it.

4. A confession of sins, with a prayer for remission, taken partly out of the
prayer of Manasses.
ALmighty Lord God of our fathers, who have made heaven and earth, with all the
ornaments thereof, who have bound the sea by the word of thy commandment,
whose terrible and glorious Name all men do fear, and tremble before thy
powerful judgments; for the displeasure of thy great Majesty cannot be borne,
and thy angry threatenings against sinners is importable, and who can stand in
thy presence when thou art offended? But yet (O Lord) thy merciful promises to
penitent sinners are unmeasureable, and unspeakable; for thou art the most
gracious Lord, full of mercy and great compassion, and of long suffering, that
desires not the death of a sinner, but that he should repent and live, who of
thy great goodness have promised to give repentance and forgiveness to them
that sin against thee, that they may be saved. Now thou therefore (most dear
Lord) who came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance (of whom
I am the chief) thou of thy infinite mercy (I trust) have appointed repentance
and remission unto me, whose sins are in number above the sands of the sea, or
the hairs of my head; I have committed much evil, and have omitted to do the
good I ought, for I have neglected all my duty and service toward thee, and am
not worthy to be called thy servant, nor to behold the height of heaven, or to
look up unto the place where thine honor dwells, for the multitude of mine
iniquities have bowed me down, and as a weighty burden are too heavy for me; I
am depressed with the load of my sins, and oppressed with the fear of due
punishment for them; for I have justly provoked thy wrath (O God) and
multiplied my transgressions before thee: I have not done thy will, neither thy
holy Commandments have I obeyed. Now therefore (O my Redeemer) to thee I
humbly bow the knee of my heart, imploring thy mercy, and beseeching thee of
grace: I will confess my sins against my self, and will not hide my
unrighteousness from thee: I have sinned (O Lord) I have grievously sinned,
and I acknowledge my manifold offenses; for which I have nothing to answer, but
(like the Publican) Lord be merciful unto me a miserable sinner: Wherefore I
most humbly entreat thee to forgive me, my sweet Savior forgive me, and
destroy me not with mine iniquities, be not angry with me for ever, neither
condemn me in thy displeasure to the lower part of the earth, and reserve not
evil for me hereafter: But (dear Father) make me of that blessed number, to
whom thou imputest not their faults, and whose sins by my Saviors
righteousness are covered; for thou art the God of the just, and the God of
them that will repent, and in poor me, thou will show all thy goodness and
pity: for thou will pardon and save me that am so vilde and unworthy, even of
thine own great grace and mercy: Therefore I will turn my steps into thy
ways, and will seek thy will, and obey thee with my whole heart: I will
praise thee all the days of my life, and for ever: And let the heavens and the
earth praise thy eternal Majesty; for thine is all glory for ever, Amen.

5. A Prayer for the Lords day, before we go to Church.
O Eternal God, most high Creator; preserver and disposer of all things: to
thee is due all praise, honor, and worship, for thou art our gracious Lord,
the only author of all our good, by whom we live, move, and have our being. O
with what humble reverence, and devotion ought we to prepare our ears and
hearts, to hear, receive and perform any thing which concerns thy most
sacred Majesty; and even to take heed unto our feet when we enter into the
house of God, that our ways may not offend thee: Neither ought we to presume
to take thy holy Name into our mouths, except we endeavored our selves to be
reformed by thy laws. Thou, O God, art Lord God of Sabbath, and have inobled
this day by the glorious resurrection of thy Son our Lord Jesus, and by the
guidance of the Holy Ghost in thy blessed Apostles, and Catholic Church, have
ordained it for thy public service, honor and worship: so make me to serve
thee therein with due fear and reverence. I most humbly beseech thee to
sanctify my heart and soul to the true performance of thy blessed will in
rightly observing the same; and leave me not unto my own weakness and
disability, who can of my self neither think well, nor do any thing that is
good, for all my strength and righteousness is in Christ my Redeemer: Assist
me therefore (sweet Savior) with thy Spirit of grace to cease from sin, and
all worldly works, or earthly cogitations this day, that may withdraw me from
thy fear and service: And give me an attentive ear to hearken diligently to
thy divine word: Open my heart as thou did the heart of Lydia, that with true
understanding, I may receive, and faithfully keep the same, with a conscionable
care to practice what I shall learn thereby, devoutly calling upon thy most
holy Name. and using due reverence in all my actions before thee: And good
Lord, bless thy servant whom thou have appointed this day to instruct and
direct us in thy word and will; open to him the door of utterance, and give
him the true understanding of thy holy word, that according to thy gracious
pleasure all may be saved that come unto the knowledge of thy truth, and that
he may be faithful in thy service, rightly to dispose thy divine mysteries,
and to teach in faith and verity: And grant that I may hear with due
attention, and resolve to follow and practice all good instructions, with true
intention to thy glory, and the furtherance of my salvation, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

6. An entrance to Prayer.
O God of mercy, thou will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should
turn from his wicked ways and live: Vouchsafe to knit (dear Lord) my soul
unto thee, that I may truly fear thee, and unfeignedly love thee, dedicating my
self unto thy service, and setting mine affections and desires in all true
obedience, to seek above all things thy glory, thy Kingdom, and thy
righteousness; that so all thy graces may daily increase in me, and my humble
and unperfect service in calling on thy holy name, may grow daily more
faithful and fervent, now and at all times to be acceptable unto thee, through
the merits of thy dear Son, and my only Savior, in whom thou art
well-pleased, Amen.

7. A short thanksgiving at the first sight of the morning light.
O Lord, I bless thee for my health, rest and preservation this last night,
and all my time past: And now most humbly pray thee give me grace so to spend
this day, that some glory may redound unto thee by my service, some benefit and
good unto them with whom I live, by my example, and some further assurance unto
my self of thy favor, and my eternal salvation, through Jesus Christ my
Redeemer, Amen.

8. A private morning Prayer.
Eternal God, and my most loving Father, in all humility of soul, and
unfeigned acknowledgement of my bounden duty, I humbly present my sinful self
here before thy Throne of grace and glory; beseeching thee to strike an awful
reverence into my heart, lest my presumption and want of due respect toward
thy great Majesty; should turn my prayers into sin. And seeing without faith
it is impossible to please God, indue me, good Lord, with true faith to
believe, and apply unto my own soul, all thy most gracious promises in Jesus
Christ, whom thou have appointed to be my righteousness, redemption, and the
reconciliation of my sins; his precious blood I know is all sufficient to
satisfy thy just displeasure against me, and to make me, through him, to
appear pure, holy, and acceptable before thee: But of my self, alas, I
confess that I am poor, wretched, miserable, and wholly corrupt both in soul
and body, the chief of all sinners, guilty of the breach of all thy
Commandments, such an one as in whom is no goodness, and to whom there is
nothing due, but shame and utter confusion for ever! Lord give me a lively
apprehension and sight of my woeful estate, that with true faith, contrition,
and unfeigned repentance, I lay hold on thy mercy and gracious pardon, in thy
beloved Son my only Savior, humbly beseeching thee (O dear Lord) to accept his
blessed death, as an absolute discharge for all mine offenses; so as my sins
may never be imputed unto me, but that all my infirmities may be healed by his
wounds; for I know thy mercy is above all thy works, and thou delightest not in
the death of a poor sinner. Therefore I will wait for thy salvation, rely on
thy gracious promises, and trust in thee for ever and ever, Amen.

9. A thanksgiving.
I Will praise the Name of the Lord because he is good, and his mercy endures
for ever; for thou have many ways extended thy great goodness toward me,
thine unworthy servant, which I acknowledge with all humble thankfulness; for
who am I, that thou should be mindful of me in mercy, to refresh me this
night past with quiet rest, and to defend both my soul and body from all the
perils thereof, preserving me by thy gracious providence all my life hitherto,
from many evils and just punishments that my sins have deserved, should have
fallen upon me: And thy mercies are renewed every morning: O Lord, thy
compassions fail not, but thou have multiplied thy benefits toward me, both
spiritual and temporal; which I beseech thee for Christ Jesus sake still to
continue and increase, especially thy favor in bestowing all spiritual graces
on me needful to salvation. O let thy holy Spirit direct me in every word and
good work, and fill me with the fruit of righteousness, so as I may have a
holy care this day and ever, to live as in thy sight, and to study to please
and obey thee in all things, with reverence and fear, in a pure, holy, and
blameless conversation. O God, knit my soul unto thee, and create a new and
upright heart within me, and sanctify me throughout, in soul, body and
spirit, that I may give up my self a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable
unto thee, and may be preserved from all sin and evil, this day and for ever:
crucify my sinful flesh with the lusts thereof, and withdraw mine affections
from the love of this vile world, and fix my desires on things that are above,
where my Savior sits at thy right hand, who is my treasure, my hope and
help, with whom I trust to live for evermore, Amen. And further I beg all these
blessings in the name, merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, concluding in that
perfect prayer which he has sanctified and left us saying, Our Father, etc.

10. A Prayer for the afternoon.
MOst Gracious God, and my merciful Father in Jesus Christ: how exceedingly
are we wretched creatures bound unto thy excellent Majesty for that
unspeakable privilege which thou vouchsafest unto mortal man, to have free
liberty and access (through Christ) unto thy gracious presence, there to
unfold our woes, to power out our souls, and lay open our griefs and desires
before the immortal God, who is ready to hear, and art both able and willing
to relieve and help us? This imboldneth me (unworthy wretch) to present my
person and petitions unto thy grace, and to call upon thy holy name through thy
beloved Son: Lord let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart,
be always right and acceptable in thy sight, my strength and my Redeemer; for
thou know my nature and substance, being but flesh and blood, how corrupt
and frail it is, so that I am not of my self able to perform any holy duty
as I ought, neither to will or do any thing that is good, without thou grant me
the assistance of thy holy Spirit, to sanctify my thoughts, to guide my
tongue, and to help my infirmities: what am I but dust and ashes, a most vile
and miserable sinner, conceived and borne in iniquity, and my transgressions
are daily multiplied, adding sin unto sin till they be innumerable? how
have I misspent this present day, the sins whereof, may justly provoke thy
heavy displeasure against me, having throughout my whole life, committed all
evil, and omitted all good, and have neglected the performance of my bounden
duty and service toward thee upon every flight occasion; and which is worst of
all, custom of sinning, has seared up my conscience, and deprived me of the
true sight and sense of my sins and woeful estate, and bred such a fearful
hardness in my heart, that I cannot duly repent as I ought, and as the
greatness of my fault requires? Thou have called often, and sought to reclaim
me, and have waited to have mercy on me, but I have refused, and hated to be
reformed, carelessely neglecting thy infinite patience, long sufferance, and
goodness toward me. But now to thee, O God of mercy, I bring my heavy laden
soul, casting my self down at thy feet, beseeching thee, O Lord, to receive
me to grace and favor, and reject me not as I have deserved, but convert thou
me, and I shall be changed: make me turn unto thee in true contrition, that
thou may return unto me in gracious compassion, to forgive all mine
iniquities, remit my ungratefulness, and remember my offenses no more. O wash
and cleanse my sinful soul in the pure blood of that innocent Lamb, that I
may feel the virtue of his death, to slay all sin in me, and the power of his
resurrection to raise me to newness of life, in true obedience to all thy
Commandments; and with a child-like love, fear to offend thee, striving to
please thee in all things, that so I may obtain favor and mercy in thy sight,
both for thy blessing in this life, and eternal salvation after death. through
thy dear Son, and my only Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

11. A short Prayer for night.
O God, the fountain of all goodness, I humbly and thankfully acknowledge,
although I am altogether unworthy of the least of thy manifold mercies; yet
have I great experience of thy infinite goodness, bounty and favor, both
toward my soul and body all my time past, this day, and always, preserving
me from all the evils which sin and nature have made me subject unto, with a
gracious supply daily ever since I was born, of all things needful for this
present life: For all which I humbly bow the knee of my heart and soul unto
thy glorious Majesty; but especially for all thy graces furthering my salvation
by Jesus Christ, I bless and praise thy most holy name, yielding all possible
and hearty thanks for all thy benefits vouchsafed to me, the continuance
whereof* I humbly beg at thy gracious hands, commending and committing my soul
and body into thy merciful protection this night and ever, praying thee to
preserve me therein from all perils, sin or evil, for thou Lord only keep
me in safety: now stretch out thy wings of grace and mercy over me, that while
sleep seizes upon my body, let not security oppress my soul, but so
sanctify all outward refreshings unto me, as thereby I may be the more fit
and able to serve thee faithfully all my life to come, that taking quiet rest,
because thou Lord sustainest me, I may also when this life cease, lay down
my head in thy peace, and be made partaker of thy glory, through thy mercies
and Christ's merits, with the assistance of the blessed Spirit. To whom, O
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all praise, power, dominion, and glory now and
for ever, Amen: Continuing my prayers further as Christ has taught us, saying,
Our Father, etc.

12. A short Prayer in bed before sleep.
Dear Lord, receive me this night and always, into thy gracious protection,
to give me now health, safety, and rest, if it be thy will: And dear God, when
I shall enter into my long sleep of death, vouchsafe to sanctify, and prepare
my soul for eternal life, by the assistance of thy grace and holy Spirit,
before thou call me away hence; and grant me a happy and blessed departure out
of this world, that thou may receive me into thy favor and mercy, to be
with me in my death, that I may dye in the Lord, and rest in peace, and
obtain a blessed resurrection, that so I may be accepted to live with thee, to
praise thy great and holy name for ever, Amen.

13. A Prayer before the receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
O Most sweet Savior Jesus Christ, and my dear Lord, who art the author and
finisher of my faith, redemption, and salvation, the life and food of my soul:
I most miserable sinner, presuming nothing at all on mine own merits or
worthiness, but trusting wholly in thy infinite mercy and goodness, do fear
and tremble to appear before thy Majesty, or to come unto the table of this
heavenly banquet: But thou Lord Jesus who graciously call me, and all heavy
laden sinners, accept in mercy the will for the deed, in that I am unworthy and
ill prepared to presume into thy presence; and vouchsafe me the assistance of
thy divine Spirit, I humbly beseech thee, in this holy action, that my duty and
service therein may be acceptable in thy sight: And power down thy heavenly
blessing upon this thy holy Ordinance of thy Word and Sacraments, that they may
be effectual to revive, strengthen, and supply in me all sanctifying and
saving graces needful to the due and right performance of this sacred duty in
an acceptable manner, whereby to enlighten my understanding with thy grace to
the right knowledge of thee and thy truth; and work in me a lively true faith,
wherewith I may lay hold and apply unto my sick soul all the sweet and
comfortable promises and benefits purchased by the bitter death of my sweet
Savior: Indue me also with most unfeigned and hearty sorrow and repentance for
all my great and grievous sins and offenses committed against thee; for all
which I most humbly beg thy gracious pardon: and grant me such perfect love and
charity, that I may sincerely, with all due reverence and devotion, love thee,
my God, with all my heart, soul and strength, and may love my neighbor as my
self, yea my very enemies for Christ's sake; that so I may rightly receive this
blessed Sacrament, being prepared by thy grace as I ought to be: And let, O
Lord, thy precious blood shed for me, cleanse and wash away all my sins, and
the breaking of thy precious body, heal all the wounds of my corrupt soul,
that by the gracious operation of the Holy Ghost, I may be inwardly and
inseparably joined to thee my head Christ; that thou may supply all my
weakness and defects in soul or body, out of thy infinite fullness of grace
and mercy; that being clothed with thy righteousness, I may be accepted by
thee, and through thee; and so be accounted worthy to be partaker of all thy
merits, that with the outward sign of bread and wine, I may blessedly receive
the true signified Christ, with all his benefits, and may have grace to hunger
and thirst after the spiritual food of Christ's body and blood, to nourish my
soul unto eternal life, and to make me become a new creature in holiness of
living, with all true and humble thankfulness, to thy glory and my everlasting
salvation: beseeching thee to accept my poor endeavors for perfect
performance, and reach forth thy helping hand from heaven to save me, thy
unworthy servant, pardoning my sins, and covering my imperfections, with the
pure innocence of that immaculate Lamb, Jesus my Savior. And so I humbly
commend my self unto thy mercy, who art able to do abundantly, above all that
I can ask or think; to thee be all honor, power, and praise for evermore,
Amen.

A short meditation, direction, or preparation before you presume to enter into
the presence and sight of God, to approach unto the heavenly banquet, humbly
desiring this, or the like by prayer. As thou drawest near unto the holy table,
pray earnestly in thy heart unto Christ:
THat he will draw near by grace unto Knowledge of God and our selves.
thy soul, to strengthen thee with knowledge, true faith, unfeigned repentance,
and perfect charity, that thou may rightly, reverently, and faithfully
receive this holy Sacrament to Gods Ps. 14. 22. 1 Jo 1. 8.
glory, and thine own comfort, and salvation. Now when thou come to
communicate and receive this blessed Col. 3. 2. Romans 12. 1. 2. and 1. 15.
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: First, banish all vain and earthly thoughts,
and recollect thy heart to the serious meditations, of that which is the life
of the 1 Timothy 2. 4 Humility. 1 Pet. 5. 6. 1 Jo. 2. 2. and 4. 14.
Sacrament, even the death of thy Savior; and humbly and devoutly present thy
self and service to the Redeemer of thy soul, and Lord of the feast, the only
savior of mankind, Jesus Christ our righteous Lord. Then apply thy mind to
these contemplations: First, remember with great reverence the infinite Majesty
of God, his mercy, True repentance. 1 Jo. 9. Prove. 28. 13.
goodness, and justice, in whose presence we are. Secondly, consider thine
own vileness, misery, and unworthiness, being wholly corrupt both in soul
and body. Thirdly, confess all thy sins True faith 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19 21. 2. 14.
1. 3. 21.
plainly, for in hiding our sins this work will not prosper; but with most
hearty and unfeigned sorrow, in all humility cast thy self at Jesus feet,
earnestly begging for pardon, with hatred to all sin, and purpose of amendment:
For who 1 Pet. 3. 22 Heb. 12. 24. 1 Jo. 2. 3.
so confesses and forsakes their sins shall find mercy. Fourthly, try and
acknowledge thy faith, and steadfast belief in Christ Jesus (the blessed Son of
God the Creator) to be the only Savior 1 Timothy 21 5. Jam. 1. 17.
and Redeemer of the world, who dyed for thy sins, and rose again for thy
justification, and is ascended up to heaven for thy salvation, where sitting at
Gods right hand, he makes intercession for 1 Timothy 21 5.
thee, and powers down all graces and blessings upon thee, who gives himself
with all his merits, unto thee in this Sacrament, covering all thy offenses
with Jam. 1. 17.
his perfect obedience: So making thee righteous, and leaving thee a pledge and
Sanctification. 1 Jo. 17. 19. Heb. 13. 12.
seal of thy future and eternal happiness, this his holy institution, which
the divine word has sanctified to that end and purpose. Now call to mind the
exceeding love of God and Christ toward thee, the one in sending his only
dear Son, to become man and suffer death: The fifth, in giving his most
precious body and blood, to be crucified Gods love to us.
and shed upon the cross, to satisfy the just wrath of God due for thy sins;
of which this bread broken, and wine powered out (that we see) is a remembrance
which we ought often to celebrate, and set our hearts and souls duly and
truly, Our love to God.
to love and honor this gracious God and Lord, who has loved us first, and
done such great things as to give himself for us. 6. Ponder well in thine heart
1 Ja. 4. 9. 10.
all the divine mysteries of this holy Sacrament; to which heavenly banquet,
Jesus thy Savior now inviteth thee, taking away thine hateful iniquities, and
Jam. 2. 8.
clothing thee with his innocence; so Jo. 15. 12. Charity to our neighbors.
1 Jo. 4. 21.
to make thee acceptable in the sight of God the Father, and by the gracious
operation of the Holy Ghost, joining thee unto himself, as thy head, and all
of us in true love one to another, as members of one body, to walk in newness
of life the rest of our days. 7. And Amendment. 1 Jo. 33. 10. 1 Pet. 4. 2.
lastly, forget not to be ever truly thankful for these inestimable benefits
of God the Father, of the blessed Trinity; and of Jesus Christ our Lord toward
us, who has laid down his own life to redeem us, such vile and miserable
sinners, all which the Holy Ghost applies unto us. Thankfulness. 1 Jo. 5. 7.
Ephesians. 5. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18.
Infinite mercies, we are never able sufficiently to acknowledge and admire.
Prepare not thy belly, but thy soul; believe, and thou have eaten; this says
St. Augustine.

14. A thanksgiving after the holy communion of the Lords Supper.
OH! blessed and praised for ever, be the Name of the Lord my God, who has
done great and many things for me; and holy is thy gracious and glorious name,
and let thy mercy and thy truth (O Lord) never forsake me, but vouchsafe to
continue thy goodness and loving kindness toward me for ever, and say unto
my soul thou art my God, my help and my salvation for evermore. And now
especially (O Lord) as I am infinitely bound, I render unto thy divine Majesty
all humble and possible praise and thanks for this present and particular
favor showed unto me thy unworthy servant, in feeding my soul to eternal
lfe, with the most precious food of thine own sacred body and blood, blotting
out all my sins, and sanctifying me by thy holy Spirit, imputing to me thy
righteousness, and admitting me (so unworthy) to be a happy partaker of this
blessed Sacrament: The benefit whereof is unspeakable, and the mercy therein
unexpressable; only I admire thy goodness toward mankind, and magnify thy
great mercy, beseeching thee (my God) as thou have vouchsafed to accept me at
this holy Table; so (good Lord) let me not depart without a blessing, but be
pleased to receive me into thy gracious care and favor, that I may live and
die therein; and give me grace to spend the rest of my time in a careful
reformation of all evils past, a diligent performance of thy most holy will in
all things, and true obedience to all thy Commandments, with a faithful and
right application of all thy mercies and merits; so that I may feel thy bitter
passion (O Lord) sweet unto my soul, and by the assistance of thy Spirit,
bring forth the fruits of amendment of life, and most hearty thankfulness all
my days; that at the end of this life, I may obtain a blessed room in the
Kingdom of glory, there to praise thy holy name for evermore, Amen.

15. A short Prayer for conclusion to any prayer.
O God the Father, bless and govern my soul and body, in all things to thy
service: O Lord the Son my Savior Jesus, protect me, and direct me at all
times to do thy will: O holy Ghost, blessed Spirit, preserve me from falling
into any sin or evil: but instruct, sanctify and lead me into the ways of
truth and righteousness, that I may live in thy fear, and dye in thy favor,
and may continue in thy right Church and true faith unto my end: So that in the
hour of my death, and in the dreadful day of judgment, I may find grace in
thy sight that thou may pardon and pass by my sins, and receive me to mercy
through Jesus Christ, that I may live with thee my God for evermore, Amen.

16. A Prayer for the Lords day in the afternoon when you are from Church;
being seven humble petitions from a poor sinner to our Savior Jesus Christ,
the Lord and fountain of mercy, prescribed and allowed by sacred Scripture.
MOst great and gracious Lord, and 1. Remission of sins, and amendment of life.
Luke 18. 13. Romans 6. 6.
my only Savior Jesus Christ, whom the Angels do admire, all the Saints do
magnify, and at thy name (O Jesus) does every knee bow in heaven and earth: I
most humbly beseech thee, to have mercy on me that presume to speak unto thee,
who am but dust and ashes; yet Lord I beg of thee to forgive all my grievous
and manifold offenses, and cast all my sins out of thy sight, and not only to
pardon all my past misdeeds, but also by thy mighty power and spirit, to slay
all sin in me for the time to come. And of thy gracious favor vouchsafe while
I live in this world to make me a blessed partaker in the first resurrection
2. To rise from sin, Rev. 20. in this life*
to arise here, from remaining or lying dead in sin, and so the second death
shall have no power to hurt me, but by thy 3. In death Rev. 14. 13 21. 3. 4.
Luke 22. 32. 36.
grace and assistance, I may become a new creature in all holiness of life
before thee, that I may daily be raised from sin by thy holy Spirit to a new
life of grace in Christ. But when the appointed time of my death does approach,
sweet Jesus leave me not, but keep and deliver me from that great hour of
temptation, when Satan will sift me, and seek my destruction, then dear
Lord, pray for me that my faith may never fail, neither let my souls enemies
prevail over me, but make thy poor servant one of those blessed that shall
die in thee, O Lord, whose tears God will wipe from their eyes, and they shall
rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Now, good Jesus, grant
also in the last day and hour of death, 4 The first judgeme^t. Mat. 25. 34. 41.
when I shall come to my first account before the Throne of God, and the
dreadful Majesty of the Father; O my Savior, appear with me, that by thy
gracious mediation I may find favor in his sight, and through thee obtain to
be received into the society of thy Saints and servants; and also by thy
infinite mercy and bitter passion, that I may in and through thee have my sins
covered and pardoned, and may be accounted worthy to escape thy just and great
wrath, which my iniquities have deserved, and say always unto my soul thou
art my God, and my salvation for ever. And so I miserable sinner, through thy
merits, sufferings, and unspeakable mercy, may be made able to stand before
thee the blessed Son of God and man, at my appearance in thy glorious and
awful presence when thou come to judge the world, and have full power to
save or to condemn us, then look Savior on me as one of thine. And sweet 5.
At the last judgment, 6. Is after death. Rev. 8. 20. 15.
Savior, I further beseech thee by thine own former and free election and
mere grace toward me, vouchsafe in the dreadful time of thy great visitation,
that my poor name may be found written in heaven in the book of life, so as
sin nor Satan may not be able to blot me out; but that thou, gracious Jesus,
wilt be pleased to acknowledge me (thy most unworthy servant) to be thine,
before God and all his holy Angels. Now lastly, Lord by thy great goodness
and The 7th. For eternal life, John 17. 22. 24. Ps. 16. 11. Conclusion.
mercy, that I may be received into thy grace and favor, and so accepted as to
enjoy that most happy place and heavenly inheritance of everlasting glory,
which thou our Jesus have dearly purchased for us: that where he my blessed
Savior is, I may live with him, who loved me so much as to die for me, and
through him being admitted into the glorious presence of God, which is the
fullness of joy, at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore: I shall there
eternally serve, praise and magnify his most holy name, who lives for ever
and ever, Amen.

17. A Prayer to the Trinity for direction and acceptance from God, of all our
prayers.
MOst glorious God, and our heavenly Father in Christ, I most humbly pray thee
for his sake to hear and accept me, and my supplications that I offer up unto
thy Majesty in the name of thy beloved Son: And I beseech thee sweet Jesus, in
thy love and mercy, which made thee become our Redeemer; vouchsafe also to be
my gracious advocate, and to direct and receive my petitions, and present them
to the Father, for by and through thee only, I must obtain acceptance. Now
further I beg of thee, Lord Holy Ghost, who best can teach us to pray as we
ought, to take compassion on my frailties and infirmities, to heal and help
them, and be pleased to sanctify and assist my heart and soul to perform
this duty and service at all times, rightly, faithfully, and constantly; to
Gods glory, and mine own comfort and furtherance of my eternal salvation in
Christ my Savior, Amen.

18. Another Prayer for the afternoon for many several blessings.
OH most dear Lord, who know my manifold infirmities, and innumerable
miseries: In mercy let thy gracious care and holy hand be over me now and
ever, to guide me into thy right paths, that I may walk in the ways of thy
Commandments, and keep them with my whole heart unto my end. And vouchsafe,
good God, to cleanse and change the thoughts of my corrup heart from vain and
idle imaginations, to good and godly meditations, which may produce ^ me by thy
assistance, holy actions agreeable to thy most blessed will; and by thy spirit
let my affections be reformed, and my love withdrawn from the vanities of this
vile world, and may be fixed on heavenly things above, that there may be my
heart and only joy, where my Lord Christ sits in glory at the right hand of his
Father; and so I may with blessed Mary choose the better part, to forsake all
the world, and my self also, to follow and hear Jesus; and first and chiefly
so to seek as to obtain that which is most needful, even thy glory, O God,
thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, and leave all other things to be
bestowed on me as shall seem best unto thee. And Lord grant that my
understanding may be enlightened to discern, embrace, and practice the holy
works of thy blessed Spirit, and that my memory may be strengthened to retain
and make right use of all the good instruction that I hear or read according
to thy will, and make my heart the storehouse of all thy divine precepts, that
by thy grace I may bring forth good fruit in my life; and make me able rightly
and reverently, to read and hear thy holy word, and heavenly will daily as I
ought to do, and by thy grace to frame my life thereafter; and direct thou me
thy poor servant in all I go about to do that which is best, and most to thy
glory, that howsoever all the powers and ^^culties of my soul, or the members
or senses of ^^y body may be decayed or lost by age, grief, or ^^cknesse, for
the occasions of this life, yet so Lord all that is needful for thy constant
service, I beseech thee, continue to my last breath. And also be pleased to
grant, that my death be neither sudden, nor unexpected, nor my pains violent,
whereby to be made unable earnestly and faithfully to pray and call upon thy
holy name; but if it be thy will, give me knowledge of my death when thy time
is come to call me out of this world, and assist me fervently to cry unto
thee for grace and mercy, in the needful time of dread and danger; then
(dear Lord) fit and prepare me for thy self, and give me a blessed departure
hence to dye in thee, my Lord, and so I shall remain safe and ever happy; and
sweet Jesus, make me pray unto thee with my last breath, and yield up my spirit
to God that gave it with praises in my mouth unto my gracious God, the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. Now vouchsafe, good Lord, while I live, to indue me thy
most unworthy servant with thy grace and holy Spirit, whereby devout love, and
fear of thy Majesty, with true faith, steadfast hope, perfect charity, and
unfeigned repentance, with all other saving graces, may be daily renewed and
increased in me, toward thee, to thy glory, and the furtherance of my
salvation through Christ: O sweet Savior, who have performed and suffered
great and many things for me; dear Jesus, continue thy infinite favor, and
finish thy work of mercy toward me the least of thy servants, still to call
and draw me daily unto thee, and make me faithful, constantly, and wholly
thine, in all humble obedience and true humility to serve thee in uprightness
of life, and a holy conversation toward all so long as I live, and wilt assure
my soul, that thou art my merciful God, and after death, make me a happy
partaker of thy everlasting Kingdom of glory. So be it. Amen.

19. A Prayer of three petitions, to the blessed Trinity, the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, for the spirit of prayer, for repentance and remission of sins, and
grace to amend and lead a new life.
O My Lord Holy Ghost, our sanctifier and comforter, and preserver, the giver
of all heavenly gifts and graces, and the directer and assister of us to all
goodness: I most humbly pray thee to indue me thy poor sinful servant, with
thy true spirit of grace and prayer, to help and teach me how to pray as I
ought, and to drive away, and banish from me in the performance of this my
duty, all evil temptations, and wicked hindrances that seek to pervert and
withdraw my heart and soul from the true service of my God; and suffer not the
world, the devil, nor any his agents to have power over me, or part in me, to
prevail against me, and to cause God to turn his ear and face of mercy, from
hearing and receiving my prayers and supplications: but Lord, by thy grace make
my petitions now and always right, faithful, and acceptable to Almighty God,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Savior.

But O my God heavenly Father, the original of all goodness, and mercy, who
graciously command us to call upon thee in the time of trouble, that thou
delivering us, we may glorify thee; what greater misery and danger, then a
heavy load of sins that will not easily be cast off, and a wounded spirit who
can bear it? for I confess I have most grievously sinned against thee, and my
iniquities are multiplied before thee, as the stars which cannot be numbered.
O Lord, whose compassion never fails those that seek and trust in thee, as
thy mercy exceeds all thy great works, so let that through thy dear Son
move thee to release me of this intolerable burden; which else will throw me
out of thy presence and favor, wherein is the fullness of joy; and press me
down to hell into everlasting torments amongst the enemies of God and man. Now
merciful God, who have pity on thy poor creatures, and delightest not in the
death of a sinner; Lord turn me from all my evil ways, that I may be
converted unto thee, to fear, love, and obey thee unto my end: And vouchsafe
to pardon all my transgressions past, and remove my sins from me as far as
the East is from the West, and bury them in oblivion, that they may not be able
to separate my God from me, as far as heaven from hell: but Gracious Lord, be
pleased to give me, thy unworthy servant, the blessed gift of true sorrow and
repentance to salvation, to fit me for thy mercy, and prepare me with grace by
the amendment of all my misdeeds, for thy loving acceptance of me in thy favor
again, and say to my lost soul, I am thy God, and thy salvation for ever; and
so thou working in me, both the will and the deed, the praise, honor and glory
be only thine, for evermore.

Now swet Jesus, the fountain of mercy, and Savior of all that trust and
believe in thee, who graciously call all heavy laden and penitent sinners to
come to thee, that thou may ease them; have mercy on me, and heal my
sinful soul with thy most precious blood; and thy righteousness I know is
alsufficient to cover a world of sins, if thou please to impute it unto me.
O shroud me under thy innocent wing, that the great wrath I have deserved may
never fall upon me: but vouchsafe, dear Lord, to receive me sinful creature
into thy favor, as thou did Mary, to become wholly thine, and be thy
faithful disciple so long as I live; and stretch forth thy hand of mercy, as
thou did to Peter from sinking in the sea; so Lord save me thy unworthy
servant, from perishing in my sins; and by thy assistance, according to thy
blessed advice, that I may make my peace here, where I have transgressed,
before I go where the utmost farthing must be paid. O Lord, by thy grace make
me a new creature, daily to work out my salvation, with sorrow for my time
lost, fear to offend again, and trembling at the heavy judgments due unto me,
and striving to make my calling and election sure, by a holy life and godly
conversation both toward God and man all the rest of my days. And make me
cast utterly off all love of this deceitful world, which is but lost, and my
own vain desires that hang so fast on, and only apply my heart and soul to
seek after thee and thy Kingdom, with the righteousness thereof, and then I
shall obtain the end of my faith and hope; even thy glory, and my own
salvation, through thee only dear Jesus, my blessed Lord and alone Savior. To
whom with God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one eternal God
and glorious Trinity, be rendered as is due, all praise, honor and glory, for
ever and ever, Amen.

20. The conclusion to this book. A short Prayer so to perform our duties
here toward God, that we may obtain heaven hereafter.
OH most merciful Lord God, thou know my unaptnesse to any good: I humbly
pray thee to give me thy poor unworthy servant grace so truly to fear thee, as
not to offend thee; so constantly to believe in thee, and confidently to rely
upon all thy gracious promises, in all my troubles and necessities; and so
entirely and sincerely to love and honor thee above all things, that nothing
in this world may withdraw my mind from thee, nor any vain hopes, or earthly
desires make me neglect my service to thee; but that I may daily study and
strive, rightly and carefully to obey thee my Lord at all times, diligently to
seek thee, and know thy will, and faithfully to serve and please thee as I
ought to do as long as I live. For thou, O God the Father, lovedst us first,
and sent thy dear Son out of thy bosom to redeem us, and our sweet Savior
Jesus in his love gave himself, and laid down his own life to save us from
eternal death; greater love cannot be found then for one to dye for a friend,
but thou Lord diedst for thine enemies; much more having now reconciled us to
the father, and to thy self: I trust being united to thee also by the Holy
Ghost, by sanctification and true faith wrought in me by that blessed Spirit, I
shall obtain mercy through the merits and sufferings of my dear Jesus, to
live with thee in heaven hereafter, to glorify the great Name of God, the
eternal Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to whom be all praise and honor for
ever; and let heaven and earth, Saints and Angels, and all creatures, give
glory to him for evermore, Amen.

Here is one Prayer more which I join to these, because it concerned one of my
daughters, to whom this Book belonged, though it was lately penned upon a very
strange accident.

21. A thanksgiving to Almighty God, for his most merciful preservation of my
noble kinswoman the Lady Eliz. Feelding, and of my own daughter, the Lady
Eliz. Cornwalleis, from drowning under the Bridge, and was long under water:
and one worthy Gentlewoman in the company could not be recovered. This may
serve upon any such fearful accident.
MOst Mighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, and the only disposer of all
things therein, thou art the defender and protecter of all thy children and
servants, and the gracious preserver of all those that depend upon thee: thy
power rules both by sea and land, and thy allguiding providence directs all
things in the world, according to thy own high will and good pleasure, and for
the good of all them that trust in thee. Whereof thou have given many, and me
the unworthiest of thy servants, an especial testimony of thy infinite mercy
toward my dear daughter and kinswoman, in that great and miraculous
deliverance lately of them, in the dreadful danger of sudden death by drowning
in the Thames; for thou did mercifully provide and take care to save their
lives, when they were past sense to take care of themselves, or to call upon
thee for help; yet beyond all hope, thou did bring them back from the gates
of death, praised for ever be thy most glorious Name; and let neither us, nor
any of our generation forget this thy great mercy. Now Lord, make us duly to
acknowledge all thy benefits, and let us not pass them out of our minds
without true thankfulness for all thy favors continually vouchsafed unto us
undeserved: for all which we poor creatures have nothing to return to thee,
but devout love, faithful service, and careful obedience, with the humble
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; which by thy assistance, I will perform
toward thee with a grateful heart, so long as I live, and for ever, Amen.

22. A Petition of the Author for herself.
O Lord, as Paul said, he would readily perform the duty in his charge that
lay upon him, lest while he preached to save others, himself should become a
castaway: so dearest Lord, I having taken pains to compose many Prayers for
the use of others (under my care) to further them in the constant performance
of this duty of prayer; which being rightly used, will draw many blessings from
thee: Almighty God, I most humbly beseech thee, to hear and receive their
supplications, that call upon thee by these Prayers. So, Gracious Lord, suffer
not me to neglect my duty and daily service herein, toward thy Majesty, but
make me carefully, rightly and reverently to offer up due praises and prayers,
daily unto thee in a faithful and acceptable manner all the days of my life.
And give me thy poor servant the assistance of thy grace and holy Spirit, to
reform all my ways before thee; to suppress and overcome the corruption of my
heart, the vanity of my mind, and to forsake and abandon the love of this vile
world, with all the deceitful vanities thereof, and to cast off those great
and superfluous cares and desires after the things of this mutable life, which
pass away like a shadow or dream. Wise Solomon that had the plenty, and trial
of all things under the Sun, tells us what it will prove, only vanity of
vanities, and vexation of spirit. Wherefore let me learn with Paul, in what
estate soever I am, therewith to be content, and to submit with humble patience
to thy pleasure in all things thou sendest, who know what is best and
fittest for me; and keep me for repining and despairing in thy chastisements;
for thou can heal as well as wound, when thou please. Therefore I will
dedicate my heart and soul, and all my endeavors unto thy faithful service,
striving to make my calling and election sure, by looking after thee my God,
thy Kingdom, and thy righteousness, which is the only thing needful: This
grace grant unto me, O God, for Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

The end of the first Book.
BOOK II.
THis Book I began to write at my house at Barking in Essex, where I retired my
self in solitariness, after the death of my worthy and dear husband, Sir
Thomas Richardson, Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench: who dyed at
Candlemas, 1634.

Where shortly after I finished these Prayers following for my own private
use; being the fittest employment for my time, who was then in so much
heaviness-

I call this Book a weekly exercise of Prayer, either for a private person, or
in their own family: To which there are added some other necessary Prayers,
very useful for those particular occasions, whereto they are directed: which I
shall be very glad and joyful, if my children, grandchildren, kindred,
friends, or any good Christian that shall peruse them, may make a good and
right use of them to Gods glory: And I do most heartily and humbly pray, that
God will vouchsafe to hear in heaven, and to receive, accept, and grant their
just requests, to his own honor, their comfort, and my great happiness, who
am a wel-wisher, and true lover of their souls in the Lord.

Eliz. Richardson.

THese Pr^^^^^ I composed for the instructions of my children, and
grandchildren, after the example of my dear parents, Sir Thomas Beaumont, and
his Lady, of Stoughton in the County of Leicester, who I think were as
careful and industrious to breed up their children (which were living) in the
instruction and information of the Lord, to serve and obey God, as any parents
could possibly be, which made them take much pains with us, more then is
usual, by their endeavors to bring us to know and fear God, and to keep his
Commandments: Which Solomon says, is the whole duty of man. But when parents
have done the best, and all we can, it is Gods grace and blessing that must
perfect the work: which I humbly pray him to add to accomplish my desire, to
their eternal happiness.

An Exhortation concerning Prayer.
BEfore thou go to pray: consider seriously of these three things, which are
very necessary to fit and prepare thee the better for that holy and blessed
exercise: First, ponder with thy self, into whose presence we come, and to
whom we presume to speak, being before the great Majesty of God Almighty.
Secondly, in what manner we pray, and to what end our prayers tend, which must
chiefly respect the glory of God and his service; and then out own desires and
necessities, both for soul and body. Thirdly, weigh well what good or hurt,
what benefit or danger may ensue, by the performing of this duty carefully or
negligently.

1. A short Petition to precede any other Prayers.
O Lord Holy Ghost, who know my corrupt heart, and the frailty of my soul,
which can perform no good but by thy grace. Vouchsafe, my Lord, to sanctify,
assist and teach me the unworthiest of thy servants, by thy holy Spirit, so to
pray now and always, that my supplications may be faithful and acceptable to
my God, to his glory, and the comfort and good of my self, both in soul and
body for ever, Amen.

2. A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost, for the true spirit of grace in prayer.
O God Holy Ghost, the giver of all good gifts and graces, give me thy true
Spirit Lord, who art the comforter and sanctifier of thine Elect: thou know
my great and manifold infirmities, and frailties; all which, I humbly pray thee
in thy love and mercy to heal and help. And Lord give me power, strength,
and grace, by thy assistance, to resist and overcome all wicked assaults and
temptations of the devil, that seek to draw me from God and goodness, and
lead me to all evil: but vouchsafe Lord, I beseech thee, still to be present
with me in this holy exercise, and indue thy poor servant with thy blessed
Spirit and gift of prayer to call upon thy glorious Name faithfully and
sincerely, whereby my unworthy petitions (though full of imperfections) may be
received and accepted by thee. And Lord, banish all wandering thoughts, and
wicked hindrances from my soul, in the performance of this my bounden duty and
service, that I owe unto thee, my God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And be
pleased Lord, to assist me now and ever with thy grace to worship thee at all
times, in spirit and truth, as thou requirest: and not to present a dead, dull
and corrupt offering unto my Lord, of the lips without the heart, or by joining
in my thoughts God and the world, or mammon together, which thou hate, and so
make my prayers abominable to thy Majesty; for thou have made the heart, who
ought and must be served and honored with it. Therefore I humbly pray thee, to
enable me by thy assistance, to offer unto thee, my God, a holy and living
sacrifice, of my self, my prayers, and praises daily, in a right and
acceptable manner, not looking so much to the benefit and recompense of reward
that shall be received thereby from thy merciful hands to my own good, but
chiefly for the honor and glory of thy great Name, whose I am, and whom I am
bound to serve, and from whom I have already received so many great blessings
and benefits both spiritual and temporal: for which I render most humble and
hearty thanks unto thy Majesty. Now lastly, dear Lord Holy Ghost, I earnestly
beg of thee, daily to unite me unto thy glorious head, and only Savior Jesus
Christ, that so I may perform with true faith, good devotion, humility, and
sincerity, this, and all other holy duties and services, according to thy
blessed will and word, to thy glory and my great comfort; now and for ever: So
be it.

3. A short preface before any other Prayers, for the Lords day.
ALmighty Lord God, in whose glorious presence I am, presuming to take thy
sacred name into my sinful mouth: before thee, Lord, I most humbly prostrate
my self; thou see the heart, and know our wants before we ask, yet have
thou commanded us to ask in thy Sons name, promising for his sake, to grant us
all needful blessings both for soul and body. O Lord, thou understandest my
great weakness and disability, who can do no good, but by thy assistance: I
now most humbly pray thee, to keep all evil interruptions from my heart and
soul, and so to indue me with thy true Spirit of grace and prayer, in
performing this duty and service to thy glorious Majesty; that so all my
supplications may now and at all times be right, faithful, acceptable, and
pleasing unto thee: and by thy great mercy also, prevailing for my good, and
furtherance of my salvation, through my only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Amen.

4. A Prayer for the Lords day at first awaking.
O Most glorious Lord God, the high and gracious Creator of heaven and earth,
with all things therein; Thou did finish that mighty workin six days, and
rested the seventh, commanding thy Church and people of the Jews to keep holy
the seventh day, to thy due service and praise. But our Lord Jesus having
finished the redemption of mankind by his cross and passion, and bitter
sufferings, did bury that Sabbath in his grave upon that day, and by thy
Spirit did guide thy Apostles and Christian Church to sanctify and keep holy
this first day of the week, in perpetual memory of his glorious resurrection
and eternal rest from that labor, and suffering for our redemption, to thy
due service and praise; blessed be thy holy name therefore. And now, dear Lord,
for all my former neglects of my duty herein; for Jesus his sake, pardon my
sinful breaches of this, and all other thy holy Commandments heretofore: and
vouchsafe, O God, always to knit my straying heart, to the true fear of thy
great name, to keep me from offending thee, and fill my soul with the infinite
love of thy divine Majesty, that I may daily strive to lead the rest of my life
in all obedience to thy holy will. And Lord, vouchsafe to inspire me thy most
unworthy servant, I humbly pray thee, with thy blessed Spirit, that I may
withdraw my mind this blessed day, from all worldly cogitations, thinking my
own thoughts, speaking my own words, doing my daily works, or going my own
ways; but assist me with thy grace, that I may apply my heart and soul wholly
to meditate of thy wonderful works, and manifold mercies, with thankfulness,
and to attend thy service either public or private, with care and
faithfulness, and to obey all thy Commandments henceforth with diligence, and
constantly serving thee all my life to come, that so I may praise and glorify
thee, and thou may pardon my sins, and save my poor soul, through thy
great and unmerited mercy in Jesus Christ, my Lord and only Redeemer, Amen.

5. A Prayer for the Lords day in the morning before going to Church.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name,
who is most worthy of all honor and glory.

ALmighty God, our heavenly Father in Jesus Christ thy beloved Son, who of thy
infinite goodness by thy great power and divine word, did in six days
create heaven and earth, the sea and the whole world, with all things therein,
and resting the seventh day, did bless and hallow it, commanding all thy
people in purity after thine own image, to keep the same holy to thy due
honor and praise; having also given us six days for our own occasions: and
after this great and unexpressible work, thou did also in thy appointed time
accomplish by thy beloved Son Jesus, that happy redemption of mankind, who
were lost by sin, and fallen from thee; which unspeakable mercy and benefit
was as upon this first day of the week consummated by the miraculous blessed
resurrection of our Savior, which we Christians now keep in commemoration of
these thy infinite benefits; that according to thine appointment thy servants
may rest this holy Lords day, from all worldly affairs to thy honor and
glory: blessed and praised now and for ever, be thy glorious Name, for these
thy mavelous works. Therefore I most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, of thy
great mercy, by thy Spirit of grace, to sanctify me thy most unworthy
servant, both in soul and body, that I may at all times, but especially this
Lords day, and upon all other days consecrated by thy Church to the memory of
any of thy blessings, benefits and deliverances, wholly devote my self, to thy
true fear, holy devotion; and faithful service, in performance of thy blessed
will and commandment: And so thy worthy name may be glorified, my salvation
furthered, and thy favor and blessing rest always upon me and mine. And
likewise I most humbly pray thee, O God, for thy Son Jesus sake, to forgive all
my sins done in my whole life past, in breaking this and all other thy divine
Laws, that through the death and bitter passion of my dear and innocent
Savior, which he suffered to redeem us, thou will vouchsafe to be reconciled
unto me, thy guilty and sinful creature; that as this is a day of rest to thy
due praise, so by thy marcy it may be a happy day of joy and peace to my poor
soul and conscience, through my only Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ,
Amen, Amen.

6. A Prayer to be said at the Church, as soon as we are come into our seat.
O Lord our God, who art here present amongst us, thou see and understandest
all things, and know my heart; prepare, sanctify, and assist my heart and
soul, with thy grace, so to behave my self, both outwardly and inwardly, as
in the presence of thy glorious Majesty, in this thy blessed house of prayer
and hearing thy word, with such due reverence, fear, humility, true faith and
devotion, as may be best pleasing and acceptable unto thee, and most profitable
and available for the good of mine own soul. O God, indue thy servant the
Preacher, with thy holy Spirit, to teach thy saving truth rightly and
sincerely, that it may be powerful to our edification, and effectual to the
beating down, and banishing of all sins from our souls, and the increase of
faith and grace in us that hear him; to thy glory, and the furthering of our
salvations, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

7. Another shorter Prayer to the same purpose.
GOod Lord, that know my infirmities, prevent and remove all sin and evil
hindrances and impediments of drous^nesse, and wandering thoughts from me frail
sinful creature, and open my ears and heart like Lidiees to attend and mark
diligently what is taught out of thy most sacred word. Inlighten, Lord, my
understanding, to conceive rightly what I hear, and keep my mind wholly
intentive upon thy faithful service; in hearing thy holy word with true
devotion before thee; and make my memory retentive of all the good instructions
that I learn, and give me grace carefully and conscionably to practice them
throughout my whole life, to the honor of thy great name, the performance of
thy most holy will, the amendment of all my faults; and finally, the salvation
of me thy poor servant; through my Savior Jesus Christ's merits and mercies,
Amen.

8. A Prayer after the Sermon is ended, before we go out of the Church.
MOst Gracious Lord God, I humbly beseech thee, to pardon all my sinful
neglects, defects, and want of due preparation, or any infirmities that have
overtaken me in the performance of my duty toward thee, in this thy house,
and blessed exercise of Prayer, and hearing of thy divine Word. And let me not
depart out of this holy place without thy blessing, whereby my knowledge,
faith, holiness, and comfort in thee may be daily increased in me: And Lord,
add thy grace to what I have now heard, that by thy gracious assistance, it
may bring forth plentiful fruit in me, to the reformation of my life and
conversation, in avoiding all evil, and doing all good, which may be
serviceable and acceptable to thy Majesty, and best pleasing in thy sight,
through Jesus Christ, my only Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for the Lords day at night, of three Petitions.
FIrst, thankfulness for benefits already received, with prayer for the
continuance of all Gods mercies. Secondly, for repentance, true faith,
remission of sins, and amendment of life. Lastly, so to live and dye unto God
here, that after death, we may live with him in heaven for ever.

9. The Prayer.
MY soul praise thou the Lord, and forget not all his benefits, which
forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine infirmities, which
redeemeth thy life from death, and crowns thee in mercy and compassion, who
provided a ransom for thee, before thou had being to understand thine own
wretched estate. Oh, my Lord God! how good and gracious have thou ever been in
all thy mercies both spiritual and temporal toward me, the least and
unworthiest of thy servants, before I was borne, and ever since, from time to
time? Now Lord, I humbly pray thee, in the same love and favor, from which I
have hitherto received so many and great benefits, vouchsafe thou always to
continue thy blessings unto me, especially in daily renewing all spiritual
graces in my soul, for the true performance of all holy duties and service, in
a right and acceptable manner toward thy Majesty: and Lord, make my humble
thankfulness unto thee, appear in my true obedience of thee in all things,
that I may duly praise and glorify thy name for ever. Now dear God, let not
thy mercy in prolonging my days, increase the number of my sins, and so to
heap up wrath unto my self against the day of wrath, by drawing upon me due
punishments for my offenses; but merciful God, add thou grace unto my days;
and for Jesus sake, forgive all my sins past that I have done before thee in
my whole life time, especially in my many breaches of this holy and blessed
Lords day, which we keep in remembrance of our Saviors resurrection; with all
my neglects and defects in the performance of my duties toward thee this
present day, and heretofore, according to thy Commandments. And grant, O God,
through thy mercies, and my Saviors merits, that my iniquities may never be
imputed unto me; but Lord, let thy goodness, patience, and long sufferings,
lead me to daily and unfaigned repentance: and give me true faith in all thy
gracious promises, and by the assistance of thy holy Spirit, to bring forth
amendment of all my former faults, with true obedience unto thy blessed will,
and holiness of living all my life to come: That so I may obtain grace and
favor in thy sight, to prevent and keep me hereafter from all sin and evil,
or offending thee, my God, in thought, word and deed; and direct thou my ways
right before thee, in all godliness and uprightness of heart, that I may be
enabled through my Lord Jesus Christ, to do every good work, and by thy grace
to live here according to all thy Commandments; and when thou please to call
for me ^ut of this wicked world unto thy self, Lord assist me with thy spirit
and grace to make a blessed end, and to die in thee, my Lord, and so I shall
find mercy through the merits of my Savior Jesus, after death to be accepted
and received into the Kingdom of heaven, and through Christ my Savior, may
be admitted into thy glorious presence, O God, where is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, of which Lord make me a
happy partaker, when this life is ended. Amen, Amen.

10. A Prayer for Monday to God the Father, at first awaking.
I Will praise thee with my whole heart, for thou have dealt lovingly with me.
Blessed and praised now and ever, be thy most glorious Name, O my God, heavenly
Father, for all thy great and manifold mercies and blessings, both spiritual
and temporal in soul and body, vouchsafed unto me thy most unworthy and
sinful servant, before I was borne, and hitherto, this last night, and all my
life past; for thy favors have ever been right, good and gracious toward me,
having done great and many things for me, praised be thy most holy Name, who
have been my only stay, succor, help and comfort in this world; and thy
infinite mercy in Ghrist, is all my hope and confidence, for the life to come.
Now Gracious Lord, who have been my good God and guide from my youth, have pity
upon my infirmities: and for Jesus sake, forgive all my sins that I have
committed before thee in my whole life past, and let thy mercy and truth, never
leave me nor forsake me, neither in life, in death, nor in the last judgment,
but be pleased by thy Spirit, to say always unto my soul, especially at my
death, thou art my God and my salvation, for in thee will I trust so long as I
live, and for ever. So be it.

A short supplication before the weekly Prayers. 11. A morning Prayer for
Monday to God the Father.
Hear me when I call upon thee, O God of my righteousness, have mercy upon
me, and hearken unto my prayer. Most Gracious Lord God, and my heavenly
Father, in Christ Jesus my Savior; thou know my great and grievous
infirmities, that I can of my self neither will nor perform any good, nor
think a good thought, but by thy grace; therefore I most humbly pray thee to
indue me thy poor unworthy servant with thy holy Spirit, whereby these and
all other my prayers and petitions, that I presume to offer unto thy Majesty,
may by thy assistance be made in a right manner, and in an acceptable time,
when thou will please to be found of me, and graciously to hear and receive me
and my supplications. And now vouchsafe, dear God, to sanctify, prepare and
assist my heart and soul, with thy true Spirit of grace and prayer, to drive
away all vain and wandering thoughts, sluggish dullness, and all evil
temptations out of my mind; and knit my heart and soul to the true fear of
thy great Name, and to the devout love of thy divine Majesty; and teach me
with all due reverence, and such true humility and devotion, as is fit to
appear in thy sacred presence, that I may rightly, faithfully, and humbly, now
and at all times, call upon thy holy Name as I ought to do, and daily pray
unto thee, O my blessed Lord God, who have awaked me in health and safety to
this days light, which I most thankfully acknowledge, with all other thy
blessings and benefits, both spiritual and temporal, bestowed on me thy
sinful servant, from time to time; beseeching thee of thy infinite mercy
always to continue them unto me. And as thy gracious providence has brought
me to begin this new day, so Lord, by thy power defend me therein from falling
into any sin or evil, to offend thee; but give me grace at this present to
perform, and ever continue to lead a new, a holy, and an upright life in thy
sight, all the rest of my days to come, to frame my heart, and reform my
ways in all true obedience hereafter to thy most holy will and Commandments.
And further, I humbly praise thy glorious Name, for thy gracious preservation
of me and mine, and all other thy benefits vouchsafed me the last night, and
all my life past unto this instant hour, having hitherto given me health,
maintenance and safety; which, I pray thee, whilst I live, still to vouchsafe
me, and make me truly thankful to thee for all thy mercies; and let thy
benefits never slip out of my mind, but that I may daily and duly acknowledge
them to the true praise of thy most holy Name. And grant me grace to spend the
rest of my time to come more carefully and faithfully then I have formerly
done, to seek, serve, fear, love, obey, and please thee my Lord, in all
things as I ought to do, so that it may be more then meat and drink unto me,
to do the will of thee my heavenly Father. And I most humbly beseech thee, O
God, the fountain of mercy, to forgive and pardon all my sins and offenses
past that I have committed against thee, either in soul or body throughout my
whole life; Lord blot them out of thy remembrance, with the most precious blood
of thy dear Son, my only Savior Jesus Christ; and grant through thy mercies,
and his merits, and sufferings, that my iniquities may never be imputed unto
me. But vouchsafe, O God, now and ever, to keep me thy poor servant, as the
apple of thine own eye from all sin and shame, and hide me under the shadow of
thy wings from falling into any evil or danger this day; especially, O Lord,
preserve me always from the great wickedness of committing any presumptuous
sin before thee, and from the fearful sin against the Holy Ghost (which is
unpardonable) and from the dangerous sins of neglect toward thee, hardness of
heart, senseless security, or falling into wicked despair, whereby I may
prevent my soul of thy mercy in Christ for my salvation. But, good God, direct
thou my thoughts, desires, words, and deeds, to be ever agreeable to thy most
holy will, and obedient to all thy Commandments, that I may henceforth live
before thee with an upright heart, daily studying and striving to serve and
please thee in all things, so long as I live, that after death, I may praise
and magnify thy Name in heaven among thy Saints and servants, for ever and
ever. These great mercies, O gracious God, with all other thou know needful
for me, either for this life or the life to come, I further beg of thee, in the
name, merits and mediation of thy dear Son, and my sweet Jesus, concluding in
that perfect form of prayer, which he has taught us, saying, Our Father, etc.

12. A Prayer to God the Father for Monday night.
O Lord my God, how excellent is thy name in all the world, who have done great
works, and brought mighty things to pass.

ALmighty Lord, and my heavenly Father in Christ, most high and mighty God,
Creator, possessor, preserver, and disposer of heaven and earth, and all that
is therein, the fountain of grace and mercy, and Father of light, from whom
comes all good and perfect gifts: I most humbly pray thee of thy great
goodness to give me thy poor sinful servant, thy grace and holy Spirit, to
direct my heart and all my ways aright in thy sight, and to guide me in the
paths of truth and righteousness; and Lord, lead me into that straight way,
and through that narrow gate, which brings unto life eternal; that so of thy
infinite mercy through Christ, I may enter in (though most unworthy) with them
that obtain grace to find it, and there to live with thee, my God, in joy and
bliss for evermore. And further, I yield and render unto thee, my Lord, all
humble and possible praise, honor, and thanks, for all thy great and manifold
mercies and benefits, spiritual and temporal, vouchsafed unto me thy most
unworthy servant in soul and body from time to time; and also for thy gracious
preservation of me and mine, and all other thy blessings bestowed upon me this
day past, and all my life hitherto. Now, good God, for Christ's sake, I humbly
pray thee, to forgive and pardon all my sins and trespasses that I have
committed before thee, inwardly or outwardly in soul or body, by thought,
desire, word or deed, this present day, or any time of my life heretofore.
Merciful Father, wash away all my sins out of thy sight, with the most
precious blood of that All-sufficient sacrifice, the innocent Lamb of God,
Jesus, who was slain for our transgressions: hide all my sins in his wounds,
and bury them in his grave, so as they may never be able to rise in judgment
against me, either to accuse or to condemn me. But Lord, make me of that
blessed number, whose sins thou will cover, and whose iniquities thou will
pardon. And vouchsafe also to forgive my omission of all those good deeds I
ought to have done, and my sinful neglect in the true performance of all duty
and service that I owe unto thee; especially my wicked negligence in calling
upon thy holy Name, and daily praising thee for all thy mercies: and likewise I
beg pardon for my often omitting, or slightly performing this duty of praying
unto thee as I ought, now and at all times; which Lord give me grace more
carefully, faithfully and devoutly to perform toward thee, by the assistance
of thy holy Spirit ever hereafter, that so of thine infinite mercy thou may
b^ing me to that eternal Kingdom which thou hall prepared, O God the Father,
before the world began, for all that truly love and believe in thee, to thy
great praise and honor, and my salvation i^ Christ, through thy mercy, O
blessed Lord God, to whom be glory now and ever.Amen.

13. The conclusion for Monday, to be said last, or in bed.
O My God, I most humbly commmend and commit my self both body and soul, my
children and grandchildren, my kindred, friends and family, and all that does
belong unto me, here or else where, with all my fellow members in thy whole
Church, into thy most gracious protection and preservation, this night and
always. Good God, I beseech thee, vouchsafe to bless, sanctify and keep our
souls and bodies in thy true faith, fear and favor, with safety, this night,
and to our lives end. Amen.

14. A Prayer at first awaking, for Tuesday, to our Savior Jesus Christ.
MY soul shall magnify thee, O Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my
Savior, who has done and suffered great and many things for me, blessed be
thy most holy Name for thy infinite benefits and blessings, both spiritual and
temporal bestowed upon me thy unworthy sinful servant from time to time. And
chiefly (Gracious Lord) for thy accomplishment of my redemption before I had
any being: who did vouchsafe to come into the world amongst evil men, and to
be borne of a Virgin, to take the shape and nature of man upon thee, and in our
flesh did work and perform all righteousness to be imputed unto us; and
also submitted thy self to suffer the most bitter and ignominious death of the
Cross, to free us from that eternal death, which our sins have deserved;
and also rose again from the grave the third day, to overcome sin, death, the
grave, hell and Satan, with all other things for us. And so thou, sweet Jesus,
art become our reconciliation, redemption, righteousness, and justification,
with hope also through thee of salvation and glorification hereafter. Of all
which thy inestimable benefits, I humbly pray thee, O Lord my Savior, of thy
infinite mercy both in this world, and after this life is ended, to make me thy
poor unworthy servant a happy partaker amongst thy Saints and servants, that I
may live hereafter with thee and them, to praise and glorify thy Name, my
dear Jesus, for ever. Amen.

15. A Prayer for Tuesday morning, to God the Son, our Redeemer.
I Know that my Redeemer lives, and shall stand the last day upon the earth,
to judge the world in righteousness, and all the people with equity. O sweet
Jesus Christ, who art my Lord and perfect Savior, the beloved Son of God, the
blessed Redeemer of the world, the only searcher of man's heart, before whom all
things are manifest, all desires known, and from thee no secrets can be hid:
Lord cleanse and reform the thoughts of my wicked corrupt heart, by the
inspiration of thy most holy Spirit, to purge my heart, soul and conscience
from all sin, evil, and dead works, rightly and faithfully, to fear and serve
thee, the true and living Lord, that I may unfainedly love thee, and constantly
praise and magnify thy holy and blessed Name all the days of my life, and for
ever. Now, Gracious Jesus, grant that the words of my mouth, and the thoughts,
and meditations of my heart, in these and all other prayers and petitions that
I make unto thy Majesty, may be always guided by thy blessed Spirit, and that
all my ways and actions; be directed according to thy holy word, and so by thy
merciful assistance, all things I go about, shall be ever right and acceptable
in thy sight, O Lord God of truth, that art my strength and my Redeemer. And
dear Savior, who know the infinite corruption of my wretched nature, and
my unaptnesse to all goodness, vouchsafe to draw and knit my heart and soul,
to thy true fear and faithful service, and suffer no worldly respects, regard
of persons, nor any pleasures, to withdraw my mind, or hinder my soul from
the true performance of my daily duties and service toward thee, my God, with
due observance of thy great Majesty, faithfully, devoutly and constantly
serving thee, and calling on thy holy name, now and at all times, and daily
worshipping thee in spirit and truth, as thy self have commanded. And be thou
pleased, dear Lord, by thy grace, to guide and direct my heart, soul, and
body, with all my desires, ways, and works, according to thy own good will
and pleasure; for I humbly commend and commit my self, my children and
grandchildren, with all belonging to me, and all things that any way
concerns me, to thy most gracious protection, direction, and disposing, now
and ever. And I humbly pray thee, O my sweet Jesus, so to prevent me with thy
holy Spirit, that I be led into no temptation this day by the devil or his
evil agents, the vain world, or my own corrupt flesh, neither suffer any
sinful thoughts to possess my soul; but assist me, I beseech thee, to set a
watch over my heart and ways, and before my mouth, and set a seal of grace
and wisdom over my soul, and upon my lips, that I offend not with my tongue,
or in my actions, either against thee my God, my neighbor or my own soul;
but Lord, make my heart clean and upright before thee, and keep me from
falling into my former sins again, but indue me with grace so to number my
days, that I may apply my heart to wisdom and goodness, and daily endeavor
and strive to lead a new and godly life in thy sight; and make me firm,
steadfast, and constant in thy right Church, saving truth, and true faith unto
my lives end, to live and die therein; but if I hold any errors contrary to thy
will and word (O Lord) speedily convert my soul unto thee, and show me the
paths of life, and teach me thy truth, and suffer me not to slide from it, but
so long as I live here, constantly to set my whole heart, soul, and delight,
to seek, to serve, to love, and to fear thee, my Lord, in all true obedience,
humility, repentance, and purity, with steadfast faith in thee, and true
holiness of living, as is required of thy children and servants, through the
assistance of thy blessed Spirit, and the blessing of thy heavenly Father, who
lives and reigns with thee, three Persons, and one true eternal God,
blessed for ever. Amen. Concluding my humble petition, with that perfect
prayer, which Christ our advocate has sanctified, and taught us saying, Our
Father, etc.

16. A Prayer for Tuesday at night to our blessed Savior, for my self and
children.
O Sweet Jesus Christ, that art both God and man, my blessed Savior, Redeemer,
and Mediator, who understandest all things, and see what we want before we
ask, and know best what is in miserable mortal man, that is made of earth,
how corrupt my nature and substance is, how many and great my frailties and
infirmities are, and how subject I am to fall into all manner of evil both in
soul and body, if thy grace uphold me not: therefore I most humbly beseech
thee, O Lord, to receive me and mine now and ever, into thy provident and
gracious care, to protect and direct us in all our ways to do thy blessed
will, and to live in all thy holy fear, to save and guide us waking from all
sin and shame, and to keep and defend us sleeping from all perils and
dangers either of soul or body, that so by thy mercy we may rest in peace and
safety this night, and also awake in thy grace and favor, and do all things
to thy honor and glory, and may live and dye thy true and faithful servants;
and after death vouchsafe, dear Lord, by thy merits and sufferings to give us
eternal life with thee in heaven, which thou have dearly purchased for us. Now
sweet Jesus, vouchsafe to indue and assist me with thy grace and holy Spirit,
that I may be able rightly, faithfully, and confidently (as I ought to do) to
cry and pray unto thee, my God, for grace and mercy, that I may find favor
in thy sight, and that my trust in thee may never cease, that so I may obtain
true contrition for all my offenses, and pardon for my sins past, with all
saving graces for my salvation both in life and death, and assured hope of
everlasting life when this is ended, through thy precious death and bitter
passion, sweet Jesus my Savior. Now, good Lord, indue me with grace, to fit
and prepare my soul as I ought, before my day of death approaches, that I be
not taken unprovided; but assist me with thy blessed Spirit to work in my
heart a true and lively faith, to lay fast hold upon all thy mercies, merits,
and gracious promises, and rightly to apply them to my own soul. And further
give me, I humbly pray thee, unfaigned repentance and remission of all my
sins, with other needful graces for the performing of all holy duties to thy
Majesty, that so I may be enabled rightly and faithfully to serve and please
thee while I live here; and also make me carefully to fit and prepare my soul
for thy merciful acceptance, before thou call me to thy self out of this vale
of misery; and give me grace daily to die unto this world, and forsake it
while I am in it, that I may live more and more in true holiness and
righteousness before thee; and so I shall obtain blessedness here to be
directed by thee in all things, and to have thy protection over me to die
happily in thee, and live eternally with thee, who art my only Savior and
Redeemer, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom be all glory for ever and ever.
So be it.

17. The conclusion for Tuesday, to be said at night or in bed, to the Son, for
my self and children.
MY sweet Jesus, by thy grace and holy Name, keep me thy poor servant, and
all mine from all sin and shame, and by thy bitter death and passion, save us
from thy great wrath, and endless damnation, and by thy powerful
resurrection, raise us daily from sin to grace and newness of life, and by thy
glorious ascension, draw me thy unworthy servant continually to heaven after
thee by a holy life and godly conversation; and of thy great mercy, after
death, reserve me to be where thou art, and make me partaker of thy everlasting
salvation; and in all my troubles, sorrows and distress, do thou my griefs
redress, and be my blessed consolation; and vouchsafe to receive me this night
and always into thy merciful preservation: for now I will lay me down in
peace, and also rest and sleep, because thou Lord, do only me sustain, and
wilt in safety keep: for on thee alone I wholly do depend, who art all my
hope, help, comfort, and confidence, sweet Jesus my Savior. Amen.

18. A Prayer for Wednesday to the glorious Trinity at first awaking.
GReat is our God, and worthy to be praised, I will speak of all thy
mavelous works, for thou have done great things, and holy is thy Name.

To thee O God, heavenly Father, our gracious Creator of all things; with God
the Son, that blessed Redeemer of mankind, and God the Holy Ghost the
sanctifier of thine elect; unto thee, O Lord, three Persons, one true and
everliving God, be given and rendered as is due by me, and all other thy
children and servants, all humble and possible praise and thanks, now and ever.
For I thy most unworthy servant, do humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that I
find thy blessings and benefits both spiritual and temporal, sleeping and
waking, daily and howrely, to be renewed toward me, for which I bless and
magnify thy holy Name, especially for those spiritual graces thou have
vouchsafed unto my soul from time to time, before I had any being, for my
election by the whole Trinity, and my creation by God the Father, which thou
did fully perform in thine own innocent person: but chiefly in that
infinite love token unto mankind, of God the Father in ordaining and sending
thy dear Son out of thy bosom into the world; and thou, O Christ, in coming
amongst wicked men, to put thy self into their cruel hands for our
redemption, and so become our righteousness, justification, and salvation,
which thou have dearly purchased for us with thy own blood. And since I was
borne, O blessed Spirit, for my continual preservation, and daily supply of
all needful blessings for my soul and body, especially for my vocation, and
calling to the right knowledge of God and his saving truth, with some measure
of true faith, sanctification, and regeneration from sin to grace, all
wrought in me by the holy operation of thee Lord Holy Ghost; by whom also we
are united unto our Lord and head Christ Jesus, from whom Lord let me never be
separated. Now vouchsafe O God, still to continue all thy mercies toward me;
and chiefly in giving me daily a supply and increase of all heavenly gifts, and
spiritual graces, whereby I may be able rightly, faithfully, and constantly,
to fear and love, to seek, serve, and please thee my God, in all things as I
ought to do; that so I may obtain thy grace and favor (by thy assistance) to
live a holy life here according to thy will, that thou of thy infinite mercy,
Almighty God, and glorious Trinity, may make me partaker of thy heavenly
Kingdom of glory hereafter. Amen.

19. A Prayer to the Trinity for Wednesday morning.
O God the Father of heaven, the gracious Creator of all things, the righteous
judge, that searches the heart, and tries the children of men, and beholds
all our ways; and know my substance is but dust, flesh and blood, and my
nature as it is corrupted by sin, is of it self, earthly, sensual and
divelish, and can merit nothing from thee, O Lord, but condemnation. Dear God,
the original of all goodness, I most humbly beseech thee to have mercy upon
me miserable sinner, and enter not into judgment with thy poor servant, for
no flesh living is righteous before thee; neither reward me after my
wickedness, for I am a wretched and most sinful creature, and have done
exceeding much evil in thy sight; but I humbly pray thee, O God, for thy dear
Son and my Saviors sake, to withdraw thy great wrath and heavy displeasure
from me, which my sins have justly deserved; and if it be thy will Lord
release my present afflictions, which now and long have lain upon me: and
vouchsafe also to prevent and remove those weighty judgments, that hang over
my head for my iniquities, that by thy unspeakable mercies I may escape them;
yet if thou please further to visit me with fatherly chastisements for the
amendment of my faults; Lord give me wisdom and patience to bear all things
as I ought to do, without offense toward thee, and by thy grace to make the
best and rightest use of all thou sendest, so as in the end they may turn to
thy glory and the furtherance of my salvation in Christ my Lord. O God the Son,
Redeemer of mankind, who did vouchsafe to be borne of a woman, to become
man for our redemption, and came into the world to seek and save all those
that were lost by sin, that they might live by faith in thee; which Lord grant
unto me, sweet Jesus my Savior, and have mercy upon me a wicked sinner, to
forgive and pardon all my sins and offenses that I have done before thee all
my life past in thought, word and deed; and impute not my iniquities unto me,
neither destroy me with my transgressions, nor let thy heavy displeasure
reserve evil for me hereafter: but dear Lord, of thy great goodness grant me
thy poor servant true faith, and unfeigned repentance, with thy gracious
remission of all my trespasses, and wash my sins out of thy sight with thine
own most precious and innocent blood, which thou did so freely shed for our
redemption; nail all my offenses upon thy cross, and bury them in thy grave,
so as they may never be able to come in judgment against me, either to accuse
or shame me in this world, or to condemn and confound me in the world to
come, for thy mercies sake, sweet Jesus my Savior: But I most humbly beseech
thee, O Lord, ^^ sanctify and cleanse my heart and soul from all sin and
evil, by thy holy Spirit, that I may be upright in thy sight, to reform all
my ways before thee, and let thy grace and holy Spirit lead me into the paths
of truth and righteousness all my life, that after death thou may of thy
infinite mercy bring me to that everlasting inheritance of happiness which
thou have so dearly purchased for us with thine own blood, in whom is all my
trust, who art my only Savior, Mediator and Advocate for ever. O God the Holy
Ghost, our comforter, preserve and sanctify thou my heart and soul, that I
may unfeignedly love thee, truly fear thy holy Name, and faithfully serve,
please and obey thee, as I ought to do now and all the days of my life: And
vouchsafe, O blessed Spirit, to instruct and inlighten my soul and
understanding, with the true knowledge, devout love, and steadfast belief of
thy sacred truth, and keep me therein for ever. O Holy Ghost, vouchsafe to
make thy seat and dwelling in my soul, and let thy holy Spirit take full
possession of my heart, and abide always with me to fill me with all saving
graces, whereby I may be preserved from falling into any sin or evil, and
be enabled to do all good that may be best pleasing unto thee, and to
perform all duty and service (by thy assistance) in an acceptable manner unto
my gracious and Almighty God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three
Persons, and one ever glorious Trinity, to whom be rendered all praise, honor,
power, and thanks, as is right due, for ever and ever. Amen.

20. An evening Prayer to God the Holy Ghost for Wednesday.
O God the Holy Ghost, blessed Spirit, by whom we are sanctified and sealed
unto the day of redemption, and by whose holy operation, we are joined unto our
blessed Lord and head Christ Jesus; from whom let nothing in heaven or earth
ever separate me: And merciful Lord I humbly pray thee, cast me not in thy
displeasure out of thy care and favor for my sins, and withdraw not thy
grace and holy Spirit from me, neither forsake me, nor leave me to my self,
who am wholly subject to all wickedness. But I most humbly beseech thee, to
creat in me a new, a clean, an upright, a faithful and perfect heart in thy
sight, to walk in all true holiness before thee, as thou requirest, all my
days to come; and good Lord, daily renew thy grace, and a right holy spirit
within me, to sanctify and cleanse my soul from sin, to preserve me from
falling into evil, and to guide me into the ways of truth and righteousness.
Now dear Lord, mark me thy poor servant for thine own, and prevent me with
thy grace that I never grieve, despite, or neglect thee my God in any thing,
neither to resist or quench the good motions of thy holy Spirit in my heart at
any time; but I most humbly pray and desire to be led and directed in all
things by thee, who best know my frailties and infirmities, that I can (of
my self) neither will nor perform any good at all, much less call upon thy
holy Name as I ought, all my best works and endeavors, being full of
imperfection and corruption; but I humbly beseech thee, good Lord, to accept in
me the will for thee deed, the affection for the action; and vouchsafe to heal
and help my great disability to any goodness, and teach, and assist me
rightly, faithfully and constantly, to pray unto thee my God, now and at all
times according to thy holy will, and daily to call upon thy great Name in
truth and sincerity. And be pleased, O Lord Holy Ghost, to prepare, assist and
lift up my heart and soul toward thee, and bend down thine ear of mercy to
hear me, and vouchsafe thou blessed Lord, to make request by thy grace in me,
with such inward and faithful devotion, humility, sighs and groans as cannot
be expressed, that so my supplications may be acceptable to God my heavenly
Father, through the merits and sufferings, of my dear Savior Jesus, and the
holy working of thee O God the Holy Ghost, my comforter, who art the sanctifier
and preserver both of my soul and body; I humbly pray thee to inflame my heart
and spirit with fervent zeal and unfeigned devotion to the true and constant
performance of all duties and services that I owe unto thee my God. And
vouchsafe Lord, by thy holy Spirit to infuse into my soul everlasting and
devout love toward thy Majesty, with Christian charity toward all my
brethren, thy children and servants: And Lord, put thou a right and steadfast
hope into my heart that my trust in thee may never fail, till I have attained
to the eternal felicity, which God the Father has prepared, and our blessed
Savior has purchased, and thou blessed Spirit by thy holy assistance wilt
bring us unto, to glorify the Name of my God in heaven hereafter for ever.
Amen.

21. The conclusion for Wednesday at night, to the blessed Trinity.
Merciful God, heavenly Father, blessed Son, and Holy Ghost, who have
appointed the night for all mortal creatures to take rest, without which our
weak natures cannot subsist: I am now in health by thy gracious providence, by
thy favor, and laid down in my bed, which represents the grave, and by thy
mercy hope also to take quiet rest and sleep, that is the image of death,
from which I know not whether ever I shall awake again to this worlds light,
for my life depends on thy good pleasure; therefore I most humbly pray thee
of thy infinite mercy, O God, to forgive all my sins past that I have committed
against thee, this present day or heretofore, through the merits and sufferings
of my Redeemer Jesus; and vouchsafe heavenly Father to be reconciled unto me,
thy most guilty sinful servant, in and through thy dear and innocent Son, who
is my righteous Savior: And grant while I live here, that in Christ I may
hereafter live to thee, and thy faithful service; and when I sleep, Lord let
me safely rest by thy blessed preservation, and by the assistance of thy holy
Spirit, that I may continue in thy true faith, fear and favor with a good
conscience unto my last breath; that so if thou call me away this night, or any
other time in my sleep, thou will in Christ pardon my sins, and after death
receive my soul to thy grace and mercy, to remain with thee for ever, and may
praise thee, my God, everlastingly. Amen, Amen.

22. A Prayer for Thursday morning at first awaking to God the Father.
MY God, I heartily praise thee for my present health, rest and preservation
this night and formerly, and safe approach by thy providence to this light. I
humbly beseech thee, vouchsafe this day and always, to be my present help in
all dangers, and my merciful God to pardon all my sins and wickedness, that
I have done heretofore, and to prevent and to protect me by thy grace and
favor from falling into any sin or evil to offend thee hereafter; and direct
me by thy holy Spirit in all things I go about, to do that which is
acceptable in thy sight (through Christ) and to the best for my own soul.
Dear Lord, give me thy sinful servant thy grace, whereby I may be able
rightly and faithfully to seek, serve, and please thee my God, as I ought to
do, this day and at all times throughout my whole life: These great blessings
I beg of thee, O God the Father, by thy gracious assistance, in, and through,
and for the sake of thine own dear Son, and my only Savior, Jesus Christ
the righteous. So be it.

23. A Prayer for Thursday morning to God the Father.
MOst mighty God, and my merciful Father, the giver of all good gifts: grant
me thy grace and the light of thy countenance, to guide me this day and ever,
to walk in thy paths of truth and righteousness all my life, and to run in
the way of thy Commandments unto my end; for thy beloved Son has taught us
before all things to seek that which is most needful, even the Kingdom of
God, and the rightousnesse thereof, and then our heavenly Father will supply
all things else which he knows to be necessary for us: Good Lord, make me
(with Mary) to choose the better part, to seek, hear, and follow our Savior
Jesus, and let that never be taken from me thy poor servant. To which end, I
humbly pray thee, O God, to weane and withdraw my heart and soul, from the
cares, love or liking of this vilde world, and all the vanities thereof, all
which like a dream and shadow fade away: And Lord, drive all wicked thoughts
out of my mind, and banish covetous desires (the root of all evil) from my
heart, and make me ever consider what it would advantage me, if I could win the
whole world, and should lose my own soul. Therefore I beseech thee, O Lord,
by thy holy Spirit, to settle my heart and soul, my desires, affections, and
delight, only upon thee my God, thy glory, thy Kingdom, thy righteousness;
and make me to account all earthly things but dross and dirt so that I may win
Christ, and attain to the excellent knowledge of Jesus my Savior, who is the
Lord of life, him chiefly, O God, let me find and obtain to be mine, with
whom I shall have all other good things, by thy infinite mercy I beseech thee,
that so I may be able rightly and faithfully to serve and please thee as I
ought, while I live hear, that after death thou of thy unspeakable goodness,
may make me partaker of thy heavenly Kingdom of glory. And now, dear God,
vouchsafe unto me thy most unworthy servant the grace of daily and unfeigned
sorrow and repentance for all my sins, with a sound sense and feeling of them
in a contrite spirit, with care to reform all my former faults in the rest of
my life, and make me strictly to examine my own heart, soul, knowledge, and
conscience, of all the evils I have done before thee, and severely to judge,
hate and condemn my self for them, that so I may escape thy great wrath, and
may not be judged and condemned by thee in thy heavy displeasure, which I am
not able to bear; for who can stand in the sight of thy great Majesty when
thou art angry? therefore I most humbly pray thee, good God, in the multitude
of thy mercies, to forgive and grant me thy grace and pardon of all my sins and
offenses past that I am guilty of, for thy beloved Sons sake, that so my
iniquities may never be imputed unto me; but Lord give me true faith to lay
fast hold upon thy mercies, and all thy gracious promises, and the merits and
sufferings of Ghrist, with grace rightly to apply them to my own salvation,
through Jesus my Savior; that so I may be quit through him, and freed of my
account with thee before I die; and grant that I may daily die unto the world,
and hate all the vain pressures thereof, and may live more and more unto thee
in all righteousness and true holiness of living before thee as becomes thy
Saints: that so when thy appointed time is come for me to enter into my long
sleep of death, that thou will be pleased by thy holy Spirit to fit and prepare
me, and to give me a happy and blessed departure out of this life, to die in
the Lord that I may rest in peace and safety, and be raised up by my Savior to
grace and glory, that thou pardoning all my sins, and receiving me to mercy,
thou may wipe all tears from mine eyes, and remove all sorrow from my
soul, and for Jesus sake to admit me into thy glorious presence, and there to
enjoy eternal felicity, and be a happy member of thy blessed Church
triumphant to praise thee there for evermore. Amen. And the blessing of God
Almighty, the eternal Father, the beloved Son, and the Holy Ghost, be ever
with me, to sanctify, bless and preserve my soul and body in thy fear and
favor, and true faith, steadfast hope, and perfect charity unto my life's end.
Amen.

24. A Prayer to God the Father for Thursday night.
HAve mercy upon me, O Lord, and hearken unto my prayer, for I know thou Lord
wilt bless the righteous, and with thy favor wilt compass him as with a
shield. Lord thou love not wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee,
thou shall destroy them that speak lies, for thou abhorrest all them that
work iniquity: yet thou desire not the death of a sinner but that he should
return and live; therefore dear Lord, deliver my soul and save me in thy
manifold mercies, for I have grievously sinned before thee, and my iniquities
are gone over my head into thy presence, and are too heavy for me to bear.
But I most humbly beseech thee, for thy beloved Son Jesus sake, to give me
unfaigned sorrow and repentance for all my sins past, which are great and
many, and grant me thy gracious pardon and remission for all my offenses
committed this day or heretofore against thee; and Lord, indue me with true
faith to lay hold of all thy mercies, and my Saviors merits and sufferings,
with grace to amend, reform my life, according to thy most holy word and
Commandments, all the rest of my days to come: to which end Lord give me a
soft, a penitent, upright and contrite heart, with a tender conscience, and a
true and sound sense and feeling of all my sins, infirmities, and spiritual
wants, with grace earnestly and faithfully to cry and pray unto thee for mercy
and relief in all my necessities, and chiefly for all spiritual graces to my
soul. And as I trust thou will awake me from the dullness of this nights
sleep in safety to the morning light; so dear Lord, by thy holy Spirit daily
quicken my soul from the deadness of sin, to newness of life, and raise me
up in mercy hereafter, from the darkness of death, unto light and life
eternal, to live with thee my God for evermore. Now gracious Lord, receive me
with all that does belong unto me into thy merciful protection now and
always, to keep and deliver us from all sin and evil, giving us this night
quiet sleep, health and rest if it be thy will; and grant whether I sleep or
wake, live or dye, I may be wholly thine, and do all to thy honor and glory;
that so both in life and death, Christ may be to me an advantage, through thy
infinite mercy, O my blessed Lord God. Now I humbly pray thee, so to inlighten
the darkness of my soul and understanding with thy grace, that I may see
clearly the right way to heavenly happiness, and by thy assistance follow hard
after it until I have attained to it; and also for thy holy Names sake defend
me from all perils and dangers of this night either to my soul or body, to
me or any of mine, for the love of thy only Son, my dear Savior Jesus Christ:
for whose sake, grant me also the guard of thy holy and good Angels now and
ever, that they may pitch their tents about me to preserve me from all my
enemies bodily and ghostly; and commit me Lord to the custody of thy blessed
Spirit to keep me from falling into any sin or evil, and to guide my ways
into the paths of truth and righteousness, that I may live in thy holy fear,
and dye in thy faith and favor; and good God, grant that in the hour of my
death, and in the day of judgment, thy dear Son and my sweet Jesus, may be my
merciful judge and Savior, to pardon and pasle by all my sins, and cover
them with his righteousness, that after death I may be received and accepted
into thy grace and favor, to live and remain in joy and bliss eternally with
thee my God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now, O God, who can do abundantly,
more then I can ask or think, to thee be all praise, honor and glory, for
ever and ever. Amen.

25. The conclusion for Thursday night in bed.
O Lord my God, I thank thee for all thy mercies vouchsafed unto me this
present day and formerly: and now be pleased, O Lord, by thy holy Spirit to
sanctify me thy poor unworthy servant, in soul, body and spirit throughout,
to thy right faithful and constant service all my days; and assist me with
thy grace that I may daily confess, lament, hate, leave and amend all my
former misdeeds, and may become faithfully and unfainedly thine in all true
obedience and sincere and perfect love toward thy Majesty, both living and
dying, and for ever; that through thy mercy and Christ's merits, I may be found
blameless at the appearance of my Lord Jesus, by whom I trust to obtain to
live in heaven with thee, and to be presented by my Savior unto thy gracious
acceptance in that great day of the Lord, to remain with thee my God for ever.
Amen.

26. A Prayer for Friday at first awaking to God the Son.
Dear Savior Jesus, have mercy upon me a miserable sinner: Thou immaculate
Lamb of God, that knew no sin, but diedst for our transgressions, and
shed thine own most precious blood to cleanse us from sin: I most humbly
praise and magnify thy holy Name for all thy mercies who have done and
suffered great and many things for me, but especially I bless thee for those
spiritual blessings thou have bestowed upon me before I was borne, and
hitherto. Now sweet Jesus, who know my frailty, I do most humbly pray thee
never to leave me to my self, nor to my souls enemies, neither while I live,
at my death, nor in the great and dreadful day of judgment, when all things
shall be made manifest before thee, and it will be wholly in thy power to save
or to condemn; then Lord Jesus look in mercy on me as one of thine, whom
thou love to the end, to pardon and cover all my sins, and receive me into
thy grace and favor, for by thee only comes my salvation, and in thee, O
Lord, is my whole trust: Therefore vouchsafe Lord, to continue thy goodness,
thy favor, and thy loving kindness toward me this day and for ever, in
forgiving all my iniquities, that I have committed in my whole life past; and
also my sinful omission of those duties and good works, which thou have
commanded, and I have wickedly neglected. But I most humbly beseech thee, my
Savior, to indue me thy most unworthy servant with thy grace and holy Spirit,
to direct my heart, and all my ways aright before thee, and preserve me at all
times in the sincere and perfect love of thy divine Majesty, and in thy fear
and favor, with unfaigned repentance and amendment of life, that I may obtain
thy gracious pardon for all my offenses; and Lord, give me true faith, steadfast
hope, and perfect charity unto my li^^^ end. These great mercies I ask at thy
gracious hands, dear Jesus Christ, who art my only Savior, Redeemer,
Mediator, and Advocate; to whom be all praise and glory for ever. Amen.

27. A morning Prayer for Friday, to God the Son.
SWeet Savior, none can come to the Father but by thee; and whosoever comes
unto thee thou castest not away, but wilt raise him up at the last day unto
eternal life.

Now dear Jesus, thou blessed Son, and innocent Lamb of God, that take away
the sins of the sins of the world, who graciously call unto thee all
heavy laden and penitent sinners that thou may ease and refresh them; have
pity on me, and vouchsafe to sanctify and cleanse my soul and body, from all
sin and evil by thy holy Spirit, and make me pure and upright in thy sight,
and be pleased to protect and direct my heart and soul, and all my ways
before thee, and to indue me with thy blessed Spirit, to preserve me from
falling into any sin or offense toward thee; but assist me with thy grace in
all things I go about to do, that I may do that which may be most acceptable
and best pleasing in thy fight. Now Lord, I confess that I was conceived and
borne in sin, and I am a miserable and wretched sinner above all others, and
unto whom should I come, but to thee the Savior of mankind, who came into
the world to save sinners by thy grace, of whom I am chief? O fountain of
mercy, who did vouchsafe to be borne of the blessed and pure Virgin Mary,
(to become man) and tookest our wretched nature upon thee, therein to suffer
death, to reassume us from eternal death, sin, the grave, hell and Satan,
and did willingly lay down thine own life for us, which no man could take
from thee, that we might live by faith through thee; and also thou had power
to take it up again, and did rise from the grave the third day for our
justification, and to vanish all our spiritual enemies: and lastly, thou our
Lord, did gloriously ascend into heaven, there to take possession, and make
intercession for us unto thy heavenly Father, with whom thou do reign in
heaven for ever, whither thou do graciously and daily draw to thee all those
that truly believe in thee, there to live hereafter with thee; of which number,
dear Lord, in the fullness of thy mercies make me one. Now I further humbly
pray thee, sweet Jesus, the Savior of all that trust in thee, that thou will
have mercy on me, to forgive and pardon all my sins and offenses past, and
present, both original and actual, of omission and commission, of infirmity
or presumption, whatsoever I stand guilty of before theee, and even those
secret sins, that none but thy All-seeing eyes, and my own conscience can
testify against me, which is more then a thousand witnesses: I humbly pray
thee to cast them all behind thy back into the pit of oblivion, never to come
in remembrance with thee; and wash all my faults out of thy sight with that
blessed stream of thine own most precious blood, which thou did so
plentifully shed for us in thy most bitter passion. O blessed Lord, let not all
these thy mercies and benefits which thou have done and purchased for mankind,
be fruitless or in vain toward me, thy poor unworthy servant, whose
confidence is only in thee, that thou will make me a happy partaker of all thy
great benefits and favors: And sweet Jesus, grant through thy mercies, merits
and infinite sufferings, that my transgressions may never be laid to my charge:
for there is no other name under heaven but thine only, blessed Jesus our
righteous Lord, by which we can be saved. To thee be rendered as is due all
honor, praise, thanks, and glory, for ever and ever: Concluding my petition
with that perfect Prayer, which thy self have taught us, saying, Our Father
which art in heaven, etc.

28. A Prayer for Friday night, to God the Son, our blessed Savior.
I Will love thee dearly, O Lord my strength, for thou art my helper, my
refuge, and the lifter up of my head, and I will praise thy name so long as I
have breath. O Lord Christ, by whom was fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, and
in thee all the promises of God are Yea and Amen, to the glory of God the
Father, and the comfort of all thy servants; thou art that pure and innocent
Lamb of God, that was killed and is alive, to thee was given all power, honor
and glory, who lives and reigns for ever in heaven and earth, of whose
Kingdom there is no end; to thee Lord be all possible praise and thanks for
ever. This is my only Lord and blessed Savior Jesus Christ the righteous, who
died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, and art our
Advocate in heaven; so that whatsoever we shall ask the Father in thy name,
according to thy will, if we believe, we shall obtain it for thy sake, who art
the beloved Son of God, in whom only he is well pleased. My dear God, have
mercy upon me a most grievous sinner to pardon all my offenses past, in soul
or body, of ignorance or wilfulness, of frailty, neglect, contempt or wicked
stubbornness; bury them all, sweet Jesus, in thy grave, and cleanse them from
before thine eyes, with thy most precious blood, which thou did of thine own
accord and infinite love shed for us, to free us from eternal death which by
our sins are due; therefore gracious Lord, grant through thy merits, and
manifold sufferings, that my iniquities may never be able to appear before
thee against me, either to accuse or condemn me, neither in this life, at my
death, nor in the great and last judgment: but in that dreadful day, Lord by
all thy mercies I beseech thee, show thy self my loving Savior, to pass by
and cover all my misdeeds with thy righteousness, that so I may escape thy
just wrath which my transgressions have deserved. Now, dear Jesus, while I
live here, make me thy unworthy servant wholly thine, to be thy faithful and
constant disciple, and so to love thee as to keep thy Commandments which are
not grievous, but in obeying them there is great reward; and let me so follow
thee here, as to be lowly and meek, to forsake my self and the world, and to
take up all my crosses with patience, and strive to go after thy steps, though
I be far unable to drink of that heavy and bitter cup of Gods wrath of which
thou so deeply tastedst, who art the propitiation for our sins to deliver us
from that fearful condemnation due unto us: my offenses Lord, I confess did
add unto that weighty burden of Gods heavy displeasure, and our grievous
sins which thou did bear upon the cross for all true believers, who shall
pass from death, to life eternal, which thy sufferings, O Christ, has
purchased for us; whereby I, the unworthiest of thy servants do also hope to
follow thee hereafter, from the grave to heaven at the resurrection of the
just, that according to thy will declared before thy death, all that are thine
shall be with thee, even where thou art to enjoy all bliss and happiness; in
thine own love by thy unmerited mercies, we shall be made partakers with thee
of thy heavenly Kingdom of glory, there to serve and praise thy glorious Name,
who art most worthy, world without end. Amen.

29. The conclusion for Friday night.
LOrd Jesus, vouchsafe to receive me this night into thy gracious protection
both in life and death: And dear Lord, I humbly pray thee to inlighten me with
thy grace rightly and faithfully to serve and obey thee in all true devotion,
and with due submission to thy holy will in all things so long as I live; and
now Lord, I am in health laid down in my bed by thy loving permission, hoping
to take quiet rest and sleep, which I beseech thee to give me, and also I trust
by thy mercy to a wake in thy grace and favor to the morning light again,
because thou gracious Lord, do only me sustain, and wilt in safety thy poor
servant keep; who do most humbly commend and commit my self, my soul and
body, my children and grandchildren, and all I have to thee, from whom I have
received all the good I do enjoy, for thou have showed great mercies unto me;
for which I bless and praise thy holy Name, beseeching thee to give me grace,
never to forget thy benefits, but to continue Lord thy true and faithful
servant unto my death, and for ever. Amen.

30. A Prayer to the blessed Trinity, at first waking for Saturday morning.
I Will praise the Lord because he is good, for his mercy endures for ever; by
whom we live, move, and have our being, our maintenance, safety and
preservation. Now glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, I humbly pray
thee, vouchsafe unto me thy most unworthy servant, such grace and favor to
knit my heart and soul fast to theee, so that my sins, nor my souls
enemies, the wicked world, my own corrupt flesh, nor the malice of the Devil,
may not be able to pluck me out of thy merciful and powerful hands; but Lord
assist me with thine own blessed Spirit, that I may daily continue and
increase in all sincere and perfect love and obedience toward thy Majesty; and
in thy fear and favor, and all other saving graces, to have a good conscience
before thee, with true faith, steadfast hope, and perfect charity unto my life's
end. Amen.

31. A Prayer unto the Trinity for Saturday morning.
O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world, for thou have laid
the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands, and
thou did create, and do govern, dispose and rule the whole world, with all
things therein, according to thy good pleasure. O most divine and adored
Trinity, Father Son and Holy Ghost, three persons, but one true, eternal and
everliving God, to whom be all praise, honor and glory as is right and due for
ever. Thou only by thy word and power did make all things for thine own
glory, especially mankind after thine image in purity and holiness to thine
own service; for by thy ptovidence and mercy comes all good gifts and
blessings unto us, and also deliverances only from thee, of those evils and
dangers which sin has made us subject unto in falling from thee, and our
first integrity, by the subtillty and malice of Satan and our own frailty,
yet of thine own free grace thou did elect a number by thee selected of thy
chosen servants to inherit an eternal Kingdom, with and through thy beloved
Son, whom thou did ordain and send into the world at thine appointed time to
be the redemption of all that believe in thee. O God the Son our blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, it is written of thee that thou should do the will of God the
Father, who ordained thee to be our Redeemer, and were made of God unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and salvation, with glorification
hereafter. Now dear Jesus, who have paid our ransom, even the all-sufficient
and acceptable sacrifice of thine own precious blood to wash away our sins, who
was lifted upon the cross between heaven and earth to make an atonement
betwixt God and man, his heavy wrath and our grievous offenses, and so thou art
become our Priest, to offer up thy innocent self to cleanse us from our
sins, who art our Prophet to instruct and teach us and direct our ways
aright, to show us the path of life, and make the way plain before our faces,
and by thy example, to bear our cross patiently, and follow thee that art the
way, the truth and the life, to lead us to eternal salvation; also thou art
our King to protect, defend, and reign over us in mercy, truth and
righteousness, till thine enemies be made thy footstool, and all that hate
thee be destroyed before thee, for God has put all things in subjection under
his feet, then shall thou judge the whole world in righteousness and equity,
and wilt bring thy servants, to that eternal inheritance, which thou have by
thy merits and sufferings so dearly purchased for us, who were borne unto us to
be the joy and comfort of all people, and the glory and salvation of all that
truly believe and trust in thee our Savior. O God Holy Ghost, the giver,
worker and sealer of all graces unto us; by thee we are called to the knowledge
of God and his saving truth, sanctified to the performance of his will and
Commandments certified by the holy Spirit of our salvation in Christ Jesus,
and by thee applied unto us to be regenerated and borne again by thy holy
operation from sin to grace, to thy glory and our endless felicity. And thy
Spirit also witnesses to our spirits that we are the children of God and
heirs with Christ of the Kingdom of heaven to the eternal comfort of all thy
servants, being by thee also united to our blessed Christ, and sealed to the
day of redemption, and continually assisting us to all goodness. Now great and
glorious Lord God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou have plentifully powered
down thy manifold mercies and favors upon us, and multiplied exceedingly thy
blessings and benefits spiritual and temporal toward us before we had being
in the world, since we were borne, and after death thou have laid up an
eternal weight of glory for all those to possess that truly believe in thee,
which give me grace to do, for none has or ever can deserve them. Oh the
abundant mercy, bounty, and goodness of our gracious God toward mortal
mankind! who can declare the height and depth of Gods unspeakable love, or be
sufficiently thankful to him for such unexpressible benefits; but with David,
we may say (Lord) What is man that thou art mindful of him? Or what shall we
render to thee for all thy mercies, having in us no good at all, but what we
receive from thy self? therefore Lord, add this further grace unto thy former
favors, by the assistance of thine own Spirit, to make us thy unworthy
servants, able, rightly, faithfully, and constantly to fear, love, honor,
serve, obey and praise thy most glorious Name while we live, and for ever and
ever. Amen.

32. A Prayer to God the Holy Ghost, for Saturday night.
O God Holy Ghost, the giver of all graces and and my gracious sanctifier,
comforter and preserver, thou know my infirmities, my inclination to all
evil, and backwardness to any goodness: vouchsafe Lord, to sanctify me thy
poor sinful servant, in soul, body and spirit throughout, to thy true fear,
entire love, and right faithful and constant service, all my time to come: And
be pleased Lord, by thy grace to enlighten my dull soul and understanding,
with the sound knowledge, sincere love, and steadfast belief of thy saving
truth, and keep me ever constant therein. And vouchsafe, dear Lord, to enrich
me thy poor unworthy servant, with the infinite treasure of that heavenly
wisdom from above, which waits about thy Throne, that may teach me thy holy
will, and what is good and acceptable unto thee; and enable me with grace to
do it, that so I may discern between good and evil, and make me shun and
hate that which is evil, and follow and cleave unto that which is good; and to
withdraw my love from this vain world, and fix my affections upon thee my God,
and on heavenly things that are above, that my chief treasure may be settled
there in heaven, and my heart also; and so I shall first seek to obtain that
which is most needful, even thy glory, thy favor, and thy blessed Kingdom,
and then Lord, I know thou will supply all the defects of grace in my soul,
and heal all the infirmities of my body; but chiefly vouchsafe daily to
continue and increase all spiritual graces in my soul by thy mercy and mighty
power, O my blessed Lord God: to which end, O gracious Spirit, give me an
upright and penitent heart, an humble and lowly spirit, a quiet recollected
mind freed from the vanities and cares of this present world, and the love of
this vile life; but Lord teach me with Mary first and above all things to seek
after thee my God, thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, so that I may
have grace wholly to devote and dedicate my self, my time and best endeavors
unto thy true and faithful service, and daily study and strive to do thy holy
will in all things, and seek thy glory here, that so I may be partaker of thy
heavenly Kingdom hereafter. And dear Lord Holy Ghost, inspire me with thy
grace daily to hear and read thy holy and blessed word as I ought to do, and
that I may so employ my time therein as to frame my life hereafter to thy glory
and my souls good. And grant me graciously, O God, to choose, to speak, and
to walk in the ways of truth and righteousness, and to set thy heavy
judgments against sin continually before my face to deter and make me daily
to remember my own last end, and by thy assistance to prepare for it, and to
consider the end in all my actions before I do them, that I may never do
amiss; and let me still remember thy all-seeing eyes are ever upon our ways
that I may not displease or offend thee in any thing: But Lord, indue me with
thy holy Spirit to direct my heart and all my ways aright before thee, that so
thou may witness to my spirit that I am the child of God, and ever
continue unto me that unspeakable comfort to give me the joyful hope of my
salvation, through my Lord Jesus Christ, unto my end: and in my end especially
establish me with thy free spirit to work in my soul all saving graces that
may make me acceptable in thy sight, through my Lord Jesus Christ, for whose
sake I beseech thee further to extend thy goodness toward me, to forgive all my
sins and offenses that I have done before thee in my whole life past, and
preserve me in soul and body from all sin and evil, either committing or
falling on me; but dear Lord, vouchsafe daily to supply and bestow upon me
all the benefits and blessings necessary for this present life; but chiefly be
pleased to sanctify my soul and body unto thy faithful service, and indue me
with all saving graces for my salvation both in life and death, that so I may
be able rightly and constantly to serve and please thee whilst I live here,
that also by thy gracious assistance I may obtain a place hereafter to live
with thee eternally, O Holy Ghost, and my blessed Lord God, to whom be all
thanks and praise for ever. Amen.

33. The conclusion for Saturday night in bed to the weeks Prayers for mornings
and nights.
I Most humbly beseech thee, my Lord God, mercifully to look upon me and my
manifold infirmities, and for Jesus my Saviors sake, vouchsafe to forgive and
pardon all my sins and grievous offenses that I have committed in thy sight
all the days of my life past; and in thy great mercy turn from me all those
evils that my transgressions have justly deserved; and Lord, grant me thy
preventing grace and fatherly providence to be still with me to preserve me
at all times from falling into any sin or evil, either to offend thee my
God, or to hurt my own soul. And vouchsafe, Lord, so to direct and dispose
the heart and ways of me (thy most unworthy servant) toward the right
performance of all duties and services that I owe unto thee my God, and the
happy obtaining (by my Lord Jesus) of everlasting salvation to my own self;
that amongst all the changes, chances and adversities of this miserable,
mutable, and mortal life, I may ever be defended by thy ready help and favor
from falling into sin, shame, harm or danger, either in soul or body, and may
be directed and assisted by thy grace and providence to walk in the ways of
righteousness and true holiness before thee, that thou my Lord Holy Ghost,
may guide me in all things I go about, to do that which may be most
serviceable, acceptable, and best pleasing in the sight of my Lord God, to whom
be all praise, honor, power and eternal glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The end of the second Book.
BOOK III.
Short Prayers which may belong to any the three Books, when time serves, not
for longer devotions.
1. A short Preface before other prayers or petitions.
O Lord Holy Ghost, who best know my manifold infirmities, have mercy and
pity upon me; and vouchsafe to prevent, or to banish and drive away all evil
hindrances and temptations that may withdraw my heart from God in the offering
up of my prayers and humble petitions unto thy Majesty; and be pleased Lord, to
sanctify, teach and assist me herein with thy holy Spirit and grace, that I
may rightly and faithfully perform this duty and service before thee, to thy
glory and my good, and comfort of my soul through Christ Jesus. Amen.

2. A short thanksgiving at first sight of the morning light.
MY blessed Lord God, I most humbly praise thee for thy gracious preservation
of me with quiet rest and health this night past, and bringing me in safety to
this light; Lord bless and sanctify me this day and ever unto thy faithful
service, and keep me always in thy true faith, fear, favor and ready
obedience; and make me constantly and unfaignedly thine all my life time, but
in my death especially, that when it pleases thee to call for me out of this
miserable world, thou may bring me to eternal salvation by thine own merits
and mere mercy, sweet Jesus, I most humbly beseech thee. So be it.

3. A Prayer for help in present temptation, in the time of prayer to our Lord
Jesus, who overcame and subdued the old tempter, the subtle Serpent our
everlasting enemy, from whom God defend us.
OH my God, heavenly Father, who have made and see all hearts, and know my
great affection and fervent desire rightly to serve thee, and my weakness and
frailty in performance thereof, have pity on my infirmities, and assist me with
thy grace. And sweet Jesus my Savior, who did suffer thy self to be
tempted by the Devil, that thou might overcome the tempter, and succor all
those that are tempted; to thee Lord, I call and pray, for help and defense
against this malicious adversary. O God the Holy Ghost, indue me with thy
blessed Spirit and power so to resist him that he may fly from me, and banish
thou Lord, all wicked hindrances and temptations away from thy poor servant in
performing all my duties toward thee. Now dear God, have mercy upon me most
miserable sinner, and in thy infinite mercy drive away this subtle enemy of my
poor soul, with his pernicious agents, the vain world, and the corruptions
of our own nature, let them not prevail over me at any time, for these are
very ready to assault, tempt and draw my mind from thee in all my devotions
and services that I endeavor to offer unto thy Majesty; and to make my prayers
vain and void, and drive me to fall into wicked neglect toward my God,
whereby to prevent, destroy, and divert all my comforts and hopes in thee O
Lord, which is the whole life of my soul. But Gracious God Almighty, whose
power and strength is above all, vouchsafe to overcome and banish all from me,
never to return again; and let thy blessed Spirit rest constantly in me to
withstand all disturbances in the performance of my duty before thee; and dear
Lord, make new, clean, and upright my heart, and frame it to thy holy will,
that so by thy gracious assistance, I may faithfully serve and honor thee,
please and praise thee my God, now and at all times, in this life and for ever,
to thy glory, and my eternal comfort. Amen.

The afternoon prayers at four a clock for each day in the week. Monday. 1. A
thanks giving to the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
O My good and gracious God, great and many are thy mercies and blessings I
have received from thee both spiritual and temporal, from time to time; and
now what shall I render unto thee, having no good to return, but the poor
fruit of my lips, which is nothing unto thee but the performance of our duties
to praise thy great Name, and to acknowledge all thy benefits? therefore now I
will give thanks to God the Father, our gracious Creator, who so loved us when
we were his enemies, and had lost our selves by sin, that he ordained, and
after sent his only begotten and beloved Son into the world, that whosoever,
believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life; Christ being the
propitiation for our sins, that we may live by faith through him. And also I
yield all possible praise unto my blessed Savior, who became man, and in his
infinite love willingly laid down his life for us, and washed away our sins
with his own precious blood, and made us by his merits and sufferings, Kings
and Priests unto God, and adopted children to his Father, and heirs with
himself of an eternal Kingdom, by whose resurrection we have a lively hope
of an inheritance that cannot be shaken, and withers not, reserved in heaven
for us. Now to thee Lord Holy Ghost, the preserver, sanctifier, and comforter
of mankind, by whom we are sealed unto the day of redemption, and by whose
holy working we are united unto Jesus our blessed head, and are certified by
thy Spirit, witnessing to our spirits that we are the children of God to our
great comfort; and further by thy assistance and grace, our weak prayers are
rightly and effectually offered up unto the Lord our God. Now to thee, Almighty
God, three Persons and glorious Trinity, but one true and everliving God, from
whose merciful hands we daily receive all the good we do enjoy in this
present world, with further and full assurance of far greater happiness by thy
infinite mercies in the life to come, be all praise and glory. Amen.

Tuesday. 2. A Prayer to the Trinity for grace and true faith.
O Sweet Jesus Christ, Son of God, who art the divine word, without whom
nothing was made, and being made had been utterly lost, had thou not been our
powerful and merciful Redeemer; thou art the way, the truth, and the life,
and thou who have said, that no man can come unto the Father but by thee, who
came into the world, and did willingly lay down thine own life only to
save sinners by thy grace, of whom I am chief; have mercy upon me miserable
sinner, who can of my self neither will nor perform any good work toward
God as I ought to do* but vouchsafe Lord, to indue me with grace to serve and
obey thee, to learn thy will and to do it, and through faith to lay hold of
thy mercies, that so thou my Savior may in thy righteousness present me to
thy heavenly Father, that he may look upon me poor sinful creature, through
thee his dear Son, and for thy sake to receive and accept me into his gracious
favor, to pardon all my sins, and save my soul, through thy perfect
righteousness, and manifold sufferings all performed for me. Now thou Lord
have further said that none can come unto thee except the Father draw him,
therefore I most humbly pray thee, O God the Father, by that infinite love to
wards mankind, which caused thee to send down thy beloved Son out of thine
own bosom into this wicked world, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life: I earnestly pray thee, O God the Father, to
draw me to thy Son Jesus, that I may lay fast hold by faith on him to be my
Savior, and to be his faithful and constant servant, and to be made through
him, and by thy mercy a happy member of him our blessed head, and then I shall
be sure never to fall into condemnation, but by steadfast faith in him obtain
eternal salvation: And dear Lord Holy Ghost, the giver of grace, by whom we
are joined to our Lord and head Christ, and sanctified to a new and holy life:
Lord cleanse and frame my heart and soul by the holy working and assistance of
thy Spirit and grace, unto the right, faithful and constant service of my Lord
God my Savior Jesus, with thee O Holy Ghost, so long as I live: Lord daily
increase my faith and all saving graces in me for my salvation, and may by thee
be directed and lead into the ways of righteousness, until thou have brought
me unto endless happiness through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Wednesday. 3. A prayer to God for charity.
O Merciful Lord God, the giver of all graces, I humbly beseech thee to frame
my heart, will and affections, in all ready obedience to thy most holy will and
Commandments in all things, especially in the works of mercy, and charity,
they being a sweet smelling sacrifice wherewith thou art well pleased, and
wherein we may imitate thee, and shall thereby gain the honor to be made like
unto thy self, and be known to be one of thy disciples if we love our
brethren as our selves. O God, as thou have blessed me of thy mere goodness
with an estate above some others, to give me the grace of compassion and
charity, and enlarge my heart toward thy service, to show mercy unto them that
want, as thou have been merciful unto me, that I may willingly distribute,
communicate to those that are in need, and be liberal of my earthly vanishing
wealth to relieve thy childrens necessities, for thy sake, that are dear unto
thee, who were free of thy very blood, and sparedst not thine own life to
ransom them and me from utter destruction: and so the loins and bellies of
the poor shall praise thee and bless me in their comforts; and thou may
vouchsafe to receive and accept at my poor hands that small mi^e of
thankfulness and obedience toward thee my God, from whose most gracious hand
I have received many bountiful blessings and benefits throughout my whole
life, which let me never forget, gratefully to acknowledge while ^ have
breath, and to praise thy holy Name (...) ^ll thy mercies now and for evermore.
Amen d^^re God. Amen.

Thursday. 4. A Prayer to the Trinity for spiritual graces.
MOst gracious Lord God, who did create man of the dust of the earth, and
know we are by nature the children of wrath, and wholly inclined to evil;
for thou best understandest how unapt and unable I sinful creature am to do
any good before thee, much less to call upon thy great and glorious Name as I
ought to do, yet thou in mercy have appointed prayer to be the chief means
betwixt thy great Majesty, and the unworthiness of us thy poor sinful
servants, whereby to declare our wants, griefs, and desires unto thee, who art
our only hope and help: Therefore dear Lord, indue me thy unworthy servant
with thy true spirit of grace and prayer, to teach me how to pray as I ought,
that thereby I may have power and strength to withstand all evil temptations
that seek to draw me from thy service, and by thy assistance that I may be able
so to resist the Devil that he may fly from me in the performance of all
duties toward thee; and give me grace with faith and fervency, humility and
true devotion, to cry and pray daily and constantly unto thee for relief and
distress in all my troubles and wants, and faithfully to call and rely upon
thee for all thy blessings and benefits both spiritual and temporal, to be
bestowed on my soul and body as thou shall think fittest; that so I may
render all thanks and magnify thy Name, as I am right bound to do, for all
thy mercies and favors vouchsafed unto me the most unworthiest of all thy
servants from time to time. And I humbly pray thee, O Lord, to give me the
blessed gift of true faith, without which it is impossible for me to please
thee my God, but thereby I may lay hold, and rightly apply unto my own soul
all the infinite benefits purchased by the bitter death and passion, and
precious bloud-shedding of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, that I may bring
forth the fruits of righteousness and true holiness before thee as becomes
that Saints and servants; whereby I may glorify thee, and have assurance to my
own conscience that I am thine by constantly obeying thy will: And also Lord
grant me hearty and unfaigned repentance and true sorrow for all my sins
original and actual, in omitting the good I ought to do, and committing the
evil I should not do against thee, that so I may obtain pardon of all my
trespasses, through the merits of Jesus Christ the righteous; and let thy
blessed Spirit produce in me amendment of my life all my time to come, and
assist me with thy grace to shun and hate all approaches of evil, and Lord
show me the way of life, and turn my steps into the right paths that I may
wallke in true obedience to all thy holy Commandments. Now dear God of thy
mercy, give me the true fear of thy holy Name, with assurance of thy gracious
favor toward me, and continual joy and comfort in the Holy Ghost, that I may
strive always to keep faith and a good conscience before thee toward all; and
indue me with grace, will, understanding and ability, to do good works to thy
glory, and bring comfort and profit to my soul in praying, reading, and
hearing of thy most holy word at all times, and most devout love toward thy
Majesty, with affection to all my brethren, thy children, servants and all the
days of my life to come, by thy gracious assistance dear God. Amen.

Friday. 5. A Prayer for defense against our souls enemies, in all temptations.
GOod Lord God, who know the power and great malice of our spiritual
enemies, from who^ none can defend or deliver us, but only thou, O Lord, whose
power and strength is over and above all; and if thou please to receive me into
thy gracious protection, who can hurt or pluck me out of thy merciful hands?
Therefore I most humbly beseech thee, O God, to defend me both in soul and
body, in life and death, from all the temptations of my own wretched nature
within me, the wicked inticements of this vain world round about me, with the
malicious snares, and evil temptations of the Devil that are ever at my back
ready to entrap me, and draw my soul from thee my God and all goodness, and to
lead me captive into all wickedness, sin and evil, to separate me from
thee, all which like roaring Lions seek to devour and destroy me
everlastingly. But I most humbly pray unto thee, O Lord, who understandest my
frailties, to preserve and deliver me from all their assaults, that they may
never be able to prevail over me to draw me to sin against thee my God, in
any thing; neither suffer them to prevent, hinder, disturb or carry away my
mind, or possess my vain heart with wandering thoughts in the performance of
any holy duty or service toward thy Majesty; nor give them power to bring
those harms, dangers or mischiefs upon me either in soul or body which they
desire to do. But let thy blessed Spirit so fully possess me, and ever direct
and assist me in all my ways, to do all things in a right, faithful and
acceptable manner before thee, that so at all times thy Spirit may witness
unto my spirit, that I am thy child and servant; and of thy infinite mercy
good Lord, vouchsafe thou always to say unto my soul, especially at my death,
that thou art my God, my help and my salvation for ever: and by thy grace make
my heart and soul to answer and perform unto thee again, that I am, and will
be thy true, faithful and obedient servant unto my last breath for ever. Amen.

Saturday. 6. A Prayer for the true spirit of prayer, or a meditation. With a
short prayer to Jesus our Savior.
Dear Lord Holy Ghost, the helper of our infirmities, the preserver and
sanctifier of mankind, I most humbly beg of thee to indue me thy unworthy
sinful servant, with thy true Spirit of grace and prayer, that I may rightly
perform that duty toward thee of calling upon thy holy Name, and all other
thy service this day and at all times, with true and right devotion, that so my
petitions being humbly presented to thy great Majesty lowly and meekly on the
knees of my heart and body; they may by thy merciful assistance be lifted up
and ascend by the wings of faith and devotion unto the highest heavens, and
there with confidence through my Savior Jesus, enter into the glorious ears
and presence of Almighty God, where all mercy, grace and goodness abounds.
And then my supplications by thy favor, may be heard and accepted by thee my
God, to prevail and draw down from thy merciful hand all graces and
blessings needful, upon me thy poor creature both in soul and body; and so
my unworthy sacrifice of due praise and thanks that I offer unto thee may be
received and accepted by thee, the Lord of all mercies, who does often take in
good part even the will for the deed, from thy frail unworthy servants, and
then my poor prayers shall bring much joy and comfort to me, and give glory to
thee, my Lord. To whom (as of right belongs) be all honor and praise, for
evermore. Amen.

A short Prayer to our blessed Savior Jesus, to be joined to the former
prayers.
OH my dear Lord Jesus, who did in thy infinite mercy give thy innocent
self to death for me a poor miserable sinner; Lord by thy grace make me to
dedicate and offer up my self a living sacrifice holy and acceptable unto
thee, in daily striving rightly and faithfully to serve and obey thee, that I
may be wholly thine; and as thou have bought me with an unvaluable treasure,
even thine own most precious blood, so sweet Jesus by thy holy Spirit unite me
unseparably unto thee, my blessed head; and by thy assistance, that I may
become a new creature, to hate and forsake all sins, the vain world, and my
wicked self, and to be a true, careful and constant servant unto thee, to
fear, love, honor, and glorify thy great and heavenly Name, who art the
comfort and salvation of all that believe and trust in thee, which Lord, let me
unfaignedly do, so long as I live.

7. A Prayer to God, the Lord of all grace and mercy, containing seven humble
petitions from a penitent sinner: 1. For true faith. 2. For the Holy Ghost. 3.
For wisdom. 4. For the fear of God. 5. For the love of God, and charity to
our neighbors. 6. For repentance and true contrition of heart. 7. And for the
grace and right spirit of prayer.
O Most bountiful Lord God, which gives to all men liberally, and reproacheth
none, if we ask in faith and waver not: and our blessed Savior makes us a
large promise, saying, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and you shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you: And whatsoever you shall ask in my
Name I will do it, if you believe when you pray that you shall have it; for
your heavenly Father if you ask in my name, will give the Holy Ghost to them
that desire him, and wisdom to such as ask it of God, and no good thing shall
be wanting or withheld from them which fear the Lord, and walk uprightly in
his sight; so that we may well say with David, What is man that thou Lord art
mindful of him, and do visit him with thy mercy, and crownest him with
glory and honor? Most merciful Lord, these thy gracious promises and great
goodness toward mortal man, imboldneth me, though a miserable sinner, and
most unworthy of thy favors, now to offer up my supplications, and become an
humble suter to thy Majesty, to beg these great blessings at thy hands, who
have justly deserved grievous punishments from thee for my offenses. But of
thine own mere mercy, dear God, who desire not the death of a sinner, but
our repentance, conversion, and salvation; and for thy best beloved Sons sake,
in whom thou will deny us nothing, vouchsafe to incline thine ear to receive
the humble petitions of me thy poor servant, who presumes to crave of thee,
the Father of mercy, and the original of all goodness, from whom only
comes all good and perfect gifts, the seven spiritual and heavenly graces,
wherewith to vanquish and banishus from the seven dangerous deadly sins,
which like Serpents slay and destroy so many souls, the least sin we commit,
being sufficient to condemn us for ever. And now first, Good God, I humbly
pray thee to bestow upon me the blessed and most needful gift of true faith,
without which it is impossible to please thee, whereby I may steadfastly believe
and trust in thy goodness, and lay fast hold of all thy mercies and gracious
promises, especially upon the merits and sufferings of thy dear Son, and my
Savior Jesus for my redemption, and by thy grace rightly to apply them all to
my salvation. And grant I may with thy assistance, bring forth such fruits of
true holiness and righteousness, as may be most to thy glory and the peace
and comfort of mine own conscience. And since I have begun to speak to thee,
O Lord, who am but dust and ashes, vouchsafe for Jesus sake, further to give me
the most excellent gift of the Holy Ghost, to unite me inseparably to my
blessed head and Savior Christ, and inspire my soul with all saving graces,
which may change all the evil in me to goodness, darkness to light, vices to
virtues, and so wholly to cleanse and sanctify my soul, body, and spirit,
throughout, that I may be made perfect to every good work, and renewed and
enabled to all obedience, godliness and holiness of life before thee: and I
also most humbly beseech thee (O gracious God) to enrich me thy poor unworthy
servant, with the unvaluable treasure of that heavenly wisdom from above,
which abides about thy Throne, to direct and reform my heart, and all my
ways aright in thy sight, and to teach me thy holy will, and what is good and
acceptable unto thee, and enable me with grace to do it; and likewise Lord
indue me with the true understanding of thy holy Laws, that I may keep them
with my whole heart unto my end? Now, O my Lord, we are taught by Solomon, That
the beginning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord, and the knowledge of divine
things, true understanding; therefore I do most humbly entreat thee to knit my
rebellious heart to the holy fear of thy glorious Name, who only art to be
feared, with the due consideration of thy righteous and terrible judgments,
who can cast both body and soul into hell; let this detain me from falling
into any evil or offense toward thee, and thereby also draw my sinful soul
unto thy faithful service, with true contrition for all my past transgressions
against thee. But especially, good God, be pleased to indue my poor soul with
the infinite gift and blessing of thy sincere and perfect love of thy divine
and heavenly Majesty who art the true and only good. And, O God, grant that I
may love and honor thee above and beyond all other things, with all my heart,
all my soul, all my strength, and with all my mind, setting my affections not
on things that are below, but upon heavenly treasures that are above, which are
permanent and fade not, where my sweet Savior who dyed for me on earth, now
lives and reigns with thee in heaven for ever, and makes intercession for
me there, that by thy assistance I may continually study and strive, carefully
and willingly to perform all duties toward thee in obeying thy Commandments
with an upright and perfect heart before thee: and in all true charity being
ready to do good to others as thou command, and to love my neighbor as my
self, even my enemies for thy sake. Most merciful Lord, who know our
frail and wretched natures, and desire the conversion, and not the confusion
of poor miserable sinners; thou sweet Jesus, came to call, not the righteous,
but sinners to repentance, such as I am, and to save that which was lost; Oh
let not my poor soul be lost which cost thee thy dear precious blood to
save; but Lord, make me by true faith lay hold of my redemption by thee, and
all other thy works of mercy; and though I have grievously offended in thy
sight, yet I beseech thee, withold not thy favor from me thy poor sinful
servant, but give me the grace of unfeigned sorrow and repentance, with a true
contrite spirit, and a broken heart for all my sins committed before thee,
from the greatest to the least, wherein I have displeased thee, by thought,
desire, word or deed; hating, judging and condemning my self, for so offending
thee my Lord God; and most earnestly and humbly crave thy assistance, that I
may now happily return to thee with a penitent and grieved heart, from whom I
have so unhappily gone astray by a vain corrupt mind and sinful soul,
whereby I hope in thy great mercy to escape thy just wrath and condemnation due
to my grievous offenses; and may also obtain thy gracious pardon for all my
passed misdeeds, with the assistance of thy holy Spirit, which I most humbly
crave, to amend my former faults, and to reform my ways the rest of my life
in all things according to thy blessed will. Now lastly, O gracious Lord our
righteousness, my sure hope and heavenly Father, the fountain of all
goodness, in whom is all mercy and compassion, from thee only we receive all
good gifts and graces; for thou hear the prayers, and to thee shall all
flesh come, who understandest our wants before we ask, and know our
wretched natures and disabilities to all goodness, so that thy grace only must
work both the will and the deed of all that is good in us, and then of thine
own mercy accept the same through the merits and mediation of our Savior
Jesus; so doubling thy favors toward us miserable mortal creatures, whose
hearts are vile and false unto our selves and to thee also, and our thoughts
are only evil continually: Therefore sweet Jesus the mirror of mercy,
vouchsafe to hear and help me, to call and draw me to thy self, and knit
fast my heart and soul unto thy true fear, devout love, and faithful service
for ever; that so by thy self. I may be enabled to run willingly and joyfully
after thee, rightly and readily to perform all duties toward thee, and keep
all thy Commandments constantly. Oh gracious Lord Holy Ghost, our blessed
preserver, comforter and sanctifier, soften thou my hardened heart by thy
grace, and inlighten my dull and sinful soul, with all the powers thereof, my
understanding, memory, will and affection, with all saving graces; especially
as the chief means to gain the rest, vouchsafe to inspire me with thy true
spirit of grace and prayer rightly, humbly, fervently and faithfully to call
daily on thy sacred Name, and to worship thee in spirit and truth, even as thou
requirest to be served, that so by thy favor I may obtain grace, power and
strength, to banish all wandering thoughts, and to vanquish and resist all
wicked hindrances cast in by the devil or his agents, the world, and mine own
corruptions, which distract and disturb my serious and devout attendance of
both soul and body in rightly performing this du^y of prayer unto my Lord God,
whereby I may be duly thankful for all thy benefits and mercies, already
bestowed on me and mine, and also to beg and obtain the gracious countenance
of all thy blessings spiritual and temporal, in whatsoever thou see
necessary for this present life, and that which is to come; but more especially
in giving me all saving graces, which may fit, prepare and further me here for
thy heavenly Kingdom hereafter. To which my Savior and Redeemer bring me by
all the merits and sufferings, and in the fullness of thy mercies, I humbly
beseech thee, dear Jesus. Amen, Amen.

1. A sorrowful widows prayer and petition unto the gracious protector and
defender of widows, and father of the fatherless, which I composed shortly
after the death of my dear husband: And this may also serve any other upon the
like occasion.
ALmighty God, and most gracious Lord, who art full of pity and goodness,
vouchsafe to hear, assist, and accept the humble devotion and supplication of
me thy poor unworthy servant, in Jesus Christ thy dear Son. Most mighty God,
whose mercies are above all thy great works, and whose power and divine
providence directs and disposes all things to the best, for those that do
love and depend upon thee. Thou have ever been pleased to show mercy unto me
thy poor handmaid, the most sinful of all thy servants, and have taken care
of me even from my mothers womb, and vouchsafed me many benefits and
blessings, and delivering me out of very great crosses and troubles, still
holding me up by thy gracious hand from sinking in the midst of a sea of
sorrows; and like a most loving Father in my diverse change of fortunes, have
at all times provided for me and mine beyond our deserts, or the worlds
expectation, having in thy merciful goodness made me see with comfort all my
children, who were left destitute, now by thy provident provision and blessing,
well settled for this life: All which by thy infinite favors, Lord make me ever
thankfully to acknowledge, and grant that I and all mine, may serve, obey,
praise, and glorify thy great and blessed Name for ever, and ever. And as thou
Lord, have stretched forth thy hand of bounty to supply all my worldly wants;
so dear God, vouchsafe more especially to extend thy gracious care over my
soul, to prevent and keep me from sin, and indue me with all spiritual
graces, so that my whole life and ways may ever be serviceable and acceptable
to thy heavenly Majesty. And now, O Lord, since it has been thy will and
pleasure, to take away, and call to thy self my dear husband out of this
transitory life before me, and to bereave me of him who was my chief comfort
in this world: I humbly beseech thee, vouchsafe to take me into thy care, and
give me grace to choose with Mary. that better part which may never be taken
from me, chiefly to serve and follow thee, that so I may turn this freedom
from the bond of marriage only the more to thy service, and may become thy bond
woman to serve and praise thee day and night like Hanna, so long as I live. And
Lord, assist me with thy grace to obey thee in all things according to thy holy
will, daily endeavoring to work out my salvation with fear and trembling, and
continually striving by a godly life and holy conversation, to make my calling
and election sure, which is one of the chiefest things needful. Now dear God,
make me to change and far exceed the fervent affection and careful observance
I have lived in toward my husband, into a holy fear, with devout and sincere
love of thy Majesty and service, and due watchfulness over my self, that I
displease not thee my God in any thing. And good God, by thy holy Spirit,
withdraw my heart from the covetous seeking, desiring and longing after the
vanities, riches, delights, preferments, or vain pleasures of this wicked
deceitful world, but instead of my former care and troubles in worldly
businesses, to please my husband, and for the good of my children, let me now
bend my mind, and wholly set my heart and soul, to seek after thee my good
God, thy glory, thy Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, that so I may
walk before thee all the rest of my days, with an upright, faithful, and
perfect heart in thy sight. Lastly, indue me with true thankfulness to thy
gracious Majesty for all thy manifold mercies vouchsafed unto me, Lord give me
grace to use those benefits thou bestowest on me conscionably as may be best
pleasing unto thee, and to employ all I have to thy glory, the relievement of
thy truest servants, and my own comfort, especially the good of my soul in
performing my duty toward thee, in striving to do all the good I can, while I
have time, for I desire so to use and receive thy blessings here, as I may be
also received into the place of eternal blessedness hereafter, through Jesus
Christ my Lord. Finally, I most humbly beg that thou will vouchsafe to be a
loving and gracious Father in thy care and comfort to me, and all mine, and let
thy mercy, blessing and favor, rest always upon me, my children and
grandchildren kindred and friends, with all that thou have given thy poor
servant, who does in all humility commend and commit my self, my ways and
works, wholly to thy most blessed protection, and direction, to dispose
according to thy good pleasure; that so I may do all things to thy glory here,
and by thy mercy be a happy partaker of thy eternal Kingdom of glory
hereafter, through Jesus Christ my Lord, Amen.

2. A Prayer to the God of mercy in time of affliction.
O Most gracious Lord God, the original of all goodness, and fountain of
mercy, thou have commanded thy poor servants to call upon thee in the day of
trouble, that thou may deliver us, and we may glorify thee; great are the
troubles of thy children, but thou deliverest them out of all; thine eyes, O
Lord, are upon thy servants, and thine ears are open to their cry, for thou
art near unto all that call upon thee in truth, and wilt save such as be
afflicted in spirit: the sorrows of my heart are increased, Lord draw me out of
my troubles; the poor cries, and the Lord hears, he prepares their hearts,
and bends his ears to them, and delivers them out of all their fear and
care; for the hope afflicted shall not perish before thee for ever. The Lord
also will be a refuge in due time, even in affliction, and they that know thy
Name will trust in thee, for thou will not fail them that seek thee: have
mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my troubles which I suffer of them that hate me
without cause, thou have been my defense, and have lifted me up from the gates
of death: O Lord my God, in thee I put my trust, save me from them that
persecute me, and deliver me in thy good time. But, dear God, I most humbly
confess that my sins are so many and grievous, as they have deserved far
greater punishment then I am able to bear, and I can hope for no help or
release but from thine own goodness, who art my only hope and sure refuge;
for thou have mercy on whom thou will have mercy, and take compassion on whom
thou please; but I acknowledge that my sufferings are not answerable to my
sins, for thou have corrected me with favor, not in rigor; therefore if thou
should kill me, yet will I trust in thee, for thy mercy exceeds all thy
works, and under the shadow of thy wings will I rest in confidence, till all
my afflictions be overpassed. Yet Lord, if it seem good unto thee to continue
these heavy troubles and visitations, that now lie sore on me, I humbly pray
thee to sanctify all my afflictions unto me thy poor servant, which I hope
are but fatherly chastisements for the amendment of my faults, and not the
fearful judgments and ensigns of thy wrathful displeasure; from which Lord,
for thy Sons sake, preserve me ^^y poor sinful creature, and lay no more
upon me then thou will make me able to undergo as I ought to do, saying with
Ely, It is the Lord, let him do what he pleases: and make me to consider like
Job, that naked I came into the world, and naked I shall return, the Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken, praised be his name for ever; but thou Lord art
my stength and my stay in all distractions. I further humbly beseech thee, to
give me grace and patience in all things, and at all times, to keep my self
from any offense toward thee, by repining at thy just and favorable
corrections for my transgressions; but grant that I may as Christ has taught
us, meekly and humbly, submit my self to thy most righteous and blessed will,
that so I may (by thy assistance) make the best and right use of whatsoever
thou sendest, that all may be to the best for thy honor, and turn to my good
when thou art pleased to give a happy issue to this temptation, and in thy good
time to ease and deliver me out of these great adversities to thy glory. But I
know that the afflictions of this present world, are not worthy of the glory
that shall be revealed to us hereafter; yet I humbly desire if it so please
thee, that I may live the rest of my days in peace and quiet, constantly to
attend thy service, and seek after my own salvation. Lord be merciful to this
whole Kingdom, now in very great distraction, distress and misery, and also
to all my fellow members in thy whole Church universal, wheresoever any of us
are afflicted, inwardly or outwardly in body or mind, grant us either speedy
delivery, or else grace to perform thy good pleasure, and with patience to
wait thy leisure, until thou please to have mercy on us to our release and
comfort, and to thy own praise and glory, who never failest those that depend
upon thee. Now I most humbly acknowledge with all possible praise and thanks,
which I am bound ever to render unto thee, that thou have formerly delivered me
out of many sorrows, ears, troubles and vexations, both in body and mind,
and also I bless and magnify thy holy Name for all thy great and manifold
blessings which thou have bestowed upon me, thy most unworthy servant; and I
pray thee Lord, of thy infinite goodness, not to let my sins and wickedness
hinder thy mercies toward me, but pardon and cast all my offenses out of thy
sight, through Jesus Christ my Savior; and vouchsafe always to continue thy
grace and favor to me, and especially in daily renewing all spiritual graces
in me, that so, when, or how soon soever thou have appointed an end unto my
days here, I may then obtain the end of my faith and hope, even thy glory and
my own salvation, through thy beloved Son and my only Savior Jesus: for whose
sake, Lord hear me, and grant these my humble requests, with all things else
which thou best know necessary either for my soul or body, for this life,
or for the life to come, in which, dear God, make me in thy manifold mercies
partaker of eternal happiness, for evermore. Amen.

3. A Prayer for due preparation before the holy Communion of the Lords Supper.
O Most gracious God, and our heavenly and merciful Father in Jesus Christ,
who hate nothing thou have made, and desire not the death of sinners, but
that we should return to thee and live; thou absolvest all those that truly
repent and believe thy holy Gospel, and did send thine only and beloved Son
Jesus into the world, to seek those that were lost, and to save sinners by thy
grace, of whom I am chief. O sweet Jesus, thou call to thee, those that are
heavy laden and truly penitent, and weary of their burdensome sins, that
thou may mercifully ease and refresh them; thou came to call sinners to
repentance, and restore us that were lost by sin, and to lay down thine own
life to redeem mankind from eternal death, and have left us a gracious
remembrance thereof in thy most holy Supper of that unspeakable work of our
redemption, which we are exceedingly bound often to celebrate, in
acknowledgement of thy unexpressible mercy and favor toward us. But oh my
Lord! I tremble and fear, knowing that I am a wretched and wicked sinner, and
my offenses have made me abominable in thy sight, being wholly corrupt both in
soul and body, from the crown of my head, to the soal of the foot, the worst
deserving of all thy servants, and if thou should strictly mark what I have
done amiss, or enter into judgment with me, how should I dare to come into
thy presence having nothing to answer for my self, but (to cry with the
Publican) I have grievously offended, Lord be merciful to me a sinner? (and
as another says of himself, how should I presume to appear in the presence
of God, can the Lord be merciful to so miserable a sinner as I am?) But Lord,
I have learned, and do believe that there is mercy with thee, and plentiful
redemption; therefore we are infinitely bound to love and fear thee; but I do
humbly confess that I am altogether unworthy of my self to approach unto thy
blessed table, but thou Lord that give both the will and the deed in all good
works, so Lord I pray thee to work in me a due preparation for thy
acceptance, and then enable me to perform my duty herein in a right and
faithful manner, for there at thy heavenly banquet, thou Lord, Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, art present in thy great Majesty beholding our unperfect devotions,
wants in preparation, and manifold infirmities; but thou Lord by thy powerful
grace cleansest us from sin, and changest us into new creatures, and in thy
highest bounty giving thy self really unto us to be received spiritually by
faith, and by the working of the Holy Ghost; thou art the heavenly food of our
souls unto eternal life, pouring such great and wonderful treasure into
poor earthen vessels, as we are, and and so making us partakers of all the
benefits of thy unspeakable merits, and bitter passions and sufferings. Oh
Lord, who invitest me thither, continue thy mercy to perfect the good work
thou have begun for my salvation, and heal thou my corrupt soul, converting
my straying and deceitful heart, and knit it unto thee my God, and by thy
grace prepare and fit me, rightly, reverently, faithfully and worthily, to
receive that high and divine mystery, in all humility, contrition, true faith
and charity, with such devotion as I ought to do. Now dear Lord, give me
grace rightly to understand, and duly to consider and ponder of thy greatness
to fear thee, of thy goodness to love thee, of thy power and manifold mercies
toward me, ever to believe and trust in thee: And also to look into my own
rebellious disobedience, and shameful ingratitude toward thee, and my most
miserable estate, who am in danger of everlasting damnation by my innumerable
transgressions committed against thee; Lord touch my hardened heart with the
oil of thy grace, that it may be fastened to receive a sound and sensible
feeling and sight of all my grievious sins past, both in committing the evil
I was forbidden, and omitting the good I am commanded, with a true sense of thy
just wrath against me for the same, which may work in me by thy assistance,
such unfaigned sorrow and penitencie, even to break my stony heart with hatred
of my self and all sin for so offending thee, with such true contrition and
repentance unto salvation, as I may obtain thy merciful pardon sweet Jesus,
that by thy wounds I may be healed, and all my offenses hidden, never to be
imputed unto me hereafter; and by thy grace heartily purposing, constantly to
endeavor the amendment of all my misdeeds for the time to come, and by thy
help to lead a holy and a sanctified life so long as I live. Now I humbly
beseech thee, oh dear Lord, to indue me also with the blessed gift of true
faith, which is the only hand to lay hold of thee, and all thy mercies whereby
thou may dwell in me, and I in thee for ever; I believe, Lord help my
unbeleefe, and strengthen and increase in me a right hope, and lively faith,
steadfastly to believe, and rightly to apply to my own soul all thy gracious
promises, benefits, merits and sufferings for me to my salvation. Oh my God
Holy Ghost, vouchsafe to inspire my heart with true and perfect charity toward
all my brethren and neighbors, yea even to my very enemies for thy sake, that
I may forgive them, as thou do pardon me. And thou Lord, preserver of
mankind, by thy gracious operation in this blessed Sacrament, join me an
unworthy member unseparably unto thy blessed head Christ Jesus, especially at
this time, grant that through thy holy working and assistance, I may be a
happy partaker not only of the outward signs, but also of the inward and
inestimable graces bestowed upon our souls by the real body broken, and
precious blood shed of our dear Savior Jesus, which was crucified for us, to
be the precious food of our souls, all which Lord rightly apply unto my soul,
with all other benefits thereby signified and assured unto us, and through his
righteousness and merits, that I may be reconciled and accepted by God our
heavenly Father, to my eternal comfort and happiness; that so I may devoutly
and everlastingly love and honor, magnify, and admire the infinite mercy,
love and favor of God, the Father, our dear Savior Jesus, and of the Holy
Ghost, to whom be all praise and glory for ever. Now Almighty God, grant me thy
poor servant grace to live in true faith, ready obedience, and continual
thankfulness all the rest of my days here, that I may live hereafter in
heaven with thee, in joy and bliss for evermore. Amen.

4. An humble thanksgiving after the receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.
I Yield unto thee my merciful Lord God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, all
humble and possible praise and thanks, for all thy great benefits and loving
favors vouchsafed unto me, thy poor sinful creature both spiritual and
temporal all my life hitherto; and dear Lord, the fountain of all mercy,
thou have been exceeding good and gracious toward me, which I humbly
acknowledge, especially in vouchsafing so great and manifold blessings to me
thy most unworthy servant in this thy present favor, which thou have been
pleased to make me partaker of amongst thy children. Now, dear Lord, make me
ever truly thankful with all my heart and soul unto thee for all thy mercies
bestowed on me, who with shame and sorrow do confess, I have deserved no
good, but all evil at thy hands by my manifold offenses committed against
thee; therefore in all humility I do beseech thee, to cast all my sins and
wickedness out of thy sight* and let them be no hindrance to thy grace and
mercy toward me; but Lord still continue and increase thy fatherly care and
loving kindness both to my soul and body to prevent and preserve me from
falling into any sin or evil; and vouchsafe to bestow all spiritual graces on
me, that may enable me to live a more holy and acceptable life before thee
ever hereafter; and seal thou my pardon for all my sins past, for Christ
Jesus sake, who dyed for me, and with his own unvaluable blood paid my
ransom, and fully satisfied thy great and just wrath against me. But gracious
God, how unspeakable is thy goodness and infinite favor toward mankind,
that instead of pouring down punishments upon us for our great offenses against
thee, thou did thy self in thy tender love ordain the means for our
redemption, justification and eternal salvation, through Christ thine own
dear Son: praised be thy glorious Name for ever, and chiefly at this time I
magnify thee sweet Jesus (the mirror of mercy) who before thou had finished
the great work of our redemption, did also institute the blessed Sacrament
of thy holy Supper that inestimable benefit, to all thy servants which rightly
receive the same, it being a pledge of thy love, a remembrance of thy mercy, a
renewing of grace in us, a testimony of thy favors, a confirmation of our
faith, a uniting of us (by thy Holy Ghost) to our blessed Lord and head Christ
Jesus, and all our fellow members in perfect charity one toward another, with
assurance thereby of the pardon of all our sins, and eternal salvation to
our souls: the great benefit thereof is beyond my expression, of which this
day thou have graciously vouchsafed to make me (though unworthy of my self)
yet by thy favor a happy partaker. Now dear Lord, enlarge thy goodness
further toward me thy poor servant, to give me daily the spiritual gifts of
sound repentance, increase of true faith to believe all thy gracious promises,
with grace rightly to apply them to my own soul, and all the infinite
benefits which thou my dear Savior have purchased for me, that so this
Sacrament may work those good effects in me which thou have therein offered
unto us, and that I may by thy assistance, bring forth the fruits of
righteousness, obedience, and true holiness of life, all the rest of my
days, and to make such thankful and constant acknowledgement and right use of
all thy mercies, as I may glorify thy blessed Name; reform my ways, and
frame my heart in all things to be faithfully and constantly thine, and then I
know that thou will ever be my gracious God, to thy honor and my endless
felicity, through my Lord Jesus Christ the righteous. Amen.

1. A meditation concerning death.
O Lord God Holy Ghost, our sanctifier, preserver and comforter, who best
knows my corrupt nature, that cannot of my self perform any true service
toward God, being inclined to all evil, and unapt to any goodness, I humbly
beseecb thee, that understandest my manifold infirmities, be pleased to indue
me with all saving graces in the performance of all holy duties toward God.
And I humbly pray thee sweet Jesus to call and draw me daily unto thee; and
vouchsafe Lord by thy holy Spirit to possess my heart and soul, to make me
wholly and constantly thine, truly to fear and love thee, to serve and obey
thee in all things, that so thou in thy infinite mercy may never leave me,
but be my gracious Lord, and merciful God for ever. And I humbly pray thee
Lord Holy Ghost, to sanctify and assist me thy poor sinful servant, with all
spiritual graces for my salvation in Christ, both living and dying, that I may
strive to become what I ought to be, and to do thy holy will in all things
while I live. Now O good God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, thou know that
many and evil have been my days in this world, and by thy providence I have
attained to a great age, but have not performed the ends for which I came into
the world, who being made only to serve God in holiness and righteousness all
the days of our lives to his glory, and our salvation, which is the chief
thing needful; but alas, for the most part it is the least regarded or thought
upon, where I confess (with sorrow) that I have been too much neglectfull,
having sometimes been drawn by the cares and troubles of this life, which
necessity brought upon me, to set my heart ever carefully upon earthly things,
and likewise, too often have I been carried away with the vanity of my own
heart in following after the preferments, or vanity of my own heart, in
following after the preferments, or delighting in the pleasures of this vile
world, all which perish in the using, by which delusions and deceits, that old
subtle serpent Satan (that first wrought our ruin) he now steals away our
time and hearts, only to make us lose our souls also. But dear Lord, though I
have too long gone astray, yet while I am going toward my God, Lord let it be
thy work of grace and mercy to make me see and understand when I am out of
the right way before I go too far to fall into irrecoverable danger, from
which I cannot return. Oh show me the paths of life and lead me into the true
way to heaven that I may first turn to thee in true faith with a contrite
spirit, and a broken heart for my lost time past which I have misspent, that so
I may obtain pardon for all my sins formerly committed before thee, and then
I know thou will receive me as one of thine, and in mercy bring me to thy
salvation. Now Lord, although our times are only known to thee, yet I cannot
have long to live, for the life of man is but short, and old age laden with
infirmities and sickness is a sure messenger and forerunner of death, and then
draws near the first appearance when my breath cease, of my poor soul
before the tribunal seat, of thy great Majesty, O God, and before all thy holy
Angels there to be called to give an account of all my life and time misspent:
Alas, how can I answer one thing of a thousand; now what should I do, if I had
not there in heaven an All-sufficient Savior, who is also my blessed advocate
to mediate for me, in whom is all my trust, comfort and confidence; therefore
gracious Lord Jesus help me now while I am here, and assist me to make my
peace (as thou do advise) while I am in the way before the grim and cruel
Sergeants of sickness and death lay hold upon me to prevent me of the
freedom, and ability of my senses, and spirit, being aided with thy power,
strength and grace by unfaigned repentance, and true faith to obtain through
Christ my release, and pardon of those grievous debts and trespasses that I
stand guilty of before God, which I am no ways able to satisfy, but only by
thee my Savior Jesus, or else I shall be thrown into that dreadful dungeon,
from whence there is no escaping: Therefore now I do most humbly beg and pray
thee, that I may find such favor in thy sight, knowing my own disabilities,
that thou Lord would knit and prepare my heart and soul, for thine own
merciful acceptance, before thou call and ceise upon me by death, to take me
out of this life, and make me continually mindful of my last end while I live
in health, and of that strict reckoning which then I must make unto thee, the
great God of heaven and earth, who sees and knows all things of all my life
past, even to my very words. And let me still remember that thou Lord searchest
the hearts and triest the reins, and beholdest all our ways, and will bring
each work to judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or evil:
Therefore I most humbly beseech thee, while I am in this world, give me the
grace of daily and unfaigned repentance for all my sins past, with care to
amend all my former faults in the rest of my life, and narrowly to examine my
own heart, soul and conscience of all the evils I have done before thee,
hating and severely judging and condemning my self for them, that so I may
escape thy great wrath, and not be judged and condemned by thee, O Lord, in thy
heavy displeasure, which I am not able to bear; for who can stand in the sight
of thy great Majesty when thou art angry? Therefore gracious God, let me here
obtain thy merciful pardon for all my offenses past, with grace to reform my
former misdeeds, and by thy blessed assistance become a new creature all my
days, that so I may gain a blessed end, through my Savior to dye in him, and
make my peace with God here, before I go hence and be no more: To which
purpose I humbly pray thee while I live, to make me a true and faithful member
of thy right Church and Kingdom of grace here to profess and practice true
Religion, and all holiness of life to my last end; but chiefly, Lord, give me
a blessed part in the first resurrection, that I may not lie dead in trespasses
and sins, but may by thy holy Spirit be daily raised from the grave of sin,
and enabled to live the life of grace, that so the second death may have no
power to hurt me; and at the last when it shall please thee to appoint a stop
to my days, and to set a period unto my time, grant that my death be neither
sudden, nor unexpected, neither my pains violent, whereby I should be
unable, faithfully, earnestly and constantly to cry unto thee my God, and call
upon thy holy Name, for relief and comfort in that great and dreadful day and
time of death and danger, when my souls enemies will seek my utter
destruction; then Lord, depart not from me, but pray that my faith in thee
fail not, and strengthen my weakness by thy power, and supply my soul with
all saving graces, and defend me from the malice and subtle temptation of my
spiritual adversaries, that they may never be able to prevail against me in
any thing. But I humbly pray thee sweet Savior, to grant that in the day of
thy great visitation, my poor name through thy unspeakable goodness, may be
then found written in thy blessed book of life, so that my sins, nor my
souls enemies, may not be able to blot it out; but that by thy infinite mercy
and favor, sweet Jesus, unto me, I may then be accounted in thee worthy to
escape thy just wrath, and by thy power and clemency, who did vouchsafe to be
borne of a woman, and shall be judge of the whole world, grant through thy
mercies, merits, and manifold sufferings, that I poor sinful creature, may be
made able to stand before thee the blessed Son of God and man in that great and
dreadful day of judgment, when all our secret wickednesses shall be made
manifest, and thou Lord, to whom all judgment is given by the Father, art to
give our final sentence: Oh then dear Jesus, in whom only I trust, receive me
into thy gracious favor as one of thine, that my sins may be covered with
thy righteousness, that so I may be preserved from thy wrath, and that woeful
doom, Go ye cursed into hell fire, appointed for the Devil and his Angels;
but Lord, in the fullness of thy mercy, make me one of that happy chosen
number, to whom that joyful call shall belong, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit, and enter into that Kingdom, which he has prepared for you before
the beginning of the world; and also thou our Savior have purchased for us;
then Lord in thy infinite love grant me a part in that everlasting happiness,
to live with thee, and glorify thee there, for ever and ever. Amen.

2. A Prayer to live blessedly, and dye happily.
OH gracious Lord God, who did create all things by thy omnipotent power, and
lastly made mankind! thou best know the frailties and corruption of our
wretched nature which we inherit from our first parents, whose substance was
but earth, and we are of our selves inclined only to earthly and evil things,
and such is the condition of mortal man, that all that are borne must dye, and
return to dust from whence they came, but the spirit returns to thee, O God,
that gave it, to receive either joy or bliss with thee for ever, or else
eternal banishment from thee, who art the only good; therefore I do most
humbly beseech thee, dear Lord, to look mercifully upon me, to help my
manifold infirmities, and daily to prevent and keep me from falling into any
sin or evil to offend thee. But especially in the time of my death, dear
Lord, be merciful unto me a most miserable sinner, to forgive all my sins
and offenses past, that I have committed against thee my God, my brethren, or
my own soul; and grant through the merits, and many sufferings of thy beloved
Son, and my only Savior Jesus, that they may never be imputed unto me thy
poor servant, but vouchsafe good God, in thy manifold mercies to indue me thy
most unworthy suppliant, with all saving graces leading to my salvation both in
life and death; for we daily see by example how suddenly death may surprise us
when we least expect it; therefore while this life is in being, and I am going
on in the way of all flesh, which can be of no long continuance; Lord teach and
assist me to make my peace for my offenses with thee my God while I am here,
who else wilt take an account of me in a dreadful place, and art able if thy
wrath be not pacified, to cast me into hell fire, from which there is no
redemption; therefore have mercy on me, sweet Jesus, that I may by thy help,
grace and assistance, rightly fit and prepare my self for thy acceptance before
sickness lay hold on me; for when death seiseth it will carry me immediately
before the judgment seat of thy great Majesty: Oh there let me find thee,
dear Jesus, to be my gracious Savior and Advocate, and so I shall obtain
mercy and favor, and by thy sufferings, my offenses pardoned, and Gods severe
justice satisfied. And thus in thee and through thee only, my blessed Redeemer
Jesus Christ, I shall be received to grace and mercy, and made partaker of
eternal life, and remain with Almighty God, in whose presence is the fullness
of joy, and at his right hand there are pleasures for evermore, which Lord make
me partaker of, there to glorify the Name of Almighty God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, for ever. Amen.

3. A Prayer to be prepared for a happy death, and to gain a joyful
resurrection.
MOst glorious Lord God, who did make all things, thou well understandest
that we poor creatures (how highly soever we are conceited of our selves) are
but dust and ashes, and must return to earth from whence we came; our lives
and times are in thy hand and power, and what thou have appointed we cannot
change, and all things to our selves are most uncertain; for when thou with
just rebuke do chastise man for iniquity, thou make his strength and beauty
to consume away like a flower of the field that withers and falls: for when
thou call, man cannot retain the spirit, nor add one hour to his time,
but it returns to thee that gave it, and he goes down to the grave, from
which he shall not return again till this world is at an end: Therefore,
dear Lord, I now most humbly beseech thee, for thy beloved sons sake, who
has satisfied thy just wrath by his infinite and innocent sufferings, and
redeemed me from sin and Satan by his death, Lord forgive and pardon me all my
sins and offenses past, either in soul or body, that I have committed
against thee ever since I came into this miserable world, which I confess are
innumerable, more then the hairs of my head, or the sand upon the Sea shore,
but vouchsafe, O merciful God, to be reconciled unto me a wicked sinner, in
thy dear and righteous Son Christ Jesus my only Savior, who has paid my
ransom with his own precious blood, wherewith, oh God of mercy, blot my debt
to thee by sin, out of thy sight; and also he did fulfill all righteousness
for me, who is now my blessed Mediator in heaven, to impute all this unto me:
Therefore, dear Lord Holy Ghost, by thy gracious and holy Spirit, join and
unite me unto my Lord and head Christ, never to be separated from him while I
live here, and when I go from hence carry me to be where he is, and give me
grace and faith in and through him, to make my peace while I am in the way and
passage of this life, and while I have breath to call upon thee, before I am
laid into the dark dungeon of the earth, when the worms shall eat my corrupt
flesh; yet I trust and do believe through him, that has overcome death, the
grave, and hell for me, that at the blessed resurrection of thy children and
servants, that my corruption shall put on incorruption, and I shall see my
blessed Lord and Savior with these my eyes, who did redeem me, and shall be
my merciful judge to save me; therefore I have sure confidence in his favor,
and under the wings of his mercy shall I rest in safety. Now I humbly pray
thee, O God the Holy Ghost, to sanctify, fit, prepare, and assist my heart and
soul with thy Spirit, to fill me with all saving graces for my salvation;
while I live, to enable me to call, pray and strive to please thee here in all
things; but especially Lord at my death stand by me and pray for me that my
faith fail not: fit and prepare me for thy gracious acceptance, before thou
call and seize upon me to take me out of this present life; and make me always
mindful both in health and sickness of my own last end, and then of my
appearance before thee, to make answer before the great God of Heaven and Earth
(from whom nothing can be hid) of all my life and deeds past, even to my very
words; for thou art only and above all to be feared, who can both save and
kill, and cast both soul and body into utter perdition in hell: Therefore
Lord, vouchsafe to assist me with thy grace to work in me all things which may
make me acceptable unto thee before the day of my departure, that when it does
approach it may not be fearful and terrible, but happy and comfortable unto
me in Christ Jesus my Lord, that through him, my last day may be my best, and
most welcome to my soul; that I may then call and pray, and say with
confidence, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, for into thy hands I most humbly
commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth; and
vouchsafe thou even to my last breath, always to say unto my soul, thou art
my God, and my salvation for ever. Amen.

4. A Prayer in sickness, with expectation of death.
OH heavenly Father, who have been my gracious God before I had being, and my
merciful guide from my youth, be pleased especially now at the hour and point
of my death which I shall shortly expect, to be merciful, O God, unto me a
miserable sinner, to pardon for Jesus sake all my sins and iniquities that I
have committed formerly; and vouchsafe to heal and save my wretched soul that
has infinitely offended thee, and strengthen my weakness with thy power, and
supply all graces wanting in me by thy mercy, and defend me from all my
spiritual adversaries, who will endeavor my destruction if they can, but let
them not prevail against me; and Lord Jesus, be not far from me, neither
forsake me in a time when so much trouble and danger is about me; but in the
multitude of thy mercy, Lord pray for me that my faith fail not, and stretch
forth thy hand to save me, as thou did to Peter, lest I perish. Now, O God,
give me such sound and unfaigned repentance, as may obtain from thee remission
of all my sins, with true faith to lay hold of all thy gracious promises, and
a right and a steadfast hope in all thy mercies; but chiefly indue me with
devout and perfect love toward thy Majesty, which may make me faithfully and
constantly thine to serve and obey thy holy will in all things, with Christian
charity toward all my brethren: but Lord, if it be thy will give me knowledge
of my death when it is near, that I may faithfully pray unto thee, and call on
thy most blessed Name with my last breath, and may joyfully and willingly yield
up and commend my spirit back to thee my Lord, who gave it unto me: And dear
Lord, prevent and remove all evil hindrances in my way to heavenly happiness,
that through Christ Jesus my Savior, I may be received amongst thy children
and servants, and admitted into the presence of thy Majesty, O heavenly Father,
there to enjoy eternal felicity with thee in heaven when this life is ended by
death. But if thou should please at this time to continue and prolong my
days upon earth; Lord, so long as I live, teach me by thy grace so to number
my days that I may apply my heart to wisdom and godliness and holiness of
life, seeking to redeem my lost time past which I have misspent, by daily
repentance and amendment of life, striving to make my calling and election
sure, by a holy and good conversation the rest of my time to come, that by thy
mercy, and merits of my Savior Jesus I may be freed of my trespasses, and
heavy account with thee before I dye, and may escape thy just and great wrath
which is due for my manifold transgressions. Now Lord Jesus, I willingly submit
my self to thy good pleasure to dispose of me as thou see best: but I most
humbly beg of thee, when my last and appointed hour is come, that I shall enter
into my long sleep of death, and go to lie down in the dust; dear Lord, give
me a happy departure out of this life, that I may dye in thee, O Lord, to rest
in peace and safety, and may be raised up by thee at the last day to grace and
glory, that thou receiving me into thy mercy* and favor, I may live and
remain with thee in eternal happiness to glorify thy blessed Name, and sing
hallelujah amongst thy Saints for ever and ever. Amen.

5. A Prayer unto the Lord of mercy in the time of sickness to be fitted for
death, and assisted in that dreadful hour against all temptations, to gain a
blessed passage out of this world at Gods appointed time.
O Great and merciful God, who reignest and disposest of all things in heaven,
and in the whole world as it pleases thee, and understandest all the passage
here below on earth, be it never so secret, and by thy mercy and power do
work all things to the best for those that love and depend upon thee; for thou
art full of goodness, patience and long-suffering toward us poor weak and
frail creatures, and thy abounding mercy, does exceed all other thy great
works in pardoning sinners; but beyond all other thy favors toward us, thy
infinite love to mankind did most appear in sending thine own dear Son into
the world to save sinners by thy grace, that all that believe in him might be
saved; without which thy mercy, what hope, comfort, or help were there left
unto us miserable sinful creatures; for the just man falls seven times a
day, but the wicked much more, and if the righteous scarcely be saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear, such as I am? Therefore I come and cry and
pray unto thee, who only can relieve me, in all humility, contrition and
confession of my manifold transgressions, and in the blessed Name of thy dear
beloved Son, my only Savior, I do beg and beseech thee, O Father, full of
compassion, not to enter into judgment with me, nor to remember what I have
done amiss; but to consider what thy Christ has done and suffered for me,
and looking on me through him, have mercy and pity upon me a most grievous
sinner; I know too well, how justly thou may condemn me; but Lord, to save
a poor sinner by thy grace is far greater honor and glory unto thee: And
gracious God, who of thine own mere mercy did give us thy most dear Son to
be our reconciliation and redemption when we were thine enemies, much more
being reconciled, and having performed all things for us, thou can deny us no
good thing that we ask in his beloved Name: Therefore, O God, for Christ
innocent sake, vouchsafe to be reconciled unto me, thy most unworthy sinful
servant, and cast all my offenses into his grave, where my Savior paid the
last part of my ransom; and by his power rising again the third day from
death, he conquered and overcame all my souls enemies, sin, death, hell and
Satan; and dear Lord, with his precious bloodshed upon the cross, wash my
soul clean before it appear in thy presence, and take away all my iniquities
out of thy sight, never to come in remembrance before thee, so that Christ may
be unto me both in life and death an advantage. And now most dear God, my life
and time here is only in thy hand and pleasure, and thou have cast me upon the
bed of sickness, from which I know not whether I shall recover, or rise any
more while I live in this world; therefore I most humbly pray thee, sweet
Jesus, never to leave or forsake me, but stand thou always in mercy by me, and
let thy right hand uphold and sustain me to preserve me from all my spiritual
enemies that wait to destroy my soul: But thou my Lord, art sufficient for me,
O Lord, vouchsafe me thy grace to direct my heart and words toward thee, and
by thy ready help to assist me in all things, and at all times, that in thy
mercy at the last thou may finish all thy favor in me, which is the
accomplishment of my faith and hope in thee: And Lord grant that I may
willingly and readily come unto thee when thou call; and vouchsafe, O
blessed Spirit Holy Ghost, to fit and prepare me by unfeigned repentance to
obtain remission of all my sins that I have done before thee, with true
faith to lay hold of all the mercies of my God in Christ, and with steadfast
hope to rest on all thy gracious promises, O Lord, who never failest those that
trust in thee. Now Lord, give me strength and patience to wait thy good leisure
and pleasure, until thou have pity and compassion on me, either to recover and
restore my health here (if it be thy will) that I may live and glorify thee
longer in this life, or else that thou will please to receive and prepare me
for thy self, and give me all saving graces for thine own merciful
acceptance, when thou please to call and take me to thee out of this wretched
world, that so my faith and sure trust in thee may never fail unto my last
breath. Now lastly, Lord grant, that as the outward man (the body) decays and
grows weaker, so the inward part (the soul) may by thy gracious assistance
grow together in faith and confidence toward thee, with full assurance of thy
Spirit within me of thy favor to me for my eternal salvation: Then come Lord
Jesus when thou please, for into thy hands I humbly commend my spirit, that
when this life shall leave me, thy grace and mercy may receive me into that
endless happiness in heaven, which my Lord and only Savior has purchased
for me, that I may praise God everlastingly. Amen.

6. My Prayer of thanksgiving after my long and great fit of sickness, which
begun on Twelfth day at night and held me till Whitsontide: This may serve upon
any other occasion.
MOst gracious Lord God, I bless and praise thy great and holy Name, for all
thy blessings and benefits both spiritual and temporal vouchsafed to my soul
and body; but especially. I magnify thy glorious Majesty for all those
spiritual graces thou have bestowed upon my soul before I was borne and
hitherto, which I beseech thee of thy mercy daily to continue and increase
toward me: Now dear Lord, make me thy unworthy servant ever truly thankful
to thee for all thy goodness extended toward me, and grant me grace to make
such right use of all thy mercies as may be most to thy glory, and my salvation
in Christ. But now, O Lord, that art my God, I must at this time render thee
humble thanks in particular, and not forget to acknowledge thy benefits, and to
praise thy holy Name for all thy mercies showed unto me; for in my late and
long sickness thou have heard my groans, and taken pity on me, and released me
from all my pain and griefs, for thou do visit my transgressions with favor
(not in wrath) and have always been my stay and comfort from my youth, and
thou art my deliverance and ready help in all my adversities, thou did bring
me down for my sins almost to the grave, and have in mercy lifted me up
again from the gates of death, and restored me to health, who healest all my
infirmities, pardonest all my iniquities, and give me present supply in all
my necessities, blessed be thy glorious Name for ever. Now O God, as thou art
pleased to prolong my days on earth, so especially I humbly pray thee daily to
increase all saving graces in me for thy true and faithful service, and
vouchsafe always to continue all thy goodness and mercies toward me, that I
may truly fear, perfectly love, and carefully obey thee in all things; and by
the assistance of thy holy Spirit, make me to become, and ever to continue to
be more and more thy unfeigned servant: And now I am aged, and fit to leave
the world when thou please, yet while I am in it, Lord make me continually to
grow from grace to grace unto the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ, with
faith in him rightly to please and praise thee so long as I live. And gracious
Lord vouchsafe never to withdraw thy grace and favor from me, until thou have
finished thy greatest work of mercy, and the height of my hopes, and
happiness, which is the salvation of my poor soul, through thine own dear
Son, and my only Savior Jesus Christ; and when it shall please thee to call
me away to thy self out of this vain world, be pleased to give me a happy and
blessed departure to dye in my Lord Jesus, and in thy true faith and favor,
that thou having pardoned all my sins, and passing by my unworthiness, in
Christ, thou may after death receive and accept me poor sinner into thy
grace and favor, though thy dearly beloved Son, in whom only thou art
pleased, who is my righteousness, Lord, and my Redeemer; and so when I have
left this life, I shall rest in peace and safety, sleep in Christ, and be
raised by him hereafter to great glory amongst his servants, and may obtain
favor to be accepted into the society of holy Angels and blessed Saints, and
admitted into the glorious presence of Almighty God, there to praise and
magnify his Name, for ever and ever. Amen.

7. My conclusion. A Prayer to my blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
OH my dear Lord Jesus, I most humbly beg for thy love and mercies sake to
pardon all my sins past, that thou may look down in pity and compassion
on me, to hear the prayer of thy unworthy sinful servant, who does earnesty
entreat thee, to vouchsafe me thy gracious and continual help, protection and
direction, in all my weak endeavors, wants and troubles, that so all my
desires ways and actions, being begun, continued, and ended in thee, I may be
able rightly and faithfully to serve and please thee at all times, really to
love and honor thee above all things, truly and carefully to fear and obey
thee according to thine own will; confidently to rely upon thee, and
willingly to submit to thy pleasure in all my crosses and calamities; and
constantly to praise and magnify thy most worthy and holy Name, for thy great
and manifold blessings and benefits bestowed upon me of thy mere grace and
mercy: O my blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who art the author and
finisher of my good, and finally of my eternal salvation, to thee be all
praise, honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

8. Another short Prayer.
O Lord my God, have pity upon me that am a most miserable sinner, and full of
frailty, unapt and unable to do any good, I earnestly desire rightly to serve
thee, but without thy grace and help I cannot do it, a fit subject for thy
great mercy. Dear Jesus, pardon all my sins past, and give me grace
henceforth to become a new creature in thee, daily to attend thy service
constantly, and to perform all holy duties which Iowe unto thee faithfully;
and to shun and resist all sinful neglects toward thee carefully; that so
while I live, I may duly fear and obey thee rightly and truly to love and
praise thee, here and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

