THE Comfort and Crown OF GREAT ACTIONS. IN A SERMON Preached, December. 4. 1657.
Before the Honorable East India Company.

By Edward Reynolds, D. D.

LONDON: Printed by Tho. Newcomb, for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown in
St Paul's Churchyard. 1658.

To the Honorable The Governor and Committee OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY.
Right Honorable,
IN the first entrance upon great Actions, it has been the use of good men to
begin at the Sanctury, and there to seek of the Lord a right way, as knowing
that whatever be the services of Men, yet the success and blessing must be from
God alone. A course which honorable persons amongst the Heathen have sometimes
used, as Scipio, in Consultations of State, went first to the Capitole, and
then to the Senate. You were pleased in the great work which you have
undertaken, thus to do, and what businesses you are to prosecute by the
concurrent Counsels and Services of Men, to commend first to the favor and
blessing of God. Wherein having used my poor service, you were pleased so far
to accept of it, as to desire to have it made more public. Hereunto I was the
more easily persuaded, that the great and good example of Nehemiah might be
still before your eyes, both to direct you in your Honorable undertakings, and
to comfort you in your imitation thereof. The Lord be pleased so to remember
you for good, as by his Counsel to direct, and by his blessing to reward
whatever you go about in comformity to his Will, and in pursuance of his Glory.
To his most gracious protection I commend your persons and enterprises, and am

Your Faithful Servant in the Work of the Lord, Ed. Reynolds.

THE CROWN OF Great Actions.
NEHE. 13. 31. Remember me, O my God, for Good.
THough all Saints have all the members of the new man, and all the Graces of
Christ fashioned in them (for there are no monsters in his body,) John 1. 16.
yet as in the natural body, some excel in sight, or hearing, or swiftness, or
strength, or beauty; so in the mind, one excels in one grace, another in
another, according as the Spirit is pleased diversely to distribute his gifts
unto men. 1 Cor. 12. 11. Ephesians. 4. 7. Abraham is renowned for Faith, Isaac for
Meditation, Jacob for Plainness, Joseph for Chastity, Job for Patience, Solomon
for Wisdom, Moses for Meekness, Phineas for Zeal, David for Devotion, Mary for
Love, Nathaniel for Singleness; and as some are more eminent then others in
special graces, so likewise in special services. Joshuah for a Warrior, Hushai
for a Counselor, Solomon for a Governor, Paul for a Preacher, and in this Book
Nehemiah for a wise and a valiant Manager of great and honorable Actions.

I would send a Worldling to read Ecclesiastes, to learn the Vanity of the
Creature; a Lover of Christ, to Solomon's Canticles; a Devout person, to David
Psalms; an Afflicted person, to Jobs Temptations; a Preacher, to Timothy and
Titus; a Backslider in Faith, to the Hebrews; a Moralist, to the Proverbs; a
Justitiary and Legalist, to the Romans and Galatians; a Libertine, to James,
Peter, and Jude; a Soldier, to Joshua and Judges; a Man that would study Gods
Providence, to Esther; and those who go about great undertakings, to the
reading of this Book of Nehemiah.

There are many things which such men may observe in him for their special
Direction. And because he desires God to remember them, I shall not look upon
it as a departing from my Text, if we, upon this solemn occasion, do a little
remember them likewise, and consider of what use they may be unto you.

1. Observe his care of Foreign and remote intelligence and correspondence; when
he was in Shushan, he made enquiry of the state of his Brethren in Jerusalem,
Chap. 1. 1, 2, 3. You that undertake great Actions, must be specially careful
to have accurate and distinct intelligence. You have no Elishahs amongst you to
save you that labor, 2 Kings 6. 12. And therefore as the Historian said of
Princes, (...), You had Zenophon. Cyropaed.
need have many eyes and many ears in many parts of the World, to see and hear
by them, what you cannot be your selves. Abraham's intelligence recovered Lot,
Genesis 14. 14, 16. Rebecca her intelligence saved Jacob, Genesis 27. 42. The
intelligence which the Spies brought, animated Israel, Josh. 2. 23, 24.
Abigails intelligence saved Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 14. Hushai's intelligence
preserved David, 2 Samuel 17. 15, 22. Many a man by speedy intelligence is
enriched, is delivered: It was the way whereby Joshua overcame the Kings of
Canaan, Josh. 10. 9. by coming suddenly upon them, before they could have
intelligence of it; and in like manner, Abimelech discomfited Gaal by the
benefit of secret intelligence, Judge. 9. 30, 31, etc.

2. His extraordinary love, zeal, and tenderheartedness toward his Country,
and the honor thereof; and his zealous prayer unto God night and day for it,
Chap. 1. 4, 6. Men of great and remote employments, should be very careful by
their vigilance, to prevent any reproach and injury against the Land of their
Nativity, and to manage all their dealings with such honor and integrity, as
that the very Nation which brought them forth, may have renown in the remotest
parts of the World. Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Keep the Statutes and Judgments which the Lord
commanded, says Moses, and do them; for this is your wisdom, and your
understanding in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all these Statutes,
and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise and understanding people.

3. His not being contented with his own honor and greatness, who was in so
near attendance upon the greatest Prince on the Earth, and was sure enough to
live in plenty and prosperity himself, though his Brethren were in affliction.
But his improving that interest for the service of community, and the
particular comfort of Gods people. Men of great and public undertakings,
should not look only after narrow and domestical interests, but should make
use of their own greatness, power, wealth, prevalency with potent persons, to
do real offices of love and service to the poor Church of God. Esther might
possibly have lived in splendour and royal majesty, though her people had been
destroyed; but she chooses rather the danger of perishing, then to neglect
their salvation. If I perish, I perish, Esth. 4. 16. And so Moses chose rather
affliction with the people of God, then to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter, Heb. 11. 24, 25. Nature has implanted even in senseless and
inanimate Creatures, such a love of community, as makes them forget their own
proper motions, to preserve the whole from violence or reproach. How much more
should we lay to heart public evils, even then when our own condition may seem
prosperous?

4. His prudent vigilance in viewing the state of the City secretly, and then
imparting his commission to his Brethren, Chap. 2. 12, 18. In great works,
personal prudence and joint communication, are singularly necessary for the
happy management of them: For in the multitude of Counselors is safety, Prove.
11. 14.

5. His pious courage animating his Brethren, bearing up himself against
envious aspersions of the enemy, and drawing in his Brethren into an unanimous
society in great and honorable works; and all upon grounds of Faith, giving
assurance of divine help, Chap. 2. 17. 18, 20. and 3. per totum. and 4. 1, 5,
14. Faith is a foundation of courage, (no grace so valiant as that, Heb. 11.
33, 34. 1 John 5. 4.) and Courage a foundation of constancy, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.
And therefore Faith and fortitude are necessary graces for those who will go
with resolution through great and difficult undertakings. And therein a special
wisdom to work all in a sweet and amicable concurrence, to draw one way, and to
join with special accord, hearts and hands in the same work; for differences
and divisions will unjoynt the frame of great actions, and as a breach in a
Wall, will minister unto adversaries an occasion of advantage.

6. His wise discovery of adverse counsels and preparations, Chap. 4. 8, 9, 15.
There never was any great enterprise without special opposition. Zorobabel met
with mountainous obstructions in the great work which he went about. Zach. 4.
7. (only these Obstructions are more secret and invisible then Mountains;) and
therefore men that engage in great works, must ever have their eyes running to
and fro to discover dangers, that they may prevent them, Prove. 22. 3.

7. His special care upon all emergent occasions, to call the people together
for new and further counsels, Chap. 4. 19, 20. Great businesses being full of
variety of incidental and circumstantial contingencies, will frequently call
for further resolutions and renewed consultations, will like great Vessels many
times spring a leak, and require immediate application of remedies. And
therefore it is a part of necessary wisdom, as in great Cities, so in great
actions, to have Physicians always within call, who may timely advise upon all
needful expedients for safety, Judge. 19. 30.

8. His indefatigable labor night and day, being not only a commander, but an
example of unwearied patience to all the people, Verse 22, 23. And all great
actions will require this part of self-denial. A man either of sensual or
sluggish principles, is very unfit for the management of any arduous and
weighty affairs. It was a great business, but one would think a sad one, for a
man to sacrifice his beloved son, and yet Abraham rose up early to go about it,
Genesis 22. 3.

9. His compassionate zeal mixed with wisdom, impartiality, and self-denial,
for the poor which were oppressed, rebuking the oppressors, and forbearing his
own just allowances, and preventing the injuries of servants and officers,
Chap. 5. 14, 15. In great employments which pass through many men's hands, it is
neither impossible nor improbable, for innocence many times to suffer, and much
wrong to be done, and that reductive, even by good men themselves, if their
ears be too much open to misrepresentations; as we see it was in the case of
Ziba and Mephibosheth, 2 Samuel 16. 1, 4. Unless much care, wisdom, and courage
be used, to require all Officers to do the things belonging unto them, with
Justice and expedition. And here give me leave to commend unto you the care of
your poor Brethren; a duty which Apostles themselves have put one another in
mind of, Gal. 2. 10. You cannot be without many objects of that kind, even
amongst those who serve you in these Expeditions; sick Mariners, desolate
Widows, poor Children: It would be a work of a sweet savor to God, to have a
steady stock going for the advantage of these, as well as of the Merchants.
Their Prayers may be wind in your Sails, and bring down a blessing on all your
undertakings.

10. His bounty to the work, He bought no Land, but spent himself upon the
service, and upon hospitality to the people, Chap. 5. 16, 17, 18. Covetousness
is not only a bar and obstruction to all honorable undertakings, but does
miserably corrupt and spoil them by a self-seeking management, when men drive
on and interweave domestical interests, under the specious pretense of public
good. And therefore all great works do require great and large hearts, for the
promoting of them. It was a great work, the building of the Sanctuary, and the
Lord gave greatness of heart to the people to contribute unto it, Exodus 36. 5.
It was a great work, the building of the Temple, and God gave an immense
largeness of heart to David and his Princes in offering thereunto: For the sums
offered, were so great as surpassed the treasures of any other Princes which we
read of, Sardanapalus only excepted; Budaeus de Ass. lib. 4. Breerwood de
Nummis. page 16. Raleigh. lib. 2. cap. 17. sect. 9 (...). Marc. Antonin. lib.
6. sect. 2. Vid. lib. 10. sect. 11.
as the learned Breerwood, and Sir Walter Raleigh have observed, 1 Chro. 22.
14. and 29. 14. See Isa. 60. 6, 7.

11. His undiscouraged constancy, notwithstanding all the threats, slanders,
letters, prophecies, misreports, and wicked artifices purposely used by the
subtle enemies, to weaken and dishearten his resolutions, Chap. 6. None are fit
for great actions, who are not men of constant and undanted spirits, who cannot
go through evil report as well as good, whom the integrity of their own
Consciences cannot bear up above the reproaches of enemies, 1 Cor. 4. 3. 2 Cor.
6. 8, 9, 10.

12. His wise and pious care to communicate part of the charge unto faithful
coadjutors, whom he advanced, not barely for their relation unto him, but for
their fidelity to the service, Chap. 7. 2, 3. Since it is impossible for great
actions to be managed without much concurrence, singular care is to be used
that good and faithful men, by whose care, and prudence, and prayers, they may
be promoted, be employed in the transaction of them; that even near relations
do not prevail with us, to entrust great works in the hands of weak or wicked
men. Consanguinity has a strong bias even with good men. Barnabas did
earnestly contend to take Mark along in his and Paul's expedition to visit the
Churches, which Paul opposed, Acts 15. 37, 38. The Apostle does implicitly
give us the reason of it in another place, Col. 4. 10. where he Vid. Baron. An.
45. sect. 42.
tells us, that Mark was sisters son to Barnabas.

13. His singular zeal for the purity of the people of God, that they might be
an Holy Seed; and for the Offices of Gods house, that they might not be
polluted, Chap. 7. His care of the Worship of God, Preaching, Praying, Fasting,
renewing Covenant, restoring intermitted Duties, Chap. 8. 9, 10. Of the
Chambers of Gods house, that they might not be defiled, Chap. 13. 7, 9. Of the
Portions of the Priests and Levites, that they might not be detained, Verse. 10,
14. Of the Sabbath, that it might be duly sanctified, Verse. 15, 22. Of the
courses and services of the Priests and Levites, that they might be appointed,
Verse. 30, 31. Of the Holy Seed that that might not be by Heathenish marriages
corrupted, Verse. 23, 30. Of the Name of God, that that might be duly praised
and glorified, Chap. 12. By all which we learn, that the greater men's care is
of the service and glory of God, the fitter instruments they are to do great
works, and the more likely to prosper in the doing of them; because, they that
honor God, he will honor, 1 Samuel 2. Romanos magnos feceruni domi industria, for
is justum Imperium, animus in consulendo liber, neque libidini neque delicto
obnoxious. Vid. Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 5. c. 12. and 15.
30. So long as Uzziah sought the Lord, God made him to prosper, 2 Chro. 26. 5.
Hezekiah trusted the Lord, and clave to him, and the Lord was with him, and
blessed him whithersoever he went, 2 King. 18. 5, 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 31. 21. But
when Jehoshaphat joined with Ahaziah, who did very wickedly, the Lord brake his
ships, and disappointed his expedition, 2 Chro. 20. 35, 37.

Lastly, His special wisdom and care to heal the sinful breaches and divisions
which were amongst the people, causing them to enter into a solemn promise, to
make reparations of all injuries done unto their poor Brethren, and to prevent
the reproach of the Heathen, Chap. 5. 11, 12, 13. In great companies, and great
businesses, it is hardly possible to carry things on in so smooth and regular a
way, but that some differences of judgment may arise, and cause difficulties,
breaches, and obstructions in the whole work; and as our Savior says of
Kingdoms, Cities, Houses; so may we of companies and undertakings, that
divisions will endanger their standing, Matthew. 12. 25. It is one of Gods sore
judgments, when he intends to shatter and disappoint enterprises, to send a
spirit of division amongst those who are concerned in it, as he did between the
men of Shechem and Abimelech, Judge. 9. 23. and between the Host of the
Midianites, Judge. 7. 22. and of the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites, 2 Chronicles.
20. 22, 23. And so he threatens to do with the Egyptians, Isai. 19. 2. and
with the Armies of Gog and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. 21. The like whereunto we read of
in Pausanias, Pausan. lib. 10. page 654. Gr. Lat. Dionys Hal. Antiquit. lib. 7.
P. 419.
and in Dionysius Halicarnasseus. In which case, wise and prudent men, as
Nehemiah here, will use their uttermost endeavors to heal breaches, to close up
divisions, to prevent mistakes, to find out expedients, wherein all may
readily agree, for the preventing of those evils, which differences of
judgment, if not timely cured, may be likely to produce. In which case, there
is nothing more conducent then mutual mildeness, meekness, and condescension.
So Abraham healed the breach which was going to be made between Vid. Exemplum
Chaeracratis and Chaeraphontis apud Xenophont. lib. 2. Memorabil. page 744, 746.
Edit. Paris. 1625.
his family, and the family of Lot his Kinsman, Genesis 13. 17, 8. Therefore
Rulers are called Healers, Isai. 3. 7. And so Christ is described as a binder
up, and a strengthner, Ezekiel. 34. 16. And Moses, the first Ruler Vid, Chrysostom.
in Psalm. 131. 1.
which God chose for his people, was the meekest man alive, Numb. 12. 3.
Certainly meekness is a very great ornament, and a very great instrument of
power. We may think that we show our power by our stiffness and inflexibleness;
but it is a great evidence of power to be of an yielding and a meek
disposition. It shows, first, a great power which a Latius regnes avidum
domando spiritum, quam si Lybiam remotis Gadibus jungas, and uterque Polus
serviat uni. Horat. Vid. Philip. Camerar. Hor. subcisiv. part. 3. c. 26.
man has over his own spirit, which is a work of more power sometimes then the
taking of a City, Prove. 16. 32. Secondly, It shows great humility, and
self-denial, when as the Apostle speaks, Nothing is done through strife, or
vainglory, but in lowliness of mind, each esteems other better then
themselves, Phil. 2. 3. And do mutually submit unto one another in the fear of
God, Ephesians. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 5. 5. And in honor prefer one another, Romans 12. 10.
The Apostle made himself a servant to all, and studied to please all for their
good, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 22. Faciet sapiens, said Seneca, and quae non probavit, ut
Lactant. lib. 3. c. 15.
ad majora transitum inveniat. A wise man will sometimes deny his own judgment,
in order to a greater good. And it is an excellent direction of Hilary, Ex
alienis utilitatibus placere, nec offendere Hilar. in Psalm. 54.
ex propriis. To be ready to make it appear unto other men, that I am more
desirous to please them upon the account of their profit, then to offend them
upon the account of mine own. Istae cogitationes August. 83. quaest. qu. 71.
deprimentes superbiam, and tenentes charitatem, faciunt onera fraterna invicem
libentissime sustineri, says St. Austin. Thirdly, It imitates the example of
Christ, who did not look on his own things, but on the things of others, Phil.
2. 4, 5. And of the Lord, whom Moses besought by an argument drawn from his
power to be patient and longsuffering unto his people, Numb. 14. 17, 18.

We have seen in Nehemiah, the things which he remembered to do; and which
having done them, he beseeches God to remember. And though the words seem to
have properly a Retrospect only to what had been done, yet because we find
Nehemiah praying when he began these excellent works, Chap. 1. 6, 11. we shall
therefore extend this prayer both ways; both as an humble representation of his
own sincerity before God, in what he had done; and likewise as an humble
imploring of being remembered by God, in what he should further do.

For the former of these considerations, as the words have a Retrospect to what
he had already done, we shall consider them under a double notion; first, as
the Comfort of this good man; secondly, as his Prayer.

As his Comfort, he reviewed and looked back upon those good works which God
had enabled him to do, with much complacency and delight. And this the Lord
allows his servants to do: For though in some respect the Apostle tells us,
That he forgot the things behind, Phil. 3. 13. As not esteeming his work
finished, or his pace to be slackned upon his past acquirements, yet in regard
of comfort, the same Apostle does once and again make mention of his former
conscionable conversation, as matter of present rejoicing unto him, Acts 24.
16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. 1 These. 2. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. So did Job, I have not
concealed the words of the holy One, Job 6. 10. The conscience of his true
faith, worship, and constant obedience to the words of the holy One, made him
assured of comfort in his death; and so elsewhere, Chap. 23. 10, 11, 12. and
Chap. 31. So Hezekiah, Isai. 38. 3. Yea, God is pleased to mention the good
works of his servants for their comfort, Job 1. 8. Joh. 1. 47. Acts 10. 4.
Revel. 2. 2. And he has appointed Officers on purpose to show a man his
uprightness, and thereupon to comfort him, Job 33. 23, 26. And has given every
man a conscience in his bosom, to report the consolations of the holy Spirit,
unto well-doing, and to be a continual feast within him, Prove. 15. 15. As (...),
an habit of practical principles, so it binds us; as (...), a knowledge of
duty done, so it comforts us, 1 John 3. 20. Qui facit praeceptum comparat
paracletum.

The Reasons hereof are,

1. A godly life has pardon of failings; and this is matter of confidence,
That as the husbandman looks on his Field of Corn with joy, though he see
many Weeds amongst it, and Chaff Omnia mundata facta deputantur quando quicquid
non fit, ignoscitur. Aug.
about it: So we may look with joy on an holy life, though many corruptions are
mixed with it, because God does not remember against us the iniquity of our
holy things. Pardon of sin is matter of joy, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Acts 16. 34. And
therefore mixture of sin cannot deprive of it; the Passover was a Feast, though
eaten with bitter Herbs; and a good Conscience is a feast, though mingled with
some corruptions. Nothing spoiled the Feast of a Passover. but Leaven; and
nothing spoils the Feast of Conscience, but Hypocrisy.

2. A godly life is Gods own work: It is not we, Ille facit ut saciamus. Aug.
ep. 105.
but the Spirit of God which works in us, Matthew. 10. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 10. Phil.
4. 13. And as God reviewed his own works with special delight, so may we review
Gods works in us, with comfort and delight: This the Prophet lays as a
foundation of peace, That God works our works for us, Isai. 26. 12.

3. God has commanded comfort, first or last, to wait upon a godly life, as a
proper adjunct thereof, Isai. 32. 17. Psalm. 119. 165. and 32. 12. Romans 14. 17.
And it is a wrong to Gods own appointment, when we have taken in godliness to
shut out comfort.

4. A godly life honors God, John 15. 8. benefits men, Tit. 3. 8. And therefore
being not without Fruit, it is not without a foundation of comfort. When a man
can say, I have finished my course, served my generation, adorned the Gospel,
these and these are the better for me: I have not lived like an empty Vine, as
an unprofitable burden of the Earth; but Gods end has been my end, and his
service my work; this will cause the face to shine, and the heart to rejoice.

Every man would willingly live and die comfortably; no way so to do, but to
lay up a foundation of comfort in an holy Conversation. A wicked man would
gladly forget himself, and run away from himself, Hoc se quisque modo semper
fugit. Lucretius.
He cannot look backward or inward upon himself, without guilt and horror. It
was therefore good counsel of an old Rabbi, Ne sis impius coram teipso. Be not
wicked in thine own sight, learn to reverence thy Conscience. Cor bonum bonus
socius, No such good Company as a good Conscience; a man may then dare to be
acquainted with himself, as some men have written the History of their own
lives. A Leaper cares not much for a Looking-glass, because he shall see by it
nothing but his own deformity. A Bankrupt cannot abide to cast up his accounts,
because he shall find himself so much worse then nothing. But he that has led
an holy life, is like a man which has traveled over a beautiful valley, and
being on the top of the Hill, turns about with delight to take a view of it
again.

But may a man so look back on a godly life, as to put confidence in the good
work thereof? For answer hereunto, we are to distinguish,

1. Inter rationem condignitatis, and rationem ordinis: Between the merit
deserving a Reward, which we deny; and the order and consequence which God has
put between a good work and the reward, making this mercifully, but yet
certainty to follow the other, Psalm. 19. 11. Prove. 11. 18.

2. Inter causam essendi and cognoscends: Between the cause of confidence a
priori, and the Arguments whereby to know it a posteriori.

Our good works are not either the merits or cause of our confidence or
comfort, but only the Freegrace of God, and perfect Righteousness of Christ
bestowed upon us; yet from a good conscience and an holy conversation, as from
Fruits and Effects of Divine love and grace, we may draw arguments of comfort:
For in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, Prove. 14. 26.

2. These words as they bear a retrospect unto Nehemiah's former actions, are
likewise considerable as a Prayer, Think upon me for good. And so good men that
have done much service unto the Church of God, should pray to be remembered by
God in favor and mercy: And this Prayer is

1. For Acceptance both with God, and with his people.

First, That the Lord will be pleased to approve of our poor endeavors to serve
him, and smell a savor of rest in our oblations, that he will let us know that
he is well pleased with what we have done, that we may eat and drink with joy,
when God accepts of our works, as the Wise man speaks, Eccles. 9. 7.

Secondly, That the Lord will make our works acceptable to his people, as it is
said of David, That what soever he did, pleased all the people, 2 Samuel 3. 36.
And of Mordecai, That he was accepted of the multitude of his Brethren, Esth.
10. 3. And so Paul prayed, That his service toward Jerusalem might be accepted
of the Saints, Romans 15. 31.

2. For Condonation; for since no good works of ours do bear proportion to the
rigor and exactness of the Law of God, but that all our righteousness is as a
menstruous cloth, Isai. 64. 6. Omnis nostra humilis justitia, recta forsan, sed
non pura, says Bernard: And since the Lord appointed Aaron De verbis Isaiae,
Sermon. 5.
as a type of Christ, to bear the iniquity of the holy things of his people,
Exodus 28. 38. we must therefore confefs with St. Austin, that our righteousness
Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 19. cap. 27. Et -- contra Cresconin. Gram. lib. 3. c.
80.
here consists* Potius in remissione peccatorum quam in perfectione virtutum.
As therefore Job professes, If I say I am perfect, mine own mouth shall prove
me perverse, Job 9. 20. And David, Enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight no flesh living shall be justified, Psalm. 143. 2. And Paul,
Though I know nothing by self, yet am I not thereby justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. So
this holy man Nehemiah prays to be spared, as well as Chap. 13. 22.
to be remembered, as knowing that the reward is of mercy, and not of debt.
Affuit Satan improbis ^um accusationibus pulsans -- Ille territus and turbatus
ait, Fateor non sum dignus ego nec propriis possum meritis regnum obtinere
Coelorum. Caeterum duplici jure illud obtinens dominus meus, haereditate
patris, and merito passionis, Altero ipse contentus, Alterum mihi donat, ex
cujus dono jure illud mihi vendicans non confundor. Guliel Abbas in vita Bern.
lib. 1. cap. 12.
It was a sweet and golden confession which Bernard made, when he thought
himself to be at the point of death: I confess, said he, I am not worthy, I
have no merits of mine own to obtain Heaven by: But my Lord had a double right
thereunto, an hereditary right as a son, a meritorious right as a Sacrifice: He
was contented with the one right himself, the other right he has given unto
me; by the virtue of which gift I do rightfully lay claim unto it, and am not
confounded.

3. For Vindication against the misconstruction of perverse men. Nehemiah had
many and great adversaries, who raised false rumors upon him, and were likely
to misrepresent all that he did, as the Psalmist complained of his enemies,
That they wrested his words, Psalm. 56. 5. So did the enemies of Nehemiah put
perverse constructions upon his worthy actions, Nehe. 6. 6, 14. And therefore
he prays unto God to remember him, and to strengthen him; to remember them, and
to rebuke them, Verse. 9, 14.

In great services we have all reason to mind these three things; to beg of
God pardon for our failings; acceptance of our services; vindication of our
innocence, and rebuke of our adversaries.

Now because Nehemiah, as a Governor, had work still to do; therefore we may
allow this Prayer a Prospect forward in relation to actions which he was to do:
And they serve for special instruction unto us, upon that account; For besides
that, the Prayer as to these actions, may take in the three former particulars,
of acceptance, pardon and vindication. There are three things more which may be
comprised in it under that aspect: It is a Prayer.

1. For counsel and direction, Remember me to Been ac sapienter majores
instituerunt ut rerum agendarum, it a dicendi initium a precationibus capere.
Plin. Panegyr.
teach me. I have great and weighty businesses go through my hand and care; I
am subject to errors and mistakes; one miscarriage of mine might open the
mouths of many to reproach me, might sadden the hearts of many who love and
honor me, might be of dangerous consequence to all thy people; Remember me
therefore to teach me, show me the way wherein thou would have me to go; let
not mine ignorance betray me to dishonor thee, or to inconvenience thy people.
So David prayed, Make thy way strait before my face, Psalm. 5. 8. Cause me to
know the way wherein I should walk, Psalm. 143. 8. So Solomon, I am but a
child, I know not how to Vide Pinedam derebus Solomonis, lib. 3. cap. 9.
go out or come in: Give me therefore an understanding heart, that I may
discern between good and bad; For who is able to judge this thy so great a
people? 1 King. 3. 8, 9. The greater the actions are which we undertake, the
greater need we have to implore wisdom for the direction of them; Even wisdom
(...) Arat.
to plough and sow is ascribed unto God, Isai. 28. 24, 29. How much more
necessary is it in profound and abstruse actions to implore his guidance?

2. For Assistance; for when we know what to do, we have weak hearts and weak
hands, apt to be discouraged, apt to flag and hang down, except he be pleased
to animate and strengthen them, and as he has promised, that he will hold our
hand that it may not miscarry, Isai. 42. 6. We must all say as Nehemiah did,
Strengthen thou our Certum est nos velle cum volumus, sed ille facit ut
velimus, etc. Aug* de Great. and lib. Arb. c. 16.
hands, Chap. 6. 9. As Jehoshaphat did, We have no might, we know not what to
do, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. And therefore our eyes are upon God; He it is that girdeth
with strength, Psalm. 18. 39. It is not we that do any thing, but the grace of
God which is with us, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Phil. 4. 12, 13. Isai. 26. 12.

3. For Success; for when we are taught, and when we are strengthened, yet still
we must wait upon God for his blessing. We by his help may do our works, but he
reserveth it to himself as his peculiar work to impart the blessing: We may
draw the Patent, but the Prince only can command the Seal, and make it thereby
valid and effectual, Psalm. 127. 1, 2. Paul and Apollo can only plant and
water, but the increase is from God alone, 1 Cor. 3. 6. The race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, (...)* etc. Xenoph. de Expedit. Cyri. lib.
3.
etc. But the power and providence of God overruleth all, Eccles. 9. 11. And
when he pleases, an handful of men shall discomfit a mighty host, as Gideon
did the Midianites with Three hundred men: And fewer then Ten thousand Grecians
did vanquish an army of Three hundred thousand Persians, in the famous battle
at Marathon, as Pausanias Valor. Max. lib. 5. c. 3. Pausan. l. 4.
and Valerius Maximus give the numbers.

Now lastly, with relation unto all performances which he had, or should
dispatch, so this Prayer is a Petition for that gracious Reward which the Lord
is mercifully pleased to encourage his services by, in those great and
difficult works whereunto he calls them, whereby not his servants only but
his own Son, have been animated to endure sufferings and to despise shame, Heb.
11. 26. and 12. 2. For the expected promises do awaken our patience in the
Lords work, Heb. 10. 36. 2 Cor. 7. 1. The Apostle pressed forward to the price,
Phil. 3. 14. Fought his fight, finished his course, kept the faith, in
pursuance of that Crown of Righteousness which was set before him, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
For in keeping the Commandments, there is a great Reward, Psalm. 19. 11.

And this indeed is matter of comfort and encouragement unto us, that though
the works which we are to do, are difficult, and we have withdrawing hearts,
and weak hands, and fainting spirits, and potent enemies, and strong
temptations, and having conflicted with all these, may happily lose our thanks
with men, and possibly be rewarded with hatred and ill will; yet we work for a
Master who remembers all, who keeps an account of but a cup Matthew. 10. 24.
of cold water, which is given to him in any of his poor servants. If a Raven
feed his Prophet; if Dogs 1 King. 17. 6. Luke 16. 21. Jere. 38. 11.
lick the sres of Lazarus; if Rotten rags draw Jeremy from a Dungeon; if a
broken Potsherd stand Job in any stead in his afflictions; if a Basket be a Job
2. 8.
means to deliver Paul, or Stalks of Flax to hide 2 Cor. 11. 33. Josh. 2. 6. 2 Samuel 17. 18, 19. Matthew. 21. 8.
the Spies of Israel; if the cover of a Well do protect David's Intelligencers,
if spread Garments and broken Boughs contribute any thing toward the honor of
Christ, there shall be a Record kept, and an honorable Mention made of the
services even of these inanimate Creatures. O what a good Lord Mal. 3. 16.
Psalm. 56. 8.
do we serve, who keeps a Book for our sighs, a Bottle for our tears, a
Register for but two Mites cast Mark 12. 42. Ruth 2. 8, 9, 14. 1 King. 17. 13,
15. 2 King. 4. 8, 9. 10.
into his Treasury? Who keeps a Record of gleaning of Barley, dipping in
Vinegar, of a Cake of Meal, of a Table, a Stool, and a Candlestick, and
esteems himself a debtor for such poor things, as men scarce value for
ordinary courtesies? Who would not put forth all his strength in the service of
such a Lord, who takes notice of the least that that can be done, who renders
Robes for Rags, Crowns for Crumbs, turns our Water into Wine, gives a weight of
glory for light afflictions, and eternal wages for a little momentary service?

Now in that this good man does as often as he makes this Prayer, make mention
of God as his God, Remember me, O my God: We may from thence certainly infer,
that by this consideration he had been greatly animated in his undertakings, by
the which he was so much comforted in the review of them, and encouraged to
pray for a merciful reward unto them. And this leads us unto Three
Observations, which I shall but name.

I. That a sound faith and particular interest in God as our God, is a special
principle to quicken us in great and honorable undertakings. It set Nehemiah at
first to improve his relation unto the King of Persia for the good of his
people, and the City Jerusalem, Nehem. 1. 11. and 2. 4, 8. And by the same
Argument he encouraged the people to valor and resolution, Nehe. 4. 20. The
Church professes, That in the name of their God they would set up their
Banners, Psalm. 20. 5. David went unarmed in the confidence of that name against
Goliath, because God was the God of the hosts of Israel, 1 Samuel 17. 45. In all
their marches and motions in the Wilderness, this was their comfort, That they
had a God which went before them as their Captain, who was able to scatter all
their enemies, Number. 10. 35, 36. Psalm. 68. 7, 8. In this confidence Asa and
Jehoshaphat applied themselves to God as their God, and went on with courage
and comfort against huge armies of enemies, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. and 20. 6, 7, 11,
12. By this faith, Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jephthah, David, subdued Kingdoms,
obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of the
fire, escaped the edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed
valiant in fight, etc. Heb. 11. 32, 34.

1. Faith is an active and working grace; Remembering (...). Clem. Alex. Strom.
lib. 5. Per fidem Christi non sumus liberi ab operibus, sed ab opinionibus
operum. Luth. Est res viva, potens, operosa, etc. Luther in Genesis 12. fol. 153
Metaphys. lib. 1. Fides maxima and Heroica operatur, Luth. in Genesis 29.
your work of faith, says the Apostle, 1 These. 1. 3. It will not let men be
idle or unfruitful, 2 Pet. 1. 8. It knows what a back and strength it has in
the truth and power of God, through whom it can do all things, Phil. 4. 13. And
thereupon what it finds to do, it does with its might.

2. It is an Heroical grace, as the Philosopher says of Wisdom, That it is
(...), the knowledge of the most honorable things; so we may say of Faith, That
it undertaketh the most honorable things, eyeth great objects, pursues great
ends, looks upon all things as possible, Mark 9. 23. and therefore is not
dismayed at any. What an Heroical Faith was that of Joshuah, whereby he
prevailed with God in Prayer to stop the course of the Sun and Moon, while
Israel was avenged on their enemies? Josh. 10. 12. And though Ordinary Faith be
not a Faith of miracles, yet it has a nobleness and a greatness in it, whereby
it can in the assurance of its interest in God, set upon great actions which
are conformable unto his Will.

3. It is a valiant and victorious Grace, is not afraid of Men or Devils when
it has made sure of God. It quenches the fiery darts of Satan; it overcomes
the world: One David having God for his God was not afraid of Ten thousand of
Armies of men, Psalm. 3. 6. and 27. 3. By his God, he can run through a Troop,
and leap over a Wall, and break a Bow of Steel, Psalm. 18. 29. Nothing is
invincible to Faith, it can level Mountains, Zach. 4. 7. It can Credenti omnia
sunt possibilia; fides facit ex eo quod nihil est ut sit, and ex impossibilibus
facit omnia possibilia. -- Figit cor in illud quod omnino eis absurdum and
impossible, contentum verbo. Luth. in Genesis 27. fol. 405.
more then conquer greatest difficulties, Romans 8. 35, 37. As one man by an
Engine may move Bodies, which an hundred without it could not stir; so by the
Engine of Faith, things are many times effected, which to sense and reason do
seem impossible.

4. It is a Patient Grace; it is not discouraged with every obstacle, nor
dismayed with every terriculament, nor wearied with every encounter; but like
Box, or Holly, and such other Trees, retains its verdure in the Winter, and
holds out amidst all difficulties unto the End, knows how near the promised
mercies are, and does cheerfully press forward toward them; says with those in
the Prophet, Isai. 25. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will
save us. Faith does not suffer a man to draw back, but patiently to continue in
well-doing, that he may after a little while receive the promises, Heb. 10. 36,
39. Romans 2. 7.

5. It is a Praying Grace, can in every exigent and distress call down
invisible help from God: And none go with more vigor about any enterprise then
they, who being backed with potent friends, and having free-access unto great
Treasures, are able in any extremity to obtain the concurrent counsels and
succors of others, to further their designs. The Apostle bids us by Faith to
ask wisdom of God, that thereby patience may go through and have her perfect
work, Jam. 1. 4, 5, 6. God has honored Faith and Repentance, in the Gospel,
above other graces, because they have a peculiar virtue to carry us out of our
selves in Prayer unto God: And no graces do more promote great actions then
self-denying graces, when men have ends and aids above themselves. Carnal ends,
domestical interests, and private affections, do usually obstruct noble
undertakings; because such men, as soon as storms arise, and difficulties shake
them, forsake the proper and internal merits of the business, and hold or alter
their resolutions, according as their own personal hopes or fears do dictate
unto them. And therefore the best way to make strong and steady progress in any
serious employment, is to have God for our God, that in every difficulty we may
be able to have recourse unto him for counsel, wisdom, succor, support, and may
be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might.

II. As Faith is a special principle of action in great undertakings; so it is
a special ground of comfort in the reviewing of them, when we can say, In this
action, though full of many difficulties, yet Faith in God as my God, has
upheld me and carried me through it to the end: I have undertaken it not in
mine own strength, nor in the confidence of mine own wisdom; but in an holy
fear, and comfortable dependence upon God; I have aimed at his glory, and at
public interest; I have not immixed nor interwoven in it, any carnal counsels,
or sinful projects of mine own: I have labored to keep a good conscience in
doing of mine own duty, and have cast my self upon his holy providence for the
event: In this case the Lord does ordinarily return such an answer of peace to
works that are done in the fear of his name, by the rule of his Word, in the
comfort of his promises, and with submission to his providence, as that one way
or other, the heart shall be able to take comfort in it: For Faith is a
successful grace, and has a promise of prospering. Believe in the Lord your
God, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets, so shall you prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20. 20. By Faith, Israel passed through the Red Sea, and saw the victory
of their Faith in the ruin of their proud enemies, Exodus 14. 30, 31.

If the Lord bless the undertaking it self, with a desired success, Faith has
this comfort, That it is a blessing received from the hand of a Father, an
evidence of his love, an accession unto the gift of his Son* with whom he
freely gives all other things. It is the portion which God has graciously
given unto his servant; and though the thing given be good it self, yet the
favor and blessing of God which comes along with it, is much more excellent; as
the Money in the Mouth of the Fish, or the Pearl in the Body of the Oyster is
more precious then that which was the vehiculum of it.

And on the other hand, if the Lord suffer not our labors to succeed, yet he is
our God himself still, and all desirable good is eminently comprised in him,
who is a God All-sufficient to those that walk before him, and are upright.
Though he answer me not in the particular, wherein I waited upon him, he ever
answers Secundum cardinem desiderii, Aug. Confess. lib. 5. c. 8.
in such a way as is better for me: Though the issue be not secundum
voluntatem, according to Bonus Deus qui non tribuit saepe quod volumus, ut
tribuat quod malimus. Aug. epist. 34. and Tract. 73. in Joan. and Tom. 7. lib.
de Unitat. Eccles. c. 19. and contr. Julian. lib. 5. cap. 4. and ep. 121. cap.
14.
my will, yet it is ever ad utilitatem, according to my profit and good. Paul
had not the thing he expressly prayed for, to have the messenger of Satan depart
from him, but he had a sufficiency of grace to uphold him, which was much
better. And as a Merchant is not angry with his Factor, though he send him not
the commodities he wrote for, if he send him those which are ten times more
beneficial; no more is a believer displeased with the good providence of God,
when he receives in answer to his labors and prayers, not what himself
expected, but what God knew much better for him.

III. A special interest in God as our God, is a notable argument in Prayer,
for the obtaining of a gracious Reward unto our sincere Services; for upon this
ground does this holy man thrice desire to be remembered of God: And upon this
ground did our Savior teach his Disciples to build all their Petitions by
calling God Our Father. It is the Prayer of Faith, the Prayer of a righteous
man that is effectual, Jam. 5. 15, 16. For the Lord will not hear those that
regard iniquity in their heart, their Prayer is an abomination, Psalm. 66. 18.
The Lord is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous,
Prove. 15. 29.

It is true, he is pleased sometimes to take notice of the Cries and Prayers of
Nature, and to return some answer unto them, that even wicked men may know that
it is not in vain even for them to seek the Lord; and therefore such as their
Prayers are, such returns he is pleased many times to make unto them. So God
heard the voice of Ishmael crying for Water, and showed Hagar a Well, Genesis 21.
17, 19. He took notice of the humiliation of Ahab, and thereupon respited the
judgment which he had threatened, 1 King. 21. 29. As Abraham, though he gave the
blessing and the inheritance unto Isaac, yet he gave gifts to the rest of his
children, Genesis 25. 5, 6. So the Lord, though he reserve his great Reward for
the heirs of promise, yet he leaves not himself without witness even amongst
others, giving such benefits unto them as they tender services unto him; they
give none but outward services, desire none but outward benefits; and according
to the nature of their services and desires, the Lord answers them with mere
outward good things.

But the Prayer of Faith, pleading the great and precious promises of the new
Covenant, and calling upon God as a Father by the Spirit of his Son shed abroad
into the hearts of those who are heirs of promise, has two great advantages
above any other mere Natural prayer.

1. It is sure to obtain pardon for what failings and miscarriages proceed from
humane infirmity, the Lord sparing his children, as a man spares his own son
that serves him, Mal. 3. 17. and Christ bearing the iniquity of our holy
things.

2. It is sure to obtain spiritual rewards for those holy and sincere
performances, which proceed from the grace and assistance of the Spirit of
Christ; the Lord being pleased, first, by his grace to work all our works for
us, Isai. 26. 12. And then by a second grace to reward them, and to crown his
own mercies in us. For verily there is a reward for the righteous, Psalm. 58.
11. Matthew. 10. 41. And thus we receive grace for grace; the grace of
remuneration for the grace of obedience; the grace of God enabling us to work,
and the grace of God rewarding us for working: For though it be the work which
is rewarded, yet the reward is not of man's work, but of Gods grace, Romans 4. 4.
and 11. 6. Both these graces did this holy Nehemiah beg, in the confidence of
his interest in God as his God. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also,
and spare me, according to the greatness of thy meroy, Nehe. 13. 22. Remember
me to spare me for my sinful infirmities; remember me to reward me for my
sincere performances; and both these only upon the account of thy great mercy.
Nothing but great mercy passes by many sins; nothing but great mercy rewards
weak services.

I have done with the words, and have from all but a word more to say unto you.
What the nature of that great undertaking is, which God has thus graciously
moved your hearts to begin at the doors of his Sanctuary, and to consecrate
your selves unto, by inquiring of him, and seeking of him a right way, is much
better known to you then to me, who have little inspection into such things:
But being a very weighty business, and possibly full of variety and difficulty,
and all men being subject to errors and mistakes, to impotency and infirmity,
to sinful failings and defects, to difference of judgments, and divided
affections, and all humane actions being obnoxious to misconstructions and
various miscarriages: And God having reserved events and successes in his
proper power, it is therefore your duty in all your addresses unto action, to
make your first applications unto God, that he would lead you by his Spirit,
and cause you to make his Word your Counselors; that he would work all your
works for you, and shine upon your counsels and undertakings by his special
blessing; that he would preserve you from all mistakes and misunderstandings,
and pour out upon you a spirit of unity and agreement; that he would forgive
all your failings, and teach you to approve your hearts and consciences unto
him in well-doing; that your labors may so be conversant about treasures here
below, as that your hearts and affections may be upon things above; and you may
with such sincerity, courage, zeal, and holy affections, go through the duties
of your places and callings here, as that you may be able to look backward with
comfort upon a fruitful life, and forward with Faith and Hope upon a glorious
Reward, and conclude your lives and your labors, as Nehemiah does his Book,
with a Remember me, O my God, for Good. And we should all learn so to lead our
lives, with such an eye to Gods Word and Rule, to his glory and honor, to the
service of his Church, and our Generation; to be so diligent, careful, prudent,
sincere, trusty, faithful, in every service which lies upon us, as that when
we come to die, and give up our accounts to him, we may be able to say, Lord, I
have been faithful in that little service wherein thou have employed me, let me
now enter into my Masters joy: I have remembered thy Name, to glorify thee: I
have remembered thy People, to serve them: I have remembered thy House, and the
Offices thereof: I have remembered the Widow, the Fatherless, the Poor and
Helpless, to provide for them: I have remembered every trust imposed upon me,
and have not by any wilful indiligence, imprudence, or unfaithfulness betrayed
it, but have labored to adorn my general calling by sincerity and fidelity in
my particular calling: And now, be thou graciously pleased to remember me for
good, and to spare me according to the multitude of thy mercies.

FINIS.

