The Fortunate Change: BEING A PANEGYRIC TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY, King Charles
the Second, Immediately on his Coronation, being the 23. of April 1661.

By Carew Reynell, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower walk in the
New Exchange. 1661.

The Fortunate Change: BEING A PANEGYRIC TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY, Immediately on
his Coronation.
HOw tranquil are we grown, who heretofore
Were haras'd by the The Covenant, which was the cause of our distempers, had
its Origin from Scotland.
Caledonian Boar!
Was ever such a Change! from Stygian grief
To mount to Heavenly joy! 't were past belief,
But that our eyes so plainly see it, and we
Are drunk already with our liberty.
O Noble Britains! now the King's our own,
Established, Crowned, and in the Regal Throne:
Whose dazzling luster there makes all confess,
That in his Scepter lies our happiness.
When first he was invited to come in,
Joy struck the Dutch stark mad, whose Rummerkin
A minute never stood still: to him they drunk
Rhenish enough whole Dorps for to have sunk;
And then they would not leave the business so
But they must feast him too before he go.
Ten days together did the Canons roar
Till that he parted from rough Schiveling-shore.
When whistling winds did give him passage sweet,
Unto fair Albion's Isle; where the proud Fleet
Never rang such peals of Ord'nance: For the Thunder
Pleased loyal Kentish, but was French-men's wonder.
The English leaped to see their longed-for Prince,
And vowed that they were never happy since
His absence from them: and all persons strove
Which should outdo each other in their love.
The body of the Gentry did appear,
And City too, to own their Sovereign dear.
Their Souls and Vest'ments glittered both that day
Joying him home the twenty nineth of May.
Fresh glories did the Coronation show
The glorious Prince has made his Subjects so.
The Triumphs of the Ancients mean appear,
If we compare them with our Splendor here.
The bravery of Metalls, Gemms, and Art
Were prostrate then, their glories to impart
Unto the Nobles, Cavalry, and those
Who did their Sacred Sovereign enclose.
The City beautified their streets, and built
Lofty, and speaking Arches richly gilt,
As if the Heavens to the Earth did bow,
So things were Pompous and Magnifique now.
Amongst the throngs (Great Charles) that press to see,
Pardon if I approach your Majesty.
And Oh! that I could passion forth my Love,
That all the World might in a passion move
Of highest Joy.
Castalian moisture, and the Phoebean fire
Now Juvenize my Muse, my Soul inspire,
That from the Center of my raptured heart,
My swelling joys may burst, and so impart
Themselves to those, whose loyal spirits know
To value Majesty, and what we owe
To such high Fortune, that with full Career
Runs to all Quarters of our Hemi-sphaere.
And he that will not now let us heart run over
With vast content, shall never be happy more,
By my consent.
Prince of the World, whom Heavenly Powers design,
And Nature too does with the Gods combine,
For to unravel all their stock of Art,
To show what to the World they can impart,
In framing you to be, just as you are,
Beyond what we, poor Mortals, can compare.
But then again of so Divine a Race,
There is but one on Earth assumes the place,
Which makes your Subjects proud, that they possess
Your person, whose sole value is no less
Than all the Orb beside. Great Sir it is you
That makes us great, and makes us virtuous too.
O! you are good, too good to be abused,
Thus to be dealt with, and so basely used
The Schismatics of all sorts, that oppose the Church of England, or Monarchy,
by their former, and continued plottings.
By some, whose ugly, black, and Hellish Souls
Are listed in the first of Plutoe's rowls.
Death in a thousand shapes for punishment
Would not be equal to their vile intent:
Who to affront your Sovereign Power make bold;
Would unthrone God Almighty if they could.
But loyal Subjects by such foils as these,
I hope, seem brighter to your Kingly eyes.
For otherwise men of ill principles will wind in themselves to the Court, and
other Offices of the Nation by Money and such shifts, and under the vizard of
seeming Loyalty, endeavor to disadvantage the Royal and National interest.
Countenance those, brave Prince, and those alone;
So shall you have a sure established Throne.
For if to Heretic in Church or State
You give an Inch, they will take an Ell, and Witness, after the King's extreme
mild Ecclesiastic Declaration, they had the impudence to print and say, the
King ought to stand to the Covenant taken, though his Majesty owned his crime
in taking it, which some ill men had forced on him: and commanded a
forgetfulness of it.
prate
Their wild Opinions to the Multitude,
Who Will know no reason, but from hand that is rude.
Laugh we upon them, like the Black-Moor, they
Will cut our Throats; well Cudgel'd, they will obey.
What would men have? No People's like us free.
We Have best Religion, best Propriety.
All Nations court our true-fram'd Church, and boast
Of all Reformed we are Reformed most.
But we have found the cheat; for now we are sure
To take away property, and alter the Government in Church and State.
Their aim's to be most wicked and impure.
For never honest man, and Learned both,
Did write against English Laws or Subject's Oath,
Or else against They have the most ancient Right to sit in Parliament, who
with the Lords heretofore made up the King's great Council without the Commons.
Bishops, Liturgy, or Rites,
They are the Nerves which parts to the whole unites.
They who will not at least those props maintain
Are all Phanatiques in the highest strain.
No Nation needs more plagues than this alone
That they a Half Episcop. and half Presbyt.
Linsy-woolsey-Church must own.
It Is Union, Sir, and Uniformity
Make's us all happy in your Kingdoms three.
Let Country plat their grounds, contrive their Farms;
And City mind their Shops, not Neighbor's harms.
Let Pastors teach their Flocks true Faith and Love,
And not Sedition, or Superiors move,
Or tell close Counsels, lies, or public news
In Parish Church the people to abuse.
This was their trade whereby They were the Incendiaries that set the Nation on
fire, and then kept it blazing till they were at last even burnt in their own
flames, and looked upon by the then prevailing party as useless Creatures.
themselves they damned
And Souls as fast as that men's Souls were framed.
What Laws, or King and Bishop do appoint
They spit at Heaven who give a public taint.
They who the King's co-ercive power deny
In Church Affairs smell rank of Popery.
But now no more of this: Our King is wise,
Has best experience and discerning eyes.
Leave but the State to him, we need not fear,
Let every Subject mind his proper sphere.
Drowned with delights I am to think that we
Have such a Monarch, such a Monarchy.
Our We have the unity of a Monarchy, as also its nobleness and gallantry, the
benefit of an Aristocracy, and more true liberty and propriety than any
Commonwealth.
Government so framed, we have all is good
In any Nation of our Neighborhood.
The King's Supreme, whose They are but very weak and raw Statesmen, that
think the just prerogative is opposite to the Subjects good; that being the
chief thing, that keeps us from intestine broils, that is the peaceful
Arbitratour.
just Prerogative
Is so well built, as makes our Nation thrive.
He makes our Laws: both the Estates consent:
But the two Houses are no Parliament.
Yet in opposing any of the three
We banish Native Right and Property.
For though some were, who cut us out our Commons,
And would have had us fed as once the Romans:
Yet trying all designs at last we came
Most willingly to our Monarchick frame.
For all the rest, they were so basely vain
They did undo us in a Saint-like strain.
But God be praised, now our wishes are,
To be just As we were for ancient Laws and Government, not as we were for
heart-burnings and tumultuous uproars.
as we were before this War.
And had we These were extreme able Men for politic abilities, and really
meant well for the public.
Laud and Strafford once again
We Would kiss their footsteps, and adore their train.
Our Church is glorious, to whose purity
Apostles, Fathers, Moderns do agree.
Luther and Calvin did the World improve:
Yet had great Crimes, with which we bear in love.
The one did err in point of Sacrament;
The Though he had many scandalous opinions in Discipline, and some points of
Doctrine, yet he was for a public Liturgy, from which no man of whatever
Eminency might recede.
other damned more than was God's intent.
But Oh, the Church of England far out-shines
All Europe else for learned and choice Divines.
She warned by others Crimes laid blessed foundations,
Not mixed with Rome or Schisme's deformations.
Any of these men not only went beyond Calvin, or the best Modern Divines their
Antagonists, but even in abilities and Orthodoxy equaled, if not excelled many
of the Ancient Fathers.
Jewel, and Davenant, Morton, Usher, Hall,
Andrews, and Prideaux did her Mother call.
Brownrigge with Featly and great Hammond too,
And of that judgment we have We have now Bishops and Doctors of the Church
far excelling any Europe has again. So that I wonder at the impudence of
some Persons, that dare so affront God to his face, in presuming so far
against his Angels of the Churches.
hundreds more,
Giants in Divinity which have deserts
Beyond compare of any foreign parts.
These are the men I speak of when I name
The Church of England of un-spotted fame.
I do not mean those Quacks which equal all:
Skip up in Cloaks and tell the World a tale.
Preach nonconformity, and noisome are
To all good Christians; for they breed a War
Where e're they come. Oh! no, it is such as these
Defile our Nation with their When the Covenanters wrote to the foreign Churches
their design, they showed a general dislike to it, especially Diodati, who, as
says a French Author, wrote to them earnestly to cleave to the King, and leave
off defaming the Christian Religion by their rebellious actings.
frauds and lies.
A Surplice choaks them: for that guilty crew
That Sacred badge of innocence never knew.
Their works are dark and bloody; for they wait
A time to garble both the Church and State.
Were Argus with us and his hundred eyes
He never would find their Cabal-Mysteries.
To speak the truth, themselves they do not know
What they would have, or why they teach men so.
But pride and gain it is makes them mad for action.
Oh! itching sweetness for to head a faction.
To be well rid of these it is happiness
Beyond the power of Art for to express.
But that which brings us peace, and makes us blessed,
Is Charles our King, who sweetly Crowns the rest.
His rigidst Enemies no fault can find
With any of his actions; and whose mind
Well understands the malice of his foes:
And themselves better than themselves he knows.
Dread Sir, Great Caesar, or the Macedon,
Had they but half your troubles undergone;
Or had the hardy Man of Carthage seen
Your tugging task; All these had surely been
Startled in Soul at such a strange affair,
And sunk into their Graves for mere despair.
But you did Envy's cruell'st Darts withstand;
And direst shock of fate did Counter-mand.
As Eagles eyes pierce Sun and Heaven's roof:
So you out-dar'd misfortunes, and were proof
Against rude Alarms: for there still did rest
A never-shaken courage in your breast.
Thus you endured, till pleasant gales and loyal
Wafted you over to your Palace Royal.
Monk was God's Engine to bring this about:
If merits could win Heaven, that would do it.
Great Prince, you're greater by unhappy fate,
And more He is one of the greatest Persons this day on Earth, take him as a
King, as a Gentleman, as a pious prudent Person and Father of his Country, or a
Courageous Person and get highly Clement.
accomplished made for Church and State.
That which the Rebels for your ruin design
Turns to a blessing by a power Divine.
For you have seen and suffered, done, and known,
And by experience made so much your own:
That if affairs call Nations to a view,
They cannot judge of things so well as you.
You speak all Languages, you know all Arts,
And persons Eminent for Soul or parts.
The Princes Chief of our next Continent
You know in person, and their hearts intent.
The intrigues of their States, Sir, you have found,
Which makes you able for to pick your ground.
And Judge ye, whether we have not cause to bless God for such a Prince.
Consider really his parts, and then ye wise men of the World, let your hearts
melt in his presence.
thus improved you come unto your Lands
Bravely to strengthen their enfeebled hands.
For in your absence we were all undone:
Wolves in Sheeps Clothing did our Church o're-run.
Propriety we lost, nor had we Laws
Nor yet Religion; but the Cause, the Cause
Which still was changed as new factions Rose,
And plagues on plagues on us they did impose.
Till you came with your sweetning hand, which brings
Balm and Perfumes to change the worst of things.
Oh! how already you have made us see
Your Wisdom, Goodness, and your Piety.
For you no sooner in your Country stood,
But founded bulwarks for their lasting good.
Which you by the Oblivion did declare,
And that we should be perfect friends took care.
That great and factious Army out of hand
You by your sacred Art did soon disband.
You gave free current to the good old Laws,
And rescued us out of the Lyon's jaws.
But, Sir, your wisdom never shined more clear
Than in the Church, whose Father you appear.
By standing to the Apostles Institution
Against the wicked Parity's Confusion.
By choosing Bishops truly good and Learned,
Whose piety by all is plain discerned.
The very mean of those Seraphick Souls
Their Judgments outweigh all Schismatic scrowls,
And are of value and Authority
Above all fancies of the modern cry.
Did the Enemies of the Church of England know, what fond and undigested
Churches these are, they would bite their tongues rather than mention them.
Geneva, France, and Holland-Reformations
Compared to ours are poor and sinful fashions.
But I Will not speak more of their rough-drawn mould:
Because I have heard many of them my self wish it during my abode beyond Sea.
The Synod of Dort they expressed also their desires for a Discipline like
England.
they would change for ours if they could.
For we are pure in Doctrine, and are blessed
By that sweet order which St. Paul expres'd.
Thou sacred Order art that thing Divine,
Rules Heaven it self: All things by thee combine.
Thou art a riddle to the vulgar Crew,
Who cannot judge of things beyond their view.
But yet art Sacred, for the Ancients they
Those ranck'd with Beasts that knew not Harmony.
A silent crime in Doctrine less offends
Our public peace and good, than that which tends
To break our union stamped with Church's Seal,
That hurts but one; this last, the Commonweal.
The learned of all the Nations, Sir, approve
Your Chapel-method, and your order love.
You are a second Constantine to stay
Our Holy Church from falling to decay.
And Alfred-like in state you love to see
Justice run hand in hand with Liberty.
That Royal Starr which at your birth did shine
We see did mark you out in Grand design
For brave Achievements. And your looks appear,
That settling once your Nations void of fear
Your mind will carry you to Regions warm,
And Conquer all, who dare oppose your Arm:
Should French but Swagger, Paris were our own.
If Spaniard frown, his Mexico were gone.
How many Sprightly Ladds do wait when you
Will call them out whole nations to subdue?
Now you have conquered hearts, methinks I see
Empires do homage to your Majesty.
It Is you we cleave to, Sir, and your desires
Bend to your Subjects, whence comes mutual fires
Of ardent Love; the Prince and people join
By Ecclesiastic and by civil twine.
O! God of Heaven what shall we do
Our selves Sufficient Subjects for to show
To him, whose love unto us so extends
That for our good his life and fortune spends!
Who by his presence and his lovely charms
Stills our loud cries, and takes us in his arms.
Heales them that will, and those that will not, he
Does interpose himself, that they agree.
The Nobles, Bishops, Gentry, Clergy, all
Join hands and hearts and Center in White Hall.
We are quiet now, and if we will our selves
We may avoid all rough-hewen rocks and Shelves.
Then one and all cry Charles, for he alone
Has wrought our bliss, gives every man his own
In recompense for which, Sir, this we will do
Give you our Hearts, our lives, and purses too.
FINIS.

