A NARRATION Of several passages betwixt His MAJESTY AND Master B. REYMES, at
NEWMARKET, Concerning the ARMY.

Communicated to the Committee of the Militia of London.

And to the Right Honorable the House of Peers, upon Thurday the seventeenth
of June. 1647.

Die Jovis, 17 Jnnii. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Narration be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

A Narration of several Passages betwixt his Majesty and Master B. Reymes, etc.
IN Obedience to this Right Honorable House their Command, I shall here give
an Account of my admission into his Majesty's presence, and Commission of
delivering this Message to the Militia of London, who have thought fit it
should be communicated to both Houses of Parliament; For the first, partly my
occasions, partly my desire of seeing his Majesty drew me to Sir William
Russels, where he was then playing at Bowls with some of the Commissioners;
among the rest, Major General Brown espying me, proffered me the honor of
his Majesty's hand, which I readily accepted of, so it might be without
inconvenience; and coming near his Royal Majesty, he was graciously pleased
to grant me that favor; withal asking my name, and something else of Major
General Brown, which I heard not; but he soon after came to me, and desired
my attendance at Court, where at my entrance I was received by him according to
his promise, and carried into the presence Room, where he acquainted me with
several passages betwixt his Majesty, the General, Lievtenant-Generall, and
Colonel Whaley, whom the King had that day struck, for being so presumptuous
as to listen while his Majesty was in conference with one whom they suspected
to become from London; From this he fell to a relation of his Majesty's
averseness, and unwillingnesse to comply at all with the Armies proceedings;
saying, That all their actions, for ought he saw, were both inequitable in
themselves, and disproportionable to their pretenses: To this the Major
General added, That it did highly concern both the Parliament and City to be
careful of their safeties, he being an ear witness daily of their threats,
and how much they are animated with the hopes of spoil, and enraged with
hatred to the Parliament; this he desired me to deliver, and so led me into the
Privy Chamber, and his Majesty presently came out of his Bedchamber, He came
toward me, who was standing with the Commissioners; then Major General Brown
anticipated his Majesty's Discourse by an humble entreaty, That he would be
pleased to confirm the Relation he had given me of his Majesty's
unwillingnesse to come from Holdenby, and how much against his will he stayed
here: In answer to which his Majesty clapping his hand on his breast, said;
Upon my life I came against my will, which he told me, I might well conjecture
my self by the relation he was pleased to afford me of his being taken from
Holdendy: But (said he) rather then to be carried by neck and heels (that I
may use his own expression) I went along: Nor am I so in love with their
proceedings that I should be willing to continue here, for I find my self an
absolute Prisoner. As concerning my refusal of returning to Holdenby, which by
some of my Subjects may be mis-understood, for all the reason I had was, that I
chose golden fetters, and a lightsome room before a dark Dungeon, for I
conceive this to be the better Air, knowing that my restraint there should not
be less then here. Then appealing to the Commissioners, he said, Have I not
told the General himself, and others, That I admired by what Authority he
dust thus resist him and his Parliament: To which he answered, There was
necessity. He told them, They did more then are the King, though in the height
of his power, durst, to enforce Justice, either in criminal or Civil
affairs; Indeed I have many times hastened it, but never enforced it, as they
have done, in saying, Give us Justice, or -- Yet for my part (proceeded his
Majesty) I know not what they do, or intend, but what I hear from these
Gentlemen, pointing to the Commissioners, for they have not sent legally to me
since my coming; therefore tell all those whom you think fit Communicants of
this business, that I desire nothing more passionately, then to be with my
Parliament. After this I assumed the boldness to tell his Majesty, that I
thought him then politically absent, when his affection, though not his Person,
was alienated from them: To which he answered, It was very right. Next I told
him, I thought it would be no small comfort to those whom he was pleased to
make partakers of this his intention, that his Majesty's propension and
inclination toward them was so great; which he bid me assure them, whatsoever
other illusive persuasion would possess them to the contrary. And moreover,
That if he were at the head of their Army, he would declare and protest against
all their proceedings; And whatsoever they heard to the contrary, desired them
not to believe, no, though under his hand, unless they spoke with one who had
it: from his own mouth. Last of all, at my demand of some Letter, one of the
Commissioners, Major General Brown, answered, That that was not so safe, and
this would be as effectual. This is all my memory supplies me withal; the
incompactednesse of this Narration shall, I hope, obtain your Honors pardons,
being penned without the least premeditation, and without affecting the least
methodicall style; only in obedience to Your Honour^ Commands, that I might
testify my self to be

Your Lordships most devoted Servant, B. REYMES.

FINIS.

