A REVINDICATION OF PSALM 105.15. Touch not mine Anointed, etc.

From some false glosses, now and heretofore obtruded upon it by Anabaptists:

Proving That this Divine inhibition chiefly concerns Subjects: who let them be
never so Gods servants, yet are they not Gods Anointed as well as Kings.

Being a Reply to a late seditious Pamphlet, called A VINDICATION, etc.

JUDE verse. 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the
Spirit.

Verse. 16. These are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and
their mouth speaks great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration
because of advantage.

Verse. 8. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

Printed by ROGER DANIEL, Printer to the University of Cambridge. Anno Dom.
1643.

WHy, A vindication of Psalm 105.15? Touch not mine Anointed, etc. As if the
man would perversely intimate to these misunderstanding times, that there were
no other Text of Scripture to that self-same sense and scope; from which he
would pretend to vindicate this. And so (this vindicated) the Truth it self
must quite fall to the ground. Else, wherefore keeps he such a whittling about
one slender arrow (as he takes it) when the quiver is full of strong shafts,
and such as fly mainly at the mark? Thinks he the whole hedge must needs lie
along, because the thief tugs hard to steal one stake out of it? This house
(like the house founded upon a rock) is built upon surer pillars, then to
totter though one prop be wrencht away. No, no: I can assure him, the musters
are complete, and the cause will be stoutly maintained against him, though he
would labor never so to invegle one single man away from it.

But this is not all, to deprave a Truth, which is factious heresy: but
there is as ill as that, to strike at the person whom that truth concerns; which
is villainous treachery. For why would he not have Kings here meant to be Gods
anointed? because such are absolutely inhibited here to be touched. So then he
would therefore invalide the truth of the thing, that so he might give license
to the injury of the fact. Princes (for him) might have been here also
understood Gods Anointed, but that it is here so plainly inhibited to touch
them. How to touch them? with a very malignant touch. For so the ancients in
their translation expound tangere, by malignari. We see then who are simply the
Malignants; even those that dare offer to touch the Lords Anointed.

Now seeing he excepts against a single man in this royal army, or rather will
needs insimulate him, to deny his colors; we will set him aside a while, and
have at him with double and trebble forces from another wing. At him? No. I
hold it more honorable to retreat at first onset, rather then offer to
skirmish with a seditious Pamphletter, against whom all victory is but loss
and shame.

Wherefore waving him (for he is prepossest) I earnestly wish all Subjects
(that are Christian and godly) to be well instructed in those words 1. Sam.
24.6, 10, 12. of their right meaning, of their true use. Which done thoroughly,
then themselves may be pleased to call in the man, and ask him. If here be not
a conscience fully convinced of a divine inhibition, when he says, The Lord
forbid. A phrase (both here, and in many other places of Scripture) noting not
only an inhibition, but a conscience convicted of that inhibition: and not
only a conviction, but a resolution not to practice against it: and not only
not to practice against it himself; but not so much as yield or suffer others
so to do. Ask him again, whether those words (of stretching forth the hand
against the Lords Anointed) be to be interpreted and applied not to Kings, but
only to subjects, and as subjects? surely the man's own ignorance is not so
much, as that his malice dares now be peremptory: neither his malice so much,
as to presume he may here also obtrude upon others ignorance. If he have either
knowledge or conscience; he cannot but confess, here is a Divine inhibition
given to subjects, not to Kings; who are (in a peculiar manner) the Lords
Anointed, and not they.

Let all true Subjects learn what David says again, 1. Sam. 26.9, 10, 11. Who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed? He demands Who, in the
universal and indefinite, to note, that no man ought to do such an act, of
what place or power, of what condition or concernment soever. He says, and be
guiltless, to note, there is no humane cause or command can sufficiently
warrant hereunto: much less can Jealousies, suspicions, supposalls, excuses,
pretenses; which also have a guilt of their own, besides that of the fact they
would induce unto. In the 10. verse, he leaves the Lords anointed in every
thing, to the Judgment of the Lord himself; noting, that Kings are punishable
for their offenses, not to men, much less their own Subjects, but are to be
referred here in to God alone. Lastly he says. The Lord forbid, or the Lord
keep me from: noting it to be a work of restraining grace, not to stretch forth
the hand against the Lords anointed. The Fanatticks, out of their Enthusiasmes,
do ill then to incite men hereunto, by making it a motion of the Spirit.

But good Subjects, heed moreover the 2. Sam. 1, 14, 16. See here a just
example of one, that did but pretend to practice contrary to this awful
truth. The Amalekite had not once touched the Lords Anointed to such a fact.
For ('it is evident in this Chapter, as also 1. Sam. 31. and 1. Chron. 10.) that
King Saul dyed by his own act, yet certainly the vile wretch had a will to such
a deed; and that made him boast as if he had done it. Now to boast; and lie,
and dissemble, and pretend in business of so high a nature, and concerning so
mighty a personage as that of a King; was of it self worthy of severest
punishment. And David by this example of Justice, lets us understand that it is
Capital but to intend or pretend violence to the Person of a Prince, the Lords
Anointed. Yea, the villain, presuming others conscience to be as corrupt as his
own, belyes himself in expectation of reward. (So there be many nowadayes that
mischeivously belie themselves to have had hands in such and such perilous and
unwarrantable facts, as indeed they durst hardly approach; in presumption to
please men, and be applauded.) But this Caitiff was taken at his own word, and
abhorred for it: and so ought all such to be served, that dare but falsely
boast to have been actours in foul mischief, amongst men of honest conscience.
Yea, as this Amalekite did belie himself into a Treason, and worthily suffered
for it: so has this Pamphleter (in this lie of his) little less then
treasonably; and therefore ought to suffer in the censure of God, and good men.
Besides this Amalekite; why were Rechab and Baanah, 2. Sam. 4.10, 11, 12.
Shimei, 2. Sam. 16.5. 1. King. 2.46. Zimri, 1. King. 16.9, 10, 18, 20. Bigthan
and Teresh, Esther 2.21, 22, 23. Zabad and Jehozabad, 2. King. 12.20, 21. and,
2. Chron. 24.26. and Chap. 25. verse 3. The servants of Amon, 2. King. 21.23,
24. Why (I say) were all these arraigned, condemned, executed (some according
to the Laws of God, some of men, some of Nature, as we read) and that for
touching the Lords Anointed, with a traitorous touch (whether of hand, mouth,
mind or intent) if there was no Law or inhibition concerning Kings properly to
forbid them so to do. Doubtless the Penalty (so severely executed upon them)
evicts that there was (even to this purpose) an inhibiting Law, both of God, of
Nature, of Nations, and of State.

Further, Let Christian Subjects and conscientious lay advisedly to heart those
words of the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2, 5. And if the Higher Powers be properly
Kings, then whom there is not an higher here on earth, and are only and
immediately under him, that is the Highest of all (which of necessity must be
conceded, if these words of S. Paul be compared with these of S. Peter 1. Pet.
2.13, 14. For what S. Paul here requires (...) S. Peter there appropriates it
to the King, (...): nay, and makes him to be the Higher or Supreme, in a
distinction to the inferior Governor or Magistrate.) And if to resist (take
it as the letter sounds) be an act of far more daring insolence, then to
touch; then ask this Man once more (and you shall easily have his heart and
intent) why this divine inhibition ( of resisting Higher Powers) must needs be
peculiarly understood of Kings: and that divine inhibition ( of touching the
Lords Anointed) must by no means be properly so meant? Tell him, he is nothing
so tender of the Sacred Person, as he pretends: that seeing he can say nothing
against that Place, where the Ordinance is not to be resisted; he only seeks
to cavil at that Place, where the Person is not to be touched. And if (to
excuse himself) he answer that he meant not to deny the general Truth (for he
has confessed it) nor yet to invalide the true intent of other Texts, that might
well be produced to such a purpose; but only to vindicate this of the Psalmist
in particular from the larger application (as he yields) to the stricter
letter: To him I now reply; that I cannot believe this his specious precept,
when I have such evident reasons for his seditious intent: As,

1. If he were satisfied with this Truth (that the Lords Anointed is not to be
touched, nor the Higher Power resisted) why then labors he to vindicate one
text from it, when he knows, there are besides so many to be produced for it?
So that it is more then manifest, it is not a misapplyed proof (as he pretends)
but the main Truth of all, that he strikes at, presuming that the ill affected
and easily blinded through a conceived vindication of one Place will think but
slightly of all other Places to that purpose.

2. If he did only intend ingenuously to vindicate this place of the Psalm;
then what do those other places of Scripture crowded in the Title Page; not
only so impertinent to the pretended vindication; but so calumnious, so
scandalous; and (that I may not say treasonable) merely tending to faction, to
sedition! Even that very thing argues evidently, he never meant to vindicate the
single place of Scripture at the top: but only to calumniate and instigate, by
those many impertinences of abused Scripture at the bottom of his Title Page.
As indeed he does by all those misconstrued and misapplied Scriptures, this
seditious Libill quite throughout. Thus, without doubt, you have his whole
intent.

But now let us examine him according to his pretenses. He would vindicate that
verse of the Psalm from some false glosses lately obtruded on it by
Royallists. Spoken as like a vulgarist as may be. Whose common interpretation
of Scripture is of more error then the Vulgar Translation it self. Since he is
such a zealous vindicator of texts from false glosses; why undertakes he none
of those many hundreds of places, corrupted and wrested by the Papists, and by
the Anabaptists; both Authors and Fautours of the greatest heresies and
schisms? Nay why vindicates he not this very Psalm and verse, from the
Papists: that have taken it from Kings, and given it to Popes? As for the
Papists, he nibbles indeed a little at them, and lets you understand, their
false gloss upon the place has been long since exploded: But yet he is
envious and tells you not by whom. To say truth, it was done, not by any
vulgarist, or Separatist; but by such as he calls Rovallists, and
Court-Divines; Men of learning, piety, loyalty, order, discretion. Nay, and why
vindicates he not this very Psalm and verse, from the Anabaptists; that have
taken it from both Kings and Priests, and given it to the Common people? Hah!
the Anabaptists? why it is only in their justification and behalf, that he is
so eager in the vindication, who have much abused the place, to extirpate
prelacy, confound Magistracy, and induce Anarchie, by planting here (their own
Idol of confusion) Parity. Hence seeking to heighten the vulgar, first to a
spiritual pride, and so to a civil rebellion. As well witnesses, that his main
Collection hereupon, with all the dependances; That subjects are Gods anointed,
as well as Kings. etc. which sounds paradoxall to any sensible ear. And mark
me well; if (together with that) all other the Proofs in this vindication prove
not such.

1. Paradox. That this divine inhibition, was given to Kings, not to subjects.
Given has a fallacy in it. Means he by way of direction, or by way of
obligation? If by way of obligation; then this must follow, That Kings are here
inhibited to touch or harm subjects: but subjects not inhibited here, but
rather left at liberty to touch and harm Kings. But as for the mere direction.
1. It is not so palpable, that these words were directed to Kings. And
therefore the ancient Fathers (whom this man will have conclude after his
exposition) say plainly that these words are not to be found in the history:
but if God uttered them, it was by an Angel or some secret instinct. And
although it be said in the preceding verse of the Psalm, he reproved Kings for
their sakes: yet it is not so evident and express that he reproved there by
this saying. For as much as Saying is not in the Hebrew. And therefore this man
is somewhat too confident; when (saying even to Kings themselves) he
peremptorily glosses upon a word not found in the text. 2. If we look to the
parties literally and historically here concerned (Abraham, Isaac, Jacob) their
story plainly tells, that the inhibition (touch not) is not so much directed
from God to the Kings: as from the Kings to their subjects concerning them.
Genesis 12.20. Genesis 26.11. 3. Say this were directed to Kings; yet was it not to
Kings in regard of their own subjects. For Abraham, Isaac etc. may not be said
to be subject unto those Heathen Kings. 4. It does not always imply, to whom
is the direction, theirs is also the Obligation. For we find sundry both
precepts and promises in the Scripture, that are spoken to one, and yet
concerning another. 5. These words simply considered as concerning the Lords
Anointed may have in them the force of a promise, as well as a prohibition; and
be directed to Princes generally for their faith and confidence, rather then
their charge and obligation. 6. David is inspired to call the patriarchs Gods
Anointed knowing them to be the same duputies, images, and vicegerents of God
(as the times were) as he himself was. 7. It Is absurd and seditious to say,
that these words were spoken only to Kings, and not to subjects; as if the one
were solely included, and the other here excluded from their duty.

2. Paradoxe, That these words were originally spoken and intended only of
Abraham, Isaac etc. -- Who were neither actual Kings, -- nor Kings and Priests
by office -- and they were meant of them, not as they were Kings and Priests.
-- but as forainers and subjects -- and are to be interpreted and applied, not
to Kings and Priests, as they are such -- but to the faithful, though, and as
subjects. In such a throng of Paradoxes, the man is so overseen, that he is
forced in some things to thwart and contradict himself. As that Abraham, Isaac
etc. were neither Kings nor Priests; and again, that these words were not meant
of them, as they were Kings and Priests. Where he grants the ration; only
denies the application. Item, that these words are to be applied not to Kings;
and yet he willingly and cordially professes the place may be aptly applied to
their personal safety. But where he happens to favor himself, let us now see
the truth and the Scriptures contradicting him. 1. When he faith, That these
words were originally spoken and intended of Abraham etc. Originally, it may
be; if he mean historically; but not Only. For thus he bars himself of his
own sense in the general; while he solely ties it up to this Particular.
Spoken it may be too; but not intended. For there is no question but David
intended here to include himself and his Posterity, as The Lords Anointed: as
appears in that he made it for a constant and public Psalm of Thanksgiving,
1. Chron. 16.7. Now acts and instances of perpetual and solemn Services ought
not to be restrained to temporary or private concernments. 2. That Abraham,
Isaac, etc. were neither actual Kings and Priests, neither Kings and Priests
by office. The Man is mightily deceived: They were Kings and Priests (though
not so rituall and ceremonial as afterward) yet actual and by office. It is
too too plain against him; the Patriarchs governed not only in Oeconomie, but
in Polity, even so far as in highest affairs, viz. of life and death, in
peace and war. They likewise built altars, and offered sacrifice. God calls
Abraham a Prophet, Genesis 20.7. and the children of Heth call him a mighty Prince
or King, Genesis 23.6. And as they called the Patriarch a King; so S. Peter calls
a King a Patriarch, Acts 2.29. so little difference he understood between them.
Neither was it other for substance then one government of God, that began in
the Patriarchs, went through the Judges, and ended or rested in Kings. They
being all equally of one type, deputation, presentation, vicegerencie. 3. That
the Patriarchs were subjects. That Is a kind of Bull or contradiction, to say,
Patriarchs and Subjects: for the word Patriarch sounds such a thing as King.
And they were such, as is proved above. And Kings are but Patriarchs or chief
governing Fathers of their Countries. How were the Patriarchs Subjects to those
amongst whom they sojourned? When as Abraham acknowledging himself a Sojourner,
they accounted him nevertheless a mighty Prince amongst them, Genesis 23.4, 6.
when themselves acknowledged that they were mightier then they, Genesis 26.16.
when battle was given by one of these, to four of those at once with victory
thereupon, Genesis 14.14. when they were glad to treat with them as free Princes,
to article and covenant with them for mutual privileges and indemnitie, Genesis
21.21, 22, 23. Genesis 26.28, 29, In one word, If the Patriarchs were subjects to
those amongst whom they sojourned (as this man falsely imposes upon all
Expositours) then let him show us from them, where the Patriarchs did appeal to
their Laws; (either for matter of Policy or Religion) and whether it was
lawful for them so to do? or if they were at any time subdued to that
subjection? But since it is so clear, that the Patriarchs were not Subjects but
Princes; now then it follows necessarily, that these words of the Psalm are to
be understood of them, not as Subjects, but as Princes; and in that respect
chiefly they are here called Gods Anointed. So that now the sense and sum of
these words are literally and genuinely thus to be collected and apprehended;
as God should say, O ye Kings and Princes of the Nations, Touch not, with any
offer or violence, Mine, whom I have chosen to my self before all the nations
of the earth: Mine Anointed, such as are consecrated to be Kings and Princes in
a more special manner then your selves: and have more right (by my promise) to
dwell and rule in this land, then you: Nay, to whom I (whose the earth is and
all that dwell therein) have given and subjected you. So that it is thus more
then manifest that God speaks these words of the Psalm to the nations, even
the greatest and proudest of them, whom he had execrated already and devoted
into subjection to the Patriarchs and Princes whom he had voted and consecrated
either to subdue or extirpate them as enemies; or else (as servants and
subjects) to reign and rule over them.

3. Paradox, That the People and Subjects are Gods Anointed, as well as Kings.
The man does seem cordially to profess, that Kings (in sacred writ) are
commonly called Gods anointed, etc. And to this purpose he heaps his proofs in
figures and not in words at length. And that is not so cordially, as cunningly
done. For the many proofs that are against him them he gives you but grossly,
and in a clutter; as if it did even irk him to recite them. But the few proofs
that he would have make for him, them he drawls out at length. And why so?
Because did he not curtall those former texts, the very recital would
sufficiently confute him. And all sensible men might read at once, and
perceive, That Kings are not only Gods Anointed in the general; but by a
special Emphasis called the Lords Anointed. Nor yet commonly so called; but
really so consecrated. And not only is it with an oil of outward rite and
Ceremony: but according to an Ordinance of perpetual truth and mystery. As
shall further appear in examination of the so vehemently urged proofs for his
opinion. viz. Psalm. 28.8. where the Anointed in the 8. verse, he will have to
be the People mentioned in the 9, verse. When as the 8. verse has the full
sense in it self. And not only so, but David there distinguishes betwixt the
Plebs (as they translate it) and the Vnctus. And speaks of them in the Plural;
of himself (for Gods anointed) in the singular number. Neither is it unlawful
for David in the Psalms, to speak of himself in the third Person; as appears
Psalm. 18.50. which is the next place, he seeks to wrest to his purpose. Where
since he cannot deny (his Anointed) to be David and his seed: he therefore will
have David and his seed there, to be Christ and his Elect. Which sense (we deny
not) may be orthodoxally admitted in the allegory: but by his leave, we may
not suffer the genuine sense of the letter to be rejected; unless he can make
it plain, there is such an absurdity in the literal that it cannot stand with
reason, but must necessarily therefore be transferred to another sense. Now
these words in the bare and express letter are fair and full sense, either
backwards or forwards; His King, his anointed, David: David, his anointed, his
King. Which words (either way) will primarily bear no other sense then this,
that David proposes himself to be Gods Anointed, as he was a King. And is not
this a most excellent Vindicatour now, and sincere? that pretending (as his
main work) to rescue and rectify one verse of a Psalm, according to the
original sense and meaning; and yet to that purpose, sticks not to falsify
and distort too? His next Place is Hab. 3.13. Is It possible that the man
should be so blinded, as not to distinguish there, betwixt, for thy People and
with thine anointed? The words expressly teach, that the Prophet there speaks
of them as two. As namely, for them, whose benefit was the end; with him, whose
authority was the means. It is very plain from the two preceding verses, that
by the People, the Prophet intends the Israelites; and by the anointed, Joshua,
their Captain. And I pray now, whether was Joshua a Subject, or a supreme
Magistrate? Thus he is quite out of the old Testament; where Kings and Princes
(in a peculiar manner) are above 30 times called Gods anointed. Now let us see
how he would fain help himself in the New, viz. 2. Cor. 1.21. Now, though I
might here distinguish of anointing; yet the exactness of the Apostles own
expression bids me here save the labor. Has anointed (says S. Paul to the
People of Corinth) not you, but us, and has established us with you; it may be
precisely interpreted of his Official rather then Personal unction; as of his
Apostleship, preisthood, ministry; to which God had anointed or ordained him,
and had established or confirmed him with, or amongst them. But what say we to
that Place he cites, 1. Joh. 2.27. Here I yield, that Gods faithful People,
though Subjects, have an anointing: but I dare not therefore infer hence,
that they are (in all points) Gods anointed, much less, as well as Kings. For
the Anointing here, is the holy Ghost, and his gifts; who though he anoint all
the Elect to the general calling of Christians; yet not to the special
callings of Kings, and Priests. All true Christians are anointed with the
spiritual unction, that of regeneration: but not with the regal unction, that
of inauguration; nor with the sacerdotall unction, that of ministration. Lastly
to those Places, 1. Pet. 2.5, 9. Rev. 1.6. and 5.10. Those Places are
sufficiently cleared by all orthodox Divines (whether you call them Lutherans,
or Calvinists) against the Anabaptists: who blindly presuming hence, of an
equal account with God; would hereupon proudly account themselves equal with
all men. And thus abuse those places, as arguments for their fanatic Parity,
both in Church and Commonwealth. But the learned and orthodox (as I say)
dissolve those arguments (and in that resolve all good Christians) by
distinguishing: As namely, that all true Christians are Kings and Priests. 1.
Comparatively, in reference to the heathen and uncalled: as may well be
gathered from those words in the old Testament, Exodus 19.6. from which these in
the New, are taken, and applied. Yea and S. Peter expresses so much, a royal
Priesthood, that is, a chosen generation, a peculiar people, which in times
past were not a People. 2. Spiritually, and in a large sense, As S. Peter also
expounds himself in the one place, a royal Priesthood, that is an holy nation,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices. And so does S. John in the other Kings and
Priests, not to men, but to God. Offering up sacrifices of prayers and praises;
reigning and ruling over their own carnal lusts and concupiscences. And thus
much the man himself cannot but confess, That all true Christians are Kings
and Priests in a spiritual sense, though they be but Subjects its a Politic
sense. Having said thus much himself, I wonder what it is the Man would now
contend for. Let Christians be subject in a politic sense (yet not merely
politic neither but out of Conscience, and with respect to the divine
ordinance) and who will deny them to be Kings and Priests in a spiritual
sense? Will any Christian King envy his Subjects the eternal crown of glory
(as he speaks) and their reigning with Christ for ever, so they entrench not
upon his temporal Crown; nor usurp to reign with him here on Earth? After
this his own distinction, mark now what is become of his Proposition, That all
the faithful are Gods anointed, as well as Kings. Belike he means it only in
a spiritual sense: and then it is no more, then if he had said thus, That all
good Christians are Christians as well as Kings; because Christian signifies
Anointed.

Paradox, That it is more unlawful for Kings to make war upon their
subjects, by way of offense, then for subjects to take up arms against Kings,
by way of defense. All this is besides the vindication of the Psalm; I shall
therefore be the less upon it. Otherwise this very point were worth a
treatise: which is not to be looked for in a pamphlets refutation. That poor
piece of the Psalm is but the pretense, here is the matter intended. While he
stumbles about that, he hopes the ignorant and ill-affected will swallow down
this. But he shall never resolve nor persuade wise men and conscientious;
unless he will take pains not to determine rashly, but to discuss orderly,
and instruct soundly, in these 3. points at least, 1. What war offensive, and
defensive is. 2. How far forth a man may be defensive only and yet not
offensive. 3. Whether the defensive, or offensive, be on this side, or that. To
determine all these aright, were to satisfy consciences: but to urge and
inveigh upon supposalls, is to entangle them so much the more. Yet consider a
little what he says upon supposition: It is more unlawful; that argues some
unlawfulness, as well on one side, as another. Subjects may take up arms
merely defensive; Not offensive then in any case; much less merely offensive.
Why may they do so, as he says? because they are Gods anointed too. Is that
his main reason for their taking up arms? well. And how are they Gods
anointed? He says himself, in a Spiritual sense. Why then, by the forte of
his own argument, their arms ought only to be spiritual. For they are not
(as he grants) Gods anointed in a Politic sense; and therefore politic their
arms must not be. But he has other under-reasons. Because God has forbidden
Kings to injure or oppress their subjects, being his anointed faithful
Christians. So are they inhibited though their subjects were Pagans. And God
has likewise inhibited subjects to resist and injure Kings. Item, God has
punished and plagued Kings for so doing. Note then, that it is in God to punish
them. And, besides that he delivers them to Kings to punish them; God will
likewise plague subjects if they offend their Kings. Item, that there is no law
of God or man, that has given Authority to Kings, to injure or oppress their
subjects -- wage war against them. etc. How much less is there for subjects
then? Item, that there is an Oath at the Coronation for Kings to observe: So is
there for subjects likewise, an Oath of Allegiance. But why persist I in
replying to these? Himself says, he ranks his reasons to clear this point,
That Kings must no more offer violence to their subjects persons or estates
(without legal conviction, and just cause) then they offer violence to their
Kings. A point as clear as the noon day though he had produced never a reason
for it. Beside these, and many his other instances of Scripture, although true
in themselves, and to be regarded with tremblings: yet thus abused by this vile
man, they are only to be answered with indignation and abhorring: because they
are urged upon false grounds and suppositions, and with a calumnious and
seditious intent.

5. Paradox, That Kings were created by; and for their subjects, etc. The rest
of it is so sawey, that it is not for a modest man to repeat. And this also is
quite besides the proposed vindication: and serves only to speak the intention
of the Author, Sedition. Yet is this he says, as false, as seditious, quite
contrary to Scriptures. As. Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings reign (says God) and
therefore not by men. Dan. 4.2. The most High gives the Kingdom to whomsoever
he will; and not they. Romans 13.1, 2, 3, 4. The higher Powers are Gods
ordinance, and not man's. Gods Ministers they are, and therefore not the Peoples
Servants. Why are they called Gods, Psalm. 82.6. John 10.34, 35. but because
they are immediately from God, and represent God here on earth, as types and
images of Gods divine providence, Christ's Kingly office, and the Angelical
order: yea and as the perfection of humane society and of the Communion of
Saints? What say they; when even wicked Kings are Gods ordinance. 1. Sam.
12.13. and sent of God, not for their own so much, as for the peoples sin,
Prove. 28.2. We say, there are four ends of a Kings being: the first is Gods
glory; the second is his own Salvation; the third is the good of the Church;
the fourth is the welfare of the State, (which consists as well in punishing,
as rewarding, Romans 13.3, 4.) Now because the people are one end; will they
therefore claim to be the whole efficient? though the people may secondarily,
and in some circumstances, be interessed; as in election (where any such
custom is) in the inauguration, the Counsel, the assistance, etc; yet can
they have no right of challenge to the substance, or primary fundamental, the
Ordinance, the Power, which is of God.

Yet let us take the best of this man as well as the worst. His intent (he
says) is not to foment this unnatural destructive war, etc. It was
execrable for any man to say otherwise. And therefore even those that endeavor
it are notwithstanding ashamed to proclaim it. But he professes further; that
Kings are Gods Anointed, and in that respect, their Persons are sacred; and no
violence ought to be exercised upon their persons, especially by their
subjects. As he confesses, is clear, 1. Sam. 24.3. to 12, 17, 18, 19. and chap.
26.7. to 25.2. Sam. 1.2. to 7. Nevertheless, this is not so cordially spoken
as he pretends. Because he conceals a great part of the truth. For Kings are to
be preserved inviolable, not only in their persons; but likewise in their Name
and Honor, as is also clear, Exodus 22.28. Eccles. 10.20. Also in their
Government and Authority; Romans 13.1, 2. Jude 8. As also in their rights and
revenews, Matthew. 22.21. Romans 13.7. These be matters worthy of a serious
treatise by it self (scarce to be meddled with in a by-confutation) to the
intent people may know, that all Allegiance, and obedience of subjects, is not
merely tied to the person of a Prince. And therefore that a care or zeal to the
person, is not to be pretended in an injury or neglect to all the rest.

But I hold my duty here done to revindicate Psalm 105.15. from such false
glosses as are notoriously obtruded on it by him here: and have been heretofore
by (his like) the Anabaptists. Now therefore his proofs all proving Paradoxall;
let us (ere we end) look a little into his Authorities. His Authorities? where
are they? why he says, S. Augustine, with sundry other Expositours, conclude
of the sense of this place according to his purpose. He but says so: but let
us hear and see what S. Augustine himself, and others say indeed upon the
place.

S. Augustine moves this question, How the Patriarchs could be called anointed,
antequam esset unctio, before the regal anointing as yet was. It is very plain
he speaks of the regal anointing; for he adds immediately, Ex qua hoc nomen
impositum est Regibus: by which anointing the name Anointed is attributed to
Kings. So that the sum of the Fathers quare is only this, Why this name
anointed (usual and proper to Kings) should be spoken of the Patriarchs, while
as yet no such unction was in use? And it is to be supplied in answer, That the
regal unction as yet was not in the rituall way of it; but in the virtuall way
it was. And if the Man think to snatch advantage, because the Father speaks at
large, ideo Christi, quia etiamsi latenter, jam tamen Christiani. That the
Patriarchs might therefore not amiss be called anointed, because they were
even then Christians, though veiled. Let him look before that, and he shall
find him expounding it in a straiter sense: Vnde ergo illi jam tunc Christi
appellabantur? nam Prophet as illos fuisse legimus. Why were the Patriarch;
then called anointed? because (as we read) they were Prophets. And before that
(as the first sense) speaking of the special anointing; he males the same to
begin and rest only in Kings. Quod a Saul coepit, cui David success it in
regno, at que inde caeteri and reges Judae, and reges Israel, contimtatione
sacratae consuetudinis ungebantur. Which name anointed began in Saul, whom
David succeeded in the kingdom, and thence was the sacred rite continued to
the several kings of Israel and Judah. Now let the Man show us how S.
Augustine excludes kings here from being Gods anointed, or (respectively)
expounds it of Subjects, or once intimates hereupon that subjects are Gods
Anointed as well as Kings.

S. Hierome vindicates this place of the Psalm justly against certain Jewish
Doctors, who in hatred to Christ our Lord, the true Messiah, perversely seemed
to argue hence, That none were to be called Christi, Anointed, that were not
anointed with the Regal unguent. Whereupon he inserres, Ecce, ante Legem,
Patriarchae, non uncti regali unguento Christi dicuntur. Behold, before the
Law, the Patriarchs are called Anointed; which were not anointed with the
regal unction. And that he means materially. And even that intimates that
Kings, which (since the Law) are not anointed so materially and so ritually,
are nevertheless virtually and divinely, Gods anointed. Further, lest any
should imagine, that he should exempt Kings from being specially understood in
this place; he elsewhere applies it to them alone. As commenting upon Isai.
45.1. Where God calls King Cyrus his anointed, and that according to the manner
of the Hebrews, whose regal ensign was anointing; Vnde and Saul Christus
Domini dicitur, and in Psalmis legimus, Nolite tangere Christos meos. Whereupon
(says the Father) Saul is called the Lords anointed; and likewise we read in
the Psalm, Touch not mineanointed.

These two be the chief of the ancient Expositours whom Prosper, Arnobius,
Cassiodore, venerable Bede, Bruno, and others do follow, distinguishing indeed
mostly betwixt the material, and the spiritual Chrysme or unction. But it
behooves to understand the reason of this wariness in discerning. It was
principally because the heretical Rabbines strove here to exclude Christ, as
the schismatic Anabaptists strive here to exclude Kings. We conclude
therefore against them both, making up the true and full sense of the verse of
this Psalm, with that of another, viz. Psalm. 45. Though all Christians be Gods
anointed in a spiritual sense; yet as concerning Christ, and Kings; (one in
the mystical, the other in the litetall sense) God, even their God, has
anointed them above their fellows. Wherefore be it properly and specially, not
only said, but laid to the Consciences of all men, young and old, rich and
poor, high and low, many or few,

Touch not mine Anointed, etc.

FINIS.

