THE Racovian Catechism;

WHEREIN You have the substance of the Confession of those Churches, which in
the Kingdom of Poland, and Great Dukedom of Lithuania, and other Provinces
appertaining to that Kingdom, do affirm, That no other save the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is that one God of Israel, and that the man Jesus of
Nazareth, who was born of the Virgin, and no other besides, or before him, is
the only begotten Son of GOD.

Printed at Amsterledam, for Brooer Janz, 1652.

To the Christian READER.
SEeing it has pleased Almighty God, to bring this good discourse to thy
sight; We are certain wast thou sensible of thy benefit that might redound to
thy soul upon the Embracing of the Doctrine therein contained, thou would not
look upon it, as men now a days look upon most Books, with a careless
unresolved resolution, to embrace what shall appear to them to be truth; but
rather to please their curious fancy, then nourish and refresh their souls with
good and wholesome Doctrine, the effects whereof would bring them to happiness.

We wilt not here make it our work to plead for the excellency of this
Discourse, but leave that to the Book it self. Only our advice to thee is that
(seeing the things that are therein asserted, are built upon plain texts of
Scripture, without any consequencies; and seeing its tendancy is so much to the
propagating of holiness (without which no man shall see God) and likewise that
it is not the opinion of a particular man only, but of several Churches of
Jesus Christ) thou would give the more heed to what thou read. Obtain the
honor to be like the Noble Bereans, by searching in the Scripture, whether the
things contained therein be so or not; beg of God, that he would illuminate thy
understanding, in seaching after the truth, and having sound it, sear not to
own it; God will stand by those that stand for him, and if he be on thy side
it is no matter who is against thee; continually beg of God more and more to
confirm thee in the truth, and engage him to make thee yet more wise, by
improving the wisdom thou have already obtained.

Consider how all along the truth (or at least that which was most true) has
been cried out against and persecuted under the notion of Error. How was our
Lord Jesus Christ himself looked upon, as a blaspheamer? Yea, and put to death
on that account; neither has the malice of men, rested in crucifying their
Lord, but has extended much farther, even to the killing his Apostles,
Prophets and Disciples, and all upon the same score of blasphemy and Error.

What is it that keeps Mahomets Religion in Turkey alive, but that it is death
to dispute it? And what keeps the Popes interest up in Spain, and other
Countries, but inquisitians and Tortures, which are executed on those who deny
his supremacy, and argue against his Religion? And what is it that will keep
England from ever having the knowledge of the truth flourish within its
Dominion and Terri^ories, but harkening to those that call themselves
ministers, who rather then they will part with their reputation in the world
and their sat benefices, will cry down the greatest truths for blasphemies? as
it is too apparently in these our days, otherwise how is it, that
notwithstanding our Lord Jesus Christ says, He that will be my disciple must
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, etc. and through much tribulation
we must enter into the kingdom of God; they will rather alter their Religion
from Episcopacy to Presbytery and to Episcopacy (or any other Religion that the
state and the generality of men are of) again (so they may live at ease and
have their bodies well pampered) then be a disciple of Jesus Christ upon such
terms: yea, and rather then they will enter into the kingdom of God through
tribulation, or persecution; they will maintain such a Doctrine, and stand up
for such a Religion; the profession whereof shall never expose them to
sufferings for it: Yea and if they cannot maintain it by Scripture or reason,
they will (as much as in them lies) procure the assistance of the civil
Magistrate to enforce it upon the people, though it be against their
consciences: Which if we did but well consider, is a sufficient argument to
evince the falsenesse of their Religion; it being so unlike to the Religion of
Jesus Christ and his Apostles, of whom we never read that they desired the
civil Magistrate to protect them, or to establish their Religion by force upon
the people, for that indeed is but (as best) the way to make men hypocrites, in
that the most of men will rather embrace a Religion against their consciences,
then suffer any thing for religion.

A.d therefore seeing the state of things lies as we have before declared, how
happy will he be whose Religion is built upon the Doctrine of the Apostles and
Prophets, (Jesus Christ being the chief corner stone) that has the greatest
reason of its side that possibly can be imagined; doubtless it will carry him
through all difficulties whatsoever.

That this discourse is so, we leave to thy consideration, upon thy weighing of
what is contained therein withal seriousness, and that the truth may never
(after so long waiting and looking for it) be shut out from thee, nor any of
thy country men; desire the Lord still to protect our Governors, and put it
into their hearts to continue that Liberty, which of late, through the mercy of
Almighty God we have enjoyed. That they may never harken so to our pretended
Ministers, as to suppress the truth under the Notion of error and blasphemy;
especially since they and we have hitherto pretended to stand up for the truth,
and for liberty in practicing thereof: That the blessing of the Lord may
continually attend thee in thy progress upon this account, is and shall be the
continual prayers of,

Thy friends to love and serve thee in the Lord Jesus Christ,

Of the holy Scriptures.
QUESTION. I Would fain learn of you what the Christian Religion is.

ANSWER. The Christian Religion is the way of attaining eternal life,
discovered by God.

Q. But where is it discovered?

A. In the holy Scriptures, especially that of the new Covenant.

Q. Is there then any other Holy Scripture, besides that of the New Covenant?

A. Yes.

Q. What is it?

A. The Writings of the old Covenant.

CHAP. I. Touching the certainty of the Holy Scriptures.
Q. BUt whence appears it that the Holy Scriptures both of the Old and New
Covenant are certain and not suspected?

A. Hence, in that there is not only no cause why it should be doubted of
them, but evident ground, as far as the matter will bear, why credence should
be given to them.

Q. How will you make it good that there is no cause why it should be doubted
of them, especially as to the Scripture of the New Covenant?

A. There are apparently four causes, for which the truth of books may be
doubted of, none of which has here any place.

Q. What are they?

A. The first is, when the Author is altogether unknown; the second, when the
Author is suspected; the third, when it appears from elsewhere that the Book
is corrupted; the fourth, when there are sufficient testimonies to impeach the
credit of the book.

Q. Tell me how the first cause has here no place?

A. Because from the very beginning of the Christian Religion, all Christians,
though otherwise infinitely differing in opinions amongst themselves, did
notwithstanding herein unanimously agree, that the Authors of the books of the
New Covenant were those very men whose names are prefixed to the books; so that
he who will oppose himself to so unanimous an agreement of so many ages, ought
to allege a just and pregnant ground thereof.

Q. Has there not been some doubt amongst the Ancients touching some of these
Authors?

A. Yes, but inasmuch as they could allege no just ground of doubting, the
doubt utterly vanished.

Q. But how is it that the second cause has here no place?

A. An Author is deemed to be of suspected credit, if he have not exact
cognizance of the thing which he describes, or describes it otherwise then he
knows the thing to be: or finally, if there be some hints thereof in the very
writing it self; but no such thing can be detected in those Authors, as you
shall in particular understand.

Q. Why cannot the first be here discovered?

A. Because no suspicion can possibly creep into the mind concerning those
Authors, as if they had not had exact cognizance of the thing which they
described, in that some of them were eye and ear-witnesses of the things which
they set down, and the others were fully and accurately informed by them
concerning the same.

Q. Why cannot the second?

A. Inasmuch as the Christian Religion does prohibit lying, even in the
smallest matter, it is clear that those Authors, who were not only Christians,
but also the first Doctors of the Christian Religion, could by no means lie,
especially in a thing of such importance, as would draw the whole world into
error.

Q. Why cannot the third?

A. Because in these books there is no repugnancy, no falsity, as by an
accurate discussion of all the places which seem to make show of the contrary,
might easily be made to appear.

Q. You have shown how two causes of the four have here no place, show also why
the third cannot be admitted?

A. If the third cause had here any place, it must be either that those
writings have been wholly corrupted, or in part. They could not be wholly
corrupted, for then neither would those be the Authors of them, whom we a
little before proved to have been the Authors. But if they were corrupted in
part, certainly it would either be in those things that are of great moment, or
in those that are of small moment. Not in those things that are of great
moment, inasmuch as the corrupted part would betray it self, by being
unsuitable to the uncorrupted ones. But if there be any corruption in some
things of slight moment, that neither is nor ought to be of so great weight, as
to render the credit of the Books suspected.

Q. Can you not also prove another way, that the writings of the new Covenant
have not been corrupted?

A. Yes, for it is altogether incredible that God, whose goodness and
providence are immense, has suffered those writings, wherein he has proposed
his Will, and the way to eternal life, and which through the succession of so
many ages, have by all the godly been received and approved as such, to be any
ways corrupted.

Q. How will you prove that the fourth cause has here no place?

A. You might of your self have observed that already, in that there are no fit
and sufficient testimonies of credit-worthy men, wherewith those writings may
be pressed or oppugned.

Q. Inasmuch as you have taught that there is no cause why it should be doubted
concerning the writings of the new Covenant, teach likewise why credence should
be given to the same.

A. Although this very thing, namely, that there is no just cause ^o doubt of
them, afford a strong argument why credence should be given to them, yet will I
allege a most weighty consideration to win your assent.

Q. What may that consideration be?

A. Even the truth of the Christian religion, which being comprised in those
books and no others, it is evident that credence must of necessity be given to
them.

Q. But how will you prove to me that the Christian Religion is true?

A. By the very Author of the Christian Religion, who was a divine man; and by
the very Religion it self, which is also divine.

Q. Whence does it appear that the Author of the Christian Religion was a man
truly divine?

A. From the truly divine miracles which he wrought. As also because having
undergone a most bitter death in witness of the Religion delivered by him, he
was by God raised from the dead.

Q. How know you that he did miracles, and that those miracles were divine?

A. It is evident that he did miracles, not only from the testimony of his
Disciples, but also of his professed enemies, such as the Jews are. And that
those miracles were divine you will easily acknowledge, when I shall have shown
that he was raised from the dead by God. For since he affirmed, that he wrought
his miracles by the power of God, his Resurrection from the dead puts the
matter out of question, and consequently evinceth that his miracles were truly
divine.

Q. Show therefore that he was raised from the dead by God?

A. That he was raised from the dead by God, is hence apparent; first because
there were many presently after his death, who constantly affirmed that they
had seen him raised from the dead, and for this very reason, because they
affirmed him to have been raised from the dead, they suffered many calamities,
and some lost their very lives. Again, an innumerable multitude of others
receiving the same from those that went before, did upon the same ground endure
very great calamities, and most exquisite deaths. From whence it follows
necessarily, either that Jesus was raised from the dead, or that they by
constantly affirming a thing which they knew to be false, did willingly involve
themselves in so many calamities, and so bitter deaths. The latter could by no
means come to pass, inasmuch as very common sense does abundantly refute it;
And therefore it is apparent that the first is altogether true.

Q. What other argument hereof have you?

A. Namely, that it is altogether incredible, that such a Religion as brings no
worldly splendour, commodity or pleasure to the Professors thereof, but rather
robs them of the same, casting them into various straits and afflictions,
should be embraced by so many Nations, had it not been confirmed by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Q. You have shown that the Author of the Christian Religion was a divine man;
I would also have you show, that the very Religion it self is divine?

A. You may already have perceived, that from the divine Author thereof,
nevertheless it may be also acknowledged from those things whereof this
Religion does consist, namely from the Precepts and Promises thereof; as also
from all the circumstances of the same Religion.

Q. How is it gathered from the Precepts and Promises that this Religion is
divine?

A. Because both the Precepts comprehend perfect holiness of life, and the
Promises perfect happiness.

Q. What are the circumstances of this Religion?

A. The rise, progress, efficacy, and effects thereof.

Q. How can you prove by the rise thereof that it is divine?

A. This may be easily perceived, if you consider who they were that first
founded this Religion; namely mean and contemptible persons; and withal, that
they did it without any worldly power, wealth, wisdom, or authority, making
use of nothing but preaching and persuasion, to draw men to their opinion.

Q. How prove you the same by the progress thereof?

A. Because in a very short space this Religion wonderfully increased, whilst
innumerable Nations and persons, both learned and unlearned, noble and ignoble,
of either sex, renouncing the Religions received by tradition from their
Fathers, embraced this Religion, being neither allured with any commodities of
this life, nor affrighted with any calamities that usually attend this Religion.

Q. How prove you the same by the efficacy and effects thereof?

A. First, because it could be suppressed by no counsel, nor craft, nor force,
nor power of men, next, because it took away all the old Religions, saving the
Jewish, which it acknowledged for such a Religion as proceeded from God, and
was to continue for a certain time.

Q. Hitherto you have shown how firm and certain the writings of the New
Covenant are, show also that those of the Old Covenant are no less firm?

A. The Scripture of the New Covenant testifies that the writings of the Old
are certain, and consequently since the witnesses are true and certain, as
appears by what has been said; their testimony likewise must needs be true
and certain.

CHAP. II. Touching the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures.
Q. THat the sacred Scriptures are firm and certain, you have sufficiently
proved, I would therefore further learn, whether they be so sufficient, as that
in things necessary to eternal life we ought to rest in them only?
A. They are altogether sufficient for that, inasmuch as Faith on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and obedience to his Commandments, (which twain are the
requisites of eternal life) are sufficiently delivered and explained in the
Scripture of the very New Covenant.

Q. If it be so, then what need is there of Traditions, which the Church of
Rome holds to be necessary unto eternal life, calling them the unwritten
Scripture?

A. You rightly gather, that they are unnecessary to eternal life.

Q. What then must we think of them?

A. Not only that they were fancied and invented without just cause and
necessity, but also to the great hazard of the Christian Faith.

Q. What may that hazard be?

A. Because those Traditions give men an occasion of turning aside from divine
Truth to falsehood, and the imaginations of men.

Q. But they seem to assert those Traditions from the very Scripture.

A. Those testimonies which they produce out of the Scripture to assert those
Traditions, do indeed demonstrate that Christ and the Apostles spoke and did
certain things which are not comprehended in the holy Scriptures, but no ways
prove that they were delivered from hand to hand by them to be perpetually so
conserved, or that those things which are consigned in the holy Scriptures, are
not sufficient to Religion and salvation.

CHAP. III. Touching the clearness of the holy Scriptures.
Q. YOu have already shown that the sacred Scriptures are both certain and
sufficient: I would entreat, you, also to show; that they are clear to all, and
easy?

A. Although some difficulties occur in them, yet are the holy Scriptures,
especially that of the New Covenant, easy and clear, in those things that are
necessary to salvation.

Q. How will you demonstrate that?

A. First, inasmuch as God would have the holy Scriptures to that end and
purpose delivered to men, that they might thereby come to the knowledge of his
will, it is altogether incredible that he would have such writings delivered,
from whence his will could not be perceived and known by all. Next, because in
the very beginning of the Christian Religion, the Apostles directed their
Epistles, wherein the chief mysteries of the Christian Religion are contained,
to plain and simple men.

Q. Whence arise so many dissentions in drawing out the sense of the Scriptures?

A. Because men either negligently read the Scriptures, or bring not a sincere
heart, discharged from all encumbrances and lusts, or do not with such care and
carnestnesse as is requisite implore the divine assistance, I mean the gift of
the holy Spirit, which God has promised to those that call upon him night and
day.

Q. If so, what use is there of teachers?

A. That men may by them be stirred up to maintain and practice those things
that they understand, and be assisted in understanding the more difficult ones.

Of the way of Salvation.
CHAP. I. Touching the causes of discovering the way of Salvation.
Q. AS to the holy Scriptures, I acknowledge my self to have received
satisfaction from you, but forasmuch as in the beginning you said that this
way, which leads to immortality, was discovered by God, I would fain know for
what reason you said so?

A. Because as man by nature has nothing common with immortality, so could he
not by himself possibly know the way leading thereunto.

Q. Why has man nothing common with immortality?

A. Because he was at first formed of the earth, and therefore created mortal.
Again, because he transgressed the commandments of God proposed to him, and so
by the decree of God himself expressed in the commandment was necessarily
subjected to eternal death.

Q.. But how agrees this with those places of the Scripture, wherein it is
written, that man was created after the image of God, Genesis 1. 26, 27. and that
death by sin entered into the world, Ro^. 5. 12.

A. As for the testimony which pronounces man to have been created after the
image of God, we must know that by the image of God immortality is not
signified (which appears from hence, that the Scripture, at what time man had
been subjected to eternal death, acknowledges the image of God in him, Genesis
9. 6. He that sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, for after
the image of God made he man. Jam. 3. 9. With the tongue we bless the God and
Father, and with the same we curse men, who were made after the image of God:)
but man's power and sovereignty over all the creatures made by God upon the
earth, as the same place, wherein it is trea^^^ o^ ^is very image, Genesis 1. 26.
does clearly intimate, Let us make man after our image, and let him have
dominion over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over
the cattle, and of all the whole earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth.

Q. But what think you of the second testimony?

A. The Apostle in that place does not speak of mortality, but of death it
self: but there is a wide difference between death and mortality, inasmuch as a
man may be mortal, and yet never die.

Q.. What therefore is the meaning of those words, that death entered into the
world by sin?

A. Namely this, that Adam for sin was by the decree and sentence of God
subjected to eternal death, and consequently all men, inasmuch as they are
propagated from him, are liable to the same eternal death: that the thing is
so, the comparison of Christ with Adam, which the Apostle makes in the same
chapter from the twelfth verse to the end, does sufficiently intimate.

Q. I observe that man by nature has nothing common with immortality; but how
prove you that he could not by himself know the way leading thereunto?

A. It may be proved thus, because that knowledge does far exceed man's reason,
as the Apostle expressly says, an animal man receives not the things of the
spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. meaning the things whereof he had spoken a little
before p. 9. and 10. which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor ever came
up into the heart of man, which God has prepared for those which lo^^ him. But
he has revealed them to us by the Spirit. All which that it is to be
understood of immortality, and the way and means tending thereunto, is evident
from the very thing it self.

Q. But can you make this plain by another testimony of the Scripture?

A. Yes; by that Romans 1. 19. 20. where the Apostle says, That what may be
known of God is manifest in them, for God has manifested it unto them. For the
invisible things of him from the foundation of the world, being understood by
his works are seen; both his eternal power and divinity; so that they are
inexcuseable.

Q. But how appears it plainly from that testimony?

A. Because the Apostle affirms those things which God has by the Gospel
discovered to men, to be such as were invisible from the very creation of the
world. So that they could by no means be traced out by men. For the very
matter, which the Apostle in this place proposes to be handled, intimates
that those works, whereby the invisible things of God were known, are to be
understood of the works done under the Gospel.

Q. But that place is commonly interpreted in another sense?

A. I am not ignorant thereof, but that comes to pass, because they read the
passage otherwise then it was written by the Apostle. For whereas the Apostle
wrote, From the creation of the world, they read, By the creation of the world.
Again, they join the same words not with the clause going before, (an example
of which joining you have in the 13. of Mat. ver. 35. I will open my mouth in
parables, I will disclose things hidden from the foundation of the world) but
with the clause coming after, as if the Apostle meant that the invisibles of
God were seen by the Creation of the world.

CHAP. II. Wherein the way of Salvation does consist.
Q. I Perceive that the way has been discovered and disclosed by God, and
therefore would now fain know what it is?

A. Even the knowledge of God and Christ, as the Lord Jesus himself testifies,
This is life eternal, that they know thee (Father) the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17. 3.

Of the knowledge of God.
CHAP. I. Touching the Essence of God.
Q. EXplain therefore to me wherein the knowledge of God does consist?

A. In the knowledge of those things that pertain to his essence, and his will.

Q. What things pertain to his essence?

A. They are of two sorts; the one comprising those things that are simply
necessary to salvation; the other those that are very conducible thereunto.

Q. What are the things that pertain to the Essence of God, and are simply
necessary to salvation?

A. These; that God is, that he is but one, that the is eternal, that he is
perfectly just, perfectly wise, and perfectly powerful.

Q. What is it to know that God is?

A. To acknowledge, or at least to be firmly persuaded, that he has of himself
divine Sovereignty over us.

Q. What is it to know that he is but one?

A. To acknowledge and firmly believe, that he only has of himself divine
Sovereignty over us.

Q. What is this divine Sovereignty over us?

A. A right, and Sovereign power to determine of us as he please, even in those
things to which neither humane force, nor any other wha^soever can extend, of
which sort are our thoughts while they lie hidden in the inward recesses and
closets of the heart, to which he can prescribe Laws according to his pleasure,
and appoint penalties and rewards.

Q. What is it, that he has Sovereignty of himself?

A. Namely that he has not received it from any other.

Q.. What is it, that he only?

A. I said not simply that he only has it, but that he only has it of
himself. For nothing hinder, but that he may communicate with another that
power and Sovereignty, which no other besides him has of himself, although
the Scripture affirm, that he is the only Potentate and Lord, 1 Timothy 6. 15.

Q. Why then does the Scripture speak in that manner?

A. Because all power and authority, not only divive, but also humane,
happens to every one that has it, by his grant and donation.

Q. What is it to know that God is eternal?

A. That he is without either beginning or end.

Q. What is it to know that God is perfectly just?

A. That it is natural to him to maintain and observe rectitude, and equity.

Q. What is it to know that God is perfectly wise?

A. That he not only knows all sorts of things, but every thing in particular
so exactly, that nothing can escape his cognizance.

Q. What is it to know that he is perfectly powerful?

A. That he can do whatsoever things he will.

Q. Why is it necessary unto salvation to know all these things?

A. Because without the knowledge of them we could not be able to persevere
unto the end in this way of salvation.

Q. Show how this is verified of every one of these things in particular?

A. As to the first, who sees not that it is necessary unto salvation to
believe that God is? for unless we believe that God is, we cannot possibly
believe that this way was delivered by him. And hence is it that the Author to
the Hebrews says, He that makes his address to God, must believe that God
is, Heb. 11. 6.

Q. How prove you that the knowledge of the second is necessary to salvation?

A. Unless we believe that God is but one, we must needs be distracted in
mind, not knowing who has prescribed that way to us. And therefore the
Scripture frequently admonishes us of this thing, as you may see in Moses,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. which passage is cited by Christ himself, Mark 12. 29. Hearken
Israel, thy Lord the God is one Lord. And again in Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 39. See
that I alone am He, and there is no God besides me. Esaias 44. 6. 8. Esaias 45. 5.
14. 21. Esaias 46. 9. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6. Gal. 3. 20. Ephesians. 4. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 5.

Q. How the third?

A. Unless we believe God to be eternal, how can we hope for eternal life
from him, and so attain the end to which this way does lead?

Q. How the fourth?

A. To believe that God is perfectly just is necessary unto Salvation, first
that we may persuade our selves, that God will make good his Promises to us,
though we be unworthy. Next, that we may acknowledge all those trialls to be
just, (which being entered into this way we must of necessity undergo) in that
they are permitted by God.

Q.. How the fifth?

A. This is therefore necessary to be known, to the end we might not doubt,
that even our very heart, then which nothing is harder to be searched out, and
from which the chiefest estimate of our obedience is taken, lies always open
unto God.

Q. How the sixth?

A. Because we could not expect eternal life from the hands of God, as the
prime Author, were we not persuaded that his power is circumscribed with no
bounds and limits. Again, who would endure so many adversities, as are
incident to all those that make profession of the Christian Religion, were not
this persuasion deeply fastened in his heart, that all things are in the hands
of God, and afflictions happen not without his will, neither is any thing,
either in heaven or on earth, able to hinder his divine power from
accomplishing what he has promised, and we expect from him.

Q. You have unfolded what things are necessary to be known touching the
Essence of God, and therefore I pray you now discover what things are very
conducible thereunto.

A. It is very conducible hereunto to know that in the essence of God there is
but one Person.

Q. Demonstrate this I pray you.

A. Inasmuch as the Essence of God is but one in number, there cannot be so
many persons therein, since a person is nothing but an individual intelligent
Essence.

Q. Who is this one divine Person?

A. That one God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the most evident testimonies of the Scripture, thus Christ himself, John
17. 3. says, This is life eternal that they may know thee (Father) the only
true God. And the Apostle Paul, 1 Corinthians. 8. 6. says, To us there is but one
God, the Father, of whom are all the things, and we for him. And Ephesians. 4. 6.
There is one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in
you all.

Q. But Christians commonly hold, that not only the Father, but also the Son,
and the Holy Spirit are persons in one and the same Deity.

A. I know it well, but they are grievously mistaken, producing arguments for
it out of the Scriptures ill understood.

Q. What are their arguments wherewith they endeavor to prove their opinion?

A. The chief are these. First they say that the Scripture calls not only the
Father, but also the Son, and the Holy Spirit, God; And forasmuch as the same
Scripture affirms that there is but one God, hence they gather, that these
Three are that one God.

Q. How must this Argument be solved?

A. I will first make answer concerning the Son, and then concerning the Holy
Spirit.

Q. What answer will you make concerning the Son?

A. The word [GOD] is two ways chiefly used in the Scripture. The first is,
when it denotes him, who both in the heavens, and on the earth, does so rule
and exercise dominion over all, that he acknowledges no superior, and is so
the Author and Principal of all things, as that he depends on none. The
other is, when it designeth him who has some sublime dominion from that one
God, and so is in some sort partaker of his Deity. Hence is it that the
Scripture calls that one God the God of Gods, or most high God. Psalm. 50. 1.
Heb. 7. 1. And in the latter signification, the Son of God is in certain places
of the Scripture dignified with the title of a God.

Q. How prove you that the Son of God is in this latter signification dignified
with the title of a God?

A. From the very words of the Son himself, John 10. 35. If he call them Gods,
to whom the Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken; say ye of him
whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the world, Thou blasphemest,
because I said, I am the Son of God? By this speech Christ does clearly
intimate, both that the word [GOD] is sometime attributed unto them in the
Scripture who are far inferior to that one God; as also that he called himself
the Son of God, and consequently a God, for no greater reason then because he
had been sanctified by the Father, and sent into the world.

Q. But what answer give you concerning the Holy Spirit?

A. The Holy Spirit is no where in the Scripture expressly called God; and
though in some places the things of God are attributed to him, yet does it not
thereupon follow, that he is either God, or a person of the Deity, since this
happens for another cause, as you shall hear in in its place.

Q. What is the second argument wherewith they go about to prove the three
Persons in one Deity?

A. It is taken from those places, wherein mention is made of the Father, and
the Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Q. Which are those places?

A. The first is that, where Jesus commands his Aposties to make all Nations
Disciples, baptizing them into the name of the Father; and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit, Mat. 28. 19.

The second is, that where the Apostle writes in this manner. There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. And diversities of Ministeries, but
the same Lord. And diversities of Operations, but the same God, that operateth
all the things in all, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. And afterward in the eleventh verse
of the same chapter, he says, But all these things operateth one and the same
Spirit, distributing to every one as he will.

The third is in John, 1 Epist. 5. 7. There are three that hear witness in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are one.

Q. What are we to think of these Quotations?

A. In general I answer, that these Quotations only show that there is a
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which we not only acknowledge, but constantly
assert, so that we pronounce him to be no Christian, who is either ignorant
thereof, or does not believe it. But it is evident that these Quotations do not
demonstrate the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit to be three Persons in one
Divine Essence.

Q. Yet from such a Conjunction of those three in divine Operations, it seems
somewhat probable that they are three Persons in one divine Essence.

A. By no means. For as to the first place, although the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit be conjoined in Baptism, yet does it not therefore follow that they are
Persons in one divine Essence, both for that it is said in the words
immediately going before, that all power in heaven and on earth was given to
the Son, which cannot possibly agree to him that is a Person in the divine
Essence; as also because it is no new thing for the Scripture, in other things
no less divine then Baptism, to join with God such Persons and Things, as no
ways pertain to the divine Essence. Of Persons you have an example in the
first book of Samuel, chap. 12. 18. And all the people greatly feared the Lord
and Samuel. And in Moses, Exodus 14. 31. where according to the Hebrew it is
read, And the people feared the Lord, and believed in the Lord, and in his
servant Moses. Of things you have an instance, Acts 20. 32. I commend you to
God, and to the Word of his Grace. and Ephesians. 6. 10. Strengthen your selves in
the Lord, and in the power of his might.

Q. But they hold he must needs be God, into whose name we are baptized?

A. They are exceedingly mistaken, for we read 1 Cor. 10. 2. that the
Israelites were all baptized into Moses. And Act. 19. 3. that certain Disciples
were baptized into the Baptism of John; Although neither Moses were God, nor
the Baptism of John a Person, much less God.

Q. But it seems one thing to be baptized into any ones name, and another to
be baptized into any one?

A. By no means. For by virtue of the Hebrew Idiotisme, it is oftentimes all
one to do something into any ones name, and into any one, as is sufficiently
known. Neither need we go far for any instance, since the matter in hand will
readily furnish us, for whereas we read in some places, that Disciples were
baptized into the name of Christ, see Act. 8. 16. Act. 19. 5. we read in
others, that they were simply baptized into Christ, Romans 6. 3. Gal. 3. 27.

Q. What answer give you to the second Quotation?

A. That although divine operations be attributed to God, and to the Lord, and
to the Holy Spirit, yet can it not be rightly inferred thence, that these three
are of one essence. Yea the contrary may be thence clearly collected, namely
that they cannot be of one essence, since the Lord and the Holy Spirit are
openly distinguished from God, whom we formerly proved to be no other then the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But because together with God, mention is here
made of the Lord, and of the Holy Spirit, this is therefore done, because the
Lord is he by whom God does work all these things, with the concurrent
ministry of the Holy Spirit, for here he treats only of those things that
appertain unto the faithful, in whom the Holy Spirit works.

Q. What answer give you to the third?

A. First since it is known that in the more ancient Greek copies, and in the
Syriack, and in the more ancient Latin Versions, these words are not extant, as
the chiefest of our Adversaries do show, nothing certain can be concluded from
them. Again, though they were extant in the Scripture, yet could it not be
thence concluded, that there are three Persons in one Divinity. For that place
speaks of no other thing then of witnessing that Jesus is the Son of God, or
the Christ. But that this may be attested, not only by such as are divine
persons, but even by such as are no persons at all, appears by the following
words, wherein the Apostle says, that there are three that bear witness on
the earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. Now when he says that the
former three are one, that this is meant of their being one in testimony and
agreement, but not in essence, is apparent by the following verse, where the
like expression is found, and must be taken in such a sense.

Q. I perceive by your former discourse, that there is but one Person in the
divine essence, and therefore I would now know how the knowledge hereof is very
conducible to salvation?

A. You will easily perceive that, if you consider how pernicious the opinion
of the Adverse Party is. For first, that opinion may easily undermine and
weaken the belief of one God, whilst one while it confesses but one God,
another while acknowledges three Persons, every one whereof is that one God.
Secondly it obscureth the glory of that one God, who is only the Father of
Jesus Christ, whilst it transferreth it to another, who is not the Father.
Thirdly, it may easily pervert the way of salvation, whilst it takes away the
difference between the first and second cause thereof, and suff^reth us not
rightly to acknowledge who is the prime Author of our Salvation and how God
manageth the same by Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit. In sine, it greatly
hinders Aliens from embracing the Christian Religion, whilst it delivers
such things as are opposite to divine Truth and sound reason. From all which
inconveniences that opinion is free which holds that there is but one Person
in the divine essence.

Of the Will of God.
Q. YOu have explained to me the things that pertain to the essence of God,
explain now those things also that concern his Will.

A. Those things that concern the Will of God, are partly such as all men in
general are and ever have been partakers of them; partly such as properly
belong to those who are to obtain eternal life.

Q. What are those whereof all men in general have ever been partakers of?

A. They are three in number, first the Creation of heaven and earth, and all
the things that are therein, Act. 14. 15. Secondly his care and providence over
all things in particular, Mat. 10. 29. Lastly, the remuneration of them that
seek him, that is yield themselves obedient to him. Heb. 11. 6.

Q. Why is it necessary to believe that God created heaven and earth?

A. There are two principal causes thereof. The one, that God would have us
believe it. And therefore in the Scriptures both God and his Ministers do so
frequently and clearly admonish us thereof, as amongst other testimonies you
have it in Isaiah, chap. 44. 24. I am the Lord that makes all things, that
stretches out the heavens alone, that spreads abroad the earth by my self.
And in Moses, Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
And in David, Psalm. 33. 6. By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and
all the host of them by the breath of his mouth. He gathers the waters of the
Sea together, as an heap: he lays up the depth in storehouses. Let all the
earth fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
For he spoke, and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast. And in the
Acts, chap. 4. 24. Thou Lord art he who made the heaven and earth, and seas,
and all that in them are. And in the Acts, chap. 4. 24. Thou Lord art he who
made the heaven and earth, and seas, and all that in them are. And again,
chap. 17. 14. God who made the world, and all the things that are therein, he
being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands. The
second reason is, because unless we be persuaded thereof, we have no ground to
believe that God has any care of particular men, and so will not be induced to
yield our selves obedient to him.

Q. I perceive by this answer of yours, that I have no reason to ask why God
takes care of particular men, and rewards those that obey him; wherefore
explain to me those things that concern the Will of God, as it properly
belongs unto them, who shall obtain eternal life?

A. They are those things that he has discovered by Jesus Christ.

Of the knowledge of Christ.
CHAP. I. Touching the Person of Christ.
Q. INasmuch as you have said that those things have been discovered by Jesus
Christ, that concern the will of God as it properly belongs unto them, who
shall obtain eternal life, I would entreat you to declare those things to me
concerning Jesus Christ, which are need full to be known.

A. I am content. First therefore you must know that those things partly
concern the Essence, partly the Office of Jesus Christ.

Q. What are the things that concern his Essence or Person?

A. Only that he is a true man by nature, as the holy Scriptures frequently
testify concerning that matter, and namely, 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is one Mediator
of God and men, the man Christ Jesus. And 1 Cor. 15. 21. Since by man came
death, by man also came the Resurrection from the dead. And indeed such a one
God heretofore promised by the Prophets, and such a one the Apostles Creed,
acknowledged by all Christians, confesses Jesus Christ to be.

Q. Is the Lord Jesus then a mere man?

A. By no means. For he was conceived of the Holy Spirit, and born of the
Virgin Mary, and therefore is from his very conception and birth the Son of
God, as we read, Luke 1. 35. where the Angel thus speaks to the Virgin Mary,
The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee, therefore also that Holy Thing Generated shall be called the
Son of God. That I may omit other causes, which you shall afterward discover
in the Person of Jesus Christ, and most evidently show, that the Lord Jesus
ought by no means to be reputed a mere man.

Q. You said a little before that the Lord Jesus is a man by nature, has he
not also a divine Nature?

A. At no hand; for that is repugnant not only to sound Reason, but also to
the holy Scriptures.

Q. Show me how it is repugnant to sound Reason.

A. First, because two substances endued with opposite properties, cannot
combine into one Person, and such properties are mortality and immortality; to
have beginning, and to be without beginning; to be mutable, and immutable.
Again, two Natures, each whereof is apt to constitute a several person, cannot
be huddled into one Person. For instead of one, there must of necessity arise
two persons, and consequently become two Christ's, whom all men without
controversy acknowledge to be one, and his Person one.

Q. But when they allege that Christ is so constituted of a divine and humane
Nature, as a man is of a body and soul, what answer must we make to them?

A. That in this case there is a wide difference; for they say that the two
Natures in Christ are so united, that Christ is both God and Man. Whereas the
soul and body in a man are so conjoined, as that a man is neither soul nor
body. For neither does the soul nor the body severally constitute a Person. But
as the divine Nature does by it self constitute a Person, so must the humane by
it self of necessity also constitute.

Q. Show how it is also repugnant to the Scripture that Christ should have a
divine Nature.

A. First, because the Scripture proposes to us but one God by nature, whom we
formerly demonstrated to be the Father of Christ. Secondly, the same Scripture
witnesses that Jesus Christ is a man by nature, as was formerly shown.
Thirdly, because whatsoever divine excellency Christ has, the Scripture
testifies that he has it by gift of the Father. John 3. 35. John 5. 19, 20,
21, 22, 23, 26, 27. John 10. 25. John 13. 3. John 14. 10. Acts 2. 33. Rev. 2.
26, 27. 2 Pet. 1. 17. Finally, because the Scripture does most evidently show,
that Jesus Christ does perpetually ascribe all his Divine acts not to himself,
or any Divine nature of his own, but to the Father; who sees not that such a
Divine nature as the Adversaries imagine in Christ, would have been altogether
idle, and of no use?

Q.. But they endeavor to assert that Divine nature of Christ from the
Scriptures.

A. They endeavor indeed sundry ways, but whilst thy are laboring either to
evince from the Scriptures the things that are not there, or to draw wrong
conclusions from the things that are there, they have very ill success.

Q.. What are those things that they labor to evince from the Scriptures
touching Christ, that are not there?

A. His being from Eternity, which they go about to prove from the Scriptures
by two sorts of Arguments, the one taken from those places wherein they think
this being of Christ from eternity is expressed, the other taken from those
places, wherein although it be not expressed, yet they suppose it is here
employed.

Q. What are the places of the Scripture wherein the being of Christ from
Eternity seems to be expressed?

A. They are those, wherein the Scripture testifies of Christ that he was in
the beginning with God, John 1. 1. was in heaven, John 6. 62. was before
Abraham, John 8. 58.

Q. What answer you to the first?

A. In the quoted place there is nothing concerning Christ's being from
Eternity, since mention is here made of the beginning, whereas a beginning is
opposite to Eternity. Besides, the word [beginning] every where in the
Scripture is wont to be referred to the subject matter, as you may see Dan. 8.
1. John 15. 27. John 16. 4. Acts 11. 15. 1. John 2. 7, 24. Since therefore the
subject matter here is the Gospel, which John undertook to describe, without
question by the word [beginning] he understood the beginning of the Gospel.
This will further appear if you compare Mark 1. 1. Luke 1. 2. Luke 3. 23.
(where according to the truth of the Greek the words ought to be rendered thus,
And Jesus was about thirty years of age when he began, being (as it was
received by Law) the son of Joseph.) I say if you compare these Texts with the
first words of John's Gospel.

Q. What answer you to the second?

A. Neither is here any express mention made of his being from Eternity from
this place, the Scripture testifies that the Son of man, that is, Jesus Christ
as man, (who it is certain could not possibly have been from Eternity, in that
he was born at a certain time) had been sometimes in Heaven, namely when he
ascended up thither to receive his message from God.

Q.. What answer you to the third?

A. In this place the being of Christ from Eternity is not only not expressed,
(since it is one thing to have been before Abraham, another to have been from
Eternity) but not so much as this, namely, that he was before his
Virgin Mother. For that those words may be read otherwise, (namely, Verily,
verily I say unto you, before he become Abraham, I am he,) appears from those
places in the same Evangelist, where there is the same expressions in Greek, as
chap. 13. 19. From this instant I tell it you, before it come to pass, that
after it is come to pass, you may believe that I am he. And chap. 14. 29 Now I
have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to pass, you may
believe.

Q. What would the sense of that reading be?

A. Very elegant: For Christ admonishes the Jews, who went about to catch him
in his words, that whilst they had opportunity they should believe him to be
the Christ, or Light of the world, before the Divine Grace, that Christ offered
to them, was taken away from them, and translated to the Gentiles. Now that
those words, [I am he] are to be supplied in the same manner, as if he had
said, [I am the Christ] will appear by comparing Mark 13. 6. with Math. 24. 5.
See also John 8. 24. 28. Again, that those words, [Before he become Abraham] do
signify what we have said, may be discovered by the meaning of the word
Abraham, which as the Scripture, Gen: 17. 5. does hint, signifies a Father of
many Nations. Wherefore since Abraham did not become Abraham indeed, that is, a
Father of many Nations, until the grace of God manifested in Jesus Christ,
redounded unto many Nations, in that he was before the Father of but one
Nation, it is apparent that the meaning of these words, which we have brought,
is genuine and true.

Q. What are the testimonies of the Scripture, wherein they think the being of
Christ from Eternity is not expressed, yet may be deduced thence?

A. Those, which seem to attribute some things to the Lord Jesus from Eternity,
but others at a certain and determinate time.

Q. What are those places, that attribute certain things to the Lord Jesus from
Eternity?

A. They are those from whence they endeavor to evince that Christ was
begotten out of the Essence of the Father from Eternity.

Q. From what places do they endeavor to evince that Christ was begotten out
of the Essence of the Father from Eternity?

A. From these chiefly, Mich. 5. 2. And thou Bethlchem Ephrata, though thou be
least amongst the thousands of Judah; yet out of thee shall he come forth unto
me, that is to be Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth [have been] from the
beginning, from the days of Eternity. And Psalm 2. 7. Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. And Pal. 110. 3. Where according to the vulgar
translation, it is read, From the womb before the morning star have I begotten
thee. And Prove. 8. 23. where Wisdom says of her self, I was begotten from
Eternity.

Q. How must one answer these quotations?

A. Before I make an answer to each, you must know that that generation out of
the Essence of the Father is impossible. For if Christ had been begotten out of
the Essence of the Father, either he had taken part of the Essence, or the
whole: he could not take part of the Essence, because it is not dividable; nor
the whole, since it is one in number, and therefore incommunicable.

Q. What answer is to be given to the first quotation?

A. This passage makes nothing for Christ's generation out of the Essence of
the Father from eternity, in that mention is here made of a beginning, and of
days, which have no place in eternity. And these words, which in the vulgar
translation are rendered, [From the days of eternity,] are read in the Hebrew,
[From the days of age,] but the days of age are the same with the days of
old, as Isa. 63. 9, 11 Mal. 3. 4. So that the sense of the place is, that
Christ should fetch the Original of his Birth from the very beginning, and from
the ancient times, that is, from that time, when God established a King over
his people, which was done in David, who was both a Bethlemite, and the Author
of the Stock and Family of Christ. It is further observable, that those words
[Have been] are not found in the Hebrew, and therefore nothing compels us to
understand them rather then some others, as namely [have been determined, or
appointed, or fore-known] which last word is taken out of the Apostle Peter, 1
Epist. 1. 19. 20.]

Q. What say you to the second?

A. Neither is there any mention touching the generation of Christ out of the
Essence of the Father from eternity, for the word, [to day,] inasmuch as it
denotes a certain time, cannot signify eternity. And that God begat him,
does not evince that it was out of his own Essence, especially considering that
these words (as Interpreters observe) were in the first sense spoken of David,
of whom it is certain, that he was neither begotten from eternity, not out of
the Essence of God. Besides, the Apostle Paul applies the same words to the
resurrection of Christ, Acts 13 33. and the divine Author to the Hebrews,
alleges them to demonstrate the glorification of Christ, whereby he became an
High Priest, Hebr. 5. 5. Finally, it is apparent from the Scripture, that God
begeteth sons otherwise then out of his Essence, thus are the faithful said to
be begotten of God, John 1. 13. 1 John 3. 9. 1. John 5. 1. 4. James 1. 18.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. We must know that in the vulgar and Greek versions, that place is ill
rendered, for it is read otherwise in the Hebrew, namely, From the womb of the
morning, thou have the dew of thy youth, or Birth. In which words he either
speaks of the perpetual vigor of Christ's life, which should be continually
fresh and flourishing; or else of the multitude of Christians that should issue
from him, and be in number equal to the drops of the morning dew.

Q. What say you to the fourth?

A. That you may the better perceive the thing, you must know that the
Adversaries reason from this place in this manner. The Wisdom of God was
begotten from eternity. Christ is the Wisdom of God. Therefore he was begotten
from eternity. That this argument is invalid appears hence: First because
Solomon speaks of wisdom simply and absolutely considered, without addition
of the word [God,] but Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 24. whose words they are wont to confer
with those of Solomon, does not speak of wisdom simply and absolutely, but
with addition of the word [God.] 2 By wisdom sundry Expositors, whom the
Adversaries themselves account to be Orthodox, do not conceive that a true and
real person is meant; but only that a feigned person is here ascribed to
Wisdom, and it brought in speaking like a woman. Thirdly, though we should
admit, that by Wisdom is understood a person yet what hinders but that we may
with far greater probability understand it of the holy Spirit, who is called
the Spirit of Wisdom, and has the same things attributed to him, that are
ascribed to Wisdom; see Isaiah 11. 1, 2, 3. 4, 5. Isaiah 4. 4. Exodus 31. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6. compared with Prove. 8. 12, 14, 15, 16, 20. and Genesis 1. 2. compared
with Prove. 8. 22, 29, 30. Where it is observable, that Moses describing the
Creation of the world, makes mention of the holy Spirit, but not of the Son of
God; who was as worthy to have been mentioned, and would accordingly have been
expressed, had he been then present with God, as well as the Spirit. Neither
will it be amiss to cite the concurrent suffrages of holy men under the Old
Covenant, whose writings though put out of the Canon, as not found in the
Hebrew, are yet deservedly of great esteem among the people of God. For it is
apparent from sundry passages, both of the book of Wisdom, and that of
Ecclesiasticus, that these Writers, as they by wisdom understood a creature,
so did they conceive that creature to be the Spirit of God. See Wisdom 6. 24,
chap. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7. chap. 7. 27. chap. 9. 17, 18, 19. Ecclesiasticus 24. 12,
13, 14. chap. 1. 4, 5, 7, 8, 9. Fourthly those words Pro. 8. 23. which are
rendered from everlasting] are in the Hebrew a seculo, from the age, or from of
old. But it is one thing to be a seculo, from the age, or from of old, and ab
aeterno from everlasting. See Isa. 64. 4. Jer. 2. 20. Luke. 1. 70.

Q. What are those places of the Scripture, that seem to attribute some things
to Christ at a certain and determinate time?

A. They are of two sorts, the one having respect to names, the other to
things, which they imagine to be attributed unto Christ by the Scripture.

Q. What are they that have respect to the names of Christ?

A. Those, wherein they think that Jesus is called Jehovah, Lord of Hosts, the
true God, the only Master, the great God, the Lord God Almighty, who was, is,
and is to come, the God that purchased the Church with his own blood, the God
that laid down his life for us. See Jer. 23. 6. Zach. 2. 8. 1 John 5. 20. Jude
2. Tit. 2. 13. Rev. 1. 8. and Rev 4. 8. Act. 20. 28. 1 John 3. 16.

Q. What answer give you to these places, and first to the first?

A. It does not of necessity follow, that the name [Jehovah] is here attributed
to Christ. For those words, [And this is the name wherewith he shall be called,
JEHOVA-TZIDKENU, or the Lord of Righteousnesse] may be referred to Israel, of
whom the Prophet spoke in the clause immediately going before. Yea that it
ought so to be, will appear by comparing this place with that in the 33. chap.
v. 15. 16. where the Prophet says, In those days, and in that time will I
cause the branch of righteousness to grow up to David, and he shall execute
judgment and righteousness in the land. In those days shall Judah be saved,
and Jerusalem dwell safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called,
JEHOVA-TZIDKENU, that is, the Lord our rigoteousnesse. In this place the
feminine Hebrew particle, rendered [She] in English must of necessity be
referred to Jerusalem, and does in this place answer to Israel, which was put
in the former place, chap. 23. 6. and consequently those words [And this is the
name wherewith he shall be called] are to be referred unto Israel. But though
we should grant that the word Jebovah may be referred to Christ, yet is it
apparent, hat he is not simply called Jehovah, so that it cannot thence be
concluded that he is indeed Jehovah, no more then the Altar which Moses erected
and called Jehovah-Nissi, Exodus 17. 15. was indeed Jehovah. Or that which
Gedeon erected, Judge 6. 24. and called Iehova-Shalom. Or the place which
Abraham called Iehova-jireth, Genesis 22. 14. whether therefore those words, Ier.
23. 6. be spoken of Christ, or of Israel, the meaning of them is, that God
would justify the Israelites, which was then accomplished when he sent Christ
amongst them.

Q. What say you to the second?

A The words of Zachary run thus, chap. 2. 8. 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts,
After the glory has he sent me unto the Nations that spoiled you, for he that
touches you, touches the apple of his eye. For behold I will shake my hand
upon them, and they shall be a spoil to their servants; and ye shall know that
the Lord of Hosts has sent me. This passage is by the Adversaries wrested to
Christ, because they suppose it here to be said, that the Lord of Hosts was
sent by the Lord of Hosts. Which exposition is so absurd, that any other sense
was rather to be put upon the words. But it is evident that they were uttered
by another then the Lord of Hosts, namely by the Angel, who talked with
Zachary and the other Angel, and is in the fourth verse first brought in
speaking. For he says not, He that touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye, but of his eye, meaning the Eye of the Lord of Hosts that sent him.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. In this passage, 1 John 5. 20, 21. We know that the Son of God is come, and
has given us understanding to know the true one, and we are in the true one,
in (or by) his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life. These
words, [This is the true God] cannot be referred unto Christ, not as if he were
not a true God, but because he is not the true God that is here spoken of, as
the article added in the Greek does intimate. Neither does it any whit
advantage the adversaries cause, (who will have these words, [This is the true
God] referred unto Christ) that Christ was mentioned immediately before. For
relatives are not always referred to the antecedents immediately going before,
but oftentimes to that which is chiefly spoken of, as appears from these
places, Act. 7. 18, 19. Till another King arose, which knew not Joseph. The
same, (or, he) dealt subtly with with our kindred. Act. 10. 6. He (Peter)
lodges with one Simon a Tanner, whose house is by the seaside: he shall tell
thee what thou ought to do. 2 Epist of John v. 7. Many deceivers are entered
into the world, who confess not Jesus, coming in flesh, to be Christ. This is
the deceiver and the Antichrist. From which places it appears that the
relative has not respect to the nearest antecedent, but to that which is more
remote. Wherefore the meaning of those words of John [This is the true God, and
eternal life] is thus; This whereof I have last spoken is the true God,
(namely he that has for his Son, Jesus Christ;) and it is also eternal life,
(namely to know the true God, and to be in him by his Son, Jesus Christ.) With
this accords that passage of Christ himself, John 7. 3. This is Life
eternal, that they know thee (Father) the only true God, and whom thou have
sent, Jesus Christ.

Q. What say you to the fourth?

A. The words of Jude v. 4. run thus, denying the only Master God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ. Form which place because there is but one article prefixed in the
Greek, they conclude that both descriptions ought to be referred to one petson,
and consequently to Christ. But this observation taken from the unity of the
article prefixed to several words, is not perpetual, as appears by the
inspection of these places in the Greek, Mat. 16. 1. Luke 19. 45. Act. 15, 41.
1 These. 1. 8. Heb. 9. 19. Ephesians. 2. 20. Ephesians. 3. 5. Wherefore we must have our
chief recourse to the nature of the thing it self.

Q. What say you to the fifth?

A. The fifth testimony is that of Paul, Tit. 2. 13. Looking for that blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ. In which words that the Epithete of great God is referred unto Christ,
the adversaries endeavor to evince with two reasons, the first is taken from
the unity of the articles prefixed in the Greek; the other from our expectance
not of the Father, but of the Son. The first of which reasons was solved a
little before. To the second I answer, that Paul in the Greek does not say,
(the glorious appearing of the great God) but (the appearing of the glory of
the great God.) Now it is certain that Christ shall come to judge the world,
not only in his own glory, but also in the glory of his Father. Luke 9. 26.
Mat. 16. 27. Again, what inconvenience is it to say, that when Christ comes to
judge the world, God does come? since Christ in judging the world, sustaineth
the person of God, from whom he has received his authority of executing
judgment.

Q.What say you to the sixth?

A. The sixth testimony is this, Rev. 4. 8. Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God
Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come. This passage is therefore by the
adversaries referred to Christ, because they suppose that none is to come but
Christ, for he is to come to judge the quick and dead. But we must know that
that word which is here rendered (to come) may as well be rendered (to be) as
John 16. 13. Where Christ says of the Holy Spirit whom he promised to the
Apostles, that he should tell them things to come, that is, to be. And Act. 18.
21. We read of a feast to come, that is, to be. Again who perceives not, that
when it has been first said, (who was, and is, and it is immediately added,
(and is to come) that (to come) is all one with (to be) that the speech may in
every part be understood of existence? and not in the two first clauses of
existence; in the last of coming. Neither is there any one that may not easily
observe that the eternity of God is here described, which comprehends the
time past, present, and future. But that which detecteth this gross mistake,
is Rev. 1. 4, 5. where we read, Grace and peace be to you, from him that was,
and is, and is to come, and from the seven Spirits that are before his Throne,
and from Jesus Christ the faithful and true witness. From which testimony it
appears that Jesus Christ is quite another then He that is* and was, and is
to come.

Q. What say you to the seventh?

A. The seventh runs thus, Take heed to your selves, and to the whole flock,
over which the Holy Spirit has made you Bishops, to rule the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own blood. Act. 20. 28. Whereunto I answer,
that the name (God) is not here referred to Christ, but to God the Father, who
is from the beginning of the speech perpetually understood by the name of God,
and whose blood the Apostle calls that blood which Christ did shed, in such a
way of speaking, and for such (...) cause, as the Prophet says, That he which
touches the people of God, touches the apple of Gods Eye. For the exceeding
great conjunction that is between God the Father and Christ, although they be
different in Essence, causes the blood of Christ to be called the blood of God
the Father, especially if it be considered as shed for us. For Christ is the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: Whence the blood shed to
that purpose, is called the blood of God himself, and that deservedly. Neither
is it to be passed by, that in the Syriack Edition it is not read (God) but
(Christ.)

Q.What say you to the eighth?

A. The eighth runs thus, Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid
down his life for us, 1 John 3. 16. First therefore you must know, that in no
Greek edition, save the Complutensian; nor in the Syriack Translation is the
word (God) read. But though this word were read in all copies, should therefore
the word (He) be referred to God? At no hand. Not only for the forementioned
reason, in answer to the third testimony, namely that relatives are not always
referred to the persons next going before, but also because John refers the
word (He) sundry times in this Epistle to him that was a great while before
named, as in the 29. verse of the foregoing chapter, where he says, If ye know
that he is just, know that he that does justice is generated of him. Where by
(him) as both the thing it self, and the following words show, is meant the
Father, although in the words next going before mention had been made of Christ
only?

Q. You have given me satisfaction as to the names of Christ. I would now
therefore have you explain those quotations that have respect to the works of
Christ, which the Adversaries imagine are ascribed to him by the Scripture.

A. They are such, wherein they imagine the Scripture attributes unto Christ,
that he created the heaven and the earth; that he conserveth all created
things; that he brought the people of Israel out of Egypt, that he was with
them in the wilderness conducting them, and doing good to them, that his glory
was seen by Isaiah; that he was incarnate.

Q. Declare to me what proofs they allege to evince that Christ created the
heaven, and the earth?

A. Even these, where it is written, That all things were made by him, and
without him nothing made, that was made, John 1. 3. And again, That the world
was made by him, verse 10. And again, That all things were created by him, that
are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by him, and
for him, Col. 1. 16. And, that God by him made the world, Heb. 1. 2. Finally,
likewise from that passage, in the 10, 11. and 12. verses of the same chapter,
namely, Thou Lord in the beginning laidst the foundation of the earth, and the
heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou abidest; and
all shall wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and
they shall be changed. But thou Lord art the same, and thy years shall not fail.

Q. What answer give you to the first testimony?

A. In the first testimony, the words may be as well rendered (all things were
done by him) as (all things were made by him.) For the Greek word signifies
the one as well as the other, although in English there is some difference
between being made and being done, inasmuch as the propriety of the language
admits the one many times to be used, where the other would not have place.
Again, the Evangelist says (all things were done by him) which kind of
speaking denotetl. not the first; but the second cause. In fine, the word (all)
is not here taken for all things simply and absolutely, but is restrained to
the subject matter, which is a thing most frequent in the Holy Sriptures,
especially that of the New Covenant, a singular example whereof you have 2 Cor.
5. 17. wherein it is treated of a matter altogether like to that which John
here speaks of, and it is said, that all things are become new; when
notwithstanding it is certain, that there are many things which have not been
made new. Wherefore since the subject matter in John is the Gospel, it
appears that the word (all) ought to be understood of all those things which
any ways belong to the Gospel.

Q. Why did John add, that without him nothing was done that has been done?

A. The better to illustrate those foregoing words, (namely, all things were
done by him) which seem to have such force, as if all those things had been
done by the Word, or Son of God only, though some things, and those of great
moment, were not immediately done by him, but by his Apostles; of which sort is
the calling of the Gentiles, and the abolition of the legal Ceremonies. For
though these things had their beginning from the words and deeds of the Lord
Jesus, yet were they not brought to an issue by Christ himself, but by his
Apostles, yet not without him; for the Apostles managed all things in his name
and by his authority, as the Lord himself says, John 15: 7. Without me ye can
do nothing.

Q. What say you to the second?

A. First, John does not here say, that the world was created, but made by him.
Again, he uses the same form of speech, designing the second or middle cause,
for he says not that he made the world, but that the world was made by him.
Finally, the word [world,] as well as others, that are equivalent in the
Scriptures, does not only denote the heaven and earth, but besides other
significations, designeth either manking, as the present place shows, where
it is said, That he was in the world, and the world acknowledged him not; or
the world to come, as appears from Hebr. 1. 6. where we read, that when he
brings the firstborn into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of
God worship him; which is taken of the world to come, as appears from the
second chapter of the same Epistle, verse fifth, where the Author says, For he
has not put the world to come, whereof we speak, in subjection to Angels. But
he no where spoke of that world, but in the sixth Verse of the former chapter.
Besides, you have another place, Hebr. 10. 5. where speaking of Christ he
says, Wherefore entering into the world he says, sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body thou have fitted me. Where since it is apparent that
the Author speaks of that world, into which Christ being entered; became a
Priest, and made his offering (as all the circumstances of the place do show)
it must needs be that he speaks not of this world, but of the world to come,
since in the eighth chapter verse. 4. he had said of Christ, That if he were on
the earth, he would not so much as be a Priest.

Q. What understand you by this expression, The world was made by him?

A. A double sense thereof may be given; first, that mankind was reformed, and
as it were made again by Christ, because he brought life and immortality to
men, who were lost, and subject to eternal death: (which thing John upbraideth
the world with, namely that being vindicated from destruction by Christ, yet
did it not acknowledge him, but despise and reject him.) For it is the custom
of the Hebrew speech, that in such forms of speaking, the words [make and
create] be equivalent with [make anew, and create anew] inasmuch as that tongue
is destitute of compounded verbs. The latter sense is, that the world to come,
which we expect by Christ, is by him made, as to us; as the same is said to be
come in respect of us, although it be already present to Christ, and the
Angels.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. That this testimony also speaks of Christ, as of a second and middle
cause; and the word (Create) as in the Scripture used not only of the Old, but
also of the New Creation, an instance whereof you have, Ephesians. 2. 10. For we are
his workmanship, (or making, as the Greek has it) created in Christ Jesus,
unto (or rather, upon condition of) good works. And a little after verse 15.
For to make in himself, of twain, one new man, (in the Greek, For to create in
himself the twain into one new man.) Besides, that those words, (all things in
the heaven, and on the earth) are not used for all things simply and
absolutely, appears both by the article in the Greek set before the word
(all) to limit it, and also by the collation of the words put a little after in
the 20. verse, where the Apostle says, That by him God has reconciled all the
things that are both in the heavens, and on the earth; and finally by the
inspection of the very words themselves, wherein the Apostle says not, that
the heaven and earth were created by Christ, but all the things that are in the
heavens, and on the earth.

Q. How then understand you this testimony?

A. That after God had raised Christ from the dead, and given glory to him, all
the things both in the heavens, and on the earth, were by him reformed, and
reduced to another state and condition, in that he became the Head of Angels
and Men, who before acknowledged God only for their Lord.

Q. What say you to the fourth testimony?

A. That it is not here said, that the Son made the world, but God made it by
the Son. Now that the word (world) may not only signify that which is past and
present, but also that which is to come, is confessed. And that it is here
spoken of the world to come, is evident from hence, namely that the same Author
affirms, that by him, whom God has appointed heir of all things, the world
was made. For Jesus of Nazareth was not appointed heir of all things, before
God had raised him up from the dead, which is apparent, because then at length
all power in heaven and earth was given to him by God the Father, in the
donation of which power, and not in any other thing, that inheritance of all
things is contained.

Q. What answer you to the fifth?

A. This testimony does not expressly speak of Christ, but of God. But forasmuch
as this divine Author does apply it unto the Son of God, it is to be
considered, that the words expressly speak, not of one thing, but of twain
chiefly: The one whereof is the creation of heaven and earth; the other is the
abolition of the things created. Now that this Author does not refer the
first unto Christ, is from hence apparent, namely because he proposed to
himself to demonstrate, not that excellency of Christ, which he has from
himself, but that which he obtained by inheritance, and whereby he was made
better then Angels, as appears from the fourth verse of this first chapter
of the Hebrews; of which kind of excellency since the creation of heaven and
earth neither is, nor can be, it is evident that this testimony was not
alleged to prove that Christ created the heaven and earth. Since therefore the
first cannot be referred to Christ, it is apparent that the latter only
pertains to him; and that therefore, because God will abolish both the heaven
and earth by Christ, when he judges the world by him. Wherein the excellency
of Christ shall so far surpass that of Angels, that the very Angels shall
therein minister to him. Which latter speech, since it could not be understood
without the words going before, wherein mention is made of the heaven and
earth, inasmuch as it is joined to them by the word (they) the author was
therefore necessitated to repeat them also. For if other sacred Writers do in
that manner cite testimonies of the Scripture, when they are pressed with no
necessity, much more ought this Author so to do, when he was necessitated
thereunto.

Q. Where do sacred VVriters do so?

A. Amongst many other testimonies you have that of Mat. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21.
Where it is very evident that the 19. v. only pertains to the purpose of the
Evangelist, since his intention was to show the reason, why Christ would not
have himself be made manifest. Again, Act. 2. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. where also
the 17. and 18. ver. only make to the purpose of the Apostle, which is to show
that the H. Spirit was poured out upon the Disciples; and in the same chapter v. 25
26, 27, 28. where it is clear that the 27. ver. only is perertinent to the
business in hand, since the Apostle intends to prove that Christ could not
be detained by death. Finally in this very chapter to the Heb. v 9. where it is
apparent that these words, (Thou lovedst righteousness, and hatedst iniquity)
are not pertinent to what the divine Author goes about to prove, namely that
Christ is made better then Angels.

Q. With what testimony do the adversaries go about to prove, that Christ
conserveth all created things?

A. From that place Heb. 1. 3. where it is said, That Christ upholdeth all
things by the word of his power.

Q. What say you to this testimony?

A. That the word [all] in this, as well as in other places, does not design
all things without exception, but is referred to those things only that pertain
to the Kingdom of Christ, as the Article in the Greek set before the word [all]
to limit it, does sufficiently declare, showing that it is to be understood
only of all the things of a certain kind. Besides, the Greek word which is by
the English Translators rendered (upholding) ought to have been rendered
(carrying) which has rather the signification of ordering and mannaging, then
of conserving, as that which is annexed, [namely, by the word of his power]
seems to intimate.

Q. By what testimony prove they that Christ brought the children of Israel out
of Egypt?

A. Out of Iude's Epistle verse. 5. Jesus, having saved the people out of Egypt,
did the second time destroy them that believed not.

Q. What answer make you hereunto?

A. That the word (Jesus) is extant in no Greek copy, but instead thereof the
word (Lord) is here read: so that this testimony no whit proves what the
Adversaries intend.

Q. But whence prove they that Christ was with the Israelites in the
wilderness, and conducted them, and did good to them?

A. From that passage of Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 4 They all drank the same spiritual
drink, for they* drank of the spiritual rock that followed them; but that rock
was Christ. As also from the 9. ver. of the same chap. where the Apostle says,
Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and perished by Serpents.

Q. What answer give you to these places?

A. As to the first, the Apostle does not at all say, that Christ was in the
wilderness with the people of Israel, and did good to them. For though he
write that the Rock, whereof the people drank, was Christ, yet does not he
therefore assert that Christ was indeed there, because those words of Paul may
be figuratively taken. Now whereas he calls that Rock spiritual, this does
nothing advantage the cause of the adversaries, since that Rock may be called
spiritual, although it were Indeed material, for the same cause that the meat
was called spiritual, namely in that it contained in it a mystical sense, as in
the Revelation John says, That the great City, where our Lord was slain, is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11. 8. Moreover in that he faith, that
the Rock followed them, it is to be understood of the water issuing out of the
Rock, and following the people through the wilderness, which before was
destitute of running water, or at least of such as was potable. To which
Isaiah, chapter 43. 20. does allude, where he says, The beast of the field shall
honor me, the Dragons, and the Ostriches; for I have given them waters in the
wilderness, and rivers in the desert; to give drink to my people, my Chosen.
As for the second testimony, namely, Let us not tempt Christ, as some of them
tempted: From these words likewise it can not be shown that Christ was indeed
tempted in the wilderness. For instance, should any man say, let us not be
refractory to the Magistrate, as some of our Ancestors were: it could not
thence be concluded that the same numericall Magistrate is in both places
designed. Now if there be found in the Scriptures such kinds of speaking,
wherein the like speech is referred to him, (whose name was a little before
expressed) without any repetition of the same person, this hap'neth in such a
place, where no other, besides him whose name was expressed, can possibly be
understood, as Deuteronomy. 6. 16. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, as thou
temptedst in Massah. But in this speech of the Apostle, whereof we speak,
another then Christ may be understood, as Moses, the Angel, etc. see Number. 21. 5.

Q. From what place prove they that the glory of Christ was seen by Isaiah?

A. From John 12. 41. These things spoke Isaiah, when he saw his glory, and
spoke of him.

Q. What say you hereunto?

A. First, that these words are not of necessity to be referred to Christ,
inasmuch as they may be referred to God the Father. For the words that are set
a little before, are spoken of the same; namely he has blinded their eyes, and
hardened their hearts. Again, the glory which Isaiah saw, might be, yea was,
not a present, but a future glory. For it is proper to Prophets to see the
things that are to come. Whence likewise they were called Seers, 1 Samuel 9. 9.
Finally, although you understand these words of that glory which was then
present, and seen by Isaiah, yet is it one thing to see one's glory, another
thing to see himself; for in the glory of that one God, Isaiah likewise saw the
glory of the Lord Christ, for the Prophet there says, The earth is full of the
glory of the Lord. Which thing was then accomplished, when Jesus Christ first
appeared to the people of the Jews, and afterward was preached to the whole
world.

Q.From what testimonies of Scripture do they endeavor to demonstrate that
Christ was (as they say) incarnated?

A. From John 1. 14. where according to their Translation it is read, The Word
was made flesh. And from Phil. 2. 6, 7. Who (Christ Jesus) being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal to God, But made himself of no
reputation, taking upon him the form of a servant, being made in the likeness
of men. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, etc. and from
1 Timothy 3. 16. Great is the mystery of godliness, God was manifested in flesh.
And from Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels: but he
took on him the seed of Abraham. And from 1 Ioh. 4. 3. Every spirit that
confesses Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God. And lastly from Heb.
10. 5. Wherefore entering into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared for me.

Q. What say you to the first testimony?

A. That it is not there said that God was incarnated, or that the divine
Nature assumed a humane. For it is one thing to say, The Word was made flesh,
another, that God was incarnated (as they say) or that the divine Nature
assumed a humane. Besides, these words (The Word, or rather, the Speech was
made flesh) may and ought to be thus rendered (The Word was flesh.) Thus the
word (...) is rendered verse 6. of this very chapter. There was a man sent by
God, his name John. And Luke 24. 19. Who was a Prophet great in word and deed.
And these places, with sundry others, show that it may be so rendered. But that
it ought to be so rendered, the order of the Evangelists words sufficiently
teaches, for it would have been incongruous to have said, that the Word was
made flesh, that is, (as the adversaries would have it) assumed a Humane
Nature, after he had already spoken those things of the Word, which followed
the Nativity of Jesus Christ, as namely that John the Baptist gave testimony of
him; that he was in the world; that his own received him not; that to them who
received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God.

Q. How is that to be understood that the Word was flesh?

A. That he by whom God perfectly revealed his whole will, and who had been
therefore by John called the Word, or Speech, was a man, of the same
constitution with others, and subject to the same infirmity, afflictions and
death. For in this sense the Scripture uses the word (flesh) as appears from
those places, where God says, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh, Genesis 6. 3. And Peter out of Isaiah says, All flesh is
grass, 1 Pet. 1. 24.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. It is one thing to say that Jesus Christ, being in the form of God, took
the form of a servant: and that the Divine Nature assumed a Humane. For here
the form of God cannot design the Divine Nature, in that the Apostle writes
that Christ emptied himself of that form. But God can by no means empty himself
of his nature. Neither does the form of a servant denote a humane nature, since
to be a servant is referred to the fortune and condition of a man. But neither
is it to be concealed, that the writings of the New Covenant does use the word
(form) elsewhere but once, namely Mark 16. 12. and that in such a sense, wherein
not the nature, but exterior fashion is signified, whilst, it says that
Jesus appeared to two of his Disciples in another form.

Q. But from those words, which the Apostle presently after subjoyns, namely He
was found in fashion of a man, does it not appear that he was (as they say)
incarnated?

A. At no hand. For it is said of Sampson, Judge. 16. 7. 11. that if such and
such a thing was done to him, he should become as a man. And Asaph, Psa. 82.
denounces to those, whom he had called Gods, and Sons of the most high, that
they should die like men, notwithstanding it is certain it cannot be said, that
they were (as the adversaries say) incarnated.

Q. But how do you understand this whole place?

A. Thus; that Christ, who conversed in the world as God, doing the works of
God, and receiving divine worship, did, when God so willed, and the salvation
of man required, become as a servant and vassal, and as one of the vulgar men,
when he of his own accord suffered himself to be bound, whipped, and crucified.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. First that in many ancient copies, and in the vulgar Translation, the word
(God) is not here found; so that nothing certain can be concluded out of this
place. Again, though we read the word [God] there, yet is there no cause, why
it should not be referred to the Father, since it may of him be affirmed, that
he was manifested in Christ and the Apostles, who were flesh. And though it be
afterward, according to the vulgar translation, read, that he was received up
into glory, yet is it in the Greek, he was received in glory, that is, with
glory, or gloriously.

Q. What then is the sense of this place?

A. That you may the better perceive it, I will cite the whole. Thus therefore
the Apostle says, God was manifested in flesh, was justified in spirit, was
seen of Angels, was preached to the Gentiles, was believed in the world, was
received in glory. The meaning of all which is this. The Christian Religion is
full of mysteries. For God, that is, the divine Will touching the salvation of
men, was perfectly discovered by weak and mortal men, and yet notwithstanding
by reason of the miracles wrought by the spirit in confirmation of the Gospel,
it was acknowledged for true. The same was at length perceived by the Angels
themselves, and preached not only to the Jews, but also to the Gentiles, and
not only generally believed, but entertained with the greatest glory and
magnificence.

Q. What say you to the fourth?

A. In it there is not so much as a resemblance of an Incarnation, since the
divine Author does not say (took) but [taketh,] nor (humane nature,) but the
seed, that is, the posterity of Abraham. And indeed to show the invalidity of
the argument taken from this place, there needs no more then to consult the
various reading of the English Translators, set in the margin.

Q. What then is the sense of this place?

A. The meaning of the Author is, that Christ is not the Savior of Angels but
men, who being subject to afflictions and leath (which thing he before expressed
by the participation of flesh and blood) therefore Christ of his own accord
submitted himself to the same, that he might free the faithful from the fear
of death, and succor them in all their afflictions.

Q. What say you to the fifth?

A. Here likewise is nothing to assert the incarnation (as they term it.) For
whereas it is read in the ordinary Bibles, Every spirit that confesses Jesus to
be come in the flesh, is of God. The Greek has it, Every spirit that
confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh, or, Every spirit that confesses Jesus,
come in flesh, to be Christ. That is, Every spirit is of God, that confesses
Jesus, who discharged his Embassy on the earth, without any worldly pomp and
ostentation in the most humble manner, as to his outward presence, and with the
greatest contempt, and finally endured a most ignominious death, to be the
Christ, or King of the people of God.

Q. What say you to the sixth?

A. Here also is no mention of any Incarnation, since the world whereinto this
Author here says, that Christ entered to perform his offering, is (as has
been formerly shown) the world to come. Whence to enter into the world, does
not here signify to be born; but to pass into the heaven. Again, by body, in
those words (A body have thou prepared me) may be understood an immortal one.

Q. What then is the sense of the place?

A. That God, while Jesus was entering into heaven, furnished him with such a
body, as was very suitable and fit to discharge his Priestly Office.

Q. You have hitherto explained the places of Scripture, from whence they
endeavor to prove that which is not found there: I entreat you therefore now
to allege those places from whence they draw wrong conclusions?

A. The Scriptures from whence they draw their wrong conclusions, either
directly concern Christ, or are referred to him by a certain accommodation.

Q. What are those that directly have respect to Christ?

A. They are such, wherein Christ is called either a God, or one with God, or
equal to God, or the Son of the living God, or the proper or only begotten Son
of God; or the first born of every creature, or having all things that the
Father has, or the Father of eternity, or the Word of God, or the Image of the
Invisible God, or the Character of his substance, or he, who being seen, the
Father is seen, or in whom the fullness of Deity dwells bodily, or that had
glory with the Father before the world was, or whose Spirit was in the
Prophets, or that came down from heaven, came out from the Father, and came
into the world, was sent by the Father into the world, or the only Lord, Lord
of Glory, King of Kings, Lord of Lords, and to whom Faith and divine honor
pertains.

Q. In what places of the Scripture is the word (God) attributed to Christ?

A. Joh. 1. 1. The Word was a God. And c. 20. 28. Thomas says to Christ, My
Lord, and my God. And Ro^. 9. 5. writes that Christ is a God over all to be
blessed for evermore.

Q. What say you to these passages?

A. That it cannot from thence be demonstrated that Christ had (as the
adversaries speak) a Divine Nature, may (to omit what has been formerly
spoken) be made appear from hence, namely that it is spoken in the first
testimony touching such a word as was with God. In the second, Thomas calls
him his God, in whose hands and feet he found the prints of the nails, and in
his side the print of the spear. And Paul says, that he, who was of the
Fathers according to the flesh, was over all a God to be blessed for evermore.
All which it is clear cannot possibly be said of him that is God by Nature. For
from the first it would follow, that there are two Gods, whereof the one was
with the other. As for the other twain, namely to have the prints of wounds,
and to be of the Fathers, do altogether pertain to a man, which that they
should be ascribed to him that is God by Nature, is very absurd. But if any one
to cloak the business pretend the distinction of Natures, we have formerly
removed that, and taught that this distinction is not to be endured.

Q. Where does the Scripture teach that Christ is one with the Father?

A. John 10. 29. 30. Where the Lord says, The Father that gave me the sheep is
greater then all, and none can snatch them out of the Fathers hand.

I and my Father are one.

Q. What say you to this proof?

A. When it is said that Christ is one with the Father, it cannot be thence
evinced that he is one with him in Nature, as the words of Christ himself
spoken to the Father about the Disciples to demonstrate: see Jo. 17. 11. Father
keep them in thy name whom thou have given to me, that they may be one, as we
are one. And afterward v. 22 The glory which thou have given me have I given
them, that they may be one as we are one. Now that Christ is one with the
Father, this ought to be taken of unity or oneness in will or power, as to the
business of man's Salvation. Yea that the Divine Nature of Christ cannot be
proved out of that place, is evident from the place it self, where Christ
says, The Father is greater then all, and consequently then the Son, as the
Son himself elsewhere confesses, John 14. 28. and that he gave those sheep to
Christ.

Q. But where does the Scripture call him equal to God?

A. John 5. 18. Therefore the Jews sought the more to slay him, in that he had
not only broken the Sabbath, but also called God his own Father, making himself
equal to God. And Phil. 2. 6. Who (Christ Jesus) being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal unto God.

Q. What answer you to those places?

A. That Christ is equal to God no way proves a Divine Nature in him, yea the
contrary is hence collected. For if Christ be equal to God, who is God by
Nature, he cannot possibly be the same God. But the equality of Christ with God
herein consists, that by the power which God conferred on him, he did all
those things (and will do them) which pertain to God himself, as if he were
very God.

Q. Where read we that Christ is the Son of the living God, the proper and only
begotten Son of God?

A. Of the first we read, Mat. 16. 16: where Peter says, Thou art the Son of
the living God. And Romans 8. 32. where the Apostle says, Who (God) spared not
his own proper Son, but delivered him for us. And John 3. 16. So God loved the
world, that he has given his only begotten Son, and a little after v. 18. He
that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed on the
name of the only begotten Son of God.

Q. What do you answer to these places?

A. From all those attributes cannot be proved any Divine Nature of Christ. For
as to the first, it is apparent that Peter confesses the Son of Man to be the
Christ, the Son of the living God, who it is certain had not a Divine Nature,
as they imagine. Again, the Scripture testifies of other men, that they are
Sons of the living God, as Paul cites it out of Hosea, Rom 9. 26. and it shall
be in the place, where it was said unto them, you are not my people, they shall
be there called the Sons of the living God. But as to the second and third
places, in them we read that the proper and only begotten Son of God was not
spared, but given and delivered to death for us, which cannot be said of him
that is God by Nature. Yea, from thence that Christ is the Son of God, it is
apparent that he is not God, otherwise he will be the Son of himself. Now the
reason why those attributes are ascribed to Christ, is this, because amongst
all the Sons of God, he is both the chiefest, and most dear to God, as Isaac,
because he was most dear to Abraham, and the heir of all things, is called the
only begotten, Heb. 12. 17. although he had a brother Ismael. And Solomon is
called the only-begotten in the fight of his Mother, Prove. 4. 3. although he
had more brethren of the same mother, 1 Chro. 3. 5.

Q. Where is he called the firstborn of every creature?

A. Colos. 1. 15.

Q. What say you to it?

A. Neither can it be hence concluded, that Christ has a Divine Nature. For
since Christ is the firstborn of every creature, it must needs be that he also
is one of the creatures. For such is the force of the word (firstborn) in the
Scripture, that it must of necessity be one of them amongst whom it is the
first born; as the firstborn of sheep is a sheep, of asses an ass, of men a
man. But that Christ should be the firstborn of creatures in the Old creation,
the adversaries themselves must not admit, unless they will become Arrians.
Wherefore they must confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is one of the New
Creation. Whence the Divine Nature of Christ is not only not concluded, but it
is on the contrary firmly concluded, that he has no Divine Nature. But that
Christ is by the Apostle called by that name, does hence proceed, namely that
he both in time and dignity precedeth all other things of the New Creation.

Q. Where does the Scripture affirm that he has all things that the Father
has?

A. John 16. 15. where Christ himself says, All things that the Father has
are mine. And below, chapter 17. 10. All mine are thine, and thine are mine.

Q. What say you to these places?

A. The word (all) as was formerly demonstrated, is commonly r^strained to the
subject matter. Wherefore from such places no such thing, as the adversaries
would have, can be collected. Now the subject matter, John 16. is that which
the Holy Spirit was to declare unto the Apostles concerning the Kingdom of
Christ; and c. 17. it is apparent that it is spoken of the Disciples of Christ,
whom God had given to him, whence he also calls them his own. Besides,
inasmuch as whatsoever Christ has, he has it from the grant of the Father,
and not from himself, it is hence evident, that he has no such Divine Nature
as is imagined. Since he that is a God by Nature has all things from himself.

Q. But where is Christ called, a Father of eternity?

A. Isa. 9. 6.

Q. What say you hereunto?

A. That a Divine Nature cannot hence be proved, inasmuch as Christ is for a
certain respect called a Father of eternity, as may be seen by the words a
little before in the same place expressed. But it is a wonder that the
adversaries urge this place, especially according to the English Translation,
where Christ is called the everlasting Father. For this quite subverteth the
common Doctrine of the Trinity, by confounding the first and second Persons
thereof. But the words may well be rendered a Father of eternity, or an
everlasting Father, both because he is the Author of eternal life to them that
obey him, and lives for ever to shelter and protect and cherish Christians,
who are elsewhere called his seed. See Isa. 53. 10.

Q. But where are those Elogies given to Christ, namely that he is the word or
Speech of God, the Image of the invisible God, the Character or express image
of his person or substance, that he which sees Christ, sees the Father, that
in Jesus Christ dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, or of Deity, bodily?

A. John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, compared with Rev. 19. 13. where
Christ is called the word of God. Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. Io. 14. 9. Col. 2. 9

Q. What say you to these pleases?

A. It cannot from thence be concluded that Christ has a Divine Nature,
because he is called the Word of God, yea the contrary is manifest. For since
he is the Word of that one God, he cannot be that very one God, unless one will
absurdly and contradictiously say he is the Word of himself. Which answer may
be given to every one of these testimonies. But Jesus is therefore called the
Word, or speech of God, because he has declared the whole will of God to us,
as John himself seems to expound it, chap. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any
time; the only-begotten Son, who is (or rather, was) in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him. As he is in the same sense called both Life, and
Truth. And the same may be said of his being called the Image of the invisible
God. But he is called the express Image of his person or substance, hereby is
meant, that God has already exhibited in him, whatsoever he has promised to
us. But as to the saying of Christ, he that sees me, sees the Father, this is
not fit to prove the Divine Nature of Christ; since that reason of seeing is
not appliable to the Essence of God, which is invisible, but to the knowledge
of those things which Christ, as his Fathers Ambassador, both said and did. For
proof of this, see Joh. 12. 45. Neither lastly can the divine Nature of Christ
be evinced from thence, namely that all the fullness of the Godhead, or of
Deity, dwells in him bodily; since this word (Godhead) may denote the divine
will; see Ephesians. 3 19. and forasmuch as the Apostle does oppose that speech, not
to persons, but to Philosophy and legal ceremonies, it is evident that it is
meant of the Doctrine of Christ, not of his Person. But should we take the
words as they sound, yet could not such a divine Nature as the adversaries have
imagined, be thence collected. For it is true and manifest that the fulness of
Deity or Godhead does now dwell in Christ even bodily, in that his very body is
altogether divine, as being made both of divine and spiritual matter, namely
that of the heaven, see 1 Cor. 15. 45, 47, 48. and being endued with divine
life, and divine splendor, and divi^e strength. But concerning the word
(corporally) of that we will discourse somewhat afterward.

Q. But where says the Scripture that Christ had glory with the Father before
the world was?

A. John 17. 5. Now, Father, glorify me with thy self, with the glory which I
had with thee, before the world was, or (as the Greek runs) with the glory
which I had before the world was, with thee.

Q. What say you to this place?

A. Neither can the Divine Nature of Christ be evinced from hence: for that
Christ might have glory with the Father before the world was, and yet not be
thereupon God, is apparent from 3 Tim. 1. 9. where the Apostle says of the
faithful, that grace was given to them before the world began. Besides it is
here written that Christ does beg this glory of the Father, which shows
neither that he was formerly in actual possession thereof, for then he would
have been in possession of it still, and consequently needed not, as he does,
to beg it as the reward of his work, nor had a Divine Nature, for then his
Divine Nature would have supplied him with such glory as he wanted, without
being beholden to another. Wherefore the sense of the place is, that Christ
beseeches the Father to grant unto him that glory which he had with him in his
decree, before the world began.

Q. Where says the Scripture that the Spirit of Christ was in the Prophets?

A. 1 Pet. 1. 10. 11. Concerning which salvation the Prophets diligently
scarched and inquired, who prophesied of the grace that should happen to you,
searching at what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ in them did
signify.

Q. What say you to this?

A. The spirit here said to be in the Prophets, is therefore called the spirit
of Christ, either by a prolepsis, because he is now become the spirit of
Christ, or because he foresignified the things of Christ, as Peter himself
hinteth, saying, when it testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the
glories that should follow; which form of speech you likewise have, 1 John 4.
6. where the spirit of truth; and the spirit of error, are so called, because
they speak the things belonging to truth, and to error.

Q. Where says the scripture that Christ came down from heaven, came out from
the father, and came into the world?

A Joh. 3. 13. No man has ascended into heaven, but he that descended from
heaven, the son of man that is, (or rather, was) in heaven. And chap. 16. 28. I
came out from the father, and came into the world: again (or rather on the
contrary) I leave the world, and go to the father, and Ioh: 17. 18. As thou
have sent me into the world.

Q What say you to these passages?

A. That the divine nature of Christ cannot hence be evinced, is apparent, in
that the words of the first testimony, (namely who came down from heaven) may
be figuratively taken, as in Jam. 1. 17. Every good donation, and every perfect
gift is from above, descending from the father of light. and Rev. 21. 2. 10. I
John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem, descending from God out of heaven.
But if they ought properly to be taken, which we most willingly admit, it is
apparent that they are not spoken of any other, then the son of man, who since
he of necessity has a humane person, he cannot be God by nature. Moreover,
whereas the Scripture testifies of Christ, that the father sent him into the
world, we read the same concerning the Apostles of Christ, in the words before
quoted, John 17. 18. As thou have sent me into the world, so have I also sent
them into the world. But that saying namely, that Christ came out from the
Father, are equivalent with his descending from heaven: but his coming into the
world, is such a thing, which the Scripture shows to have happened after his
nativity, see John 18. 37. where our Lord himself says, I was therefore born,
and therefore came I into the world, that I should bear Record to the truth,
and 1 John 4. 1. It is written that many false prophets were gone out into the
world. So that from those forms of speech, a divine nature of Christ cannot be
evinced. But in all these speeches is described how divine the beginning of
Christ's prophetic office was.

Q. But where is Christ called that one Lord, Lord of glory, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords?

A. 1 Cor. 8. 6. To us there is one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we through him, 1 Cor. 2. 8. For had they known they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. Rev. 17. 14. They shall make war with the Lamb,
and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
and chap. 19. 16. and he has on his vesture and thigh a name written, King of
Kings and Lord of Lords.

Q. What say you to these testimonies?

A. As to the first, the divine nature of Christ cannot be concluded from the
Apostles calling him that one Lord. For first, he manifestly distinguishes him
from the father, whom he confesses to be that one God, whom we formerly showed
to be the only God by nature. Again, the Apostle by saying that all things are
by him, shows that he is not God by nature. Since, as we formerly
demonstrated this particle [by] does not design the first, but the second
cause, which cannot be affirmed of him that is God by nature. And though the
scripture sometimes says of the Father, that all things are by him, yet is this
otherwise understood of him, then of Christ: For this is spoken of the father,
because all the middle causes, whereby something is done, are derived from him,
and are not such, as that God cannot work without them, but it is said of
Christ, that some other, namely God, who must of necessity therefore be the
first cause, does work all things, Ephesians. 3. 9. It is expressly said. I need not
commemorate that the word [all] is here to be restrained unto the subject
matter, as the very article set before it in the Greek sufficienly shows,
Much more these two words [us] and [Father] which plainly demonstrate that Paul
speaks only of all the things that pertain to Christians, whence it
follows that Christ is not called that one Lord simply, and absolutely, but
for a certain respect, as being he, by whom all the things pertaining to
Christians are administered. As for the second testimony, since it is there
treated of him that was crucified, it is clear that the divine nature cannot
thence be concluded, since no such thing can be affirmed of the divine nature,
but only of a man, who is therefore called the Lord of glory, that is,
according to the Hebrew Phrase the glorious Lord, because he was by God crowned
with glory and honor. In the third testimony since it is spoken of him who is
a lamb, and clothed with garments, whom the same John most openly testifies to
have been slain, and to have redeemed us with his blood, (which thing can by no
means be referred to the divine nature) it is apparent that the divine nature
of Christ cannot thence be asserted, but all the things that are in these
testimonies ascribed to Christ argue his singular authority given to him by
God, in relation to the things of the new covenant.

Question, What testimonies of Scripture may be alleged for believing in
Christ, and giving divine honor to him?

Answer, John 14. 1. Christ himself says, Ye believe in God, believe also in
me. And John 3. verses 14, 15. As Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, that whosoever believes on
him may not perish, but have eternal life. And John 5. verse. 22. 23. The
Father judges no man, but has given all the judgment to the son, that all
should honor the son, as they honor the Father, and Philippians 2. verse. 9,
10, 11. wherefore God has exceedingly exalted, and given him a name above
every name, that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of heavenly,
earthly, and infernal things; and every tongue should confess that Jesus is
Lord to the glory of God the Father, and in sundry other places.

Question, What say you to these testimonies?

Answer, As to the first, it is so far from proving that Christ is God by
nature, that it clearly shows him to be a far different one. For it openly
puts a difference between Christ, and that one God, of whom that is here
treated, the Article added in the Greek does intimate. Now whereas the
adversaries say, that faith is not to be placed, but in God himself, this
solved by Christ in another place, whilst he says, he that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me. whence it is evident, that Christ
arrogateth not that faith to himself, which we ow to God only; for that faith
is, due to God only, which is terminated in him, and which has respect to him
as the prime author of all things, but it is clear that such faith is not
attributed to Christ, for we therefore believe on Christ, because he has
obtained of God a power to make us eternally happy, and is appointed unto that
office; whereby it comes to pass, that our faith on Christ, is through him
directed to God himself, as the ultimate end, which is attested by Peter,
saying, through him (Christ) you believe in God, that raised him up from the
dead, and gave him glory, so that your faith and hope is on God, 1 Epist. 1. 21.

Question, But they allege out of Jeremy, that he is cursed who trusts in
man, Ier. 17. 5.

An. It is not said absolutely, that he is cursed who trusts in man, but he,
who so trusts in him, as that he makes flesh his arm, that is, fasteneth his
whole hope in mere humane forces, without the assistance of divine power; for
that is, understood by the word flesh, to which these words are further added,
[and his heart departs from the Lord. But we who place our confidence on
Christ, do not make flesh our arm, nor in our heart depart from God, yea in
trusting on Christ, we trust on God himself, and so our heart comes unto God,
and not departs from him.

Q. What say you to the other testimonies which speak of Christ's divine honor.

Forasmuch as all the places that testify concerning Christ's divine honor, do
also testify that this honor was given to him at a certain time, and for a
certain cause, it is plain that the divine nature of Christ cannot thence be
collected. Now whereas the adversaries object that of Isaiah, chap. 42. 8. I
will not give me glory to another. I answer that it is apparent enough what he
means by another, for he presently adds, nor my praise to graven images. In
this place therefore God speaks of them who have no communion with him, and
to whom if any glory and honor be ascribed, it redoundeth not to him. But he
says not, that he will not communicate his glory with such an one as is
dependent, of him and subordinate to him, for by this means no diminution of
his glory is made, since the whole is referred to him, for since the Lord Jesus
depends of him, and is subordinate to him, whatsoever honor is given to
Jesus, redoundeth wholly to God himself.

Q. I have been in informed touching those places of Scripture which seem
directly to respect the son of God, I would fain learn those also which are
applied to Christ by a certain accommodation, and seem to prove a Divine nature
in Christ.

A. The places are these, Isaiah 8. 14. where it is said that he should be a
stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, which Luke chap. 2. 34. and Paul Romans
9. 32. and Peter 1 Epist. 2. 7. do repeat next. Isa. 45. 23. where God says I
have sworn by my self, that to me every knee shall bow, which is applied to
Christ, Romans 14. verse 11. Thirdly, Isaiah 41. verse. 4. and chapter 44. ver. 6.
and chapter 48. verse 12. I am the first and the last, the same is read of
Christ Revelat. 1. v. 17. Fourthly, Isaiah 35. verse. 4, 5, 6. God himself shall
come and save us, then shall the eyes of the blind, and ears of the deaf be
opened, then, shall the lame leap like a heart, and the tongue of dumb shall be
loosed, which things are repeated of Christ, Mat. 11. 5. Fifthly, Zac. 12. 10.
And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, which John, chap. 19. 37.
attributes to Christ. Sixthly, Psalm. 68. 19. Thou have ascended on high, and
led captivity captive, and received gifts for men, which same is repeated of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8. From all which testimonies they argue thus,; in as much as
those things which were spoken of God, under the Law, are spoken also of Christ
under the Gospel. It appears that Christ is the God of Israel, and
consequently God by nature.

Q. What answer you hereunto?

A. It may be so answered to all these passages, that it may be apparent that
the divine nature of Christ cannot thence be collected, for what things are
spoken of God under the Law, may for another reason be spoken of Christ under
the Gospel, as they are indeed spoken, namely for the great and intimate
conjunction between God and Christ, in respect of dominion, power, and office,
all which the Scripture of the new covenant every where testifies, that Christ
has obtained by the donation of God, now if the Scripture deliver such things
of Moses, as that he brought Israel out of Egypt, Exodus, 32. 7. and that he was
the redeemer of that people, Acts 7. 35. and so of others, the very same things
that are elsewhere written of God himself, when in the mean time neither Moses,
nor those others had so great conjunction with God, as intervened between him
and Christ, much more deservedly may these things which are primarily spoken of
God, be accommodated to Christ, by reason of that most singular and strict
conjunction that is between them.

Q. I perceive that Christ has not a divine nature, but is a true man, now
tell me of what avail unto salvation the knowledge hereof will be?

Answer, From the knowledge of this, that Christ is a true man, a sure and well
grounded confirmation of our hope does follow, which by the contrary opinion is
exceedingly shaken, and almost taken away.

Q. How so?

An. Because it follows from the adverse opinion, that Christ is not a true
man, for since they deny that there is in Christ the person of a man, who sees
that they with one and the same labor deny him to be a true man, in that he
cannot be a true man, who wants the person of a man, but if Christ had not
been a true man, he could not dye, and consequently not rise again from the
dead, whereby our hope which rests on the resurrection of Christ, as on a
firm basis, and foundation, may be easily shaken, and well nigh thrown down,
but that opinion, which acknowledges Christ to be a true man, who conversing
in the world, was obedient to the Father, even unto death, does assert, and
clearly determine that the same died, and was by God raised from the dead, and
endued with immortality, and so in a wonderful manner, supporteth, and
proppeth, our hope concerning eternal life, setting before our eyes the very
image of that thing, and assuring us thereby, as it were with a pledge, that we
also though we be mortal and dye; shall notwithstanding in due time rise from
death, to come into the society of the same blessed immortality, whereof he is
made partaker if we tread in his steps.

Question, I understand the things pertaining to the person of Christ proceed,
I entreat you to his office?

Answer, Very well, you must know that the Office of Christ consists, in
being our Prophet, King and Priest.

Question, Where is he called a Prophet in the Scriptures.

Answer, There is a singular testimony hereof cited by power, Acts 3. verse 22.
out of Moses, Who said to the Fathers, the Lord your God shall raise up a
prophet to you out of the midst of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you
hear, according to all the things whatsoever he shall speak unto you, Deuteronomy. 18.
18.

Question, Wherein consists his prophetical office?

Answer, In perfectly manifesting and confirming the will of God to men.

Question, Whence appears it, that Christ has perfectly manifested the will
of God to men.

Answer, From hence; namely, in that Jesus himself did in the most perfectest
manner, learn it of God, in the heavens, and was magnificently sent from thence
to publish it unto men, and did accordingly declare it unto them, which is most
apparent from those appellations that in the Scripture are attributed to him,
whilst it calls him the Word; or Speech of God, the Image of the Invisible
God, the Brightness of the Glory, or the Image of the Person, or Substance of
God; and whilst it affirms that the whole fullness of the Godhead, or of
Diety does dwell in him bodily; that is the who I will of God is entirely, and
solidly discovered in the doctrine of Christ.

Q. Whence is it written, that Christ was in heaven, and was sent down from
thence?

A. Joh. 6. 38. I came down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of
him that sent me; and lo what if you should see the son of man ascending where
he was before; and Chap. 3. 13. No man has ascended into heaven, but he that
descended from heaven; the son of man, who is (or rather was) in heaven, and
below, verse. 31. he that came from above is above all; he that is, (or rather
was) from the earth, is earthly (in the Greek is of the earth) and speaks of
the earth; he that came from heaven is above all: And what he has seen and
heard that he testifies, and Chap. 8. 40. Now you seek to kill me a man, who
has told you the truth which I have heard from God, and below, v. 42. If God
were your Father, you would love me, for I came out from God, and am come, for
neither did I come of my self, but he sent me; and chap. 13. 3. Jesus knowing
that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came out from
God, and goes away to God, and chap. 16. 27, 28, 30. Ye have belived that I
came out from God, I came out from the father, and came into the world; again
(or rather on the contrary) I leave the world and go to the Father; now we know
that thou know all things, and need not that one ask the hereby we
believe that thou came out from God: and chap. 17. 8. And they have known
indeed, that I came from thee; and have believed that thou sentest me; and if
any man have a desire to know when Christ was in heaven, with God; the same
Evangelist shall tell him that he was in the beginning with God; Joh. 1. 2.
namely when the Gospel first began to be set on foot, and before any thing
thereof had been yet performed; for John the Baptist preached not the Gospel,
but only prepared the way of Christ, that was to preach it; as you have it
intimated in the sixth verse.

Q. What is that will of God discovered by Jesus Christ?

A. It is the new Covenant, which God made with mankind, by Christ, who is
therefore called the mediator of the new Covenant.

Q. What does this new Covenant comprehend?

A. Two sorts of things, whereof the one has respect to God, the other to man.

Q. Which is that which has respect to God?

A. The perfect precepts, and perfect promises of God.

CHAP. I. Of the Precepts of Christ which he added to the Law.
Q. WHat are those perfect precepts of God discovered by Christ?

An. Partly they are contained in the Precepts delivered in the Law, together
with the addition thereunto made in the new covenant, partly contained in those
things which Christ peculiarly prescribed.

Q. What are the former?

An. They are those that are contained in the Decalogue.

Q. Are there other Precepts delivered of God by Moses?

An. Yes, wherereof some contain to outward Rights, commonly called ceremonies,
others to judge men, but Christ took them away, either expressly or tacitly,
expressly by the Apostles, but especially by Paul who abolished a great part of
Precepts belonging to outward rights, or ceremonies, which were not openly
taken away, are to be thought abolished by the propriety of the new Covenant,
for the same cause that the others were taken away, which we find to be
expressly abrogated.

Quest. What is the property of the new Covenant?

Answer, This, that it is altogether spiritual, and not placed in any outward
things, but inward ones, but external rights commonly called ceremonious, are
not spiritual, in that they have respect to the outward features, wherefore
unless there be one express commandment touching such a thing in the new
covenant, we are to believe that under the new Covenant it is not to be
observed, so that it is to be held, that whatsoever pertaining to Ceremonies,
was commanded under the old covenant, does not all belong to the New.

Quest. What is the reason that certain ceremonies of the old covenant were
openly obliged?

Answer, Because they were shadows of things to come, which are now present,
and have appeared in the new covenant, so thar there is now no more place left
for shadows.

Question, Is there any express testimony hereof in the Scripture?

Answer, Yes, in Paul, who says, Col. 2. 16. 17. Let none judge you in meats
or drinks, or in regard of an holy day, or new moons, or saboths, which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ: and hence it comes to
pass, that all other ceremonies, though they be not openly abolished, are yet
to be thought tacitly abrogated, since it is evident that they were all shadows
of those things, that have appeared in the new covenant, although certain
ceremonies of the old covenant were such, as that they were on this ground
abolished, because they pertained only to the old and not to the new.

Q. What are such ceremonies?

An. You have one example thereof in the Paschal Lamb, and the Feasts of
Tabernacles, those and some others like unto them belonged only to Israel,
which under the old Covenant, was the people of God, but not to the Gentiles,
converted to God by Christ, which are at this day, the greatest part of Gods
people.

Q. As for the Judaicall precepts, how were they abolished, tacitly, or
expressly?

A. Not expressly, but tacitly rather, although it appears, that the causes
for which they were abolished, and are so to be accunted, are manifest.

Q. What are those causes?

A. Three, principally; First, because under the old Covenant, severity and
rigor had place; but under the new, grace and mercy; Secondly, because under
the new Covenant, there is an express promise of Eternal life, which the old
Covenant had not, promising no other thing expressly, but the temporary good
things of this life. Thirdly, because, under the old Covenant, the people of
God had but one earthly Commonwealth; and the form thereof prescribed, and
constituted by God, which Commonwealth failing, the Laws and Judgments
introduced for the settlement thereof vanished also.

Q. Is therefore the Government and Ordination of Magistracy, and one earthly
Commonwealth vanished?

A. At no hand since all authority is from God, Romans 13. 1. And a Christian
himself may bear Magistracy, so that in the maintaining and management thereof
he so behave himself, as that he offend not against the Laws and Commandments
of Christ?

Q. Explain at length, what are Commandments of the Decalogne? and also what
the Lord Jesus added to each of them?

A. The first, In order is thou shall not have other Gods before me.

Q. What contains this Commandment in it self?

A. These two things, first that Jehovah is to be acknowledged God, for our
God, and to be celebrated with divine worship and honor, next that no other
besides him is to be acknowledged and worshipped for God.

Q. Since I have formerly understood, who is to be acknowledged for God, Now I
would know how he is to be celebrated with divine worship and honor?

A. In such a manner as that the worship and honor do many ways exceed all
humane worship and honor which is ordinarily given to any one, and that we so
behave our selves therein, as if we saw God himself, who is invisible.

Q. Wherein does the honor and worship of God consist?

A. Briefly in adoration.

Q. In what manner is adoration to be attributed to God?

A. The adoration due to God is twofold, inward and outward.

Q. What is the inward?

A. Such as comprehends in it self, the greatest reverence of the mind
toward God, so that from the very sense of our heart and mind, we acknowledge
and profess, that he has most absolute authority, not only over our bodies,
but also over souls, so that he can give laws to them, and exercise judgment
over them.

Q. What is outward adoration?

A. Such as comprehends the most lowly submission of our body (which is a
witness of our inward adoration) and infinitely exceeds all outward honor,
that is exhibited to creatures.

Q. Does it not pertain to the same Adoration that we fall upon our knees and
faces before God?

Ans. Yes and moreover the same adoration contains in it self the celebration
of the divine name and public thanks given for benefits received, and
imploration of the divine help in necessities.

Q. What has the Lord Jesus added to these things?

A. First, in that he has prescribed to us a certain form of prayer.

Q. What is that form?

An. It is set down in Matt. 6. 9. etc. Luke 11. 2. etc. Our father which art
in heaven, etc.

Q. What does this Prayer contain?

A. Petitions of two sorts, whereof the former respects the glory of God, the
latter are referred to our uses.

Q. What. are they that respect the glory of God?

A. The things first in order.

Q. Which is the first of them?

A. Hallowed be thy name.

Q. Explain this Petition.

A. In this petition we desire God to assist us every way, that we may
celebrate his name with words, hymns, writings, and by other means whatsoever.

Q. What is the second?

A. Thy Kingdom come.

Q. Explain this Petition.

A. In this petition we do beseech God that he would induce us, by such means
as are best known to himself, to consecrate and resign our hearts up to him,
but more especially by the discovery and obsignation of his truth, and choicest
promises in our hearts, for then God truly reigns, when he exercises his
Kingdom, by the laws of the Gospel, in our hearts and mind.

Quest. What is the third Petition?

Answ. Thy will be done, as in the Heavens, so in the Earth.

Quest. Explain the meaning of this Petition?

Answ. In this Petition we beg of God, that he would vouchsafe us his
assistance in performing the obedience due unto him, and what is to be
expressed in our lives and actions, for a man standing in need of much
assistance to the performance of those things which God has commanded him,
especially under the Gospel, for they are such as far exceed his strength:
there is also in this Petition a tacit confession of our own weakness, and of
our confidence in God, and hope which we conceive of his bounty when we dare to
beg of him that he would make us no less ready to yield him obedience then the
Angels who are in Heaven.

Quest. What are the Petitions that are referred to our use?

Answ. The other three which follow in the same order.

Quest. What is the first?

Answ. Give us this day our daily bread.

Quest. Explain this Petition.

Answ. Therein we desire God, first that he would bestow upon us the gifts of
his grace necessary to sustain and cherish our Spiritual life; next, that he
would confer all those things that any ways pertain to the maintenance of this
life.

Quest. What is the second?

Answ. Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our Debtors.

Quest. Explain this also.

Answ. Therein we beg of God, not only to remit those sins, which we have
committed since we subjected our selves to the laws of the Gospel; but also
much more those which we committed before the knowledge of the truth: in as
much as these are far more grievous, and more easily exclud us from the
possession of eternal life, and cast us into everlasting damnation: but
whereas it is added. As we forgive our debtors, it is held, that the
forgiveness of sins can at no hand be hoped for, unless we forgive offenses
unto others, and that from our hearts, so that to be quite alienated from all
desire of revenge.

Quest. What is the third Petition?

Answ. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

Quest. Declare it?

Answ. In this Petition we entreat of God to assist us, that we be not over
come in afflictions, which are sent for the trial of our faith, as often as we
fall into them, by the will or permission of God, and that he would keep us
from Satan, suffering us not to be oppressed with those temptations which he
uses as engines to subvert, and overthrow us.

Quest. Is it not lawful to pray otherwise?

Answ. Yes, for he neither here, or elsewhere forbids it, so that our prayer
be not such as thwarteth the will of God, openly prescribed to us: But if we
desire any such thing concerning which the will of God is not manifested, then
is that petition to be wholly submitted to the will of God.

Quest. To what end therefore did Christ command that we should pray in the
aforesaid manner?

Answ. That we might know assuredly what things are always, and necessarily to
be desired of God?

Quest. What else has the Lord Jesus added to his first precept?

Answ. That we ought to acknowledge him likewise for a God, that is such a one
as has divine sovereignty over us, and to whom we are bound to exhibit Divine
honor.

Quest. Wherein consists the Divine honor due to Christ?

Answ. That as we are bound to celebrate him with Divine adoration, so we may
in our necessities implore his aid; now we adore him for his sublime majesty,
and implore his aid for his divine and Soverain Authority.

Quest. What else pertains to the Divine honor of Christ?

Answ. The Administration of his Supper, of which you shall hear anon.

Quest. Whence prove you, that Divine Adoration is due to Christ?

Answ. There are proofs thereof in many passages of the Scripture, and namely,
John 5. 22. Christ himself says the Father has given all Judgment (that is
according the Hebrew phrase, all government and rule) to the Son, that all
should honor the Son as they honor the Father: and Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11.
wherefore God has exceedingly exalted him, and given him a name above every
name, That in the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, on
the Earth, and under the Earth, and that every tongue should confess, Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

Quest. But how prove that we may fly to Christ in all our necessities?

Answ. First, because he is both able and willing to help us; next, that we
have incitements thereunto, both from the Lord himself, and also from his
Apostles: in fine, because we have examples thereof in holy men.

Quest. How prove you that Christ is able, and willing to help us?

Answ. We will speak of that below, when we come to his Kingly, and Priestly
Office.

Quest. But where has the Lord, or where have the Apostles proposed to us
these incitements?

A. John 14. 13, 14, and chap. 15. and chap. 16. 23, 24, 25. where the Lord
himself says, whatsoever you shall ask in my name (that is, relying on my name
and power, or directing your prayers to me by name, or so to the Father as that
I only be named in the prayers) I will do it, Rev. 3. 18. I council thee to
buy of me gold tried in the fire, etc. and Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16. where that
divine Author writes, after this manner, Having therefore a great high Priest,
passed through the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God. Let us hold fast the
confession, for we have not a High Priest that cannot be touched, with a fellow
feeling of our infirmities, but in all things tempted like unto us, without
sin: Let us therefore with boldness make our addresses to the throne of Grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find favor to help in time of need; and Romans 10.
13. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.

Quest. Where have you examples hereof?

Answ. Luke 17. 5. the Apostles say Lord increase our Faith; in like manor,
Mat. 8. 25. Lord save us we perish; and Acts 7. 59. where Stephen invocating,
breaks out into these words, Lord Jesus receive my spirit; and again, ver.
60. Lord lay not this sin to their charge. Also 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8. Lest I should
be too much elevated with the excess of Revelation, there was given to me a
prick in the flesh, an Angel of Satan, to buffet me, that I might not be
elevated; whereupon I besought the Lord, that he might depart from me: also 1
These. 3. 11. Now our very God and Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ direct our
way unto you; besides, this may be farther seen in all the Apostolic
salutations wherein they wish Grace, Mercy, and Peace, As from God the Father,
so also from his Son Jesus Christ, unto the faithful.

Quest. But is not the first Commandment of the decalogue altogether changed by
this addition, namely, that we ought to acknowledge Christ for a God, and
celebrate him with Divine honor?

Answ. At no hand, for the Commandment it self is not changed; in as much, as
all the worship that is given to Christ, redoundeth to the glory of that one
God, the Father; but the reason and manner of worshipping is changed, for
before Christ God was worshipped immediately, but under Christ mediately.
Besides, that law forbids us to have other Gods, before the Lord God, and
Christ is not an other God; but in that very worship which is given to him
subordinate to that one God, it is apparent that that law is no way changed,
since it is well known that subordinate things are not opposite to one another.

Quest. Is Divine Honor and Worship so attributed to Christ, that there is
herein no difference between him and God?

Answ. Yes, very great, for we adore and honor God as the first cause of our
Salvation; but Christ as the second, or to speak with Paul, God the Father: as
him of whom are all the things, the Lord Christ, as him by whom are all the
things, 1 Cor. 8. 6.

Quest. What think you of those men which do not invocate Christ, nor think
that he must be adored?

Answ. That they are no Christians, since indeed they have not Christ; for
though in words they dare not deny him, yet in reality they do.

Quest. You have showed, that next to God Christ ought to be worshipped, tell
me whether any one else is to be worshipped?

Answ. None, for neither is there any Divine testimony from whence it may
appear, that to any other but Christ, Divine soverainty over us is given: and
whereas at this day in the Church of Rome some divine Authority is attributed
to the Virgin Mary, and to the Saints, that is wholly built upon their own
opinion.

Quest. Can they not justly be excused, since they do it to this end, that
they may thereby give worship to God?

Answ. No, for in the worship of God, it is not enough to ground our selves
upon opinion, though never so specious, but thereunto there is need of the very
truth it self, otherwise that worship ought justly to be accounted for Idolatry.

Quest. I perceive that none but God and Christ is to be worshipped, but may we
not invocate the Virgin Mary, and the Saints, not that they themselves may
bestow any thing upon us, but impetrate it by their prayers unto God and Christ?

Answ. It is no ways lawful for the reason a little before declared: as also
because in those things that concern the worship of God, one ought to be most
certainly persuaded, that the things which are done, may be done according to
the will of God: But no testimony can be produced out of the sacred Scriptures,
from whence it may appear; that the Virgin Mary, and the other Saints, either
have any care of those things that are done by us, or any knowledge, or at
least are able to hear our Prayers; of which things never the less, he ought
to be persuaded, who would address his prayers to them.

Quest. I suppose I now perceive what force this precept has in the Christian
Religion, come therefore to the second.

Answ. The second is this, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image,
etc.

Quest. What is the meaning of this precept?

Answ. That no Image is to be made, to the end it should be adored and
worshipped, nor any such Image as may occasion such adoration and worship.

Quest. What are those Images which men make to the end they should be adored
and worshipped?

Answ. Such as are made out of an opinion, and shadow of Religion.

Quest. In what manner is such adoration performed?

Answ. Not only when Images themselves are worshipped; but when the worship is
performed before them, and when they are religiously clothed; but much more
when Tapers are lighted before them, Incense burned, Vows made to them, and
Pilgrimages undertaken to them.

Quest. But they say these things are not exhibited to the Images themselves,
nor the Images themselves adored, but those whom they represent?

Answ. This shift avails them not, for in that prohibition there is no
mention of such a difference, that this should be done for the Images sakes or
not, but the people are enjoined not to do the thing at all: But that this
evasion is not to be admitted, the example of the Calf which the Israelites
made in the Wilderness, and of those Calves which Jeroboam made for the
Israelites in the Land which the Lord had given them to possess. For it is
certain, that the worship that was given to those Calves, was in the intention
of the Israelites, not given to Calves themselves, but to the Lord God of
Israel, whom they thought to be represented by them, nevertheless, that
worship was repugnant to the will of God, as appears sufficiently out of the
sacred Story.

Quest. How will you prove that the Israelites worshipped God in the Calf that
was made in the Wilderness?

Answ. That appears from the fact of Araon, and the People. From the fact of
Aaron, because being enforced by the prayers of the people, to make them a God
that might go before them, he framed that Calf. But it is certain, that Aaron
had no other God besides the Lord; which is also apparent from hence, namely,
in that Aaron when he was about to dedicate that Calf, says of him, Tomorrow
is a solemnity to the Lord, Exodus 32. 5. From the fact of this people, because
they said of the Calf, that he was the God which brought them out of the Land
of Egypt; for this whole action of bringing them out of the land of Egypt, by
the hand of Moses, was performed under the express name of the Lord himself.

Quest. How will you prove the same concerning those Calves that Jeroboam made
for the People?

A. First because those calves were proposed to the people by Jeroboam to be
worshipped, with these words, behold thy God O Israel, that brought thee up out
of the land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12. 28. Besides, it is evident from the very
history, yea therein expressed, that those calves were therefore framed by
Jeroboam lest the people should go to Jerusalem to worship the Lord, for they
would never have desisted to go to Jerusalem, nor have rested in the worship of
the calves, had they not been persuaded that they worshipped God in them.

Q. What is added to this Precept in the new covenant.

A. That we do not only abstain from adoring images, but also utterly avoid
them, and fly from them. See 1 John 5. 21. Little children keep your selves
from idols, 1 Cor. 8. and chap. 10. 14. wherefore my beloved brethren, fly from
Idolatry.

Q. In what manner are idols to be avoided?

A. By being absent from those places where images are worshipped, and not
partaking of those things that are consecrated to them, as it does clearly
appear out of those places, which was a little before quoted.

Q. what is the third Precept?

A. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.

Q. What is it to take name of God in vain?

A. To call God to record in false matters.

Q. What is added to this Precept under the new covenant?

A. First, that we may call to record not only God, but also Christ, inasmuch
as the Lord Christ searches the hearts and reins, Rev. 3 13. next that, it is
n^^ only unlawful for us to forswear our selves, but to swear at all, unless
it be in most weighty matters, and such wherein the glory of God is concerned,
and then it must not be done rashly, but with great fear of God, and singular
caution.

Q. Where is is written concerning this matter?

A. Matt. 5. 33 34. And ye have heard, that it was said to them of old, thou
shall not forswear thy self, but thou shall pay thy vows to the Lord, and
concerning which matter, see also what is written Iam. 5. 12.

Q. Since the Lord forbids to swear at all, how prove you that it is lawful
to swear in most grave and weighty matters?

A. That word [at all] has not such a sense, as if it were not lawful at all
to swear, in any case whatsoever, for it is opposed to voluntary oaths, and
such as proceeded from lightness, such as the law of Moses did not forbid, if
they were true, whereas our Savior Christ opposes his doctrine to that of
Moses in this point, besides we read that the apostles have sworn, as Romans 1.
9. 2 Cor. 1. 23. and chap. 11. 31. Phil. 1. 8. 1 These. 2. 5. 10. 1 Cor. 15. 31.
but to take away all scruple concerning the forequoted place, Mat. 5. 33. 34.
etc. let it be well considered, whether it be not here spoken of such paths,
wherein a man promises that he will do something, and are therefore called
promissary oaths, which though lawful under the law, do by these words of
Christ seem to be altogether forbidden unto Christians under the Gospel, see
also the other forecited place, James 5. 12. which gives light hereunto.

Q. Why should the Lord Jesus forbid us to swear voluntarily and lightly, even
in the things that are true?

A. That the name of the most high God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, should be
in the greater veneration, again lest by levity of swearing we should learn to
forswear our selves.

Q. Is it lawful to swear by others besides God and Christ?

A. At no hand, for neither has God given to any other besides Christ, to
search the heart and reins.

Q. What is the fourth Precept?

A. Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, etc.

Q. What think you of this Precept?

A. That it is taken away under the new covenant, as well as other ceremonial
observations.

Q. Why was it inserted into the Decalogue?

A.That it might appear that the chiefest part of the Mosaicall Law was not
perfect, and a hint might thereby be given, that a far perfecter Law should
succeed in room of Moses Law, namely the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. Did not Christ institute that we should celebrate the day commonly called
the Lords day, instead of a Sabbath?

A.By no means, since the Christian Religion, as it takes away other
ceremonial observations, so also the difference of days, see Coll. 2. 16. but
forasmuch as we see the Lords day to be of old celebrated by Christians, we
permit the same liberty to all Christians.

Q. What is the fifth Precept?

A. Honor thy Father, and Mother, etc.

Q. What is it to honor our Parents?

A. To be obedient to them in all things which are not repugnant to the word of
God, and to show, all thankfulness to them for the benefits we have received
from them. Ephesians. 9. 1, 2. 1 Timothy 5. 4.

Q. But what is the duty of Parents?

A. That they do not provoke their children, but educate them in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Coll. 3, 21.

Q. What is it to provoke children?

A. To chastise them without cause, or exceed measure in chastising them, or
always to pursue ones right, and forgive nothing to them, for by these means
children are discouraged: But the Apostle injoyneth that Parents provoke not
their children, lest they be discouraged.

Q. What is it to educate them in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord?

A. To introduce them into the ways of the Lord, and the obedience of his
commandments, both by pious conferences, and exhortations, and examples; and
example and conversation, see Deuteronomy. 11. 19. where there is a singular Precept
concerning this matter, that parents talk with their children about the law of
God at morning, and at even, and not only at home, but also when they are
abroad, when they are in their Journey.

Q. What has the Lord Jesus added this Precept.

A. There seems nothing added hereunto. Nevertheless, whatsoever is
delivered in the new covenant, concerning Subjects and Magistrates wives and
husbands, servants and Masters; seems referrible hereunto, by reason of the
mutual duties that are between them, as between parents, and children.

Q. What is the duty of Subjects toward the Magistrate?

A. To obey the Magistrate, not only for fear, but for conscience, to pay him
tribute and custom, to honor and fear him.

Q. What is the Office of the Magistrate?

A. To acknowledge their power given them by God for the defense of good men,
and terror of wicked men, see Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Q. What is the duty of wives toward their Husbands?

A. That they be obedient to their Husbands in all things, as the Church is to
Christ; and that they fear their Husbands, Ephe. 5. 24, 33. 1 Pet. 3. 5. Col.
3. 18.

Q. What is the duty of Husbands toward their Wives?

A. That they love them, as Christ loved the Church, and as their own bodies,
and give honor to them as to the weaker vessels, and do not rage against them.
See Ephesians. 5. 25, 28. Col. 3. 19. 1 Pet. 3. 7.

Q. What is the duty of Servants toward their Masters?

A. To obey their Masters with fear and trembling, and sincerity of heart, as
Christ, not giving eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but as servants of Christ,
doing the will of God from their hearts, with good will, serving the Lord, and
not men; knowing, that whatsoever good thing every one shall do, that he shall
receive from the Lord, whether he be bond, or free, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7, 8. And 1
Pet. 2. 18. Let servants be subject to their masters with all fear; not only
to the good and gentle, but also the froward. And Tit. 2. 9, 10. That they
please their masters in all things, not answering again, not purloyning, but
showing all good fidelity. And 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. As many as are servants under
the yoke, let them account their masters worthy of all honor, lest the name of
God, and his doctrine be evil spoken of. And those that have believing
masters, let them not despise them, because they be brethren, but serve them so
much the more, because they are faithful, and beloved, partakers of the
benefit.

Q. What is the office of Masters toward Servants?

A. That they give to Servants that which is just and equal* and forbear
threats, knowing that they themselves also have a Master in the Heavens, and
there is with him no acceptance of persons' Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.

Q. What is the sixth precept?

A. Thou shall do no murder.

Q. What has the Lord Jesus added hereunto?

A. That we be not rashly angry with our brother, and offend him with rough
speeches, proceeding from a desire of revenge; which the Lord Jesus expresses
by the word Racha, (that is a vain person) a fool, Mat. 5. 22. hereunto
belongs those words of Paul, Ephesians. 4. 31. Let all bitterness, and chasing,
and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from you with all malice.

Q. What is it to say to another, Racha, or fool?

A. It is all one as if you should say he were a man good for nothing, or
without reason.

Q. But if it happen that we offend our Brother, what ought to be done?

A. He is very carefully to be reconciled; for unless we be at peace with our
Brother, our Religion is vain, and there is danger lest we fall under the
judgment of God.

Q. It is then altogether unlawful to be angry?

A. It is indeed unlawful to be angry, and that you should endeavor to
satiate your desires of revenge; but if any one be angry at the apparent
sinfulness of a thing, and yet does not meditate, or studdy any revenge, not
persevere in his anger, it is not forbidden to be angry in such a matter.

Q. What else has the Lord Jesus added to this precept?

A. He has prohibited all kind of revenge, not only private, but that which
is by the Magistrate; so that if any one hurt either our body, goods, or good
name, we should be ready rather to receive another injury, then to revenge our
selves, which the Lord Jesus taught in these words, But I say unto you resist
not evil, but if any one smite thee, etc. Mat. 5. 39, 40, 41.

Q. Are not those words of our Lord to be taken simply as they sound?

A. No, for we read of our Savior himself, that when he had a blow given him
with the palm of the hand; he did not only forbear to turn the other cheek,
but also opposed those words to the smiter, If I have spoken ill, hare witness
of that evil, if well, why do thou smite me? John 18. 23. we read the same
of the Apostle Paul, Acts 23. 3.

Q. May we not then go to Law before the Magistrate, and prosecute injuries?

A. Yes, so you be free from the desire of revenge, for our Savior forbids
this only. But it is revenge when a man endeavors to requite him that has
been injurious toward him, with like for like, as it was tolerated in the Law
of Moses, to requite eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for
foot, burning for burning, stripes for stripes.

Q. What is the seventh precept?

A. Thou shall not commit adultery?

Q. What has the Lord Jesus added thereunto?

A. first, that we do not only avoid the act of Adultery, but forbear to look
upon a woman, so as to lust after her, intimating, that he which lusts after
her in his heart, has already committed adultery with her; besides, he adds,
that he which puts away his wife, unless it be in case of Adultery, and
marryeth another, does commit adultery; and he also that marries her that is
put away, does also commit adultery. Lastly, he forbids all fornication and
uncleanness, and filthy speech, and sacrallity, and jests, Mat. 5. 28. chap.
19. 9. 1 Cor. 9. 10. 13. 18. Heb. 13. 4. 1 These. 4. 3, 4. Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.

Q. What pertains to the same precept?

A. That a Believer do not marry with an Unbeleever, lest by such a Marriage
the Believers heart be seduced; for which cause we see that under the Law such
Marriages were forbidden by God himself. See 1 Cor. 7. 39. Exodus 34. 16. Dent.
7. 3, 4.

Q. What if it happen that one of the unbeleeving married parties, become a
Believer, must the other unbeleeving party be thereupon deserted?

A. By no means, if the unbeleeving party be content to dwell with the
believing; but if the unbeleeving party be not content, the believer is at
liberty in such a case, 1 Cor. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13.

Q. What is the eight precept?

A. Thou shall not steal.

Q. What is forbidden in this precept?

A. All manner of interversion in those things that concern the commodity of
our neighbor, which comes to pass when we either take away those things
which he has, or do not, when we are able, lend our assistance to him
standing in heed.

Q. In what manner do we take away from our neighbor that which is his?

A. Either by force, or fraudulent interversion, how it is effected by force,
is evident to every man: but there are sundry ways of fraudulent Interversion
for you may easily find them, in buying, or selling, or exchanging, or hiring,
or letting, or lending, or other actions, as we have an old prohibition of God
touching sale, Lev. 19. 35, 39. Deuteronomy. 25. 14, 15. Thou shall not have in this
house an Epha and an Epha, but thou shall have a just weight, and a just Epha.

Q. Is not Usury to be referred hither?

A. Yes.

Q. What is Usury?

A. It is the extorting of Commodities, and benefit from money lent, with the
oppression of another, which appears from the signification of the word,
wherewith Usury is expressed in the Old Covenant, which is all one with
biteing, Exodus 22. 25. Levit. 25. 36, 37. Deuteronomy 23. 19, 20. whence it is
apparent, that to receive Commodities from money lent, without biteing, or
detriment of another, is neither biteing, nor Usury; whence it comes to
pass, that under the Gospel, the receiving of such benefit is no where
forbidden, unless it be there where Covetousness or extortion is forbidden,
although all those things that are contrary to the Spirit and Doctrine of Jesus
Christ, are in sundry places expressly set down.

Q. What has the Lord Jesus added to that precept?

A. That we should not be covetous.

Q. What is it to be covetous?

A. To desire more then is necessary for the maintenance of the life, both of
you, and yours, Heb. 13. 5. 1 Timothy 6. 8, 9, 10, 11.

Q. How is that done?

A. Whilst men, beyond their private and just necessity, do either get, or lay
up, Luke 12. 15. etc.

Q. What is the just necessity pertaining to the maintenance of our life?

A. Food and raiment, and such things without which the present life cannot be
conserved.

Q. To what uses then ought Christians to convert those things that exceed just
necessity?

A. Either to the use of the Divine Glory, or to the relief of the Poor,
especially the Domestics of the Faith; yet with such caution, as that they do
nothing with an aim to their own private Glory; which Christ teaches in those
words, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, Mat. 6. 3.

Q. What measure is to set to food and raiment?

A. Such as that neither luxury, nor bodily pleasure be found in us.

Q. How may luxury, and bodily pleasure be avoided?

A. When we fit the use of meat and drink to the procurement of health, and
afford such raiment to the body, wherein neither luxury nor levity appears.

Q. What do you call luxury in the use of meat and drink?

A. Gluttony, and Drunkenesse, whereunto pertains Revelling, which our
Savior forbids, as the writings of the New Covenant plainly show, Luke 21.
34. Romans 13. 14. Gal. 5. 21.

Q. What is the ninth precept?

A. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Q. What pertains to this precept?

A. All lying whatsoever, which not only proceeds from a mind desirous to
deceive, but also from levity. Besides, all sorts of backbiting, and
detraction, and condemning, Rev. 21. 8. Ephesians. 4. 25. 1 Pet. 2. 1. Mat. 7. 1.
Luke 6. 37.

Q. What is the tenth precept?

A. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, nor his wife, etc.

Q. What is it to desire ones neigbbours house?

A. It is to determine in ones heart, to grasp that which is our neighbors,
though it be by any unjust means.

Q. What is added to this precept under the New Covenant?

A. That it is not only unlawful to desire that which is our neighbors, in
that manner; but so to set our minds upon it, that though we do not resolve to
gain it, yet we take some delight in our hearts from the very desire thereof.
For what is unlawful for a Christian to do, or possess, he must not so much
as desire.

CHAP. II. Of the special Precepts delivered apart by Christ.
Q. YOu have explained to me the Precepts of Christ, which are contained in the
Commandments of God delivered by Moses, and such as are added unto them by
Christ, it remains that you explain those also, which Christ has proposed in
particular and by name.

A. They are twofold, for the one has respect to manners, the orher to outward
religious acts, commonly called ceremonies.

Q. What are they that have respect to manners?

A. These, the denial of ones self, the bearing of the cross, and imitation
of Christ, Matt. 16. 24.

Q. What is self denial?

A. The renouncing of our private wills, and evil lusts, and worldly and
carnal interests.

Q. What are these Interests?

A. Such as pertain either to the pleasure of the flesh, or riches, or pride of
life, which John comprehends in these words, love not the world, nor the
things in the world; for whatsoever is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life is not of the father, but of the world,
1 Epist. 2. 15. 16. All which John does not only forbid to be sought with the
prejudice of health, or injury of others, or contumely, but if they happen unto
the faithful without these indirect means, he would have them to be despised
and contemned.

Q. What is the manner of bearing the cross?

A. It is when a man is prepared in mind, not only to undergo all sorts of
afflictions, but even a most bitter and ignominious death for Christ's sake,
together with a voluntary receiving and suffering thereof when occasion is
offered.

Q. What is the imitation of Christ?

A. It is the composure of our life according to the rule of his life.

Q. Wherein does it consist?

A. In the exercise of those virtues which the Lord Jesus proposed to us in
himself, as in a living pattern.

Q. What are those virtues?

A. The chief are confidence in God, perfect love, humility, and assiduity in
prayer.

Q. What is confidence in God?

A. You shall hear of that hereafter.

Q. What is love?

A. It has respect either to God or to our neighbor.

Q. What is perfect love toward God?

A. To love him with all the heart, with all the Soul, with all the strength.

Q. What is love toward our neighbor?

A. That is directed either toward a brother, or toward an enemy.

Q. Wherein consists perfect charity toward a brother?

A. That we even lay down our life for him which the Lord Jesus calls his new
commandment John 13. 34. whence it appears, that a brother is to be loved,
not only as our selves, but above our selves.

Q. What is it to lay down our life for a brother?

A. Not only to make no spare of other things, but to bring our life it self
into hazard, that we may save a brother, as we see an example thereof proposed
by Paul in Priscilla and Aquila, and Epaphroditus, Romans 16. 3. 4. Phil. 2. 30.

Q. Wherein consists love toward an enemy?

A. As an enemy is of sundry sorts, so also is the love toward him. For to
those that curse us, we are bound to wish well; to those that hate us, to do
good; for those that afflict and persecute us, to pray: when they ask we must
give to them; when they hunger and thirst, we must give them meat and drink,
and when in a true and proper necessity they will borrow of us, we are not to
reject them, Mat. 5. 42. 44. Luke 6. 27, 28. Romans 12. 20.

Q. What is humility?

A. It is the submission of our mind, although we be chief persons, and the
readiness to perform the meanest offices for the least of the faithful, whereof
he gave a pattern in himself; when he washed his disciples feet, Phil. 2. 34.
John 13. 4. 5.

Q. What is assiduity in Prayers?

A. It is the most frequent lifting up of our heart to God in every place, and
commending our necessities to him, and not only ours, but the necessities of
all the faithful, yea of all men, but especially of Kings, and all that are in
Authority.

Q. With what things ought those that tray to be furnished?

A. They ought to confide in God, not doubting but that he is able to give what
they desire. They ought also to ask according to the will of God, that is,
those things which God has promised. They ought finally to fulfill the will of
God, especially by remitting the injuries done unto them by others, and so lift
up pure hands, without wrath and doubting. To which purpose fasting is of great
avail, yet so, that men impose it upon themselves without any mark of
hypocrisy.

Q. What is fasting?

A. Abstinence from meat and drink for a certain space, as may be observed from
sundry examples in Scripture.

Q. Is it not fasting, where men abstein from certain sorts of meat?

A. You may perceive, by the definition of fasting, which we have given, that
to abstain from a certain sort of meats is not fasting, but rather a choice of
meats, which the Apostle reproves, and reckons amongst the doctrines of
Devils, 1 Timothy 4. 3.

Q. Ought those that fast to be tied unto certain days?

A. At no hand, for the same is contrary both to the property and liberty of
the Christian Religion, which is spiritual, and not at all tied to times.
Neither is fasting acceptable to God, unless the glory of God, and the
Salvation of our selves, or others, or some pressing necessities draw it from
us. Wherefore the whole time allotted unto fasting, is to be spent upon
Christian exercises, as reading, and explaining the Word of God, ardent
Prayers, and pious Conferences.

CHAP. III. Of the Lords Supper.
Q. WHat are Christ's Ceremonial Precepts, as they call them?

A. There is but one, namely the Lords Supper.

Q. What is the Lords Supper?

A. It is an Institution of the Lord, that the Faithful should break, and eat
the Bread, and drink of the Cup, to declare the death of the Lord; which
Institution is to continue till the Lords coming.

Q. What is it to declare the Lords death?

A. It is in a solemn and public manner to give thanks, that he, out of his
unspeakable love, would suffer his body to be tortured, and in a manner broken,
and his Blood to be shed for us, and so to extol and celebrate this great
benefit.

Q. Why would the Lord have the memory of this thing above all others, to be
celebrated in his Church?

A. Because of all the actions of Christ it is the chiefest, and most proper to
him; for though the Resurrection and Exaltation of Christ be far greater, yet
they were performed by God the Father, and not by Christ himself.

Q. Is there not another reason, for which the Lord instituted the Supper?

A. None at all, although men have devised many, some saying that it is a
sacrifice for the quick and dead; others, that by the use thereof, they gain
the remission of their Sins, and hope to confirm their Faith, and bring to
their remembrance the Lords death.

Q. What are we to hold concerning these opinions?

A. That none of them can stand; for since that is the end of celebrating the
Lords Supper, that we should give thanks to Christ for benefits received, it is
apparent that it was not therefore instituted, that we should there receive
something, yea he that will worthily partake of the Lords Supper he ought to be
assured of the remission of sins on the part of God, and confirmed in the
faith, and so affected, that the death of Christ never slip out of his mind.

Q. What are we to think of that opinion which says, that the Supper is a
sacrifice for the quick and dead?

A. That it is a most grievous error; for the Scripture testifies that the
offering of Christ was performed in heaven, and could not be performed on the
earth. Besides, since Christ himself is both Priest and sacrifice, it follows
that none can offer Christ, but Christ himself. Finally, since the Sacrifice of
of Christ is altogether perfect, since it is one, whereby he has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified, there is no need that it should be
repealed, otherwise it would not be perfect and absolute. Heb. 8. 1. 2, 3. 4.
Heb. 9. 24. Heb. 7. 27. Heb. 10. 14.

Q. What is the meaning of those words, this is my body?

A. They are not taken by all in one and the same manner, for some think that
the bread is truly turned into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood,
which turning, they call Transubstantiation, others think that the Lords body
is with, in, and under the bread. Finally there are some, who in the Lords
Supper think they are truly partakers of the Body and Blood of the Lord, but
spiritually. All which Opinions are fallacious and erroneous.

Q. How will you demonstrate that?

A. Because in these words [This is my Body] the particle [This] may be
referred to the whole action of breaking, and taking the Bread, and pouring out
the Wine. Wherefore it is not necessarily referred to the Bread and Wine only
by the Adversaries; neither can their captious opinions be hence framed, and
contrived. Besides, as to the Transubstantiation it self, (as they call it)
since the Scripture does in the very use give the name of Bread, to that Berad
we take, as appears from the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 16. and chap. 11. 26,
27, 28. It is evident, that Bread remains there without any transmutation
into the Lords Body. Furthermore, the same Scripture testifies, that the Body
of Christ is in the Heavens, and must be there contained till the times of the
restitution of all things: wherefore it cannot any more exist on the Earth. In
a word, if the Bread were turned into the very Body of Christ, it would follow,
that the immortal Body of Christ (wherewith all agree, that he is now endued)
is taken in a gross and carnal manner: but this cannot be, that an immortal
Body should be so taken, and consequently neither can the Bread be turned into
Christ's Body. As to the second Opinion, that, as it cannot consist for the
former reasons, especially this, that the Body of Christ is now in the Heavens;
so neither can it for his grand inconvenience, namely, that this Opinion does
divest the Body of Christ of its properties. Lastly, as to the third Opinion,
that cannot have place, since it is absutd, that one should be really partaker
of Christ's body, and also spiritually. And they themselves sufficiently bewray
the uncertainty of their own opinion, whilst they confess that this manner of
receiving the Body of Christ is altogether inexplicable, or at least that they
are utterly ignorant how it is done.

Q. What is to be held touching the use of the Body, and Blood of Christ? John
6.

A. Christ does not in that place treat of the Supper, for there he does
without any condition ascribe Eternal Life to him that shall eat his Flesh,
and drink his Blood; and on the contrary takes Eternal Life away from him
that shall not eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood. Which, that it is not spoken
of the Lords Supper, is evident from hence, in that a man may partake of the
Lords Supper, and yet perish. And on the contrary may be saved, although he
partake not thereof. But Christ there speaks concerning the cause of Faith on
him, which is the continual meditation of the death of Christ, from whence we
derive strength unto a pious, and immortal life.

Q. How are those words of Paul to be taken; The Cup of blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ?

A. In such a manner, as that all those who bless this Cup, that is, using it,
celebrate the name of the Lord, and bless him; and also those that break the
Bread in Communion, do thereby openly testify, that they are partakers of the
Body and Blood of Christ, that is, of all those things which Christ by his
death has procured to us. As he a little after speaks of the Israelites,
saying, that the Israelites, who did eat the Sacrifice, were partakers of the
Altar, that is, belonged unto all those things, which were promised in that
Religion.

Q. Explicate therefore to me the true and genuine sense of those words, This
is my Body?

A. It is, as if Christ had said, this action of breaking and eating this
bread, is a commemoration, and certain adumbration of that which is to be done
with my Body; and this action pouring out, and drinking this Wine, is a
commemoration, and representation of what is to be done with my Blood; or (that
we may explain the words of Paul, 1 Cor. 11. 25.) the drinking of this Cup is a
commemoration of that excessive love of God exhibited to us in the New
Covenant, and confirmed by the death of Christ. In this manner it is written
concerning the solemn custom of eating the Paschal Lamb, (for they had their
loins girded, their feet shod, their staves in their hands, and did eat it
hastily) that it was the Passover of the Lord, Exodus 12. 11, 27. Thus also,
Ezekiel. 5. 3, 4, 5. it is said of the shorn hairs, part whereof was burned, part
scattered, part conserved: that this was Jerusalem.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Baptism of Water.
Q. WHat think you concerning the Baptism of Water?

A. That it is an external Rite, whereby men coming from Judaisme, or
Gentilisme to the Christian Religion, did profess openly, that they
acknowledge Christ for their Lord.

Q. Do Infants belong to that Rite?

A. By no means, for neither have we in the Scripture either precept, or
example thereof; nor can they, as the thing it self shows, acknowledge Christ
for their Lord.

Q. What then is to be thought of those that baptize infants?

A. Although they err herein, yet is it not therefore lawful to condemn them,
so that they be not otherwise Idolaters, but live piously according to
Commandments of Jesus Christ, and forbear to persecute others, who reject their
opinion. For the Kingdom of God consists not in these outward things, but in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Spirit.

Q. What think you of them that think they are regenerated by this Rite?

A. They are exceedingly mistaken, for Regeration is nothing but the
transformation of our mind, and will, and composure of them to the doctrine of
our Savior Christ, as the very word [Regeneration] does intimate. But such a
transformation cannot have place in Infants, who know not good and evil, much
less that a thing of so great moment should be incident to them. But that
those of perfect age, in whom the transformation of mind and will has place,
should be regenerated by Water, is so distant from truth, that it seems to
carry a face of Idolatry with it, whilst that is ascribed to a gross
elementall thing, which is only to be ascribed to God himself, and his Word,
since it is he, who has of his own will begotten us by the Word of his truth;
and that incorruptible seed, whereof we must be regenerated, is the Word of God
that lives and abides for ever.

Q. But the Apostle says, Tit. 3. 5. that God has saved us by the Laver of
Regeneration?

A. True, but he does not therefore affirm, that that Laver of Regeneration is
the Babtism of Water. Neither is it unusual in the Scriptures, that the
purlfication of our Souls, which is wrought by the Word, should be siguratively
called a Laver; for the same, Paul, Ephesians. 5. 26. writes, That Christ has
sanctified his Church, having purified her with the Laver of water in the Word.
And the Author to the Hebrews exhorts them, who had long since given their
names to Christ, and did no more stand in need of the Baptism of water, that
they should have their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and their
body washed with pure water. Finally, the Apostle himself in this very place,
which we have in hand, explaineth himself, what he means by the Laver of
Regeneration, sub-joyning those words that give light to the foregoing ones,
namely, [And renewing of the holy Spirit.] For that this particle [and] is
sometimes all one with, [that is] was formerly demonstrated.

Q. But as concerning these words of Ananias to Paul, arise, be baptized and
wash away thysins, having invocated the name of the Lord, Acts 22. 16. what is
to be held?

A. It is to be held, and we shall find this observation give light to many
other places of the Scripture, that when in the writings of the new covenant,
that is ascribed to some act or outward ceremony, which altogether belongs to
eternal salvation, this is not therefore done, as if that act or outward
ceremony had such power, but because thereby a certain adumbration is made of
that thing, which altogether belongs to salvation. Thus when it is said, The
Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the Blood of
Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 1 Cor. 11. and elsewhere, as many of you, as have been baptized into
Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. And after this manner the words of
Ananias may and ought to be understood; although the place may be so
constrained, as that the meaning of Ananias was not that Paul by the Baptism
of water should wash away his sins, but that he should be baptized, and wash
away his sins, by invocating the name of the Lord, since the time was now come,
wherein every one that called upon the name of the Lord should be saved.

Q. Does not our Savior Christ in his conference with Nichodemus John 3. 5. by
water understand Baptism?

A. By no means, for there he speaks of being born from above, but the water
of Baptism comes not from above, besides he treats of such a regeneration,
without which none can enter into heaven, which reason it self shows, cannot
be said of the Baptism of water. Now that water and the spirit are the same in
that place, so that by water is meant the spirit, or spiritual water, seems
thence to be plain, in that the particle [and] may in this place signify [that
is] as we formerly showed, that it sometimes signifies so in the Scripture,
and by name in that passage, Matt. 3. 11. which is like to this under
contestation, and where John the Baptist says, He shall baptize you with the
Holy Spirit and Fire. Hence it is, that Christ in the progress of his
discourse with Nichodemus, makes no more mention of water, but only of the
Holy Spirit.

CHAP. V. Concerning the promise of Eternal Life.
Q. YOu have declared to me the perfect Precepts of Christ, declare also his
Promises?

A. The greatest, and that which compriseth in it self all others, is Eternal
life; but there is yet another thing besides, very conducible to the attainment
of the first.

Q. What may that be?

A. The Gift of the holy Spirit.

Q. Were not the same Promises contained in Moses Law?

A. No, neither of them, for you shall no where find in the Law of Moses,
either Eternal Life, or the holy Spirit promised to those that obeyed the
Precepts of that Law, as it is apparent that they are promised in the Law given
by Christ.

Q. But it appears that there was some hope of Eternal Life in the People of
God before Christ?

A. Nothing hinders but that you may hope for something, although you have not
the Promise of God for the same, so that the thing be very desirable, and
such, as it is very likely, that God will give unto those that serve him. But
neither is any thing more desirable then Eternal Life, nor more credible, then
that God will bestow it upon them that serve him as the reward, that is
suitable to his person, without which, the other things, though proceeding from
God, are scarce worthy to be termed a Divine reward.

Q. And why so?

A. For two reasons, first, because not so much the good it self, as the
perpetuity thereof, seems to have some Divinity in it. Next, because it is
apparent, that of other good things, except Eternal Life; even those, and
those chiefly are partakers, who regard not the service of God, yea, blaspheme
him.

Q. Shall they have Eternal Life, who hoped for the same, all bough it was not
promised to them?

A. Yes, but not all, but those only that served God with their whole heart,
and were obedient to him. For nothing hinders, but that God may perform more
then he promised. And Christ openly teaches this, when from the words of God
he truly and subtly collecteth, that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob shall arise
from the dead, and live, Luke 20. 37, 38. whom the Divine Author to the Hebrews
imitating, chap. 11. 16. says, That God is not ashamed of them, to be called
their God, for that he has provided a city for them, and has decreed that
they shall live for ever with him.

Q. If God will give Eternal Life to those men, why did he not promise it?

A. God deferred so excellent a Promise till a fit time, that it might the more
evidently appear to all, that so excellent a thing is his proper Gift, flowing
from his mere bounty.

Q. Are there not in the New Covenant, besides Eternal Life, Promises likewise
made concerning this Life?

A. The Scripture testifies, that Picty, even under the New Covenant, has the
promise of this life, as well as of the life to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. And likewise
if any man, for the sake of Christ, and of the Gospel, shall forsake all
things, that he shall receive a hundred fold even in this life, with
persecution, and in the world to come, life everlasting, Mark. 10. 29, 30.

Q. Is the New Covenant, then equal to the Old, as to the promises of this
present life?

A. Since it appears from other places of the Scripture, that a Christian
ought to rest in those things that are necessary to the maintenance of his
life, it appears that the Promises of this life made under the New Covenant,
though in themselves very full and plenteous, ought so to be taken, as that a
Christian shall not want any thing that is necessarily required to the
maintenance of this life. But under the Old Covenant it was lawful, not only
to get, and possess more then the necessity of this life did require, but also
superfluities, pleasures, and other things, without which we may be in this
life, so that this was done without injury to another. Wherefore the promises
of this life under the Old Covenant, are not to be restrained, but to be taken
as the words sound. Whence likewise it may be seen, that Eternal Life was not
promised under the Old Covenant, otherwise the New would not have better
Promises then the Old, contrary to what the Divine Author to the Hebrews
affirms, chap. 8. 6.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Promise of the holy Spirit.
Q. DEclare to me the other Promise, and explain what the Gift of the holy
Spirit is?

A. The Gift of the holy Spirit promised in the New Covenant, is twofold, the
one perpetual, the other temporary, which was visible, as the first invisible.

Q. What was that temporary and visible Gift?

A. The gift of doing Miracles, which in the beginning was openly given to
those that believed on Christ.

Q. Why did not that Gift always continue?

A. Because it was granted to confirm the New Covenant, which, when it seemed
to God to be sufficiently confirmed, that Gift by his pleasure and counsel
ceased.

Q. What mean you by these words, namely, That the New Covenant was
sufficiently confirmed?

A. I mean, that those, who were apt to believe the Gospel, had sufficient
ground for their Faith (from what had been done for the confirmation of the
Covenant) to all suceeding times.

Q. But who are those that are apt to believe?

A. Such are endued with honesty of heart, or are at least, not averse
therefrom. For it is not in the will of God, that those who are otherwise
qualified, should have no cause to reject the Gospel; which would have come to
pass, had that confirmation been perpetual. For there would have been no man
found so wicked, who would not have acknowledged the doctrine of Christ for
true, and have embraced it, not so much out of a love to piety, and virtue, as
out of a desire of that soverain good, which Christ has promised to his
followers, namely, Eternal Life. Whereby it would have come to pass, that in
the Christian Religion, which by the will and counsel of God is to distinguish
the honest from the dishonest, there would have been no difference between good
and bad.

Q. Tell me therefore, what is the Gift of the holy Spirit, which continues
perpetually?

A. Before I unfold this, I must demonstrate, that under the New Covenant,
there is a certain Gift of the holy Spirit, which continues for ever in the
Church of Christ.

Q. Yea, I desire you to do so?

A. Besides other testimonies, it is evident from those words of our Savior
himself, Luke 11. 13. that God does, and always will give his holy Spirit to
his Children, that beg the same of him.

Q. What is the holy Spirit?

A. That you may the better understand what the holy Spirit is, consider with
your self, First, that in the Scripture of the New Covenant, by the word
[Spirit] is sometimes designed the very Gospel of Jesus Christ, partly,
because the things contained therein, are such as were revealed by God himself,
and could not have been discovered by the wit of man; partly, because it
respects the spirit of man, and makes us spiritual, which the Law could not
do. Hence the Apostle Paul says, Romans 7. 6. But now we are freed from the Law,
that being dead wherein we were held,: so that we serve in newness of the
Spirit, and not in oldnesse of the Letter. And Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit
of Life in Christ Jesus, has freed me from the Law of Sin, and Death. And ver.
9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And 2 Cor. 3.
6. the same Apostle calls himself, not a Minister of the Letter, that is, the
Law, but of the Spirit, or New Covenant. Secondly, by the word Spirit, is
understood such a Gift of God, as is by the Scripture called an Earnest, or
pledge of our Inheritance, 2 Cor. 1. 22. chap. 5. 5. Ephesians. 1. 14. So that we
thereby conceive a firm and certain hope of the Eternal life that is promised
to us, have a kind of taste and feeling thereof in our hearts.

Q. Do we not perceive a hope of Eternal Life by the very preaching of the
Gospel?

A. Yes, in some measure; for from the preaching of the Gospel, a hope of
Eternal life therein promised, may be acquired, otherwise why should that Life
be there promised: But to fasten, and rivet in our minds a firm and certain
hope thereof, by virtue whereof we may continue invincible in all temptations,
it seems requisite that that promise outwardly proposed by the preaching of
the Gospel, should be inwardly sealed in our hearts by God.

Quest. Does this inward sealing happen unto all, to whom the outward preaching
of the Gospel comes?

Answ. At no hand, but only unto them who believe the Gospel preached to
them, and so rightly use that outward means employed by God in confirming the
promise of Eternal Life. For if that Gift of the holy Spirit, which continued
but for a time, was given only to those that believed the Gospel, much more
are we to hold, that that Gift of the holy Spirit, which is perpetual, is not
imparted to others; but them who have sincerely believed the Gospel, and from
their hearts embraced it.

Q. Is there not need of the inward Gift of the holy Spirit to believe the
Gospel?

A. By no means; for neither do we read in the holy Scriptures, that that Gift
is conferred on any one, but him that believes the Gospel. See John 7. 38, 39.
Act. 8. 21, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Acts 15. 7, 8. Act. 19. 1, 2, 6. Gal. 3. 14.
Ephesians. 1. 13.

Q. Since you have declared to me what the Gift of the holy Spirit is, I desire
you also to declare whether the holy Spirit be a person of the Godhead?

A. That the holy Spirit is not a person of the Godhead, is evident from the
Scriptures, wherein it is affirmed that he is given, and sent by God, 1 John 3.
21. 22. 23, 24. 1 Pet. 1. 12. yea, in the name of Christ, John 14. 26. That he
speaks not of himself, but what he hears, glorifying Christ in that he
receives of his, and declares it to his Disciples, John 16. 13. 14. that he
is the Advocate, John 14. 16, 17. compared with 1 John 2. 1. where you have the
same Greek appellation in both place, but in the latter the English Translators
themselves render it [Advocate]. That he makes intercession for the Saints
with groans inutterable, Romans 8. 26: All which, with sundry other things, that
might be enumerated, cannot possibly agree to him that is a person of the
Godhead, and consequently the most High God.

CHAP. VII. Touching the confirmation of the Divine Will.
Q. HOw Jesus declared unto us the Divine Will, has been explained, I would
now have it also explained how he confirmed the same?

A. There are three things of Christ that did confirm the Divine Will which he
declared; first, the absolute innocence of his life, John 8. 46. 1 John 3. 5.
Secondly, his great, and innumerable Miracles, John 15. 24. John 21. 25.
Thirdly, his death, 1 Timothy 2. 6. chap. 6. 13. All these three are united in
that noted place of John, 1 Epist. 5. 8. There are three that bare record on
Earth, The Spirit, the Water, and the Blood. For by the Spirit, without
question the holy Spirit is meant, by whose Virtue the Miracles of Christ were
wrought, Acts. 10. 38. As by Water is understood the Purity of his life, and by
Blood, his Bloody death.

Q. What was the Innocence of Christ's Life, and how was the will of God
confirmed thereby?

A. The Innocence of his Life was such, that he not only committed no sin,
neither was guil found in his mouth, nor could he be convicted of any crime,
but he lived so transcendently pure, as that none, either before, or after, did
equallize him, so that he came next to God himself in Holiness, and was
therein very like to him. Whence it follows, that the Doctrine delivered by
him was most true.

Q. What were his Miracles, and how did they confirm the Divine will?

A. The Miracles were so great, as none before him ever did; and so many, as
that had they been set down in particular, the world would not contain the
Books. And these Miracles do therefore make to the confirming of the will of
God, in that it is not imaginable that God would invest any one with such
power, as was truly Divine, who had not been sent by him.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ's Death.
Q. What was the Death of Christ, and how did it confirm the Will of God?

A. Such a death, as had all sorts of afflictions ushering it in, and was of it
self most bitter and ignominious, so that the Scripture thereupon testifies
that he was made like to his brethren in all things, Heb. 2. 17.

Q. Why does the Scripture witness that Christ was buried, and that God was
not forgetful of him in the grave?

A. That it might appear that he was truly dead, and yet not left therein; so
that the faithful may thereby conceive a hope, that though death seize upon
them, yet shall they not utterly perish.

Q. But what necessity was there, that Christ should suffer so many tbings, and
undergo so bitter a Death?

A. Because those that are to be saved by him, are for the most part subject to
the same afflictions and Death.

Q. But what reason was there that the Savior should endure the same
afflictions and death with the saved?

A. There are two reasons thereof, as Christ also saves the Faithful in a
twofold way; for first, by his example, he moves them to persist in the way
of Salvation that they have entered into. Next, he stands by them in every
combat of temptations, afflictions, and troubles, and at length delivers
them from Eternal Death. But how could Christ by his own example have moved
the Faithful to persist in that singular Piety and innocence, without which
they cannot be said, had he not tasted of a bitter death, which is easily wont
to attend true Piety? Or how could he have had a fellowfeeling of the
calamities and sufferings of the Faithful, and so become the more ready to
help them, unless himself had tried how grievous, and of themselves
intolerable to humane nature they are? first of these is hinted by Peter, 1
Epist. 2. 21. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps. The latter, by the Divine Author to the Hebrews, chap. 2.
18. Christ, in that he suffered, being tempted, is able to succor them that
are tempted: And chap. 4. 15. He can have a fellow-feeling of our infirmities,
having been tempted in all things after the same manner, without sin.

Quest. Could not God cause that the Faithful should not be subject to
afflictions, and violent deaths?

Answ. He could indeed, if he would change the nature and condition of things.
But God is not wont to do this, unless sometimes, and that very seldom, and
in some special cases, and for a time, but not always, and commonly, as it
would here be very behoovefull, had he a mind to exempt the Faithful from
afflictions, and violent deaths.

Quest. Why was that altogether necessary?

Answ. Because the Faithful in Christ are endued with singular Piety and
Innocence of life; neither is it lawful for them to avenge themselves on any
one. The first whereof naturally exposes them to the hatred of all wicked men,
which make the greatest part of mankind, whereby it comes to pass, that they
grievously afflict the Faithful, and if an occasion be offered, inflict death
upon them. The latter is a greater incitement to the wicked, and affords them
an opportunity to effect, and accomplish their cruel designs upon the
Faithful.

Q. But how did the Blood, or Death of Christ confirm the Divine will to us?

A. Two ways: first, because it ascertained us of the exceeding great love of
God toward us, so that he is thereby engaged to make good what he has
promised us in the New Covenant; whence it is called the Blood of the New
Covenant, Mat. 26. 28. And the Blood of sprinkling, (that is, of federation,
Heb. 9. 19, 20.) which speaks better things then that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24,
25. And Christ himself is called the true and faithful Witness, Rev. 1. 5.
and chap. 3. 14. Next, because, being followed with a resurrection to Eternal
Life, it makes us sure that we also, if we obey the commandments of the Lord
Jesus Christ, shall be partakers of the same Resurrection.

Q. Explain more largely in what manner we are, by the Resurrection of Christ
(which was a consequent of his death) assured of our own Resurrection?

A. First, because we have a pattern thereof proposed to us in the Resurrection
of Christ, whereby we are forbidden to doubt, that those, who out of Piety
toward God, suffer death, shall afterward be delivered of it again: Next,
because it is now put out of question, that Christ has attained such power, as
that he can confer upon the Faithful Eternal Life. For the resurrection of
Christ, following upon his Death, was such a one, as that he thereby obtained
all power in Heaven and Earth, Mat. 28. 18.

Q. How does the power of Christ, which he has obtained by the intervening of
his death, make us more certain, then if he wanted that power?

A. Two ways: first, because we now see a beginning of fulfilling the promises
of God, especially of that wherein he expressly promised, that Christ himself
should deliver us from death, and give unto us Eternal Life. Next, because we
likewise see that the power of fulfilling the promise of God made to us
touching Eternal Life, is put in his hands, who is not ashamed to call us
brethren and who tasted all those afflictions, whereunto we must be exposed, if
we will obey God, and therefore knows how to be pitiful to us, and touched
with a fellow-feeling of our infirmities, as we formerly discoursed of this
thing.

Q. Hence I perceive, that in the business of our Salvation, greater stresse
is laid upon the resurrection of Christ, then upon his death.

A. It is altogether so, for so the Scripture it self speaks of this matter,
see Romans 5. 10. If when we were enemies, we were reconciled unto God by the
death of his Son, how much more being reconciled, shall we be saved by his
Life? And again, Romans 8. 34. who shall condemn us, it is Christ that dyed, yea,
rather that rose again, who is also at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us? And again, 1 Cor. 15. 17. If Christ be not risen from the
Dead, your Faith is vain, ye are yet in your sins. And again, Romans 4. 25.
Christ was delivered for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification.

Q. Why does the Scripture so frequently elsewhere ascribe these things to the
death of Christ?

A. Because death was the way to Resurrection, and exaltation of Christ, so
that according to the Decree of God, he could not without it arrive to his
Power and Dignity. Again, because of all the things that God and Christ did for
our Salvation, the death of Christ does chiefly show unto us; and set before
our eyes the transcendent love of God and Christ toward us.

Q. Is there not some other cause of the death of Christ?

A. None at all; although Christians at this day commonly think, that Christ by
his death merited Salvation for us, and fully satisfied for our sins. Which
opinion is fallacious, erroneous, and very pernicious.

Q. How so?

A. As to the fallaciousnesse, and error thereof, the case is clear, not only
because the Scripture is silent concerning any such thing, but also because it
is repugnant both to Scripture and reason.

Q. Demonstrate this in an orderly manner.

A. That this opinion is not set down in the Scriptures, is apparent, in that
the maintainers thereof do never allege clear and evident Texts to prove it,
but knit together I know not what consequences, whereby they endeavor to
confirm their tenet, which consequences, as they are to be admitted, when they
necessarily flow from the Scriptures, so ought they to be esteemed of no force,
when they are repugnant to the Scriptures.

Q. How are they repugnant to the Scriptures?

A. In as much, as the Scriptures every where testify that God freely
forgiveth sins, especially under the New Covenant, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Romans 3. 24,
25. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. Mat. 18. 23. etc. But nothing is more repugnant to
free forgiveness, then full satisfaction. For that Creditor which is
satisfied, either by the debtor himself, or by some other in his behalf, cannot
be truly said to have freely out of his mere grace forgiven the debt, as at
first hearing is apparent to every man.

Q. How is it repugnant to reason?

A. In that it would hence follow that Christ has undergone Eternal Death, if
he had satisfied God for our sins, since it is clear that the punishment which
men deserved by their sins, was Eternal death. Again, it would follow, that we
were more beholden to Christ, then to God, as who had showed exceeding favor
toward us in making satisfaction, whereas God by exacting fully what was due
to him, had shown no grace at all toward us.

Q. Tell me also how this Opinion is pernicious?

A. Because it opens a gap to licentiousness, or at least inviteth them to
sloth in the pursuance of Holiness and Virtue, whereas the Scripture
testifies that this, among others, was the end of Christ's death, that we might
be redeemed from all iniquity, redeemed from our vain conversation received by
Tradition from our Fathers, delivered out of this evil world, and have our
consciences cleansed from dead works to serve the Living God, Tit. 2. 14. 1
Pet. 1. 18. Gal. 1. 4. Heb. 9. 14.

Q. But how do they maintain this Opinion?

A. First, they endeavor to maintain it by reason, next by authority of
Scripture.

Q. What is their reason?

A. They say, that there is in God by nature both Justice and Mercy; and as it
belongs to Mercy to forgive sins, so is it the property of Justice to punish
them. Now in as much as God would have both his Justice and his Mercy take
place, he found out such a way, as that Christ should suffer death in our
stead, and to satisfy to Justice of God in that nature, which had offended God.

Q. What answer make you to this Reason?

A. This reason is plausible in show, but in deed has neither truth, nor
solidity in it self. For though we confess, and exceedingly rejoice, that our
God is wonderfully merciful, and just, yet we deny that such mercy and
justice, as the Adversaries would here have, is in him by nature. For that
mercy is not so in God by Nature, as they imagine, is evident, because he could
not then punish any sin at all: and on the contrary were that Justice in God ^y
nature, as they suppose, he could not forgive any sin at all. In as much as God
can never do any thing repugnant to those properties that are in him by nature.
For instance, since wisdom is in God by nature, God never does any thing
contrary thereunto; but whatsoever he does, he does it wisely. But since it is
evident that God forgiveth sins, and punishes them when he pleases; it
appears that such a Justice and Mercy, as they imagine, is not in him by
nature, but are only effects of his will. Besides, that Justice, whereby God
punishes sins, and which the Adversaries oppose to Mercy, is never called by
this name in the Scriptures, but anger, or fury. Yea, it is attributed to the
Justice, or righteousness of God in the Scriptures, that he forgiveth sins,
see 1 John 1. 9. Romans 3. 25. 26.

Quest. What is your opinion concerning this matter?

Answ. That, for as much as that Justice and Mercy which the Adversaries speak
of, are, not in God by nature; there was no need at all of that temperament and
reconciling of the Justice and Mercy in God, which they have devised. We do
not indeed deny that there is a certain natural Justice in God, but that is
such a Justice as is called rectitude, and opposed to pravity. And this indeed
appears in all the works of God, (whence they are all just, and right, and
perfect) and that no less, when he forgiveth sins, then when he punishes
them.

Quest. What are the passages of Scripture, whereby they endeavor to confirm
their opinion?

A. Such as say, that he dyed for us, or for our sins; and that he redeemed us,
or gave himself, or Soul as a ransom for many; and that he is our Mediator,
and reconciled us to God, and is a propitiation for our sins; finally, they
fetch an Argument from the Sacrifices under the Law, which did shadow forth the
Death of Christ.

Quest. What answer you here unto?

Answ. The satisfaction of Christ cannot be proved from such places, wherein it
is said, that he dyed for us, for the same Scripture says, that we ought to
lay down our lives for the brethren, 1 John 3. 16. and that Paul suffered for
the Colossians, and filled up that which was behind of the afflictions of
Christ for his Body, which is the Church, Col. 1. 24. But it is certain, that
neither do the Faithful satisfy for the Brethren, neither did Paul for the
Church.

Quest. What is the meaning of those words, that Christ dyed for us?

Answ. This expression [for us] does not signify in our stead, but on our
behalf, as the like words intimate, when the Scripture says, that Christ dyed
for our sins, which manner of speech cannot mean, in the stead, or room of our
sins, but by reason of, or on the behalf of our sins. Wherefore the meaning of
that expression [Christ dyed for us] amounts to thus much, that he therefore
dyed that we might both embrace and obtain that life, which he brought from
Heaven, and promulgated to the world, which in what manner it is effected, you
heard a little before.

Quest. What answer you to those testimonies, wherein it is said that we are
redeemed by Christ?

Answ. From the word [redemption] the satisfaction cannot be evinced, in that
it is said of God himself in the Scripture, that he redeemed his people out of
Egypt Isaiah 29. 22. And wrought redemption for his people, Psalm. 31. 6. as
also that Moses was a Redeemer, Act. 7. 35. and that we are redeemed from our
iniquities, and vain conversation, or the curse of the Law, Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet.
1. 18. Gal. 3. 13. But it is certain that neither God, nor Moses satisfied any
one, nor can either our iniquities, or vain conversation, or the Law be
satisfied.

Q. What force think you those words carry, when it is said, that Jesus
redeemed us, and gave himself a ransom for us?

A The word [Redemption] does here signify nothing but freedom. Now it is
said of Christ, that he, by his Blood, or Death, has redeemed, or freed us,
because by the intervening thereof, we have obtained freedom, both from the
sins themselves, that we should no longer serve them, and from the punishment
of them, that being delivered out of the jaws of Eternal Death, as we might
live for ever.

Q. Why that freeing of us, expressed by the word [Redemption?]

A. Because there is a great similitude between our deliverance, and a
redemption properly so called. For as in a proper redemption there must be a
captive, and he that detaineth him, and a redeemer, together with a ransom, or
price of redemption: so in our deliverance, Man is the Captive, Sin, the World,
the Devil, and Death, they that detain the Captive; God and Christ the
redeemer of the Captive; and Christ, or the Soul of Christ given to the Death,
the ransom, or price of Redemption; the difference only lies herein, that in
this redemption of ours, there is none that receives any thing by way of
ransom, which must of necessity come to pass in a true Redemption.

Quest. Why does the holy Spirit rather make use of a Methaporicall
expression, then of a proper one?

Answ. Both, because this Metaphorical expression was already in most frequent
use in the Old Covenant, as also because the great love, labor and cost of God
and Christ, is more elegantly set off thereby, for a deliverance may possible
happen without cost, or love, but so great a redemption could not be effected
without great cost, and love.

Quest. What say you to this, that Christ is a Mediator between God and Men,
or of the New Covenant?

Answ. Since we also read in the Scripture, that Moses was a Mediator, (namely
between God and the people of the Old Covenant) Gal. 3. 19. neither does it any
ways appear that he satisfied God, it cannot be certainly collected from
Christ's being a Mediator of God and Men, that he made any satisfaction to God
for our sins.

Q. Why does the Scripture attribute to Christ, the name of a Mediator?

A. Because he made, in the Name of God a New and Eternal Covenant with Men,
and declared to us the whole Will of God, whereby we have an access to God.

Q. What say you to this, that Christ reconciled us to God?

A. First, it is no where said in Scripture that God was reconciled to us by
Christ, but only that we by Christ, or his death, were reconciled to God, as
you may see in all the places, wherein mention is made of this reconciliation,
as Romans 5. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Ephesians. 2. 16. So that such a satisfaction
cannot thence be evinced; yea, the opinion of the adversaries is rather clearly
refuted thereby.

Quest. What think you of this reconciliation?

Answ. That Christ showed to us, who, by reason of our sins were enemies of
God, and alienated from him, a way how we might be converted to him, and so
reconciled.

Quest. What say you to Christ's bearing our sins?

Answ. The satisfaction cannot be asserted from hence, because it is said of
God himself, Exodus 34. 7. and Numb. 14. 18. according to the Hebrew context,
That he shows mercy to thousands, and bears iniquity and sins, which in our
Translation is rendered, [forgiveth iniquity and sins.] And Moses, Levit. 10.
16, 17. says to the sons of Aaron, wherefore have ye not eaten the
sin-offering in the Holy-place, seeing it is most Holy, and God has given it
you to bear the iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for them
before the Lord. And Numb. 18. 1. the Lord says to Aaron, Thou and thy sons,
and thy Fathers house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary; and
thou, with thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your Priesthood. And
Mat. chap. 8. 17. says expressly, that when Christ cured many diseases among
the people, then was that fulfilled which was spoken by Isaiah, [He took our
infirmities, and bore our diseases] Isai. 53. 4. Nevertheless, neither did
God, nor the sons of Aaron, or Aaron himself, satisfy for the sins and
iniquities of any, nor Christ for the diseases of men.

Quest. What therefore is the meaning of these words?

Answ. That Christ took away from us, both our sins, and the punishment of
them, as perfectly as if he had born them on his own Body, or carried them away
into a far Country; as the Scripture elsewhere says, that he is the Lamb of
God, that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. and that he was once
offered, that he might bear, or take away sins of many, Heb. 9. 21.

Quest. What say you to this, that Christ is called a propitiation? 1 John 2. 2.

Answ. The satisfaction is not necessarily concluded hence, because the
Scripture says that God himself proposed Christ as a propitiation, Romans 3. 25.
As also because the cover of the Ark is called a propitiation, or propitiatory,
Heb. 9. 5. (where in the Greek you have the same word that is found in the
foregoing place of the Romans.) But it is evident that it did not satisfy God.
Finally, it is one thing to satisfy, another thing to propitiate, appease, or
make favorable, since he that is appeased, or made favorable, may remit, and
abate much of his right, whereas he that is satisfied, abateth nothing.

Q. But what is your opinion concerning this thing?

A. That God did, and does in a wonderful manner yield himself propitious, and
favorable to us in Christ, and has by him revealed to us, all the things that
he would have us know, especially when he delivered his son to death, whence
the Apostle in the forequoted place added these words, [by his Blood.]

Q. What answer you to those testimonies, wherein it is delivered, that by the
sacrifices of the Old Covenant the death of Christ was figured, and shadowed
forth?

Answ. First, we must know, that not all the Sacrifices of the Old Covenant
figured the death of Christ, but only the killing of that Beast which every
year was slain, and with whose blood the High Priest went into the Holy of
Holies. Which killing, as it was not the Sacrifice it self, but a certain
preparation thereunto, and an inchoation thereof; but the Sacrifice it self was
then performed, when the High Priest entered with the Blood into the Holy of
Holies: so also the death of Christ was not his Sacrifice, but a preparation
thereunto, and inchoation thereof; but the sacrifice it self was then
performed, when Christ entered into the Heaven itself, whereof you shall here
more anon. Besides, although those Sacrifices had shadowed forth the death of
Christ, yet does it not thence follow, tha God was by the death of Christ
satisfied for our sins, since the Scripture no where testifies that those
Sacrifices had such power, as to satisfy God for sins. And yet it is necessary
that between the Figure, and thing Figured, there should be some similitude and
proportion.

Q. What think you of those Sacrifices?

A. That by them the sins of the people were expiated, or attoned, that is, by
the intervening of those Sacrifices, the remission of sins, graciously decreed
by God, was brought to effect.

CHAP. IX. Of Faith.
Q. I Have understood those things which Gods part pertain to the New Covenant,
explain these also which on our part seem to belong to the same?

A. That which on our part belongs to the New Covenant, is Faith on our Lord
Jesus Christ.

Q. What is Faith on our Lord Jesus Christ?

A. This Faith is in the Scripture set forth under a double consideration,
sometimes it notes that Faith, which is not necessarily attended with
Salvation, sometimes that which is so attended.

Q. What is that Faith which is not necessarily attended with Salvation?

A. It is a bare assent to the Doctrine of Christ as true, which, that it is
not of necessity attended with Salvation, appears from the example of those
Rulers, John 12. 42. Of whom the Evangelist says, that many of them believed
on Christ, but by reason of the Pharisees durst not to confess him, lest they
should be cast out of the Synagogues.

Q. What is that Faith which is of necessity attended with Salvation?

A. It is a confidence through Christ on God; whence it appears that that
Faith on Christ comprehends two things; first, that we confide not only on
God, but also on Christ; next, that we be obedient unto God, not in those
things only, which he has commanded in the Law delivered by Moses, and are not
abrogated by Christ; but also in those things which Christ has added to the
Law.

Q. Do you then comprehend obedience under Faith?

A. Yes, for the thing it self shows, that none can be found, who conceives
in his mind a certain hope of Eternal Life, which Christ has promised only
to those that obey him, who is not also obedient unto Christ, in as much as
Eternal Life is such a good, as no man can wittingly and willingly despise it.
Besides, James openly testifies, that as the Body without the Spirit is dead,
so Faith also without Works is dead, James 2. 26. and a little above he had
said, that the Faith of Abraham was perfected by Works, ver. 22. For which
reason likewise pious men, and such as are obedient to God, are called the
Faithful.

Q. But why does Paul the Apostle oppose Faith to Works?

A. In those places where he opposes Faith to Works, he speaks of such
works, as contain perfect, and perpetual obedience, which was by God required
under the Law: but not of such works as comprehend that obedience which God
requires of us, who believe on Christ.

Q. What is that obedience?

A. That putting off the Old man with his Works, we desist from all our former
sins, which thing the Scripture calls Repentance. Next, that according to our
ability, we perform the Will of God, so as that we walk not after the Flesh,
but by the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh. In short, that we contract
the habit of no sin, but gain to our selves the habits of all Christian Virtues.

CHAP. X. Of Free Will.
Q. Does it lie in our power to obey God in that manner?

A. Yes, for it is certain, that the first Man was so created by God, as that
he was endued with Free Will. Neither was there any cause why God, after his
fall, should deprive him thereof. And indeed the Justice of God does not permit
it, nor is there any mention of such a punishment, amongst those punishments
that God inflicted on Adam for his transgression.

Q. Is not this Free Will depraved by Original sin?

A. There is no such thing as Original sin, wherefore neither can it deprave
Free Will. For, that Original sin cannot be proved out of the Scripture. And
the fall of Adam being but one act, could not have such power as to deprave his
own nature, much less the nature of all his posterity. But that this
punishment was inflicted upon Adam, neither does the Scripture any where
relate, and it is altogether unsuitable to God, who is the fountain of all
equity, so to do.

Q. But yet that there is Original sin, seems to be proved by that
testimony, Genesis 6. 5. All the thoughts of man's heart were only evil, and that
continually; and Genesis 8. 21. The thought of man's heart is evil from his
childhood?

A. These testimonies speak of voluntary sin, so quireth of them; But a will to
perform them is in all men by nature: yet is not that ability so little, that,
if a man will offer violence to himself, he may not by the accession of the
Divine Assistance, obey the Divine Will. But God denies his assistance to that
Original sin cannot be proved thence. For as for the first, Moses shows that
it was such a sin, for which it repented God that he had made Man, and he
resolved to punish him with a Flood; which certainly can by no means be
affirmed of sin that is in man by nature, such as they think Original sin to
be. But in the other testimony he shows, that the sin of man shall not have
such power, that God for it should punish the World with a Flood. which also
does not agree with original sin.

Q. What think you of David, who says, Psalm. 51. 7. that he was conceived in
sin, and by his mother shaped in iniquity?

A. It is to be noted, that David does not here speak of all men, but only of
himself; nor that simply, but in respect of his fall; using such an expression
as you have, Psalm. 58. 4. The wicked are averse, or estranged from the womb, as
soon as they be born, they go astray, speaking lies. Wherefore neither can
Original sin be evinced from this testimony.

Q. But Paul, Romans 5. 12. says that all sinned in Adam?

A. It is not there said, that all sinned in Adam: But that Greek expression
which in some Translations is rendered [in whom] is in our English Translation
rendered [for that] agreeable to the Original, as appears by the collation of
these places, Romans 8. 3. Phil. 3. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 4.

Q. Seeing you have shown that Free Will could not be depraved by Original
sin, explain how far the power of Free Will extends it self?

A. There is commonly in men but little ability by nature, to perform those
things which God requires none of them, to whom he discovers his Will.
Otherwise he could not justly chastise, or punish the refractory, both which
notwithstanding he is wont to do.

Q. What is that Divine assistance?

A. It is twofold, Inward, and Outward.

Q. What is the Outward?

A. The Promises and Threatenings of God. But the Promises have the greatest
force by far Whence it comes to pass, that because Promises under the New
Covenant are far more excellent then those under the Old, it is an easier
matter to do the Will of God under the New, then under the Old.

Q. What is the Inwards assistance?

A. It is the obsignation of what God has promised, in the hearts of such as
obey him.

Q. If there be Free Will, as you teach, how comes it to pass that so many
opposes it?

A. Because certain testimonies of the Scripture seem to them to take away
Free Will.

Q. What may those Testimonies be?

A. They are of two sorts; the one, out of which they think they can collect,
and deduce such a Doctrine; the others, wherein they suppose that Free Will is
expressly taken away.

Q. What are those out of which they endeavor to deduce such a thing?

A. Such as make mention of predestination, wherein they think it is intimated,
that God did by an irrevocable, and immutable Decree from all Eternity, choose,
and design certain men in particular, and by name, unto Salvation; and
reprobate the rest unto damnation, not because he foresaw the obedience of the
one, and the disobedience of the others but out of his mere pleasure?

Q. What think you concerning this matter?

A. Such an opinion touching the Predestination of God, is altogether erroneus,
and that for two reasons chiefly; whereof the one is, that it would bring all
Religion to ruin; the other, that it would charge God with many absurd, yea,
horrid things.

Q. But how would the admission of this opinion bring Religion to ruin?

A. Because all the things pertaining to Religion and Piety would be in us,
necessarily and unavoidably; and if so, to what purpose were it to labor, and
endeavor, that we might be pious? For all endeavor and diligence, is there
superfluous, where all things come to pass necessarily, as reason it self
shows. But if the endeavor and study of Religion, and Piety be taken away,
Religion and Piety it self must needs be taken away together.

Q. What absurd and horrid things will be attributed to God, if this opinion
be admitted?

A. They are four in number; 1. Justice. For it would be manifestly unjust, to
punish one for not doing what he was unable to do. But when God punishes the
impious and disobedient, what else does he, then punish them, who do not what
they are unable to do. For if the opinion of the Adversaries be true, they, by
reason of the immutable decree of God cannot possibly become pious and
obedient. 2. Hypocrisy, joined with deceit: For God having excluded already
the greatest part of them, to whom the Gospel is declared, from salvation, by
his decree, does notwithstanding offer salvation unto all; and so does one
thing, and makes show of another, which is the property of Hypocrites and
deceivers; And which is worse, God does in such a thing wherein another is
exceedingly circumvented and hurt. 3. Great imprudence; for God would seem to
take care, and endeavor that, which he certainly knows cannot come to pass.
But what is more foolish and light, then to make a show as if you earnestly
endeavored to effect that, which you know certainly cannot be done, and so to
expose your self to scorn. 4. Pravity, in that God would be the author of sin.
For since it is altogether necessary that sin should go before damnation,
certainly he that decrees a man shall be of necessity damned, decrees also that
he shall of necessity sin.

Q. How do they go about to prove that opinion of theirs, concerning
Predestination?

A. By certain testimonies of the scripture, wherein this is the chiefest, Romans
8. 28, 29, 30. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that
love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. For whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his son,
that he might be the first born among many brethren: Moreover, whom he did
predestinate, them he also calls; and whom he has called, them he also
justifyeth; and whom he has justified, them he also glorifieth.

Q. What answer give you to this testimony?

A. That you may the better understand that Testimony, and the like; I must
first declare to you, what the scripture means by Predestination, Election,
and Vocation or Calling.

Q. I would fain have you explain that?

A. The Predestination of God in the scriptures signifies no other thing, then
such a decree of his concerning men before the foundation of the world, that to
those who would believe in him and be obedient to him, he would give eternal
life; and punish them with eternal death and damnation, who would refuse to
believe in him, and be obedient to him; which thing is apparent, in that
Christ, the perfect Interpreter of the divine will, has so expounded to us
this counsel and decree of God, saying, that he that believes on him, shall be
saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned Mark 16. 16.

Q. What say you of Election?

A. Election, when the Scripture speaks of our Salvation, has a double
signification, for sometimes those that assent to the Gospel preached, are said
to be Elected of God: but sometimes also they, who do not only assent to the
Gospel, but lead their lives according to the prescript thereof, are called
elect. An example of the first signification you have, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. You
see your calling, brethren, that not many wise men according to the flesh, not
many Potent not many noble, but God has chosen the foolish things of this
world, that he might shame the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, that he might shame the strong: where election and vocation are taken
for the same thing. An example of the latter, you have, Matt. 22. 14. where
Christ says, That many called, but few chosen. But you have an example of both
in those words of Peter, 2 Epist. 1. 10, 11. Endeavor to making your calling
and election sure, that is, by good works, as some coppies have it.

Q. What say you of Vocation?

A. Vocation, when it is referred to our salvation, has the same signification
with Election, as appears by the quoted places.

Q. But how do you make answer to the aforesaid testimonies?

A. This testimony makes nothing for that Predestination which the Adversaries
have devised. For they hold a predestination without any regard of good works;
whereas Paul here speaks of such a predestination as has regard to those
that love God; and demonstrateth that afflictions do not hurt such men, but
rather help them for good. Now he says of them, that they are called according
to the purpose, to show, that they at length have believed the Gospel,
according to the purpose of God, and are predestined to salvation, who love
God. But we have before shown that that is in man's power.

Q. I would therefore entreat you to expound the place to me?

A. The plain meaning is this, The Apostle shows, that all afflictions
cooperate for good to them, who love God, and have believed the Gospel of
Christ. Which he proves in this manner, namely in that they are predestined
to all those things, which it behooved the Lord Christ himself to suffer. Now
as those things could not stop his passage to Eternal Life, so neither can it
stop theirs. Which when the Apostle had demonstrated, he describes certain
degrees, whereby men attain unto Eternal Life, showing that God, does by the
preaching of the Gospel gather them into his Church, whom he has
predestined to be conformable to the image of his son in afflictions, and
immortality, and then justifies them, being freed from all their sin, and
finally, does in a more perfect way design them to Eternal Life, and
Immortality.

Q. What are those testimonies, whereby they think that Free Will is expressly
taken away?

A. They pertain either to all, or to certain persons.

Quest. Which are they that pertain to all?

A. Amongst others, they are these; It is not of him that wills, nor of him
that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. No man comes to me,
unless the Father, that sent me, draw him, John 6. 44. They believed as many
as were ordained to Eternal Life, Act. 13. 48.

Q. What say you to the first?

A. The Apostle does not there speak of a will, and endeavor to obey the
commandments of God, (for this would be repugnant to all the Scriptures, which
inculcate nothing more frequently, then an endeavor to live according to the
Commandments of God) but of such a will and endeavor, whereby we prevent God,
and move him to propose his benefits to us. Which that it is so, appears from
the very position of the Apostle, which is such: Not all, who are born of
Abraham according to the flesh, are truly his sons, and such as to whom the
promises of Eternal Happiness, made to the seed of Abraham, do belong, but
only those, whom God vouchsafes that Grace, without any regard had to their
birth according to the flesh, of which sort are they that have believed in God
through Christ, (of what parents soever they are descended) and by this means
are become the children of Abraham, according to the Spirit. Whence it
follows, that righteousness and salvation are not to be fetched from the Law
of Moses, which was sometimes delivered to the posterity of Abraham and Israel,
according to the flesh; but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, which has since been
proposed for ever by the same God to the Spiritual sons of Abraham and Israel.
And this is the genuine meaning of the place. Wherefore, as we willingly
consent that there is no man, who by his willing, and running, could, or can
obtain to move God to confer some benefit upon him: so in like manner, after
God has offered Grace, that a man either cannot accept and embrace the Grace
offered, or guide his life according to the prescript of the Divine Will, we
account a pernicious Error.

Q. What say you to the second?

A. This way of drawing likewise does not take away the liberty of our will,
for neither is it done in such a manner, as that God should offer violence unto
men, but God, by holding forth the excellency and certainty of his promises,
does draw men unto his Son. Now that this manner of drawing is not made by
force, or violence, first appears from what our Savior sub-joyneth in the
same place, where he explaineth that way of drawing, saying, They shall be all
taught of God. He therefore that has heard from the Father, and learned, he
comes unto me, John 6. 45. where it is clear, that to be drawn by the Father,
is no other then to hear from the Father, and to be taught. And how that is
done, appears from the words of Christ a little after expressed, Not that any
man has seen the Father, but he that was from God, he has seen the Father,
ver. 46. Again, it is perspicuous, that that way of drawing, pertains unto
all, to whom the declaration of the Gospel does come, as may be easily
collected from that place, where Jesus says, When I am lifted up from the
Earth, I will draw all men unto me, John 12. 32.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. That this passage takes not away the liberty of the will, may hence
appear, in that here is no mention made of God, who ordained those men to
Eternal Life, but it is only said simply, that they believed as many as were
ordained to Eternal Life; which may be understood of the men themselves, that
they were ordained, that is, fit, and set in a posture to embrace the doctrine
of Christ, and so to lay hold on Eternal Life therein proposed, as it is
spoken a little before in the same Chapter, in a thing contrary to this,
namely, that others judges themselves unworthy of Eternal Life, Acts 13. 46.
And as Christ says afterward, Act. 18. 10. That he had much people at
Corinth, for no other cause, then that they were apt to become his people.

Q. What are the testimonies pertaining to certain persons?

A. Amongst others, those wherein it is written that God hardneth the heart of
Pharaoh, and that Judas, who was an Apostle of Christ, did betray his Lord,
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, from whence the Adversaries infer that
he was forced thereunto.

Q. What say you to these places?

A. I confess that God does sometimes so reject certain men from his Grace,
that they can neither repent, nor be amended. But those works, and actions of
God, do no ways (if we speak simply) take away Free Will, since those
examples, wherein they appear, are singular. Which God would therefore have
extant because the men, when they might, did nevertheless refuse to obey God,
and therefore God had been for a long time worthy that God should execute his
judgments upon them, which he, when he thought, did accordingly execute upon
them; of which sort was Pharaoh, who had long before affl^cted the people of
God; and Judas, who had been long before a Thief, and covetous person; and
therefore God made use of them to perpetrate such horrid deeds.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
Q. SInce I understand what Faith is, and how far forth in our power, now show
what we get by that Faith?

A. By Faith, on Christ, we get Justification.

Q. What is Justification?

A. It is when God accounts us for just, which he does then when he does both
forgive our sins, and endue us with Eternal Life; concerning which Paul openly
testifies, whilst he says, that the happiness of a man consists herein,
that God imputes righteousness to him, Romans 4. 6. And then adds out of the
32 Psalm, that blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin.

Q. Is none then justified without Faith in Christ?

A. None at all. But this is to be understood of that time, since Christ has
been revealed. Concerning which those words of Peter also, are to be
understood, That there is no name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must
be saved, but the name of Jesus, Act. 4. 12. For as to the time that went
before the Revelation of Christ, this cannot be affirmed thereof. For although
all men that ever believed in God, shall by Faith be justified, (as may be
openly gathered from Heb. 11.) Yet notwithstanding that way of Justification
was not comprehended in the Covenant given by Moses, but merely depended of the
Grace of God. Whereas now the manner of Justification by Faith in Christ, is
contained in the very New Covenant. Whence their Faith did not include Faith in
Christ, and therefore the Apostle says that Faith came by the Gospel, Gal. 3.
22, 23, 24, 25. So that they were not justified by Faith in the Son of God, but
by Faith on God himself alone.

Q. But that place, Act. 15. 11. seems to oppugn this opinion, where the
Apostle Peter says, that we hope to be saved by the Grace of the Lord Jesus,
as well as they, that is, the Fathers.

A. In this place, the word [they] is not referred to the Fathers immediately
before mentioned, (for neither is it here treated of them) but to the Gentiles,
of whom it is here purposely discoursed, who are sundry times in the same
speech opposed to the believing Jews, as the Jews to the believing Gentiles.
For thus we read, God therefore who knows the heart, gave testimony unto them
(that is, the Gentiles) having imparted the Holy Spirit unto them, as also unto
us, (Jews) neither has he put a difference between us and them, having
purified their hearts by Faith. And now why tempt ye God, to put a yoke,
(meaning the Law of Moses) on the necks of the Disciples, (that is, the
Gentiles) which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to bear. Yea, by the
Grace of the Lord Jesus, etc. Neither is it any impediment to this
interpretation, that word [Fathers] is nearer then the word [Disciples] as we
have formerly shown from the places which we alleged on a like occasion. Also
neither is that of any moment, that the word [they] is of the Masculine, and
the Word [Gentiles] in the Greek, of the Neuter gender, for the word [Gentiles]
is elsewhere found in the Scripture either joined with a masculine gender, or
related thereunto, vide Mat. 28. 19. But if this will not be here admitted, we
say that the word they is commodiously referred to the word [Disciples] going
before, which is of the masculine gender.

Of Christ's KINGLY Office.
Q. I Have perceived all things pertaining to the Prophetic Office of Christ,
proceed, I pray you, to his other Offices, namely, the Kingly and Priestly.

A. Thus then, the Kingly Office of Christ falls under a twofold
consideration, both of the Kingdom it self; and of the people subject
thereunto.

Q. What is the consideration of the Kingdom it self?

A. Namely, that God has placed Christ, being raised from the dead, and taken
up into Heaven, at his right Hand, having given to him all power both in
Heaven; and on Earth, and put all things in subjection under his feet, that he
might govern, defend, and Eternally save those that believe in him.

Quest. Where are these things extant?

Answ. The Scripture is full of them, but the Apostle Paul gives a singular
attestation thereunto, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. etc. where he says, that God the
Father put forth the exceeding greatness of his power, when he raised Jesus
Christ from the dead, and set him at his right hand in the Heavenly places, far
above all Principality, and Authority, and force, and Lordship, and every name
that is named, not only in this world, but in the world to come, etc. and the
Apostle Peter, Act. 5. 30, 31. says, that the God of their Fathers had raised
up Jesus, whom the Jews had slain, hanging him on a tree; And that he had
exalted him to be a Prince and Savior, to give Repentance and Remission of
sins to Israel.

Q But the Adversaries say that Christ raised himself?

Answ. They are exceedingly mistaken, since the Scripture says manifestly in
infinite places, that God, the Father of Christ, raised him from the dead.
Which is so true, that the writings of the New Covenant, in many places not
expressing the Name of God, do thus describe him, He that raised Jesus Christ
from the dead, Romans 4. 24. chap. 8. 11.

Q. How comes it to pass that they hold such an opinion?

A. They think it is hinted in some passages of the Scripture, as when Christ,
John 2. 19. says, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
And afterward, John 10. 17, 18. Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay
down my life, that I may take it again. None takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and power to take it again. And
Peter, 1 Epist. 3. 18. Christ once suffered, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God, being mortified in the Flesh, but quickened in the Spirit.

Q. What answer you to the first?

Answ. First, I answer, that so few, obscure, and figurative places, ought not
to be opposed to so many, and perspicuous ones, so that a few obscure places
should explain many perspicuous ones: but rather the few and obscure places
should be interpreted according to the tenor of the many and perspicuous ones.
Again, as to the first testimony, the sense may be, that Christ being brought
again from the dead, should raise up or erect his Body, namely, when God had
put life again into it. But indeed, in such figurative expressions, not so much
the words in particular, as the sense is to be attended, especially if the
obvious and literal sense seem to contain in it somewhat that is false, and
repugnant to other places of the Scripture. Yet nevertheless if any man will
obstinately urge that expression, [I will raise it up] let him consider, first,
that the Scripture is wont to say a man does a thing, which he only causes to
be done, or is the occasion thereof; thus Jeremy, chap. 38. 23. says to
Zedekiah, Thou shall be taken by the hand of the King of Babylon, and thou
shall burn this City with fire, (for so the Hebrew context has it) And John
12. 25. He that hates his life, (or rather soul) in this world, shall keep it
unto Eternal life. Yet neither did Zedekiah, if you speak properly, burn the
City, nor do those that suffer death for the Word of God, properly keep their
Soul. Secondly, in as much as the Jews demand of Christ, that he should do a
Sign, it was necessary that he should so shape his answer, as if he himself
were to do the thing he speaks of, otherwise he had not so oppositely
answered them, yet that his words might carry a sufficient intimation, that he
himself should not properly do the work, it is observable, that in the Greek he
omits the particle [I] saying only (...), not (...), which had it been
inserted, would have clearly shown that he had truly raised himself, though
even then it could not have been thence firmly collected, that he did it by his
own power, and consequently was the most High God.

Quest. How thence is the place to be understood?

Answ. As if Christ should say, though you take me out of the way, yet shall I
after three days be raised from the dead and restored, which will be a clear
sign that I was sent by God.

Q What say you to the second?

A. This speech does not prove that Christ, when he was dead, had some power in
him to raise himself, since we read of believers, that power is given to them
to become the Children of God, that is, immortal; (though it be certain, that
God, enduing them with immortality, will make them his sons.) John 1. 12. so
that the meaning of the passage is this, I have power to lay down my life,
because I have received this commandment from my Father, whose command gives
sufficient power and authority for the doing of any thing. I have also power
(or right, or privilege, as the Greek will bear) to take it, (or receive it,
as the Greek may also be rendered) because the Father has promised, that if I
lay down my life, and suffer death, he will raise me again from the dead.

Q. What say you to the third?

A. Neither from this place does it appear, that Christ raised himself from the
dead, since it is not here written, that he was quickened with his own Spirit,
but only quickened with the Spirit, or in Spirit.

Q. In what body was Christ raised?

A. In the self same that he was crucified in, in as much as we read, that he
did after his resurrection eat and drink with his Disciples, Act. 10. 41. And
showed the wounds in his hands, feet, and side. John 20. 27.

Q. Why was Christ raised in that body?

A. That he might ascertain his Disciples of his resurrection; which was also
the cause why he conversed with them forty days, that he might discourse of
the Kingdom of God, and ever and anon appear to them, after that he had been
raised from the dead.

Q. But what body has Christ at this time?

A. He has a glorious, powerful, spiritual, and immortal body, as being
made a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45.

Q. What bodies shall those that believe in him have?

A. Such as are like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. last verse.

Q. Where does the scripture testify that Christ was taken up into Heaven?

A. Luke 24. 50, 51. where we read; And he brought them forth unto Bethany, and
lifting up his hands, blessed them. And it came to pass, that as he blessed
them, he parted from them, and was carried up into Heaven. And Mark 16. 19. and
Act 1. 9.

Q. Why was he lifted up to Heaven?

A. Because that is the seat of immortality, and there is the mansion and
commonwealth of all Gods people, whether he, as their forerunner is entered
in, that he may prepare a place for them. Phil. 3. 20. Heb. 6. 20. Joh. 14. 2,
3.

Q. Where does the Scripture deliver, that Christ is sat down at the right
hand of God, and hatb all things subject to him?

A. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22. where the Apostle expressly treats of this matter.
And 1 Cor. 15. 27. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Heb. 1. 3, 13. Heb. 12. 2.

Q. What is it to sit at the Right hand of God?

A. To be next to him in Dignity, to be his Vicegerent, and to have efficacious
authority to govern and protect the people of God; which eminently appears in
this, that Christ has absolute dominion over the bodies and souls of men; yea,
over Angels, both good and bad, and over Death and Hell it self.

Q. Why has Jesus that power over the bodies and souls of men?

A. That he may be able to relieve them in all necessities, whether corporal,
or spiritual; and because he is appointed Judge of the Quick and Dead, and
will render to every one according to his works; and will exercise judgment
according to the very secrets of the hearts.

Q. Why has he power over Angels, both good and bad?

A. Over the Good, that he may use their Ministry, in accomplishing the ends of
his Kingdom, and assisting his people in all their necessities: Over the
Evil, that he may quell their endeavors and machinations, who are wholly set
to root out, and exterminate all mankind, but especially the Faithful, who are
to inherit Salvation; and that he may employ them, when he will, either to
punish, or restrain men, who hinder either his honor, or his peoples
salvation, or any way hurt, or oppose them.

Quest. Why has he power over Hell and Death?

Answ. That he may be able to restore to life the faithful, after they are
swallowed up by death, and make them immortal, wherefore he is expressly said
to have the keys of Hell and Death, Revel. 1. 18.

Of Christ's PRIESTLY Office.
Q. YOu have explained the Kingly Office of Christ, explain now his Priestly
Office also?

A. Although I ought of right to proceed to the explication of the doctrine
touching the people of Christ, yet for as much as the Priestly office of Christ
is nearly linked with his Kingly Office, I will first treat thereof. The
Priestly Office of Christ therefore, consists herein, that as by his Kingly
Office, he is able to assist us in all our necessities, so by his Priestly
Office he is willing to do so, and consequently assisteth us. And this manner
of assisting, or giving aid to us, is called his Sacrifice.

Quest. Why is this manner of assisting called a Sacrifice?

Answ. Because as under the Old Covenant the High Priest entering into the Holy
of Holies, did perfect those things that pertained to the expiation of the
peoples sins: so Christ has now passed the Heavens, that he may there appear
before the face of God in our behalf, and accomplish all things pertaining to
the expiation of our sins, Heb. 2. 17. 4. 14. 5. 1. 9. 24.

Quest. What is the expiation of sins?

Answ. The deliverance from both the temporary and eternal punishments of
sins, and from the very sins themselves, that we may no longer serve them.

Q. How does Jesus accomplish in Heaven the expiation of our sins?

A. First, he delivers from the punishments of them, whilst by the full and
absolute authority, which he has obtained of the Father, he does perpetually
defend us, and by his intervening in a manner keep off from us, the wrath of
God, which is wont to be poured out upon the ungodly; which the Scripture
expresses, when it says, that he intercedeth for us. Next, he delivers us
from the servitude of the sins themselves, whilst by the same authority he
withdraws, and calls us away from all kind of sins, by showing us in his
own person, what he shall gain, who desisteth from sinning; or else by
exhorting, and warning, and helping, yea, sometimes by punishing us.

Q. What is the difference between the expiation of the Old and New Covenant?

A. That of the New, is more excellent, and that for two reasons chiefly;
first, in that the legal expiation extended only to such sins as were
committed out of ignorance, or weakness: but for greater fins, which were
manifest transgressions of the Law, no sacrifices were appointed, but the
penalty of death was proposed. But if God did remit such sins to any one, that
was not done by virtue of the Covenant, but by the singular Grace of God, which
God beyond the Covenant exhibited when and to whom he listed. But under the New
Covenant, not only those sins are remitted, which have been acted through
ignorance and weakness, but such as are the most open transgressions of the
Law of God, so that he, who has fallen in that manner, do not persevere
therein, but truly repent, and relapse no more into such sins. Secondly, in
that under the Old Covenant, the expiation of sins was so made, as that the
temporary punishment only was taken away; whereas the New Covenant exhibites
such an expiation, as removes not only the temporary, but the eternal
penalties of sins, and instead of punishment, offers Eternal Life, promised
in the Covenant, to those whose sins are expiated.

Q. How do you demonstrate each of these?

A. That the sins which could not be expiated under the Old Covenant, may be
expiated under the New, is testified by Paul, Acts 13. 38, 39. where he says,
Be it known unto you, brethren, that by this man is remission of sins declared
to you. And from all things, wherefrom ye could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, by Him every one that believes is justified. The same may be seen, Rom
3. 25. Heb. 9. 15. Now that sins are in such a manner expiated under the New
Covenant, as that the eternal penalty of them is taken away, and Eternal Life
given, appears from the last place we quoted, Heb. 9. 12. Where it is said,
That Christ by his own Blood, entered once into the Sanctuary, having found
Eternal Redemption.

Q. Why is that Sacrifice of Christ performed in the Heavens?

A. Because it required a Tabernacle suitable both to the Priest, and the
Sacrifice. For since the Priest is immortal, and his Sacrifice altogether
incorruptible, it was necessary that he should enter into an Eternal
Tabernacle. But in as much as Heaven only is such a Tabernacle, being the seat
and habitation of God, and therefore it was necessary that he should enter into
the very Heaven, there to discharge his Priestly function, as the Author to the
Hebrews plainly testifies, Heb. 7. 26. and chap. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. and chap. 10.
5, 6, etc.

Q. What? was he not a Priest till he entered into the Heaven? not when he hung
upon the Cross?

A. At no hand; for, as you heard even now, the Divine Author to the Hebrews,
chap. 8. 4. expressly says, that if Christ were upon the Earth, he would not
be a Priest. Besides, for as much as the same Author, chap. 2. 17. testifies,
that Christ ought in all things to be made like unto his Brethren, that he
might become a merciful and faithful High Priest to God ward, it is evident,
that until he had been made like unto his brethren in all things, that is, in
afflictions and death, he was not out merciful and faithful High Priest.
Whereby it comes to pass, that his afflictions, and death were not his very
Sacrifice, but a preparation thereunto.

Quest. Why does the Apostle say, that Christ delivered himself a sacrifice and
offering to God, for a sweet smelling savor? Ephesians. 5. 2.

Answ. First, you must know that we do not separate the death of Christ, and
exclude it from his offering, yea we constantly affirm that Christ no
otherwise, then by his death, and the intervening thereof, offered himself.
Only we assert that his offering was not actually completed and absolved,
till being raised from the dead, he passed into Heaven. For in that yearly
sacrifice under the Law, which chiefly shadowed out the Sacrifice of Christ,
for the completing of the work it was altogether necessary, that the blood of
the slain Beast should be brought into the Sanctuary by the High Priest, see
Heb. 9. 7. Again, it is to be considered that the Apostle in the forementioned
place does not say, that Christ offered himself to God for us. For this word
[delivered] ought not to be joined with the word [offering] but to be read by
it self, so that the sense is, that Christ delivered himself to death. For in
that significaon the Scripture elsewhere uses the word [deliver.] Furthermore,
the following words [a Sacrifice and offering to God for a sweet smelling
savour] are an illustration and commendation of that work of Christ in
delivering himself to death, (whereby the Apostle exhorts the faithful to
imitate that deed of Christ in loving their neighbor.) As goods Works are in
the like manner of speaking, else where commended, see Phil. 4. 18. And
therefore doing of good, and communicating, are called Sacrifices, wherewith
God is well-pleased, Heb. 13. as also all good Works which the Faithful in
Christ do. Which good Works of Christians were shadowed forth in the legal
Sacrifices.

Quest. What is the meaning of that place; Heb. 1. 3. Christ having made a
purgation of our sins, sat down at the right hand of the majesty on high?

Answ. That the manner of expiating and purging our sins, is, since Christ,
being raised from the dead, entered into Heaven, and offered himself to God for
us, I say, is perfect and complete; that is, all is now finished whereby we may
be moved to embrace the remission of sins, which God has offered to us; and
Christ has obtained authority to confer that remission upon us. Whence
afterward perpetually issues the cleansing from sins, and true freedom from
the penalties of them.

Q. Why does the Scripture, treating of Christ's Priesthood, say that he
intercedeth for us?

A. Both, that the care which Christ takes of our Salvation, might by the
requests, which he is said to make to God, appear to us; and also that the
Prerogative, and eminency of the Father above Christ, might remain entire, and
inviolate.

Touching the Church of Christ.
Q. YOu have spoken concerning the Kingdom of Christ, speak now also
concerning his People.

A. It is the Church, or society of Christians, and that either visible, or
invisible.

CHAP. I. Touching the Visible Church.
Q. What is the Visible Church?

A. The Society of such Men, as hold and profess the saving Truth. Which
society may be considered in general, or in special. In general, when all
the visible Societies of Christ, dispersed through the whole world, are
considered as one Society of Christ, or one Church. In special, when the
particular Societies, abiding in certain places, as taken for the Church of
Christ.

Q. For as much as now all Societies challenge to themselves the name of the
Church of Christ, I would fain hear whether there be any marks, whereby the
Church of Christ may be known.

A. It is to no great profit to inquire the Marks of a true Church of Christ,
since I have declared to you what constituteth a True Church, namely the saving
Truth, which whatsoever Society holds, and professes, is a true Church of
Christ. But such a Society as holds not the saving Truth, or Doctrine, nor
professes it not, although it make show of I know not what signs, yet can it
not be accounted a true Church of Christ. But to hold the saving Doctrine,
since it is the essence of the Church of Christ, cannot, if we speak properly,
be the Mark thereof, since the sign ought to differ from the thing whereof it
is the sign.

Q. Therefore to know which is the true Church of Christ, it is sufficient to
know the saving Doctrine.

A. You rightly apprehend the thing. For he that embraces the saving Doctrine,
is already in the true Church. So that he has no need to enquire the notes of
a true Church, whereby it may be known. But what the saving doctrine is, you
may understand by our foregoing speech, and conference.

CHAP. II. Of the Government of the Church of Christ.
Q. SInce you have taught me that the Visible Church of Christ consists in
the saving doctrine, I would also be taught, what order is in the same Doctrine
prescribed to that Church.

A. That order consists in the duties of those persons, whereof the Church
consists, and the diligent and accurate care, that all the persons perform
their several duties.

Q. What are the persons whereof the Church consists?

A. Of them, some govern, others obey.

Q. Who rule?

A. Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Doctors, Pastors, Bishops, Elders, and
Deacons.

Q. What is their duly or office whom you call Apostles?

A. To go out into all the world, and preach the Gospel of Christ, for which
things sake they were both chosen first by Christ, and by him sent forth, from
whence they had the denomination of Apostles, whom Christ also endued with his
holy Spirit sent in a visible manner, and armed with great powers, Mat. 28. 19.
Mark. 16. 5. Act. 2. 4.

Q. What is the office of Prophets?

A. To foretell things to come, and expound the things that are hard to be
understood in the Christian Religion, 1 Cor. 14.

Q. What is the office of Evangelists?

A. To be assistant to the Apostles in preaching the Gospel, and to disperse
it through diverse regions, and plant it; of which sort were Philrp, Timotheus,
and others, Act. 21. 8. 2 Timothy 4. 5.

Q. What are the offices of Doctors, Pastors, Bishops, and Elders?

A. To go before others in speaking, to keep order in the Church of God, and
pour out prayers for the people of God, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Acts 6. 4.

Q. What is the office of Deacons?

A. To be serviceable to the necessities of the Church, especially of the Poor
therein, Act. 6. 2, 3.

Q. Are all those persons, which you said are to govern others, and whose
offices have you described, at this day found in the Church of God?

A. As to the Apostles and Prophets, it is certain that they have no more place
in the Church of Christ. For the cause for which they were chosen and sent
forth by the Lord, is now ceased; which was, that God by them would have the
doctrine of his Son declared and confirmed to the world. And therefore they
were called the foundations of the Church of Christ by Paul, Ephesians. 2. 20.
Wherefore, after that the Gospel of Christ had, according to the counsel of
God, been abundantly discovered to the world, and confirmed, there is no more
place left in the Church for such persons as should any further discover, and
confirm the same.

Q. Why call you the Apostles and Prophets the foundation of the Church, when
Christ himself is the foundation thereof? 1 Cor. 3. 11.

A. The Apostles and Prophets are called the foundation of the Church in one
sense, and Christ is in another the foundation thereof. The one, only in
reference to other men, who belong to the same Church of Christ, and wholly
ground themselves on the doctrine of the Apostles, and Prophets. And then
Christ is considered as something greater, that is, as the chief Cornerstone of
that foundation, see the forecited place, Ephesians. 2. 20. The other, not only in
reference to the rest of the Church, but also the very Apostles themselves, who
are built upon Christ, as well as other Believers.

Q. What say you concerning Evangelists?

A. That they ceased together with the Apostles. For they did then with the
Apostles preach a New doctrine, which now accounted most Old.

Q. What think you of the other persons?

A. In as much as their Ministries do even now continue, the persons
themselves must also needs continue, as being constituted for the ministries
sake.

Q. How are they constituted for the Ministry?

A. As we have it set down in the doctrine of the Apostles.

Q. How is that?

A. Concerning the offices of Doctors, Pastors, Bishops, and Presbyters, or
Elders, the Apostle Paul at large discovers, 1 Timothy 3. 2, 3. etc. A Bishop
must be unblameable, etc. and Tit. 1. 6, 7. etc. A Bishop must be
unreproveable, etc.

Q. Have not those who teach in the Church, and keep order therein, need to be
sent in some special manner?

A. By no means; for they do not now bring a new doctrine, and such as was
unheard of before, but that of the Apostles, received of old by all men,
exhorting men to lead their lives according to it. Whence the Apostle expressly
describing all things, which belong to the constituting of such persons, make
no mention of any mission or sending. Nevertheless when such persons according
to the prescript of the Apostolic Doctrine are constituted, and are endued
with those two properties, namely innocence of life, and aptness to teach,
they ought thereupon to have just authority amongst all.

Q. What say you to those words of the Apostle, Romans 10. 15. How shall they
preach, unless they be sent?

A. The Apostle does not here speak of any preaching whatsoever, but of the
preaching of a new Doctrine, and such as has not formerly been heard, of which
sort was the preaching of the Apostles, and their assistants, who therefore had
need of a mission, or sending. But in as much as at this day there is no such
preaching, there is also no need of such a mission.

Q. How ought Deacons to be ordained?

A. As the Apostles directed, 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Let the Deacons in like manner be
grave, etc.

Q. You have handled what pertained to those that govern, now handle also that
which pertains to those that are governed.

A. It is their duty to be obedient unto those that govern, in all those
things, which they prescribe according to the Word of God. Concerning which we
read in the Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. 13. 17. Next, that they communicate
to them that teach in all good things, Gal. 6. 6. yea, that they allow them
double honor, or maintenance, 1 Timothy 5. 17. Finally, that an accusation
against them be not admitted under two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5. 19.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Discipline of the Church of Christ.
Q. YOu have shown the Offices of the persons which constitute the Church of
Christ; now likewise show the way how these Offices may be duly performed.

A. That way partly concerns all, partly those that govern.

Q How does it concern all?

A. In that manner, as it is written, Heh. 3. 12, 13. Take heed brethren lest
there shall be found in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, etc. and Heb.
12. 15. Taking care lest any man shall fall from the Grace of God: and Paul
says, 1 These. 5. 11. Admonish one another, and build up one another. See also
ver. 14. of the same Chapter.

Q. How must ^hey be dealt withal, who are despiseds of this order?

A. Two ways; for they are either privately to be corrected, or publicly:

Q. (...) to be privat^ly corrected?

A. As Christ has taught, Mat. 18. 15, 16, etc. If thy brother offend against
thee, etc.

Q. Why to be so corrected?

A. Because, as it appears from this place, they privately offend against us,
and therefore the same is to be held concerning any private offense, whether
against God, or against others; for so equity it self persuades, and Christian
Love altogether requires.

Q. How are they publicly to be Corrected?

A. By words, or deeds.

Q. How by words?

A. In such a manner, as that they be publicly reproved by all in the Church
of Christ, of which thing Paul speaks, 1 Timothy 5. 20. and 2 Cor. 2. 6.

Q. How by deeds?

A. When we either avoid their company, or refuse to eat with them, although we
do not yet count him for an enemy, but admonish him as a brother; or when we
cast him out of the Church of Christ, and no longer acknowledge him for a
brother.

Q. Where is it written concerning this matter?

A. Touching the first manner, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 These. 3. 6, 10. Touching the
latter, 1 Cor. 5. 14, 15. and Mat. 18. 17.

Q. Why is such correction observed in the Church of Christ?

A. That the transgressour may be healed, and reduced into the way; and others
may be stricken with fear, and kept untainted, and that scandal may be removed
out of the Church of Christ, and the Word of God not evil spoken of; and
finally, neither his Name nor Glory be profaned.

Q. What danger is imminent over such men?

A. Even this, that being cast out of the Church, and consequently out of the
Kingdom of Christ, there remains nothing for them, nothing but destruction,
since this Excommunication is no other then that binding whereof Christ
speaks, Mat. 18. 18. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall bind
upon earth, shall be bound also in the Heavens; and whatsoever ye shall loose
upon earth, shall be loosed also in the Heavens.

Q. What is the power of binding and loosing which the Church has?

A. It is the declaring and denouncing according to the Word of God, who is
unworthy to be of the Church of Christ.

Q. What is that manner of keeping order in the Church of Christ, which
chiefly concerns them that govern?

A. They are bound not only to observe those Offices, which appertain to
others, more diligently then all the rest, but also continually to excite
others to the discharge of them respectively, to oversee the Church, to observe
the carriage of every one, to be instant in season and out of season; to
reprove, rebuke, with all long-suffering and doctrine, as you have it, 2 Timothy
4. 2. yet must these things be done with such caution, as the Apostle shows
fit to be used, namely, that they do not chide an Elder, but admonish him as a
Father, a junior as a brother; the elder women as mothers, the younger as
sisters, with all chastity, 1 Timothy 5, 1, 2.

CHAP. IV. Of the Invisible Church of Christ.
Q. WHat is the Invisible Church?

A. Such as put their confidence in Christ, and obey him, and therefore are his
Body.

Q. Why call you that society of men, Invisible?

A. because It is not exposed to the sight of men, who are not able to
penetrate into the hearts, and tell who sincerely believe, or not. But with the
heart it is believed to righteousness, Romans 10. 10. and by Faith men are
ingrafted into the Olive of the Church, and made members of Christ. Romans 11.
19, 20.

Q. Can it not by outward actions be known, who is a member of the Church?

A. By the outward actions may easily be known who is not a member of the
Church of Christ, for the Apostle says, that the works of the flesh are
manifest, Gal. 5. 19. and such men walk in the works of the flesh. But it can
hardly be known by the outward actions where true Faith is; for outward
actions, proceeding from a corrupt heart, may carry the same appearance with
those that flow from a heart which is sincere. In short, he that is
evill-minded, may put on the outward garb of a good man: but it is otherwise in
a good man, who never labors to put on the garb of an evil man.

Q. I now understand all the things that pertain to the knowledge of God and
Christ, declare further if any thing else pertains to the knowledge of this
saving way.

A. I have already abundantly opened every thing to you. It will be your part,
having well understood, and considered them, to imprint them in your mind, and
institute your life according to the prescript of them. And the Lord God give
you his assistance thereunto, to whom, in as much as he has been pleased
graciously to help us in bringing this Conference to an end, be praise and
glory, through Jesus Christ, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

