FIFTY QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED To the ASSEMBLY, to answer by the Scriptures:
whether corporal punishments may be inflicted upon such as hold different
opinions in Religion.

Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye
suffer fools gladly, 2 Cor. 11. 19. and yet I may not be suffered. By S. R.

London, Printed, 1647.

Fifty Questions, etc.
WHether corporal punishments can open blind eyes, and give light to dark
understandings?

2 Whether carnal punishments can produce any more then a carnal repentance
and obedience?

3 Whether the destroying of men's bodies for errors, be not a means to prevent
their conversion, seeing some are not called until the eleventh hour: and if
they should be cut off for their errors the seventh hour, how should they
have come in? Mat. 20. 6.

4 Whether those who would force other men's consciences, be willing to have
their own forced?

5 Whether it be wisdom and safe to make such sole Judges in matters of
Religion, who are not infallible, but as liable to err as others?

6 If a father or Magistrate have not power to force a virgin to marry one she
cannot love; whether they have power to force one where they cannot believe,
against the light and checks of their own consciences?

7 Whether the Scripture makes the Magistrate Judge of our faith?

8 If the Magistrate may determine what is truth; whether we must not believe
and live by the Magistrates faith, and change our religion at their pleasures?
and if nothing must be preached, nor no books of Religion printed, nor be
allowed to pass, unless certain men may please to approve and give their
allowance thereto, under their hands, whether such do not by this practice,
tell God, that unless he will reveal his truth first to them, they will not
suffer it to be published, and so not known to be (even with him)
notwithstanding the Magistrate may and ought to hinder the printing and
publishing of that which shall be against the safety and welfare of the State.
But we must distinguish between matters civil and religious: we question their
power in the latter. Also, whether the Licenser setting his hand to the book
to license it (he being a Priest by his ordination, and from the Pope) be not
the mark of the beast spoken of, Revel. 13. 17. And whether all such as have
gone to them to license the truth ought not to repent of it, and do so no more?
Also whether these men be fit to be Licencers of the truth, who when the truth
has been tendered them to be licenced, they have confessed the truth of it, as
they have been free to license it; but refused, because they durst not? And
whether it can be made appear, that God has revealed his truth first to these
Ministers of England, and so the first spreaders of it? Instance, who opposed
the Prelates, the Ministers or the people, first? And so of the rest.

9 Whether it be not the command of Christ, that the tares (those that walk in
lies) and the wheat (those that walk in the truth, should be let alone, and
the blind (led in a false Religion) which are offended at the declaration of
the truth should be let alone Mat. 13. 30, 38. Mat. 15. 14.

10 Whether he was not reproved that would have fire from heaven to devour
those that reject Christ, Luke 9. 54, 55.

11 Whether the servants of the Lord are not forbidden to strive, but to* be
gentle toward all? 2 Timothy 4. 2.

12 Whether the Saints weapons against errors, be carnal or no: 2 Cor. 10. 4.

13 Whether it was not Christ's command, that his Disciples when they were
persecuted, they should pray, and if cursed, bless?

14 Whether the Scriptures declare, that the Saints should persecute others,
and whether the gentle lambs of Christ can serve the Wolves so, seeing he sent
his as sheep among wolves, and not as wolves among sheep, to kill and imprison,
Matthew. 10. 16.

15 Whether Christ has said, He will have an unwilling people compelled to
serve him?

16 whether ever God did plant his church by violence and bloodshed?

17 Whether tares may not become wheat, and the blind see, and those that now
oppose and resist Christ, afterward receive him: and he that is now in the
devils snare, may get out and come to repentance: and such as are Idolaters, as
the Corinthians were, may become true worshippeers, as they that are strangers
may become Gods people?

18 Whether to convert an Heretic, and to cast out unclean spirits, be done
any other way then by the finger of God, by the mighty power of the Spirit in
the word?

19 Whether he that is not conformable to Christ, may not at the same time be a
good subject to the State, and as profitable to it as any?

20 Whether men that differ in Religion, may not be tolerated, seeing Abraham
abode among the Canaanites a long time, yet contrary to them in Religion, Genesis
13. 7. and 16. 13. and he sojourned in Gezer, and King Abimelech gave him leave
to abide in his land, Genesis 20. 21, 23, 24. And Isaac dwelt in the same Land,
yet contrary in Religion, Genesis 31. The people of Israel were about 430 years in
Egypt, and afterward in Babylon, all which time they differed in Religion
from the State, Exodus 12. 2 Chronicles. 36. Christ and his Disciples differed from
the common religion of the State, Acts 19. 20. and when the enemies of the
truth raised up any tumults, the wisdom of the Magistrate most wisely appeased
them, Acts 18. 14. and 19. 15.

21 Whether it be not better for us, that a Patent were granted to monopolize
all the command cloth, and to have it measured out unto us at their price and
pleasure, which yet were intolerable; as for some men to appoint and measure
out unto us what and how much we shall believe and practice in matters of
religion.

22 Whether there be not the same reason that they should be appointed by us
what they shall believe and practice in religion, as for them to do so to us,
seeing we can give as good grounds for what we believe and practice (as they
can do for what they would have) if not better.

23 Whether men heretofore have not in zeal for religion, persecuted the Son of
God, in stead of the son of perdition?

24 Whether it is not a burden great enough for the Magistrate to govern and
judge in civil causes, to preserve the subjects rights, peace and safety?

25 If the Magistrate must judge and punish in matters of religion, the
Magistrate must ever be troubled with such persons and such causes: and if
after his conscience be convinced, he had no such power, or see that it was
truth he punished; what horrors of conscience is he like to possess?

26 Whether he is fit to appoint punishments, that is not fit to judge?

27 If the Magistrate must punish errors in religion, whether it does not
impose a necessity that the Magistrate is to have a certainty of knowledge in
all intricate cases? and whether God calls such to that place, whom he has not
furnished with abilities for that place? And if a Magistrate be in darkness,
and spiritually blind, and dead; be fit to judge of light, of truth and error?
and whether such be fit for the place of the Magistracy? then whether it be not
a scruple to a tender conscience to submit to such in civil causes, because
not appointed to that place by God? whereas if the Magistrates power be only
civil, the doubt is resolved, because such as may be fit for Magistrates, and
men ought in conscience in civil things to submit unto them.

28 Whether there be any Scripture that says, that any man's conscience is to
be constrained, and whether the Magistrate can reach men's consciences; and
whether he be fit to make a law to conscience, who cannot know when conscience
keeps it, and that cannot reward conscience for keeping it, nor punish the
conscience for the breaking of it?

29 Whether it be not in vain for us to have Bibles in English, if against our
souls persuasions from the Scriptures, we must believe as the Church believes?

30 Whether the Magistrate be not wronged, to give him the title of Civil
Magistrate only, if his power be spiritual?

31 Whether laws made merely concerning spiritual things, be not spiritual
also?

32 Whether if no civil Law be broken, the civil peace be hurt or no?

33 Whether in compulsion for conscience, not only the guilty, but the innocent
suffer also? As if the husband be an heretic, his sufferings may cause the
innocent wife and children shall suffer as deeply also?

34 Whether such as are spiritually dead, be capable to be spiritually infected?

35 Whether God will accept of a painted sepulcher, a shadow, a mere
complement of obedience, when the heart is dead and rotten, and hates God and
all that is good? God has no need of hypocrites, much less of forced ones:
God will have those to worship him, as can worship him in spirit and truth,
John 4.

36 Whether the Scriptures appoint any other punishment to be inflicted upon
Heretics, then rejection and excommunication? Tit. 3. 10.

37 Whether freedom of conscience would not join all sorts of persons to the
Magistrate, because each shared in the benefit?

38 Whether those states (as the Low Countries) who grant such liberty, do not
live quietly, and flourish in great prosperity?

39 Whether persecution for conscience do not harden men in their way, and
make them cry out of oppression and tyranny?

40 Whether some corporal punishments would not make thousands in England face
about to Popery as it did in Queen Mary's time.

41 Whether laws made concerning religion, have not always catched the most
holy men: witness Daniel, and the three children: the rest will be of what
religion you will.

42 Whether the Saints crave the help of the powers of this world to bring
Christ to them; or fear their powers to keep him from them?

43 If no religion is to be practiced, but that which the Commonwealth shall
approve on: what if they will approve of no religion? shall men have no
religion at all?

44 Whether the Saints ought not to continue their Assemblies of their worship
of God, without, or against the consent of the Magistrates; they being
commanded to do so, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 10. 25. By an Angel from God,
Acts 5. 20. It was the Apostles practice (who were not rebellious not
seditious) Acts 4. 18, 19, 20, 23. and 5. 22. 28.

45 Whether Uniformity in Religion, in the State, do not oppress millions of
souls, and impoverish the Saints bodies?

46 Whether Gods people have not disputed and taught a Religion new worship,
contrary to the State they lived in, and spread it in traveling and open
places; as appears, Acts 17. 2, 17. and 18. 48. yet no origancy and
impetuousnesse. Yea, contrary to public authority in the Nations Uniformity,
in false worship, Dan. 3. the three children; so the Apostle, Acts 4. 5. The
Saints have openly witnessed, that in matters spiritual, Jesus was King, Acts
17. 7. and for this Christ suffered; as appears by his accusation. John 9. 19.
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews, Psalm. 2. 6. Acts 2. 36. Gods People have
seemed the disturbers of the civil State, upon the Apostles preaching, there
followed uprores, and tumults, and uprores, at Iconium, at Ephesus, at
Jerusalem, Acts 14. 4. Acts 19. 29, 40. Acts 21. 30, 31.

47 Whether Jesus Christ, appointed any material Prisons for Blasphemers of
him? Whether notwithstanding the confidence of the truth they have, to which
they would force others, whether the Bishops, their Fathers, etc. have not been
as deeply mistaken; for now they, are found to be Antichristian.

48 Whether it be not a natural Law for every man that lives, to worship that
which he thinks is God, and as he thinks he ought to worship; and to force
otherwise, will be concluded an oppression of those persons so forced. Whether
it be best for us to put out our eyes, and see by the eyes of others who are as
dim-sighted? In my judgment, your judgment is a lie: will ye compel me to
believe a lie? compel ye a man to be present at a worship which he loathes?

49 Either the Civil, or the Spiritual State must be supreme: which of these
must judge the other in spiritual matters? if the Magistrate, then he is
above the Church, and so the head of the Church; and he has his power from the
people: (to govern the Church) whether it will not follow, that the people, as
a people, have originally as men a power to govern the Church, to see her do
her duty, to reform and correct her; and so the Spouse of Christ, wife of
Christ must be corrected according to the pleasure of the World, who lie in
wickedness? 1 John 5.

What power a Church has over a Magistrate, if he^ be a Member of the Church:
if Members, they may be excommunicated, if so discerning.
Reason 1 Because Magistrates must be subject to Christ, but Christ censures
all offenders, 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5.

2 Every brother must be subject to Christ's censure, Mat. 18. 15, 16, 17. but
Magistrates are Brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 5.

3 They may censure all within the Church, 1 Cor. 5. 1^.

4 The Church has a charge of all the souls of the Church, and must give
account of it. Heb. 13. 17.

5 Christ's censures are for the good of souls, 1 Cor. 5. 6. but Magistrates
must not be denied any privilege for their souls, else they by being
Magistrates, should lose a privilege of Christ's.

6 In which privileges, Christians are all one, Gal. 2. 28. Col. 3. 11.

Sins of Magistrates are hateful and condemned, Esaias 10. 1. Mich. 3. 1. Its a
Paradox, that a Magistrate may be punished by the Church, and yet that they are
Judges of the Church.

50 Whether every man upon that Religion, which in his conscience he is
persuaded is true, whether he does not upon the truth thereof venture his soul.

If that Religion the Magistrate, be persuaded be true, he owes a threefold
duty.

First, Approbation, Esa. 49. Revel. 21. with a tender respect to the truth,
and the Professors of it.

Secondly, Personal submission of his soul to the power of Jesus his
government, Matthew. 18. 1 Cor. 5.

Thirdly, protection of them, and their estates from violence and injury, Romans
13. to a false Religion he owes.

1 Permission (for approbation he owes not to what is evil) as Matthew. 13 30.
for public peace and quitenesse.

2 Protection of the Persons of his subjects (though a false worship) that no
injury be offered to the persons or goods of any, Romans 13.

Object.The Kings of Judah compelled men to serve the Lord, Ergo, Kings may now
compel, etc.

Answ.They who lived under the Jewish worship only were compelled, strangers
were not.

Secondly, they were not compelled to any thing, but what they knew and
confessed was their duty, 2 Chronicles. 6. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Thirdly, if they did compel, their actions were not moral to obliege other
Kings to do so. May not the Prelates by the same reason allege the order of
the Priesthood for their Episcopacy, as you for the Kingly.

Fourthly, the Kings of Israel did not imprison Schismatics, Pharisees,
Herodians, etc.

Fifthly, the Kings of Israel had extraordinary profits to direct them what to
do infallibly; these Kings have none such to direct them.

Sixthly, if the Law be moral; where is it set down in Christ's Testament
(which is to be our Rule) that the Magistrate shall compel all to his
Religion: for to another he will not.

Object.Then every man may live as he list.

Answ.Had not he as good live as he list; as live as you list?

Object.Then it seems errors may be suffered.

Answ.If truth may be suffered also, it will prevail against Errors. Its no
more in their power to hinder Errors, then it was in the power of the Prelates
to hinder men's preaching, writing, and speaking against them. If you can hinder
Satan's suggestions, and the vain imaginations of men's hearts, and expel the
darkness in men, and place light in stead thereof* and hinder men from
speaking each to other, then you can suppress errors, else not, the Lord only
can surprise Errors by the mighty power of his Spirit with his Word, and we
believe he will certainly do it in his time to his glory, and the comfort of
his people, Amen.

One thing more I desire to know why the Priests of England assume to
themselves the title of a (Divine) is it because they are exercised in Divine
Truth, or because they partake of the Divine Nature, or both, if so, then many
Tradesmen may as well have the title of Divine given them as well as they,
because they partake of the Divine Nature, and are as much exercised in matters
Divine, as the most of them, but it is a question to me, whether the title
Divine is to be given to any man, but only to God alone; whose being, is only
Divine.

FINIS.

