DIVINE EFFICACY WITHOUT HUMANE POWER. Opened in a SERMON Preached at St.
Margarets Church in Westminster before the Right Honorable the House of
COMMONS, June 28. 1660. Being the day of solemn Thanksgiving for the happy
Return of the Kings Majesty.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS D. D. And Chaplain in ordinary to his Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

Friday 29th. June 1660.
Ordered,
THat the thanks of this House be given to Dr. Reynolds, for his great pains
in preaching and carrying on the work of public Thansgiving, before the House
at Saint Margarets Church Westminster yesterday, and he is desired to Print his
Sermon then preached, and is to enjoy like Privileges in Printing, as has
been allowed to others in like Cases.

And Mr. Pryn is desired to acquaint him herewith, and to give him the thanks
of this House accordingly.

W. Jessop Cl. of the Commons House of Parliament.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND IN PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Right Honorable,
IT may justly seem strange unto you, Non se capit exundantis Laetitiae
magnitudo, sed dedignata pectorum latebras, ita multa and candida foris
prominet, ut intelligatur, non ingentior esse quam verior. Nazar. Paneg.
That, when Joy is one of the swiftest affections of the soul, and of all
other most impatient of suppression. This Sermon, preached before you on one
the greatest solemnities of Joy that this Nation has seen, In eundem hominem
non puto (...) Gaud^^m and S^l^ntiam. Pacat.
should have yielded such slow and lingering obedience unto your commands, and
like Cushi should come last with the tyings of a Restored King, for which I
have no other Apology to make but this, That the joy of one Service did retard
the have of another. For having, together with some other of my Reverend
Brethren, received a command from his Sacred Majesty, (whose heart is zealously
set upon healing the breaches and divisions which are in the Church of God
amongst us) to draw up some materials toward so happy a work; and finding,
That in papers of such a nature, brought under the view of different judgments,
(wherein every clause, yea, many times single words and particular expressions,
prove the subject of long debates) it is impossible to make such dispatch, as
otherwise the urgency of the design does passionately call for: the necessary
and constant attendance upon that service, did put for a time a suspension upon
the obedience, which I was ready much sooner to have yielded unto your
Commands, for publishing this Sermon.

It is now at last, by Gods assistance, come forth, and shows how easily the
Spirit and providence of God; can erect his Temple, and provide for the
Interests of his Truth and Worship, though the instruments of it be utterly
destitute of humane power. It is indeed an happy thing, when they who have
power will exert it for God, and lay it out upon the service of his House. But
though they should want hands or hearts to build the Church, God has ever a
residue of Spirit to advance his own work by, Mal. 2. 15.
and knows how to infatuate all Counsels, 2 Samuel 15. 31. Isa. 19. 3. 11.
and to dissipate all enterprises and machinations which are framed against it.
Job 5. 12, 13, 14. 12. 17.


Our eyes have seen how easy it is with God to dissolve and demolish the most
cunningly erected structure, Isa. 54 17.
which either policy could contrive, or power support, 1 Reg. 19. 12.
and that with a still voice, and in a silent way, without so much as drawing a
Sword, or striking a blow to effect it. How he can do things which we looked
not for, Isa. 64. 3.
by rebuking seas, Mat. 8. 26.
and levelling mountains, Zach. 4. 7.
and melting Arms, Psalm. 46. 9.
and scattering the beasts of the reeds, Psalm. 68. 30.
and making a plain and sudden way through insuperable difficulties to bring
home our DREAD SOVEREIGN to his Throne and Native Dominions again. Isa. 49. 11.


And he who has wrought wonders for us in these our Civil concernments, can do
the like for his Church, Isa. 43. 4.
(the Interests whereof, are, of all things on the Earth, dearest unto him; and
the welfare and happiness whereof, all the Earthquakes and Concussions, which
have been amongst us, do call aloud unto you, to look after, aad to be tender
of. Hag. 2. 6, 7.
When the Lord shakes heaven and Earth, Churches and States, it is to make way
for him who is the Desire of all Nations. If Christ, and the Glory of his holy
Ordinances, and spiritual worship be not more exalted; If the sons of Levi be
not purified, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness;
Mal. 3. 3.
if the House of God be not purged of corruptions; if pomp and splendour, and
terrene interests be the things most passionately prosecuted, and the vitals
and essentials of Religion, the great things of the Law, purity of Doctrine,
spiritualnesse of Worship, power of Godliness but in the second place regarded:
If we be zealous for mint and cummin, Luke 11. 42.
and philacteries and precepts of men, Mat. 23. 5.
and have not a proportionable fervor of zeal for the Magnalia Dei: Mat. 15.
9.
Certainly God will yet reckon with us, Acts 2. 11.
and call us to an account for all the blood which has been shed, for all the
Treasure which has been exhausted, for all the Judgments and mercies, for all
the providence and wonders which have been expended upon us. I speak not this
to accuse, but only to awaken; not to charge, but only to beseech you to
consider, whether the Lord do not expect, That after such vicissitudes of
wonders as we have seen, (especially having inclined the heart of our GRACIOUS
SOVEREIGN unto moderate, healing, and Reforming Resolutions,) you should
together with him take up the same purposes, to make the Church of Christ
amongst us more holy and happy then ever it was before. For certainly never any
Parliament had greater advantages to promote Religion, than you have. I shall
conclude this Dedication and address unto you with the words of Azariah the
Prophet unto Asa, 2 Chronicles. (...). 1.
The Lord is with you while you be with him, and if you seek him, he will be
found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. The Lord shine upon
all your Counsels.

From my Study, July 24. 1660. Your Honors most humbly and devoted in all duty
and obedience EDW. REYNOLDS

DIVINE EFFICACY WITHOUT HVMANE POWER. Opened in a Sermon Preached at St.
Margarets Church in Westminster, before the Right Honorable the House of
COMMONS, June 28. 1660.
ZACH. 4. 6. Then he answered and spoke unto me, saying, This is the word of
the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit,
says the Lord of Hosts.


IN the former part of the Chapter we have a Vision of a golden Candlestick,
with a Bowl and seven Lamps and Pipes, and two Olive Trees on either side of
the Bowl, out of which the Candlestick was supplied with Oil. The Prophet
being prepared by an humble sense and confession of his own ignorance to
receive fuller instruction concerning it, is by the Angel in these words
acquainted with the mind of God therein. Teaching us by the way not to despond
or be discouraged by the difficulty of the Scriptures from the studying of
them, but to be humbled under the sense of our own blindness, and to stir up in
our selves a serious desire after fuller knowledge of God in them, and to
betake our selves unto Christ, to reveal the counsel of God unto us; and then
to rest assured that the Lord will help our infirmities, and give us an
understanding to know him, so far as shall be necessary for our condition and
salvation. According unto those gracious promises, The meek he will teach his
way, and show them that fear him his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 9, 14. If any man will
do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, John 7. 17.
Unto him that orders his conversation aright, I will show the salvation of
God, Psalm. 50. 23.

1. We are here to enquire why this word is sent unto Zerubbabel? We find that
the Lord stirred up Josuah and Zerubbabel, as principal Instruments, whom he
would use in building the Temple, and restoring his worship; which accordingly
we find them setting about, Ezra 2. 68, 69. Ezra 3. 2, 8. The work by the
power and malice of the Samaritans, was obstructed from the days of Cyrus to
Darius. The Lord by the Prophet Haggai and Zachariah raised up the hearts of
Zerubbabel and Josua to revive the work, Ezra 5. 2.

And as we find Josua and Zerubbabel the two chief Builders, so we find two
chief Enemies resisting these two in that service. Satan a spiritual enemy
resisting the spiritual office of the Priest. Tatnai and others as Statesmen
opposing this enterprise in civil respects, as injurious to the King.

In the former Chapter the Lord in a Vision comforted Josua, and rebuked Satan.
In this Vision he comfort Zerubbabel, and rebukes that mountain of
opposition which was raised against him, very fit and necessary it was that
both Instruments should be encouraged, that both Adversaries should be rebuked.

2. We are to enquire how these words are an Answer to the Prophets Question,
and an Exposition of the Vision which he saw? The Resemblance between the
Vision and the Word stands thus. As the Candlestick was set up without man's
hands, and fed with oil dropping into it immediately from the Olive trees
without any humane help thereunto concurring, so the Lord alone,
notwithstanding the opposition of men, and weakness of his people, would by
his Spirit alone bring this work to a consummation, and magnify his power in
the weakness of his Instruments. Zerubbabel must not be dismayed, because
mountains of opposition are in his way, the Lord being able to level and
remove them all, Matthew. 17. 20. As he said by Haggai, The silver is mine, and
the gold is mine, Hag. 2. 8. If I would that way have made this Temple
glorious, I could as easily do it now as I did before, but I have another glory
and a greater to fill this House withal. So here, if I would erect this House
by power, I could easily have done it, being the Lord of Hosts. But I have
another way to do it by, even by my Spirit, It shall appear to be the work of
mine alone Grace, and thereunto shall my people with all thankful acclamations
ascribe it, crying Grace, grace unto it.

My Spirit is here opposed to an Arm of flesh, as Isa. 31. 3. to signify that
the Lord alone would bring this work to pass, without the help of humane power,
as he said by the Prophet Hosea, I will save them by the Lord their God, and
will not save them by Bow, nor by Sword, nor by Battle, by Horses nor by
Horsemen, Hos. 1. 7. As Christ was conceived not by humane Generation, but by
the power of the most high, Luke 1. 35. So the Temple, a type of Christ, was to
be raised by the power of the Spirit guiding various intercurrent providence
unto that end.

1. The Spirit did powerfully stir up the hearts of Zerubbabel, Josua, and the
people to the work, Hag. 1. 14. 1. By pressing upon their hearts the judgments
which they had suffered for their neglect of this great work, ver. 6, 9, 10,
11. 2. By comforting them with the assurance of his presence and assistance,
ver. 13. 3. By minding them of their coming out of Egypt, which was the alone
work of the Spirit of God, which Spirit did still remain amongst them, Hag. 2.
5. 4. By giving them assurance of a signal blessing, from the day that they
should set about this work, chap. 2. 19. 5. By promising them the Messiah, who
was to come, and to fill that Temple with his glory, thereby comforting them
against their want of silver and gold, wherewith they might suppose that House
ought to be beautified, as well as the former had been, chap. 2. 7, 8, 9, 21.
6. By assuring him that no power should stand in his way to hinder or obstruct
the accomplishment of this work, v. 22, 23.

2. The spirit ordered the Letter of the enemies for hindering the work unto the
promoting of it against their wills, Ezra 5. 6.

3. The Spirit put it into the mind of Darius to confirm the decree of Cyrus,
and to add enlargements thereunto, that they might offer sacrifices, and might
pray for the life of the King and his sons, Ez 6. 6-12.

In the words observe, 1. The general scope and intent of them, an
encouragement to build the Temple, though they then wanted power to effect it.
2. The means of this encouragement, A Word of the Lord. 3. The Vehicula
whereby this word is conveyed, by the Angel to the Prophet, by the Prophet to
the Prince, then HE answered and spoke unto ME. 4. The subject of this
encouragement, Zerubbabel. 5. The matter of the comfort set forth, 1.
Negatively, Not by might nor by power. 2. Positively, but by my Spirit, says
the Lord. From the words thus opened, we may

1. Observe the great care of the Lord to heal and remove the discouragements
of his servants, whereby they might be weakened in any work unto which he
calls them. If Satan resist, he shall be rebuked, if mountains stand in the
way, they shall be levelled; If royal Edicts hinder, they shall be revoked; if
sad and desponding thoughts disquiet, they shall be removed. God never sets his
servants on work, and then leaves them to their own fears, but ever
proportioneth assistance and comfort to the difficulties of the service
whereunto he calls. Though his Authority alone be argument enough unto his
servants to do what he requires, yet he deals not only in a way of
Sovereignty to show his dominion over us, but in a way of condescension to show
his compassion unto us. He remembers that we are but dust, and accordingly
attempereth his dealings to our condition. If he chastise* it is with the Rod
of a man, 2 Samuel 7. 14. If he tempt, it is with the temptation of a man, 1 Cor.
10. 13. If he draw, it is with the cords of a man, Hosea 11. 4. So he deals
here with Zerubbabel and Josua. It might seem to humane Reason an impossible
enterprise, for a few poor men, newly crept out of their Graves, to erect so
stately a fabric, resist^^ by Satan, maligned by wise and (...) men,
obstructed once already by an Imperial Edict for many years together. Therefore
as the Lord gave Moses, Aaron and Hur to hold up his hands, so here he sends
unto Zerubbabel, Haggai and Zechariah to strengthen his hands, and to assure
him, that the Ministry only, and the Obe^dience should be his, but the work it
self God would effect by his own power, and that in so strange and wonderful a
manner, making use of the very malice of Enemies to promote the design which
they most maligned, as if the house had been built, and the candlestick fed by
an immediate Creation.

Thus the Lord has ever dealt with his servants in difficult employments, he
has answered their objections, resolved their doubts, removed their fears,
magnified the power of his grace in their infirmities. Abraham and Sar^^ were
beyond hope of children, dead unto such a purpose, Heb. 11. 12. Romans 4. 19. The
Lord raises him above these doubts, by his omnipotency and alsufficiency, Genesis
17. 1. 18. 14. Jacob was afraid of his brother Esau, the Lord removes it by a
Vision of Angels, and his prevalency in wrestling, Genesis 32. 1, 28. Moses was
commanded upon hard service to bring Israel out of Egypt, we find him full of
Objections, in every one of which God satisfied him before he dispatched him
upon the service.

They will not believe me, Exodus 4. 1. No? I will make them know thou come
from me by the miracles I will enable thee to do, ver. 2 -- 9. I am not
Eloquent, I am slow of speech, unfit to persuade Pharaoh to part with Israel,
ver. 10. This God answers by arguments from his omnipotency, presence and
continual direction, ver. 11, 12.

There may be a fitter man for so weighty an employment, find such an one, the
fitter the man, the more successful the negotiation, ver. 13. Here, though the
Lord were angry that he should charge God with making an unfit choice, (who
usually in great works has regard to the lowliness of his Instruments) yet he
condescendeth so far as to send Aaron with him to be his mouth to the people,
v. 14 -- 16.

And now when he is made willing to go, and has captivated his reason unto
Gods Will, the Lord himself removes the great reason, which lay as a
discouragement upon him; the fear of those that sought his life, ver. 19.
leaves not any doubt unremoved which might have disheartened him in the work.

So he dealt with Gideon, called him to great service, to deliver Israel from
the Midianites, Judges 6. 13. Gideon is presently at Moses his fence, My family
is poor, and I the meanest in it, wherewith shall I save Israel? ver. 15.
Wherewith? By my Power, I am with thee, v. 16. How shall I know that? Show me a
sign, v. 17. The sign comes, and that puts him into a new fear. Timor etiam
auxilia reformidat. It betrays the succors which God and Reason offer, ver.
22. The Lord removes that fear, Thou shall not die, ver. 23. but even then sets
him upon a work which endangered his life, v. 25 -- 30. His Father has no
sooner satisfied the people, and saved his life, ver. 31, 32. but a new fear
arises, the Midianites and Amalekites gather together against Israel. Gideon
obeys Gods call, but wants signs to remove doubts, ver. 34 -- 40. He is
gratified in them; but then he is exercised with a great temptation. His Army
must be lessened from thirty two thousand unto but three hundred men. He obeys,
but fears still, Judge. 7. 10. and this fear is removed by a dream of one in
the enemies camp, ver. 13, 14. And being so many ways confirmed, he sets on the
work and prevails.

This is very suitable to the goodness of God, who knows that we have no
strength of our own, that we cannot serve him but by the grace and help we
receive from him. We give him of his own, 1 Chr. 29. 14. Aug. ^om. 4. lib. de
patientia. cap. 18.
Quisquis contendit haberi posse charitatem Dei sine Dei Adjutorio, quid aliud
contendit quam haberi posse Deum sine Deo? says Saint Austin.

It concerns the Lord in honor to back his servants to his own work, when the
opposition they meet with is not against them but for his sake; when Israel
fled, Gods great name was concerned, Jos. 7. 8, 9. and therefore Asa prayed,
Let not man prevail against thee, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.

It is that which he has promised, never to fail nor forsake us, Jos. 1. 5.
to be with us while we are with him, 2. Chron. 15. 2. to keep us in our ways,
Psalm. 91. 11. The way of the Lord is our strength, Prove. 10. 29. We are ever
under Gods protection while we are in Gods way. He will encamp about his house,
and will be a wall of fire unto it.

From this point we learn, 1. That even when we are about Gods work, we must
look for difficulties, some arising from within our selves, our own ignorance,
weakness, frowardness, impatience, which usually make easy things hard (such
is Christ's yoke in it self, though to our corruption it may seem irksome.)
However, though we bring never so much love and resolution to the work, yet
Satan will resist us, the world will hate us, God himself will try us, and put
us hard to deny our selves, to empty our selves, and to captivate our Reason
unto his Will. There will be mountains in our way, when we are to build Gods
house; mountains of pride and prejudice, and high imaginations, (...), Greg.
Naz. Orat. 1.
within our selves: (...), as Greg. Nazianzen speaks, we are strong and learned
against our selves and our own good; and mountains of opposition and
contradiction from others, who will ever malign, and, as they are able,
obstruct the prosperity of so good a work. T^rtul. de corona militis, c. 1.
Primus imp^tus eis major quam virorum est, s^quens minor quam seminaru^. L.
Florus l. 2. cap. 4.
And therefore we may not lean on carnal wisdom or self-confidence for
performance of any duty, as being wholly in our selves without strength. Novi
ego istos in pace leones, in praelio Cervos, said Tertullian, a man may be more
then a man before the battle, Fortissimus in ipso discrimine exercitus est, qui
ante discrimen quietissimus. Tac. Hist. l. 1.
and less then a woman in it, as Peter was; None sooner fall then they that
fight in their own strength, Numb. 14. 44.

2. We must not murmr against the Lord, nor complain of austerity in him, as
if he called us to harder conditions then we can bear; this was Jobs error,
when he complained that God dealt with him, as if he had been made of stones or
brass, Job 6. 12. We are too apt to esteem our trials singular, our
difficulties unparalled, and so to chide with our condition, and therein with
God, when many times it is not the difficulty of the service, but the
impa^ience of the heart which so makes it. We pervert our ways, and then we
fret against God, Prove. 19. 3. A meek and humble spirit will make things easy,
which we think intolerable. Take David in a passion, when Nabal refused to send
him and his men provision, and compare him with David humbled under the hand of
God, when Absalom rebelled, and Shimei cursed him, and then judge how easy an
hard duty is to a prepared heart, and how hard an easy thing is to a froward
heart.

3. We may not betake our selves to carnal shifts for avoiding any danger,
which assaults us in doing duty. If the Lord set us on work, he is able without
our sin to deliver us. Gods alsufficiency is an invincible argument to
sincerity, Genesis 17. 1. Why should I make my self beholding to a sinful shift,
when I have an alsufficient God? There were some Christians in the Apostles
time, who out of confidence in their own knowledge and strength to stand, would
venture to eat meat at the Idols table, thereby keeping in with their
Idolatrous friends for fear of persecution. To these the Apostle gives, 1. A
sharp Exhortation, to take heed of falling when they think they stand, 1 Cor.
10. 12. 2. An answer to their fears, that God will not suffer them to be
tempted beyond the strength which he will supply them withal, verse 13.

4. We may not therefore shrink from duty upon any discouragement, but follow
the call of God, and be upright before him. When it is our duty to obey, it is
his promise to protect. Say not with Solomon's sluggard, There is a Lion in the
way, Prove. 22. 13. but remember there are Angels with us to bear us in our way,
Psalm. 91. 11. Jonah was afraid to go to Niniveh, a great, and a wicked City,
one man to threaten so many thousands with speedy destruction, it was the next
way to be swallowed up, and destroyed himself. He thinks there was no means to
fly this danger but by declining duty. And now he that feared the raging of
the people, met with the tempest of the sea, he that feared to be swallowed up
of danger, was swallowed up of present death into the belly of the Whale, and
the Lord, by delivering him from that death, taught him to trust on his power,
who could as well have delivered him from any other.

The Lord has called you, Right Honorable, unto arduous and weighty services;
A very difficult work it is to cure complicated diseases, to extricate and
unravel the entangled interests of divided minds, to allay animosities, to
calm jealousies, to moderate rigours of judgment, to close distant opinions,
to separate the gold from the dross, the precious truths and worship of God
from those many prodigies of error and madness, which had so long assaulted
it, to settle the house of God, and the hearts of men, upon firm foundations
of truth, peace and righteousness, to join together the sticks of Ephraim and
Judah, and to make whole the broken staves of beauty and bands. If you shall
now say as David did, make thy way strait before our face; as Iehosaphat did,
we know not what to do, but our eyes are upon thee; as Paul did, Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Thou have done great things for us, whereof we are
glad, thou has delivered our eyes from tears, our ^ee from falling; what is
it that we now shall render to the Lord for all his benefits? truly Lord we are
thy servants, and would willingly act in our places for thy name, and for the
Interests of thy Christ and of his Church, we have no higher design then this,
That the God, who has wrought wonders for us, may be alone magnified and
advanced by us, in Orthodox doctrine, in pure Ordinances, in spiritual worship,
in united affections, that no unnecessary thing may remain, as a ground of
offense, and fomes of division and separation, but that all healing and closing
counsels may be used to make us all of one heart and of one soul: If you thus
in singleness and uprightness of heart do bespeak the Lord, I can confidently
say from him to you, that he will be with you, and uphold you, that his Spirit
will level all mountains before you, and break in pieces any gates of brass,
and cut in sunder any bars of iron which stand in your way; the service he
requires of you, he will work for you, he will not only command you by his
Authority, but assist you by his Grace. When our interests and Gods are folded
up together, when we make his Will our will, and his End our end, we are sure
never to fail in our designs, because he can never miscarry in his.

We have seen how the Lord encourages his servants against all difficulties
which might dismay them in his service. Now the means by which he does it, is
by a Word, This is the Word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel.

Nothing can so effectually uphold the spirits of men above difficulties and
discouragements which they meet with in the duties whereunto they are called,
as a seasonable word spoken unto them from God. The Word of the Lord to
Zerubbabel, is confirmation enough against all the oppositions of most potent
adversaries. So it was to Josua, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee, etc.
Jos. 1. 5, 8. So to Asa, when he heard the words of the Prophet, he took
courage, 2 Chronicles. 15. 8. The righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1. And
their confidence is founded on a word. Psalm. 119. 49.
And well it may, if we consider,

1. The Truth of it, confirmed by signs and wonders, and by the solemn Oath
of God. Now it is impossible for God to lie, every word of his is founded on
his own immutable being; and these are grounds of strong consolation, Heb. 6.
17, 18.

2. The Authority of it, which is sufficient to animate any man unto obedience.
A man that has an ample commission from a supreme power, acts with courage,
as knowing the power he has to back him. No commission so full of power as
that which God gives. This made Moses and Aaron venture on Pharaoh and all his
Sorcerers. Amos an herdsman upon the Court of Jeroboam a King. Peter and John
illiterate men, to speak boldly, notwithstanding the inhibition of the chief
Priest and his Council, Acts 4. 19, 20. Acts 5. 29.

3. The Efficacy of it. Nothing more operative then the Word of God. It was a
Word only which made the world. He said, let there be light, and there was
light; By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them
by the breath of his mouth, Psalm 33. 6. (...), Eusebius. calls it. And it is a
word only which upholds the world, Heb. 1. 3. and the word is able still to
give being to every promise, and subsistence to every purpose of of his toward
his people, It is a commanding, and a creating word, Psalm. 44. 4. Isa. 57. 19.
Gods purposes and promises are ever seconded by his power. He will not leave,
till he have done what he has spoken, Genesis 28. 15. I have spoken, I will bring
it to pass, I have purposed, I will do it, Isa. 46. 11.

The Lord has ordered all duty to have some difficulty in it. And the same
word which is the Rule of the duty, is also the comfort against the difficulty.
We have therein the comfort of his Authority requiring it of us. It is the work
which he has given us to do, we have not rushed upon it presumptuously our
selves. We have the comfort of his promises quickening us unto it; for every
word of command has a word of promise with it, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Heb. 10. 36. We
have the comfort of his grace working together with the Word, facilitating the
duties required, and proportioning the soul to the service, giving an heart to
do the word, Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. And therefore by faith and hope we may improve
every word unto comfort and courage in duty. Faith giving a kind of Being unto
the things promised, Heb. 11. 1. and hope waiting with joy for the
accomplishment of them, do powerfully work the heart above difficulties unto
cheerful obedience; Faith quenches temptation, overcomes the world, purifieth
the heart, works by love* removes fear, the discourager and obstructer of
duty, 1 John 4. 18. Hope causes us to purify our selves, 1 John 3. 3. To
serve the Lord instantly day and night, Acts 26. 7. To deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. To wait on the Lord, and to keep his Way,
Psalm. 37. 34. To renew our strength, to run and not be weary, to walk and not
faint, Isa. 40. 31.

When the soul of a man is in such straights and perplexities, that all the
world is not able to comfort him, one sentence out of the word wisely managed
by the hand of faith, is able to bear up the heart, and to make it victorious,
above all the powers of darkness. Wit, wealth, power, policy, youth, strength,
security, sensuality, worldly employments, will peradventure serve a while to
fence against fear and discouragement; but these are but like a bush in a
storm, which shelters a while, and after annoys with its own dropping. Nothing
will minister durable and final comfort against all doubts and fears, but a
word from God seasonably brought unto the conscience, this alone can hold up
the heart against the roarings of Satan, and all the powers of darkness. You
may happily have before you many knotty and difficult debates, and be at a stand
which way to steer your judgment, and to dispose your suffrage; men may, like
Carneades, dispute plausibly and probably on either side, and the substantial
merits of a question may lie hidden under the Oratory which has pro and con
been spent upon upon it. In such cases attend not only to what you have heard
spoken, but with David, make the word of God your Counselors, Psalm. 119. 24.
Let not frowns dismay you, let not interests biass you, let not paralogismes
dazzle you, but seriously weigh what is most consonant to the Will of God, what
is most likely to promote the great Ends which that calls for, the Glory of
God, the Salvation of men, the Cause of Religion, the Simplicity of the Gospel,
the Spirituality of worship, the peace, unity and integrity of the Church, the
healing and setting in joint the dislocated and divided affections of men, the
impartial settling of judgment and righteousness in the Land. And when you
hear a word behind you, saying, this is the way, then walk in it, turn not to
the right hand or to the left, Isa. 30. 21.

We have seen how the Lord encourages his servants in difficulties, and by
what means he does it, by the Word of his own mouth, now this word is brought
by the Prophet to Zerubbabel, and by the Angel, (1.) By Christ unto the
Prophet; The Angel in the former Chapter spoke immediately to Joshua, here
mediately by the Prophet Zachariah unto Zerubbabel. 1. The first Revealer of
the counsel of God unto the Church is the Angel of the Covenant; It was his
Spirit which spoke in the Prophet, 1 Pet. 1. 11. He by his Spirit preached in
the days of Noah, to the spirits which are now in prison, Defensio fidei
Trident. l. 2.
1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. for so Andradius a learned Pontifician, as well as Beza and
other Protestants have expounded that place. No man has seen the Father but by
the revelation of the Son, Joh. 1. 18. Mat. 11. 27. He was the Angel that
spoke unto Moses, Act. 7. 30. 38. and unto Isaiah, John 12. 40, 41. He
instructed his Apostles in things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Acts 1. 3.
They must deliver nothing to the Church, but what they had first received from
him, 1 Cor. 11. 23.

Greatly do the profane the Ministry of the Word, and betray the Trust which
Christ has put upon them as his Ambassadors, who preach the vision of their
own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord; and a woeful curse they incur
by so high a presumption, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. The less there is of Christ in a
Sermon, and of the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, how full soever it
may otherwise be of Exotic learning, of heaped allegations, of strains of wit,
or luxuriancies of fancy and language, it has so much the less of the power
of God to the salvation of the souls of men. For we are not to preach our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, 2 Cor. 4. 5. And as they are the best
Ministers, who so preach, so they are the best hearers, who savor and relish
nothing so well in a Sermon, as the gracious and powerful manifestations of
Christ to the conscience, and evidences of the commission which the preacher
has received from him.

2. When the Prophet brings no other then the Word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel,
It is his duty to hear it, Princes and Magistrates, men of highest place and
authority, must receive Gods counsel from the mouth of his Messengers, and be
contented to be directed, comforted, encouraged by their Ministry. David,
though himself a Prophet, was not without his Seers, Gad, Heman, Asaph,
Jeduthan, Nathan to admonish, reprove, comfort him as his condition required.
So we find Shemaiah a Prophet sent to reprove Rehoboam, Oded and Azariab to
encourge Asa, Jehu and Jahaziel to threaten and comfort Jehoshaphat. We read of
the writing of Eliah to Jehoram, of the threatening of Zachariah to Joash, of
the Prophet Isaiah counselling and rebuking Ahaz, comforting and encouraging
Hezezekiah, Jeremy and Ezekiel denouncing judgments against Zedekiah; Hosea
and Amos, against Jeroboam; Jonah sent to the King of Nineveh, and John Baptist
to Herod. And though great difference is to be used in the manner of our
application to great and to ordinary persons, yet the same fidelity is due unto
all. Cum eadem omnibus debeatur Charitas, non eadem omnibus adhibenda medicina,
as Saint Austin speaks. If a Minister must show all meekness to all men, much
more must he deliver his message with all Reverence and humility, with all awe
and tenderness, with all honor and prudence, unto those great persons, whose
dignities do as well call for our veneration, as their consciences for our
fidelity, we must be so true to their souls, as that we be not rude and uncivil
to their persons. Meek and humble preaching, in this case especially, is like a
fall of snow, (...), Iliad. (...).
unto which Homer compares the eloquence of Ulysses, which soaks and sinks more
kindly then a hasty shower.

And the Lord does hereby greatly commend the power of his Word, and the secret
impresse and Character of his divine Majesty stamped upon it, when from the
mouth of mean Instruments, he gives it an Efficacy on the hearts of the
greatest men, and causes Princes themselves with meekness to receive his
counsel from the lips of poor and inconsiderable persons, who have no other
authority then the evidence of the Spirit of God, and the Ministry wherein they
stand related unto him, to bear them up, and encourage them in his service.
Thus great ships are turned about with a vere small helm, Plin. Hist. Not. l,
32. c. 1.
and as some say stopped in their course with a very little Remora. We have
this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the power might be of God, who did not
choose the earthquake, or the strong wind, but the still small voice to
manifest his presence by, 1 Reg. 19. 11, 12.

We have seen the encouragement in building Gods House, the means of it, a
Divine Word, the Vehicula of that word, Christ the great Angel of the Covenant
delivers it to the Prophet, and the Prophet as his messenger to Zerubbabel. So
then Zerubbabel is the subject animated by this word, and the work whereunto he
is animated, is the Building of the Temple.

1. Then Princes and Magistrates are to build the House of God, and to take
care of the Interests of Religion, and to see that his truth and worship be
advanced in their territories. And although we have no examples hereof in the
New Testament, when the Empire and the Church were divided from one another,
yet in the state of the Jews where they were conjoined together, we have
examples in most of the good Kings, David, Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,
Josiah, how careful they were to purge Gods house of pollution, to abolish
false worship, to pull down high places, to send Priests and Levites to teach
the people, to establish true Religion, to cause the people to enter into
Covenant with God, to build his House, and order the courses and services
thereof. And in like manner the Christian Princes, Constantine, Thoedosius,
Valentinian, and many others called Synods, and made Laws to condemn and
suppress Heretical Doctrines, and comforted and encouraged the Orthodox
Bishops and Pastors of the Church.

1. They are fathers of the people, and therefore must take care of the souls
of those to whom they have so near a Relation.

2. They are Gods Ministers for our Good, Romans 13. 4. Therefore certainly they
must not be careless of our chief good.

3. We are to pray for them, that under them we may lead quiet and peaceable
lives in all godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2. 2. therefore certainly there
lies a care upon them, as well of the godliness, as of the peace of their
people.

4. He is to have the book of the Law before him continually, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19.
not only that he may keep it himself, but that he may be careful to make others
keep it.

5. He is to be a nursing Father to the Church, Isa. 49. 23. Gods people are
promised that they shall suck the breasts of Kings, Isa. 60. 16. Therefore
certainly it belongs to their care to see that the people be provided with the
sincere milk of the Word, Where Religion and the means thereof are wanting, to
set it up, where it is, to preserve it, where it is corrupted, to reform and
to restore it. It is one thing says Saint Austin for a Prince to serve God in
his private capacity as a man, Aug. ep. 50.
this he does by living faithfully: another thing to serve him in his public
capacity, as a Prince, this he does by a vigorous sanction of Laws, requiring
righteous things and forbidding the contrary.

There is a twofold building of the Church: The one doctrinal and persuasive by
the Ministry of Pastors, and preaching of the Word. The other legal and
coercive by the sanction, and constitution, and command of Princes; for so they
are said to build up the Churches walls, Isa 60. 10. for the safety of the
State being greatly concerned in the welfare and peace of the Church, the care
of this must needs belong unto them whose office and duty it is to preserve the
other, since without this the other cannot be preserved. Aristot. Polit. lib.
7. c. 8.
And therefore Aristotle an Heathen Philosopher reckons divine worship as a
principal thing, without which a City or Civil Polity cannot be.

And thus we find Constantine by his Laws prohibiting Heathen sacrifices and
idolatry. Theodoret. l. 5. cap. 20. Niceph. l. 12. c. 25.
And when Julian restored them, and Valens allowed the liberty of them, Eusebius.
de vit.
Jovinian and Theodosius did root them out, Constant. l. 2.
and remove them again. Aug. epist. 166.
We find the same Constantine settling Christian Religion in his Empire by his
royal authority, Sozom. l. 2. c. 27
judging in the causes of Athanasius and Caecilianus; Theod. l. 7. c. 2.
The Emperor Gratian granting a commission to eject Arians: Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.
Aurelian casting out Paulus Samosatenus out of the Church, Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 1
-- 11.
Justinian making special Laws in matters of Religion. I conclude this with
that memorable saying of Saint Austin, Aug. contr. Crescon. Grammat. l. 3. c.
51.
In hoc Reges Deo serviunt in quantum Reges, si in suo Regno bona jubeant, mala
prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad Humanam societatem, verum etiam quae ad
divinam Religionem. That Princes then serve God as Princes, when they command
good things and forbid evil things, not only appertaing unto humane society,
but also unto divine Religion.

The Church of God amongst us has in our late miserable and licentious
confusions suffered great dilapidations in the holy truths, and in the unity
and peace thereof; I shall not pollute the solemnity of this days joy, with
giving you in (which is hardly possible) a Catalogue of them. Unto you, Right
Honorable, and the other orders of the Kingdom, it belongs to be the
repairers of our breaches, and the restorers of paths to dwell in. Do this as
it ought to be done, and certainly there will be nothing more conducent to the
settling of our tranquillity, to the establishing of Government, to the
re-uniting of the shattered and divided hearts of the people, and to the
edification of the Church, which it infinitely more concerns all wise and
good men to look after, then any single, domestical or separated interest. Nor
are you without direction in the Text for this weighty employment. For,

2. Zerubbabel must not be without the Word of the Lord. In the building of
Gods House Magistrates must wait upon the mouth of God for direction and
counsel. It is no less then eight times observed in one chapter, Exodus 40.
that in the setting up of the Tabernacle and worship of God, Moses did every
thing as the Lord commanded Moses; for so he had received his instructions,
Exodus 25. 9. And in like manner David gave unto Solomon his son the pattern of
all that he had by the spirit, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 12. So runs the Apostles
commission from Christ, teaching them to observe al things whatsoever I have
commanded you, Tertul. de Praescript. cap. 6.
Mat. 28. 20. Non ex Arbitrio Deo serviendum sed ex Imperio, says Tertullian.
Vid. Brisson de formulis. l. 1. p. 12.
Even Heathens would have their superstitious services done by rule, Semper
Agatne Rogat, nec nisi jussus agit. If men, A. Gel. l. 1. c. 13
who may err and mistake in their commands, are offended with such as disobey
them, though thereby they do them better service, judging it a corrupting and
despising of commands, when they be not obeyed, Pereunte obsequio etiam
imperium intercidit. Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
though they be mended: How much more must the most wise God be offended with
us, when we do his work not according unto his will, but our own, thereby
presuming to see what is meet and convenient better then God himself, thereby
taking upon us to be controlers of his wisdom, Hooker l. 2. sect. 6.
as learned Hooker speaks. Lib. 6. c. 6.
It was a very pious proposal which Sigismond the Emperor made to the Council
of Trent, as we read in the learned review of that Counsel, That they would
conform their constitutions to the obligation of the Law of God. Certainly the
more Religion and the Church of God is settled by the Rule of the Word, the
less matter of mere dispute and discrimination is admitted, the less of
divided ends, and mere humane interest, and partial design is attended, the
more men seek the Glory of God, the Salvation of men, the Peace of the Church,
the more they do in simplicity and godly sincerity consider what is
intrinsecally, and in natura rei, necessary, what hic and nunc, expedient for
edification, what course will be most healing, most uniting, most likely to
establish truth, peace, and holiness in the Church, to close up the divided
minds of men, and cement them in that wherein they may all agree, or draw as
near as may be to an agreement; the more certainly will God be pleased and
honored, and the more will the Churches of God abroad be joyed and comforted,
with whom it is doubtless our Religious Interest, to procure as firm an union
as we can.

We have seen the encouragement, the means of it, a Word, the Vehicula of that
word Christ and the Prophet, the subject to be encouraged, Zerubbabel, the
Magistrate, who is to build the Church by the help of the Word and Prophet.
There only remains the matter of the comfort, set forth, 1. Negatively, Not
by Might, nor by Power. 2. Positively, But by my Spirit, says the Lord.

Might and Power is here denied, not generally and in Thesi, as if God did
prohibit humane power from looking after the interest of the Church, for the
Magistrate is the Churches Guardian. The same Lord did by the victories and
spoils of David make provisions for Solomon's Temple, who would use no such
helps for the glory of Zerubbabels. But it is excluded Hypothetically in this
particular case and condition. Though they had potent enemies, though they were
destitute of Might and Power in themselves, yet God will not have them desert
their station, or despond of success, Because 1. He can blast every Sword that
is formed against them, Isa. 54. 17. 2. He can convert to the good of the
Church that very power which does oppose it, and make Hamans tongue the
Petitioner for Mordecai's honor, Esther 6. 6, 7. 3. He can build the Church
upon the sufferings of his servants, as seed in the ground first dles and then
multiplies, the more the adversaries of Paul, the wider the door of his
Ministry, 1 Cor. 16. 9. It matters not how weak the Instrument, when God is the
Agent.

The Church and worship of God is reared and restored by the virtue of Gods
Spirit alone. In the present case, the Lord by his immediate providence ordered
various intercurrent means unto the finishing of the Temple, which of
themselves had no natural influence or tendency thereunto. It was the spirit of
the Lord, that by the Ministry of Moses and Aaron, brought Israel out of an
Egyptian bondage. It was the Spirit of the Lord that in the wilderness
preserved them by miracles, with bread from heaven, and water out of the rock.
It was the Spirit of the Lord that overruled the heart and tongue of Balaam to
bless, when he was hired to curse them. It was the Spirit of the Lord that
divided the waters of Jordan, and demolished the wall of Jerico by the sound of
Rams-horns. It was the Spirit of the Lord that stirred up Saviors for his
oppressed people, and by them wrought deliverance for them. It was the Spirit
of the Lord that brought the Ark from the Philistines into its place, by the
conduct of kine contrary to their nature. It was the Spirit of the Lord that
rescued the Jews from the malice of Haman, by a chain of events, which had no
cognation one with another, nor any natural suitableness to such an end: It was
the Spirit of the Lord, that when they were as fast in Babylon as dry bones in
a grave, stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus to give them a resurrection.

This divine power may be observed both in the Head, and in the mystical body
of the Church. For Christ the Head, 1. His Incarnation spiritual, A stone cut
without hands, a Tabernacle pitched by the Lord, and not by man, fashioned in
the Virgins womb, by the overshadowing of the holy Ghost. 2. His Oeconomie in
the work of Redemption wholly spiritual, borrowing nothing of humane power, by
the eternal spirit he offered himself to God, Heb. 9. 14. 3. His Resurrection
spiritual, made the chief cornerstone after he had been rejected by men. Thus
the foundation of the building was laid not by Might nor by Power, but by the
Spirit of God, Psalm. 118. 22, 23.

2. The Church or Mystical Body of Christ has nothing either in its original
or propagation from the power of man, but all from the Spirit of God.

1. The original alone heavenly and from the Spirit, born not of the will of
man, but of God, John 1. 13. 3. 5, 6. A Kingdom not of this world, Joh. 18. 36.
Made by an heavenly Calling, Heb. 3. 1. As dew which does not stay for man,
Psalm. 110. 3. Mic. 5. 7.

2. The propagation wholly from the Spirit, when mountains of opposition and
persecution, the gates of Hell and powers of darkness combined against it. Now
for a doctrine which taught men to deny themselves, to renounce the world, to
take up a Cross, to suffer Afflictions, and follow Christ without the camp,
bearing his reproach, for such a doctrine to prevail over the world by twelve
weak and naked men, upon the promise of things not seen, and the hopes of
reward in another world, cannot be ascribed to the wisdom of man, but only to
the Spirit of God, by whom alone the weapons of our warfare are mighty.

It is a spiritual Building, and therefore not reared by humane power, a
Kingdom un-attended with worldly splendour, and therefore comes not with
observation, Luke 17. 20. The Enemies of it for the most part spiritual, and
therefore not vanquished but by a spiritual power, Ephesians. 6. 12. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5.
No humane power able to encounter, no humane wisdom to disappoint the gates of
Hell. None but he who is the power and wisdom of God, has power enough to
overcome, or wisdom enough to defeat the Kingdom of darkness. The special end
which God had in erecting the Church, was, to glorify his power, wisdom and
grace in the nothingnesse of the matter, out of which he framed it. The visible
world, as it does by the beauty, order, and greatness thereof set forth the
glory of God, so in nothing more then this, that all this great being is made
out of nothing. Now Gods glory is more magnified in the Church then in the
world. The Church is the Jewel, the world but the Ring wherein it is set. The
World, an House or Farm for Creatures and Tenants to dwell in. The Church,
Gods own Palace, wherein he dwells himself, Psalm. 132. 13. And the Excellency
of this glory, is, That it is a Creation out of nothing, no material aptness,
no Active concurrence of the subject unto the heavenly being, which by Gods
spirit alone is wrought in it. We contribute no more to our own conversion of,
or, from our selves, then water does to its own heating, which naturally
resists the fire that heats it. We have no good in us either formally or
potentially, so as to be educed out of us, all is to be superinduced, by the
Spirit of God upon us. No flesh must glory but in free Grace, which alone could
raise a corrupted mass into so stately a Palace.

And therefore we must not despair when things seem to Humane view helpless
and hopeless, but look up to the Spirit of God, who can beyond all our thoughts
make those that dwell in the dust, to awake and sing; Whereas if we build our
hopes on humane might or power, we shall find them vain, every man a liar,
sometimes weak and cannot help us, sometimes false and will not help us,
always mutable, and may not help us. The more we attribute to Persons, the
more we derogate from God. Let us not therefore be troubled at mountains of
opposition, or any difficulties which we conflict with in the work of God. It
is his promise to bring all Christ's Enemies under his feet. Let us believe it,
and he will do it, though we see not how.

And now to conclude and bring all home to the mercies of this day. There is no
Nation has had more experience of the truth of these words, then we in this
Land have had. When the Lord had commanded the sword of a civil war back into
the scabberd, and things seemed to draw toward a comfortable close by the
Kings gracious concessions in the last Treaty, divine providence was pleased to
carry us back into doleful confusions, into the surges of the Sea again, by the
subtle counsels of a divided party, who having possession of the sword, and
intending to use it to the altering of the fundamental constitution of
government, in order thereunto, debarred the Peers of their right, plucked out
all such worthy persons from the other House, who would (...) their work, laid
the foundation of their Utopia in the Blood of their natural Prince, and in the
Exile of his children and family, and concluded by Might and Power to carry all
before them. And now comes in the Spirit of the Lord to stop this career of
domination. And first he stirred up an Abimelech against these men of Shechem,
who liked not that threescore and ten Persons should reign, but rather to
reign himself. By this hand a stop was put to their domination, till by the
strange conduct of the same providence his family was pulled down by the hands
of his own Allies. And so the threescore and ten get into the Throne again;
These confusions in State seconded with desperate confusion in Religion;
Ministry and Universities, and all supports of truth* and learning endangered,
and by a miscellany of all Religions, way made unto none at all. The Spirit of
the Lord then works again, mingleth a perverse spirit between them and their
military Officers, and divides their Counsels, and makes use of another
violence to thrust them out again. The same divine providence awakeneth an
Honorable instrument in the North, to give a check to this new design. And on
a sudden by the secret power of the Spirit of God, the military Officers, who
had so long been the terror of the Nation, became, no man can tell why, like
women, their hearts dismayed, their Counsels confounded, their Soldiers
scattered, and by that divine providence, whereby they had so often justified
their irregular actions, were they, in one day, without Might or Power, but
merely by impressions from the hand of God, as it were annihilated, and made
utterly to disappear. By the same divine impression are the hearts of the
people of the land in all places strangely excited as one man, to call for the
Restoring of the secluded Patriots, by them to make way for a free Parliament,
and by them to bring back from exile in the Chariots of Aminadab, a willing
people, and upon the wings of Love, our Dear and Dread Sovereign, not only to
the Throne of his Father, but to the hearts of his people. They who had long
known what it was to fear where they did not love, were now ambitious to love
where they need not so to fear.

And now that the Lord has brought these Kingdoms upon the Basis of their
ancient and fundamental constitution, and has restored into your bosoms, a
Prince of the greatest suavity and meekness of Spirit (one of the best tempers
in the world for Government) that ever swayed these Scepters, whom he has
trained up like David, in a School of affliction to sit upon a Throne, and
fitted by a Crown of Thrones to wear a Royal Diadem, and by the bitter cup of
his own sufferings, to provide against the sufferings, and to heal the wounds
of his poor exhausted people: what remains but these two things?

1. To fill our hearts and mouths with the praises of God for these so divinely
contrived mercies, without the effusion of one drop of blood, beyond the view
of humane counsel to have effected; to ascribe all to the Spirit and Grace of
God, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory? To bless him
for this first fundamental step to settlement, without which we should ever
have been in danger of flames and blood. To bless the Lord for inclining the
heart of his Majesty to dedicate his Government with so Religious a public
Testimony against profaneness, then which there is nothing which does more
loudly call upon you to second the zeal of his Majesty in. To bless the Lord
for that Christian meekness of his Majesty, in anticipating and preventing the
very Petitions of his people for pardon, and hastening the means of their
security therein. To bless the Lord for his Majesty's firmness in, and zealous
care of the Protestant Religion, and withstanding all temptations which would
have drawn him from it. To bless the Lord for his tender indulgence toward
men of sober, peaceable, and pious affections, who cannot in every thing come
up to the judgment or practice of other of their brethren. To bless the Lord
for his Christian prudence, and healing moderation, in endeavoring such a
fraternal condescension amongst brethen, as may bury all past animosities,
prevent all further distempers, and reduce things unto an equal and amicable
temperament.

2. To consider how to use these mercies unto the glory of God that gave them,
and to the good of the whole Body, and not the particular divided interest of
any one Party alone. It is a distinct virtue, as the Historian tells us, to get
Victories and to use them. And so likewise it is to receive mercies and to
improve them.

Consider I beseech you what it is which the Lord calls for at your hands in
such a time as this. Whether after such Earthquakes and concussions, such
Afflictions and Temptations, such little less then miraculous vicissitudes of
divine providence which we have seen, after the effusion of so many thousand
men's blood, after the expense of so many millions of Treasure, whether he does
not justly expect, that now you should be more zealous for his Glory, more
tender of his Church, and the souls of men therein, more severe against all
impiety and profanenss, more careful of the power of godliness, and the
powerful preachers and preaching thereof, and purity of Divine Ordinances; more
active and solicitous to close up breaches, to remove offenses, and by the most
satisfactory provisions that may be to prevent the danger of any further
distempers, then ever any Parliaments have done before you. That it may be
recorded amongst the memorials of this Nation, as once of Josiah, like unto
this King and this Parliament (who have been so obiged with such a Series of
mercies and of wonders) that there was no King nor Parliament before them, that
turned to the Lord with all their heart, and with all their soul, and with all
their might, according to all the Law of God. This shall be written for the
generation to come, and the people that shall be created shall praise the Lord.

FINIS.

