THE LORDS PROPERTY IN HIS REDEEMED PEOPLE OPENED IN A SERMON AT ST. Paul's
Church, London, October. 28.

BY EDWARD REYNOLDS, D. D. and Chaplain in ordinary to the Kings Majesty.

Printed by the Order of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

ALLEYNE MAYOR.
Die dominica in festo Simonis and Judae Apostol. 1660. Annoque Regni Regis
Caroli secund. Angliae, etc. duodecimo.
It is Ordered that Dr. Reynolds be desired from this Court to print the Sermon
he preached this day at Paul's.

To the Right Honorable Sir RICHARD BROWN Lord Mayor of the City of London;
Sir THOMAS ALLEYN the last Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
BEing desired by the Order of your Court to print this Sermon preached on the
last day of the then Lord Mayor, and the first of the present, I shall humbly
crave leave to mind both those honorable Persons, and all others, of the
signal providence of God to them and us this last year. How graciously the Lord
has carried the last Lord Mayor through the storms and difficulties of a most
troublesome government, bearing him up by a spirit of prudence and calmnesse,
above potent frowns, and popular passions, till at last his year was honored
with the most glorious spectacle that this City has seen for many and many
ages, in the happy return of our dread Sovereign unto his royal Throne, our
eyes have been abundantly witnesses of. From how many afflictions and dangers
your present Lordship has been wonderfully delivered, the Lord providing
shelters and chambers to hide you in, from the jealous eyes, and iron arms of
those who were then in power, reserving you unto, and recompencing you with
this present honor, you cannot but with thankful adoration of divine
providence be most sensible of, and affected with. What terrible things the
Lord has done for these three Kingdoms, things which we looked not for, in
breaking Governments, infatuating Counsels, melting Armies, levelling
Mountains, and preparing a way for his sacred Majesty through the hearts of his
people to the possession of of his Throne, is so eminently known to all
Nations, as if it were registered with a beam of the Sun, and proclaimed by an
Angelical Herald. What use both you, and all of us should make of these
wonderful workings of divine providence, I cannot give you in better words then
in those of Samuel unto Israel, 1 Samuel 12. 24. Only fear the Lord and serve
him in truth with all your heart, for consider how great things he has done
for you. If unto such a wise and holy improvement of mercies this present
Sermon may be of use unto you (wherein is set forth how Ransomed persons are
not their own, and therefore not to seek or serve themselves, and how much they
are engaged to live to the Glory and service of him that delivered them) I
shall have abundantly the fruit of my labors, and I hope therewith the benefit
of your prayers, who am

From my Study Nov. 20. 1660. Your Honors most humbly devoted ED. REYNOLDS.

AT PAVLS-CHVRCH, October. 28. 1660.
1 COR. 6. 19, 20. -- Ye are not your own. For ye are bought with a price;
therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.


SUch is the desperate corruption of man's heart, that those very blessings of
God which should oblige unto his service, do usually alienate and estrang the
same from Him, so that the very Table of wicked men is a snare, and the things
which are for their good, do become unto them an occasion of falling, Psalm 69.
22. They no sooner wax fat, but they kick, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Their wealth becomes
the fuel of their lust, and their prosperity, the mother of their luxury and
intemperance. When they are filled with their pastures, they forget God H^s.
13. 6. When the Lord feeds them to the full, they commit adultery, and assemble
themselves by troops in the harlots houses, Jer. 5. 7. Thus it fared with the
people to whom our Apostle writes in this Epistle. Corinth was a rich City in
Peloponesus, between the Ionian and the Aegean sea, the Head of Achaia, one of
the principal Emporia, or Mart Towns of Greece, celebrated by Homer. Iliad.
lib. 2. Strabo. lib. 8. Cicero Orat. pro. L. Manil L. Florus lib. 2. c. 16
Homer, Strabo, Cicero, Florus: for the great wealth thereof. And as it was
famous for Riches, so was it as infamous for those sins which plenty and
prosperity use to produce, especially the sin of uncleanness and
fornication, insomuch that (...) was an expression amongst the Greeks for
Scortation: and they were wont, Eustath^us in Homer. Iliad. p. 290.
as Athenaeus tells us, Athen. lib. 13.
when they prayed for success in their undertakings, Ambros. de Abra. l. b. 2.
c. 11.
to vow, that they would bring Whores into the City, as if it had been an
honor and service unto it. Grot. in Act. 15 20. and Lo^in. ibid.
And learned men are of opinion, that the Apostles in their Council at:
Jerusalem did by letters, forbid unto the Gentiles Fornication, Acts 15. 20.
because amongst them it was judged a free and lawful thing to make use of
mercenary harlots, who for gain did prostitute themselves unto the lusts of
men. How much this sin did prevail at Corinth, not only before their
embracing of Christianity, as ver. 11. but even after they had been taught by
the Apostle, and given entertainment unto the Gospel, as is evident by his
complaint, 2 Cor. 12. 21. So we may further gather from the special arguments
he furnishes them with in this Chapter against it.

1. That which alters the end and use for which the body was made, is not to be
allowed; but fornication makes a quite contrary use of the Body, then that for
which it was made, which was to be for the Lord, dedicated to those services
wherein he should employ it. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord,
and the Lord for the Body, ver. 13. The Body for the Lord to serve and honor
him; and the Lord forth Body, to sanctify and save it.

2. The body which is to be raised unto glory, and which we hope shall be mede
like unto Christ's glorious body, is not in the mean time to be conspurcated and
dishonored with so impure a pollution. But God has raised up the Lord, and
will us, v. 14.

3. The Members of Christ ought not to be made the members of an Harlot, in as
much as this is an high indignity unto Christ, that so pure and holy an Head,
should have so leaprous and filthy Members. But our Bodies by the inhabitation
of the Spirit of Christ in us, are his members, and therefore should not be
made one flesh with an Harlot, verse 15, 16, 17.

4. That which (...) this is more unnatural and atrocious then other sins, in
that other sins do not terminate themselves in the body, but go out unto other
objects, is not to be admitted. But fornication brings a peculiar dehonestation
and contumely upon the Body, therefore it is not to be admitted, v. 18.

5. Temples which are peculiarly consecrated unto God and to his service, ought
not to be defiled or profaned by any Sacrilegious pollutions, for Him that
defiles the Temple of the Lord, he will destroy. But our Bodies are Temples
for the holy Spirit to dwell in, therefore ought not to be converted into
stews, or Receptacles of impure lusts, v. 19.

6. They who are not their own, Duorum unius rei in solidum
nor in their own disposal, but belong to another Lord, Dominium esse non
potest. Dig. lib. 13 Tit. 6. leg. 5. Sect. 15.
are not to live after their own Will, or by their own lust, but according to
the Will, and the Ends, and Uses of their principal Lord. But we are not our
own, and therefore have not the power to live according to our own lusts, but
we are His that made us by his Power, redeemed us by his Love, dwells in us
by his Spirit, therefore Him we are to glorify by pure spirits, and chaste
bodies.

So the words of the Text are the last argument which the Apostle uses against
that great sin which did so abound in that rich and luxurious (...);
therefore Hierom, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Theophylact dismember them from the
words preceding.

Wherein are considerable three particulars. 1. A double proposition, the one
Negative, ye are not your own; the other Affirmative, ye are Gods. 2. The
Reason of both, ye are bought with a price. 3. The inference from both,
Therefore glorify God in your body and spirit.

The first proposition is negative, ye are not your own, therefore it is
against the Rule of common Right and public Justice (quae suum cuique tribuit)
to dispose of your selves according to your own counsel and pleasure, None of
us lives to himself, no man dies to himself, Romans 14. 17. We have neither
Being, nor well-Being, nor subserviencies unto either, of, or from our selves,
therefore none of it is to be disposed at our own Will. There are indeed vain
men that say, We are Lords, Jer. 2. 32. Our lips are our own, who is Lord over
us? Psalm. 12. 4. and thereupon resolve to walk after their own devices, Jer.
18. 12. and to do whatsoever* thing goes forth out of their own mouth, Jer.
44. 17. But as their claim of themselves is but an usurpation, so their living
to themselves is but a Sacrilege, whereof they must give a strict account.

A thing is said (...) be our Own Dominio pleno, when we have a Propriety in
it, and a Possession of it. Vid. Greg. T^ol. Syntagma. juris. lib. 1. cap. 12,
13
Propriety is two fold, Original, that of the supreme Lord; Derivative, as that
of the Copyholder, the Emphyteuta, the usufructuary, who has a right granted
to use, or to meliorate, but not to corrupt or abuse the Land or Tenement
conveyed unto him. Possession also is twofold, the one by way of Dominion, as
when a man holds that which is truly his own, or conceives bona fide to be
his own. The other by way of custody and trust, as a Guardian holds the
Estate of his pupil; a steward or servant, the goods of his Lord; a Depositary,
the goods of him who entrusts him with the keeping of them. This premised, we
say, 1. By Original propriety none can call either himself, or any other thing,
His own but only God, Exodus 3 14.
who alone is the Fountain of all Being, whose Name is, I am, who is of Himself
only, and all other Beings are by derivation and participation from Him; For of
him; and through him, Rom 11. 36.
and to him, are all things. And therefore he only being of Himself can work
only for Himself; and being the Author of all other Beings, may justly also
challenge to be the end of them; for He made all things for Himself, Proverbs
16. 4.

2. By Derivative propriety men have a Right under God unto many good things:
There is a double grant made by God of good things, one by way of general
indulgence, and so he has given the^ earth to the children of men, Psalm 115.
16. And divided to the Nations their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. Even Heathen and
wicked men have a Right by divine providence to their estates, as he gave unto
Jehu and his sons for four generations the Throne of Israel, 2 Reg. 10. 30. And
the land of Egypt to Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 29. 19. It is a dangerous opinion,
which tends to the dethroning of Princes, and concussion of States, to teach,
that Temporale dominium fundatur in gratia; and that wicked men are usurpers of
all which they enjoy; for the Lord makes His rain to fall on the just and
unjust, Mat. 5. 45. And commanded to give unto Caesar, an heathen King, the
things which were Caesar's, Mat. 22. 21. And though wicked men by the demerit of
their sins deserve to be deprived of good things, yet de fasto, the Lord does
indulge the use and fruition of them. Aquin. 22. ar. 12 qu 2. Opus. de Regimine
principis l. 1. c. 10. Bellarm de Pont. Romans l. 5. c. 6, 7, 8 Baron. Anno 496
Sect. 26, 27. An. 593 Sect 90. Anno 598 Sect 9 Anno 603 Sect 23 Anno 730 Sect 5
Suarez Advers Anglic Sectae errores lib 3 de Primat. Pontif cap 23
And therefore it is a wicked doctrine of those Pontificians, who teach, that
an Heretical Prince that is in their sense, one that casts off the yoke of
the Roman Religion, does thereupon forfeit his Temporalities into the hands of
the Pope, and so to make him in ordine ad spiritualia, to be the disposer of
Crowns and Kingdoms.

But this propriety men are to use under those restrictions and limitations
which the Lord in his Word has prcscribed, viz. in order unto his glory, 1
Cor. 10. 32. and in order to the good of our selves and others, else though
they have a lawful, they have not a pure and sanctified use of them.

Again, There is a divine grant by way of special grace and Covenant, and thus
the Lord has given unto his peculiar people both Himself and his Son, and his
Spirit, and all things, that belong unto life and godliness. He is not ashamed
to be called their God, Heb. 11. 16. and gives them leave accordingly to
avouch him for their God, Deuteronomy. 26. 17. and together with himself and his Son
has estated them in all other good things, Romans 8. 32. All the gifts,
endowments, graces natural or spiritual which he has bestowed upon any,
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, the most eminent of men, are given for them
and their comfort, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. They are all given to profit withal, 1
Cor. 12. 7. And for the perfecting of the Saints, Ephesians. 4. 12.

3. Again we have the Tenure and Possession of our life, our nature, our
faculties, our endowments, all the gifts and talents which are bestowed upon
us. But this is not a possession of Dominion, to dispose of these things at our
own pleasure, we may not rashly throw away our lives, or profanely lay our our
wit and learning, upon the service of Satan, or our own, or other men's lusts.
But it is only a possession of Custody and trust, in order to the glory of God,
and to the Edification, comfort and benefit of others: For all the gifts and
power which God gives, is to profit withal, and for edification, not for
destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8.

Sad then will be the account which they shall make, who by luxury and
intemperance, by challenges and duels, or by any other way of rashness and
wickedness, expose their lives unto danger of ruin: or on the other side, do
so pamper nature, and indulge to their sensual appetites, as propter vitam
vivendi perdere causas, and have their souls only for salt to keep alive their
bodies, and to serve for no other purpose. Who use the gifts of God against the
giver of them, and have their wisdom, power, wit, learning, wealth, interests,
only as a Panoply of Satan, Luke 11. 22. to fight his battles against God and
his Church, 2 Samuel 16 20 17 1
as Achitophel used his wisdom against David, Acts 24 1, 2
and Tertullus his Oratory against Paul, 1 Reg 13 4
and Jeroboam his power against the Prophet, and the Scribes and Pharisees
their learning against Christ, and Libanius, Lucian, Porphyry, Celsus, and
other proud Philosophers, their wits and pens against Christian Religion.

Here then offers it self a weighty and serious question to be resolved,
namely, when does a man act as if he were His own, and as if he had the
Original Propriety, and plenary possession and Dominion over Himself?

In the general I answer, when a man does exempt himself from all superior
jurisdiction, will be subordinate unto none, and from all brotherly Communion,
will be coordinate unto none, will neither live to the glory of God above him,
or the use and benefit of his brethren about him, will be, as it were alone,
Isa. 5. 8. And as if he had a kind of Deity and sufficiency within himself, as
Tyrus said, I am a God, I fit in the seat of God, and did set her heart as the
heart of God, Ezekiel. 28. 2. And as Nebuchadnezar said, Is not this Babylon the
great that I have built for the house of my kingdom, and for the honor of my
Majesty? Dan. 4. 30. And as Pharaoh, Who is the Lord that I should obey his
voice to let Israel go? Exodus 5. 2.

But more particularly we shall resolve this question in four propositions.

A man then acts and lives, as if he were His Own, and in his own disposal.

1. When he makes his own Reason his supreme Rule by which to work.

2. When he makes his Own Will His chief Law and Authority therein.

3. When he makes his own Interest His ultimate end in working.

4. When he makes His own performances the principal ground of all his hopes.

1. When a man makes his own Reason his supreme Rule, resolving as Joroboam
did, to follow what his own heart has de vised and contrived, 1 Reg. 12. 33.
Reason indeed is the candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. But what is a Candle to
the Sunbeam? unto which the Apostle compares the Gospel, Romans 10. 18. The
Lord will have no disputing or replying against Him, Romans 9. 20. But will have
humane Reason strike sail, and captivate it self to the Word of God.

For stating of this point, we are to distinguish between carnal Reason and
right Reason. Carnal reason, or Reason darkened and corrupted by the Original
pravity which cleaves unto it, is Enmity against God, and neither is, nor can
be subject unto him, Romans 8. 7. It is that which the Apostle calls (...),
Imaginations, High Things, Thoughts, Reasonings, 2 Cor. 10. 5. By the help
whereof it is that men do so argue and dispute in defense of those lusts, which
they are loath to part with, Vid. Aug. Confess l 5. c. 10. and de Civ. Dei. l.
14. c. 14.
or be convinced of: a notable example whereof we have in Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 15.
20. 21.

Right Reason may be considered, either with relation to the Law, or to the
Gospel. With relation to the Law so we acknowledge, that it being the remainder
of the Image of God in the mind of man, it is in things moral, though short of
the Word, yet consonant unto it. It is short of it, for the Apostle had never
known concupiscence to be sin, if the Law had not forbidden it* Romans 7. 7. And
if Reason in Morals, those we mean which were natural and concreated, had not
been dimmed and defaced, there would not have been any need in that respect, of
the publication of the Law, which was promulgated, that thereby we might know
sin, Romans 3. 10. Nay, after the Law was published, the Apostle till his
conversion had not the full knowledge of the spiritual nature and wideness of
it* as after he had, Romans 7. 9. Phil. 3. 6. The Law is perfect and spiritual,
Reason is not.

Yet withal it is consonant to the Word, and therefore the Apostle in some
cases appeals to nature, and bids us Judge within our selves, and tells us,
that they who have not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, 1 Cor. 11. 13, 14.
Romans 2. 14. And says of the sin of the incestuous person, that it was not so
much as named among the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 5. 1. There is a Eruptiones animae
doctrina naturae congen^tae and ing^nitae
natural (...), or habit of practical Principles, ingrafted notions of original
light which the mind does most readily assent unto. conscientiae tacita
commissa, etc. Tertul de Testim. Aiae. c 5 Primordialis l^x, matrix omnium
praeceptorum Dei. Idem advers. Judaeos, cap 2
Called Natural knowledge, Jude, v. 10. And the knowledge of God in the heathen
which makes them without excuse, Romans 1. 20.

With Relation to the Gospel, so we say, that the Mysteries of Christian
Religion, though they be not against Reason, are yet above Reason. They are not
Ang. de Genesis ad lit l 1. c. 19
against it: therefore our Savior proves the Resurrection by the Power of God.
And in like manner the Apostle, Mat. 22. 29. Acts 26. 8. Mat. 11 27
Yet they are Above it, for eye has not seen, Rom 16 25 (...). Justin. Mart.
de recta Confess.
nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Therefore
it is every where known by the name of a Mystery, and hidden Mystery, Ephesians. 3.
9. Col. 1. 26. A mystery which flesh and blood has not revealed, but the
Spirit of God, Mat. 16. 17. Evangelical Doctrines of faith are not
comprehended, nor virtually comprised in the seeds of natural reason, but made
known only by divine and supernatural revelation.

Lastly, Though Reason is not able to discover Evangelical Mysteries, yet the
Revelation of them being supposed, it is an excellent Instrument to make use
thereof, and to deduce such consequences from the Principles of the Gospel, as
have a natural and clear connection unto them: and therefore the Apostle calls
Evangelical Teaching, (...), and (...), and (...), A Demonstration, Conviction,
Manifestation of the Truth, 1 Cor. 2. 4. John 16. 8. 2 Cor. 4. 2. All which are
acts or ways of clear Ratiocination: Vid. Camero de verbo Dei c. 18
For as nature stands in need of grace to elevate the faculty, and give it a
spiritual perception of things which are above it, so Grace uses nature, and
the perspicacy and Acumen thereof, to make the more clear discoveries of those
Truths which are revealed.

We see the state of that habitude and degree wherein Reason stands with
relation to Law or Gospel; How the one is more perfect, and the other more
sublime, and wherein consists the sober and religious use of it. But when a
man will exalt his Reason into the Throne, and set up his own high
Imaginations, which should be brought into Captivity to the obedience of
Christ, above Law and Gospel, and suffer the wantonness of a luxuriant and
discursive fancy, Quid magis contra fidelem quam credere nolle quicquid non
possit ratione attingere?
to dispute away the love due to the one, the faith due to the other, and the
obedience due to both, when men will make their Reason the Judge of Gods own
Word, -- Laudatur Maria quod rationem ^ide praevenit, pu^^tur Zacharias quod
fidem ratione tentavit, Bernar. Epist. 190.
and the last resolvtion of every thing which they mean to do and believe: This
is to tell the world, that they are their own, and that they acknowledge no
authority above themselves.

2. When a man makes his Own Will his chief Law which he is resolved to obey.
All the contest between God and wicked men, is whose Will shall stand. The Lord
commands that his Will be observed, the sinner resolves that his own Will shall
be obeyed. The Law requires duty, the sinner will not do it. The Law threatens
curses, the sinner will not believe it. The Word convinces of what is Gods
Will, and the sinner swells in contumacy and obstinacy against it. Bernar. de
Resurrect. Dom. Ser. 3.
Cesset voluntas propria, non^erit infernus. In this case the Lord resolves to
make sinners know, whose word shall stand, His or theirs, Jer. 44. 28. To break
those whom he did not bend, and to make known his power against their pride,
Exodus 9. 16. To fetch his glory out of* strong and stubborn people, Isa. 25. 3.
As a Tempest teareth an Oak that resists it; but hurts not the corn that
yields unto it. Jam 4 6
He resists the proud, Psalm 51* 4
and will overcome when he judges.

3. When a man makes his Own interest his ultimate end, directing all his aims
and designs to his own gain, pleasure, credit, ease, advantage, looking in
nothing beyond himself, eating to himself, drinking to himself, Zac. 7. 6.
Bringing forth fruit unto himself, Hos. 10. 1. without any conscience toward
Gods Will, or aim at his glory.

But are we so little our Own then, that we may not at all seek our selves, or
eye those things wherein our own interests are concerned? Doubtless we may. He
that commands to love our selves, allows to aim at the profiting and pleasing
of our selves. For love shows it self in benevolence and beneficence, willing
and doing our selves good. But it must not be either arbitrarily or ultimately,
not arbitrarily, but with submission to the Rule of Gods Will, and not
ultimately, but with subordination to the Glory of his Name. We may seek our
own preservation, yet Providence, Psalm. 31. 15.
in whose hand our times are, Phil. 120.
and so as to be willing, that God be magnified in our mortal body, Whether by
life or by death. We may seek the improvement of any gift temporal 1 Cor. 12.
11 Romans 12. 13.
yet so as to aquiesce in that measure which he is pleased to proppotion unto
us, and so as to consecrate our selves, Luke 11 22
and all our endowments unto his glory: that Glory of God; we do eo ipso
promote our own salvation. Whenever we prosecute our own salvation, we do Eo
ipso, bring Glory to God. Whatsoever glorifies God, does ever end in our
salvation. Faith glorifies God; Abraham was strong in faith, giving Glory to
God, Romans 4. 20. And the End of our faith, is the Salvation of our soul, 1
Peter 1. 9. Works of Obedience glorify God, Joh. 15. 8. And they are the ready
way to our own salvation* for after we have done the Will of God, we shall be
sure to receive the promises, Heb. 10. 36. God can glorify Himself in our
damnation, but we neither can, nor may do any thing tending to our damnation,
that God may be thereby glorified: for whenever we break the Law, We
dishonor God, Romans 2. 23.

4. When a man makes his own performances the principal ground of all his
hopes and desires; having no joy or comfort, but what he can draw out of
himself: trusting in his own power to effect and bring about his ends, as
Pharaoh and Babylon did, Exodus 15. 10. Isa. 14. 13, 14. Sacrificing and burning
incense to his own net and drag, Hab. 1. 16. ascribing successes to his own
might and power, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. As the proud Assyrian did, Isa. 10. 13. and
expecting salvation from his own good works, like the proud Pharisee, Luke 18.
11, 12.

But may we not build on our own performances for salvation? Does not the
Apostle call Good works a foundation? 1 Timothy 6. 19. And may we not then build
upon it?

In answer hereunto, we are to distinguish inter Rationem condignitatis, and
rationem ordinis. Between the merit deserving the reward, and the order and
consequence which God has put between the one and the other, making the reward
mercifully, but with all certainly to follow the obedience.

Again, we are to distinguish Inter causam essendi, and cognoscendi; between
the cause of confidence a priori, Psalm 19 11
and the means and arguments whereby to know it a posteriori. Prove. 11 18
Our good works are not the merit, or cause, or proper foundation of our own
salvation, or confidence concerning it; but only the free Grace of God, and the
Righteousness of Christ thereby bestowed upon us; yet from an holy life, as an
effect of Faith in Christ, and fruit of divine love, and certain Antecedent
unto salvation, we may draw comfortable arguments a posteriori to establish our
hearts in the expectations of it. In which respect the wise man says, That in
the fear of the Lord there is strong confidence, Prove. 14. 26.

And for the Apostles Metaphor of a foundation, it is there opposed evidently
to that which he calls in the same place, verse 17, The uncertainty of
Riches, to note the stability and permanency of that treasure, which they that
are rich in good works shall at last enjoy; so that there is nothing of
causality intended in it. Not to pass by the notion of a very learned man upon
the place; who tells us, that there the word (...) imports the same which
Gnikar does in the Rabbis, which signifies, Sam. P^t. var. litet. l. c. 11.
as he observes out of Maimonides, Scriptum quo cavetur de refundenda
creditori pecunia, so that the Apostles meaning, is the same with Solomon's,
Prove. 19. 17. He that has pity on the poor, bends unto the Lord* and so has
(...), Bonum nomen, very good security for that which he has given, God will
pay him again.

We have seen what it is for a man to live as if he were sui juris, His own,
and at his own disposal. And that no man is thus His Own, neither made by
himself, nor made for himself: So not our Own.

And if not Our Own, then some others we must needs be. And the Apostle tells us
whose we are, Bodies and Spirits, All of us Gods; and therefore we cannot
without great Sacrilege invade his Right, and mancipate unto an Harlot that
which is consecrated unto him. He formed the Body of the dust of the ground,
therefore that is His: and He breathed into it the breath of life, therefore
the Spirit is His, Genesis 2. 7. His then by right of Creation, and primitive
designation; for whatsoever he made, he made for Himself.

How then comes in the intervention of a price to make us His, whose we are ab
Origin? Sure this necessarily presupposes an Alienation; for no need to buy
back that which before was mine own, if it had not withdrawn it self from my
disposal.

And indeed such an Alienation there has been. Adam in his fall, played the
fugitive from his first Master and Lord, and by that means sold his posterity
under sin, Romans 7. 14. And sinners themselves renew oftentimes that bargain,
and sell themselves to commit sin, as it is said of Ahab, 1 Reg. 21. 20, 26. So
the people are said to have sold themselves for their Iniquity, Isa. 50. 1. as
Balaam ran after the wages of iniquity; 2 Pet. 2. 15. Jude v. 11. For every one
that commits sin, is the servant of sin, John 8. 34. Romans 6. 19. and not
only so, but a slave and Bondsman, he that is overcome is brought into bondage,
2 Pet. 2. 19. as wicked men are said to be taken captive by Satan at his will,
2 Timothy 2. 26.

Men may be two manner of ways under the Thraldom and Tyranny of sin and
Satan. 1. Voluntarily by way of Covenant and Contract: as wicked men are said
to make a Covenant with death, Isa. 28. 15. as Samuel told Saul, Rebellion is
as the sin of Witchcraft, D^abolus jure hominem possidebat quia hemo spon^e
diabolo cons^atit, Bernd. Epist. 190
1 Samuel 15. 23. Wherein there is a kind of compact with the devil: and
agreement to do such or such service for such or such wages, of pleasure,
Nequiter usurpatum, sed just permissum* ibid.
or profit, or honor, or some other poor satisfaction.

2. Judicially and penally, when men having long provoked God by their
voluntary service of lust and Satan, are at last by divine Tradition given up
to uncleanness, and delivered unto Satan, as into the hand of a Jailer and
Executioner of divine wrath, whereof we read, Romans 1. 24, 26, 28. 1 Timothy 1. 20.
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.

Thus poor sinners, like fugitive servants, though they have no right to
dispose of themselves (for nothing can extinguish the Dominion or Sovereignty
which God has over all the works of his own hands) are by their own Covenant,
and sometimes by Gods judgment, under the power, possession, and command of
Satan: for as the Lord gave the land of Canaan to Abraham and his seed, yet the
Canaanites themselves had the first possession; so the Lord has given unto
Christ a Kingdom, and a seed, and people to serve him, Psalm. 2. 8. 22. 30. Joh.
17. 6. Heb. 2. 13. but sin and Satan had the first possession of them. And as
Joshua was by the power of the sword to vindicate the promised land unto
Israel, in pursuance of Gods Covenant; so the Lord Jesus was to assert the
people whom his father had given him out of the power and possession of Satan,
and sin unto himself.

And here, since that is a true saying of Pliny, Mala emptio exprobrat
stultitiam, that an ill bargian does upbraid a man with folly; this then must
needs be a very prodigy of madness, for men to sell away themselves for the
poor, low, stinking, momentary pleasures of sin, when the whole world, if a
man could enjoy it for ever unto himself, would not be an exchange worthy for
the soul, Mat. 16. 26. And therefore whenever you are allured and tempted
unto sin, bring it to this issue, whether the wages of it be worth your
souls? If not, do not incur so great an imputation of folly, as to exchange an
immortal soul for a momentary and perishing vanity.

Now the passing over of these poor Captives from the possession and dominion
of sin and Satan unto God, is here said to be by an Emption, ye are bought
with a price: For understanding whereof, we are to know, That unto this work of
Redemption, two things are required: 1 A Right. 2. A Power to prosecute that
Right. The Right stands in two things. 1. In an ancient and original
propriety to the thing purchased. 2. In a Propinquity thereunto.

Christ has a double claim and propriety unto his people. 1 In the Right of
his divine nature, and our Creation, because he made us. And we cannot by any
fraudulent Contract of ours, divest him of that original and inseparable Right
unto his own Creatures: For by him all things were created, Col. 1. 16. 2. In
the Mediatorship, as head of the Church, to whom we were given by the Father,
to be in such manner recovered, as he in his Commission should appoint. He had
a promise that he should see his seed: for there could not have been a
Redemption without the Consent of the person with whom the Contract was to be
made. In Election the Church was to be given unto Christ, before in Redemption
he could purchase it unto himself.

And as Christ had thus a propriety to Jure propinquitatis: for the Apostle
alludes to the usage in the Old Testament, where he who redeemed, and brought
back an alienated Inheritance unto the family again, was to be a near Kinsman,
Lev. 25. 25. Ruth 4. 3, 4. Christ therefore redeeming us, and recovering the
estate for us which we sold away, was to be our kinsman, that he might have the
Right of Redemption: for he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are
all one, Heb. 2. 11. Sin was to be condemned in our flesh, Romans 8. 3. It
behoved him to be like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful high Priest.

Whence we should learn as Brethren, to do all offices of love, and of
helpfulness unto one another, to restore one another, to bear one another
burdens, because we are all of one blood, Acts 17. 26. Gal. 6. 1. So that
whatever services we do to any, we do it to our own flesh, as the Prophet
speaks, Isa. 58. 7.

Power to actuate and execute Right. And this power is twofold: A Power of
Authority, derived from that Commission and Command given unto Christ to
execute all Judgment: Of which Commission we read, John 5. 22. John 10. 18,
34, 35, 36. Mat. 28. 18. Heb. 10. 7, -- 9. 2 A power of strength and vigor, to
do and suffer the things commanded. In which respect Christ is called the
Captain of our salvation, stronger than the strong man, able to save to the
uttermost those that come unto God through him, Heb. 7. 25. To finish the work
given him to do, John 17. 4. To go forth conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2.
To lead Captivity Captive, Ephesians. 4. 8. To destroy Satan, Heb. 2. 14. To spoil
Principalities and Powers, and to triumph over them, Col. 2. 15. To deliver us
from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. And in one word, to offer up himself by
the Eternal Spirit unto God, so as to obtain Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.
12, 14. By that one offering, perfecting for ever those that are sanctified,
Heb. 10. 14. Ceasing from his work as God did from his, to note the
consummation of it, Heb. 4. 10.

These things qualifying the person that is to redeem; The work it self is
double, there is Redemptio per modum liberationis, by way of deliverance out of
Captivity, or by way of Ransom, which is called delivering us out of the hands
of our enemies, Luke 1. 74. And per modum Acquisitionis, called by the Apostle
(...). The Redemption of the purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. We have them
both together, Gal. 4. 4, 5.

For the former of these we must observe, Captive, Mankind; They Rom 7 6
the Supreme Judge, Almighly God under whose Law the sinful world is held; Mat
5 25
so the Judge is said to cast into prison, Mat 3 20
to destroy soul and body in Hell; to deliver to the Tormentors, Mat. 18. 34.
to conclude in unbelief. And under this supreme Judge, Romans 11. 32.
Satan, sin, death, the powers of darkness, Acts 26. 18.
which are Jaylors, Sergeants, Officers, all under the Rebuke and Command of
the principal Redeemed, the Lord our Righteousness; Jesus, that delivers Jer.
23. 6.
The Price by him laid down for the obtaining of our discharge, 1 These 1. 10.
for in Redemptions a price was to intervene, Ier. 32. 7, 10. and this was his
Blood, Ephesians 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19.

Men may be several ways freed from Captivity. 1 By Escape, as Peter by the
help of the Angel, Acts 12. 11. 2 By Dismission and free release, as Absalom
was dismissed from banishment by the free pardon of David, 2 Reg. 14. 21. 3 By
Power, as Abraham rescued Lot out of the hands of those that had taken him
captive, Genesis 14. 16. 4. By Commutation of one for another, as Prisoners in War
use to be mutually exchanged. 5. By Ransom and payment of a price. And in this
manner has Christ delivered his Church, by giving his life a Ransom for many,
Mat. 20. 28. 1 Timothy 2. 6. For though it be as to our selves a free condonation,
we have remission of sins by the Riches of his Grace, Romans 3. 24. Ephesians. 1.
7. And Satan, and all the powers of darkness a victorious Rescue, whom Christ
spoileth, Luke 11. 21. Yet as to God, the Judge, whose Justice our sin
offended, from whose wrath we cannot be delivered, till that Justice be first
satisfied, Rmo. 8. 32.
It was by the Solution of a price, or laying down of a proper Ransom; Isa.
53. 6.
for the Lord spared not his own Son, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
but laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Gal. 3. 13. 4. 4.
which he bare in his body on the tree, so that he was made a curse for us;
made purposely under the Law, that he might pay, by his Obedience to the Law,
that debt which we had contracted, but could never discharge. Unto his Father,
did Christ pay this price for us. He had the primitive and original Property in
us; from his service we revolting, unto the service of another Lord, were
responsible to him as our Judge for so great a wrong; Anselm. Cur Deus homo,
lib. 1. cap. 11.
Debet omnis qui peccat honorem quem rapit Deo solvere, as Anselm speaks. His
Prisoners and Debtors we were: to him alone we pray for the pardon of them.
Satan and Death were but his Jaylors, unto whose power and custody we were
delivered. Though they were our Lords, and we their servants by a Covenant of
sinning, yet they were Usurpers in regard of God, by intruding upon his Right
in us; for we being His, and not our own, had no more power to alienate our
selves from his service, then one man's Apprentice has to bind himself unto
another Master. Here then having been a double wrong done unto God; one by the
sinner, another by Satan; Christ satisfies for the wrong of the sinner, by
suffering his curse; and revengeth the wrong of Satan, by rescuing the sinner
from him unto his natural service again: the one in a way of Justice, the other
of Power.

Now lastly, Emption being a Contract whereunto three particulars concur,
Just. l. 3. T. 24.
Res, Precium and Consensus, the thing bought, the price for which, and the
consent of the parties contracting: unto the consummation of this work is
required, besides the solution and validity of the price, Acceptance thereof
by the consent of the Judge, that is, of God, to the Ransom. And this
abundantly made known unto us in the Word; the Lord declaring that he was well
pleased in his Son, Mat. 3. 17
That when his soul should be made an offering for sin, Mat. 17. 5
He should see his seed, and prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
should prosper in his hand, and he should see of the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied, and by his knowledge should justify many, etc. Isa. 53. 10, 11.
That we are accepted in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Who was answered in his
prayer by a voice from heaven, to signify Gods owning of that sacrifice which
he was presently after to offer, John 12. 28. Thus we see how we were bought by
way of liberation and Ransom.

Now lastly by way of Purchase and Acquisition, Christ having thus bought his
Church with his own blood, Acts 20. 28. Has further, by the Redundancy of the
merit of that his blood, purchased for it an excellent Inheritance, a Dowry of
Grace and Holiness here, and of Glory and Blessedness hereafter: called by the
Apostle, The Adoption of sons, Gal. 4. 5.

And being thus redeemed, we are now Gods Own, not only upon the common and
general Title of Creation, as all other things in the world are, but by a
peculiar, and in a more gracious manner; by Redemption, as his liberti; by
Dedication, as his Temples; by Union, as his Members; by Unction, as his
peculiar people, whom he has chosen and formed for himself, Ps. 4. 3 Isa. 43.
21.

Which leads us to the last particular in the Text, the practical inference or
use which the Apostle makes of both the Propositions, that therefore we should
glorify; and as the vulgar adds, Bear, or show forth God, both in our
Bodies, and in our spirits, which are both His; for therefore he has given us
both the one and the other, that we might use them both unto his honor, and
preserve them in that dignity and relation which they both have unto him.

And indeed, where is the Lord glorious, works? Bless the Lord all ye his works
in all places of his Dominion, Psalm 103. 22. We are his By Creation, Members?
which are animated by that Spirit of glory, and of God which rested upon
Christ, the Lord of Glory, 1 Pet. 44. 1. And we are his by Union, Members that
ought to be conformed to a His Temple? For in his Temple does every one speak
of his glory, Psalm 29. 9. And we are his by Dedication, built up a spiritual
Temple unto him, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Where glorious, Own anointed people, his peculiar
Treasure? Psalm 135. 4. His Jewels Mal. 3. 17. In whom he intends to be
admired, 2 These. 1. 10. Where Service, if not from those whom he has redeemed?
The civil Law says, Cod de postilimin reversis l 8 and 17 Petit: de leg Attic
l 2 Tit 6
Redemptus est Redimentis per modum pignoris; and Demosthenes (...). That he
who is delivered from enemies, is a servant unto him that delivered him, till
he can pay the Ransom which was given for him. Quod emitur transit in
potestatem ementis. Where Christ is Redemption, he is Sanctification too, for
we are redeemed from our former vain Conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 19. And from all
Iniquity, Tit. 2. 14. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, Ephesians. 5. 26. Romans 14. 9.

Being therefore not our Own, but bought with a price, Let us Glorify him that
bought us. 1. In Adoring this great Mystery brought about by the Exinanition of
the Son of God, Aug. de Trin l 13 c 10 Ber Epist 190
and the humbling of him to our Curse: for though the Omnipotent Lord wanted
not other means to have wrought this deliverance; yet herein has he magnified
his Power, Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and Love, in doing it by the Incarnation and
Suffering of his Eternal Son: That as the first Adam made us sinners in
semine, so the Second make us Righteous in sanguine. To Adore the freeness of
it, in that he came unsought to seek, as well as to save, Luke 19. 10. And the
Discrimination which is therein made between us and Angels; for he took not the
nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. Though the Devil in
Coelo in tumuit, ego in sterquilinio.

2. To admire the Severity of divine Justice, which would not suffer sin to go
unpunished, or the sentence of death against it unexecuted, though it were in
his own Son. The unsearchableness of divine Mercy, in accepting a Commutation,
a son for a servant, a sacrifice for a sinner. The infinite depth of divine
Wisdom, in finding out a way to punish the sin, and to save the sinner; to
punish it thoroughly and as thoroughly to pardon it; to cause him that was
eternal, to be made; Him that was impassible, to suffer; Him that was Lord of
life, to die: to make our nature in that person pay a debt, which all the
Angels in Heaven could never have discharged.

3. To believe and apply the comfort of so precious a Doctrine to our selves,
and to put in for a share in it, and so to glorify God, as Abraham did, Romans
4. 20. Without it I am a captive to sin and Satan, cursed in body, cursed in
soul; my conscience says Amen to the Curses, Deuteronomy. 27. 15 -- 26. The Law holds
me under, the Scripture shuts me out; I have no shelter nor refuge from the
thunder of divine wrath.

But now by the Redemption which Christ has wrought, God is placable, sin
pardonable; the soul curable, the curse removeable. And shall God offer Mercy,
and I refuse it? Am I bought with a price, and shall I not glorify God by
accepting of it? Do I not stand in need of Christ? Is he not provided for me?
Is he not revealed to me? Does he not invite, entreat, command me to come unto
him? Did he ever cast away any that did so? May I not venture to believe? May I
not reach forth an arm to embrace the sure Mercies of David? Are there not
examples of great sinners who have been welcome unto great Mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13
-- 16 Lord I am a great sinner, I confess it, I bemoan it, I hate it, I forsake
it; I will throw away every thing which keeps me and Christ assunder, thou do
freely give Christ, I greatly want him, I earnestly desire him, I thankfully
accept him, I willingly follow him; I am his ransomed servant to be ruled by
him, and to live to his grace. I am bought with a price, therefore I will not
be a servant of men, 1 Cor. 7. 23. To captivate either my Reason, my
Conscience, or my Conversation, to their Will. I am bought with a price,
therefore I will be servant to him that bought me, that as he has by his blood
purchased Glory for me, so I may by my obedience bring Glory unto him: For
herein is he glorified when we bring forth much fruit, John 15. 8. I will
glorify him in my body; by external purity, and exemplary sanctity; I will
possess my vessel (i) my Body in Holiness and in Honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3. I will
cleanse my self from all filthiness, as well of flesh as spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. I
will yield my Members servants of righteousness unto Holiness, Romans 6. 19. I
will let my good works shine before men, that they may glorify God, Mat. 5. 16.

I will glorify him in my Spirit, by internal purity of heart. I will
sanctify the Lord God himself, and make him my fear and dread, Isa. 8. 13. I
will labor for truth and chastity in the inward parts, Psalm 51. 6. I will take
heed of Jezabel and her fornication, because the Lord searches the reins and
the heart, Revel. 2. 20 -- 23.

Thus if we glorify him in body and spirit in a way of obedience; He will at
last fashion our vile bodies like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21. And
raise it up in honor and power, 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43.

And he will make our spirits, the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12.
23. and shed abroad his Image fully upon us, when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 10. Which
that we may do, let us call upon God.

FINIS.

