Joy in the Lord: Opened in a SERMON Preached at Paul's, May 6.

By Edward Reynolds, D. D. DVM PREMOR ATTOLLO^



London, Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for Robert Bostock, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the King's Head in St Paul's Churchyard, 1655.

To the Right Honorable Christopher Pack, Lord Major of the City of London, and
the Honorable Court of Aldermen there.
Right Honorable,
IN Conformity to your desires signified by your Order unto me, I here humbly
present you a second time with that plain, but wholesome Doctrine, which you
were lately pleased to receive with all ready attention. And indeed the
argument is such, as the Apostle thought need full to inculcate once and again.
And therefore if the Tongue and the Pen, the Pulpit and the Press, do a first
and a second time invite you unto the same duty, the Apostles example will both
commend your zeal in desiring it, and excuse my obedience in conforming to so
just a desire.

Self-sufficiency is Gods peculiar honor, one of those Regalia which belong
unto him alone. All creatures must go out of themselves, both for the
continuance of that Being, which they have, and for the Acquisition of such
further good as they stand in need of. And since they are all thus defective in
them selves, they must needs be unable to complete the perfections of one
another, much less of man, who is one of the principal and most excellent of
them. That good therefore, the want whereof does kindle desire, and the
fruition whereof does produce delight, must be sought above the world, in him,
who as he is sufficient to himself, so is he alone All-sufficient unto his
Creatures.

And because there is no approach for sinful men unto God without a Mediator,
the Father has set up his eternal son, as that middle person, in whom we may
have communion with him, and access unto him. Justly therefore was the Lord
Christ before his coming, styled The Desire of all Nations; and as justly is
he, after his coming, their everlasting Delight, since in and by him alone, the
Lord is pleased to be at peace with us, and out of his fullness to communicate
all good unto us. To set forth this Preciousness of Christ unto his people, and
to quicken their joy in him, was the end of this Sermon, and is indeed the end
of all other.

We live in changeable and uncomposed times; we see distempers at home, we hear
of distresses abroad; the Lord is shaking heaven and earth, Churches and
States; our eyes and our experience tell us, how mutable are the wills, how
inconstant the Judgments, how fickle the favors, how sudden the frowns of men,
how vain the hopes, how unstable the delights which are drawn out of broken
Cisterns; how full of dross and dregs the most refined contents of the world
are. God alone is true and every man a liar, either by falseness deluding, or
by weakness disappointing those that depended on them.

Since therefore the life of man does hardly deserve the name of life, without
some solid comfort to support it; and neither men nor Angels, much less honors
or pleasures, plenty or abundance, can supply us with that Comfort; what
remains, but that we betake our selves unto that Fountain of living water,
whence alone it is to be had? that we secure our interest in the Lord Christ,
who is faithful, and cannot fail; powerful, and will not forsake, nor expose
those that come unto God by him? that so being upon the Rock which is higher
then our selves, we may be able amidst all the tempests and shakings, the
delusions and disappointments below, to Rejoice in him with a fixed and
inconcussible delight, who can bring joy out of sorrow, light out of darkness,
and turn all confusions into order and beauty. This that you, and all Gods
people in City and Country may every where do, is the prayer of

Your Honors most humble servant in the work of the Lord. Edward Reynolds.
From my study, June 2. 1655.
Joy in the Lord: Opened in a Sermon Preached at PAVLS, May 6.
PHIL. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say, rejoice.
THere is nothing which the hearts of Believers do either more willingly hear,
or more difficultly observe, then those precepts which invite them unto joy and
gladness, they being on the one hand so suitable to the natural desires, and
yet withal on the other so dissonant to the miserable condition of sinful man.
Had our Apostle called on the blessed Angels to rejoice, who have neither sin,
nor sorrow, nor fear, nor sufferings, nor enemies to annoy them, it might have
seemed far more congruous: But what is it less then a Paradox to persuade poor
creatures, loaded with guilt, defiled with corruption, clothed with
infirmities, assaulted with temptations, hated, persecuted, afflicted by Satan
and the world, compassed about with dangers and sorrows, Job 5. 7.
born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward, that notwithstanding all this, they
may rejoice, and rejoice always? But we have a double corrective to all these
doubts in the Text, one in the Object, another in the Preacher of this Joy. The
object of it is Christ the Lord, as appears by the same thing twice before
mentioned, cap. 3. 1. 3 The Lord that pardons our guilt, subdueth our lusts,
heals our infirmities, rebukes our temptations, vanquisheth our enemies,
sweetneth our sufferings, heightneth our consolations above our afflictions,
and at last wipeth all tears from our eyes. Rev 7. 17.
Here is matter of great joy, may we be satisfied in the truth of it: And for
that we have the word of an Apostle, who gives assurance of it by Divine
Revelation, and by personal experience. He who next to the Lord himself, 2 Cor.
11. 23. 27
was of all his servants, a man of sorrow, in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in perils, in
deaths, in weariness, in watchings, in hunger, in thirst, in cold, in
nakedness, beaten with rods, stoned with stones; shipwrackt at Sea, beset at
Land; he who in the prison, the inner prison, Malam mansionem vocabant Antiqui
vid. Dionis. Gothofredi notas in Digest. Tit. Depofiti vel contra. L. 7.
the stocks (a kind of case of prisons one within another) did yet Nihil C^us
sentit in nerv^ cum animus in Coelo est. Tertul. ad Martyras.
rejoice and sing Psalms unto God, Acts 16. 24, 25. He it is, who from the Lord
calls upon Believers to rejoice always. Instead then of a Paradox, you have
here a Paradise, a Tree of life, as joy is called Prove. 13. 12. And the
servants of God may securely, notwithstanding their sorrow for sin, their sense
of sufferings, their certainty of temptations, their conflicts with enemies,
their sympathy with brethren, may yet I say securely rejoice, and rejoice
always, they have the Lord to warrant it, they have his Apostle to witness it.
Let worldlings delight in sensual pleasures, Let false Apostles delight in
carnal worship, and ceremonial privileges; but you my brethren have another
kind of object to fix your joies upon; Rejoice in the Lord, and again rejoice,
and rejoice always; and that upon the word and credit of an Apostle, I say it,
and I say it again.

There are many particulars couched in the words; 1. The Subject of them,
spiritual joy, or an holy exultation of soul in the Lord, as the most beloved,
desired supreme good, wrought in it by the spirit of grace, rendering Christ by
faith, present unto it; whereby it is not only supported under all afflictions,
but enabled to glory in them, and to triumph over them. 2. The difficulty of
this joy intimated, in that believers are so often invited unto it 3. The
sureness and the greatness of it, noted in the doubling of the words. 4. The
stability and perpetuity of it, They may rejoice always in the midst of their
sorest fears or distresses. 5. The object of it, a glorious and replenishing
object, Christ the Lord. 6. The Apostolical attestation given unto it, Again I
say, rejoice; I speak it by Commission from the mouth of Christ, requiring it;
I speak it by the experience of mine own heart, enjoying it in the midst of all
my sufferings: So you have both a mandatum and a probatum for it; Rejoice in
the Lord always; and again I say rejoice. But because I love not to mince and
crumble the bread of life into too many particulars, I shall therefore comprize
all in this one Proposition (which I shall make the subject of my present
service.

That the Lord Jesus is the great, sure, and perpetual joy of his own people.

By accident, unto wicked and impenitent sinners, he is a stumbling block, as
wholesome meat is offensive to sick stomachs, and the light of the Sun unto
distempered eyes; but unto those that believe, he is altogether lovely, Vid.
Iren. l. 4. cap 15. Aug. Tract. 10. in Joannem. Beatior percipiendo fidem
Christi quam concipiendo Carnem. Idem. To. 6. de sancta virgin cap. 3.
precious, and desirable. Abraham rejoiced to see his day, John 8 56. Mary
rejoiced more that he was her Savior, then her son, Luke 1. 47. Simeon
embraced him with a Nunc dimittis, Luke 2. 28. Matthew made a great Feast to
receive him, Luk 5. 29. Zacheus entertained him at his house joifully, Luke 19.
6. The Eunuch as soon as he knew him, went on his way rejoicing, Acts 8. 39.
The Jailor, who even now was ready to have killed himself; when Christ was
preached unto him, rejoiced and believed Acts 16. 34. Christ is the author of
our joy; he calls it his joy, John 15. 11. It is the work and fruit of his
spirit, Gal. 5. 22. and he is the object of our joy, it is fixed and terminated
on him, as on the most commensurable matter thereof, Phil. 3. 3.

There are many things belonging unto the object of a full and complete joy. 1.
It must be good in it self, and unto us. 2. That good must have several
qualificatious to heighten it to that pitch and proportion which the joy of the
heart may fix on.

1. It must be a Good present, Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 31. art. 1. Aristot. Rhetor. L.
1. c. 11.
in the view and possession of him whom it delights: Good absent is the
object of desire, good present, of delight. It is true, Azorius Moral. lib 3.
c. 10. qu. 10. Habit praeteriti doloris Secura Recordatio delectationem. Cicer.
ep. l. 5. ep. 12.
a man may rejoice at some good that is past, as that he did at such a time
escape a danger, or receive a benefit; but then the memory makes it as it were
present, and the fruit of that past good is some way or other still remaining.
Also a man may rejoice in a good to come, as Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's
day. John 8. 56. and believers rejoice in the hope of glory, Romans 5. 2. but
then faith gives a kind of subsistence to the things so hoped for, Heb. 11. 1.
and the virtue and benefit of them is in being, though they themselves be but
yet in hope, and so in regard of efficacy, Christ was a Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world, though not actually slain before the fullness of time:
So still the most proper ground of delight is fruition, which presupposes the
presence of the thing enjoied.

2. It must be good precious which has some special value belonging unto it.
We read of the joy of harvest, Isa. 9. 3. because men then reap the precious
things of the earth, as they are called, Deuteronomy. 33. 14, 16. Iam. 5. 7. It was
not an ordinary thing, but a treasure, a pearl of great price, which made the
Merchant-man sell all that he had to buy it, (...). Aristot. Ethic. lib. 1. c.
5. vid. Rhetor. l. 1. c. 6.
Mat. 13. 44. 46.

3. It must be a full good, sufficient and thoroughly proportionable to all the
desires and exigencies of him that is delighted with it: Bring the richest
pearl to a man under some sore fit of gout or stone, he cries, groans, sweats,
is in pain still: The object, though good, though precious, yet is not suitable
to his present condition; in that case he takes more pleasure in an anodine
medicine, then in a rich Jewel. It would be little good news to such a man, to
tell him that his kidneys or his bladder were full of pearls or diamonds,
because there they would not be his treasure, but his torment.

4. It must be a Pure good, without any dregs or dross to abate the sweetness
of it: All earthly delights are bitter-sweets, wine tainted by the vessel,
which brings a loathing along with it; (...): Crates apud Laertium.
the best corn has its chaff, the richest wine its lees, the sweetest oil its
dregs, the sun it self its spots; nothing of mere creatures can cause an
unmixed joy, free from all tang and tincture of the vessel, from whence it
proceeds: And any one defect may corrupt all the content which the rest
ministers as a dead fly will spoil the whole pot of ointment. Eccles. 10. 1.


5. It must be Bonum insolitum plus amatur. Cassiod. variar. l 8. c. 20.
Quaesitissimae dapes non gustu sed difficultatibus aestimabantur, miracula
avium, longinqui maris pisces, alieni temporis poma aestivae nives, Hybernae
Rosae. Mamertinus in Panegyr.
rare, wonderful, glorious; the commonness even of good things, takes from the
loveliness of them. If diamonds were as plentiful as pebles, or gold as iron,
they would be as little esteemed; if there were but one balsom or drug in the
world that would cure any mortal disease, a man would value the monopoly of
that above the richest Jewel. Because the Pool of Bethesda had a rare healing
virtue, multitudes of impotent, blind, halt, withered, were waiting continually
for the moving of it, John 5 2, 3.

6. It must be various, (...), Plutarch (...). Aristot. Problemat sect. 5. qu.
1. (...). Marc. Anton. lib. 6 sect. 46. Vid Gataker. Ann^t.
like the holy anointing oil, compounded of many principal spices, Exodus 30
23-25. in rich hangings in choice gardens, in great feasts, in select
libraries, variety is that which greatly delights the spectators: were a
table filled with one and the same dish, or a study with the same book, or a
garden with the same flower, it would wholly take away from the delight of it.
And this variety is then much more delightful, when each particular good does
answer some particular defect, or desire in him that enjoys it; when it is as
a rich Storehouse, as the Shop of the Apothecary, or as a Physic Garden,
wherein a man may in any distemper fix on some thing proper to help him.

7. It must be a prevalent and sovereign good, (...). Aristot. 7. Rhet. lib. 1.
cap. 11.
a most efficacious catholicon against evils. Victory even in trifles, where no
evil is to be removed, as in bowling or shooting, is that which makes the
pleasure in those games; much more delightful must that needs be, which can
help a man to overcome all the evils and enemies that assault him; no joy to
the joy of a triumph when men divide the spoils. Periculum in prae^io, gaudium
in triumph^. Aug. Confess. lib. 8. cap 3.
In this case Iehosaphat and his people came to Jerusalem with Psalteries,
Harps, and Trumpets, to the house of God, rejoicing over their enemies, 2 Cron.
20. 25, 20.

8. It must be a perpetual good, Verum Gaudium non de^init, nec in contraria
vertitur. Senec. ep. 59.
commensurate in duration to the soul that is to be satisfied with it; they are
but poor and lying delights, which like Jordan, empty all their sweetness into
a stinking and sulphurious lake. True comfort is a growing thing, which never
bends to a declination. That man will find little pleasure in his expedition,
whose voyage is for a year, and his victual but for a day, who sets out for
eternity with the pleasures and contents of nothing but mortality. Such are all
natural, sensual, secular, sinful joies. As the sheep feeds on the grass, De
Tuo Gaude. Sen. Ep. 23.
and then the owner feeds on him, so poor sinners feed awhile on dead comforts,
and then death at last feeds on them, Psalm. 49. 14.

Lastly, That which crowns and consummates all, is, it must be our own proper
good; all the rest without this, signify nothing unto us. A beggar feels not
the joy of another man's wealth, nor a cripple of another man's strength; the
prisoner that is leading to death, has no comfort in the pardon which is
brought to another malefactor. As every man must live by his own faith, so
every man must have his rejoicing in himself, and not in another, Gal. 6. 4.

Now then let us consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ
Jesus, and we shall find him alone in every one of these particulars, to be a
most adequate object of the joy and delight of all his people.

1. He is a Good ever more present with them; I am with you always, Mat. 28. 20.
though bodily absent, and that for the expediency and comfort of his servants,
John 16. 7. yet in his Ordinances, and by his Spirit ever amongst them; You
shall see me (says he to his Disciples) because I go to my Father, John 16.
16. whereby is not only intimated his purpose of appearing unto them before his
ascension, but with all the full manifestation of himself unto them, when he
was gone, by sending the holy spirit, per cujus vicariam vim, Vicarius Domini
Spiritus. Tertul. de Veland. Virg cap^. 1. and de praescript. cap. 13.
his bodily absence should be abundantly compensated. By that spirit his people
are joined unto him, as the feet below to the head above, 1 Cor. 6. 17. by that
spirit in the Gospel he Preaches peace unto them, Ephesians. 2. 17. and is evidently
set forth before them, Gal. 3. 1. by that spirit he dwells in them, Ephesians. 3.
17. manifests himself unto them, makes his abode with them, John 14 20-23. Rev.
3. 20. walks in the midst of them, as in his house and Temple, 2 Cor. 6. 16. is
more present with them then any good thing they have besides. Some things are
present with us, in our eye, in our possession, yet still without us, as Goods,
or Friends; some things more intimate, but yet separable from us, as health,
strength, our soul it self; but Christ is not only with us, but in us, Col. 1.
27. not only in us, but inseparably abiding with us, Romans 8. 38, 39. As in the
Hypostatical union there is an inseparable conjunction of the manhood to the
Godhead in one person: so in the mystical union, there is an inseparable
conjunction of the members to the head in one Church or body.

2. He is not an ordinary common good; which if a man want, he may compensate
by some other thing; but a Treasure and Pearl of highest price, in whom are
unsearchable riches, Ephesians 3. 8. Hidden treasures, Col. 2. 3. in comparison of
whom, all other things are loss and dung, Phil. 3. 7, 8. most precious in the
eyes of his people, 1 Pet. 2. 7. precious in his own immediate excellencies,
Ephesians 5, 23. 2. 22.
the chiefest of ten thousand, Cant. 5. 10-16. precious in the respects he
bears toward us; in the sweet and intimate relations of an Husband, Heb. 2.
11, 12, 13. Isa. 9 6. Joh 15. ^4. H^b. 7. 22. 8. 6 1 John 2. 1, 2.
an Head, a Savior, a Brother, a Father, a Friend, a Surety, a Mediator, a
Propitiation, an Advocate, Precious in the great things he has done for us, in
the rich supplies of grace and peace he does bestow upon us, in the high
dignity whereunto he advances us, John 1. 12. 1 John 3. 1. Romans 8. 15, 16. in
the great promises he makes unto us, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3, 4. in the glorious hope
which he sets before us, and blessed mansions which he prepares for us, Col.
1. 27. John 14. 2. in the light of his countenance shining on us, in the fruits
of his spirit wrought in us, in the present life of faith, in the hidden life
of glory, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Col. 3. 3.
in the great price he paid for us, in the great care which he takes of us, in
the effusions and manifestations of the love of God unto us: In the Seals,
Pleadges, Testimonies, first fruits of our eternal inheritance, which he is
pleased by his spirit to shead forth upon us, in the free and open way which he
has made for us unto the Throne of grace; in these, and many other the like,
is the Lord Christ more honorable and precious in the eyes of his people, then
a thousand worlds could be without him.

3. He is not only a most present, and a most precious good, but full and
sufficient for his people; He ascended on high that he might fill all things,
Ephesians. 4. 10. that he might power forth such abundance of spirit on his Church,
as might answer all the conditions whereunto they may be reduced: Righteousness
enough to cover all their sins, plenty enough to supply all their wants, grace
enough to subdue all their lusts, wisdom enough to resolve all their doubts,
power enough to vanquish all their enemies, virtue enough to cure all their
diseases, fullness enough to save them, and that to the uttermost, all other
good things below, and without him, have a finit and limited benignity. Some
can cloth, but cannot feed; others can nourish, but they cannot heal; others
can enrich, but they cannot secure; others adorn, Omnis mihi copia quae Deus
meus non est, Egestas est. Aug. Confess. lib. 13. cap. 8. Non alio Bono Bonus
est sed Bonum omnis Boni -- Non Bonus animus, aut Bonus Angelus, sed Bonum
Bonum. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 8. cap. 3.
but cannot advance; all do serve, but none do satisfy: They are like a
beggars coat made up of many pieces, not all enough either to beautify or
defend; but there is in Christ something proportionable to all the wants and
desires of his people. He is Bread, wine, milk, living-water to feed them, John
6. 51. 7. 37. he is a garment of righteousness to cover and adorn them, Romans
13. 14. a Physician to heal them, Mat. 9. 12. a Counselor to advise them, Isa
9. 6. a Captain to defend them, Heb. 2. 10. a Prince to rule, a Prophet to
teach, a Priest to make atonement for them, an Husband to protect, a Father to
provide, a Brother to relieve, a Foundation to support, a Root to quicken, an
Head to guide, a Treasure to enrich, a Sun to enlighten, a Fountain to cleanse.
As the one Ocean has more waters then all the Rivers in the world, and one Sun
more light then all the Luminaries in heaven; so one Christ is more All to a
poor soul, then if it had the All of the whole world a thousand times over.

4. He is a most pure good without any mixture of dross, or bitterness to abate
or corrupt the excellency of it; A Lamb without spot and blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
He did no sin, no guile was found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2. 22: Holy, harmless,
undefiled, Heb. 7. 26. Never any believer found any thing in him, for the which
to repent of making choice of him; as holy Polycarp said, Eusebius histor. l. 4 c
14.
I have served him these eightysix years, and he never did me any hurt; even
the severest things of Christ are matter of joy unto his servants: If he make
them sorrowful, their sorrow is turned into joy, John 16. 20. his very yoke is
easy, his burden light, his Commandments not grievous, nay his very cross and
afflictions, matter of choice, of joy, Melch Adam. page 138. Vid Cypria de
Nativitate Christ^ sect. 6, 7, 8, 9.
of gloriation, of triumph, Heb. 11. 25, 26. Acts 5. 41. Romans 5. 3. Romans 8. 37.
It was an heroical speech of Luther, Malo ego cum Christo ruere quam cum
Caesare stare; I had rather fall with Christ, then stand with Caesar. And if
his sufferings are so sweet, O then how glorious are his consolations?

5. He is the rarest good in the world; his whole name is Wonderful, Isa. 9.
6. his whole dispensation mysterious, 1 Timothy 3. 16. the invisible God
manifested, a Son born of a Virgin, the Lawgiver made under the Law, the Lord
of Glory, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, humbled, emptied, in
the form of a servant, reckoned amongst transgressors, without form or
comeliness, rejected, despised, put to shame, a man of sorrows; a dead man
raised by his own power, and advanced to the Throne of God; these, and all the
particulars, Christ crucified, are things so profound and unsearchable, that
the very Angels desire to look into them with wonder and astonishment, 1 Pet.
1. 12. The best and most excellent things God has made single, one Sun in the
Firmament, one Tree of Life in Paradise, one heart, one head in the body: So to
us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.
He the alone living, elect, precious, chief corner stone, no other name under
heaven given amongst men whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 11, 12.

6. As a rare good, so full of exquisite and copious variety, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, redemption. It pleased the Father, that in him
all fullness should dwell, Col. 1. 19. In him he has made known unto
Principalities and Powers, the manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3 10. As the
curious Ephod in the Law was made of Gold, blew, purple, scarlet, and fine
twined linen; and the breast plate set with twelve curious precious stones: So
Christ, the substance of those types, was filled with the spirit of wisdom,
understanding, counsel, might, knowledge, and the fear of God; Isa. 11. 2. and
that above measure; John 3. 34. That there might be enough in him to answer all
the desires and delights of his people: Wisdom to teach; righteousness to
justify, grace to renew, power to defend, peace to comfort, life to quicken,
glory to save them; seven eyes upon one stone.

7. He is a most prevailing and victorious good, stronger then the strong man,
Luke 11. 22: casting out, and judging the Prince of the world, John 12. 31. 16,
11. abolishing death, 2 Timothy 1. 10. taking away sin, destroying the works of
the Devil, 1 John 3. 3. and overcoming the world and the lusts thereof, John
16. 33. treading all his Churches enemies under his and their feet, 1 Cor. 15,
15. triumphing openly over them in his cross before God and Angels, Col. 2. 15.
ascending up on high, and leading captivity captive, Ephesians. 4. 8.

1. By a way of wisdom catching Satan by the hook of his divine power, hidden
under the infirmities of his human nature.

2. By a way of Judgment, condemning him for shedding the innocent blood of
the Son of God. Vid. Aug. de Trinit. lib. 13. cap. 13, 14, 15.


3. By a way of Power vanquishing him, and casting him out of the possession
which he had purchased.

8. He is a perpetual and durable good: Death has no more dominion over him,
Romans 6. 9. He ever lives to make intercession, Heb. 7. 25. there is an Oath, an
Amen upon the perpetuity of the life and Priesthood of Christ, Psalm. 110. 4.
Rev. 1. 18. Behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen: And he lives not only for
ever in his person, but he is for ever the life portion, and blessedness of his
people. Because he lives, they live, John 14. 19. they shall appear with him,
they shall be like unto him: As he is sat on his Fathers Throne, so shall they
sit on his Throne, never to be degraded.

Lastly, He is the proper good of his own people: He has not only given
himself unto God for them, as their Sacrifice, but he has given himself
likewise unto them, as their Portion. He is theirs, and they his, Cant. 6. 3.
They his, by a dear purchase, and he theirs by a sweet communion: They are said
to have him, John 5. 12. as a man has his most peculiar possession; his name
is, The Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. he is made unto us of God, wisdom,
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. he is more
ours then we are our own, we have and possess infinitely more in him then in
our selves; defective in our selves, complete in him; weak in our selves,
strong in him; dead in our selves, alive in him; miserable in ourselves,
blessed in him; mutable in our selves, established in him. Thus we see there is
nothing necessary to the completing of an object of joy, which is not fully to
be found in Christ.

Unto these grounds of joy drawn from the nature of delectable objects, I shall
add a few more mentioned by the Prophet Zachary, Chap. 9. 9, 10. drawn from the
Royal Office of Christ; Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, shout O daughter of
Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation,
lowly, and riding upon an ass, etc.

1. He is a King, thy King, the promised Messiah, in whom all blessings were to
be made good unto Israel. They had been servants under strange Lords, Nehem. 9.
36, 37. and so had we: The Prince and God of this world had the first
possession of us, Ephesians. 2. 2. But they were to have a King of their own from
among their brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. 15. Their Governor was to proceed from the
midst of them, Ier. 30. 21. And this must needs be matter of great joy; That
whereas oppressors did pass through them before v. 8. the King now promised
them should be a near kinsman should not be ashamed to call them brethren, Heb.
2. 11. The shout of a King should be amongst them, who should have the strength
of an Unicorn, able to break the bones of his enemies, Numb. 23. 21, 22.

2. His approach, He comes: When Solomon, a type of Christ, was made King,
they did eat and drink with great gladness before the Lord, Vid. Joseph.
Antiquit. lib. 7. cap 11. Turneb. Adversa. lib. 24. cap 45.
1 Chronicles. 29. 22. At such solemn Inaugurations, the Trumpets sound, the people
shout, the Conduits run Wine, honors are dispensed, gifts distributed, prisons
opened, offenders pardoned, Acts of grace published, nothing suffered to
eclipse the beauty of such a Festivity. Thus it was at the coming of Christ:
Wise men of the East bring presents unto him, rejoicing with exceeding great
joy, Mat. 2 10, 11. The glory of God shines on that day, and an heavenly Host
proclaim the joy, Luke 2. 9, 14 John Baptist leapeth in the womb, Mary
rejoiceth in God her Savior, Zachary glorifieth God for the horn of salvation
in the house of David; Simeon and Hanna bless the Lord for the glory of Israel:
And after when he came to Jerusalem, the whole multitude spread garments,
strewed branches, cried before him and behind him, Hosanna to the son of David,
Hosanna in the highest, Mat. 21. 9. And the Psalmist Prophesying long before of
it, said, This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad
in it, Psalm. 118. 24.

3. His Character: 1. He is Just. And this is the great joy of his people, Isa.
9. 3. 7. especially being such a King as is not only just himself, but makes
others just likewise: In the Lord shall the seed of Israel be justified and
glory, Isa. 45. 25. Sin pardoned, guilt covered, death vanquished, conscience
pacified God reconciled, must needs be a glorious ground of joy and peace unto
believers, Romans 5. 1, 2. Luke 10. 20.

But a Prince may be just himself, and yet not able to deliver his people from
the injustice of enemies that are stronger then he, as Iehosaphat said, We have
no might against this great company, 2 Cron. 20. 12. Therefore 2. Our King here
has salvation, is able to save himself and his people from their enemies, and
that to the uttermost, Heb. 7. 25. It was his Name, his Office, the end why he
was sent, why he was exalted to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5. 31. 1 John
4. 14. And this surely matter of great joy. It is an Angelical Argument, I
bring you tidings of great joy which shall be to all people; for unto you is
born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.
10, 11.

But Princes possibly, the more powerful and victorious they are, may be
likewise the more stately; it is not altogether unusual with men where they do
much good, to be supercilious and haughty toward those to whom they do it:
But lo here, 3. A Prince great in honor, righteous in peace, valiant in war;
and yet humble and lowly still: So lowly as to minister to his own servants,
and to wash their feet, John 13. 14. as to be an example of meekness unto them,
Mat. 11. 29. The meanest of his people have access unto him, may present their
wants before him; nay he stays not for them, he comes to seek, as well as to
save, calls on us, stands and knocks at our doors, waits that he may be
gracious; bears with us in our failings, expects us in our delays, forgives
our wanderings, Vid. Ciceronis ad Q. fratrem Epistelam. and Sen. de Clemen^ia.
prays us to be reconciled to God, Luke 19. 10. Isa. 13. 18. Rev. 3. 20. Now
there is nothing more rejoiceth the hearts of a people, then the mildness,
gentleness, and clemency of their Prince, whence, when his heart is not
haughty, nor his eyes lofty, as David said of himself, Psalm. 13. 1. when he is
as a servant to his people, and speaks good words unto them, as the old men
advised Rehoboam, 1 Reg. 12. 7.

But a Prince may have a righteous heart, a valiant hand, a meek temper, and
yet do the less good by a natural slowness and indisposedness to action Tantum
Bellam, tam diuturnum, tam long lateque dispernm -- Cis. Pompeius extrema
hyeme apparavit, ineunto vere suscepit, Media aestate confecit Cis. prolege
manilia.
; there is nothing more acceptable to the people, and necessary for the Prince,
then vigor and dispatch in works of Justice and prowess. Therefore, 4, Our
King is here set forth riding: He did always go about doing of good, made it
his meat and drink to do his Fathers work: And here, when it seemed most
reasonable for him to have drawn back and spared himself, when he was to be
crucified, he shows his cheerfulness in that service, by riding to Jerusalem
about it, which we read not that he did upon any other occasion: He did
earnestly desire that Passover, he did severely rebuke Peter when he dissuaded
him from that work, he did express his singular readiness to become a
sacrifice; Lo I come, I delight to do thy will O God; yea thy Law is within
mine heart, Psalm. 40. 7, 8. And though in his agony he did earnestly desire
that the cup might pass from him, yet those groans of his nature under it, did
greatly set forth the submission and willingness of his love to undergo it. Now
this is a further ground of great joy to a people, when all other Princely
endowments in their Sovereign, are vigorously acted and improved for their
safety and protection; when they see him deny himself in his own ease and
safety, that he may be ever doing good to them. We see what an high value the
people set on David, Thou art worth ten thousand of us; and this the occasion;
I will surely go forth with you my self, 2 Samuel 18. 2, 3.

But a Prince may have all the endowments requisite to render him amiable in
the eyes of his people, just and meek to them, valiant and active against their
enemies, and yet fail Amplissimorum vi^orum consilia ex even ^u, non ex
voluntate aplerisque pro^ari solent. Cic. ep. ad Atti^^. lib 9. ep 10 Vt
quisque fortuna utitur ita praecellet, atque ex^nde supere eum omnes dicimus
Plautus.
of success in his undertakings, and they consequently have the joy of his
Government much abated; for, The Race is not always to the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong: But it is otherwise with our King here. Therefore it is
added, 5. He cuts the Chariot and the horse, and the battel-bow, he speaks
peace to his people, he extends his Dominion from Sea to Sea, from the River to
the ends of the earth; he rides on in his Majesty prosperously, the people fall
under him, Psalm. 45. 4, 5. He goes forth conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2.
he takes from the strong man all his armor, and divides the spoil, Luke 11. 22.
Isa. 53. 12. he never fails of full and final victory, reigns till all enemies
are put under his feet, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25. And this is the Crown of his Peoples
Joy, That they have not only a just, a valiant, an humble, an active, but a
prosperous and successful Prince, making his people rejoice in the spoils of
their enemies, breaking the yoke of their burden, the staff of their shoulder,
the rod of their oppressor, extending peace to them like a River, and the glory
of the Gentiles like a flowing stream, causing them to put their feet on the
necks of their adversaries. Thus, many ways are the people of Christ
encouraged to rejoice in him.

This then serves, 1. To reprove the sin and folly of all those who seek for
joy out of the broken Cisterns of the Creatures, which can hold none, and leave
that living fountain out of which it naturally flows. Some seek it in secular
wealth and greatness, others in sensual pleasures, feasting, gaming, luxury,
excess; some in Titles of Honor, others in variety of knowledge, some in
stately Structures, magnificent retinue, goodly provisions; others in low,
sordid, and brutish lusts. Unto all whom we may say as the Angel unto the
women, Luke 24. 5. Why seek ye the living amongst the dead; or as Samuel did
unto Saul, Set not thy mind upon the Asses, there are nobler things to fix thy
desires upon. Solomon had more variety this way, and more wisdom to improve it,
then any now have; and he made it his business critically and curiously to
examine all the creatures, and to find out all the good which was under the Sun.
And the product and result of all his enquiries, amounted at last to a total
made up all of Ciphers, of mere wind and emptiness, Vanity of vanities, vanity
of vanities, all is vanity: So he begins his book; and to show that he was not
mistaken, so he concludes it, Eccles. 1. and 12. Every particular vanity alone,
and all in a mass and collection, vanity together, enough to vex the soul,
enough to weary it; but never enough to fill it, or to suffice it: Many of them
sinful delights, poisoned cordialls, killing, cursing, damning joies; dropping
as an honeycomb, smooth as oil, but going down to death, and taking hold of
hell, Prove. 5. 35. All of them empty delights, in their matter and expectation
earthly; in their acqnisition painful, in their fruition nauseous and cloying,
in their duration dying and perishing; in their operation hardening,
effeminating, levening, puffing up, estranging the heart from God; in their
consequences seconded with anxiety, solicitude, fear, sorrow, despair,
disappointment, in their measure shorter then that a man can stretch himself
on, narrower then that a man can wrap himself in; every way defective and
d^sproportionable to the vast and spacious capacity of the soul, as unable to
fill that, as the light of a candle to give day to the world. What ever
delights men take pleasure in leaving Christ out, are but as the wine of a
condemned man; as the feast of him who sat under a naked sword, hanging over
him by a slender thread; as Adams forbidden fruit seconded by a flaming sword,
as Belshazars dainties with an handwriting against the wall, In the midst of
all such joy, the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviniss,
Apul. Apologi.
Prove. 14. 12. Like a flame of stubble, or a flash of gunpowder, Claro
strepitu, largo fulgore, cito incremento: sed enim materia levi, caduco
incendio, nullis reliquiis. A sudden and flaming blaze which ends in smoke
and stink. The triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the hypocrite
is but for a moment, Job. 20. 5. Like the Roman Saturnalia, Macrob. Satur. l. 1
c. 7. 10. Athenaeus, l. 14. c. 17.
wherein the servants feasted for two or three days, and then returned to
their low condition again.

2. This discovers the great sin and folly of those who take offense at
Christ; and when others entertain him with Hosanna and acclamations, are
displeased at him, as the Scribes, Mat. 21. 15. and with the young man in the
Gospel, go away sorrowful from him, Mark 10. 22. Our Savior pronounces them
blessed, who are not offended with him, Mat. 11. 6. thereby intimating the
misery of those, who stumbling at him, as a rock of offense, are thereupon
disobedient unto his word. Christ does not give any just cause of offense unto
any; but there are many things belonging unto Christ, which the proud and
corrupt hearts of men do turn into matter of grief and offense unto themselves.

1. Some are offended at his Person, in whom the Godhead and Manhood are
united, as the Jews, John 1. ^. 33. and the Samosatenians, Photinians, and
Neophotinians since; who though the Lord in his Word call him the Miphty God,
Isa. 9. 6. tell us that the Word was God, John 1. 1. God blessed for ever, Rom
9. 5. Equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. The true God, 1 John 5. 20. The Great God.
Tit. 2. 13. a God whose Throne is for ever and ever, Heb. 1. 8. The Lord who in
the beginning laid the foundation of the earth, v. 10. Jehovah our
righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. yet will not endure to have him any more then a mere
man, without any personality or real subsistence, till he was born into the
world of the Virgin Mary. It would be tedious to trouble you with the manifold
offense which ancient and modern Heretics have taken at the Person, Nature and
Hypostatical union in Christ. The Nicephor. Calist. l. 6. c. 26
Sabellians acknowledging three names of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but only
one Hypostasi. The Socrates, lib. 1 c. 3.
Arians affirming him to have been of like essence with the Father, but not
coessential, nor coeternal, but a mere creature. The Epiphan. l. 2. to 2.
Manichees denying the truth of his humane nature. The Greg. Naz. orat. 46.
Apollinarians the integrity of it. The Tertul. de Carn. Christi. c. 1.
Valentines and Mareionites, the original of it from the blessed Virgin. The
Nestorians affirming a plurality of persons, as well as of natures. The Vid
Aug. Phi. and Epiphan. de Haeresibus.
Euthychians, a confusion of natures in one person. So mightily has Satan
bestirred himself by many and quite contrary instruments to plunder the Church
(if it had been possible) of the Lord their Righteousness.

2. Others are offended at his Cross, both Jews and Greeks, 1 Cor. 1. 23. Those
pitching in their expectations upon a glorious Prince, who should free them
from the Roman yoke, could not endure to be so disappointed, as in the stead
thereof to have a crucified man, one in the form of a servant to be their
Messiah; and therefore whosoever rule over them, he shall not, Luke 19. 4.
These, judging it a foolish thing to expect life from a dead man, glory and
blessedness from one who did not keep himself from shame and curse, hearing
doctrines wholly dissonant and inconsistent with the principles they had been
prepossessed withal, did thereupon refuse to submit to Christ; who
notwithstanding, to them which are called, was the power of God, and the wisdom
of God; had more power then that which the Jews require, more wisdom then that
which the Greeks sought after. The Cross of Christ, likewise to be taken up by
his Disciples and followers, is matter of offense unto many others, called the
offense of the Cross, Gal. 5. 11. When they hear that they must suffer with
him, if they will reign with him; that through many tribulations they must
enter into the Kingdom of God; that affliction is an appendix to the Gospel,
and find the truth of it by experience (persecution arising because of the
word) then presently they are offended, Matthew. 13. 21.

3. Others are offended at the Free Grace of Christ, cannot endure to be shut
out from all share and causality toward their own salvation. Thus the Jews not
willing to seek righteousness by faith in Christ, but as it were by the works
of the Law, stumbled at that stumbling stone, Fideles Seipsos discernuntab
infidelibus. Grevinchov. dissertat. de elect. and fide praevisa. p. 226.
Romans 9. 32, 33. Men would fain owe some of the thank for their salvation to
themselves, to their own will, their own work, their consenting to Christ,
their not resisting of him, their cooperating with him, their works of
condignity and congruity disposing them toward him; they like not to hear of
discriminating grace. But when men have used all the Arts and Arguments they
can to have the efficacy of divine grace unto conversion, Vid. Aug. ep. 46 De
spiritu and litera cap. 34. de praedestinat c. 3, 5, 8. De Great. Christi l. 1.
c. 24. Contraduas. Epist. pelag l. 1. c. 19, 20, and l. 4. c. 6. De Great. and
lib. Arb. c. 21. De Corrept. and Great. c. 14.
within the power or reach of their own will; yet still this will be Scripture,
That it is God that works in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure,
Phil. 2 13. That it is God who makes us to differ, 1 Cor. 4. 7. that he has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, Rom 9. 15. that his grace is his own, to
dispose of as he will, Mat. 20. 15. 1 Cor. 12. 21. That the purpose of God
according to election shall stand; not of works, but of him that calls, Romans
9. 11. That by grace we are saved, through faith, and that not of our selves,
Ep. 2. 8. That it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of
God that shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. That Gods divine power gives us things
pertaining to life and godliness, 2 Pet. 1 3. That there is an exceeding
greatness of his power, toward those that believe the working of the might of
his power, Ephesians. 1. 19. That the Lords people are willing in the day of his
power, Psalm. 110. 3. So then our willingness is the work of his power the
efficacy of his power is not suspended upon our will; we will, because he
effectually works; he does not work effectually, and with success, because we
will.

4. Others are offended at the Doctrine of Christ, they are not able to endure
the things that are spoken by him.

1. Some at the sublimity of it, as being above the disquisition of Reason, the
Philosophers mocked at the Doctrine of the Resurrection, Greg. Naz. Orat. 3.
Aug. de Civ. dei l. 10. c. 29. and l. 13. c. 16.
Acts 17. 32. Julian scorned Christians, as yielding up their souls captive to
a blind belief; pride of Reason disdaining to admit any thing beyond its own
comprehension, has been the cause of that offense which many have taken at
Evangelical Doctrine, The Deity of Christ, and the Holy Spirit, the
Hypostatical union, traduction of sin, imputation of righteousness, etc. It
has been noted by learned men, Hooker. l. 5. s. 3. Aug. Epist. 56.
that the Eastern Nations by reason of the pride and curiosity of their wits,
have been most troubled with horrid and prodigious herefies. And it has been
regularis Haereticorum temeritas, the constant presumption of heretical
spirits, to oppose sound believers, as unskilful and illiterate persons, with
the name and pretense of Reason.

2. Some at the simplicity of it: The doctrine of the Cross was esteemed
foolishness by the Grandees of the world, 1 Cor. 1. 18. Acts 17. 18.
partly because delivered without the enticing words of man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.
4. partly because the things were such as pride and lust judged unreasonable to
stoop to. Christian doctrine is above reason natural, against reason sinful.

3. Some at the Sanctity and severity of it. When it teaches Self-denial, Mat.
16. 24. and 5. 29, 30. Heb. 13. 13. Luke 14. 26 27 Mat. 7. 13, 14 Phil. 3. 20.
Col 3. 1. 5. Mat. 5. 44. Ephesians. 6. 12. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 5 22. Acts 24. 16. Phil. 2.
15. Ephesians. 5. 15. Psalm. 16. 8. Heb. 11. 25. 26
pulling out the right eye, cutting off the right hand, taking up a cross,
following Christ without the Camp, hating and forsaking all for him, walking in
the narrow way, having our conversations and affections in heaven, mortifying
our lusts, loving our enemies, wrestling against Principalities and powers,
praying always, abstaining from all appearance of evil, exercising our selves
in a good conscience toward God and men, living without rebuke, in the midst of
a crooked generation, walking circumspectly, setting the Lord always before us,
choosing the reproaches of Christ, rather then the pleasures of sin, or honors
of the world. When sensual and earthly minded men are held close by such
Doctrines as these, they conclude with the men of Capernaum, This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? John 6. 60.

Now the greatness of this sin appears by the other dangerous sins that are
folded in it: for it plainly implies;

1. Unthankfulness for Christ, and undervaluing of him; for did we apprehend
him (as in truth he is) exceeding precious, no such slender prejudices would
cause us to take offense at him. There is nothing in him which is not lovely to
believers; those very things at which wicked men stumble, are to them amiable.
Nyssen. in Cant. Homil. 3.
As that Odor which is deadly to a Vultur, is comfortable to a Dove; as the
same water of jealousy, in case of an innocent woman, did cause to conceive,
which, in case of guilt, did cause the belly to swell, and the thigh to rot,
Number. 5. 27, 28.

2. It notes love of sin, and senselesness under it; for were men truly
affected with the danger of that, they would not be offended at the bitterness
of the medicine that removes it. Had the young man's affections been looser from
his possessions, they would have cleaved closer unto Christ. (...), Euripid
apud Stobaeum. Sermon. 61.
An adulterous heart does many times take more pleasure in an unhandsome
harlot, then in a beautiful wife. Unbelief in Christ ever proceeds from the
predominancy of some other love, John 12. 42, 43.

3. It notes slight apprehensions of the wrath to come. The more the heart is
possessed with the terror of wrath, the more it will value the Sanctuary which
protecteth from it. No condemned man is offended at his pardon, by what hand
soever it be brought unto him.

4. It notes Hardness and contumacy in sin: nothing shuts out the voice of
Christ, but pride of heart, which will not submit to the law of faith, Heb. 3.
7. Romans 10. 3.

5. It notes an unsavouriness of soul, which cannot relish the things of God.
As a bitter palate tastes every thing bitter, so an impure heart knows not how
to judge of things that are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 14. Heb. 5. 13.
makes even an impure Scripture an impure Christ, an impure Religion. And this
is indeed a right dangerous condition; for where Christ is not for the rising,
he is for the fall of men; where his sweet favor is not reviving, it is
deadly: That sickness, of all other, is most incureable, which rejects
Cordials: no state so desperate, as that which thrusts away salvation from
it, Acts 13. 46.

3. We should therefore be exhorted unto this so comfortable a duty, to stir up
in our hearts that joy in Christ which the inestimable benefit of our high
calling requires of us. It is a comely thing for the righteous to rejoice,
Psalm 33. 1. Shall wicked men glory in that which is their shame, and shall not
the righteous rejoice in him who is their salvation? Shall he rejoice over us
to do us good, Ier. 32. 41. and rests in his love to us, Zeph. 3. 17. And shall
not we rejoice in him who is the chiefest of ten thousand? Are not all the
objects of joy, which are scattered amongst the creatures, heaped up, and
everlastingly treasured in him alone? Do we delight in wealth (as many will
say, Who will show us any good) behold here unsearchable riches, Ephesians. 3. 8.
Durable riches, Prove. 8. 18. without bounds, without bottom, without end. Do we
delight in pleasure? Behold here rivers of pleasure that never dry, pleasures
for evermore that never vanish, Psalm 36. 8. and 16. 11. Do we delight in
beauty? He is fairer then the children of men, Psalm 45. 2. In sweet odours?
All his garments smell of myrrh, alloes and cassia; he is perfumed with all the
spices of the Merchant, Psalm 45. 8. Cant. 3. 6. In music or elegant orations?
His mouth is most sweet, altogether lovely, grace is poured into his lips,
Cant. 5. 16. In plentiful provision? behold here a feast of fatted things, Isa,
25. 6 living water, John 4. 10. Bread of life, meat indeed, John 6. 51, 55. a
Banqueting House, with flagons, apples, fruits, Cant. 2. 3, 5, 7, 17. In
stately buildings? Here is an Ivory Palace, whose beams are Cedar, whose
galleries are cyprus, Ps. 45. 8. Cant. 1. 16. In profound learning? Here is
knowledge that passes knowledge, (...), Phil. 3. 8. the excellency of
knowledge, knowledge that is life, John 17. 3. In honor and dignity? Here is
the Lord of Glory, honorable in himself, Phil. 3. 9. an honor to his people, 1
Pet. 2. 7. making them all Kings and Priests to God, Rev. 1. 6. In safety and
security? This man is our peace, when the Assyrian is in the Land, Mic. 5. 5.
He will cast out our enemies, he will undo those that afflictus, Zeph 3. 15, 19
In him the fullness of all delectable things; and that which makes all the more
delightful, it is bonum parabile, though so superlatively precious, yet not to
be purchased at a dear rate, set before us, offered unto us, without money,
without price, Isaiah 55. 2. a gift, a free gift a gift of grace, a gift of
righteousness, Romans 5. 15, 18. Well might the Psalmist bid us rejoice, and
exceedingly rejoice, Psalm 68. 3. Well might the Prophet bid us sing, and
shout, and rejoice, and be glad with all the heart, Zeph. 3, 14. Well might the
Apostle call it, a joy unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. since the
Lord Jesus is not only the joy of Saints, Luke 19. 37, 38. but of blessed
Angels, Luke 2. 13. yea of God himself. He is called the Lords delight, Prove.
8. 30. Surely then Gods people cannot but be fully agreed upon it to Rejoice in
him.

And how in him?

1. In his person and immediate excellencies, those glorious treasures of
wisdom and grace wherewith he is replenished, a spectacle of Angelical
adoration, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Heb. 1. 6.

2. In his mediation, the great things he has done, the great benefits he has
procured for us. God forbid (says the Apostle) that I should glory, save in
the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14.

3. In our knowledge of him, and communion with him in all those benefits; a
knowledge, in comparison of which, the Apostle esteemed all other things as
loss and dung, Phil. 3. 8.

4. In all the means which he has appointed to bring men to this knowledge of
him, and communion with him: In his Ordinances, which are his voice speaking
from heaven unto us, according to our estimation whereof, he accounts himself
regarded by us, Luke 10. 16. In his Ministers, to whom he has committed the
word of reconciliation, whom his people have received as Angels of God, Gal. 4.
14, 15. unto whom what respect, or disrespect is showed, Christ looks on as
done unto himself, Mat. 10. 40, 41. And here I cannot but follow the example of
our Apostle toward these Philippians, Chap. 4. v. 10 -- 14 -- 19. and with joy
and thankfulnness make mention of the zeal and Christian care of this Honorable
City, both to provide a learned and faithful Ministry, and having such to
speak comfortably unto them, as Hezekiah did, and to encourage them in the
service of the Lord: And this your work of faith, and labor of love, is the
more acceptable, in that it has flourished in these loose times, wherein many
unstable and seduced souls have been misled by the profane impulsions of such
as bear evil will to the prosperity of our Sion, to load the Ministers of
Christ, as the Jews did their Lord before them, with execrations and
reproaches. This your zeal has been famous in all places at home, and I
persuade my self in all the Churches of Christ abroad; and I doubt not but it
will be a rejoicing and a crown unto you at the appearing of the Lord. And
truly your Honor stands not so much in your spacious City, in your goodly
Structures, in your great River, in your numerous ships* in your wise Senate,
in your full Treasures, Londinium -- Copia negotiatorum* and commeatu maxim
Celebre. Tacit. annal. lib. 14.
in your vast Trade, in your ancient Name (for you have been a most famous
Emporium upon record, for above fifteen hundred years) all these are but thin
and empty Elogies unto that one, Ezekiel. 44. 35. The name of the City shall be
Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there. This is, this will be your honor, if you be
a City of truth, the mountain of the Lord of hosts, the holy Mountain, Zach. 8.
3. The Gospel is the riches of a Nation, Romans 11. 12. obedience and wisdom the
renown of a people, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Go on therefore thus to rejoice in Christ, by
honoring his Ordinances, by strengthening the hands, and comforting the hearts
of his Ministers in his service, and the Lord will be with you, and men shall
say of you, The Lord bless thee O habitation of justice, and mountain of
holiness, Ier. 31. 22

5. Rejoice we in that work whereunto by these he calls us; as it was his joy to
do his Fathers work, so it is the joy of believers to do his work, 2 Cor. 1.
12. they live not, they die not unto themselves, but unto him, Romans 14. 7, 8.

6. In the graces he supplies us withal for the performance of that work: Thus
we read of the joy of faith, Phil. 1. 25. not only in regard of the good things
it assures unto us, but of the efficacy which it has in us, inabling us to
work by love.

7. In the light of his countenance shining on us, which is much better then
life it self; Psalm. 63. 3. We may all say unto him, as he said unto his Father,
Acts 2. 28. Thou shall make me full of joy with thy countenance.

8. In the hope of his glory: The spirit of adoption is even now a glorious
thing, John 1. 2. But it does not yet appear what we shall be, only this he
has assured us of, That we shall be like unto him, shall see him as he is,
shall appear with him in glory; shall sit upon his Throne, and be ever with
him; 1 John 3 1, 2. Col. 3. 4. And this blessed hope, secured by the witness of
the spirit (who is the seal and earnest of our eternal inheritance) fills the
hearts of believers with joy unspeakable and full of glory; while they look not
on the things that are seen, but on the things that are not seen.

9. In the fellowship of his sufferings, which though to sense they be matter
of sorrow, yet unto faith are they matter of joy. When Gods servants consider,
that unto these sufferings they were appointed, 1 These. 3. 3. That Christ owns
them as his, Col. 1. 4. That they work for them a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4. 17. That thereby the spirit of glory rests
on them, and that God himself is glorified in them: 1 Pet. 4. 14. In these
respects they not only rejoice, but triumph as more then conquerors in all
their afflictions, Acts 5. 41 Romans 8. 37. Iam. 1. 2.

Thus are Believers to rejoice in Christ: And that, 1. Greatly, again and
again. Other delights may please the senses, tickle the fancy; gratify the
reason; but there is no joy that can fill all the heart, but the joy of the
Lord, Zeph. 3. 14.

2. Always: Rejoice ever more, 1 These. 5. 16. all other joies have their periods
and vacations, they flow and ebb, they blossom and wither: In a fit of
sickness, in a pang of conscience, under a sentence of death, they are all as
the white of an egg, without any savor. But no condition is imaginable, wherein
a conscionable believer has not a foundation of joy in Christ: This Tree of
life has fruit on it for every month, Rev. 21. 2. The comforter he sends
abides with us for ever, John 14. 16. The joy he gives, none can take away,
John 16. 22. Though Gods people have many causes of sorrow in themselves,
strong corruptions, hard hearts, little strength, weak graces, many
temptations; yet in Christ they have still matter of rejoicing; in the
constancy of his love, in the abundance of his pardoning mercy, in the fullness
of his spirit, in the sufficiency of his grace, in the fidelity of his promise,
in the validity of his purchase, in the vigilance of his eye, in the readiness
of his help, in the perpetuity of his intercession; we disparage so good a
Lord, discredit his service, disquiet our selves, discourage others, grieve his
spirit, expose his ways to prejudice and reproach, weaken our hands in his
service and our hearts in his love, when we pine and languish under groundless
perplexity, and waste that time which should be spent in his work, about our
jealousies of his favor.

3. With trembling and holy reverence, Res severa est verum gaudium, without
levity, without wantonness, without presumption, without arrogance, Psalm. 2.
11. So rejoice in him, as withal to fear to offend him, to work out our own
salvation with fear and trembling; even for this very reason, because he is so
gracious as to give us both, to will and to do of his own good pleasure, Phil.
2. 12, 13.

4. With improvement of this joy: 1. Unto thankfulness for Christ, and any
thing of Christ in our selves, In eundem hominem non luto Convenire Gaudium and
silentium. Pacatus in Panegyr.
having tasted that the Lord is gracious, let us ever be speaking good of his
name; though our measures are not so great as some other men's, yet we may not
esteem any thing of salvation small, or little; it will grow unto perfection.

2. Unto more cheerful service, the more we triumph in his victory, the more we
shall abound in his work, 1 Cor. 15. 57, 58. The joy of the Lord is our
strength, Nehem. 8. 10. Return to thy rest, O my soul; there is David's joy, I
will walk before the Lord; there is the work of that joy, Psalm. 116. 8, 9. None
are more fruitful in his service, then they who are most joifull in his favor.

3. Unto consolation against any other evils, though we have not the wealth,
health, gifts, employments, honors that others have; yet if Christ have given
us himself, his blood to redeem us, his spirit to quicken us, his grace to
renew us, his peace to comfort us; Should such consolations seem small unto us?
Job 15. 11. What wants are there which the joy of the Lord does not compensate?
What sufferings are there which the joy of the Lord does not swallow up? Would
we exchange Christ if we might have all the world without him? And shall we be
displeased if we have not all the world with him? Nay have we not in him all
other things more eminently, sweetly, purely, richly to enjoy, then in all the
creatures besides? Fidelibus totus mundus divitiarum est. Does thy journey to
heaven displease thee, because the way happily is deep and stony? admit it were a
Carpit-way like Salisbury Plain, happily there thou would loiter more, happily
there thou would be more assaulted, whereas in a deeper way thou art more
careful of thy self, and more secure against thine enemies.

Lastly, unto a zealous provocation of others to come in and be partakers of
the same joy. In times of festivity, men use to call their neighbors under
their Vines and Fig Trees, Zach. 3. 10. The Lord Jesus is the feast of his
servants, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. unto him therefore we should invite one another, as
Andrew did Simon, and Philip Nathaniel, John 1. 41, 45. Joy is of all
affections the most communicative, it leaps out into the eyes, the feet, the
tongue, stays not in one private bosom, but as it is able, sheds it self abroad
into the bosoms of many others. Non se capit exundantis laetitiae magnitudo,
sed designata p^ctorum latebras, foris prominet. N^z. panegyr.
It was not enough for David to express his own joy by dancing before the Ark;
but he deals amongst all the people, cakes of bread, pieces of flesh, flagons
of wine, that the whole multitude of Israel might rejoice in the Ark of God as
well as he, 2 Samuel 6. 14. 19. I shall shut up all with removing two obstacles
which seem to stand in the way of this joy.

1. If I must always rejoice, how then, or when, shall I sorrow for sin? I
answer, These two do sweetly consist. As the Passover was a Feast, yet eaten
with bitter herbs, so Christ our Passover may be feasted upon with a bitter
sense of our own sins. As in the Spring many a sweet flower falls, and yet the
Sun shines all the while: So there may be sweet flowers of Godly sorrow, and
the Sun of righteousness still shine on the soul. None do more mourn for
offending Christ, then those who do most rejoice in the fruition of him.

2. But what shall we say of wounded and afflicted consciences, lying under the
buffets of Satan, under divine desertions, sinking under temptation, and
wrestling with the sense and fear of wrath, can these rejoice at all, much less
always? It is true, when God hides his face, none can behold him, in such a
shipwreck neither Sun nor Stars will appear. But yet,

1. There is the matter and foundation of true joy, the seed of comfort Light
is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart, Psa. 97. 11.

2. These sorrows are many times preparations for more joy, as the sorrow of a
travailing woman, Joh. 16. 20. black roots bear beautiful flowers: The Whale
that swallowed Jonah, carried him to the shore. Dark colors make way to an
overlaying of gold. The more a stone is wounded by the hand of the engraver,
the more beauty is superinduced upon it. Many times where the Lord intends most
comfort, he does usher it in with more sorrow; as the Angel first lamed Jacob,
and then blessed him.

3. This very estate is far more elegible then the pleasures of sin, and
therefore has more delight in it. If you should ask an holy man in this case,
you see how severely Christ deals with you: Will you not rather give over
serving him, lamenting after him, languishing for want of him, and resume your
wonted delights of sin again? What other answer would a good soul give, but as
Christ to Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me. Though
there be little reason that he should comfort me, yet there is great reason
that I should serve him. The wounds of Ghrist are better then the kiss of the
world; it is much better being with a frowning fat^^r, then with a flattering
foe. The worst estate of a Saint is better then the best of a sinner, the
bitterest Physic, then sweetest poison. As in the midst of worldly laughter
the heart is sorrowful; so in the midst of saddest Temptations, the soul still
concludes, It is good for me to draw nigh to Christ. Let him deny me, let him
delay me, let him desert me, let him destroy me, yet I will love him, and
desire him still. As the blackest day is lighter then the brightest night; so
the saddest day of a believer is more joyous then the sweetest night of a
wicked man.

We have thus considered the Lord Jesus as a present, a precious, a full, a
pure, a rare, a various, a victorious, a perpetual, a proper good of his
people; a Prince adorned with justice, with salvation, with humility, with
dispatch, with success and peace; We have showed the folly of those who fix
their delights upon empty creatures; the danger of those who are offended at
the Person, the Cross, the Grace, the Doctrine, the Sublimity, the Simplicity,
the Sanctity of the ways of Christ. We have exhorted his servants to rejoice in
his Person, in his Mediation, in their knowledge of him, in the Ordinances and
Instruments he has appointed to bring unto that knowledge, in the service
whereunto he calls us, in the graces wherewith he supplies us, in the light of
his countenance, in the hope of his glory, in the fellowship of his sufferings;
to rejoice in him fully, to rejoice in him always, to rejoice with trembling, to
improve this joy unto thankfulness for his benefits, unto cheerfulness in his
service, unto Consolation against all evil, unto the provocation of one another
unto the same joy: Now the God of hope fill us with all joy and peace in
believing, that we may abound in hope, through the power of the holy Ghost;
that the peace of God which passes all understanding, may rule in our hearts;
that we may rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, receiving the end
of our faith, even the salvation of our souls. And the God of peace, who
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, make us perfect in every good
work to do his will, working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight,
through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 30. r. Paradise, passim: p. 3. l. 24. r. tears. p. 5. margent, r.
habet, r. (...), p. 6. marg. r. (...), p. 16. l. 4. r. dispensed, p. 18. marg.
r. dispersum, r. Cn. r. ineunte, p. 19. l. 21. r. offense, l. 17. r. mighty, p.
23. l. 2. r. Hypostasis, l. 3. r. Valentinians, r. Marcionites, l. 10. r.
Eutycheans. Small litteral faults correct.


