JUSTIFICATION BY CHRIST ALONE, A Fountain of life and comfort, Declaring that
the whole work of man's salvation was accomplished by Jesus Christ upon the
cross, in that he took away and healed all his, from all sins, and
presented them to God holy without fault in his sight. And the Objections
against this are Answered, for the consolation of such as believe; and that
they may not ascribe that which is proper to Christ's Preistly Office, to their
beleiving.

Isa. 53. 11. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many for he
shall bear their iniquities.

Joh. 19. 28. 30. Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled; he said it is finished, and he bowed his head and
gave up the ghost.

Col. 21. 22. In the body of his flesh through death, to make you holy and
unblamable, and without fault in his sight.

Romans 5. 9. Being justified by his blood.

Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.

By Samuel Richardson.

LONDON; Printed by M. S. and are to be sold by Hannah Allen at the sign of
the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. And George Whitington at the Anchor near the
Royall-Exchange. 1647.

TO ALL THAT LOVE THE LORD JESUS In SINCERITY and truth, (Heirs of the
purchased Possession in Christ Jesus) Who has loved us and washed away our
sins in his own blood.
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
DEarly beloved brethren, These are the last times wherein iniquity abounds,
and the love of many waxes cold; so as we are ready to misconst^re, and take
all things in the worst part from God or man, For want of love. The times are
perilous, I cannot but desire you before I go hence, That ye keep your
selves pure from the error of the wicked (and from Idols, and to love one
another) And that you may the better do it. 1. Keep to and hold fast the
wholesome Pattern of sound words, which are expressed in the holy Scriptures, 1 Timothy 6. 3. and 4. 6. For if ye come once to forsake the words and exp^^ssions
of Christ, you will quickly lose the Truth of Christ; and receive error instead
of Truth, I cannot but believe when the Apostle condemns preaching Christ in
wisdom of words, 1. Cor. 2. 17. 8. 24. He mainely strikes at holding out the
Truth in strange and curious words, which tend to render men excellent, a man
of great parts and incomes, so this also suites with the fleshly humors of the
hearers; and to pussell their understandings, as Circumlocution Intrinsicall
etc. Which is no other to the common people then a strange Language, which they
understand not. Also to take heed, that you deny not the truth of the Letter of
the Scriptures, (as the manner of some is) nor so to rest in the letter, as to
come short of the sense and meaning of it; If the first be admitted we may
burn the Bible: For if it be not true, what shall we do with it? If some of
it be false, why not the rest also? And then who can tell what is truth? And so
we^ vent^^^ our souls upon uncertainties, this is dishonorable to Christ, and
uncomfortable: and to be abhorred by all, and is the only way to bring in and
defend all errors, on the other side, if we affirm that the mind of God is
so expressed in the letter, in so many words as he that can read may see it,
is to deny any Interpretation of Scripture, and to deny them to be a Mystery:
But without controversy, great is the Mystery of godliness, and he that
observes the variety of expressions in Scripture concerning one thing, may well
confess; that unless the holy Spirit reveal to us the deep things of God,
we cannot know them, therefore take great heed you receive not any thing for
truth, unless for the substance of it, it clearly appear in the Scripture:
which is to be our Rule, both for Doctrine, and manners. Some place
justification to be only in the Conscience, but we place it only in Christ
where it is, and to whom it belongs: Justification consists in taking away of
sin, and none but Christ can do that; justification and acceptance are one:
For without justification there is no acceptance, and seeing we are accepted
in Christ we are justified in him; If our justification be a spiritual
blessing (as it is) then it is in Christ where all spiritual blessings are,
Blessed be God, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ,
Ephesians. 13. Where our redemption and righteousness is, there is our
justification: for righteousness and justification are one; and this we have
not in our selves, but in Christ, who is made unto us of God, wisdom
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. In whom we have redemption, Col. 1. 14. Our
justification is a part of our compleatnesse: Therefore where we are complete
there we are justified, but we are not complete in our selves, but in him
Col. 2. 10. If all things on which depends our happiness were accomplished,
Joh. 19 28. then was our justification also: for without that no man could be
saved. This mystery of Christ is a great mystery: oh meditate and dive as deep
as you are able into this mystery, the benefit will be great and sweet; The
more I am exercised herein, the more I see into it and enjoy justification by
Christ alone, and more clearly see our beleiving cannot justify us: yet I
deny no^, but the power to believe i^ from the Spirit, which is the life of
motion in faith, the life of faith, is the life of Christ, as I have treated
else where; what faith is, and what it does, and wherein it differes from
presumption, etc. God has given faith to his to know, assent and believe the
Truth, Heb. 11. 3, Acts, 28. 24. To encourage us to go to God, for all we
need, Acts, 26. 18. To enable us to suffer for Christ, Heb. 11. To conquer
enemies, Ephesians. 6. 16. To make our afflictions easy to bear, to in able us to
obey, Romans 15. To cleave to God, Acts, 11. 23. To his word, Psalm. 119. 30, 31.
To hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. To depend upon Jesus Christ alone for life
and salvation; what more necessary and useful in this life then faith? There
is a light in faith, and as our blind eyes and da^ke understandings are
enlightened, Ephesians. 1. 18. and 5. 13. so accordingly we are filled with the
fullness of God, Ephesians, 5. 19. Fullness of knowledge is that perfection we are
to press after, Phil. 3. 12. 17. Col. 2. 2. 4, 12. This sight shows us our
justification to be in Christ alone; And the seeking a further measure of
knowledge is a seeking to be justified, Gal. 2. 17. Because this knowledge is
that which justifies our Consciences.

Also we confess that he that beleives not has no knowledge of any
justification, all that are without faith they are visiblely in a perishing
state, there is not the least appearance to the contrary, no man may apply
salvation to such as believe not, nor may they apply any to themselves, such as
believe not have no enjoyment of God, no true peace, no evidence of life, no
right to Baptism, or the Supper, they cannot see the mystery of the Truth; He
cannot honor God nor love the truth, nor suffer for it. Yet faith cannot
satisfy justice, nor merit the pardon of the least sin, only Christ can do
that. And that exposition that gives most glory to Christ and least to man, I
believe is the truth, and that which occasioned me to write at this time. For
since my Book entitled the Saints Desire has been published, I have received
several Objections against what I have write in Page 147. Namely, That we are
justified by Christ alone, and not by our beleiving. Some affirm the contrary,
their Reasons with an answer I here present to your considerations: Because I
am persuaded I have written the truth, and that the contrary opinion is
dishonorable to our Lord Jesus Christ, in that they ascribe not their
justification to him alone; but to something else, namely, their believing. You
know this Doctrine I contend for, is the Doctrine of free Grace, in the
knowledge whereof you find sweetness, because the works of your salvation is
finished by Christ; Whose works are all perfect, This glads your hearts and
keeps your souls from fainting, this removes all objections, that otherwise
would discourage us, this is the Fountain that cannot be drawn dry, that ever
flows with sweet and strong consolation, full of Spirit and life: where our
souls may drink freely at all times, and be refreshed with this marrow and
fatness, That all is finished. My desire is that they into whose hands this
shall come, would consider seriously what I have written, and know that no man
is to be believed upon his bare word; therefore search the Scriptures whether
these things be so or no, and if any thing I have written be not according to
them, that they let that go. My whole scope and aim in these few lines, is to
prove that we are justified by Christ alone, who is our justification, and that
we are not justified by any thing that is in us. 2. That faith or any thing in
us is not a cause, means, or condition, required (to partake of the Covenant
of Grace, justification or salvation) but only fruits and effects of the
Covenant, Thirdly, That the elect were ever in the love of God, and did ever so
appear to him just and righteous, in and by Christ. We have known and believed
the love that God has to us, God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him. The God of love so unite all the hearts of his people
to his truth, and one unto another, that so we may walk in the truth, and live
and die in love.

Your fellow servant and brother in Samuel Richardson.

TO THE HOLY SPOUSE OF JESUS CHRIST, WHO ARE subject to him in the obedience of
the Gospel.
Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Dearly beloved brethren;
AS there is nothing that frail man is more liable to, then in the things of
God to mistake; and call darkness light, and light darkness, so by how much
the more spiritual any Truth is, by so much the more men are apt to fall short
of the knowledge of the glory of it; and to intermingle with it something of
their own, as that which may make it commendable and beautiful in their eyes:
And above all others that which this small insueing Treatise speaks of,
Namely, Justification by Christ alone; Without having respect either to any
thing in the creature, or done by the creature. This favoring so much of pure
grace in respect of the love of God, and that Covenant which lies between
Christ and God; as that the poor creature, man, knows not how to own or
receive it. And truly it must be no less nor no other power put forth by God
to cause the soul to be believe this, then was put forth in raising up Christ
from the dead, Ephe. 1. 18.

And truly amongst those who are the beloved ones of our Lord Jesus, who have a
like share and intrest in him as their life and peace: There is an aptness in
men to miscarry in the knowledge of this rich grace of God; Some being apt to
conceive that there is no Justification of a creature in no sense before and
without faith, and so make Faith a joynt-partner with Christ in the business
of Justification: For indeed this is to me a certain truth, that whatsoever
gives a being to a thing must needs be a part of that thing which it gives
being to, and therefore if there be no Justification in no sense considered,
but as it has respect to faith. It is much to be feared, That that opinion
claims a great share of that glory which is peculiar to Christ Jesus alone.
That the Scripture holds forth justification by faith in a sense is very
clear: but yet under no other consideration, but by way of evidence, Heb. 11.
1, 2. And as it respects the taking away of sin from off the Conscience: For
indeed the debt is paid by the blood of Christ alone, and we are therefore
said to be justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. For indeed as Christ Jesus our
Lord has paid the debt, The Lord having laid upon him the iniquities of us
all. So does he declare this (satisfaction and acceptance of us in Christ) by
faith; That being the eye of the understanding whereby the soul comes to see
the great things which God the Father has prepared for them. Beloved these are
the last times, wherein it behooves you to beg with much earnestness strength
from the Lord; that he may put straight stepps to your feet, that you may walk
to his praise, exalting him alone as your life and glory. Which was the maine
end of the Author presenting these few lines to your consideration, wherefore
read it carefully, and noble B^rean like try all things, and hold fast that
which is good. And it shall be his desire, who desires nothing more in this
world, then your growth in the knowledge of Christ Jesus; and your walking as
the children of the light, That the God of all grace may cause all grace to
abound in you to his own glory: So prays he.

That is yours in the Lord, in all WILLIAM KIFFEN.

JUSTIFICATION BY CHRIST ALONE.
REVELATIONS 1. 5. Unto him that has loved us, and washed away our sins in his
own blood.
THese words contain the virtue, fruit, and effectualnesse of Christ's death,
and the benefit, privilege and happiness of the sons of God by it.

In these words we are to consider. 1. The persons whose sins Christ washed
away, and they were all those who were given to Christ, Ioh. 17. 29.
Jo^. 17. 29. 2. What is he that washed their sins away, and that is the Lord
Jesus Christ, ver. 5. 3. How and by what means he washed them away, and that
was with his blood. It is ascribed to his blood, Because, Heb. 9. 22.
Without blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. Question, Did Christ's blood,
as blood, Simply so considered, effect this work? Heb 9 14.
Ans. No, there is something else included in it. As appears, The blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God,
Ioh. 1. 14.
Heb. 9. 14. The word was God, the word took flesh, Joh. 1. 14. Christ who is
God: by taking flesh, united the Elect by his flesh to himself, and so became
one with God, Ioh. 17. 22, 23.
as God and Christ are one, Joh. 17. 22. 23. So that the flesh of Christ became
(in an unspeakable manner) one with the perfection of the Divine, Heb 10. 20.
and Infinite Being, which was the life and substance of all, which lay hid
under, This veil that is to say his flesh, Heb. 10. 20. So that by the power
of his Divine Nature, he might make satisfaction in and by the humane; and by
reason of this union there was an infinite value and worth in Christ's blood;
Act. 20. 28.
therefore it is called, The precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19. yea the
blood of God, Acts 20. 28. So that we may not know Christ simply after the
flesh, 2 Cor. 5. 16.
but in the flesh, and in the Spirit together, 2 Cor 5. 16. 4. The time when he
washed their sins away, which was then when he shed his blood: for in his
blood they were washed away, Christ's blood and their sins went away together.
5. The ground and cause why he took their sins away: Was his love which was
in himself, nothing in us or done by us, could move him to die for us.

The Sum of all is, That Jesus Christ by once offering the Sacrifice of
himself when he was upon the cross, he took away, put to an end, blotted out
and utterly destroyed all the sins of his people for ever; and presented them
just, righteous and holy, without spot before God.

This will appear, to be true if ye consider these several Reasons, which
are proved by plain Scriptures.

1. Because that was the time which Christ was to do this work in. Dan. 9.
24, 25, 26, 27.
Seventie weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon the holy City, to
finish the transgressions, and to make an end of sins, and to make
reconciliaton for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to
seal up the vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most holy. And after
threescore and two weeks shall the Mesiah be cut off but not for himself. And
he shall confirm the Covenant with many etc. Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27. Which
time was at an end when Christ died, therefore it is said, The year of my
Redeemed is come, Ioh. 17. 1.
Isa. 63. 4. Yea, the hour is come says Christ, Joh. 17. 1.

2. Because, Christ was ordained of God to take away sins, and to present us
holy, Who verily was fore ordained to redeem us with his precious blood, 1.
Pet. 1. 19. 20. For he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him: 2 Cor. 5. 21. Who of God in
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1 30.
sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

3. Because Christ was mighty to save. Therefore he did do this work himself
alone: Isa. 63.
Who is this that comes from Ed^m with dyed garments from Bozrah? that is
glorious in his apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that
speak in righteousness, mighty to save. I have trodden the wine press alone,
and of the people there was none with me. I looked, and there was none to help;
therefore my own arm brought salvation unto me. Isa. 63. So that Christ did all
this work alone, for none else could help. Then thou spakest in a vision to thy
holy One, Psalm 89. 19.
and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. Psalm. 89. 19.

4. Because Christ took flesh on purpose to effect this work: Wherefore when he
came into the world, Hebr 10.
he said; Sacrifices and offerings thou would not; but a body thou have
prepared for me: in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou had no
pleasure. Heb. 10.

5. It was the will of God that Christ should by the shedding his blood
sanctify his, by the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus once for all. Heb. 10. 5. to 11.

6. Because Jesus Christ came on purpose to take away our sins, 1 Ioh 3. 5.
etc. Then said I, L^, I come to de ^hy will, O God. Heb. 10. He was manifested
to take away o^ sins, and in him i^ no sin. 1 John 3. 5. Once in the end of the
world has he appeared to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Heb. 9.
12. 25, 26, 28.

7. Because Jesus Christ was made a curse for us, and suffered all the
punishment due to us for sin: Gal. 3. 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.
Gal. 3. 13. Surely he has born our griefs, Isa. 53.
and carried our sorrows: we did esteem him stricken, and smitten of God, and
afflicted. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him: the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all. He bare the sins of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors. Isa. 53.

8. Because the Scriptures says he has obtained eternal redemption for us:
Hebr. 9.
Having obtained eternal redemption for us, Hebr. 9. In whom we have
redemption through his blood, the forgivensse (...) reproveable in his sight.
Col. 1. 20, 21, 22. For this end Christ gave himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5. 25.
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it might be holy without blemish. Mi^. 7.
19.
Ephesians. 5. Therefore the Scriptures say, all our sins are scattered, removed,
cast behind his back: Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. Isa. 38.
17. They are cast into the depth of the Sea: Mich. 7. 19. As far as the East
is from the West, Psalm. 103. 12.
so far has he removed our t^ansgr^^ssions from us. Psalm. 103. 12. Psalm. 32.
1.
This is something, but this is not all, they are covered: Whose sin is
covered, Psalm. 32. 1. Yet the soul is not satisfied, because a thing may have a
being that is covered; therefore God says they are b^otted out, Isa. 44. 22.
I have blotted out as a thick land thy transgressions, and as a cloud thy sin.
Isa. 44. 22. This is more, for now they are not, Isa. 43. 25.
they have no being. But God can remember that which is not: this is answered,
for God says, I will not remember thy sins: Isa. 43. 25. I will remember their
sins no more: Ier. 31. 34.
Jer. 31. 34. I hope now you are satisfied.

16. Because they are holy, and without spot. Therefore Christ says of his,
Song 4. 7.
Thou art all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee. Song 4. 7. Song 2. 10.
My love, my fair one: Song 2. 10. They are without fault before the throne of
God. Rev. 14 5.
Revel. 14. 5. Now this could not have been, Ephesians. 5. 27.
if Christ had not in the body of his flesh through death made them so holy,
and presented them so to God. As Col. 1. 21, 23. Ephesians. 5.

17. Because Christ says that we are without ^in; 1 Ioh. 4. 17.
we may have boldness in the day of judgment, 1 Ioh 3 5.
because as he is, so are we in this world. H^b 9. 28.
1 John 4. 17. How is Christ, I pray, sure he is without sin, for so says the
Scriptures: In him is no sin. 1 John 3. 5. Hebr. 9. 28. Thus we are now, as we
are in Christ in respect of his righteousness, which is ours though it be in
him; I say this our perfection and happiness is in respect of our
justification, and as we are in Christ: for as we are in our selves simply so
considered (though we were never out of Christ) in our bodies, in the flesh, we
are not capable of so great perfection in this life; for the Apostle says, If
any man says he has no sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 8, 9.
he is a liar, and deceives himself. 1 John 1. 8, 9. But these Scriptures are
all true: therefore we are all fair, without fault and spot, and we are so as
we are in Christ, and so we were made all this by Christ when he dyed. And
seaing it must be true also that we have sin, and do sin, that is, as we are in
our flesh, in our bodies, and seeing we are so notwithstanding conversion, and
says, therefore our believing, etc. has not made us so perfect; Col. 1. 20.
22.
and therefore Christ upon his cross made us so, and so presented us to God.
Col. 1. 20. 22.

18. Because Christ did all that was needful to be done to make us perfect,
and present us holy. For what can be more required to the justification of a
^inner before God then to be free from all sin? Is not he that is no sinner a
righteous person? most not he that is free from all sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
of necessity appear just, to him that knows he is so? 1 Ioh. 1^ 7.
as God does: it is all one to be free from sin, and to be perfectly righteous.
1 Cor. 5. 21. 1 John 1. 7. Isa 53. 11.
there is no mediam betwixt them: By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. So that his bearing their
iniquity was that which did justify them; and by his knowledge he knew whose
sins he bore, viz. whom he justified. Isa. 53. 11.

19. Christ upon the cross did this work for us, because the Scripture says,
Rev. 1^ 5.
He has washed away our sins in his own blood: Rev. 5. 1. therefore they are
done away. Therefore to say that they are not done away, 1 Ioh. 3. 5.
is to contradict God in his Word, and very dishonorable to Jesus Christ, that
he should be manifested to take away our sins, 2 Cor 5. 21.
1 John 3. 5. that Christ should come to finish the transgression, Dan. 9. 24.
and to make an end of sins, etc. Dan. 9. 24. 2 Cor 5. 21. and yet this work is
still to do. What is this but to say, Christ came not to do it, or if he came
to do it, he did not do it: for he did it not, if it be still to do.

20. Because Christ says this work is finished, therefore it is so: for he is
the faithful and true witness; therefore we may believe it, and affirm it is
done. These words spoke Jesus, I have glorified thee on earth: I have finished
the work thou gave me to do. Jesus knowing that all things were now
accomplished (that the S^ripture might be fulfilled) says, I thirst. When
Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and he bowed
his head, and gave up the gh^st. Job 19. 28. 30. and 17. 1. to 5. The work God
gave Christ to do was the work of our salvation, which consisted in taking and
destroying our sins, and presenting us holy, Ioh. 19. 28 30.
without spot to God; and this he did by being made sin for us, Rev. 1. 5.
th^^ so we might be made ( by his being made sin for us) the righteousness of
God in him. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
2 Cor. 5. 21.

Therefore if when Christ dyed that was the time this was to be done, and if
Christ was ordained to do it, if Christ was mighty to save, if Christ took
flesh to do this work, if it was the will of God that he should do it, if
Christ came on purpose to do it, if our sins were laid upon Christ, and he
suffered the punishment the curse of them, if he has redeemed us; if it was
prophesied of him that he should justify many, and that his work should
prosper; if Christ did answer his types; if he has exceeded all the Priests
and sacrifices under the Law; if there needs no more offerings for sin; if
Christ has done all the Law required, if Christ has done what he came to do,
if we are justified by his blood, if he has made us holy, and presented us
without spot, if we are free from all sin, if Christ has done all that can be
done to make us just and righteous, if Christ did wash away our sins in his own
blood, if Christ has said, It is finished; then it is done, it is done, it is
done, perfectly and completely done: and then what I have said is fully proved,
namely, that Jesus Christ by once offering the sacrifice of himself, when he
was on the Cross, Col. 1. 13, 14. 21.
put an end to sin, and so destroyed all the sins of his people for ever, and
presented them just, righteous, and holy, without spot, Col 2. 13, 14.
etc. before God. Col. 1. 13, 14. 21. Col. 2. 13, 14.

Oh what a fountain of consolation is here! ^ Cor. 5. 21.
what marrow and fatness is here, Eccl 1. 2.
what sweetness is like to this, to all that believe? Isa 50. 11.
who now may say, once sin was mine, then it was laid upon Christ, Ioh. 14. 18.
and now they are neither mine nor his; because they are not at all: Col 3 3.
for by his blood he washed them all away; Heb. 13. 5.
and now they are all gone, blotted out, and shall be remembered no more, Mal. 3
6.
no more, no more. Now Christ's righteousness is mine, Ephesians. 1. 4.
as well as his, Ioh 14. 19.
for I was made the righteousness of God in him. Isa. 42. 8.
2 Cor. 5. 21. And I did nothing at all to procure these things to me: Ier. 4.
2.
in this appears free grace; Col. 3. 4.
here is Christ, Ephe. 1. 14.
and Christ alone, and nothing but Christ; all things else pass away, Isa 45.
25.
because they are under the Sun: Eccle. 12. Rom 10. 3.
they are full of mutation and change. Faith may be obscured, and the soul
greatly deserted, Ti^ 3. 5.
so as to see no light. Isa. 50. 11. yet when at the worst, they need not be
comfortless: J^h. 14. 18. for still God is their God, and their lives are hid
with Christ in God. Col. 3. 3. Who is the same to da^, yesterday, and forever:
Hebr. 13. 5. We change often, but he never changes. Mal. 3. 6. In this is our
happiness, comfort, and glory: and even then when we cannot apprehend him, yet
were we in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. and so we are, and ever shall be in him, and one
with him, and are comprehended of him: 1 John 5. 20. Because I live, says
Christ, ye shall live also. Joh. 14. 19. What Doctrine in Religion is more
sweet and comfortable, more necessary or profitable^ yea, or more honorable to
the Lord Jesus Christ? This is that which holds forth the love of God, that
sets the Crown upon his head, and will not give his glory to another: Isa. 42.
8. Jer. 4. 2. This will have Christ to be our life, Col. 3. 4. p^ace, Ephesians. 1.
14. glory, Isa. 45. 25. This is that that thrust us out of our selves, our
life, our righteousness, Romans 10 3. T^t. 3. 5. Ezra 9. ^5.
to his, to live in him, (and caused us to say, O Lord thou ar^ our
righteousness, Ezra 9 15. The Lord our righteousness) which life is most sweet
and serviceable, Col 3. 11.
because this is sure, and more spiritual. In a word, this makes Christ all in
all, Col* 3. 11. Psalm 89* 9
and exalts him above all, which is his place. Psalm. 89 19. And surely that
which is the life of ou^ ^^els, that upon which the eternal happiness of our
(...) de^ends, is not in any thing in us, 2 Co^. 5 21.
but that is Christ in him, ^ Cor. 5 21. 1 Cor. 1. 1 Cor* 1 30.
30. it lies in him, that so it may be (...) for us. And that we might not live
upon any thing within us, faith is given that by it we may live out of our
selves in another, even the Lord Jesus where our life is. Col. 3 ^. 4. Surely
if our life and happiness had been infused in us, Col. 3. 3* 4.
we should have lived in our selves, and not upon God. Adam had his life in
him, and he lost it: therefore it is better for us that our life is hid in
Christ in God Col. 3. 3, 4.

This is comfo^tab^e indeed, V^e.
(...) God ^aith: Comfort ye my people, speak comfortably unto her, tell her
that her warfare is accomplished, Is^ 40 1, 2.
and her iniquity is pardoned etc. Isa. 40. 1, 2.

This is good news from heaven indeed, that this great work is finished; it is
not now to do, neither for faith nor thee. Use.
Ch^see that ye add not, nor detract from it: if thou be Christ's, it is
thine, apply it, take comfort in it, admire G^ds love, free grace, give God all
the glory of it, give none of it to faith, nor to any thing else, rejoice in
God, and thy union with him, witness to his truth, and suffer for him; serve
and love, and live and dye with him and his.

Objections answered.

We were not justified by Christ upon the Cross, O^j. 1.
because Christ rose again for our justification. Romans 4. 24.
Rom 4. 24.

If Christ's resurrection did justify us, Ans.
then it was not faith that justified us: and seeing the resurrection of Christ
was before we were born, therefore before we believed.

Secondly, the re^urrection of Christ did justify him, that justified us, that
is, visibly declare him, and those in him to be just: 1 Co^ 15 4.
for the resurrection of Christ did wonderfully declare him to be the Son of
God, (...). 18.
in that he had power to raise himself from the dead by his infinite power.
Joh. 10. 17, 18.

Thirdly, Christ's resurrection did, and does declare us to be just who believe
in him, because we believe in him that is the Son of God; ^ Cor. 15. 15.
also Christ's resurrection does justify all them who declare him to be the Son
of God, that in so doing they witness to the truth. 1 Cor. 15. 15.

But the Apostle says, (...) 2.
if Christ had not risen, they had been in their sins: 1 Cor. 15 17.
1 Cor. 15. 17. therefore Christ's blood did not take away their sins.

The Apostles words is to be understood, Ans. 1.
it had been so, if Christ had not been the true Messiah, the Son of God; he
had not been he that could have taken away sin, (...) ^. 9, 11.
if he had not risen, seeing the Prophets and Scriptures declare, that the
Christ the Son of God should not only be crucified, Act 1. 15. ^o 32
but also rise again the third day: Act ^6. 22.
Psalm. 16. 9. 11. with Act. 2. 25. to 32. 1 Cor 25 4.
and 26. 22. 1 Cor. 15. 14. he must rise again the third day: Joh. Ioh. 18. 32
18. 32. Therefore it was not possible that Christ should be holden by death:
Act 2. 24.
Act. 2. 24. Also Christ said, that he would rise again the third day, Matt.
20. 19. and 16. 21.
Matt. 20 19. and 16. 21. And if he had not risen, he had been a false
witness, and not he that could take away sin; and if so, they had been still
in their s^ns, and their faith vain, 1 Gor. 15. 17.
to believe a lie; and this is the scope of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 15. 17.
But seeing Christ did rise again, he must needs be the Son of God, Romans 1. 4.
and the true Messiah, declared to be the Son of God with power, according to
the Spirit of holiness by the resurrection from the dead: Romans 14. Because
else he could not have raised himself from the dead as he did. Therefore it
must follow, that seeing that he did rise again, they were not in their sins,
because he had jus^ified them in washing their sins away in his own blood. Rev.
1. 5.

In as much as Christ's satisfaction was sufficient, 2.
it was impossible but it must be effectual, and could not be in vain: but it
had been in vain, if notwithstanding the payment of that price, it had been
still due, and we in our sins, and what were they the better for to have their
sins laid upon Christ, if notwithstanding they were still in their sins? yea,
and how were they laid upon him, if they were never taken from us, (or taken
from us) and laid upon us again? and how was all things accomplished, and
finished, if our justification were not finished? all had done us no good.

If Christ's merits were not of greater merit then satisf^ction for sin, 3.
and so our justi^ication, how could we be said to enjoy sonship, and glory by
his satisfaction? seeing to forgive and pardon a traitor is one thing, and to
confer glory and honor upon him is another: so that we may be said to be
adopted and glorified by his merits, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.
because all the grace and glory we shall enjoy is given for Christ's sake, Gal.
4. 5.
by virtue of his mediation, Luke 22. 29.
and consequently by his merits, Ephesians. 1. 5, Ephesians. 2. 14.
6. Gal. 4. 5. Luke 22. 29. Ep^e. 2. 14. Col. 1. And although I see not that
Christ's resurrection is a part of our justification, Col. 1.
yet unless he had risen again, 1 C^r. 15. 23.
we should have been so far from enjoying everlasting life, that we must have
lain in the grave: as appears, 1 Cor. 15. 23.

Many contend, whether we be justified by Christ's active or passive obedience;
Io^. 12. 49.
all that Christ did for man's salvation was nothing else but obedience: (...)
^4. 33.
as may appear, J^h. 12. 49. and 14. (...) 10. ^8.
33. his dying also, Jo^. 10. 18. By the obedience of one, we are made
righteous, Romans 5. 18, 19. And so long as any place an ^ascri^e the whole work
of man's salvation to God, and Christ, I ^m s^tisfied; I only exclude all
created graces and qualifications in us, to be any cause of our justification,
or salvation.

The work of man's salvation is not yet accomplished, O^j. 3.
because Christ is now a speaking, H^b 7. 21.
and making intercession for us in heaven; (...) 1. 1, 2.
for he does advocate to God for us, when we sin, therefore our sins are not
fully pardoned. Hebr. 7. 25. 1 J^h. 1. 1, 2.

These Scriptures hold forth to us (not that Christ speaks and so intercedes
for us in heaven) the continuance, Ans.
virtue, fruit, H^b 7. 25.
and efficaciousnesse of that sacrifice, Christ offered upon the Cross: that
it does for ever remain in force, which makes much for the consolation of those
who know they have interest in i^. Heb 12. 24.
Compare Hebr. 12. 24. with Hebr. 11. 4. The ground and Reason why this must
needs be the meaning is: (...). 11. 4.


1. (...). 19. 28.* 30.
Because the Scriptures declare, that this work was fully done on the Cross.
Heb 10. 14.
Joh. 19. 28. 30. Hebr. 10. 14.

2. Because he is said to be set down: now sitting declares this work is fully
done. Therefore it is said, that the Priest stands daily mini^ring, and
offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, H^b. 10. 11, 12
and which can never take away sins. But this man after he had offered one
sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the right hand of God. Hehr. 10, 11,
12.

3. Isa. 53. 5.
There is none of this work now to do in heaven, because we need no speaking
for us: 1 P^t 1. 24.
seeing that by his stripes we are healed, Matthew 3. 17.
Isa. 53. 5. 1 Pet. 1, 24. We have Christ's word for it, and God from heaven
has declared, that he is well pleased (with us) in Christ. Matthew. 3. 17. And
the spirits has witnessed that our sins shall be remembered no more. Heb 10.
17, 18.

4. Because if Christ should speak now for us with a voice, as some ignorantly
say, it would follow that there is no pe^^fection in heaven, no not in God,
that Christ should ^eed to sp^ak words to God, that so he might know his mind,
and so prevail, etc.

5. This calls in question the immutability of God, and makes him changeable, in
that he did love us, and elected us, give us Christ, yet now he is unsatisfied,
is as one that is changed, Mal. 3. 6.
and repents, and ready to destroy us for our sins; which is contrary to the
Scriptu^e, I am the Lord, I change not. Mal. 3. 6.

6. This implies, that there is less love in the Father to us then there is in
Christ: so as he stands in need to be prayed, and be^eeched to pardon, etc. but
Christ needs none to pray him; whereas if there were more in one then in
another, it would appear to be more in the Father, in that it speaks as if he
had been the original fountain of love, in choosing us, and sending Christ to
dye for us. 1 Ioh. 5 7.
And yet we may not once think but the three are one, 1 John 5. 7. alike equal
in love, and whatsoever else ye can name: And the Father needs no more
entreating to show mercy to us then Christ does, that is none at all. Also as
the Scripture declares, Christ dyed to reconcile us to God; but it is not said,
that Christ (purchased love, or) reconciled God to us, which is worth the
observing: More might be said, but I forbear.

If Christ shedding his blood took away our sins, then before his blood was
shed there was no sin taken away, Obj. 4.
and so they before Christ dyed did perish in their sins.

They that belonged to the election of grace before Christ, Ans.
were saved, Act. 4. 12.
and in the same way we are; We believe that through the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as they. Act. 15. 11.

2. If any thing but Christ could save them, why not us also? but salvation is
in Christ. Act 4. 12.

3. Christ is said to be the L^m^e sl^in before the foundation of the world: 1
Pet. 1. 19, 20.
Rev. 13. 8. Christ being appointed to dye, Wh^verily was ordained before the
world. 1. Pet. 1. 19, 20. God looked upon him as slain.

4. For the sins that were past before Christ had paid the price of them, Romans
3. 25.
God was coment to trust Christ for payment; and this is called Gods
forbearance, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past through the for e^^ance of God: Romans 3. 25. as a debtor may be re^ea^ed by
the sureties undertaking to pay it before actual payment be made. So it is
here: But Christ by his death m^de actual payment for all the sins of his from
the beginning to the end of the world: therefore God did accept of Christ's
payment, so G^d was in Christ, 2 Cor 5. 19.
reconciling the wo^ld to himself, not imp^ting their trespasses unto them.
Psalm 32 12.
2 Cor. 5. 19. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

Men's sins are not pardoned before they be committed. O^j. 5.


All the sins of the elect, Ans. 1.
past, present, and to come, are pardoned by Christ, H^b 10. 10. 12. 14.
he dyed once for all, Heb. 10. 10. far ever, v, 12. For by one ^ffering (they
were deuroyed) he has perfected for ever them that are set apart. v. 14.

2. If it were not so, Christ must come and suffer again, or else we should
perish in the unpardoned sin: Heb 9. 22. 26.
for without blood there is no remission, Heb. 9. 22. 26. There is no blood in
faith; and if faith, or any thing else could pardon one fin, why not two, and
why not all? and if so, Christ's death might have been spared.

3. Our faith ought to be of as large an extent, as Christ's death is; therefore
seeing the death of Christ was of so large an extent, as to comprehend all sin
past, present, and to come; so likewise by one act of our faith, we are to
apprehend the pardon of them all past, present, and to come: so that we believe
those sins we shall commit are as fully and freely pardoned, Romans 5. 11. to 24.
as any sins we have committed. See Romans 5. 11. to 21.

The 3. Romans 3. 25.
Romans 25. is brought against this, but by sins past, there we are to understand
those sins which were committed before Ch^i^ dyed, whereof some might doubt:
also if Christ has not pardoned, and done away all our fins to come, as well
as the rest, tell me who shall take them away, and destroy them. But it is
objected, this Doctrine opens a gap to licentious liberty. Answ. 1. We have the
Scriptures to warrant this for truth. Secondly, the contrary Doctrine to this
is to be abhorred, in that it says, we are but partly justified, and are not
perfected for ever, Heb. 10. 14.
which is contrary to Heb. 10. 14. Thirdly, none shall stumble and hurt
themselves by this truth, but such as shall perish; and it is no matter for
them: the children must have bread though dogs may snatch it. Fourthly, 1
Ioh. 2. 1.
the Apostle says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ. 1 John 2. 1. May not men cavil as well at this, and take encouragement
to sin? Lastly, they that are contrary to us herein, that say no sin is
pardoned till after it be committed, do affirm and teach, that all the sins of
the elect shall all be pardoned, it is impossible for them to perish, no sin
they can commit can separate them from the love of God, Romans 3. 33 etc.
life and salvation; we say they are pardoned; they say they shall certainly be
pardoned. If it be sure to be pardoned, a corrupt heart will be as bold to
venture upon that principle as this.

If all our sins be pardoned, O^j. 6.
then we need not pray for pardon of them, Matthew* 6.
as Matthew. 6.

By pardon in Matthew. Ans. 1.
6. we are to understand the manifestation of pardon, the assurance and
enjoyment of pardon in the conscience; the effect is here put for the cause.

2. It must be so understood, because there is no pardon but this now
attainable: therefore not to be prayed for. For seeing Christ will dye no more,
Heb. 10. 26.
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Heb. 10. 18.
Heb. 10. 26. It^s in vain for any to pray for the pardon the remission of that
sin, 2 Cor. 5. 19.
which is not remitted before in Christ. Heb. 10. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 19.

3. There is that which attends the act of sin, which darkens, sads and clouds
the souls peace, (though it ought not so to do) which we are to pray to God to
prevent or remove from us. Psalm 51. 9. 12.
David when he was converted did thus pray.

Unbeleevers are still in their sins, Obj. 7.
and therefore they are not justified. Ans.


The elect are in their sins visibly, Romans 8 33. (...) 8. ^. (...) 16. 6.
until they believe, and declare it by good works.

They have sin in them, and they are free from sin, they are charged with sin,
Iam. 7. 17.
and yet they are free from all charge. Rom 8. 33. (...) 11. to ^4
and clean from all sin; he does sin, and he cannot sin, Isa 53. 5, 6
this is a mystery: they have sin. 1 John 1. 8. 10. Ezekiel. 16. 8. they are
charged with sin: 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Jam. 5. 17. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14 Yet they are free from sin. Song 4. 7.
Isa. 53. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Song 4. 7. 1 Job. 4. 17. 1 (...) 4. 7. (...) 3. 9.
They cannot sin. 1 John 3. 9.

This is a mystery when Christ said, Ioh. 16. 16, 17.
A little while, and ye shall see me, and a little while, ye shall not see me.
They said, What is this that he says? we cannot tell what it is that he says.
Joh. 16. 16, 17, 18. Shall, and shall not was a contradiction in their
understandings: so will what I say be to many. Obj. 8.


Men's sins are not forgiven till they be redeemed from a vain conversation.

Then no man's sins are forgiven though they believe; Ans.
and so cannot enjoy forgiveness of sin in this life: Ephesians 1 7.
seeing every act of sin is a branch, and so a part of a vain conversation, and
in many things we sin all. Psa 51. 12.
Then David notwithstanding he was converted, and enjoyed the pardon of his
sins, as appears, Psalm. 51. 12. yet he was not delivered from a vain
conversation, as appeared in the matter of Bathsheba, and Vrijab: and if our
justification and remission of sin did depend upon our holy walking, then the
Papists do well to teach justification by works.

All men are by nature children of wrath, Obj. 9.
and under the curse till they believe. Ephesians. 2. 3.

I grant all the elect are so by nature, Ans.
under a state of wrath and curse; Ephesians 2 3.
and they had perished in it, had not Jesus Christ by his death redeemed them
out of that state. And although they were so by nature, yet at the same time
they were also sons of grace and love; by nature accursed, by grace in election
sure to escape it, and blessed. By wrath I understand is meant the curse of the
Law, the punishment due to sin. By nature I understand the state of nature,
viz: the state and condition of man by reason of Adams fall, Romans 5. 18.
for all men were cons^dered in him, and by his fall he made them all sinners:
as Romans 5. 18. So all the elect were considered in Christ, who by his death did
free all the elect from that Fate of sin and death; so as never since Christ's
death, none of the elect were under that state of wrath or curse, nor indeed
could possible. be for these Reasons.

1. Gal 4. 4. 5.
Because then Christ redeemed them from under the Law: Gal. 4. 4, 5. Thou have
redeemed us by thy blood. Rev. 5. 9. Christ was made under the Law, that we
might be taken from under it; We are the children of the free woman, Gal. 4.
26. 31. We are delivered from the Law, Gal. 4. 26. 31.
wherein we were held: Romans 7. 1. etc. Now we know, Romans 7. 1. etc.
that whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law. Rom 3.
19.
Romans 3. 19. But we now are not under the Law, therefore it has nothing to say
to us, Rom 6. 14.
we are under grace. Romans 6. 14.

2. Because Christ by his death put an end to the Law, the Law was not to last
no longer then till Christ came; Gal. 3. 19.
The Law was added till the seed should come. Romans 10. 4.
Gal. 3. 19. Christ is the end of the Law: Romans 10. 4. It was never in force
against any of Gods elect since Christ's death. We are freed from the Law by the
body of Christ. Romans 7. 4. Christ in his flesh did abolish the Law of
Commandments: Romans 7. 4.
Ephesians. 2. 15, 16. Col. 2. 13. 4. Now we are delivered from the Law, Ephesians 2. 15,
16.
Romans 7. 6. Against such there is no law: Gal. 5. 23. Col. 2. 13, 14.
If the Son shall make you as free in your consciences, as the elect are free
in him, Romans 7. 6.
you shall see, and say you were free indeed. Ioh. 8.
Job. 8.

3. Romans 7. 1 to 7.
Because the Law is dead to us, and we to it: As a woman is freed from the law
of her husband and if he be dead: so are we from the law. Wherefore my
brethren, we are become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that we should
be married to another, even to him, that we should serve in newness of spirit,
and not in the oldnesse of the letter. Romans 7. 1. to 7. The new husband is
better then the old; welcome Christ, and farewell Law. Now we have nothing to
do with the Law, Romans 6. 6, 7, ^.
nor the Law with us: Our old man is crucified with him. Romans 6. 6. He that is
dead is freed from sin: v. 7. We are dead with Christ. v. 8.

4. Because there is none of Moses law now in force, to the elect, Deuteronomy. 27. 4.
with curses to be under: no law, no transgression, no curse, Gal 3, 10.
no penalty in force now; for when the Law ceased, the curses of the Law ceased
also with ^t. The Law said, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the back of the law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy.
27. 10. 26.

5. Because Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us, Gal 3. 13. 14.
that the blessing of Christ might come upon us. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Christ has
under went all the curse, that all his chosen might not suffer any at all of
it; and seeing none could be redeemed from the curse without his death, Christ
did dye: and there shall none be saved, but such as were by his death then
redeemed, Heb 9. 25. 26.
for he will dye no more. Heb. 9 25, 26.

6. Because that liberty which the Saints stand in and enjoy, when they
believe, was not procured by their conversion and faith, G^l 5. 1.
etc. but by Christ upon the Cross. Stand fast in the liberty a herewith
Christ has made us free. Heb. 10. 14.
Gal. 5. 1. This liberty Believers now enjoy, but it was purchased then by
Christ's death, for then we were perfected for ever. Heb. 10. 14.

Yet until men be converted, they are visibly in a state of wrath and death.

7. We were never since in our sins, therefore the curse has no place, it has
nothing to do with us, we have no sin, for all our sins were laid upon Christ,
Esaias ^3. 6.
as Isa. 53. 6. Christ was made sin for us. 2 Cor 5 21.
2 Cor. 5. 21. and Curse for us. Gal. 3. 13. He then destroyed the power of
death and the Devil for us, Heb. 2. 14.
Heb. 2. 14. or else we cannot be saved. Romans 5. 18. 19.
Consider, Romans 5. 18. 19. the head and the members, Heb. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 12 12.
viz. Christ and all the Elect, are but one. Heb. 2. 11. they make but one
body, Gal. 2. 20.
one Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. therefore we were crucified with Christ, Rom 6.
Gal. 2. 20. dead and buried with Christ, Ephesians 2. 5. 6.
Romans 6. and were quickened together with Christ, and raised up together with
Christ. Ephesians. 2. 12. to 17.
Ephesians. 2. 5, 6. we were without God afar off, are made nigh by the blo^d of
Christ, the enmity was slain and reconciliation was made by the Cross, and by
nothing else. Ephesians. 2. 12. to 17. So that never since Christ's death, none of the
Elect are under wrath or curse, for Christ has fullfilled the law for us.

Lo this is the liberty of the Sons of God; (though none but Believers can know
that they are Sons or elected) a Believer he may triumph and say, Rom 7. 6. Act
^3. ^9. 48.
Blessed be God who has given us victory by Jesus Christ; the law with the
curse is dead, the visage of it terribly affright many. But I see it is without
any life, therefore law I care not for thee, I fear thee not, do thy worst,
thou have no power to hurt me, I will not be justified by thee, I will not let
thee come into my conscience to trouble me, I will not hear thee, nor have any
thing to do with thee, no law, no curse, no Devil, no death, nor any thing
else, cannot hurt me, nor any of the Elect, For we are not under the law, but
under grace. Romans 6. 14.

I may be this light will offend some, for when the Sun breaks forth, and
shines in its strength, it is an offense to weak eyes, because they are not
able to behold it. It Is reported of the Eagle, that she can look upon the
Sun, and she tries and rejects those to be her young, that cannot look on
the Sun when it shines it it is strength. So none but Eagle eyed Saints, can
endure to look upon the Son of righteousness, thus shining in his glory.
And as it is also observed, that the light of the Sun puts out the fire, and
the light of the Candle, etc. as not enduring any light but it self: So it is
here where this Son Jesus Christ comes, out goes all fire and candle light;
not a spark of our own fire remains, but all is in an instant put quite out,
not one spark is left to warm or comfort us withal, Esaias 50 10.
Isay 50. 10. All our good works and righteousness is departed from us, Romans
10 3.
but it is no matter, Dan 19 8.
let them all go, because Christ is come; he is light and heat, Esaias 1^. 10.
and a better strength and comfort, we need no other light, Col. 3 11
now Christ is come and shines most powerfully and gloriously in his
brightness without the help of any thing else, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
that so Christ may be all in all. Col. 3. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 28.

What then shall we sun, because we are not under the law but ungrace? God
forbid. Rom 6. 14. 15.
Romans 6. 15.

When the Apostle had taught, that we were redeemed from the law, and the law
was abolished by Christ, and we were dead to the law, etc. It seems by the
Apostles words, that some did judge that he destroyed the law, Romans 3. 31.
therefore he says, Romans 7. 12. 14.
do we then make void the Law, God forbid, yea, we establish the law, Romans 3.
31. The law is holy, just and good; this was necessary to silence Cavileers,
and also to inform such believers, who through mistake might think that they
were lawless now, they might do any thing, which is a miserable mistake; all
that believe are bound to observe the moral Law, now we are dead to Moses Law,
Rom 7 4.
but not to Christ's, now we are married to another, Matthew. 3. 17.
Romans 7. 4. So Christ, we ought to be subject to him and obey his commands, and
though we may not hear Moses, we must hear Christ, he has a yoke for our
necks and we must put it on, M^tt 11. 29.
and bear it, Take my yoke upon you, Mat. 11. Mat. 14. 23. 31.
29. Christ gives the same law, to be a rule to all his to walk in, and obey
him in. Christ's Testament is his will, which is full of commands. I grant we
have nothing to do, as a cause or means of our exceptation, justification, or
salvatition, etc. Yet we have much to do, for to honor and glorify God, Ioh.
158.
and herein is my father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit. John 15. 8.
And although there is no curse or wrath annexed to Christ's commands, Gal. 3 10.
(as there was to Moses law. Gal. 3. 10.) to constrain us to keep the law, or
to be inflicted upon us, 2 Cor. 5. 14.
when we fail and come short, yet know, the power of divine love, sweetly and
violently constrains a soul to obey Christ's words, Tit 3 12.
The grace of God that brings salvation, teaches us to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, ^^hn 14 23.
and to live soberly and righteously and godly in this present world, I^^ 5 16.
Titus 2. 11. and 3. Christ says if any man love me, Ephesians. 2 10.
he will keep my wards. John 14. 23. and 15, 16. See Ephesians. 2, 10. Therefore,
if there be any that love sin, live in sin, take liberty to sin, live basely,
in laciviousnesse, or drunkenness, or uncleanness, or lying, or cheating, or
in any sin, 1 Ioh 1 6.
let them say what they will, they are Liars, 1. John 1. 6. they mock
themselves and others, Hos. 11. 12.
let them consider, Gal. 5. 13. Romans 7 7.
to 23. and 6. 5. 7. 8. Romans 2. 17, etc. and all men are to look upon them to
be liars, yea, and the basest among men, that turn Gods grace into wantonness.
For as a man believes, so he obeyes, and as a man's works are, so is his faith
good or bad.

Where Christ comes, all old practices are done away, and all things are become
new, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
2 Cor 5. 17. they cast not off the commands of God, but desire and endeavor
with all their souls, to obey them, (and though we are not capable of
perfection in our obedience) it is as natural where the love of God has
appeared, where it is in truth in the soul, as for fire to burn, there it
constraines the soul to submit to Christ in obedience, and fire shall as soon
cease to burn, as for such as are converted for to cease to live godly, and
live wickedly: they judge Christ's yoke easy, and a sweet mercy it is for them
to observe it, it is good to do good, and to cease to do evil, Ioh 6. 28, 29.
as I have proved else where. Christ says, he came not to do his own will,
but the will of him that sent him, John 6. 28, 29. therefore far be it from
us to think that we have liberty to do our own wills, no, no, we must serve
the Lord Christ, yet in visible appearance before they be called there is no
difference.

Such as believe not cannot please God, Obj. 10.
Heb. 11. 6. therefore they are not justified.

The Apostle speaks of actions, Ans.
without faith are sinful, because the goodness of an action is required,
that all the parts the circumstances of it be good also, whereof faith is one,
and when that is wanting, the action is sinful, and condemned by God; Heb. 11.
6.
therefore he says, By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent Sacrifice
then Cain, Heb. 11. 4.

But God hates all the workers of iniquity, O^j. 11.
Psalm. 5. unbeleevers are workers of iniquity: therefore God does not love
them, and so they are not justified.

Then it seems that Gods love and Grace, Ans.
is to men according to their works, Rom 5. 8, 9, 10.
and as they deal with him; this is the old principle of the Papists, Psalm.
10^. 10.
and quite contrary to the Scriptures, as appears, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. Psalm. 103.
10. and 130. 3. 8.

The Elect before their calling, and after, do many actions that are sinful,
in which they are workers of iniquity, yet God was ever pleased with their
persons in Christ, in whom they were accepted: God never hated the persons of
those that belong to the election of grace, he loved them before the world
began, so as to choose them, although he knew what they were, and what they
wo^ld do: is he so changeable, as now to hate their persons when they sin, and
afterward to love them again when they believe; God says (otherwise) I have
l^ved thee with an everlasting love, Ier. 31. 3.
therefore with loving kindness h^v^ I drawn thee. M^c. 7. 18.
Jer. 31. 3. I am the Lord, I change not, therefore the sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Mich. 7. 18, 19. And to say, God did purpose to love them, but he did
not love them, is rediculous; for God loved them as much before they believed,
as he does when they believe, though it appeared not.

Before conversion men are dead, Phil. 1. 29.
and cannot believe till God give faith. Phil. 1. 29. Is conversion and faith a
fruit of hatred or love? Isa. 53 1.
If you say, of love, for so it is, then it will follow that God did love the
elect when they did work iniquity, yea before they did believe, else he would
not have given them faith; Psalm 5. 5, 6.
therefore those, Psalm. 5. 5. are such as belong not to the election of grace;
for the next verse says, Thou shall destroy them: v 6. But the elect shall
never be destroyed; or else the Scripture is to be understood, that persons who
live in sin appear to be such as shall be destroyed. Which I grant, and when
they believe and forsake such ways, it appears otherwise, 2 Timothy 19, 10.
that even then when they were at the worst, (...) 4.
they were in the love of God, and ordained to life. See 2 Timothy Act. 13. 48.
1. 9, 10. Ephesians. 1. 4. Act. 13. 48.

All that do not believe are in a state of condemnation, O^j. 12.
yea they are condemned already: therefore they are not justified. Mar. 16.
Job. 3.

We are to understand these and the like Scriptures, Ans.
to speak what men are according to vis^ble appearance, Ioh. 3 16.
and not what men are in respect of Gods eternal decree and appointment. Mar.
16 16.
If it be said, the Word of God is the will and mind of God, I grant it
according to the true sense and meaning of it; and if it be the will of G^d
that they shall be damned, then I say they shall never be saved: because the
Lord says, Isa. ^6. 10.
My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure: Isa. ^ct 2 23.
46. 10. See Act. 2. 23. Heb. 6. 17. Yea, and if they be condemned already, Heb
6. 17.
there is no way to escape it. Also seeing all that now believe, were sometimes
unbeleevers; and if it was the will of God then, that they should be damned for
their not believing, for the Word says, Whosoever believed not shall be
damned: Mark 16. 16. according to your exposition God has or must change his
will, Isa 14 24.
or else all men must of necessity perish for their former unbelief. See I^a
14. 24.

2. Romans 6. 14.
The elect are not under the Law, but under grace: Romans 6. Ephesians. 1. 4.
14 Therefore the Law has nothing to do to sentence and curse them, Rom 8. 1.
33.
they being in Christ. Ephesians. 14. There is no condemnation to them. Romans 8. 1.
33.

The Scriptures says, Obj. 13.
he shall redeem Israel, and he shall justify many; Psalm. ^30. 8.
but they are not redeemed, nor justified until they believe. Isa. 53 11.
Psalm. 130. 8. Isa. 55. 11.

We are to consider when these and the like places were written, Ans.
which was before Christ dyed. From hence it is, that they are most commonly
expressed in the future tense, he shall, Matt. 1. 20, 21.
and that not only in the Old Testament, but in the New also, it is said, He
shall save his people from their sins. For as yet Christ was not born, as
appears, Matthew. 1. 20, 21. But after Christ's death, the Scriptures speaks in
the present tense as done, Heb 10. 10, 12, 14.
because indeed he had actually done it: therefore it is said, We (are)
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus. Heb. 10. 10. He has
offered one sacrifice for sins for ever. v. 12. By one ^ffering he (has)
perfected for ever. Heb. 9. 12.
v. 14. Having obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9. 12. So he has
loved us, and washed away our sins in his own blood. Rev. 1 5.
Rev. 1. 5. So that it is already done, and therefore it is not now to do.

Men are not Justified until they are in Christ, Obj. 14.
and men are not in Christ until that they believe; for men are in Christ by
faith: And so Andronicus was in Christ before Paul.

The Scripture says, Ans.
that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith: but where does it say, Ephesians. 1. 4.
that we are in Christ by faith? The in being in Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12.
in Ephesians. 1. 4. is by election, and not by faith; the visible Church is
called, Christ, and those in the visible Church are said to be in him: Ioh. 15.
34.
and this is the being in Christ that is spoken of, Job 15. as appears, v. 2.
4. A contrary exposition inforces failing finally from grace. In this visible
Church, one is in before another, as Andranious was.

Also he being converted before Paul, he appeared to be in Christ before Paul
did so appear: Ephe 1 4.
but the being in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. the elect are not in that one before
another, and a third being in Christ we know not.

The Scripture does not say, O^j* 15.
that any shall be saved but such as believe; therefore faith is essential to
salvation.

No more do the Scripture say, Ans. 1.
that any shall be saved but such as obey him: 2 (...) 1. 8, 9.
2 These. 1. 8, 9. Heb. 11. 14. and 5. 9. Prove. 28. 18. Heb. 11. 14.
Matthew. 19. 17. 23. Joh. 14. 23. Who can do this, it will follow by your
reason, Pro. 28 28.
that good works are absolutely necessary to salvation, Mat 19 17, 23.
and perseverance to the knowledge of it, Ioh. ^4. 23.
(because the Scripture says. He that continues to the end shall be saved:
(...) ^3 3.
Mar. 13. 3. as well as he that believes shall be saved. Joh. 3. ^^h 3 16.
16.) and so when men have persevered to the end of their days they may know
it.

Secondly, the Scripture declares unbeleef to be a sin, Psalm ^9. 28. to ^9.
and that the sins of the elect shall not deprive them of the love of God,
(...) 8 33. to (...)
nor salvation: as appears, Psalm. 89. 28. to 39. with Romans 8. 33. to 39. What
the Lord has purchased for his they shall enjoy in his time, (...) 10 23.
because he is faithful that has promised it. Heb 10. 2 Timothy 2. 13.
23. if we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself: as 2 Timothy 2. 13. And if not any thing shall separate them from the love of God, Romans
8. ult.
unbeleef shall not. Romans 8.

But God has decreed the means as well as the end, Obj. 16.
and faith is one of the means.

We grant God has decreed the end and the means, Ans. 1.
and whatsoever God has decreed, shall unavoidably come to pass.

2. But we deny that faith is any means of our Redemption, justification, or
salvation: nothing but the Lord Jesus Christ is the means of our salvation.

3. There be means that are necessary to the revealing and enjoying the comfort
of it, as the holy Spirit, and as Ministers to reveal it, and faith to receive
it.

4. Also there be fruits and effects of the love of God, and calling, etc. as
faith, love, and our obedience to Christ, which all the Lords price in their
place, yet are no means of our salvation.

Faith makes us sons, Obj. 17.
for we are the sons of God by faith: Gal. Gal 3. 26.
3. 26. So that application of Christ, makes him ours.

By faith we know our selves to be sons of God. Ans. 1.


2. Ephesians. 1. 5.
Faith makes us not sons, but predestination: Romans 8. 29. We were made the sons
of God when we were prede^^^nated; Having predestined us to the adoption of
children. Ephesians. 1. 5. By being given to Christ, Ioh. 17. 6.
we became sons and brethren to Christ: Isa. 8. 18.
Job. 17. 6. Isa. 8. 18, Heb. 2. 13. we were given to Christ before Christ
dyed: Heb. 2. 13.
In bringing many sons unto glory through suffering. Heb. Heb. 2. 10, 11.
2. 10, 11. For he that is set apart, and they that are set apart are one, for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren: So that adoption is
acceptance of us in Christ; Gal. 3. 29.
and our being Christ's, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6.
makes us the seed, (sons) Gal. 3. 29. Therefore not our believing, Heb. 2. 10.
for adoption is without, and before our believing: Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Heb. 2. 10.
Adoption is before our redemption, and comprehends all spiritual privileges,
Romans 3. 24. and 8. 29, 30.
as redemption, reconciliation, justification, glorification, Romans 3. 24. and
8. 29, 30. The elect were sons before they believed; Because ye are sons, Gal
5. 22.
God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son i^ to your hearts: Gal. 4. 6.
unless they could believe without the Spirit. Gal. 5. 22. They were sons
before they believed, for because they were sons, God sent them the Spirit of
his Son, that so by it they might believe and know that they were sons: both
then, and before they believed.

And to say they did not appear to be Sons until they believed, is true, Heb.
2. 11.
but to say the Elect are not one with Christ, and no sons until they believe,
and that believing makes them sons, is to say our believing makes Christ
ours, this we cannot assent to: for this is to set faith above Christ, and
makes our happiness to depend not upon Christ, but upon faith; if that must
give us interest and union with Christ, and so unless we believe, Christ is
not ours, nor is to no purpose. So then Christ dyed for the sins of no man,
or so died for men's sins, as he saved no man by his blood, and so Christ must
dye for us, but our faith must save us: Thus many make Christ a servant to wait
and tend upon faith, and to be at the command of faith, and this we may not
bear.

The Scripture says, O^j. 18.
we are justified by faith, Romans 5. 1.

The word Faith is diversely understood, Ans. 1.
sometimes by faith is meant knowledge, Romans 14. 22.
as Romans 14. 22. and sometimes faith is meant the doctrine of faith, Jude 3.
Jude 3. So also for the profession of faith, Romans 1. 8.
Romans 1. 8. Thus Simon Magus believed. Also by faith we are to understand the
power by which we believe, Gal. 5. 22.
as Gal. 5. Romans 4. 13.
22. and sometimes by the word faith, we are to understand Christ, Gal 3. 16.
Romans 4. 13. Gal. 3. 16. with 19. 23. ten times at least in this Chapter the
word Faith is put for Christ.

Also we are to consider, the Scripture speaks the same things of works that it
speaks of faith: Mark 16. 16.
He that believes shall be saved: Prove. 28. 18.
Mark 16. 16. He that walks uprightly shall be saved. Prove. 28. 18. If thou will sell all, and give it to the poor, and f^llow me, thou shall have
treasure in heaven. If thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments. Matthew.
19 17. etc.
Matthew. 19. 17. to 23. He that continues to the end shall be saved. Mark 13. 3.
Mark 13. 3.
A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. Iam. 2. 24.
Jam. 2. 24. Take heed unto thy self, and unto the doctrine: continue in them;
^im 4. 16.
for in doing this, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear thee. 1 Cor.
7. 16.
1 Timothy 4. 16. What know thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife? etc.
1 Cor. 7. 16. So salvation is ascribed to faith: Luk 7. 48 etc.
And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee, thy faith has saved thee.
Romans 8. 24.
Luke 7. 48, 49, 50. We are saved by hope. Romans 1 Pet. 3 21.
8. 24. Baptism saves us. 1 Pet. 3. 21. yet Christ is he that saves his people
from their sins. Matthew. 1. 21.
Matt. 1. 21.

So the Scriptures do often give that to faith which is proper to Christ, as we
live by faith: Galat. 2. 20. by Christ, Joh. 6. 57. we have remission of sins
by faith. Act. 13. 38, 39. by Christ, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. We a^e justified
by faith: Romans 3. 28. Gal. 3. 24. by Christ, Isa. 53. 11. Romans 5. 9. We have
peace with God by faith: Romans 5. 1, 2. by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 8. and 3. 12. we
are sanctified by faith, Act. 15. 9. by Christ, Heb. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 30. we
overcome the world by faith. 1 John 5. 4, 5. by Christ, Joh. 16. 33. 1 Cor. 15.
57. We are the s^ns of God by faith: Gal. 3. 26. by Christ, Ephesians. 1. 5. we
have an heavenly inheritance by faith, Act. 26. 18. by Christ, Gal. 4. 7. we
have eternal life by faith: Joh. 3. 16. and 5. 24. and 6. 47. (...) Christ, 1 John 5. 11, 12. we are saved by faith, Ephesians. 2. 8. by Christ, Matthew. 3. 21.
Joh. 3: 17. These things are not proper to faith, Romans 8. 33.
but only to Jesus Christ alone.

Also the Scripture says, Romans 3. 24.
It Is God that justifies: Romans 8. 33. with 3. Isa 45 25.
24. Christ is said to justify: Isa. 45. 24. and 53. 11. that we are justified
by his blood, Isa 53. 11.
Romans 5. 9. with Romans 8. 34, 35. the Spirit of God is said to justify, Romans 5.
9. and 8. 34, 35.
1 Cor. 6. 11. These three are one. 1 John 5.

The question then is, 1 Cor 6. 11.
by which of these we are justified before God: 1 Ioh. 5.
we conceive that is only by Jesus Christ. Our Reason why we ascribe it to
Christ alone, is:

1. Isa. 45. 25. and 53. 11.
Because it was promised of Christ, that he should justify many. Isa. 45. 25.
and 53. 11.

2. Reason: Because when the Scriptures expressions seem to contradict one
another, those expressions that ascribe most to Christ are the clearest and
nearest the center, the rest are to follow that, and be interpreted by them;
for the Scriptures are to be interpreted for Christ, and not against him.

Thirdly, Because the whole voice of the Scripture being laid together, does
wholly drive to set up, and exalt Jesus Christ alone, Col. 3. 11.
to acknowledge him to be as he is all in all: Col. 3. Heb. 5. 9.
11. therefore he is called, The Author of salvation: Heb. 5. 9. and the means
of our salvation through his blood: Ephesians. 1. 7.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. Col. 1. 14.
1. 14. and Salvation it self: Isa. 49. 6. And if we should not ascribe our
justification to God, Isa 49. 6.
to Christ alone, God could not be all in all. 1 Cor 15. 28.
1 Cor. 15. 28. Col. 3. 11.

4. Because all things else besides God are but means of our knowing and
enjoying him that is the substance.

5. Act. 26. 18.
Because all that faith can do, is only to receive remission of sins. Act. 26.
18. it cannot give remission of sins, faith cannot satisfy justice, nor merit
pardon for the least sin, etc.

6. Romans 5. 9.
Because the Scripture says, We a^e justified by his blood: Romans 5. 9, etc.
These and the like Reasons cause us to conceive that we are justified only by
Christ alone.

And therefore when the Scripture says we are justified by faith, by faith, we
are to understand Christ: or else to understand it not properly, but in a large
sense, not as if faith did justify us, but only Christ. For 1. it is the
language of the Scripture to give

The names of things to that which is not the thng, but the similitude of it; 1 Samuel 28. 14, 15.
thus the similitude of Samuel is called Samuel: 1 Samuel 28. 14, 15. And an
Image is called a God: So the Priests offerings are said to cleanse men from
sin, Levit. 20. Heb. 10. 11.
30. and yet they nor their offering did not take away sin.

2. So we may be said to be justified by faith, as well as we are said to be
justified by our works: Iam 2. 24.
Jam. 2. 24. because by it we are justified to men, and cannot be justified
before men without faith and works. Jam. 2. 24.

3. Because faith has a relation and dependence on Christ, the one implies the
other as a father implies a son; and an husband a wife, they are relatives.
Faith looks only to Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
and fixed in God: That your faith and hope may be in G^d. 1 Pet. 1. 20, 21.
Faith and Christ go together, where one is present, the other is present also.
And,

4. Inasmuch as faith most honors God, and is all for God, Phi. 3 1^.
and we enjoy the comfort of our justification through faith, Rom 5. 1.
Phil. 3. 9. Rom 5. 1. it may have the name, in as much as faith is an effect
of justification; Now it is the manner of Scripture to put the effect for the
cause: Romans 9. 33.
as Romans 9. 33. with Isa. 28. 16. for making haste in Isa. Paul says, shall
not be ashamed. Shame and confusion being an effect that follows haste. So
sinners are said to love death, because they love sin which is the cause, and
death the effect. Some affirm faith does justify, because by faith we receive
our justification: by the same reason the hand that receives a pardon from the
Prince, it may be said his hand pardoned him; and why may he not as well say he
pardoned himself, because his hand did receive it? I thought giving and
receiving had bin two things. And if faith may be said to justify, because it
receives justification, sure it is in a very large sense. And seeing we by the
act of faith receive justification, etc. then it is the acts of faith that
justifies. Which yet some evade.

Secondly, our faith, that is to say, our believing cannot justify us, because
it is not our righteousness. For not any thing can be our righteousness or
justification unto us, but that which is made sin and curse for us, only
Christ is both these to his: Gal. 3. 13.
He has made him to be sin for us, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us. Gal. 3. 13. therefore he bare our sins, 1
Pet 1 18.
and was wounded for us, that be might bring us to God. 1 Pet. 1. 18.

Nothing can justify us, but that which is our reconciliation, our
righteousness and peace; and nothing can procure peace to us, but that which
justifies us, and covers our iniquities, that separate us from God: Isa. 57.
and 59. 2. For he is our peace, Isa 57. and 59. 2.
who has broken down the middle wall of partition between us. Ephe 2. 1^,
(...) 17
Ephesians. 2. 14, 15, 17. Can faith do these things for us? surely no. Christ
became our righteousness by his obedience. Or more strictly by his obedience
to the death of the Cross: Col. 1. 20.
Col. Ephesians 2. 16.
1. 20. Ephesians. 2. 16. God did ordain him to be our righteousness, 1 Pet. 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20
1. 18, 19, 20. and therefore we ought to look upon Christ to be our
righteousness, because God has made him so: 1 Cor 1. 30.
1 Cor. 1. 30. 2 Cor. 5. 21. Nothing can redeem us, and set us free from
bondage but Christ: 2 Cor. 5 21.
He^. 2. 14, 15. Heb. 9. 26, 28. Nothing can present us holy, Heb 2. 14, 15.
and 9. 26. 28.
and unblameable, but Christ: Col. Col. 1. 22.
1. 22. therefore Christ's Testament declares, that all the parts of our
redemption, Ephesians 2 16.
justification, reconciliation, salvation, are attributed to Christ's blood, Heb
9 and 10
to his death: Col. 1. 20. Ephe. Romans ^ 9
2. 16. Heb. 9. and 10. Romans 5. 9. the slaying our enmity, the destroying our
spiritual enemies, 1 Cor 5. 18 (...)
etc. is attributed to his Cross: therefore the word of the Gospel is called
the Word or preaching of the Cross. 1 Cor. 1. 18, 23. Therefore the main and
special thing the Apostle desired to know, and drove at in all his Preaching,
was nothing else but Jesus Christ and him crucified. And if the preaching of
Christ in wisdom of words, the Cross of Christ might be made of no effect, 1
Cor. 1. 17.
as 1 Cor. 1. 17. much more do they make the death of Christ of no effect, who
will have any thing besides Christ alone to be their righteousness, in whole
or in part: men please themselves with a conceit that they do not dishonor
Jesus Christ, in their ascribing their justification to faith; because faith is
a grace of Christ, and so from Christ. But by the same reason we may ascribe
our justification to love, patience, te^ perance, goodness, etc. because they
are from Christ, and fruits of the same spirit faith is: Gal. 5. 22.
Gal. 5. 22. And may we not also by the same reason ascribe our justification
to all our spiritual performances, prayers, tears, and all our good works;
because the power by which we do these, is from Christ: For without me, Ioh.
15. 5.
faith Christ, ye can do nothing. Joh. 15. 5.

O all ye sons and daughters of the most High, lift up your voice, and cry, No
inherent holiness to justification, as well as no works of the Law; for
whatsoever is in us, and acted by us, and passes through us, is defiled by us:
All our righteousnesses are as filthy rag^. Isa. 64. 6. Not by work of
righteousness which we have done, (...) to 9.
but according to his mercy he saved us. etc. Tit. 3. (...) 45. 24, 25.
5. to 9. But in the Lord have I righteousness. Isa. 45. 24, 25. He is our
righteousness, (...) 2^. 6.
Jer. 23. 6. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.
(...) 71. 16.
Psalm. 71. 16. My tongue shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long:
ver. 24. For no other righteousness is not to be compared to this, as it is
acted by us, is not worth the talking on.

3. Our believing cannot justify us, because nothing that we do (though by
grace) is perfect, our best acts and works of righteousness, by reason of the
sin and corruption in us that cleaves to all we do, is defiled with some spot
of sin, and has not that perfection the Law of God requires; so that our
believing is so far from justifying us, as God may reject, it as sin; as when
our love is not so much or such as it ought to be, Mar 9. 24.
then it is imperfect, and we (...): so we say of our faith, our believing is
called unbeleef Mark 9. 24.

His purity cannot justify us, Isa 64 6.
for that which is not perfect, if all our righteousness be as filthy rags:
Tit. 3. 5.
Isa. 64. 6. Tit. 3. 5. is not our act of believing so? Dan 9. 18.
does not Daniel include his most holy acts, when he names his righteousnesses?
Dan. 9. 18.

The perfect love in 1 John 1 Ioh 4. 18.
4. 18. is the love of God manifested to us, not our love to him.

Fourthly, our believing cannot justify us, because the act of faith is a
work; and if we be justified by our faith, then we are justified by works. That
the act of faith is a work, appears:

1. Because we are commanded to believe ( as we are) to love one another, 1 Ioh
3. 23.
as he gave us commandment. 1 John 3. 23.

2. To obey a command, is a work; but to believe, is to obey a command. 1 Ioh
3. 24.
1 John 3. 23, 24. Faith is an obeying of the will of God; therefore it is a
work, and a good work.

3. Matthew. 6 3^.
It Is a work, because we are reproved for the smalnesse of our faith: Matthew 8.
(...).
Christ said, O ye of little faith, Matthew. 6. 30. why are ye fearful?
wherefore do ye doubt, O ye of little faith? Matthew. 8. 26. If faith were not
acted by us (although the power is of God) why are we reproved for not
believing?

4. It Is a work, because the Saints are exhorted to exercise faith: Heb. 10. 22.
Let us draw near with full assurance of faith. Heb. 10. 22. We are not
exhorted to nothing but to that which is our duty, as it is to do a good work,
as believing is.

5. It Is a work, because to believe is a work of all the faculties of the soul,
viz: memory, conscience, affections, principally the understanding and will.
Romans 10. 9.
Romans 10. 9, 10.

6. To receive a thing is an act of the whole man; but to believe in Christ is
to receive him: 1 Ioh 1. 12.
1 John 1. 12. Therefore to believe in Christ is a work.

7. Tit. 3. 5.
Because unbeleef is a work of darkness; therefore to believe is a work of
righteousness. Tit. 3. 5.

8. Because to a good work faith is required: therefore it partakes of the
nature of a good work, Heb. 11. 4.
and so is a part of every good work.

9 It Is a work, Act. 3 37.
because we are said to do it: If thou beleevest, I do believe, Rom 10
Act. 8. 37. To believe is the action of the heart, viz: will: With the heart
man believes. He does it as truly as he confesses with his mouth. Romans 10. 9,
10.

10. If to confess Christ be a duty and a work (though by grace we do both)
then is the act of believing a work also, and a work that we do, Tit 3 9
and is one of those works of righteousness that we have done. Isa 64. 6.
Tit. 3. 5. with Isa 64. 6.

If it be objected, that faith is put in opposition to works, therefore faith
is not a work.

I answer. When faith is put in opposition to works, then by faith is always
to be understood Christ, for he alone is the matter of our righteousness:
therefore when the Apostle excludes works from justifying us, we are to
understand all our outward and inward acts, and all internal virtues, faith it
self: Rom 3. 22.
Romans 3. 28. For no command of the Law could be obeyed without faith; therefore
faith was a part of the fulfiling of the Law: Matthew. 22. 37, ^8 40.
that faith was required, appears, Matthew. 22. 37, 38, 40. The Law required
purity, but such as believe not are defiled, (...) 1 15.
their minds and consciences are defiled. Tit. 1. 15. Therefore faith was
required as a deed of the Law. Romans 3. 28.
Romans 3. 28. Not by works of righteousness which we have done but according to
his mercy he saves us. Tit 3. 5.
Tit. 3. 5. Does not the Apostle in these words exclude all in us, or that we
do to justification? And inasmuch as to believe is required the power of God:
so that in respect of the power by which we believe in Christ it may be said to
be a work of God. Ioh 6 29.
Joh. 6. 29. And as acted by man, a work of man by Gods grace. (...) 10. 9, 10.
Romans 10. 9, 10.

Fifthly, if we speak of justification in the conscience, in a strict sense,
faith cannot be said to justify the conscience, for this is the work of the
Spirit of Christ's, which speaks peace to the soul: Cor 2 9 10.
The things God has prepared for us, he has revealed unto us by his Spirit,
Heb 10. 15, 17
1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. saying, I am thy salvation, I have done away thy sins, I will
remember them no more. Heb. 10. 15. 17. The Spirit bears witness to our
spirits, Romans 8. 18.
that we are the children of God. Romans 8. 16. Now the work of faith is, to
assent to the truth of this testimony, and receive it. Now to assent unto, and
receive a thing, is not to manifest it; for giving and receiving are two
things; Ephesians 3 5.
as to declare a thing, and to believe the Declaration are two things. Ephesians. 3
5.

There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, these agree in one, that our sins are forgiven. There are three that
bear witness on earth, 1. the Spirit, 2. water, viz. dipping Baptism, 3.
Blood: viz. the Sacrament of the Supper, wherein Christ's blood is shed, and his
body broken, and these three agree in one, 1 ^oh 5. 7, 8, 1^, 12.
that is, they witness, hold forth, and declare the record, which is, that God
has given unto us eternal life, and that this life is in his Son. 1 John 5.
7, 8, 11, 12. By which ^t appears, that faith is none of the three witnesses in
heaven, nor any of the three on earth.

If faith did justify us, would it not follow that faith were greater, 1 Cor.
13 13.
and more to be prized then love? yet love is greater: 1 Cor. 13. 13.

We may more properly be said to be justified by the Scriptures the Word of
God, then by our believing, for that is that which evidenceth to us our
justification by Christ, and happiness by him; for how could we know the
safety and happiness of a believer without the Word? or that the world was
made of things that did not appear but by the Word. Heb. 11. 2, 3.
Heb. 11. 2, 3. How could we try the spirits, but by the Word of God, which is
more purer then our believing, and I will rest upon that more then on my
believing: Psalm. 119. 42. 89.
Psalm. 119 42. 89.

Sixthly, we are not justified by our believing, because all that are justified
are justified before they believe: which will appear, if ye consider,

1. The titles given to such persons whom Christ justified, they are termed
sinners, Rom 4. 5. and 5 8. 10.
enemies, ungodly: Romans 4. 5. and 5. 8. 10. The Scripture does not call any
that are believers, ungodly; they have their name from their better part:
therefore believers are called holy, Saints, living stones, babes in Christ.
And therefore seeing they were justified when ungodly, they were justified
before they believed; and therefore their believing did not justify them.
Christ justified many, by bearing their iniqnity; Isa. 53. 5. 6. 11.
he in taking away our sins, made us righteous, and this was our justification:
Romans 5. 9.
Isa. 53. 5. 6. 11. Romans 5. 9.

2. If I am to believe I am justified, and that all my sins are forgiven me, is
it true or false? If it be true, that I am to believe: Isa 40. Isa. 40 1, 2.
1, 2. then I was a justified man, and free from all sin before I believed it;
Rom 8 16.
and therefore I am to believe it because it is true. If it be not true, and so
is false, then it seems I am to believe a lie; and for me to believe I am
justified when I am not, is to deceive my self in believing that which is
false. Also if I am to believe I am justified, when I am not justified, that so
I may be justified, is to believe that which is false that it may be true;
which is unreasonable: because neither faith nor unbeleef can make any thing
true or false, nor cause the being of that which had no being before.

Therefore when Christ by his Spirit and Word of truth declares and reveals to
a soul that all his sins are forgiven, and washed away in the blood of Christ,
etc. it is a certain truth, 1 Ioh. ^ 6.
and it is the holy Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is truth. 1 John 5. 6. Therefore seeing we are justified by Christ before we believed it,
we may not believe, that faith in us was either a cause or a means, or any
instrument of it, but only a means of our receiving the knowledge of it, and
of our enjoying the comfort of it.

And as for such as are troubled because they cannot believe, as they think;
all that I can say to them is, Use the means to know where life is: wait upon
God, he calls one at the third hour, and another at the eleventh, thou know
not but there may be life in the Son for thee, it is there for thee if thou
belong to the election of grace, else not. Also if if thou hungerest and
thirstest after righteousness, viz: Christ, Matthew. 5. thou art blessed, and
shall be saved.

Seventhly, they that say they are justified by their believing, know not what
to stand to; sometimes it is the act of faith justifies them: sometimes it is
not the act, but as it is a grace, then not for the excellency of it, but
because God imputes it for righteousness, then that there is a righteousness
in faith it self. We place justification in Christ alone, by which means we are
at a certainty.

And they that think otherwise, if they please, let them satisfy me in these
few questions. 1. Whether faith in the nature and power of it unacted do
justify, or no: if yea, I desire to know how the power to believe apart from
the exercise of it, can be known to us. 2. How it may fitly be called faith,
when there is no believing, as there is not without the act, seeing faith and
to believe is one thing: and whether the same light and power, etc. be not the
same power by which we obey the rest of Gods commands: and if it be, how you
can distinguish it apart from it is act; and if it justify as it is a grace
unacted, can you tell how, and when you were justified? and if it may abide in
the soul one hour, and not act, why not two, and so two seven years? and
whether then this opinion does not imply that a man may have faith in him, and
be justified by it, and yet he never believe, nor know it. And if Faith
justify in respect of the righteousness or meritoriousnesse of it; whether it
will not follow, that we are righteous in our selves, and so stand in no need
of any righteousness in another; and so need not live by faith in the Son of
God, seeing we have our righteousness in us.

If there be no merit, no righteousness in the act of our believing, but only
God is pleased to accept it for righteousness, and reckon it so; whether it
will not follow, that God esteems, and accepts of that for righteousness, and
imputes it for righteousness which is not so in it self? and whether this is
for his honor or no? and whether it tends not to the dishonor of Christ, that
his righteousness in him is not sufficient, and may not be that which
justified those he dyed for?

Also whether one act of faith justifies, or many? if but one, how we shall
know and distinguish it, that we may know we are justified, that we may not
after that act, act it so again in like manner needlessly: for what need more
then one, if one be enough?

If many acts of faith be required to justify a sinner, then it is necessary
to know how many, that so we may know when we are justified: if we are
continually to act our faith, because we sin continually, then it will follow,
that we are not fully and completely justified, and that we may despair of ever
having one quarter of an hours sweet enjoyment of justification, because in
less time then that, yea in the 40. part of an hour, no man can say he has
not sinned in that time. And if so, then he is to be justified again, because
he is unjust, and appears so to God: so a man cannot say three minutes together
he is a justified man, till by faith we be justified again. And whether this be
not for a man to justify himself, as L^k. 16. 15. surely it was not well done
that will last no longer, Luke 16 15.
and is to so little purpose. ^ut this it is for a man to justify himself, Heb.
^0. 1, 2, 11.
he may see himself in the Priest under the Law, and his work to as little
purpose. Heb. 10. 1, 2, 11.

Also the holding that our believing justifies us, draws in many errors.

That faith is the matter of our righteousness, and makes us righteous.

That God accepts of faith, and so of us for it; that for that he justifies us.

That God looks at, and respects our faith as much if not more then Christ.

Because all the fruit of Christ's death, etc. is made of no effect without
faith.

That faith is a means essential to salvation, and so a cause, and so denies
that salvation depends alone upon Christ; and that he is not the means, but a
part of the means of our salvation.

They limite God in his love, in saying, some sins are forgiven, but not all.

They make faith the greatest means of their salvation, in saying, all other
means are not to any purpose, or not effectual without it.

They attribute righteousness in part to themselves, in attributing it to
their believing.

They quite overthrow the grace of God, in bringing in their work of believing.

They make justification not to consist in pardon of sin, but in a work of
obedience, viz: their believing; and denies Christ to have satisfied Justice
for the sins of the elect.

They rob Christ of the greatest part of his work, his glory, and give it to
faith* and set faith in Christ's throne. And an hundred errors more may be
reckoned up that will follow their opinion.

We do not say, that we are justified by faith alone, but Christ and faith
together, etc.

This is as bad to us, in that you give not Justification to Christ alone; in
that you say, that Christ does not do it, but Christ and faith together: and so
Christ is but half a Savior, if you make him so much.

2. I desire to know why you may not add to Christ and faith, Phi 1. 19.
prayer, ^ph. 2. 8.
seeing the Apostle says, that this shall turn to my salvation through your
prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ. Phile. 1. 19. ye see our
salvation is attributed to be through our prayers as through faith: Ephesians. 2.
8. Why do you leave out good works, Iam. 1. 24.
seeing James says, 2 ^^m. 2 10.
A man is justified by works, and not by faith only. Jam. 2. 24. Also Paul
says, Therefore I suffer all things for the elects sake, that they may obtain
salvation. 2 Timothy 2. 10.

3. In that ye join any thing to God, to accomplish this work as a copartner
with Christ, Romans 10 9, 10.
Christ cannot have all the glory of our salvation; faith must have a part of
it, if not we our selves, for we believe. Romans 10. 9, 10.

4. Ye deny that Christ has justified those for whom he dyed upon the Cross:
Rev 5 1.
you deny we are justified by him, by his blood: Psalm 89 19.
that he has not washed away all our sins in his blood. Isa. 45. 25. and 53.
11.
Rev. 5. 1. Psalm. 89 19. with Isa. 45. 25. and 53. 11. Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14.
in saying, Christ has not presented us holy to God before we believe: Col 1 14.
Ye contradict Christ himself. Ephesians. 5. 27.
Ephesians. 5. 27. Joh. 19. 28. 30. Ioh. 19 28. 30.
O treason, treason! Thus many ways ye dishonor Jesus Christ, which is only
to be honored; therefore ye are guilty of treason against the King of Saints,
our Lord Jesus Christ. Take notice of that, and consider of it.

We grant faith does not justify, O^j. 20.
but it is God that justifies. But yet he does it through faith, and therefore
not without it. Romans 3. 25.

Through faith, Ans.
that is through Jesus Christ, In whom we have redemption through his blood.
Ephe. 1. 7.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 3. 24.
Romans 3. 24. So the word through him is used: 1 Ioh* 4. 9.
1 John 4. 9. through him, Ephesians 1 5. 7.
and by him is all one: Ephesians. 1. 5. 7. That the blessing of Abraham might come
on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. Galat. 3. 14. 8. So that through faith is
through Christ. But if you will have it through faith, then it must be as
through a pipe of conveyance we come to receive it: Gal. 3. 14.
That we might receive the promise of the Spirit through fait^: Gal. 3. 14. And
that is not to be justified by faith, but to receive it; and so as through a
prospective gl^sse, we see all our righteousness to be in Christ, and by faith
we receive it, and come to enjoy it in our consciences: and this we grant, and
this will stand with Justification by Christ alone.

When we say, that we are, and ever were just and righteous before God in and
by Christ, we learn to distinguish between our own sight and the sight of God.
Ezekiel speaks of our own sight, Ezekiel. 20. 43.
20. 43. Job speaks in the sight of God; for that is in the sight of God, that
is not in our own sight: so that no man is justified by the law in the sight of
God, Gal. 3. 11. So to be just with God, ^^b 9 2^.
is to be cleared in his sight. Job 9. 20. Romans 3. 20. Act 10 30, 3.
So that when Christ was made our righteousness in the sight of God, C^l^ 22.
then we were justified in his sight, which was before all time: Rom 9. 10.
for those who appear without sin, must needs appear just: R^v. 5 5.
but the elect appear so to God in Christ. They are without fault before the
throne of God: Song 4. 7.
Rev. 15. 5. Song 4. 7.

Those whose sins were laid upon Christ are just, Isa 53* 11.
and therefore appear so to God. Isa. 53. 11.

Those against whom nothing can be charged, are just, and appear so to God.
Romans 8. 33.

Those who are in Christ are just: but the elect were so before the world. Eph^
1. 4.
Ephesians. 1. 4.

Those who are reconciled must needs be just: 2 Cor 5. 19.
but this the elect were before the world. God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself. 2 Cor. 5. 19. and they were actually reconciled, in and by
Christ on the Cross, by the death of his Son. Romans 5. 10. therefore before we
believed.

Those who are justified are just: Ioh 5. 10.
but this the elect were by Christ's blood. Romans 5 9.
Romans 5. 9.

Those who are redeemed by Christ, Ephesians 1. 7.
are made just: In whom we have redemption by his blood. Col. 1 2 Cor^ 5. 18.
to 21.
Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. etc.

Those whose sins were all remitted are made just: but so are all the sins of
all the elect by Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Those who have a share in Christ's righteousness, 2 Cor 5. 21.
they are righteous: but so have all the elect. 2 Cor. 5. 21.

Those to whom God imputes no sin, they are just and righteous: 2 Cor. 5. 19.
but God imputes no sin to the elect. God was in Christ, not imputing their
trespasses unto them. 2 Cor. 5. 19. therefore then blessed.

All the elect were made these by Christ upon the Cross: therefore they were
then justified: therefore they were justified before they believed. 2 Timothy 1.
9, 10.
Yea, God gave them grace in Jesus Christ before the world began, but
manifested by Christ's appearing. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. But it is objected, that these
Scriptures are to be considered to be spoken unto believers, and whom God did
so look upon because believers. I answer. If it were so, that is enough for me,
if they appear so to God. Now they believe, they appeared so to God from
eternity, for what God now sees, he ever did, and ever shall; knowledge is his
fight, or else he was not ever infinite in knowledge: but that he was.
Therefore the elect ever had a being in the knowledge and love of God;
therefore God looks upon the elect before they believe as well as after: 1 Ioh.
4. 16. Ioh 17 23.
And seeing the love of God is, and ever was infinite, for God is love: 1 John
4. 16. God has loved them as Christ was loved, Joh. 17. 23. Therefore God
loves not any the more, or the better because they believe.

The Scripture does not call Christ faith, O^j 21.
therefore by the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 13. is not meant Christ, but
the grace of faith that is in us by which we believe.

By faith in this place we are to understand Christ (as we are in some others)
because he only is our righteousness, Ans.
which I prove by these Reasons. Rom 4. 13.


1. Because faith and Christ's righteousness are two several things: 2 Pet. 1.
1.
To them that have obtained like preci^us faith thr^ugh the righteousness of
God, and our Savior Jesus Ch^^st: 2 Pet. 1. 1. therefore faith is not this
righteousness.

2. 1 Cor 1 30. Ph^. 3. 9.
Because God has made Christ to be our righte^us^^sse, who of God is made unto
us righte^usnesse, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30. therefore faith is not our
righteousness. Phi. 3. 9.

3. Because the title righteousness, is only proper to Jesus Christ, who is
our righteousness, this is his Name, ^he^eby he shall be called, (...) ^3. 6.
(...)
The Lord our righteousness. Je^. 23. 6. (...) the righte^usnesse in Mat. Matt
5 6.
5. 6. is meant Christ. Righteousness ^elongs to God: D^n 9. 7.
Dan. 9. 7. Faith is not God.

4. Because faith shall cease, and be done away: 1 Cor. 13. But this
righte^usnesse shall never cease, therefore faith is not this righteousness:
My righteousness shall be for ever. Isa. 51. 8. Gods righteousness. Isa. 51.
8.


5. Faith is a fruit of the Spirit, that is within us, but Christ's
righteousness is without us, and not in us; it covers us, and makes us
comely, beautiful, and glorious: Unto her was granted that she should be
arrayed in fine linen, Rev. 19 8. and 7 9, ^, 4.
white and clean: the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints. Rev. 198.
and 7. Isa. 6. ^0
9. 13, 14. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my
God: for he has covered me with the garments of salvation, he has covered me
with the ro^e of righteousness. Isa. 61. 10.

6. Because this righteousness in which is our happiness and glory, by which
we are accepted is in Christ, and not in us, 2 Cor 5. 21.
it is the righteousness of God in him: 2 Cor. 5. 21. In the Lord h^ve I
righteousness. (...) 25 ^4 1 ^or 1. 30.
Isa. 45. 24. Romans 4. 24. But faith is in us, therefore faith is not this
righteousness, all this is out of us, and without us. 1 Cor. 1. 30.

7. Because this righteousness of which we speak, was not brought in in
Daniels time, but was to be brought in after the end of Daniels seventie weeks:
Dan 9. 24. (...).
Seventy weeks are determined to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring
in everlasting righteousness. Dan. 9. 24 My salvation is near to come, and my
righteousness to be revealed. Isa. 56. 1. But faith was not this
righteousness, because that was within long before Daniels time; for Abraham
and the Saints believed. Also if faith had been this righteousness, Christ had
not brought it in, because it was in before he came.

8. The Saints did not count faith this righteousness, nor their own
righteousness, Christ was that to them: therefore they said, (...) 16. 24.
In the Lord have I righteousness. Psalm. 71. 16. The Lord our righteousness.
Jer. 23. 6.
Jer. 23. 6. they comforted themselves in this righteousness. He will bring me
forth into the light, I shall behold ^is righteousness. Micha 7. 9. He then
believed, therefore faith was not this righteousness. For righteousness and
glory does not consist in faith, but rather subsisteth in us by it; I mean the
comfort of this righteousness.

9. Christ only is our righteousness, because he fills all in all things:
Col. 3 11.
Col. 3. 11. The fullness of him that fills all in all. Ephesians. 1. 23. Ephesians.
1. 23.
Who is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he
might have the pre-eminence: For it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell. Col. 1. 18, 19.
Col. 1. 18, 19. He that places any righteousness in any thing but in Christ,
denies Christ the pre-eminence in all things. Therefore we say, O Lord, Ezr^
9.* 15.
thou art our righteousness. Ezra 9. 15.

10. Man when at the worst, all that he stood in need of, was only a full and
perfect righteousness, by which he might be justified; which if faith could
have been that to him, Christ might have been spared, because God could have
given us faith in himself, if faith could have taken away our ^ins, and so
justified us. Heb. 9. 26.

11. It appears that faith is not this righteousness, because this
righteousness of God is through faith: Phi. 3 9.
The righteousness of God through faith. Romans 3. 25.
Phi. 3. 9. Through faith: Romans 3. 25. Therefore faith is not this
righteousness.

12. Because the Saints expect not acceptance for any thing that is in them,
Dan 9. 18.
or acted by them: therefore they say, We do not present our supplications
before thee for our righteousness, but for thy mercy sake: Dan. 9. 18. with
Is^. 64. 6. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy be saves us. Tit. 3. Tit. 3. 5.
5. (our believing must come in amongst the rest of the righteousness which we
have done:) therefore they say, I will make mention of thy righteousness, even
of thine only. Psalm. 71. 10. 16.

13. That faith is not this righteousness, it will appear if you consider what
faith is (in it self, simply so considered apart from Christ) it is no
righteousness at all, much less this righteousness we speak of. The Apostle
in 1 Cor. 15. 17. speaks of the faith of such as did truly believe; 1 Cor. 15.
17.
he tells them that if Christ was not risen, their faith was vain: that is,
worth nothing. So that if Christ had not been the true Me^^as, and so the right
object for their faith, their believing could not have done them any good: for
all their believing they had been in their (...). So that faith considered
apart by it self, it is like a picture without life, an empty and cold
business, only to please the fancy. But if faith be filled with Christ, with
light and love, Heb. 11.
it is the powerfullest thing in the world: as Heb. 11. Ephesians 3. 16. etc. Genesis 2.
7.
Ephesians. 3. 16. etc. Man at the first was earth, till God breathed in him life,
Genesis 2. 7. and such as his life is, such is his food, earth, bread; yet he
lives not by bread only, but by the Word of God: Matthew 4 4.
Matthew. 4. 4. Bread, 2 Cor. 5. 6. and 4. 14.
1 Cor. 11. 28. etc. strengthens the senses, and they faith: Ioh. 6. 35.
the Spirit gives life to faith. 2 Cor. 3. Gal. 2. 20.
6. and 4. 13. Christ is this bread: Joh. 6. 35. He is our life. Gal. 2. 20,
Col. 3. 3.
Col. 3. 3. This life is discovered and made known to us: 2 Cor. 14. 10, 11.
2 Cor. 14. 10, 11. Our life is hid with Christ in God. We shall live with him.
Col. 3. 4.
2 Cor. 13. 4. Col. 3. 4. In this life we enjoy our life by faith: 2 Cor 13. 4.
Faith is the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11. 1.
Heb. 11. 1. In this world crosses are frequent, 1 Cor 15. 19. and 10 15.
and comforts few, if the Saints were to have no more then they have in this
life, they were of all men most miserable. 1 Cor. 15. 19. and 10. 15. according
as Christ shall fill our faith with the discoveries of life and love, our lives
shall be sweet, 1 Cor. 13. 3. 9.
and comfortable, and serviceable, etc. 2 Pet. 2. 20.
Though I have the gift of pr^phesie, and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge, Heb 4. 4, 5, 6.
had all faith, yet this alone profits nothing. See 1 Cor. Heb 10. 26. 29 Isa.
48. 1, 2.
13. 3. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 20. Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. and 10. 26. 29. Isa. 48. 1. Isa. 58.
2.
2. and 58. 2. Luke 8. 13, 14. Many make a god of their believing, and depend
upon it, Luke 8. 13, 14.
and fetch all their comfort from it, and venture all their salvation on it: if
men did live upon, and prise Christ as they do their believing, I had spared
this labor.

Because men believe, some fly out in high expressions, saying, their faith is
God, and they are goded with the Godhead of Christ, and that the divine nature
is in them. I grant we are made partakers of the divine nature, but how? by
union, not by infusion: the seed that remains in us, is not God, Romans 10. 8.
but the Word of God. Romans 10. 8. we are born of God, 1 Job. 5. 18. that is,
made the sons of God: he sins not, that is, 1 Ioh. 5. 18.
so as the wicked one can touch him, or come near to hurt him for it: 1 John 5.
18. He is freed by Christ, he is free indeed, he need not fear curse, nor
wrath, hell nor devil, etc. He that believes has the witness in him: 1 Cor.
2. 10.
1 John 5. 20. But faith is not that witness. 2 Cor. 4. 13.
1 Cor. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13. If you search the Scriptures abovenamed, it will
appear our life ^ hi^ with Christ in God^ we enjoy not life it self, Col. 3. 3,
4.
but the knowledge of it, and the comfort of it. We can tell you what great
things are provided for us; and though we have them not now, we shall have
them. Therefore Paul prays that this mystery may be revealed to us. Christ
prayed that Peter's faith might not fail, Luke 23. 32.
Christ's prayer was heard* that which keeps the Saints is not their faith, 1
Pet. 1. 5.
but the power of God. ^ Pet. 1. 5 ^ 2 Cor. 2 Cor. 13. 4.
13. 4. Col. 3. 3, 4. Because I live, Col 3. 3, 4.
says Christ, ye shall live also. Ioh 14. 19.
Joh. 14. 19.

It does not appear that there was any difference in the house that fell, and
that which stood, save only in the foundation; the one being built on the Rock
Christ, and the other was built upon the sand, not upon Christ: something else,
qualification, faith, etc. Faith is to have it is denomination from the object
of it, and the foundation of it: the confidence of an hypocrite may be as great
that he shall be saved, as his is that shall be saved: as I have proved
elsewhere out of Isa. 44. 20.

Abraham believed, Obj. 22.
and it was imputed to him for righteousness.

So Phineas executing judgment was counted, Ans.
viz* imputed to him for righteousness unto all generations. Psalm. 106, 30, 31.
Psalm. 106. 30, 31. that is, it was a good act, a righteous action to be
commended.

If God did impute his believing to him for righteousness, then it was made
his righteousness* but it was Christ the object of his faith that was his
righteousness* for nothing can make us righteous but Christ, Romans 5. 19.
By whose obedience we are made righteous. Romans 5. 19.

Righteousness is imputed not faith, and so much the word believing does
import, that our righteousness is else where, and not in faith, nor in our
selves for faith apprehends that which is out of us in another, Romans 4. 7, 8, 11
the righteousness of Christ, Ier. 23. 6.
Romans 4. 7, 8, 11. Who is our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. 1 Cor. 1. 30. Romans 3.
25.
Our propitiation, Romans 3. 25. 1 John 22. Our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. Ioh. 1. 22.
Our sanctification, Tit. 2. 14. our victorious Conqueror, Col. 2. 14, 15.
Ephe. 2. 14.
our Redeemer, Saviou^, eternal life: 1 John 5. 11, 12, 20. He that has him,
Col. 2. 14, 15.
has all* he that has not him, has nothing at all.

A man is first called before he is justified, Obj. 23.
for justification i^ after calling. Romans 8. 30.

Then men are not justified by faith; Ans.
for if they be called, they believe: Romans 8. 30.
or how else are they called? and if they are believers, and yet are not
justified, it was because their faith could not justify them.

Although the elect are justified, yet no man can know that he is justified
until he believe: Act. 10. 43.
whosoever believes on him shall receive remission of sins. Act. 10. 43. so
that men receive not remission of sins till after they believe. So that God
dispenceth out these privileges, and that we receive them in this order, as 1.
calling, then justification, and after glorification, which seems to be the
meaning of the Apostles words, which I deny not but we receive them in this
order.

He that believes, Obj. 24.
and is baptized, shall be saved: and ^e that believes not, shall be damned.
Mark 16. 16. therefore faith is a condition required to salvation.

Faith saves not as a cause or condition, Ans.
as Ministers remits sins, Ioh. 20. 23. and 3. 16.
so faith saves declaratively. Joh. 20. 23. and 3. 16. Mark 16. 16. Mar. 16. 16.
These words declare how the Gospel is to be preached, and applied by the
Preachers and hearers thereof, so that neither of them may apply to themselves,
nor unto any others salvation until they believe: and therefore this is a rule
to direct how the Gospel is to be preached. When he sent them forth, he said
unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature:
He that bele^ves, and is baptized, shall be saved: and he that believes not,
shall be damned. Mark 16. 14, 15, 16. and so they preached the Gospel.

2. If faith and Baptism be a condition required absolutely necessary,
without which no man can be saved, then our salvation depends upon works now,
as it did under the Law.

3. If faith be a condition required to partake of the covenant of grace, then
there is a condition required, and so the covenant of grace is not absolute,
nor free. If it be said, God gives what he requires. I answer. That makes the
condition easy to be performed; but still if faith be as a condition required,
there is a condition: but the covenant of grace is absolute and free, and
unconditionall on our part. And that this appears,

1. Psalm 89. 19. 24. 27, 28.
Because the covenant of grace is not made with man, but is only between God
and Christ: Thou spakest in a vision to thy holy One, thou said, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out of the people. My
faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: I will make him my firstborn,
higher then the Kings of the earth. My mercy will I keep for him, my Covenant
shall stand fast with him. Psalm. 89. 19. 24. 27, 28. So that all the conditions
of the covenant did only belong to Christ to perform; seeing Christ had
undertaken it, and he only was engaged to it, and he did it to the utmost,
which was, Psalm. 53. 10, 11
that Christ should be made a sacrifice for sin, and be should see his seed,
Psalm. 89. 35, 36, 37.
and prolong his days: and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his
hands. Isa. 42. 6.
Isa. 53. 10, 11. See also Psalm. 89. 35, 36, 37.

2. And seeing no covenant is made with the elect, there is nothing required
from them as any cause or conditions without which they cannot be saved: as
appears, Heb. 8. 10, 11, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
12. For our salvation depends not upon our believing, but upon Christ: Because
I live, ye shall live also. Joh. 14. 19. And that there is not the least
condition required from man to partake of the covenant of life and salvation,
appears by these words:
His seed will I make to endure for ever. If his children forsake my Law, and
walk not in my judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my
Commandments: then will I visit their transgressions with the rod,
and their iniquities with stripes. Nevertheless my loving kindness will I
not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my mouth. Act. 2. 25.
Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto Christ. Act. 2.
25. His seed shall endure for ever. Psalm. 89. 29. to 32.

3. Faith is a fruit of the Covenant, and a branch of the Covenant, but not a
condition on our part to perform.

4. All the elect were ever in this Covenant, for they were ever in Christ: E^h
1. 3 ^
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has b^essed us
with all spiritual blessings (in Christ) acco^ding as he has chosen us (in
him) before the foundation of the world. Ephesians. 1. 3* 4. Christ is this
Covenant: I will give thee for a Covenant of the people, Is^ 42 6, 7, 8. and
49. 9.
for a light to the Gentiles to open their eyes, to bring out the prisoners
from the prison, and them that sit is darkness out of the prison house. Isa.
42. 6, 7, 8. and 49. 9. Therefore faith is not required as a condition to
partake of this Covenant nor salvation. My kindness shall not depart from
thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, Isa. 54 10.
says the Lord that has mercy on thee. Isa* 54. 10. Thus God to show unto the
heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:
that by two immutable things ( oath and covenant) in which it is impossible for
God to lie, ^^b ^ 17, 18
we might have strong consolation. Heb. 6. 17, 18. P^al 89. 35, 36
with Psalm. 89. 35, 36. Oh this is strong consolation indeed, behold the
liberty of the sons and daughters of God.

To be justified, Obj 25.
is for to be declared or pronounced just by sentence.

The word justify, Ans.
properly signifies to make just, and men are made just,

1. E^^l. 7. 29.
By infusion, when the habit or virtue of justice is put into a person: so God
made man upright, or just: Eccl. 7. 29.

2. Men are made just by the justice of another; so were we by Christ: Romans 5.
18, 19
As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one
many are made righteous. Romans 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21. so that Christ's satisfaction is
our justification. And to affirm we are not made just by Christ's justice, is to
overthrow the foundation of Religion, and man's salvation.

3. Men are said to be made just, or justified by sentence, or pleading one to
be just, in this sense a man may justify himself, Job. 9* 20.
Job 9. 20. and be justified by witnesses: Isa. 43. 9. 26. In this men are said
to give righteousness, Isa. 43 9 26.
and to take the righteousness of the righteous from him. Isa. 5. 23. This is
not to be understood strictly, Isa. 5 23.
but in a large sense: for although this has the name of justification yet
sometimes it is worth nothing, having only but an appearance or shadow of
justification, and does men no good at all, and is of no force, except only
with such as are ignorant and de^uded, and is to be abhorred; Prove. 17. ^5. and
24. 24.
is when persons are declared to be just when they are not so: which is to
justify the wicked. As, Prove. 17. 15. and 24. 24.

Now to declare one to be just, cannot make one just for these Reasons.

1. If to declare one to be just does make a man just, then he was not just
before.

2. Rom 3 3, 4.
God and wisdom are said to be justified by men; Romans 3. Matt. 11 19.
3, 4. Matthew. 11. 19. Luke 7. 35. But if to declare him to be so, makes him so,
Luke 7. 35.
then he was not so before. Which to affirm, is blasphemy.

3. If to declare one to be just, does make him so; is it not good to justify
the wicked, and their actions? because it must needs be good to make the unjust
just. But all the declarations of justification the wicked and their actions
can have, they remain wicked, and their actions sinful still.

4. We grant, God by his Spirit declares to the soul that he is just and
righteous; but if they were not made just (by Christ upon his Cross) before,
will it not follow, that he justifies the wicked? which, he says, is
abomination to him. Prove. 17. 15. for they must either be just or wicked* if
just, then the declaring them to be so by sentence did not make them just. And
if they were not just, what were they but wicked? is there a third state? Exodus
34. 7.
God has said, He will by no means clear the guilty. Exodus 34. 7.

5. Because men are not just and righteous; because they are declared to be so;
But they are declared to be so, because they were so before. Therefore such as
God declares to be just, they were made just, justified in and by Christ; and
he looked upon them to be just (as they were) before he declared them to be so.
And no man may declare another to be just and innocent, before he appear to be
so.

Three things are essential to justification.

1. Persons that need to be made just, sinners; a perfect man neither need nor
can be made just.

2. One that can and will make just, and that none can do but God. Romans 8. 33.
Ro^ 8. 33. it is God that justifies.

3. Ephesians. 1. 5.
The means by which he must be made just, and that is Christ, Rom 3 24.
By Jesus Christ: Ephesians. 1. 5. Through the redemption of Jesus: Romans Heb. 1. 2.
3. 24. Christ is God: Hebt. 1. 2. He has redeemed us by his blood: Rev. 5. 9.
Rev. 5. 9. My righteous Servant shall justify many: Isa. 53. Isa. 53. 11.
11. Romans 5. 10. He is our justification it self, for he is our righteousness:
Rom 5. 10.
1 Cor. 1. 30. Righteousness and justification are one. 1 Cor 1. 30.
Isaiah prophefied of Christ that he should justify many: Isa. Isa 45. 25.
45. 25. which he fulfilled when he was made sin for us. Isa. 53. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
2 Cor. 1 Pet. 1. 24.
5. 21. with 1 Pet. 1. 24.

And this must needs be so, for those who are made just, or justified by
satisfaction, they are made just where the satisfaction is, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
and that is in Christ: 2 Cor. 5. 21. Romans 3. 24. Phi. 3. 9. And seeing we were
made in him perfectly righteous, Romans 3. 24.
therefore perfectly just. Phi 3. 9.
As in the first Adam we were made sinners, so in the second Adam the elect
were made righteous. Romans 5. 14 to 20.
As by the first Adams disobedience we were made sinners, so by the second
Adams obedience all in him were made righteous: Romans 5. 14. to 20. And as
Christ is the author, and means, and justification it self; so he is the author
of our salvation, and the means, and salvation it self; as is above proved. So
that Christ is all in all.

Justification is first to be considered in the will of God, sometimes called
purpose, Isa. 45. 10.
counsel, choice, election, predestination, love, Ephe. 3. 11.
the good pleasure of his will: Ephesians. 1. Romans 9. Isa. 45. 10. Ephesians. 3. 11. We
may not seek no further to ask a reason of his will; it had no cause going
before to cause it to be, or so to be: if it had, how can it be eternal, and
infinite? surely it had no beginning. 2 Timothy 3. 9, 10.
And thus the elect are said to be saved before the world, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. And
this is called justification: Tit. 3. 4. 7.
Tit. 3. 4. 7. Then our life was hid with Christ in God: Col. 3. 3.
Col. 3. 3. This is justification in purpose.

Secondly, Justification is to be considered in the act or execution of it in
the means of it, when it was effected in and by the means, Romans 5. 19.
viz: Jesus Christ, By his obedience did justify many, Romans Isa. 53. ^1.
5. 19. Isa. 53. 11. And now justification is actually done, for there were all
the elect then present considered in Christ: Ioh. 17. 2 9.
Ephesians. 1. 4. He comprehended all that were given to him. Ioh. 6. 37, 38, 39.
See Joh 17. 2. 9. and 6. 37, 38, 39. Romans 11. 7. set apart, Heb. 10. Romans 1. 7.
10. As the Priest did bear the names of the children of Israel before the
Lord, Heb. 10. 10.
Exodus 28. 21, etc. so Christ, a public person, Exodus 28. 21.
did bear, and represent all the names and persons that shall be saved, Heb. 2.
11.
that were given to him to justify and save; yea they were one with him: Heb.
2. 11.

Christ took not only the nature of man, but the persons of the elect; else
how did he answer the type, Exodus 28. else how could he bear the sins of many,
if he bore not the sins of no persons? Rev. 1. 5.
and how did Christ wash us, and present (...) holy to God, Col. 1. 21.
as he did, Rev. 1. 5. Col. 1. Ephesians. 1. 5. If he did not present our persons?
Also if Christ took only our nature, the nature of all men being one and the
same, it will follow he did as much for all men as for one; and that he bore
not the sins of any man: for the nature of man may be considered apart from the
person of a man, or else they know not what they say, who affirm, Christ took
our nature, but not the person of any.

Justification being accomplished by Christ, it is his good pleasure to reveal
the same to those to whom it belongs, by his Spirit and Word, and his people
and ordinances; all which hold forth and declare this his infinite love, and
free grace to their souls, that so they may enjoy the comfort of it.

The effect of this revelation of love, etc. begets love in the soul to God,
Col. 3. 11.
and carries the soul out of it self, it is own life, it is righteousness, to
Christ; and his righteousness looking to him as all in all, and so to set him
above all. Now the soul falls into admiration of free love, free grace, highly
pricing it, is satisfied in it, and thankful for it: and now the soul
according to the revelation of this love, etc. so it is filled with love to God,
peace and joy in God, etc. So he submits to Christ's yoke, obeys him, and
suffers for him; now he follows God ^^re abundantly and freely then ever before.

So then the cause of our salvation, or justification, it:

1. The love of God, the good pleasure of his will, this is called the
efficient cause of our salvation.

2. The material and isntrumental cause is Jesus Christ by his death, in
dying for us.

3. The (...) all cause is the end why God those and saved us, Ephesians. 1. 6.
that was his glory, to the praise of the glory of his grace:

The work being accomplished. The Spirit reveals it is done for him; Act. 26.
18.
Romans 8. 1^ says believes it is done for him, Iam. 2. 24.
and receives it: (...) 26. 28. good wor^ declare that it is done for (...) Jam.
2. 24.

Justification (...) where but in the conscience, Obj. 26.
and it is a taking of (...) of the conscience; therefore until sin be taken
out of the conscience men are not justified.

Justification to be placed in Christ where it i^ (...) Epistle^ Ans. 1.


2. If (...) taking sin out of the conscience, then faith does not (...),
because it does not take sin out of the conscience, no, nor assure the
conscience that he is (...) child of God, Romans 8. 16.
to speak strictly, for that is the work of the Spir^^^ as Romans ^. ^6.

3. A man (...) the Lord, and obey the voice of his Servant, and yet he may
walk in darkness, and see no light: as appears, Isa. 50. 10, 11.
Isa. 50. 10, 11. (...) were not a believer, how does (...) appear that God is
[his] God if sin be taken out of his (...) God is his God, how does (...) no
light (...) to see that all that Christ has done is for (...), and to see all
sin taken our of the conscience is a great light.

4. If the knowledge that a man is a believer takes away (...) not away; for it
is o^e thing to (...) know I bele^ve: as it is one thing to see, (...) to know
I see; this latter is by a reflection. So by your reason it will follow, that
neither God, nor Christ, nor the Spirit, nor faith, does not, neither together,
nor apart, justify a sinner; but the knowledge or taking sin out of the
conscience, Ioh. 1 7.
which is assurance Christ is the Lamb that took away all sin. Isa. 53. 6.
1 John 1. 7. with Isa. 53. 6.

5. If assurance of justification be justification, then a believer (...) be
(...) his conscience; yea he may be so clouded and diserted, that he may not
enjoy the assurance (...) doubt (...) or no: thus it was with Heman, Psalm. 88.
Psalm. 88 who yet was a believer.

6. It (...), it will fol^ow that (...) a man, commits, makes a man an (...)
until he does (...) ^ith, to take ^in (...) of his, conscience; and so a man
shall be a justified man, and an unjustified man (and appear so to God) in
less then ten minutes, because in less time he may sin greatly; also it may
lie heavy upon his conscience, and greatly accuse him. Thus it was with (...)
and (...) etc.

Also by the (...) it will follow, that those are unconverted, and have no
(...), until they have assurance, and all sin is taken on of their conscience
they remain unjusti^^ed persons, and still in their sins; and so there is no
faith but assurance, and yet assurance is no faith at all: For faith and
assurance are two things, as appears, We believe, and are sure. Joh. 6 68, 69.
it is an error therefore, to think men must believe, and be assured of
remission of sins, to the end they may be remitted.

Thus in placing justification to consist in assurance, many of the children of
God who is yet enjoy not assurance, but walk in darkness, and see no light*
are concluded to be in their sine, unjustified persons; which is contrary to
the Scriptures, ^ ^

Justification in the conscience is not justification i^ self, but only the
knowledge of it, which is necessary to (...) depends not upon our knowledge of
it, 1 Cor. 15. 28.
nor assurance of it; Col 3. 11.
that which saves us, (...) us; and that which (...) and that is only the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is our justification and salvation, and all in all.

An Answer to a Treatise, entitled, Sins suffered for, but not remitted, etc.
by Mr. HUET, and some others.
YOu say, Man is delivered from the curse of the Law, etc. in the time of his
justification.

We say the same; only the difference betwixt us is, when the time of
Justification is, it seems by your discourse, you judge that time to be after
we believe: we judge that we were justified by Christ upon the Cross. Our
Reasons you may see in this Treatise.

You speak of judgments and punishments of sin: but we desire you to prove, if
you can, that Christ has not made satisfaction for the sins of the elect; or
that God does inflict any thing upon his people for sin, in anger or revenge,
for to suffer by way of satisfaction: if you say not this, you say nothing
against us. We say, that that which is in it self a great plague and judgment,
is sent in love to them, and is a mercy to them: as appears, Psalm. 119. 11.
Romans 8. 28. Heb. 12. 5. to 12.

You say, that sin was not before the ^inning person had a being, and was
fastened to his soul, etc.

Ans. It seems by your words, that sin was not till we were born, etc. But if
our sins cannot be considered in no sense to have a being till we be born, then
before we were born we had no sin; and then when Christ dyed he did not bear
any of our sins, because they were not. And how can it be just that Christ
should be punished for that which was not? and if Christ did not the^ bear our
sins, as Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6, 11. we cannot be saved: for Christ will dye no more,
and without his blood there is no remission. Heb. 9.

Obj. By faith we receive pardon, therefore we are not pardoned before we sin.

Ans. We grant no man does receive it till he believe: yet sin was destroyed
and blotted out before we believe; as I have proved in this Treatise.

Obj. The Advocate has nothing to do for us concerning sin, except we commit
it. 1 John 2. 2.

Ans. We believe Christ has finished this work before we were born, as the
Scriptures declare.

Ob. After sin be committed, Christ does advocate for us.

Ans. This is answered before, p^. 12.

Ob. We put a difference between the Covenant, and the performance of it.

Ans. So do we: and we say, that when Christ dyed he performed the conditions
of the Covenant.

Ob. Heaven was then pu^chased, and they may as well say they have that now, as
pardon of sin before it be committed.

Ans. You may as well say, seeing we have not all that was purchased, as
heaven, although we believe; therefore we have no pardon of sin. The Scripture
says, He washed away our sins in his blood: Rev. 1. 5. etc. But the Scripture
does not say, we are glorified in his blood upon the Cross; and therefore the
reason is not the same.

Ob. The Popes Bull was in that manner sins past, present, and to come: but the
Scriptures speak only of sins past. Romans 3. 25.

Ans. Your Exposition is a mere bull, and quite besides the Scripture, as I
have proved in the Answer of this Objection. page 14.

Ob. We put a difference between the Salve in the Chir^^gions box, and the
healing of the wound, etc.

Ans. So do we: yet we say, when Christ was upon the Cross, He (...) sins; and
by whose stripes we are healed. Isa. 53. 1 Pet. 1. 24.

Ob. We believe that the fountain is set open to wash in, because some whose
sins Christ bore upon the Cross are yet unwashed: Z^ch. 13. 1.

Ans. Z^ch 13. 1. is a prophecy of Christ to come, at which time he should
wash away the ^ins of his people: and this Christ did when he shed his blood,
Rev. 1. 5. And if our fine were not then washed away, we cannot be saved. But
they are not now to be washed away. See page 7, 8.

Obj We believe that Christ does the work upon his (...) purifying them as
often as they (...) be (...) with sin. Mal. 3. 2.

Ans. We believe Christ by one offering did effect this work fully upon the
Cross. See pa* 1. ^o 9. And; that there is (...) the (...) (...) 7. 20. and
that Christ by his Spirit does strengthen them against it so often as they
^ppose it.

O^ Christ (...) something to de for the S^ints concerning sin, which
Priesthood and advocation is one.

'Ans. This is answered before.

O^. Ch^^^^ does give re^ission of sins; forgiveness of sins is after they are
born.

Ans. The question is not when Christ gives, and we receive remission of sins;
this is when men believe. But the question^rs, when our sin^ were destroyed,
and we made just; we say, and have proved, that it was when Christ dyed* and
not after we believed and i^ there had not been, remission of sins in Christ
for us, how could he have given it us when we believed?

Ob. We believe that all the sins the Saints shall commit, shall be pardoned.
Matthew 12. 31. Mic. 7. 8. (shall b^^ is not.)

Ans The question i^; what you mean by pardon* the manifestation of (...) is
the revealing and assuring the soul that his sins are pardoned: this you call
pardon. The taking away of sin, as (...) 53. the destroying sin we call pardon,
in time we know i^, and enjoy it: do you call the manifestation of pardon*
pardon? it shall be manifested to all the elect (and shall be, is not) we place
the substance of all to consist in what Christ did for us upon the Cross,
there is our pardon, (...) then she revealing it.

O^. Its a mocking of God to a^k him to do that he has done already.

Ans So then God has not as yet pardoned your sins: or if (...), you ought not
to pray for pardon of sin any more* See pa. 15.

Ob. As for that text, Heb. 9. 28. you say, we acknowledge it to our comfort
that Christ did bear our sins they being foreseen, he satisfied for all that
the Saints should commit: but there is a difference betwixt bearing them, and
giving us pardon for them. As, Act. 5. 3.

Ans. If Christ satisfied for them all, then they were satisfied for before
they were committed; and God has nothing to charge upon the elect for any sin:
because full satisfaction is made by Christ upon the Cross. He so did bear
them, as he destroyed them, and freed us from them, and after that he reveals
to us that they are pardoned; and you seem to say no less. So you expound 2 Timothy 1. 9. is to be understood concerning his purpose. Ans. We grant it to be
so, and that we were justified in time, viz: when Christ was upon the Cross,
and when we believe, then we know it is done for us.

O^. Hebr. 10. 10. does prove, that by one act Christ's death God was satisfied.

Ans. Now the Law is satisf^ed by Christ it is enough to satisfy us, though
men may cavil and be unsatisfied.

Ob. Forgiveness of sins conveyed by the Spirit is called pardon.

Ans. We call it the manifestation of pardon: if you please to call it pardon:
this is not that we contend for.

Ob. Heb. 10. 14. Perfecting is not mean^ pardon of sin, for 1 Cor. 6. they
were sins, and after washed.

Ans. What then does it mean, tell me what is he that is perfected? is not he
without fault, holy? etc. Christ's blood washed the elect enough, and to
purpose: as Rev. 1. 5. Christ by himself purged our sins. Heb. 1. 3.

Ob. O but, say they, Gods people cannot sin in Gods account.

Ans. We neither say so, nor think so: but we think and say the contrary. Such
as believe do s^n, and man does see it, therefore God much more; and God
accounts it as it is, sin: does not the Scripture say Christ's blood has
cleansed us, has washed our sins away, and God sees us to be clean, seeing we
are so? Also we say that there is no condemnation to be inflicted upon the
elect for their sin: So you say Israel stood without sin, consider what you
say, and see if we say more.

Ob. They also allege, 1 John 3. 9. and 5. 18. Whosoever it (...) of God
si^^eth not.

Ans. If we do so, I hope we do but as the Apostle did, and yet we say with the
Apostle, we have sin, and do sin, etc.

Ob. The Reasons why we cannot have communion with such as say, sin is pardoned
before it be committed, etc. is: 1. Because they know not the posture of a
redeemed child of Christ, whose Covenant revealed rejoices the heart. 2.
Because they do not feel the sense of sin, if they did they would cry to God:
nor know the sweetness of pardon. 3. They stumble the weak in not asking for
pardon.

Ans. To the first, if we know it not, I wish you had revealed it to us, if you
know it. You say, Christ's Covenant rejoices the heart, and this we know,
blessed be God. Ans. to 2. If you mean by sense the feeling of horror and
terrors for sin, if you desire such a sense of sin, we do not wish it you: we
wish you not to fetch your comfort from your sense of sin, tears, or crying:
but only and alone from Gods free grace. We have made a god of our tears and
crying, etc. To the 3. see pa. 15. Also it is your opinion that stumble the
weak, it is you that say, if it be pardoned they need not pray for it. We pass
not what you judge, nor for nothing you say, unless you can prove it by
Scripture.

An Answer to a Treatise entitled, An Antidote against Antinomianisme:
published by Dr. HOMES.
IN that he intituleth his book, An Antidote, it seems to declare that his book
is (not poison, but) some rare extract to expel poison; so he crowns the truth
we contend for with odious names of disgrace (which is powerful to deceive the
s^^ple) calling it unjustifiable and Antinomianisme: but this is easier said
and proved. I wish we had no cause to say, that such as have taken down his
Antidote are soundly poisoned, and stand in need of a contrary Antidote. What
you say will be current with many, but the wise will try the spirits. 1 John 4.
1.

He confesses actual justification is by union; which if it be true, he has
overthrown the substance of his whole book, and then we were actually justified
before we believed, because we were united to Christ before we believed. As is
proved, Heb. 2 11. Joh. 1. 14. And the Scripture says, we were crucified with
Christ: Gal. 2. 20. which could not be, unless the elect were considered in
Christ: as Ephesians. 1. 4. and united to him.

Ob. The instant of union is when Christ is in us by faith. Ephe. 3. 17. Joh.
3. last. Joh. 1. 12.

Ans. These places speak not a word of union, much less the time of our union;
a thing may be in us, when the thing it self is not in us, but the comfort of
it. Christ is said to be in us by faith: Ephesians. 3. 17. because by faith we
enjoy the presence of that which is not present, nor seen: as, Heb. 11. 1.
Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

Secondly, sin is in us, yet are not we united to it, it is not I, but sin that
dwells in me: Romans 7. 20. If they were one, then he could not truly say, it is
not I, sin and I are two things, though sin dwells in me: A man dwells in an
house, yet is not united to it, so as to be one with the house: so it is here.
As for Joh. 6. 36. that declares who has everlasting life, viz. he that
believes has it, but what is this to union with Christ, or the time of union?
And although we say not that men have not life till they believe: we say there
is life in the Son for the elect before they believe, and they shall have it.
See Joh. 5. 11. And as for Joh. 1. 12. declares, that such as receive Christ
are sons, and they have right to the privileges of sons: which we grant.

Ob. Ephesians. 2. declares, that believers before they believed there was no
difference between them and others; for they were by nature the children of
wrath afar off, and unreconciled.

Ans. The same Chapter declares that they were made nigh by the blood of
Christ, v. 13. to 18* we are to consider what it was that made them nigh, and
reconciled them; and when they were made nigh and reconciled, this was effected
by Christ upon his cross. See Col. 1. 21, 22. And if we were not reconciled
then, why does the Scriptures say they were?

Ob. For sin to be crucified, and to be mortified is one, and a part of
sanctification. Gal. 5. 22.

Ans. We know that our old man is crucified with him, etc. Romans 6. 6. and 7.
24, 25. Sin is a work of the devil, etc. Christ destroyed it upon the Cross:
Christ has made an end of sin. Dan. 9. Psalm. 103. 12. etc.

Ob. Justification by faith, R^m. 5. 1. is justification it self, and not the
manifestation of justification.

Ans. The 1. v. of the 5. Chap. belongs to the last ver. of the former Chap.
and is to be read with it; the misplacing the stops, and cutting asunder books
into Chapters and verses, hinders the right reading and understanding of the
words; the division of Chapters and verses, you know, are but of late
invention. As I understand by the doctrine of the Scriptures, the words are to
be read thus: Who was delivered for our ^ffences and raised again for ou^
justification: Therefore being justified. By faith we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And then the sense is this, That we are
justified by Christ, and by faith we enjoy it: the effect of which is joy and
peace. See pa 26.

Ob. Without faith its imp^ssible to please G^d: the word please signifies a
delight to him. So Basil and Bud. etc.

Ans. This is answered before. And seeing the Scriptures do declare that God's
well-pleasednesse with us depends not upon our p^easing of him, we are
satisfied; we regard no man's testimony, we own no Doctors but Christ.

Ob. Can God approve of a greater thing without faith, namely, our persons, and
yet not approve of a lesser thing, namely, our actions without faith? this is
strange.

Ans. It Is not faith, but Christ that makes our persons accepted: and unless
the action be according to the rule, it is not accepted, but condemned of God,
in them whose persons are accepted: faith is a part of a good action; and
unless the other parts of the action, as matter, manner, measure, time, end
concurs, the action comes short of the rule, and so far it is ^in, and is not
accepted neither for Christ nor faith.

Our happiness does not consist in Gods acceptations of our acti^ns, but in
our union with him, and in that our sins are not imputed to us. Joh. 17. 23,
24. Heb. 2. 11. Ephesians. 5. 30. Psalm. 32. 1, 2.

Ob. Our actions are accepted because our persons are accepted Genesis 4.

Ans. It Is strange to me that you should say so. Oh the horrible and tragical
effects that naturally flow from this doctrine! Was not David a believer before
he fell so foully concerning the matter of Bathsheba and Vrijah? And was not
Peter a believer when he denied Christ, and Peter and Barnabas when they
dissembled? Gal. 2. Many of the actions of believers are in some respect worser
then the same actions in unbeleevers; and God in his Word is so far from
accepting them, that he condemns them as deeply as the actions of others. If
God accepts of men's actions because he accepts of their persons, it will
follow, that when a man is a believer his person is accep^ed: and therefore all
his actions after are accepted, because his person is accepted. So that after a
man is once a believer, whose person is accepted, he cannot sin in any of his
actions; or if he do sin, his sinful action is accepted. We abhor to open such
a gap for sin to enter. If you speak even of the best actions of a believer,
you cannot free them to be without sin, for all our righteousnesses are as
fili^y rags. Isa. 64.

Ob. The word reconcile declares that God is at enmity with us, and us with
him; Re signifies again; con, signifies together, ciliation, to call or move
to: how is there a moving, where there was never a removing? how together of
those who were never asunder? how again, unless there had been once an
oneness which was broken apieces?

Ans. Though the word signify so, yet it will not follow that God was ever at
enmity with the elect; Fury is not in me: Isa. 27. 4. There are movings and
removings in us who are changeable; but it is not so in God, because he is
unchangeable, love in him is unchangeable. You confess Gods essential purpose
is like himse^f, eternal, and unchangeable, etc. God is love: 1 John 5. And
although the elect did sin, and so depart from God, yet the Scripture does not
say, that they fell from the love of God; or that God hated the elect for their
sin. Consider Joh. 17. 23, 24* Heb. 13 8. Romans 5. 9, 10.

Ob. In saying, God was never an enemy to the elect, you make the fall of Adam
(in whom the elect are included) a fiction, you make the Story of the Gospel,
touching Christ's sufferings, a fable, and Chri^ts passion a vanity, and ye
overthrow the nature of God, whose purity cannot endure sin. You deny many
Scriptures that te^tifie, tha^ God was at enmity with the elect. Ephesians. 2. Isa.
63. 10, 11 Levit. 26 40, 41, 42. Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63.

An. Alas, alas, here are many high charges and hard speeches indeed: Jud. 13.
13. are not these raging w^v^s of the Sea, that look big, and rise high, and
fall as suddenly into mere fables? for no such thing will follow that we
profess. We say what the Scriptu^es speaks concerning Adams fall, and Christ's
sufferings, and death, etc. they are not ^^ctions, but real things: and
unless Christ had dyed, we had perished in our sins. We were in sin, and under
the cur^e we were children of wrath, viz: the curse not only in appearance, but
we were so in deed, and in truth: so Christ was made a cur^e for us, not in
appearance, but in deed, and in truth He was ^o made under the Law, that so he
might free us from under it: Christ not only revealed love, (for seeing men
can revea^ love each to other without dying, much more could ^^d) bu^ also free
us from the curse of the Law wherein we we^^ (...): therefore Christ did dye.
So that in the (...) God, and Ch^^^^s death ^ay our e^ernall happiness. and
this do^trine does w^ll agree with what we contend for.

We ^ay, (...) paved a full price, and satisfied the Law to the (...)* neither
(...) we (...). God accepts of any sinful action, nor (...) any sin Gods
pu^i^^ hares ^in in beleeve^s, as wel^ as in othe^s: now wh^^h way does this
doctrine destroy the nature, or the (...) of God?

We deny ^o ^criptures at all, we only deny such interpretation of them as are
not warranted in the Scriptures. Also you presume above what is written, in
that you have no Scripture to warrant your exposition. We entreat you to tell
us in what place of the Scripture we shall read, that God was ever at enmity
with the elect, either before or after conversion. You say, that till
conversion comes, God is as well at enmity with the elect, as they are with
him. The Scriptures you allege to prove it do not say so: nor do we know where
to read these words in the Scripture, but to consider what the Scriptures you
bring say. Ephesians. 2. says no such thing; there is the word wrath, but this is
answere^ before. Isa. 63. 10, 11. there is the word enemy, which is to be
understood, God was so in some acts of his dispensation. The text says, he
fought against them, so he appeared to be their enemy. Levit. 26. 40 etc. God
did walk contrary to them, yet it will not follow that he did so from any
enmity or hatred he had to them; for then he ^oved them, and owned them for his
people, as appears, v 45. etc. I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into
the hands of her ene^ies. ^er. 12 7. then they were dearly beloved. As for the
word pa^ified, Ezekiel 16. 62, 63 When I am pacified towa^ds th^e, that is, when I
shall let thee know that thou art a son or daughter of my eternal love: if you
compare the 4. last verses together i^ will appear he spoke of their knowledge
of his love: for he says, I will est^b^ish my C^venant with thee, and (...)
know ^h^ Ianth L^^d [th God] ver. 2. with Joh 14 20. An^ howsoever God may hide
himself, and seem angry, and handle them roughly, yet he loves them not the
worse for that: Jer. 31. 20. even then he loves them dearly. As appears, J^h
17 23 24. At that day ye shall kn^w I am in he Father, and (...)* and I (...)
you Joh. 14 20. he says, he is the same yesterday and to day, and f^r ever
Hebr. 13. 8. (if y^u please to believe him) I am the L^^d, (...), Mal. 3. 6. ^e
never changes. Fu^y is not (...). I^a. 27. 4. Therefore your br^ther was very
much mi^^ake^, to think there was anger in God against the elect till he was
pacifie^.

O^. I^ G^ds enmity had not concurred with Eves enmity ag^^^^t him, she had not
in all like^ihood eaten the forb^dden fruit.

Ans. The fall was not from any enmity in God against her, but God would by
that means bring about his glory. See Ephesians. 1. 6. to 12. and Romans 3. 19.

Ob. God is a God of wrath to us till faith in Christ comes: Ephe 2. Rom 5. 1,
2. it is as evident as evident may be, that by faith in Christ, God is
reconciled to us, and we to him.

Ans. I wonder ye are not afraid to sa^ so, seeing the Scriptures say no such
thing, as we have already proved. Read me what you say in the Bible, either in
the Old Testament or New, and I will Print my Recantation: if you cannot, I
would entreat you to Print yours. Oh that you did but know what you have done.
For in that you deny any reconciliation to be before we believe, you deny that
Christ has reconciled any upon the Cross; which is contrary to many plain and
express Sc^iptures. As Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 16. with Col. 1. 14. 20, 21. and 2.
13, 14. Ephe. 5. 25, 26, 27. etc.

Also in ascribing our reconciliation to faith, in whole or in part, ye slight
our Lord Jesus Christ, and trample upon him, in making him but a half Savior.
So also you say, that faith is a cause of justification: do not our eternal
happiness depend upon our reconciliation and justification? and do you ascribe
these, and the like to faith?

Ob. But God is not pleased with the elect till they believe. Romans 9. 25.

Ans. By my people, we are to understand those that I have declared to be mine
in a special and peculiar manner: I have owned them, and they are mine by
profession. So the Nation of the Jews were called the people of God, as Isa. 5.
13. because God had owned them to be his people which were not my people
before: In this sense, as appears, v. 26, 27. but in another sense, the earth
and all in it is his: and in respect of choice and love, the elect were ever
his. Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9.

Ob. I say then actually God cannot be said to be reconciled to man, while man
is not reconciled to God.

Ans. We say, that we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Romans 10.
9, 10. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. What Christ did was actual. Will it not then follow
upon your grant, that the elect were then reconciled? And seeing Christ dyed
before we believed* it will follow we were reconciled before we believed.
Notwithstanding we grant that no man can know or be assured that he is one of
them that is justified, and shall be saved, until he believes. And whereas you
ask what conversion that is, that is without calling? We answer. None at all:
neither is any man called in this sense until he believe. We grant with you,
that what was done before the world concerning our salvation, was only in Gods
decree, purpose and love.

Ob. Faith brings us into Christ. Ephe. 2. 8, 9. Joh: 6. 37. Joh. 3.

Ans. You do but say so, the Scriptures do not sa^ (as you would have them say)
faith brings us [into Christ] so you say that faith is a part of Christ: But if
it be so, I would gladly see that proved. Also you say, that faith is a part of
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4, 5. The Divine Nature is God, if God can be
divided into parts, he is not infinite: the Divine Nature is incommunicable; we
are made partakers of the Divine Nature by union, not by infusion. It is no
wonder that you ascribe all so to faith as you do, if you think faith is God.

So you ask, if God saves us without our being in Christ, and whether God does
not love to see us in Christ, rather then our of him. I answer. If God
considered the elect to be in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 4. can you tell when God
considered them out of Christ? or can you tell in what place of Scripture it is
said, that the elect were ever out of Christ, or that the elect by sin fell out
of Christ, or out of the love of God? show me the Scripture that say these
things, and I will say so too. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5.

Ob. When in Ephesians. 2. 5. does not import a difference in time.

Ans. But it does; for when we were dead, then was the time that we were not
alive. Ephesians. 2. 5.

O^. Evermore say the godly learned Schoolmen (we call not the Papi^^s in) put
a difference between Gods decree, and the execution of it.

Ans. So do we, but not because they say so: if the Scriptures be clear, why
call you in any at all, we will not believe men: therefore ^pare that labor
when you write again.

We do not say, we were actually justified from all eternity; we say we were in
the knowledge and love of God from all eternity: we say we were actually
justified in time when Christ upon the Cross presented us holy to God without
spot, etc. Ephesians. 5. 27. So you tell us, that what ever appears in time,
appeared before God before all time, therefore faith appeared then also. This
we freely grant, and also tell you, that all that did appear before God was not
the cause, means, nor instrument of our justification.

Ob. Why is God said to be wroth with the same Ephesians whilst out of Christ?
Ephesians. 2. 1, 2.

Ans. You abuse the Word of God: for the Scripture does not say, that they were
ever out of Christ; or that God was wroth with them.

Ob. Tremble to say, that God loved Paul with as great love when he persecuted
the Church, as when he preached the Gospel.

Ans. Let them tremble that teach such doctrine as you do, or that say, that
persecution of the Saints is as good as preaching the Gospel. I wonder if you
did not tr^mble when you writ your Antidote against the truth, in which you
make God so changeable, and love in God not to be finite, in affirming there
are degrees in love in God, and sometimes more, and sometimes less; and that
sometimes God was without any love at all: for you say, it was but a purpose of
love, not actual love; and that purpose and an act of love are immediately
contraries. It seems I was mistaken, I thought a purpose of love could not be
without love; and that a purpose of love was love in act. Consider Jer. 31. 3.
Joh. 17. 23, 24. Joh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 2. 4, 5. Romans 5. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 1. 14, 15,
16.

Therefore concerning your distinction of Gods love of benevolence to the
sinner before conversion, and his love of complacency after conversion; there
is no light in it. Show me where I shall read this distinction of love in God
in the Bible, or else I shall be ready to believe it came out of the brains of
dead men's souls from the impure fountain of the blind Schoolmen.

Ho^ever this ^ay suit with man I pass not, but to refer this to Go^ ^. to
make him imperfect: God loved me, and gave himse^f for me. Gal. 2. 20. I did
not believe when Christ gave himself for me.

Ob. I wonder why you contend so for this expression, that God loved the elect
from all eternity; seeing the Scripture for once calling it love, calls it
purpose, choice, counsel, election, predestination, etc.

Ans. It Is no wonder we contend for it, seeing there be many that deny it to be
love: A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. Gal. 5. 9. And when men will
confess it is love, as the Scriptures declare, we will cease contending. We
believe also that all those expressions do hold forth love, and are one with it.

And seeing you confess it is called love, we earnestly entreat that you, nor
no other do deny it to belove: for as Gods purpose and will is eternal, and
unchangeable, so is his love; God is love. 1 John 4. 16. Heb. 13. 8.

So you ask where is life, and where is peace till faith comes? I answer. It is
where it should be, it is in Christ: Col. 3. 3, 4. Who is our peace. Ephesians. 2.
14. And when we believe, we enjoy the comfort of our life, and not till then.

So you object against this doctrine (of justification by Christ alone) what
need we take care what we do, if we believe he will not love us the better; if
we believe not, he will not love us the worse: then a man may dye without
faith, and yet be saved. Ans. If this be all, the Papists say as much against
you for denying that men are loved, justified, or saved for their good works.
Say the Papists, if our good works cannot make us to beloved, or justified,
etc. what need we take care to do good works, if we do them God will not love
us the better; if we do them not, he will not love us the worse: if we dye
without good works, yet we may be saved. Consider what answer you will give
them, and take it to your self, for we say the same of faith. So you tell us a
story of a Maid led away with this doctrine, said boldly to you, that she knew
not how she could offend Jesus Christ by any thing she did: unless we did know
what she meant by the word offend, we can say little to it, seeing it may bear
a good or a bad construction. If she had said, Whosoever was born of God
sins not. 1 John 5. 18. and that she was born of God, it may be you would
have cried shame of her. And if she had said that which was not fit, there was
no necessity you should have made such an outcry of it, un^esse you did it to
expose us and the truth we profess to contempt and hatred. You might have
taken it in the be^^ence, or passed it by. We entreat you to consider whose
work it is to be the accuser or the brethren: the d^ct^ine of Christ is not the
cause of the sins of men. I^ we cannot prove scores of errors, and bla^ph^mi^s,
and tragical eff^cts that flow from you. Doctrine, and ^uch as pro^esse it,
blame m^.

^o you appeal to the world f^r the truth of what you say: I say, i^ they do
not justify you, who will? the world are blind, etc. the natural man cannot
perceive the things that be of God; the Saints who know and enjoy the truth
will confess with me, that your doctrine does contradict the Scriptures, and
contain many mistakes. As, that sin was not crucified with Christ, that the
elect are sometimes in Christ, and sometimes out of him; that faith takes a man
out of the state of damnation; that God does not love the el^ct before they
believe; that there are degrees of love in ^od, etc. And such strange doctrines
you teach quite besides the Scriptures, and such as the Bible never knew: and
^ends very much to the dishonor of Christ, and obscure the Gospel; and to f^ll
the Con^cience, instead of joy and peace, with much troub^e, ^ear, and sorrow.
Whereas the sum and substance of the doctrine we (or rather the Scriptures)
teach, is only to exal^ Christ alone, and abase man; and all that he can do
for his salvation, we trample upon it, in affirming ^one of his best works can
cause God to love or ^ccept of him, ju^^ifie or save him: a^l spiritual
b^essings are freely given without our works, no man can make himself
righteous, or hol^, by any thing he can do: only Chri^^s righteousness is
that which ^ade us righteous; and that sin cannot deprive us of Christ's
righteousn^sse; and that we are, and ever shall ^emain, holy, and blamel^sse in
the sight of God by Christ, who fulfi^led all right^^u^n^ss^ ^or us the elect;
his righteou^nesse and ^a^ct^fication is theirs, we are complete in him, and
incomple^^ in our selves: there is no perfection in this li^e in the flesh; and
yet we are without fault before the throne of God; therefore no sinners:
because as Christ is, so are we in this world. Therefore we are all fair,
without spot. Consider well these Scriptures. Isa 53 5, 6, 11. 1 Pet. 1. ^4
Ephesians 5. 27, 30 Co^. 1. 22 Esb. 1. 7 Rev 1 5 Col. 1. 14. Heb 1. 3 He^ 10. 14. 1 John 1. 7 8 9. 10 R^m. 8. 33 Mat 3. 15. 1 Cor 1 30. 2 (...) 5 21. Col. 2. 10.
Romans 7. 18. ^4 (...) 14 5. 1 John 4. 17. S^ng 2. ^0 and 47 He that knows the
meaning of these, knows a great mystery, and lives in the comfort of it, and
will not be beaten from it what ever men say of it. Is not Christ's perfection
the ground of all our happiness? And does not justification imply freedom from
sin? Men are either sinners or no sinners: I desire to know, if he that is a
sinner be not under the curse, Gal. 3. 30. and how he that stands ju^^ified by
God from all sin, stands accountable to him for any sin; if Justice be
satisfied, what is therein heaven against him?

To conclude, inasmuch as the former part of this Treatise was finished, and
much of it Printed before I knew of your book, I^efer you to it for a fulle^
Answer. If you, or any deny what I have said to be true, let them Answer this;
I am resolved to Answer them till I dye. If they will answer my Reasons and
Scriptures, I will do so to theirs; I will oppose all phanatick e^husiasmes,
and fantastic dreams of men's brains (which will very much abound in this age.
Oh that all that fear the Lord would be so wise as to search the Scriptures,
and reject all men's Writings and Interpretations) which appear not in the Word
of God. I will stand to the trial of the Word of God: come let us lovingly try
it out: if you will oppose Justification by Christ alone, which is the doctrine
of fre^ grace, I doubt not but I shall take all your props and superstructu^es
easily down, to the end that Christ may appear to be (as he is) all in all.
Co^. 3. 11 That G^d may be all in all. ^ Cor. 15. 28.

Some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not. Act. 28. 24.

FINIS.

