VERSES On the blessed and happy CORONATION OF CHARLES the II.
KING of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Printed
at the hearty desires of Persons of Quality.
ONe blow struck off great CHARLE'S head and Crown,
His life, and all our laws, that blow cut down,
And in the grave with him they did remayn,
Till heaven restored, the second Charles again?
What means this triumph? why do all resort?
In pomp, and gallantry, thus to the Court,
Why are we all in arms? I hear some say,
That Gods Vicegerent, Charles is Crowned to day.
Come loyal Subjects, come and let your days
Be spent in joy! come Poets! let your bays
Be double placed, now let the Muses Spring
Run floods of verses; let sweet Flora bring
Her golden garland; let the Damsel's fair
Take up their timbrels, play beyond compare,
Hark! how the bells strike up; the loyal ringers
Strive in the music, to out-goe the singers,
Hark! hark! heaven calls, hark! hark! what is the sound?
The Angels do rejoice, the King is Crowned,
Look where good Zadock stands, amongst the rest,
With oil, for to anoint, of Kings the best,
Jehovah bows the heavens and is come down,
To bless the King, and smile upon the Crown,
Who dare think treason now, the birds that hover
Under the branches, treason will discover,
They do not only clap on him a Crown,
But do keep up the Laws, the sword pulled down,
Revive Religion, which has long been dead,
They crown the Church, aswell's the kingdoms head,
O glorious Sight! how happy shall we be,
In our good King, rejoice you Kingdoms three,
And shout for joy, and give the King of Kings,
Eternal praise, for he does wondrous things;
Thou Searcher of all hearts, prepare our hearts,
To praise thy name, for curing of our smarts,
Thine is the power, and glory we confess,
Thou art our only helper in distress,
God save the King, and in that very place,
They crown his head, crown thou his heart with grace,
Add virtues, to his virtues, praise to praise,
A happy reign, and Nestors length of days,
Give him true Subjects, let his Lords and Earls
Have loyal hearts, unto their Royal Charles,
Let Knights, and Gentry, all men spend their blood,
For Gods anointed, and the Kingdoms good,
Keep him from treasons, let him rule in spite
Of Papist, Pagan, Jew, or Cromwellite,
Preserve thy David, and he that rebels,
Confound his Counsels, like Achitophells,
And let his happy Coronation be,
Death to rebellion, life to our liberty,
Let none be wanting of this royal line,
To rule, as long as Sun, and Moon does shine,
That heaven would grant all this, so prays my pen,
And he is a Rebel, that says not Amen.
John Rich Gent.
God save King Charles the second.
Amen.
LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Francis Eglesfield at the Marygold in S.
Paul's Churchyard 1661.


