A Letter written by master Simon Rodes, Minister in York, To his Brother in
London, With the substance of Sir THO: WIDRINGTONs (Deputy Recorders Speech of
York) to His Majesty, at his Entry into the City.
Brother,
PErhaps as the World is now come about, you may in some particulars be as glad
of tidings from us, as we formerly have been from you. His Majesty made his
entrance into York, on Friday last in the afternoon, about four of the
Clock. The Mayor and Aldermen, with some others of the chiefest Citizens,
meeting him a mile from the City; Where Sir Thomas Widrington, his Deputy
Recorder of York, made a very worthy and solemn Speech unto him, and in some
passages was seen to weep.

His Speech (by any expression the King could be observed to show) was not very
well liked of him. The Speech, as near as I could get a Copy of it, I have
here sent you enclosed.

The Lord Mayor tendered the Sword unto his Majesty upon his knee, and having
kissed his Majesty's hand, received it of him again, bearing it before him,
through that part of the City, unto the Palace.

That night late the Earl of Newcastle came in with some other Company; which
Earl departed very early again, the next morning, some reported toward Hull;
others, for the Bishopric of Durham.

His Majesty had no extraordinary Attendance with him: What may follow, I know
not. Here fly diverse conjectures, suspicious rumors, upon his Majesty's
removeall so far from His Parliament: That Discontent occasioned it, we all
fear. God remove, in his good time, all Iealousies from between the King and
his people.

There came on Thursday night, a servant, or Messenger from Sir John Haughtham,
Governor of Hull, unto the Lord Mayor, being the night before His Majesty
made his entrance. What the importance of that Message did concern. I for my
part am as yet wholly ignorant of: but it is given out to be something that the
said Governor requested the Lord Major to impart unto his Majesty, as
touching some great charge he had lately received from both Houses, as touching
something about giving entrance into the Town; The rest, Time must produce.

Here are great fears about Strangers, Danes, and others, with a great Fleet
that should be upon the Coast, and to come for Hull, or Newcastle. But I trust
in God, it is not so. Some Disturbances, for certain, are broke forth in the
Bishopric of Durham, but whereupon, and what the true ground of it is, I dare
not yet write, although it is here in York given out, that some of the Popish
Party there, do not only speak, but begin to attempt strange matters: One
whereof is, That they will not part with their Arms, according unto the last
Order of the Parliament.

Your true affectionate Brother, Simon Rhodes.

Sr. Thomas Widrington, Deputy Recorder of York, his Speech unto his Majesty
Friday, March 18. 1641. what time His Majesty made his entry into York, met by
the Lord Major.
Dread Sovereign:
I Am by the assignement of the Right Honorable the Lord Major, the
Worshipful Aldermen, and worthy Citizens of York: by the duty of my place, by
my own so many personal great obligements unto your most Sacred Majesty; this
third time appointed to welcome Your Royal presence to Your City of York; and
assuredly (most undoubted Sovereign,) were it not, that we in our minds, (as
full of Loyalty as affection toward Your Majesty,) have too just cause to fear
that high discontent arising from the heavy distance, which it has pleased
God, (for our sins, for no long time we trust) to break out between Your
Majesty, and Your Grand Counsel now assembled, has rather occasioned this
Your Majesty's repair hither at this season, then the opportunity of the place,
(as Your Majesty's affairs now stand,) or any our deserved worthiness; Your
Majesty being the only Sol of our hearts, should have had a far more
transcendent vigor in them, toward the raising a far more forward Spring of
joy in them, then yet the Sun from his Sphere has in these par^s produced
out of the Earth: I speak not this (Dear Sovereign) in any wise to be
understood as if it were not deeply possessed with all real and cordial
comfort; not only at the Presence of Your Royal self, but likewise of that
of Your Royal Son, the Princes Highness; whose Excellency is this very
first time beheld generally by so great a multitude of Northen eyes as never
before in these parts; (whom God Almighty long preserve to Your Majesty's
continual security and our future support;) But to make known unto Your
Majesty, what earnest, unutterable desire, and inclination we all here have,
as we are well assured, have all Your truly Loyal Subjects throughout Your
Kingdom, to see once a happy and a firm correspondency between Your Majesty,
and this Parliament, wherein Your Majesty's good and ours, as head and members
is a like concerned. They for their part were confidently persuaded maturely
weighing; how, if the Animal Spirits descend not from the head into the
members, the whole body is suddenly surprised, either with a Lethargy or
Apoplexy: as Your Majesty, w^^ strongly believe, in Your Royal wisdom
perfectly apprehends, that for the better inab^^^ and cherishing of the Brain,
the Vital parts must administer unto the head; and were this c^^rent
interchangeably, not intermitted, friendly intercourse is found in the body
natural, its (...) is a sound constitution and iocound temperament: But if
God, whose ways are unsearchab^^ and who can unite minds though far distant
in place, shall for Your Majesty's sake in (...) of the constant religious
heart You ever bore toward him: Grant unto ancient York this bles^^^ (...)all
discontents and misunderstanding, (whence have possibly proceeded some
jealous^^ (...) end at York, may die and depart at York; may be entombed at
York, then should York have (...) (If ever York had any) of yiedling humble,
hearty, and devout Praise, Laud, and Thankesgiving (...) God; bounden duty,
thankful congratulation, nay, triumphant acknowledgement unto Your Majesty.

London, Printed for Nath: Butter, 1642.


