AN APOLOGY FOR THE Present Government, AND GOVERNOR: WITH An Answer to
several Objections against them; and twenty Queries propounded for those who
are unsatisfied, to consider, and answer, if they please.

I am for Peace, Psalm. 120. 7. Caleb stilled the People before Moses, Numb. 13.
30. Let us follow after things that make for peace, and things whereof we may
edify another, Romans 14. 19. The fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace of
them that make peace, James 3. 18. Follow peace with all men, Heb. 12. 14. Seek
peace and pursue it, Psalm. 34. 14. By SAMUEL RICHARDSON.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Gyles Calvert, at a this shop the West
end of Paul's. 1654.

Several Objections against the present Government, answered.
Obj. THis government in the hand of one single person, is in effect a kingly
government.

Answ. If so: that will not prove it unlawful, also when the power is in one
or a few, sooner and easier dipatch of business is had.

Obj. We have fought against kingly government.

Answ. If so: that were in effect to fight against Christ, for his government
is kingly.

2. We did not fight against kingly government, but against Tyranny and
oppression, but we most especially for freedom in matter of Religion.

Obj. We are to have no King but Jesus Christ, he is to be our only
lawgiver. Jam, 4. 12.

Answ. I grant it, in matters of Religion his kingdom is spiritual and not of
this world.

Obj. This kingly government hinders Christ from reigning.

Ans. This is a great mistake, the government of the world, concerning the
bodies and estates of men, is another government, and requires another King,
and this hinders not the government of Christ, but may both in their place
well agree together.

I grant the Kings of the earth have opposed Jesus Christ and his kingdom, and
persecuted his people, but that was not from their government as kingly, but by
mixing with their civil government matters of Religion, and made laws in
matters merely Religious; and so persecuted Christ and his people: which was
from their ignorance and wickedness of them who were Kings. Psalm, 2. 2 Yet are
they not forbid to be Kings, but bid to be wise, Be wise therefore O Kings, be
instructed. verse. 10. (that is) let Christ and his laws, and his people alone
meddle not with them inflict no corporal punishment upon them, nor meddle not
with their persons and estates for things merely Religious for that belongs
not to you. In matters Religious no man may make a law, the opinions that the
magistrate has a power from God to punish Heretics with corporal
punnishments has cost the blood and lives of many thousands of the precious
Saints and People of God.

There must of necessity be a government and a law in things civil, else there
will be great confusion.

Men say they know not what, when they say this government hinders Christ from
reigning; for if we speak of Christ reigning in his people by his Spirit, can
that be hindered by Soldiers, or Kings, no, none can hinder or suppress that.

If they mean Christ's personal reign, neither can all the power of this
world hinder that, seeing he is God, he can with ease break in pieces all that
oppose him, like a potters vessel, as Psalm. 2. 9. We desire Christ may come, we
trust we shall lovingly embrace him when he comes, we desire you to agree with
us and to this government but till he come. It is no treason against Christ to
adhear to this government in things civil* seeing God has in no place in his
word condemned the same, if he has I pray you show us where?

Obj. If this government be continued, to what purpose has so much blood been
spent?

Ans. It is to very great purpose, for now we enjoy freedom from persecution
in matters of Religion, which is the greatest outward blessing we can enjoy;
this alone is worth all the blood and treasure that has been spent. And what
good would all outward things in this world do us without this, the Lord make
us more sensible and thankful for this mercy. I am persuaded that since this
Nation has been a Nation, it never did enjoy so much freedom in this kind as
now it does. If you could repeat 1000 things one after another that we want, to
every one we would cry, but we have liberty in matters of Religion; and give me
leave to say the want of this has forced me to leave father and mother, wife
and friends, and native Country, and to wander desolately alone, as forsaken,
and almost stripped of all outward comforts, and in a strange land, and not
knowing how to live, and not willing to beg, nor to endure the want I have
been in, have sat down alone and wept bitterly, and not able to speak,
because my grief was so great; I have wandered and hid my self in holes and
caves of the earth, and knew not where to bestow my self; and those who are
not satisfied with the liberty we now enjoy, (excepting only the business of
Tithes) never knew what it was to be persecuted, undone, or banished, or to
leave their native Country to wander a far off in desolate wildernesses, or
have forgot, I am persuaded, the Martyrs in Q. Mary's days; if they could have
enjoyed the liberty we do, though they should have had only bread and water,
would have been content, and blessed God with all their hearts every day for
the same. And the maine thing I ever expected and ^o^k the Armies part was,
because by them I expected freedom in matters of Religion, and with them that
stand for that, I am resolved to stand and fall, and if we have it not from
this government and Army, I expect it from none else.

Obj. The Saints of God are now imprisoned and persecuted, witness Mr. Feak.

Ans. Their imprisonment is not for Religion, but for the safety of the Civil
peace: therefore I wonder how M^ Feak dare write of his sufferings as he does,
his words are, I forewarned y^u of this hour of temptation: I prisoner for the
cause of Christ: I suffer for his sake in bonds for the testimony of the
kingdom of the Lord Jesus. This honorable cause of Jesus Christ and the
Gospel, in bonds for the service of all the saints, in bonds for Christ: now in
prison for the good old cause; I am a sufferer for the Gospel, suffer upon that
account: the brethren will be confident for my bonds. Yet he says he has
been imprisoned 7 or 8 months, and knows not what his crime is; if he knows it
not, how can he, how dares he say, it is for Religion? and it appears by his
mittimus, that it is not for Religion, nor for Christ, nor for the Gospel, nor
for any of the Saints, much less for all the Saints: for the words of the
mittimus, as he says, are to commit and in order to the peace and safety of
this Nation. If it be for the Civil peace, how is it for Christ and the Gospel
etc. Is this equal and fair dealing? Blu^h^ heavens, and be greatly astonished
at this. Moreover, if it were for Christ and the Gospel, how is it that there
is no more in prison? is there but one or two in England, or London, that will
own Christ and his Gospel? how is it that all those called the separation
B^ownist, Independent. Anabaptist, etc. are out of Prison? and which is more
meet, freely and openly, and quietly: Surely something is the matter, that Mr.
FEAK and Mr* ROGERS are in Prison, have they not instead of preaching Christ
and the Gospel, in the Pulpit meddled with wordly matters, and things not fit
for that place? which did (or might at least) tend to a breach of peace, if it
did in the least degree tend to stir up sedition, it was well don to imprison
them, to prevent further danger: and if they will not be peaceable, and preach
Christ and him crucified, and not meddle with other matters, let them lie there
till they will be quiet: and if this be persecution, then let all that are
imprisoned triumph, and say, they suffer for Jesus Christ, and the Gospel.

But what if it will appear, that Mr. FEAK has persecuted him, and the way God
and Christ? for while his Highness was in the discharge of his duty, in taking
care for the safety and welfare of the Army and people of God, he smits him
with reproaches and hard words* when he was effecting his safety among the
rest, he suffers as a Christian, 1 Pet. 4 16. and is persecuted; for when the
Son of Hagar spoke against Isaac. Genesis 21. 8, 9, 10. this God calls
persecution he that was born after the flesh persecuted him, etc. Gal. 3. 29.
30. When Jobs friends spoke unjustly against Job, it is called persecution, Why
persecute you me? Job 19. 19. 21 22. has not Mr. FEAK spoken and written more
bitter things against him, as being a Persecutor of Christ and of his Gospel,
and of his people? what could be said worse, and more grievous and
dishonorable? also he has persecuted the way God has taken to carry on his
work in these days, in speaking against it, as Paul said, I persecuted that
way, Acts 22. 14. in opposing it; and Christ says he was persecuted in it,
saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9. 4. and 5. 1. So that it
appears, that Mr. FEAK is the persecuter.

Obj. We ought to witness against this Government, because it is an arbitrary
Government, we know not what is our own, we are inslaved to his will and power,
he may levy money according to his will and pleasure, and is not accountable,
etc.

Answ. This is not so; but if so, may not the same be said against any form of
Government that is supreme, instance that of Parliaments, are they not as
absolute, and every way as arbitrary? are they not above Law to the annulling
Laws, alter and make what Laws they please? are not our Persons and Estates
at their pleasure? and have levied what money they please, which they call the
prerogative power, or privilege of Parliament?

If he has a greater power to hurt that does not hurt, unless he has a will
to hurt the happiness of a People, lies not in the having this or that
Government, but in the justice and righteousness of those that govern, and in
the faithful and righteous dispencing of the same, there be that have met with
harder measure under that Government they call the best, then under this which
they call the worst.

Obj. The Army has declared against Kingly Government, and in having the power
in one single person, and now they are for it; therefore they have broke all
their Declarations and engagements.

Answ. 1. It may be they in their understandings have performed them, though it
does not appear to you.

2. If in some thing they did declare, they think not fit to keep being better
informed: in charity we are bound to believe that their judgments are changed,
they may see Reason to the contrary.

3. If a lawful thing be not also expedient for the inexpediency of it, it is
to be laid aside.

4. David did say that he would destroy Nabal and all his house, after he saw
his error, he un^^d it, and broke his engagement, and thanked God he did it
not: do ye think he was to be charged with hypocrisy and dissembling?

5. Man is changeable, and when men's conditions change, commonly their minds
change, there is no better to be expected from man; the more we consider our
selves, the more we see the truth of this; at one time we are of one opinion,
and judgment, and soon after of another: we may well say, O Lord, what is
Man? a very vanity.

6. To be unchangeable is to be attributed only to God, Job says, he is of
one mind, and is not turned, Job 23. 13. this God challenges as proper only
to himself, saying, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3. 6. he says, My
counsel shall stand. We may not say so.

7. Sometimes men's purposes are changed, because they cannot effect them; man
is often crossed in his way, because there is another Orderer above him: Man's
goings are of the Lord, Prove. 20. 24. O Lord, I know the way of Man is not in
himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. We
quarrel at men, because we do not see God in things.

Obj. Tithe is still continued and some imprisoned for them.

Ans. Indeed the late Act for Tithe is very grievous to us, and the more
because we expected before this day some other way instead thereof.

The maintenance of the Ministry by Tithe, is a great trouble to the
consciences of many, because Tithe are said to be holy, L^v. 27 30. 32 33. and
were a heave offering Nu. 18. 24. 26. and the maintenance of the Leviticall
Priesthood: and seeing that Ministry is done away, the maintenance of that
Ministry is to be done away, as appears H. b. 7. 1^. to 24. And Christ being
offered, all the Leviticall offerings which were types and shadows of him are
to cease: upon this ground a Martyr said, he that paid Tithe, did deny Christ
to be come in the flesh, because Christ coming in the flesh, was to put an
end to Tithes. I heard a good man say, he desired to starve, rather then to
take for preaching one half penny of Tithes. I have lately heard that his
Highness did promise to remove them. I hope ere long something will be done
therein, to ease the consciences of many. I long to see it, and that they do
as 1. Cor. 10. 24. and that the poor be set to work, and the oppressed be
relieved, and their Petitions answered, and that Justice may be more easily
had, as it will, when it runs down like a mighty stream. And although it does
not appear in Christ's Testament that the maintenance of Christ's Ministers is
to be by Tithes, nor by any other forced maintenance, yet this hinders not but
the States Ministers may have a forced maintenance: for though those that God
calls and sends will trust God and preach, without hier, yet those men sent have
no reason to do so, because they are not willing to do so.

2. And those who have freely received, are freely to give, Mat. 10. 8. 2. Cor.
11. 7. This does not concern them: for their learning etc. cost their Parents
much Money, besides their own industry. And it is not to be denied, but that a
man honestly buyeth and pays for, he may Justly sell.

3. It cannot be denied but the Magistrate is to take care of that which is for
the good of the Commonwealth, and the charge thereof is to be born by the
Common wealth as men. Also it cannot truly be denied, but that it tends to
the peace and well-being of the nation as civil, that there be a Ministry of
it, if only as morrall men, to teach men to agree, to do justly and live
peacibly, and be subject to authority: if there were no Ministers, the people
in many places would grow more heathenish and unfit to be governed: besides
the State has something for them to do: upon which account it appears there
is need of them; and if so, there is necessity that they be maintained by some
tax, and if any refuse to pay it they may be forced thereto as they are other
taxes.

Obj. They have set up a new Court of Tryars of worldly Ministers for worldly
ends.

Ans. 1. What if they have, they have reason to approve and appoint those they
mean to pay?

2. Why do thou find fault, so long as you and others have liberty to teach
freely without their pay, that is liberty enough for us if we cannot have the
States pu^pits, other places are to be had. 3. You need not complain, seeing
you are not forced to hear them. 4. If they approve of all the ministers of
England, there is besides many places destitute and they are not supplied there
is room for you.

5. It is necessary that the people have some, besides many of them I hope are
good men and may do much good.

6. Why should not we allow the State and others the same liberty that we
desire for our selves, as to approve of whom they please?

7. They do not preach now by virtue of the ordination they had of the
Bishops, but by parts and approbation, and now those are approved to preach who
have had no official ordination.

Obj. Now we see his aim was only to set up himself and his private interest.

Ans. That which he has done herein tends more for the safety and welfare of
the people of God, then his own which he has greatly hazarded: and though he
has the power, the danger, hazard and burden is so great that it were a
benefit for him to be without it, and there is reason to conceive he would
gladly lay it down, if it were for the welfare of the people of God and the
peace of the Nation.

2 Seeing he has often deprived himself of some of the sweetest comforts of
this life, and often adventured his life for the cause and interest of the
people of God, is a sufficient ground for us to believe that he does prefer
the welfare of Gods people, and of this Nation, above his own life or family.
Neither do I know of any of these actions he has done but it tends to our
welfare (except the ordinance for Tiths) which we expect will not continue long.

3. His pretestations before God and man, that what he did was for the welfare
of others which caused him to do that he has done, is of weight to cause
belief.

4 As the interest and welfare of the People of God, and the good of this
Nation is to be preferred before a personal interest, and is so preferred by
every good man; Therefore we ought to believe he did prefer it before his
own, we are bound by the law of love to judge the best; love thinks no
evil, and so long as way is given to evil surmises and wicked imaginations,
and take every thing in evil part, we are sensual and serve diverse lusts and
meddle with secret things that belong to God. Deu. 29 29, and no good will come
of it.

5. The form of the government being framed for the welfare of the people of
God and the good of the Nation, is a certain proof of his desires of our
good, as I know not what could be more.

This is very unnatural dealing, that after much suffering hardship, diligence
and care to preserve your lives, the thankfulness and requita^l ye give him,
is to count him your enemy, reproach him with many complaints and count it a
great part of Religion to do so: and then ye cry the Gospel suffers: it
suffers indeed by the unchristian carriages of one of you, where envy and
strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. Iam. 3. 16. those fruits
of the flesh are so manifest that it causes the Gospel to suffer.

Obj. The pomp and vanity in Court is now up again, Pride and worldly things
are embraced etc.

Ans Many things are reported of him, that are not true Joh. 8. 7. He that is
withou sin let him cast the first stone.

Romans 2. 1. Thou art in excusable, O man, whosoever thou art that condemnest
another and do the same thing. Humane frailties no one is free from.

Queries propounded to those who are dis-satisfied with the present Government,
to consider, and answer, if they please.
Whether this present Government is not as much to be owned, and is as much
according to Law, as the Armies refusing to disband, and their dissolving the
long Parliament, and their choosing another: all which some of the chief of
those who now dissent, have publicly approved of, and did not reckon it among
their offenses against God; why may they not as well own this present
Government and Governor, and not reckon it any offense against God? and if
they are so set upon their will without reason, that rather then they will own
this latter, they will disown and pull down that which they have owned and
built up, whether they are not bound in reason and conscience to publish that
their disowning, with their names and reasons why they so disown, and also to
pay back to the State all the money they have received as soldiers, since that
day that they were by authority commanded to disband.

2. Whether there be not sufficient ground to believe, that the major part of
the free people of this Nation, 1 By their silence, Number. 30. 14. Lev. 5. 1.
when the Instrument of government was held forth to them?

2. By their owning, accepting, and acknowledging the Justices of peace made by
the said authority? 3. By paying the Taxes levied by the said authority? 4. By
submitting to choose Parliament men, in the same day, and in the same way in
signing and sealing according to the appointment of the said Authority, and in
binding themselves, and those they chose, not to alter the government? Whether
these actions of obedience do not amount unto a full close with the said
government, and a sufficient testimony of their owning and acceptance thereof,
and that in a full and large manner? For if the lifting up of a hand in token
of consent, is interpreted a consent; and if in Law acceptance and submission
does make him a King, which was not so before, then surely these actions of
theirs cannot in reason but amount to a free acceptance of the Government and
Governor. And if so, whether the fewer number who descent are not concluded,
and ought now to be satisfied, so as to own and submit to the said government?

3. Whether this Government, as it is, and in the hands it is be not the best
government for the whole people of this Nation, in that all the people do, and
may live peaceably under it; whereas if it were altered, or in the hands of the
Kings Party, the Independent Party were like to be imprisoned and sequestered,
because we have served them so; and if it were in the hands of the Presbyters,
their principle is to imprison and persecute for Religion, and therefore all
inter^st could not live so quietly as now they do?

4. Whether the Kings Party, who have fought against us, have any reason to
reckon themselves among the free people of this Nation, seeing they have been
subdued and conquered? and whether there be any reason for us to conceive,
that if they had conquered us, that they would have acknowledged us to be a
free people, and consented to, and suffered us to disarm them, and to rule over
them? and if no, what reason have they to desire or expect we should do so to
them?

5. Whether the Restrictions and which is condemned in this Government, be not
a great part of the excellency of it, for that Government which allows the
least freedom to the Enemies thereof where by they are disabled to do hurts,
that Government is the safest and best for the Army and People? and if so,
whether we have not cause to justify and thank those who drew up the form of
government with these restrictions? The more I consider the Government, the
more I see a good mind toward the people in the framing of it.

6. Whether in the beginning of this Parliament the actions of some did not
declare that the Army and their Party should not have the Government, or the
power of the sword in their hands: and if the Army had submitted thereto,
whether not only many of the lives of the Army and of their party were not
hazarded? and what security could they give us, that the Kings party should not
have the Militia, and should not get the upper hand of us, and use us at their
pleasure, and so put us in as bad or worser condition then when under the King
and Bishops tyranny.

7. Whether we have cause to count them our friends, whatsoever they say, that
would disarme us, and leave us naked to our Enemies, Though they should tell us
it is for our good?

8. If the Army should part with the Militia, as some desire, whether it might
not make void and fruitless the many Victories God has given us, and the
liberty we now enjoy, and be brought into bondage again? and whether it were
lawful for us to submit thereto, and so to be the cause of our own ruin, and
if it be our duty to submit to Authority herein, why did we it not at first,
and so never have fought for our freedoms? to what purpose have we come out of
Egypt, if we are to return thither again?

9. Whether the actions of the Army do not declare, that we do fully
believe, that it is the will of God, that we should keep the power he has
given us, and put into our hands, else to what purpose was it given? and if any
say otherwise, what sign show they us, that we may believe them?

10. Whether the 52 Ministers appointed by the Parliament, did not give us
cause to expect a persecution to follow? what should they do, unless it were
to find out the true Religion, and to measure it out to us how much every one
is to have? and if so, whether there is not some ground to fear that the
Religion that the former Synod found out, is lost, or not counted good enough,
though some say, it cost the Commonwealth seventeene thousand l.?

11. Whether the Article in the Instrument of Government for freedom in
matters of Religion, be not the likeliest means to prevent persecution, as
thins are?

12. If there be any honor, preferment, and profit to be had by having the
Power, and Government, whether they do not most deserve it both in reason and
conscience, who have adventured their lives, and lost their blood for us, and
saved our estates and lives? whether in reason we may not expect a continued
safety from them who have been a means to procure the liberty we enjoy, rather
then from any others?

13. Whether it be not better for this Nation that this Government be as it is,
and in these hands it is, then to begin a new War; for we see they will not
part with it, and I suppose, that if any others will have it, they must fight
for it, and if they should, it is not certain they shall prevail, our enemies
plots have been fruitless; they have had fair play for it, they have had
pitched field-battels several times in several years, yet they have always
lost it; if we should fight it over again, we have reason to believe, they
shall not prevail, ser. 1. 9. for God is with us: as also it is some
encouragement unto us that we are to fight with them that we have with the help
of God always beaten and overcome, though they have been more in number, and
they well, and we sick and weak; and also we know the cause being the same, we
may well expect the success shall be the same: and though some of us do
differ, and not love one another as we should, there is no cause to believe
that any good man will fight against the Army, seeing the Army has adventured
their lives to save theirs, also our interest being one, a (...) self-love
will make us agree in one, against the common enemy, at home and abroad, who
desire and hope is that we will fall out among our selves, and then they shall
have what they desire.

14. If there should be any more war begun amongst us, whether it would not
endanger the ruin of the whole land?

15. Whether the ways some take in opposing the present Government, does not
declare their opposition is not from God, witness the publishing of a Libel,
called A Declaration in the names of several Churches, with several hands to
it, as if it were signed by those said Churches, and upon examination it is
proved false and counterfeit. I hope many that oppose this Government shall see
their error, and be ashamed, if his Highness depart not from this Government,
nor from those who are called Sectaries, who have been faithful and owned him,
and the welfare of this Nation; whereas the Kings Party, and the rigid
Presbyters, though they fear and flatter him, they do not, nor cannot love
him, nor never were (nor have we any reason to believe they ever will be) true
to him and the public welfare of this Nation?

16. Whether if things were worser then they are, to what purpose is it to
murmr and find fault, for that which cannot be helped, we quarrel at a
man, when it is God that sets up whom he will, Luke 1. 52. Dan. 4. 17.
consider Jam. 4. 5. and 3. 15, 16. 17. Ex. 16. ^, 8, 9. Jud. 16.

17. Whether it be not better for us to be content with what we have, and hope,
and wait for more, then by discontent to make our selves worse, in losing what
we have? for if we should fall out among our selves, and destroy one another,
the Kings party are like to possess all, then it will be worse.

18. What one thing has this Nation been oppressed with, more then it was
before, and if so, what reason have any to make such an outcry, as they do
against the present Government and Governor?

19. Whether there be any Government or Governors, but have some faults?

20. Whether those who like not this Government, have not as much reason to
like it as I, seeing they enjoy as much benefit by it as I, for I have nothing
by this Government but what I pay for, and so much they have.

I do from my heart believe, that it is best for this whole Nation, to be
content with this Government, and quietly to sit down under it, and to thank
God that things are no worse then they are; indeed I look upon this Government
in which we enjoy liberty in matters of Religion, to be a blessed Government,
if the offense of Tith were removed, I believe we should enjoy as much
freedom and liberty under it, as any do under any Government in all the whole
world.

FINIS.

