THE VINDICATION OF Abraham Reinaldson, LATE LORD MAJOR OF THE CITY Of LONDON.

With Certain QVERYES Of Conscience Resolved, concerning his refusing to obey
a late Order of Parliament, for the Proclaiming an unjust ACT for Abolishing
the Kingly Office in ENGLAND and IRELAND.

For which supposed Contempt, he was unjustly Fined 2000 l. by the House of
Commons, degraded of his Maioralty, and Committed Prisoner to the Tower of
London, April 2. 1648.

Matthew. 7.2. With what Judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what
measure ye mete, shall be measured to you again.

April 10th London Printed in the Year, M.DC.XL.IX.

THE VINDICATION OF Abraham Reinaldson, LATE LORD MAJOR OF THE CITY Of LONDON.
Gentlemen, and Fellow Citizens,
IT has always been my earnest endeavor (with that holy Apostle, St. Paul) to
preserve a clear conscience toward God, and toward man; I have usually
applied my self to the holy Scriptures, and to the obtaining of the true
knowledge of Divine Truth, whereby to steer the Actions of my life, which shall
always be the Director to my Conscience; Therefore I hold it expedient (for
the clearing of my self from a supposed crime, or contempt against an Order of
Parliament as they please to term it) That I Remonstrate unto you the Grounds
and Reasons moving me not to obey their questionable Authority, in prolaiming
their late ungodly Act, for quite abolishing the Kingly Office in England and
Ireland; without perjury to my Conscience, and the forefeiture of my Allegiance
to my King.

First, as I very well remember, when I was initiated into the Society of men,
and made a Member and Freeman of this City I took an Oath to be a faithful and
true Subject to the King that then was, and to his Heirs, and to bear to Him
true Allegiance. Secondly, I have taken an Oath, That I will Faith and Truth
bear (to King Charles) of Life and Member, and terrene Honor. Thirdly, I have
taken the Oath of Supremacy, enjoined in Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 1. and the Oath of
Allegiance enjoined me by Stat. 3. Iac. cap. 4.

Therefore, fellow Citizens, as it behooves all good Christians to be careful
before they swear, so likewise to perform that Oath they have sworn, and
especially when it concerns our duty toward our King; I advise thee (says
the Preacher) to take heed of the mouth of the King, and to the Oath of God, as
much as to say, That thou obey the King, and keep the Oath that thou have made
for that Cause; and the Prophet Zachary gives us this Commandment from God;
Let none of you imagine evil in his heart against his Neighbor, and love no
false Oath, for these are things that I hate, says the Lord. Zach. 8.17.

Again, our blessed Savior, gives me this Precept, Matthew. 5.33. Thou shall not
forswear thy self, but perform thy Oaths unto the LORD.

When I well weighed these Scriptures, and applied them to the former Oaths I
had taken, I found, That I could not obey the Parliaments Order, without a
great sin against God, and trespass against my own Conscience; for having
bound my self by so many several former Oaths made to my King, and his Heirs
after him, to pay unto them my Allegiance, Faith and Truth, of Life and Member,
and terrene Honor, and having acknowledged Him to be Supreme Governor of his
Realms; How can I then in Conscience, so persidiously withdraw my Allegiance
from his Lawful Successor, in Proclaiming their unjust Act for Abolishing the
Kingly Office, without manifest Perjury, breach of my Oath, formerly made to
the King and his Heirs, or answer for taking the Name of God in vain, by
obeying an Order from a questionable Authority, which would enjoyne me a thing
contradictory to my former Oaths, which by lawful Power, agreeable to the Laws
of God and the Realm, I have already bound my Conscience to the strict
observance of.

And in this Contempt, (as they please to term it) I have asked Counsel, not
only of the Law of God, but the Law of Reason, which ought to be writ in the
heart of every man, teaching him what is to be done, and what is to be
eschewed; the Law of God inlightning our Natural understanding, is given
principally to direct our Actions by, for the obtaining felicity in this life,
so as we guide them only by the Rule of Justice.

These Laws have instructed me, (and ought to instruct us all) what good is to
be done, and evil to be avoided; That I should do to another that which I
would another should do to me; That Justice is to be done to every man, and
not wrong; That a Trespass is to be punnished, and the like.

And if Reason directs me, That good is to be done, and evil to be eschewed, I
must then needs conclude, That this Act for the abolishing of the KINGLY,
Office, is directly against Law, and I by obeying their Order, or Command, in
Proclaiming the same, must needs withdraw my Allegiance and Subjection to my
KING from him, and so necessarily loose the benefit or good I should have by
his Protection; For the Rule in Law runs thus.

That the OBEDIENCE of the SUBJECT draws Protection from the KING, the King
being ordained for the defense of the Law, and the Bodies and Goods of all his
Subjects.

Neither is, nor can there be any lawful Power to command me (being a
Magistrate) but what is derivative from the Supreme Power in the KING, or to
His Officer, or officers, who have their Power from him, by His Writ, Patent or
Commission; neither ought I nor can I obey the Command of any such lawful
officer, if that thing which he enjoynes me to do, be contrary to the Law of
God, the Law of Reason or the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, which have all
dependencie one on the other.

Then, much less, the command of an usurped or Pretended Power.

The holy Scriptures informs me, That I must fear God, and obey the King, that
I must obey him for Conscience sake; and the Law teaches me, That I must avoid
evil; but it is evil for me to obey a pretended Authority, in proclaiming an
unjust Act, which enjones me to deny, and wrong my King, and so not honor, not
obey him, by doing of which, I must necessarily disobey God, who enjoynes me
this duty of Obedience to my King; Ergo, Their command is not only forbidden in
Gods Word, but against the Law of reason.

The law teaches me, to do, as I would men should do unto me; But if I were
a King, I would not be robbed of my wright, nor dispoyled of the duty and
service of my Subjects, Ergo. They order me to do a thing against the law of
reason.

It is injustice and wrong to take away the Kings Wright by this law, but you
Order me to proclaim an Act that takes away his wright, which must needs be, to
do him wrong. Ergo, I ought not to obey your Order.

The law of reason teaches me, That a Trespasser is to be punished, and if I
obey your Order, I must needs Trespass in the highest nature upon the Kings
Interest in me, as I am his Subject, to Trespass upon his laws as I am de
jure, under his Government, and to Trespass upon his patience and goodness,
and so make my self liable to the punishment that belongs to such a Trespass.
Ergo, there is no reason that I obey your Order.

The law of reason is generally taken as a directive Rule unto a goodness of
operation; so that by this Law I ought to direct all my Actions to a good end;
but by Proclaiming your Act, I direct not my actions to a good end. Ergo, I
cannot obey your unreasonable Order.

Again, the law of reason is such, that being proposed, no man ought to reject
it, as unjust, or unreasonable; but the King may reject the imposing of
unlawful commands upon his Subjects, whereby he is not only deprived of his
Crown and Dignity, but of their aid and Assistance. Ergo, etc.

And truly every good Christian ought to reject all such Orders, or commands as
unreasonable and unjust, because if they obey them they do thereby not only
break their Oath, (which is a grievous sin) but loose the benefit of
protection, which by the law they may claim, and ought not to have, neither
can be derived from any pretended Authority whatsoever, but resides in the
power of their Natural, Lawful, and Sovereign Liege Lord the King. Ergo, etc.

Again, whereas the law of reason is never changable by any diversity of place
or time; and whereas mine Allegiance is due to my Sovereign in all places, in
all cases, and at all times, I am forbidden by this unchangeable law, to change
so unchangable and unalterable a duty, by such a flight and unwarantable Order,
from a pretended Authority in these changeable times.

Now I hope all Moderate and unbyassed Citizens and others will conceive, That
as it was against reason for me to obey such an unreasonable, unlawful Order;
so it was against law and reason in them to require me so to do; for it is
most unreasonable and the worst or Tyrannyes, to order, or force a Christian
Magistrate to do that thing, which by doing, he must either commit that
national and crying sin of perjury and presumption to destroy my own Soul, or
by refusing to do it (because it goes against my Conscience so to do,) not
only to be Fined a great Sum, (no less then Two Thousand Pounds) but to be
hurried from my house to Westminster, and from thence to Prison by rude
Soldiers, and be degraded of my Moyoralty; Let all reasonable men judge
whether this be sit usage for a Civil Magistrate, or whether it be not the
greatest injustice and Tyranny as can be inflicted by those that pretend
Freedom, Liberty, and the like, and yet use more subtilties then the father of
lies to ensnare men, only they differ in this, Satan catches at the spiritual
riches of the soul, and the Senate at the temporal means belonging to the
body; so that between them both, external Riches, and internal Graces are now
strongly besieged by red-coats, but God of his Infinite Mercy, give us strength
and patience to hold out, so that they may not long exercise their Tyrannyes
over us, as they now Vauntingly boast, That they intend to behead all the
Noble, plunder all the rich, and starve all the Poor; As we already (by
miserable experience) are to our great sorrow, very capable of.

As for my Fine* I weigh it not, for truly I had rather loose my wealth then my
soul; and what it can advantage them to gain my wealth and loose theirs, is
past my understanding to resolve you.

Neither was it ever any custom that any Order for proclaiming Proclamations or
Acts in that nature, has been directed to the Lord Major, because it is the
Office of a Sergeant at Arms, an Herald, or the Sheriffs to do the same; But
this Order so directed to me, to proclaim the said Act in Person, was no other
but one of their old State-pollicies to set their hungry catterpillars a
feeding, to devour my Estate.

But I fear I am not the last by many, that they intend to punish in this
kind; but I have hope, in committing my present sufferings to Him, that
Judges righteous judgment; and leave these new authors of usurped Authority
to be Charactarized by the Prophet Amos. cap. 3. Verse. 7. They know not to do
wright (says the Lord) they store up Violence and Robbery in their Palaces,
and tuine Judgment into Wormwood, and leave off Righteousness in the Earth:
and as Solomon says of such, That they sleep not, except they have done
Mischief, and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall; for
they eat the bread of Wickedness, and are drunk with the Wine of Violence.

But I shall conclude, with that Proverbial Exhortation of Solomon, which shall
be my Advice to every true-hearted Citizen, My son, fear thou God, and the
King, and meddle not with them that are given to Change.

From my Imprisonment in the Tower, April, 9. 1649. A. R.

FINIS.

