Lay by your Pleading, Law lies a-Bleeding.
HAbak. 1.4. Nahum 3.7, 14, 18. Romans 6.1, 2, 3. O King, thy Shepherds slumber:
Therefore the Law is slacked, and Judgment does never go forth; for the Wicked
does compass about the Righteous. Bemoan her: Whence shall I seek Comforters?
For they make strong the Brick-Hills. Like Fig Trees with the first ripe Figs;
if they be shaken, they shall even fall into the Mouth of the Eater. What shall
we say then? Shall we continue in Sin, That Grace may abound? God forbid. How
shall we that are dead to Sin, live any longer? Know ye not that so many of us
as were Baptized into Jesus Christ, were Baptized into his Death? Prove. 15.18,
19. The Heart of the Righteous studieth to answer; but the Mouth of the Wicked
pours out evil things. Job 7.11. Wherefore I will not refrain my Mouth; I
will speak. Job 42.5. I have heard of Thee by the hearing of the Ears; but now
mine Eye sees. Job 12.3, 4. But I have Understanding, as well as you; I am not
inferior to you: Yea, who knows not such things as these? I am as one mocked
of his Neighbors, who calls upon God. Job 20.27. Does not the Ear try Words,
and the Mouth taste his Meat? Job 24.12. The Heaven shall reveal his Iniquity,
and the Earth shall rise up against him: Men groan from out of the City, and
the Soul of the Wounded cries out. Revel. 20.4. Matthew. 23.31. Jam. 5.4. Revel.
6.20. For the Witness of them that were beheaded, cries; and the Cries of them
are entered into the Ears of the Lord God of Sabbath. And they cried with a loud
Voice, saying, How long, O Lord, Holy and True, do Thou not judge and avenge
our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? Act. 17.6, 7. 1 Samuel 15.23. Those
that have turned the World upside down, are come hither also; and these all do
contrary to the Decrees. For Rebellion is as the Sin of VVitchcraft, and
Stubbornness is as Iniquity. Jude 8.10, 11, 16, 19. These be they who separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit: Woe unto them; for they have gone in
the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam for Reward, and
perished in the Gainsaying of Core. But these speak evil of those things which
they know not; but what they know naturally, as brute Beasts, in those things
they corrupt themselves. These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their
own Lusts, and their Mouth speaks great swelling Words; having Men's-Persons
in Admiration, because of Advantage; despise Dominion, and speak evil of
Dignities. Isa. 59.7, 8. Their Feet run to Evil, and they make haste to shed
Innocent Blood: Whosoever goes therein, shall not know Peace. Matthew. 11.15. He
that has Ears to hear, let him hear. Jam. 2.19, 20. Thou believe that there
is one God, thou do well; the Devils also believe, and tremble. But will thou know, O vain Man? Job 27.11. I will teach you by the Hand of God; that
which is with the Almighty, will I not conceal. Job 23.5. Job 22.4, 5, 6. I
will know the Words which he would answer me, and what he will say unto me.
Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? Is not thy Wickedness great, and thine
Iniquity infinite? 1 Samuel 8.7. For they have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected me, that I should not Reign over them. 2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19. These are
Wells without Water, Clouds that are carried with a Tempest; to whom the Mist
of Darkness is reserved for ever: For when they speak great swelling Words of
Vanity, they allure them who live in Error: While they promise them Liberty,
they themselves are the Servants of Corruption; for of whom a Man is overcome,
of the same is he brought in bondage. Matthew. 22.29. Matthew. 18.7. Ye do err, not
knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God. Woe unto the World, because of
Offenses; for it must needs be, that Offenses come: But, woe to that Man, by
whom the Offense comes! Genesis 42.21, 22. Psalm. 150.15. Psalm. 12.4. And they
said one to another, We are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we
saw the Anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear. Who
have said with our Tongue, We will prevail. Our Lips are our own; who is Lord
over us? Therefore, behold, his Blood is required. Spoke I not unto you,
saying, Touch not my Anointed,, and do my Prophets no harm. Matthew. 23.30, 31,
32, 33. And they said, If we had been in the Days of our Fathers, we would not
have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets: Wherefore, ye be
Witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the Children of them which killed the
Prophets: Fill ye up then the Measure of your Fathers. Ye Serpents, ye
Generation of Vipers; How can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? Jam. 5.6. Jam.
2.13. Ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he does not resist you. For he
shall have Judgment without Mercy, that has showed no Mercy: And Mercy
rejoices against Judgment. Act. 8.21, 22, 23. Repent therefore of this thy
Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine Heart may be forgiven
thee; for thy Heart is not right in the Sight of God: For I perceive, that thou
art in the gall of Bitterness, and in the bond of Iniquity. 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. Ye
therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these things, beware lest ye also, being led
away with the Error of the Wicked, ye fall from your own stedfastness: But grow
in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 1 John
1.6, 7. If we say, That we have Fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness, we
lie, and do not the Truth: But if we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light,
we have Fellowship with one another; and the Blood of Jesus Christ, his Son,
cleanses us from all Sin. 1 Timothy 5.25. Likewise, also the good Works of some
are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise, cannot be hid. 2 Timothy
3.4, 5. Traitors, heady, high-minded; having a Form of Godliness, but denying
the Power thereof: From such turn away. Prove. 14.4, 6. Where no Oxen are, the
Crib is clean. A Scorner seeks Wisdom, and finds it not; but Knowledge is
easy unto him that understands. Prove. 6.23. For the Commandment is a Lamp,
and the Law is Light; and Reproofs of Instruction are the way of Life. Prove.
4.25, 26, 27. Let thine Eyes look right on, and let thine Eyelids look
straight before thee: Ponder the Path of thy Feet, and let all thy ways be
established. Turn not to the Right Hand, nor to the Left; remove thy Foot from
Evil. Prove. 3.21, 23. Prove. 18.10. Genesis 19.20. My Son, behold now, this City is
near to flee unto it: Walk in thy way safely, and thy Foot shall not stumble.
The Name of the Lord is a Strong Tower; the Righteous runs into it, and is
safe. Joh. 15.3, 4. Now, ye are clean, through the Word which I have spoken
unto you. As the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the
Vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me. If a Man abide not in me, he is
cast forth as a Branch, and is withered; and Men gather them, and cast them
into the Fire, and they are burned. Matthew. 14.13. Luke 17.32. Luke 9.44. But he
that shall endure unto the End, the same shall be saved. Remember Lot's Wife.
Let these Sayings sink down into your Ears. Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and
and Pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things
that shall come to pass; and to stand before the Son of Man. 2 Cor. 5.7. For we
walk by Faith, not by Sight. 2 Cor. 6.3. 2 Cor. 8.12, 21. Giving no Offense in
any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed. Providing for honest things, not
only in the Sight of the Lord, but also in the Sight of Men: For if there be
first a willing Mind, it is accepted. 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. Whereunto he called you
by our Gospel; therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold. 2 Timothy 1.12. For the
which cause, I also suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed: For I
know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded, that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him, against that Day. Isa. 54.4, 5, 6, 8, 10. 2
Cor. 6.2. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded,
for thou shall not be put to shame: For thou shall forget the shame of thy
Youth, and shall not remember the Reproach of thy Widow-hood any more: For thy
Maker is thine Husband; the Lord of Hosts is his Name. For the Lord has called
thee as a Woman forsaken, and grieved in Spirit. For the Mountains shall
depart, and the Hills be removed; but my Kindness shall not depart from thee.
In a little Wrath I hid my Face from thee, for a moment; but with everlasting
Kindness will I have Mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For he says,
I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the Day of Salvation have I
succored thee. Behold, now is the accepted Time; behold, now is the Day of
Salvation. Isa. 51.12. I, even I, am he that comfort you. Who art thou,
that thou should be afraid of Man, that shall die; and of the Son of Man,
that shall be made as Grass? 2 Timothy 6.18. And the Lord shall deliver me from
every evil Work, and will preserve me to his Heavenly Kingdom. 1 John 3.22.
And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him; because we keep his Commandments, and
do those things that are pleasing in his Sight. Psalm. 57.2, 3. I will cry unto
God most high, unto God that performs all these things for me; He shall send
from Heaven, and save me from the Reproach of him that would swallow me up. God
shall send forth his Mercy, and his Truth. I have chosen the way of Truth. Thy
Testimonies also are my Delight, and my Counselors: O how I love thy Law! It
is my Meditation all the Day. Psalm. 119.84, 85, 86. How many are the Days of
thy Servant? When will thou execute Judgment on them that persecute me? The
Proud have dug Pits for me, which are not after thy Law. All thy
Commandments are faithful. They persecute me wrongfully, help thou me. Gal.
1.12, 13. Psalm. 119.112. I have not departed from thy Judgments; for thou have
taught me: for I neither received it of Men, neither was I taught it, but by
the Revelation of Jesus Christ. For ye have heard of my Conversation in time
past. Gal. 3.7, 9. Know ye therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same
are the Children of Abraham: So then, they which be of Faith, are blessed with
Faithful Abraham. Gal. 6.9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for, in due
Season, we shall reap, if we faint not. Ephesians. 5.14. Wherefore he says, Awake
thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light.
1 Cor. 5.6, 7. For they that sleep, sleep in the Night; and they that be
drunken, are drunken in the Night: Therefore, let us not sleep as do others;
but let us watch, and be sober. Col. 4.3, 4. Col. 2.5, 6. Philip. 3.18, 19, 20.
Philip. 1.18. VVithal, Praying also for us, That God would open unto us a Door
of Utterance, to speak the Mystery of Christ; for which I am also in Bonds,
that I may make it manifest, as I ought to speak. For though I be absent in the
Flesh; yet am I with you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your Order, and
the stedfastness of your Faith in Christ: For many walk, of whom I have told
you, and now tell you even weeping, That they are the Enemies of the Cross of
Christ. As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord; so walk ye in him,
rooted and built up in him with Thanksgiving. 2 Cor. 2.14. 1 Cor. 11.13, 14,
17. Judge in your selves. Does not even Nature it self teach you, in this that
I declare unto you. Now, Thanks be unto God, which always causes us to triumph
in Christ, and makes manifest the Favor of his Knowledge by us in every
place. Haggai 1.5, 6, 9, 10. Now therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Consider your ways: Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have
not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloth you, but
there is none warm: and he that earneth Wages, earneth Wages to put in a bag
with holes. Thus says the Lord, Consider your ways: Ye looked for much, and
lo! it came to little; therefore the Heaven over you is stayed. Zephan. 1.14.
The Great Day of the Lord is near; it is near, and hastes greatly. Prove.
21.13. Whoso stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall cry
himself, but shall not be heard. Prove. 2.17. Bread of Deceit is sweet to a Man;
but afterward his Mouth shall be filled with Gravel. Prove. 2.3. Prove. 15.10.
It is an Honor for a Man to cease from Strife; but every Fool will be meddling.
Correction is grievous unto him that forsakes the way; and he that hates
Reproof, shall die. Prove. 1.26, 28, 29. I also will laugh at your Calamity; I
will mock, when your Destruction comes: Then shall they call upon me, but I
will not answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me: for that
they hated Knowledge, and did not choose the Fear of the Lord. Isa. 29.16.
Surely, your turning of things upside down, shall be esteemed as the Potter's
Clay. Isa. 59.4, 5, 6. They has Cockatrice Eggs; their VVebs shall not become
Garments: None calls for Justice; not any pleads for Truth: They trust in
Vanity, and speak Lies; they conceive Mischief, and bring forth Iniquity. Isa.
5.2, 3, 4. Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, for I will tread them in
mine Anger, and trample them in my Fury; for the Day of Vengeance is come? Jer.
7.18, 19. The Children gather the VVood, and the Fathers kindle the Fire. Do
they provoke me to Anger, says the Lord? Do they not provoke themselves, to
the Confusion of their own Faces? Matthew. 3.11, 12. Revel. 19.20. These both
shall be cast into a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone. But he will burn up
the Chaff with unquenchable fire. John 6.63. It is the Spirit that quickens,
the Flesh profits nothing. The words which I speak unto you, they are Spirit,
and they are Life. Psalm. 5.11. Col. 4.4. Psalm. 1.19. But let all those that put
their trust in thee, rejoice; let them shout for joy, because thou defendest
them. Let them also, that love thy Name, be joyful in thee. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again, I say, Rejoice. Isa. 52.6, 7. How beautiful are the feet of
him that brings good Tidings, that publishes Peace, that brings good
Tidings of Good, that publishes Salvation; that says unto Zion, Thy God
Reigns; therefore my People shall know, that I am he that does speak; Behold,
it is I, says the Lord God Almighty? 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. Faithful is he that
calls you; who also will do it. Phile. 1.9. Gal. 6.5, 17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.25. Yet
for Love-sake, Brethren, being such an one as Paul, and also a Prisoner of
Jesus Christ, pray for us. Henceforth let no Man trouble me; for I bear in my
Body the Marks of the Lord Jesus. 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15. Revel. 3.11. 1 Timothy
6.15. Heb. 12.12, 14. Revel. 1.7. Revel. 12.12. Isa. 55.3, 4. Revel. 2.2, 3,
15. Isa. 66.9. 1 John 2.27. Neglect not the Gift that is in thee. Behold, I
come quickly; hold that fast which thou have, that no Man take thy Crown.
Meditate upon these things; give thy self wholly to them till I come; give
Attendance. I know thy Works, and thy Labor, and thy Patience. For my Name's
sake thou have labored, and have not fainted; hold fast, till I come. Which in
his time he shall show, who is the Blessed, and only Potentate, the King of
Kings. 2 Cor. 4.16. For which cause we faint not; but though our outward Man
perish, yet the inward Man is renewed day by day. Wherefore lift up the Hands
which hang down, and the feeble Knees. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness,
without which no Man shall see the Lord. Behold, he comes with Clouds;
therefore, rejoice ye Heavens, and ye that dwell in them; incline your Ear, and
come unto me. Behold, I have given him for a Witness unto the People. But the
Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that
any Man teach you; but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is
Truth, and is no Lie, and even as it has taught you, and ye shall abide in
him. Isa. 66.9. Shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, says
the Lord? Matthew. 10.26. For there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; and hid, that shall not be known.

By the Servant of the Lord, JAMES RICHARDS.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake in Jewen-Street, 1685.


