RULES FOR THE Government of the Tongue: Together, With Directions in six
Particular Cases. 1 Confession of our faults to Men. 2 Confession of Christ
before Men, 3 Reprehension of faults in others. 4 Christian Communication.
Vrbanity and Eloquence.
5 Consolation of the Afflicted. 6 Self-Commendation, and a Disproof of
Perfection in this life.


Added, as a Supplement, to the Rules for Governing 1 The Thoughts, 2 The
Affections,


In the Precepts for Christian Practice, or, The Rule of the New Creature, new
modeled.

By Edward Reyner, Minister of the Gospel in Lincoln.

Psalm. 17.3. I have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. LONDON,
Printed by R. I. for Thomas Newberry, and are to be sold at his shop at the
three Lions near the Exchange. 1656.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
I Would not trouble the Press or thee, with any thing, but what I conceive may
be useful and practical for thy furtherance in grace and obedience; the
matter whereof, I hope, will not be burnt, when it is tried by fire, though the
Paper may; but that it may bring forth fruit in thee, that will remain to
promote thy comfort, and my account in the day of Christ.

The good acceptance which my former book (entitled, Precepts for Christian
Practice, etc.) has, as I hear found with sober-wel-minded Christians, and the
advice of some judicious friends, do encourage me to make this plain piece
public. Though Satan seeks to cast an odium upon the holy and precious truths,
ways and ordinances of Jesus Christ; yea and upon the Books that are written
for the Declaration and Defense thereof, to bring them all into contempt. For
Satan fears that such Books may do poor souls good and his cause hurt; which
should be our endeavor to promote, as it is his design to hinder. This is a
common Experiment, that as in Preaching, so in Printing; Satan and his Agents
oppose that most, which may in probability, through Gods blessing, be
instrumental for public profit. But the God of Truth, who loves
Righteousness, will thoroughly plead the cause of his own Truths and Ways; and
of the reproaches of his servants, from the Tongues and Pens of their enemies
in due time. Yea the day approaches wherein God will judge men's Hearts,
Tongues and Books, according to his Gospel. Then they who have spoken or
written of the matters of God, and of his Ministers, the thing that is true and
right, shall be approved; and those that have done otherwise shall (to say no
more) be reproved. Books, as well as any other works may help men forward
either to Heaven or to Hell; and advance their Salvation, or aggravate their
condemnation. A man may do more good or more hurt by writing than by speaking;
because, what is spoken is transient, and passes away; but what is written is
permanent, litera scripta manet, and spreads it self further by far for time,
place and persons, than the voice can reach.

All Christ's servants who keep the word of his patience, Phil. 1.17.
are set for the defense of the Gospel; and they must contend earnestly (or,
(...). Jud. 3. 2 Cor. 13.8.
conflict one after another) for the Fath which was once (for all) delivered
unto the Saints. Why should they not do all they can for the Truth (in these
days of Apostasy, Heresy, and Blasphemy) now that Satan and his manifold
Instruments do all they can against the Truth? that is, by writing as well as
by speaking by Pen as by Tongue. Satan does furiously drive on a Malevolent
design to draw poor souls into delusion, and thereby unto destruction, by
dispersing scandalous, railing, Truth-perverting soul-poisoning Pamphlets
(which come forth of the Pres^, like persons out of a Pesthouse, with a
plague sore running upon them, to infect all that take them into their hands,
and are taken with them.) why then should not Christ's Ministers, 2 Cor. 5.20.
(who are his Ambassadors) factor for Christ, and as strenuously plead and
promote his cause, Isa. 44.5.
in the Press as in the Pulpit; and subscribe with their hands unto the Lord,
and to his truths and ways, as well as confess them with their mouths? Good
books, that tend to build up all that read them, in faith, holiness and
obedience, Psalm. 46.4.
are like that River, the streams whereof make glad the City of God; Joh. 12.
and like that Box of precious Ointment, which Mary brake and poured on Christ's
head, the odor whereof filled the house; like clusters of ripe Grapes, passing
under the Press, the Juice whereof is fit to be transported to all Nations. So
the pious labors of Gods servants passing under the Press are fit to be
dispersed abroad among Christians, far and near. Mr. Cotton.
The Penning and Reading of godly Books (as a Reverend man of God, now with
God, said) is a singular improvement of the Communion of Saints; as whereby we
enjoy sweet and gracious conference with the Saints, though unknown to us,
though absent in place, and distant in time (yea many ages before us) and so
partake in the Communion of their most precious Gifts; as if they were present
with us; or as if we had been long acquainted with them, I doubt not but it
has been a cordial to some of Gods servants at death, to think and say to God
in their manner and measure, as Christ did in his -- Father, Joh. 17.4.
I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have done the work thou gave me to
do, to wit, by writing as well as by speaking, by Books as by Sermons.

When I had the former Treatise under my hand, this came into my mind, that to
add to the Government of the Thoughts and of the Affections, some Rules for
the Government of the Tongue might be suitable, seasonable and profitable. But
I, laboring under some bodily Infirmities, laid the Thoughts thereof aside;
yet afterward God revived them in me, and made my spirit willing to undertake
the work, and assisted me graciously in it, blessed be his Name.

And now, Reader, I present it to thee; and put it into thy hand as a
Gospel-Grammar, to teach thee, not variety of Tongues, but Sanctity and
Excellency of speech. The Art of speaking well, that is, the Language of Canaan
or of a Christian. Do not only look on this Book by Perusal, but live it by
Practice (to wit, to the Rules described therein) and it will lead thee toward
Perfection in some good measure on earth; though the full attainment thereof,
be kept as a Reserve for Heaven.

The Lord accompany this Book with his Presence and Power, that it may be
effectual to tame that unruly Member thy Tongue, and to make thee a good
Linguist in the School of Christ; Psalm. 16.9. with Act. 2.26.
then will thy Tongue be thy glory indeed.

To this end I beg a concurrence of thy Prayers with mine, at the Throne of
Grace, that God would bless it, and make it a blessing to all that read it.
That the fruit of it (like the Trees that grow on the banks of the holy waters,
Ezekiel. 47.12.) may be for Meat, to nourish heart and lip-Graces in them; and
the Leaves for Medicine, to heal all their Tongue-vices. No member of the body
is subject to so many Moral Diseases, as the Tongue is. It is either the best
or the worst member of all.

I wait on God to fulfill his promises, upon which he has caused me to hope,
Psalm. 119.49.
as the Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in all that thou set
thine hand unto. Deuteronomy. 28.8. -- he will bless all the work of thine hand, verse.
12. ye shall rejoice in all that you put your hand unto. Deuteronomy. 12.7. which
imply a general blessing upon all that Gods servants do -- whatsoever they do
shall prosper, Psalm. 1.3. Josh. 1.8

They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for trouble, Isa. 65.23. Their
labor shall not be in vain, or without fruit, for want of a blessing from
Heaven.

This is my desire, my confidence and my earnest expectation. Faithful is he
that has promised, who also will do it. Reader, if thou reapest any benefit by
my poor labors, give God the praise, and give me thy prayers,

Who am Thy Servant, for Christ's sake, and for thy souls sake. EDWARD REYNER.

An Epistle to the Reader.
THe tongue of man (says the Apostle) is an unruly evil, Jam. 3.8.6
full of deadly poison. A world of iniquity. Man himself is a little World, and
his tongue (though but a little Member of this little World) is a world of
iniquity, Jam. 3.5
it defiles the whole body, Jam. 3.6
and sets on fire the course of Nature; and is set on fire of Hell.

The whole Life of man (says Basil) is made up of the Sins of the Tongue. Tora
vita hominis linguae delictis est referta. Basil. Dimidiam partem humanorum
vitiorum lingua sibi vendicat. Naz. Psalm. 16.9. with Act. 2.26 Jam. 3.^.
Divide the Sins of men into two parts, and one half of them are the sins of
the Tongue (says Nazianzen.)

The Prophet calls the Tongue, our glory, but most men turn this their glory
into shame. It is reported (indeed) of Cato, that he never spoke a word of
which he had cause to repent; but I believe that he who made this relation had
cause to repent of this unadvised report, for in many things we offend all. If
any man offend not in word the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle
the whole body,

Where there are many motions there are some trippings, Prove. 10.19 Psalm. 58.^
and in the multitude of words there wants not sin. The Psalmist tells us,
that all men are apt by sinful words to go astray even from the womb. Romans 3.13
And Saint Paul asserts, that in the state of depraved nature, our mouths are
like open Sepulchers, out of which steemeth much unsavouriness. Solomon says,
Prove. 19.28 Est metaph. ducta ab immanibus bestiis, quae alias uno rictu
deglutiunt. Cartw. 1 Cor. 15, 33 Prove. 15.4 Mal. 2.17 Ephesians. 4.29
that the mouth of the wicked devoureth iniquity, even as ravenous beasts do
their prey, in which respect chains of restraint, or muzles should be put upon
them.

Evil words corrupt good manners; by them men make breaches in their own
spirits, yea they weary God, and grieve the Holy Ghost. In these, and other
respects Gods Servants in all Ages have seen cause both to resolve within
themselves, Psalm. 39.^
to take heed of offending with their tongues; and also to direct their prayers
to the Lord, Psalm. 141.3
that he would be pleased to set a watch before their mouths, and to keep the
door of their lips. God causes his own Servants to weigh their words, as to
consider all their other ways, though other men be regardless of both. The
heart of the righteous studieth to answer, Prove. 15.28 Ebullit, est metaph.
ducta a scaturigine aquarum quae sine omni intermissione aquam emittit. Cartw.
Prove. 10.11 Prove. 10.2^ Cant. 4.11
but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things; even as the muddied
fountain casts forth foul streams.

And whereas the mouth of the righteous is a well of life, they do desire that
the streams of their words may be guided into right Chaneis for best
advantage. Their lips feed many, honey and milk are under their tongues; and
therefore doubtless they are willing to learn how to serve out these provisions
wherewith God has furnished them, unto the best benefit of such with whom they
do converse.

Bishop Latimer tells us, that he was the more cautious what he said before
his Examiners, when he heard the Pen writing behind the hangings; and
questionless all those whose hearts are awed with the fear of the most high
God, do the rather ponder their words in conscientious respect to his
all-hearing Majesty. Jer. 8.6 Mal 3.16 Mat. 12.36
The Lord harkneth, and hears all sorts of speeches, such as are savoury, and
seasonable, to reward them, and all idle words, that he may call people to an
account for them.

That serious sentence of wise King Solomon, should always dwell upon all our
hearts; He that keeps his mouth keeps his life, Prove. 13.3
and therefore it cannot but be a work very acceptable and profitable, to lay
down Rules and Directions for the right ordering and Governing of our Tongues,
for though the Tongue be untamable by man, as the Apostle says (Every kind of
Beasts, Jam. 3.7, 8
and of Birds, and of Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been
tamed of mankind, but the tongue can no man tame) yet God Almighty can tame it,
and this he does by giving grace to hearken to such Rules and Directions as are
laid down in the ensuing Treatise.

The Author of which is now sufficiently known by his former Book, The Rule of
the New Creature.
which has found so good acceptance with Gods people, that it is enough to
commend this work, to tell the Reader, that it is written by the same hand. In
the former, we had the Government of the Thoughts and Affections, in this, we
have the Government of our Speeches, which is so exactly and elaborately
composed, that the judicious Reader will find few, yea very few useless or
impertinent words in the whole Treatise; and if the Books that are daily
printed were of the like worth, we should not have such just occasion to
complain of the multitude of them (for who ever complained of the multitude of
Pearls and Diamonds?) as now we have, seeing by many of them, the Souls of
Christians are poisoned, and by most of them surfeited and over-burdened.

The Lord make this useful piece serviceable for the right ordering of thy
speeches, that thy Tongue may be as choice silver, and as a Tree of Life, Prove.
10.20 Prove. 15.4, 7
and that thy lips may disperse knowledge.

So pray thy Servants in the work of of the Ministry, Edm. Calamy, Simeon Ash,
William Tailor.

London, June 28. 1656.
To the Reader.
THe Tongue of man is the hearts interpreter, Quotidiana fornax nostra est
humana lingua. Aug. lib. 10 Confess. Mat. 12.34
the inward motions of the mind have vent at the mouth, as sparks from a
Furnace, and the souls conceptions are brought forth by its busy Midwifery;
the Tongue is the key that unlocks the hearts treasury, out of whose abundance
it speaks. Our discourses are discoveries of what is within, as when the Pump
goes we may know what water is in the Fountain, whether clear, or muddy, or
when the clapper strikes we may guess what metal is in the Bell; the
corruption of men's minds (not much unlike the inflammation of a Feavour)
ordinarily breaks forth, and blisters upon their tongues; he that is rotten
in his heart is commonly rotten in his talk, and as evil words corrupt good
manners, so they discover corrupt manners; the foul stomach betrays it self in
a stinking breath. And where Grace is in the heart, it will manifest it self in
holy, heavenly, savoury speeches; every true Christian endeavors to derive not
only Grace into his heart from Christ's annoynting, but of that grace that was
poured into his lips -- they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another.
Psalm. 45.2 Mal. 3.16


And as words discover much the present frame of our souls, so have they no
small influence upon the settlement of their everlasting state, they are not a
key only to open the hearts treasury, but to let in, or shut out from heaven;
Mat. 12.36, 37.
Every idle word that men shall speak (so says the Word of truth) they shall
give account thereof in the Day of Judgment, for by thy words shall thou be
justified, and by thy words shall thou be condemned. The Arrows of idle words,
though shot out of sight, and possibly quite forgotten, will hereafter drop
down upon the heads of such as drew the bow. Words are but wind, is the common
saying, but they are such wind as will either blow the Soul to its haven of
rest, if holy, wholesome, savoury, spiritual, and tending to edification, or
else sink it in the dead sea, and bottomless gulf of eternal misery, if idle,
profane, frothy, and unprofitable.

Upon these, and many other important and weighty considerations, it appears of
what consequence it is, that men take special care for a regular ordering of
this unruly member; the Apostle James compares it to fire, and that had need be
watched, and well tended, for it is a good Servant, Jam. 3.6 Jam. 1.26
but a bad Master; and he lays a mighty stress upon it, If any man seems to
be religious, and bridleth not his tongue, this man's religion is vain: the not
bridling of the tongue, stains, and sullies the most gay and fair profession,
and without this all is but seeming and vain religion; Prove. 13.3
He that keeps his mouth (says Solomon) keeps his life, the double guard
of lips and teeth is not enough, there must be thine own watchfulness. -- Where
is that man that loves not life, that desires not many days, that he may see
good? for the attainment of this blessedness the Psalmist gives an excellent
rule, Psalm. 34.12, 13
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile; and therein he
lays not a burden upon others which himself will not touch with his own finger,
but his resolutions are accordingly, Psalm. 17.3 Psalm. 39.1
I have purposed (says he) that my mouth shall not transgress; And I said
(that is within my self by a settled purpose) I will take heed to my ways that I
sin not with my tongue; and because his own watchfulness, and custody might be
insufficient, and his tongue that unruly evil might possibly, like a wild
pampered Horse, break the bridle, he beggs of God that he would set a watch,
Psalm. 141.3
and appoint a Sentinel, Set a watch (O Lord) before my mouth, keep the door of
my lips.

This godly and reverend Author (whose name is well known, and precious to many
of Gods Children by his former useful labors) has bestowed his pains
(judiciously thou will say, if thy self be such) for thy help in this so
highly necessary, and sadly neglected business, it is not long since he
published some Rules for the Government of the Thoughts, and Affections, which
were (so it has pleased God in his holy and wise Providence to order it) a
preparative, and introduction to this excellent Treatise, that the Pot being
washed, and kept clean within, there might no scum arise, or boil over at the
brim, or the heart being taught to indite a good matter, the tongue might be
as the pen of a ready writer; God has put this Book into thy hand, Read,
Consider, Meditate, Practice, get the Language of Heaven, while thou art in thy
Journey, and God bring thee to the glory of Heaven at thy journies end. So
counsels, so prays he that is

Thine in the Lord for the service of thy soul, JOHN MERITON.

THE GOVERNMENT Of the TONGUE:
Psalm. 39.1. I said I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my Tongue.


DAvid laboring under some great trouble (either Absoloms conspiracy, as some
think, or a bodily infirmity, as others,) for fear of impatient expressions,
he resolved to watch over his ways, that he might not offend with his
Tongue; by murmuring against God, or by speaking against men and to keep his
Mouth with a bridle (or a muzzle for his mouth) while the wicked were before
him; that is, to keep silence in the audience of the wicked: to speak nothing
that might reflect dishonor to God, discomfort to his Soul; or that might give
the wicked occasion of rejoicing or calumniating. Hence we learn this

Doctrine.

All that would live godly, should take heed they sin not with their Tongues.

The Subject I intend to handle is, The Government of the Tongue. Touching
which I shall spread before you Three things, scil. 1 Preparatives to it. 2
Rules for it. 3 Reasons of it.


1 Preparatives to the Government of the Tongue, Three especially 1 Wisdom. 2
Resolution. 3 Well-ordering of the Heart.


1 Wisdom is required hereto. For that Wisdom.
is the Fountain and principle of speaking well, (even Philosophers and Orators
affirm it) I mean of speaking not diversity of Tongues, according to
Grammatical Rules, as Latin, Greek, Hebrew, but of speaking any Tongue or
Language that is in use (be it, English, French, Dutch, etc.) not only
morally, but Theologically well, according to the Rules of Gods word, which
teaches us Artem been loquendi, as well as Artem been vivendi, the Art of
speakinwell, as of living well. To know fully what is the duty of the Tongue,
and to order it accordingly, this is wisdom; which is as necessary to the
Government of the Tongue, as the eye is to direct the foot; as light is to show
a man his way; as understanding is needful in a Pilot, to guide the ship; in a
master, to teach his Scholars; or in a Magistrate, to govern the Commonwealth.
As great skill and knowledge is required for ordering the Tongue well, as any
(yea all the) members of the body beside, by Reason

1 Of the Difficulty of the task (to rule, an unruly Tongue) in regard 1 Of
Man's propensity to offend therein. 2 Of the Cases and concernments thereof.


2 Of the Discommodity or Commodity of the event thereof; of all these I shall
speak more fully afterward.

Solomon, the wisest of men shows (all along in his wise sentences) the need
and profit of wisdom for wel-guiding the Tongue, wherein he makes wisdom the
principle of speaking well or right; Folly the principle of speaking ill or
wrong,

Wisdom is required

1 To the opening of the mouth, for the virtuous woman opens her mouth with
(...) wisdom. Prove. 31.26


2. To the shutting of the mouth, he that refraineth his lips, (says Prove.
10.19
Solomon) not only from speaking many words at any time, but from speaking any
words at some time (to wit, when he feeth cause to be silent) he is wise.

Wisdom keeps the doors of his mouth, and opens and shuts them in due season.
Wisdom is profitable to direct, how to dispense inward gifts for the good of
others. Hence it is said -- The Tongue of the wise uses knowledge Prove. 15.2
aright. Wisdom is the Art or skill of shaping right Answers. Walk in Wisdom
(says Col. 44, 5, 6.
Paul) that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, scil. warily and
rightly, so as your speeches may carry a grace and a force with them. Wisdom
is requisite to make you ready always, to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the Hope that is in you, with meaknesse and 1 Pet. 3.15
fear.

This wisdom to govern the Tongue well is obtainable three ways.

1 It must be begged of God by prayer, for it is Gods gift. If any lack wisdom
(says Jam. 1.5
James) to wit, to speak well, as to do or suffer well, let him ask it of God
-- and it shall be given him. -- But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering.
Verse. 6


2 It must be learned out of Gods word, which is the Grammar of the Language
of Canaan, or the Art of speaking it perfectly. The holy Scriptures contain all
Rules requisite for the right government of the Tongue. Have not I written to
thee (says Prove. 22.20, 21
Solomon) excellent things in Counsels and knowledge -- that thou might
answer the words of truth to them, that send unto thee.

Solomon's Proverbs (which are princely sayings, rare and royal sentences) were
spoken and written to teach us to speak well and wisely, or to order our speech
aright. Therefore search the Scriptures, which are able to make you wise, as to
salvation, so to elocution; as to do well, so to say well; to make you perfect
in speech, and furnish you thoroughly unto all good words.

3 It must be taught us and infused into us by the spirit of Christ, who upon
that account is called, the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation Ephesians. 1.17
, the Spirit of Counsel, and knowledge, and of the fear of the Isa. 11.2.
Lord, the spirit of a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. which makes the tongue to be
Prove. 12.18
health, and the speech to be sound that cannot be Tit. 2.8
condemned, through abundant clearness of expression and conviction. This
Wisdom from above which is absolutely needful, to rule the Tongue here below,
is a fruit of the Spirit in us. The Spirit has a great influence into the good
guidance of the Tongue in some cases, especially wherein as our Savior says
Mat. 10.20.
, it is not we that speak, but the spirit of our Father which speaks in us.
Ask the Holy Ghost by earnest prayer, and your heavenly father will give him to
Luke 11.13.
you, and wisdom from him.

The Second Preparative is Resolution, Resolution.
bottomed on Gods grace and strength, for ruling the Tongue. This was David's
resolve in my Text, I said, that is, I determined in my self, I will beware and
observe my ways from offending with my Tongue- I will keep my mouth with a
bridle -- and I have purposed my mouth shall not Psalm. 17.3
transgress.

Job strengthened himself with this sinew of Resolution against Job 27.3, 4
Tongue-transgression, to which he bound himself by a double oath; the one in
the second ver. -- As God lives, all the while my breath is in me, and the
Spirit of God is in my Nostrils, my lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my
Tongue utter deceit; the other Oath is in the fourth verse, as the words are in
the Original -- If my lips shall speak wickedness, -- If my tongue shall utter
deceit, (which is the form of an Oath, Mereer, in Job 27.4.
familiar to the Hebrews) what then Job? then let me perish, or let the Lord
punish me severely for it.

Wisdom shuts the mouth against evil, and Resolution barracado's it. Wisdom
unlocks the lips to good, and Resolution sets the doors of the mouth wide open
to let it forth.

A full and fixed purpose of heart against sin and vanity will put a bridle
into the mouth to restrain it from corrupt speech, and idle words; and will
loose the Tongue when it is tied even from good, and cast out a dumb spirit.

The Tongue is a Bow, words are Arrows; wisdom sets them right, Resolution
bends the Bow, and makes them fly. To resolve well what to say, is the way not
to speak amiss. When the heart is not bound up with resolution to order the
mouth aright, the tongue hangs loose, and is lightly moved to evil. Well
ordering of the heart.


The Third Preparative is the well-ordering, and wel-furnishing of the heart.

This is required to the Government of the Tongue, for three Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because the heart is the guide of the Tongue, that directs it, and
dictates to it. The Scribe that indites matter good or bad; the Tongue is the
pen of Psalm. 45.1
a ready-writer. A good Scribe makes a good pen. The Heart is the Master of the
Tongue, and the Tongue is the scholar of the heart. The heart of the wise,
says Solomon, Prove. 16.23.
teaches his mouth, and adds learning to his lips. A good Master makes a
good Scholar, so a good heart makes a good Tongue. If the Heart go right, the
Tongue will follow, and not go wrong. If the Heart be well framed, the Tongue
will be well taught.

Reas. 2. The Heart is the root, fountain and treasury of the Tongue; it
furnishes the mouth with matter of discourse. The words of the mouth are the
fruits, streams, and stuff that proceed out of the heart; for out of the
abundance of the heart (says Christ Mat. 12.34.
) the mouth speaks. -- A good man out of the good treasure of the Heart
brings forth good things; and an evil man out of the evil treasure ( scil. of
the heart) brings forth evil things --

As out of the heart proceed Mat. 15.19.
evil thoughts, so evil words; what are words but motions of the heart, and
thoughts of the mind, formed into a voice or sound, and made audible?

Hence such as the Heart is, such is the Tongue; such as the Thoughts and
Affections are, such are the words ordinarily.

For as the Tree is, so is the fruit, Mat. 7.17, 18. Jam. 3.11.
good or bad; As the fountain is, such are the waters, sweet or bitter. As the
treasure is, such is the stuff that is brought out of it, whether precious or
vile. If the Heart be well governed, the Tongue will be well guided (because
the Tongue is ruled by the Heart) Be Masters of your passions, and you shall
easily be Lords over your Tongues, and govern them well, your Tongues will
obey you, when you can command your affections.

But a disordered Heart makes an ill ordered Tongue. They that govern their
hearts ill, cannot guide their tongues well. An unruled spirit makes an unruly
tongue; they that do not take heed to their spirits, what they think, or how
they are affected, will not take heed to their Tongues what they say.
Heart-Renovation is the root of Tongue-Reformation; begin at the Heart to amend
the Tongue. Pray God, as David did Psalm. 51.10.
to create a clean heart, and renew a right spirit in you, this will make you
have a pure lip or language, according to that promise Zeph. 3.9.
, for then (that is, under the Gospel) I will turn to the people a pure
language (or lip) that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve
him with one shoulder.

Reas. 3. Because errors in the tongue proceed from disorders in the heart, and
from distemper in the spirit; the disease is bred in the heart, which breaks
out in the mouth, as Idleness of words proceeds from vanity of Thoughts; froth
in speech, from some and fume of spirit. Rashness of mouth, from hastiness of
spirit, to be angry: when David's heart was hot within him (with grief and
indignation) then spoke he too impatiently with his tongue Psalm. 30.3.
.

Anger in speech grows from anger in spirit. Bitter words in the mouth spring
up from a root of bitterness in the heart; Falsehood, foolishness and guile in
the mouth proceeds from folly and deceit in the heart; a divided heart makes a
double tongue. Obscenity of speech flows from uncleanness of heart,
Roughness of speech from pride and churlishness of nature, as in Rehoboam, 1
King. 12.13. and in Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.10, 11.

Blasphemy in speech proceeds from backsliding and Rebellion in heart against
God. Despairing words come from distrust in heart toward God.

The second thing is Rules for the Government of the Tongue.

The first Rule.

Consider before you speak; 1 Rule.
think what to say. Let not your tongue run before your wit; or before wisdom
bid it go, for, the heart of the Righteous studieth to answer, says Solomon
Prove. 15.28.
, he carries a pair of scales betwixt his lips (as one says) to weigh his
words in, before he utter them; but the mouth of the wicked pours out
evilthings, rashly and overflowingly, without preconsideration, or moderation;
a flood of words, without a drop of discretion or Religion. The study of
questions, Paul calls a doting or a disease 1 Timothy 6.4.
(...), sick about questions, but right answers are the study of the righteous.

He that answerech a matter before he hears it, says the wise man, Prove. 18.13.
it is folly and shame unto him; or he that returns a word, before he
hears the whole matter, and understands it well, shows folly, and procures
shame.

Be not rash with your mouth, and let not your heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God (no nor before men) It is the Preachers counsel Eccles. 5.2.
Prove. 6.2.
lest you discover weakness, or be ensnared with the words of your mouth.
Suffer not your mouth to cause your flesh (or self) to sin, by rash vows, or
extravagant, superfluous words. Be slow to speak, says James Jam. 1.19.
, that is, be deliberate and advised in your speeches. For if the heart do not
premeditate, the Tongue will precipitate. The Tongue of the wise is in his
heart (he considers what to say) the heart of the fool is in his mouth, he
speaks before he thinks, and says he knows not what. To be overforward to
speak is vain rashness, and proud boldness; there is more hope of a fool, than
of such, Pro. 29.20. when David spoke in his haste (or precipitation) as that
he was cut off from before Gods eyes Psalm. 31.22.
, that, All men are Psalm. 116.11.
liars; Samuel, and all that had promised him the Kingdom; he spoke not
aright: for the event confuted his words. Before you speak, you are Masters of
your own minds, and know what ye think, but when ye have spoken, others will be
Masters of your words, and make what construction of them they please, nescit
vox missa reverti, when a word is once out, it is past recall.

The second Rule. Rule.


In speech have respect to five particulars.

1 The Principle, from which you speak.

2 The Matter, what you say.

3 The Manner, how you speak.

4 The Season, when.

5 The End, why.

1 Have respect to the Principle from which you speak, which should be always 1
Reason, not Passion. 2 Love, not envy, hatred or malice. 3 Grace, not wit or
parts only.


1 First Principle of speech.
Speak from Reason and Judgment (as the former Rule directed you) not from
Passion. For Passions, as they blind reason, so they mislead the Tongue, which
is ordinarily more commanded by Passion, than regulated by Reason, and more
ready to serve the violence of Passion, than to follow the Evidence and Dictate
of Reason. When Passion boils in the heart, it makes the words like hot burning
coals in the mouth, it dips the tongue in Gall, and imbitters the words. When
blind Passion leads the blind Tongue, both fall into the Ditch of
Transgression, and without repentance, into the pit of perdition. Gods dear
servants have sinned most with their Tongues, when they have spoken in Passion,
as Moses Psalm. 106.33.
when he was provoked in his spirit, he spoke unadvisedly with his lips; and
Job, when he cursed his birthday Job 3.2, 3, etc.
, and Jonah, when he told God to his face, that he did well to be angry even
unto death Jonah 4.9.
, When David's heart was hot with Passion, his Tongue was inflamed in
expressions Psalm. 39.3.
.

Hence it is that Gods servants being subject to like Passions as others are,
as Elias (that famous miracle-working man of God was Jam. 5.17.
, (they being sanctified but in part here) are apt to offend sometimes with
their Tongues, as others do. Passionate expressions are Imperfections, and
discoveries of infirmities, even in the best. If any offend not in word, he is
a perfect man Jam. 3.2.
, because his Tongue is ruled by reason, not by Passion.

2 Principle of Speech. 1 Cor. 13.5. Vid. third principle of Speech.
Speak from Love, not from envy, hatred or malice. For Love, as it thinks no
evil, so it speaks no evil. Love oiles the mouth, softens the Tongue,
sweetens the words, and makes the lips drop like an honeycomb; when love rules
the mouth, the Law of kindness is in the Tongue, Prove. 31.26. but hatred and
malice never speak well, and never do good by speaking. The wrath of man
(whether it be expressed by word or deed) works not the righteousness of God,
says Jam. 1.20
James; or what is right in Gods sight; Words spoken in wrath or malice do no
good. Be slow to wrath, then you will be slow to speak, Jam. 1.19. When Paul
persuades the Ephesians Ephesians. 4.31, 32
to lay aside clamor and evil-speaking, he exhorts them to put away from them
all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, with all malice (as the Heart-rootes of
Tongue-sinnes) and to be kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another; which are fruits of love, and would cause them to speak well both of
others and to others. Good words in the mouth, are grapes and figs, which
cannot be gathered from the Thorns and Thistles of hatred, malice, and envy
in the heart.

Kind words are the flowers and Cream of true love. How well did love make Paul
speak to the undeserving Corinthians, who loved him less, for his loving them
2 Co^ 12 14, 15
more? Nevertheless Paul was ready to come to them -- and he sought not
theirs but them: and he would very gladly spend and be spent for them.

-- And to the ill-carrying Galatians who deserted him and the Gospel; Gal. 1.6
and were foolish and Cap. 3.1.
bewitched, yet what good language did he give Gal. 4.12
them? Brethren, I beseech you be as I am, for I am as you are, ye have not
injured me at all; and verse 19. my little children of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you.] till you be reduced from your
wanderings to the truths and ways of God again.

Thirdly, Speak from Grace, Third Principle of Speech.
not from wit or parts only; for Grace in the lips (of which I shall speak
afterward,) proceeds from grace in the heart, Prove. 22.11. as from

1 Faith, I believed (said David) therefore have I spoken, Psalm. 116.10. we
believe (says Paul) and therefore speak, 2 Cor. 4.13.

Unbelief sometimes shuts the mouth, for this, Zacharias was dumb, because he
believed not the Angels words, Luke 1.20.

2 From Love (as was showed before,) O ye Corinthians (says Paul) our mouth
is open unto you (scil. in Expressions) why so? our heart is enlarged. 2 Cor.
6.11, 12. to wit, in affection. Queen Esthers love to her People, the Jews,
made her open her mouth wide in requests both to God and the King, to save
their lives, though she hazarded her own thereby, Esther 4.16.

3 From zeal for Gods glory, which provoked the Apostles to speak, even when
they were commanded silence, Act. 4.20. we cannot but speak (said Peter and
John) the things which we have seen and heard: and Jeremy when he resolved
silence, Jer. 20.9. Zeal for Gods house moved Christ to speak as well as to
act; -- my house is the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of Thieves,
Luke 19.46. Zeal for Gods Sabbath caused N^hemiah to contend with the Nobles of
Judah, cap. 13.17.

4 From a good Conscience, which pours grace into the lips. The Answers of a
good Conscience toward God or man, are gracious words, excellent speech, as
that of Paul before the Council, Act. 23.1. and before the Governor, cap.
24.14, 15, 16. When Peter persuades to a constant readiness, to give an answer
to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, he
prescribes this as a means thereof, having a good Conscience, 1 Pet. 3.15, 16.
-- the answer of a good Conscience saves us, verse. 21.

5 From sincerity -- This makes the lips to be without deceit; even a Lip of
truth, Prove. 12.19. Psalm. 17.1. else the words may be smoother than butter,
and softer than oil, when war is in the heart, Psalm. 55.21.

6 From purity; for he has Grace in his lips, that loves pureness of heart,
Prove. 22.11. A clean fountain sends forth clear streams.

7 From the fear of God, which over-aweth both heart and Tongue. This is a
Remedy against Tongue vanities. -- In many words there are diverse vanities,
(says the Preacher) but fear thou God, Eccl. 5.7.

8 From Experience; Dr. Hall.
for to speak well without feeling, is the next way to procure an habitual
hypocrisy. Good words should follow and flow from good affections, not go
before them. That which does not come from Grace in the heart, cannot be
gracious in the mouth. A graceless heart makes a lawless tongue. When a
Christian speaks from grace in the heart, he speaks as one that has Authority
(as Christ did) and not as the Scribes. They had Authority to speak or read
(for they had Moses chair) but their words wanted authority and efficacy,
weight and force, in the hearts of their hearers. Those words for the most part
go to the hearts of the hearers (and minister grace to them) which come from
the hearts of the speakers, and from grace in them.

2 Have respect to the matter, Matter of Speech.
what you speak, and therein to Two things, scil. Truth, and Two things, scil.
Goodness.


1 Truth is Speech.
Have respect to truth which is twofold.

The first is an Agreement between the thing ye speak of, and your words.

The second is an agreement between your Tongues and your Hearts.

The former is called Logical truth, and the latter, Moral truth.

1 Have respect to Logical Truth, that is, to speak as the thing is, and no
otherwise, neither over, nor short, nor wide, nor awry.

This is the law of Truth in the mouth of a Christian, to speak of things just
as they are, and as the matter does require; so does the Lord himself Isa.
45.19.
, I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right. God blamed
Jobs friends, Job 42.7.
for not speaking of him the thing that was right ( scil. of his proceedings as
they were) as his servant Job had.

The contrary hereunto is a lie, which is to speak, otherwise than we know the
thing is; or if we know it not, yet what we say is an untruth.

Now lying is an ungodly, devilish and damnable practice; ungodly, because it
makes us most unlike, yea contrary to God, for God is Truth, and in him is no
lie; devilish; because Joh. 8.44.
The Devil is a liar, the Father both of liars and of lies; and damnable -- for
all liars shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death Rev. 21.8.
. Wherefore put away lying (says the Apostle) and speak every man truth with
his neighbor Ephesians. 4.25.
.

2 Truth spoken from the heart.
Have respect to moral Truth (which is an agreement between heart and Tongue)
that is to speak what ye think, and as ye think, and to think what ye speak:
For the Tongue is but the Interpreter of the mind, to declare that, all that,
and only that, which the mind dictates.

A good correspondence between the Heart and the Tongue is the character of a
Citizen of Sion, Psalm. 15.2.
he speaks the truth in his heart, that is, with or from his heart; he
speaks what he thinks, his heart and mouth do harmonize, consent and concenter
in the truth of his speech.

The contrary hereunto is guile, deceit and Dissimulation; when the heart and
Tongue are divided; and we speak what we do not think, or think as we do not
speak; so the heart and the Tongue do vary, yea contradict, and give one
another the lie. The wicked speak with a double heart, says David Psalm. 12.2.
, speaking one thing, and thinking another. 1 Timothy 3.8. (...).
A double heart makes a double and deceitful Tongue. But a man is not, what he
says with his lips, but what he thinks in his heart.

As Solomon speaks of him that has an evil eye Prove. 23.6, 7.
, as he thinks in his heart, so is he^; eat and drink, says he to thee,
but his heart is not with thee. This veracity in the mouth, is a fruit of
sincerity or truth in the inward parts, to speak what we think, and to think
as we speak (which is a parcel of our conformity to Christ -- who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his 1 Pet. 2.22.
lips.

The wise man makes this the Character of one of the worst of men ( scil. a
hateful hating man) that he dissembleth in his lips, and lays up deceit
within him Pro^. 26.24.
, when he speaks fair (or makes his voice gracious) believe him not, Ver. 25.
for there are seven (that is many) abominations in his heart. But though he
cover hatred in his heart, Verse. 26.
with deceit in his mouth, yet his wickedness shall be showed before the
whole Congregation, God will give Dissemblers over to some great sin, that they
may be publicly detected, disgraced, and detested of all.

Burning lips (says Solomon) Prove. 26.2^.
and a wicked heart are like a potsheard covered with silver dross. Burning
lips] that is, in show of affection, or profession of love to others, yet
without reality, as Ezekiels hearers, who with their mouth showed much love,
Ezekiel. 33.31.
but their heart went after their covetousness.

-- And a wicked heart] intending or wishing evil to others, and rejoicing
when evil befalls them -- are like a potsheard covered with silver drosse]
fair speaking lips upon a false, foul-meaning heart, are no better than dross
upon dirt, silver gilt upon clay.

Whereas, the Tongue of the Righteous is as choice silver, Prove. 10.20.
therefore his words are of great price; but the heart of the Wicked is little
worth, and his words are of no value. Dissemblers are like painted Sepulchers,
which appear beautiful outwardly, but within are full of rottenness and
uncleanness. So these have fair and flourishing words without, but rotten,
filthy hearts within.

They are (as one says) naught on both sides, having a bad mouth, and a worse
heart.

Dissembling is but like painting of an old rotten post, or of a wrinkled
deformed face, with fair fresh colors. To cover a rough heart with a smooth
Tongue, is but (as one compares it) like drawing a fair glove on a foul hand.
As we should pray with David to be delivered, Psalm. 120.2.
from lying lips, and from a deceitful Tongue; so that God would keep our lips
from lies, and our tongues from Deceits, and from disagreement with our hearts.

Secondly, Goodness in Speech.
have respect in the matter of your speech to goodness.

1 That it be good and sound, not evil and corrupt. 2 Profitable and useful,
not vain and idle.
1 Let your speech be good and sound good matter, and good words. To this end,

1 Speak of God and his Attributes, as David did Psalm. 145.1. Verse. 5. Verse. 6.
Verse. 7.
, I will extol thee, O God my King, I will speak of the glorious honor of thy
Majesty -- I will declare thy greatness -- men shall abundantly utter the
memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness, Verse. 8.
-- that the Lord is gracious, and full of compassion, slow to anger, and of
great mercy -- thy Saints shall talk of thy power; Verse. 11.
my Tongue shall talk of thy Righteousness all the day long, says David,
Psalm. 71.24 speak of the word of God, when you sit in your house, and when you
walk by the way, when you lie down, and when you rise up Deuteronomy. 6.6.7.
David resolved it Psalm. 119.172.
; my Tongue shall speak of thy word.

God commanded Joshuah that this book of the Law should not depart out of his
mouth Josh. 1.8.
, you ought to keep your Bibles not only in your houses, hands or hearts, but
in your mouths also, to speak thereof. Gods Word will furnish you fully with
matter of good Discourse upon all occasions.

To this end hide Gods word in your hearts, and they shall be fitted in your
lips; and you shall never want good subjects to speak of nor direction to speak
aright. The mouth of the Righteous speaks wisdom, and his Tongue talks of
Judgment -- why so? the Law of God is in his heart, therefore none of his
goings (or sayings) shall slide. Psa. 37.30, 31.
Speak of the works of God (both creational and providential) as David did
Psalm. 145.5.
. I will speak of thy wondrous works -- men shall speak of the might of thy
terrible Acts -- and of his Kingdom which is over all, Verse. 6.12.
and everlasting, and of the glory of it.

Speak of Jesus Christ and his benefits, a large subject, able to fill the
hearts and mouths of all men. My heart is inditing a good subject (says David)
Psalm. 45.1.
I will speak of the things which I have made touching the King, that is, not
only King Solomon his son, but touching Jesus Christ the King of Saints, of
whom Solomon was but a type; and my tongue is the pen of a ready writer, free
and swift, to express the renowned excellencies and just praises of Christ.

2 Speak prudent words, wise counsel, and righteous things, as does the mouth
of the righteous, Prove. 10.31.

3 Speak your own experiences to others, Gods gracious dealings with you, as
the Psalmist did Psalm. 66.16.
, come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done
for my soul.

On the contrary, speak no evil either of God or man, either ill matter, or ill
words.

1 Not of God, or against God; for this is to set your mouth against Heaven.
Psalm. 73.9.
Such a mouth shall certainly be stopped. Nebuchadnezzar (a Heathen King) made
a decree that every people, Nation and language which spoke any thing amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Mesach and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and
their houses be made a dunghill, because there is no other God that can
deliver after this sort, scil. as he did them D^n. 3.29.
. Shall Christian Princes or Potentates suffer horrible Blasphemies to be
belched forth against the God of Heaven, and let the Blasphemers go unpunished?
how will they answer this before the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords at the
day of Judgment.

2 Nor of men. Speak not evil one of another, Brethren (says James) Jam. 4.11.
for he that speaks evil of his Brother, and judges his Brother, speaks
evil of the Law, and judges the Law, and will not the Law condemn such?

Our speech should be good and sound for three Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because noscitur ex lingua, a man is known by his speech, as men of
several Countries, are by their language; so, pronouncing Shibboleth was a
proof whether they were Ephraimites or no, Jud. 12.6.

Peter's speech bewrayed him to be a Galilean, Mar. 14.70.
Jacob brought his brother Esaus hands and neck to his Father Isaac; Genesis 27.22.
but could not bring his voice. The Children of the Jews speaking half in the
speech of Ashdod, discovered, their Parents were not both of the same Religion;
though their Fathers were Jews, Neh. 13.23, 24.
their mothers were women of Ashdod, Ammon and Moab, Such mungrel matches of
the Parents confounded the speech of their Children.

So men may be known, whose they are, whether the Worlds or Gods, and whereto
they belong, whether to earth or to Heaven, even by their speech; Speech is the
Image or looking-glass of the mind. As the man is so is his speech. As Vessels
(when we knock upon them) are known by their sound whether they be cracked or
sound, full or empty: so are men many times by the sound of their words.

To speak good and not evil, David makes a Tongue-mark of a Citizen of Sion
Psalm. 15.2
.

The five Cities in the land of Egypt shall speak the Language of Canaan, Isa.
19.18
not so much for words or phrases as for matter; that is, shall confess and
praise God, and profess the celestial doctrine, written in the Hebrew tongue
which was then spoken in the land of Canaan, as a fruit or sign of their
conversion unto God. Piscator.


Good, sound, savory speech is an evidence of a good man, wholesome words in
the mouth argue a good constitution of the heart. Lips without guile are a sign
hung forth at the door of an Israelite indeed, in whose spirit there is no
guile.

Though men may speak good words sometimes, and be bad enough themselves, (as
Hypocrites, Dissemblers, and Politicians,) yet when the speech is ordinarily
bad, they that utter them cannot be truly good; because out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks. A bad Tongue is ever the companion of a base
and naughty heart; evil words proclaim an evil man, who though he may speak
good sometimes, which he has heard from others; yet when he speaks evil,
he speaks of his own or from himself ((...)) as Satan is said to do when he
speaks a lie, John. 8.44.

Unsavory words proceed from a rotten heart (as stinking breath from corrupt
lungs) the uttering of them is a bringing up of our Excrements the wrong way,
scil. out of our mouths, which will defile the man.

Therefore we should speak good and no evil, that we may both be good in our
selves and seem good to others.

Reas. 2. Because evil words corrupt good manners 1 Cor. 15.33
both in the speaker (for as one says, a man loses so much of his piety and
honesty, as he admits evil into his mouth) and in the hearers; for moral
infection may be spread abroad by words, as well as natural or pestilential
infection by breath.

Reas. 3. Because Gods Law obliges the Tongue, as well as the hand, to
obedience. Every Commandment according to the Subject matter of it.

1 Requires good to be spoken with the Tongue, as well as to be thought in the
heart, or done with the hand.

2 Forbids all sin, in word as well as in deed.

For Example,

The first Table commands us to honor God with our Tongue, by professing our
Faith, Love, Obedience, submission to him, by praying to him, and praising of
him, by confessing and justifying him before men, by speaking good of his name;
giving him the glory of all, hallowing his Sabbath in word as well as in deed.

It forbids all blasphemies, murmurings, repinings, despairings, or hard
speeches, and stout words against God -- All taking of Gods name into our
mouths in vain, by rash oaths, vows, curses, Mal. 3.13.
by irreverent use of Gods titles, or attributes without just occasion or due
affection, as in saying O God, and O Lord, O Jesus.

It prohibits us to speak our own words (that is, worldly talk) on the Sabbath,
Gods holy day.

The Second Table Commands us, To love our Neighbor, give him respect and seek
his good in word as well as in deed, with our tongues as well as with our hands.

Gods Law binds the tongue (as well as the hand) from injuring others any way.

It forbids,

1 Tongue-Murther, by scoffing, as Ishmael did at Isaac, which the holy Ghost
calls persecution Gal. 4.29
; by reviling and railing, 1 Pet. 3.9. by opprobrious terms or filthy names,
Mat. 5.22. by threatening and by cursing, Job would not suffer his mouth to sin,
by wishing a curse to his enemies Soul, Job 31.30. or that God might lay his
curse upon him to take away his life.

By Tale-bearing and backbiting, Lev. 19.16 which kills friendship and men's
names, and the comforts of their lives.

By revealing secrets, Prove. 11.13.

2 Tongue adultery, by obscene and lascivious speeches, and wanton words,
whereby men have their mouths full of Adultery, as well as their eyes, by
wanton looks.

Fornication and all uncleanness; Let it not be once named amongst you, says
Ephesians. 5.3, 4
Paul, as becomes Saints, neither filthiness, or obscentity. This is Saints
decency, not to name sin without detestation; not to take up the names of
idol-lusts no more than of Idol-gods into their lips. Psalm. 16.4.
It is a sin to speak of any sin, with delight, or without hatred and dislike.

3 The Second Table forbids also Tongue theft, by overreaching and defrauding
others, in bargaining or otherwise.

By guile of lips, flatteries.

By withholding due respect from others in titles or speech, whereby we rob
them of their honor, just praise, and good name. Render to all their dues,
says Romans 13.7.
Paul, that is, in word as well as in deed.

By denying pity and relief to others.

4 Tongue-slanders, -- by raising or spreading false reports of others, as many
did of Jer. 20.10
Jeremiah, who said, report, and we will report it.

By bearing false witness against others. By judging hardly of other men's

1 Sayings and doings; as Eli did of Hannahs moving her lips, when she prayed
in her heart only. Eli said to her, how long will thou be drunk? put away thy
wine from 1 Samuel 1.13, 14.
thee; and as they did of the Apostles, speaking diverse Languages, who mocking
said, These men are full of new Act. 2.13
wine.

2 Of other men's persons, as Jobs friends condemned him for unrighteous,
because he was so greatly afflicted, and the Barbarians did Paul, for a
murderer, when the viper came out of the fire and fastened on his hand, Act.
28.4.

Thus God has showed thee, O man, in his Law; what is good, and what the Lord
thy God requires thee to speak, and what he forbids thee to say.

Speak good and not evil.

II Profitableness of Speech. Ephesians. 4.29
Let your speech be profitable and useful, not vain and idle. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your mouth (says Paul) but that which is good, to
the use of edifying (or to edify profitably) that it may minister grace to the
Hearers. And in Ephesians. 5.3, 4. -- neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jestings, which are not convenient, but rather giving of thanks.

Our Speech should be profitable for four Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because vain speech proceeds from a vain mind, and is the badge of a
vain man. Scurrilous jests are the foam and froth of wit.

Though they seem to have the honey of mirth in their mouth, yet they really
carry a sting of grief and shame in their Tale; which they leave behind them,
sticking and pricking in men's Consciences.

Reas. 2. Because Christ says, that of every idle word ( viz. Mat. 12.36
which is frivolous and fruitless) that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment.

The Gospel (which is the Law of Liberty, by which Christians shall be judged)
gives no license to vain thoughts, or idle words: but all men must be
accountable to God for both, another day.

Reas 3. Because vain speech is the Language of strange Children, that is, of
such as are strangers to God and to his people, and to speaking by the rule of
Gods word.

David prayed to be delivered from the hand of strange Children, whose mouth
speaks Ps. 144.7, 8
vanity. Agur coupleth vanity and lies together, and makes the one a step to
the other Prove. 30.8
; Remove far from me vanity and lies. Its a sign and fruit of the death and
decay of Godly, faithful men, when they speak vanity every one with his Psalm
12.1, 2.
Neighbor.

Reas. 4. Because idle words, vain speech, etc. are not convenient, but
unbecomming the Saints, their prudence and gravity, seriousness and sanctity.
They are inconsistent with, yea, repugnant to the Excellency of their Tongues
and Speech. Prove. 10.20
The Tongue of the just is as choice silver, then all its words should be of
worth and value. Now idle words are dross, nothing worth, a hundred of them
are not worth a brass farthing. How unsuitable and ill-becomming are drossy
words to a silver Tongue. A wholesome Tongue is a tree of life Prove. 15.4.
, and a man's words are the fruit of the mouth.

Now a good Tree brings forth good fruit, says our Mat. 7.17
Savior. This is true of the tree in the mouth, (to wit, the Tongue) as well
as of the tree in the field. What are idle words but chaff, or worse?

How uncomely are chaffy words to a Tongue that is a tree of life?

The lips of knowledge are a precious Prove. 20.15
Jewel. Vain speeches are like pebbles and dust, which are unseemly to come out
of Jewellips.

Not only Ministers, but private Christians, Mat. 5.13
are the salt of the earth: therefore their speech must be seasoned with salt
of discretion Col. 4.6.
; that will preserve the mouth from vanity and idle words, (which are
altogether unsavory) and from putrefaction by them. For idle words may grow
into putrid speeches. Though words be accounted light, but as wind, yet a wise
man ought to order them so, as they may blow profit to some body. You say it is
an ill wind that blows no body profit, so that is an idle word, that is not
fit to do any good, or good to any.

Thirdly, Manner of Speech.
Have respect to the manner how ye speak. To this end, Let your speech be
always with grace, seasoned with salt Col. 4.6
Grace is that to speech which salt is to meat (and was to sacrifices) to make
it savory and wholesome; to preserve it from putrefaction. Our speech should
taste of grace, as meat does of salt. Salt feasoneth all things, so does grace;
it pouders and seasons heart and Tongue, the thoughts, affections, and
expressions. Hence we read not only of grace in the heart, Heb. 13.9. but of
grace in the lips also, Prove. 22.11. The words of a wise man's mouth are grace.
Eccl. 10.12 (...)
All the people wondered at the words of Grace which proceeded out of Christ's
mouth Luke 4.22
. When our speech is without grace, it wants seasoning, it does not relish well.

I commend to you seven Graces for your lips. ^ Graces of the Lips.
1 Fitness of speech. 2 Fewness of words. 3 Meekness. 4 Modesty. 5
Reverence. 6 Caution. 7 Constancy.


The first Grace is fitness of speech and rightnesse of Answers, to choose out
fit words, Fitness of Speech.
not only to express your minds, but fitted to the matter, persons and
occasion, spoken off or to; which are required to make up the due manner of
speech.

This grace of the Lips is a due observation of all circumstances, viz. time,
Place, and persons, and an accommodation and commensuration of speech
thereunto. Jobs friends spoke good words and excellent things, for matter; but
being not fitly applied to Jobs person and condition (for they mistook him as
if he had been an Hypocrite, by reason of his great afflictions) they failed
much in the manner of their speech. So their words proved Corrasives to Job,
which should have been Cordials, and they miserable comforters, who should have
been Physicians of great value; great revivings and refreshings to Job.

Right words (spoken plainly and directly, Right words are effectual.
to purpose) are effectual, comely and pleasant.

1 Effectual; for they hit the mark, light in the nick, and strike on the right
string. How forcible are right words? says Job Job 6.25.
, viz. to do great matters? Abigail by a few right words overcame great wrath
in David, when he and his men were upon their March to destroy Nabal 1 Samuel
25.24. 25, etc.
. The wise woman of Abel, by a few right words, she spoke to Joab, and to the
people, preserved the City 2 Samuel 20.16, 17, 22.
. Such were Christ's Answers, whereby he convinced and silenced them that put
captious Questions to him to ensnare and entangle him in his words, See John
8.7.9. Luc. 20.21. to 27. and cap. 14.1 to 7. Mat. 22.41. to the end.

Right words carry authority and efficacy in them; such a force, as none can
stand against; for they have the strength of Reason, wisdom, truth, and
righteousness in them; which are the sinews of invincible forces. Psalm. 19.8.
Heb. 4.12.
The word of the Lord is right, therefore quick and powerful, mighty in
operation, Right speech is excellent, Prove. 8.6. Right answers are mouth
stopping, heart-stabbing, conscience-convincing answers, they are unanswerable.

2 Comely.
They are comely, as great an ornament to the lips, as a well-shapen garment is
to the body, yea are as Jewels to the ear, a chain of gold, Gen 49.21
or pearl to the neck, or a gold-ring to the finger. Right answers are words
of beauty; They make the Lips like a thread of Scarlet, they are comely speech
Cant 4.3
. Words spoken awry, not fitted to the occasion, are like the Legs of a lame
man which are not equal, Prove. 26.7
and his going uneven and uncomely.

3 Pleasant.
Right words are pleasant. The words of the pure are words of pleasantness,
says Prove. 15.26
Solomon -- and pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and
health to the Prove. 16.24
bones. Right words will make you amiable and acceptable to others; and procure
favor, even with great ones. Grace in the Lips will make the King a man's
friend Prove. 22.11.
; what a grace to Joseph's lips, was his Interpretation of Pharoahs dreams? Genesis
41.38. etc
for which the King became his friend, and set him up to be second in the
Kingdom. For the Grace of Daniels Lips (through which did shine that wisdom
God had put into his heart) King Nebuchadnezzer made him a great man, Dan.
2.47, 48, Dan 5.11.
and gave him many great gifts -- and made him Master of the Magicians,
Astrologers, etc. Esther not only by the beauty of her looks, but by the grace
of her lips, obtained kindness of Hegai, King Ahasuerus his Chamberlain, Esth.
2.9. and the King loved her above all the Women, verse. 17. For the grace of
Abigails lips, 1 Samuel 25.33, 34, 39.
King David became her friend first, and afterward her Husband. For the grace
that was in the lips of the wise woman of Abel (when she gave advice to cut off
Sheba's head) Joab, 2 Samuel 20.22.
General over the Hosts of Israel, became a friend not only to her, but to that
whole City (when he besiedged it) to retire from it. Herod reverenced John for
the grace of his lips, as well as of his life. For he heard him gladly, and
did many things Mar. 6.20.
Christ loved the Scribe, who asked him which is the first Commandment of all,
when he saw that he answered discreetly Mar. 12.34.
.

This will make us hang on the lips of others, and hear them attentively, as
all the people did on Christ's Luke 19.48.
. Every man shall kiss his lips that answers right words, says the wise man
Prove. 24, 26.
, that is, shall give approbation and honor, and show affection to him. -- At
thy mouth shall all my people kiss, said Pharaoh to Joseph Genesis 41, 40.
, as a sign of love, honor and obedience; because his mouth spoke right
things. This occasions joy, both to our selves, (for, man has joy by the
answer of his mouth Prove. 15.23.
; when he returns a right answer) and to others also; for the Fathers heart
rejoices, yea his reigns, Pro. 23.15, 16.
when the sons lips speak right things.

The second grace of the speech is fewness of words, Fewness of words.
especially in ordinary discourse, except the matter, or occasion, or persons
require many, or there be need of more. Let your words be choice and few; to
utter much matter in a few words, to be solid and succinct in speech, for
brevit as grata, to be short is to be acceptable. This is a great grace and
ornament of speech. Wise sayings (which are full of matter in few words)
choice, short, pithy sentences are the cream and flower of speech. Pithy,
brevity compacting as many things as words together. Mr. Cotton.
Such were Solomon's Proverbs, and many of our Saviors speeches, and Paul's
Aphorisms, 1 These. 5.16. to 23, yea the Heathen excelled herein. Dr. Casaubon.
Pithy sayings and sentences (as a learned man says) were the best evidences
of every Nations wisdom. There was a time among the Grecians, when all wisdom
consisted in parables and sentences; and to be the Author of a wise saying,
was enough to purchase a man in the world both admiration and authority. Either
none but those of high rank and place, took upon themselves to speak sentences;
or if any others did, they were reputed persons of greatest honor. A sentence
and an oracle were then entertained almost with equal honor and reverence.

The excellency of the Schoolmen lies in this, and (as some think) this has
made their books more vendible and dearer than those of our Orthodox Divines,
to wit, their rational Disputes with distinct solidity, and succinct brevity.

Quest. Why should our words be few?

Reas. 1. Because, Verba valent usu sicut nummi, words are of force and account
in Use like money. Now as men will pay no more money than is due, no not a
farthing^ so we should speak (or spend) no more words than are due, or is
meet, upon any occasion; but husband our speech as we do our money. To this
end, we should weigh our words well, and deliver them forth by weight, rather
than by number.

Reas. 2 Because in the multitude of words there is folly, vanity, and iniquity.

1 Folly; for this is the character of a fool: A Fools voice is known by
multitude of words, says the Preacher Eccl^ chap. (...)
, and, A Fool is full of words, or multiplieth them. In multiloquio, stultilo^
quium, much speech argues little wit. It is a point of wisdom to speak no
waste nor superfluous words.

He that refraineth his. lips is wise; Prove. 10.19
he that speaks no oftener, and no more words than there is need of. It
argues excellency of spirit, to moderate speech, and to spare words,
(especially in anger) Prove. 17.27 verse. 28.
. Hence even a fool when he holds his peace, is counted wise. Whereas a
babbling fool proclaims his foolishness Prove. 12.2.
.

2 Vanity. In many words there are diverse vanities, says the Preacher Eccles.
5.^.
. As, the vanity of mis-spending breath and time, of beating the air, of tiring
the ear, of making the Tongue (which should be, like choice silver, precious)
as common as dross or dust, which God has designed to special use. The
vanity of lightness, rashness, and inconsiderateness. There is a variety of
vanity in many words, answerable to what is found in many dreams. In fond
babbling, as many vanities are to be found as in plain doting.

To make up that in number or repetition of words, which is wanting in weight
of matter (the practice of those that magnify their mouths above measure, and
love to hear themselves speak, conceiting they please others, because they
please themselves) this also is vanity. Of many long speeches it may be truly
said, that a little were too much. They that are full of words, are like those
Trees that are full of leaves, but bear little fruit, much chafe, little corn;
many evils arise of much speech. Therefore Licurgus made few Laws for the
Lacedaemonians, because they spoke little; for they did profess silence, and
were enemies to much speech.

3 Iniquity. In the multitude of words there wants not sin, says Solomon ^
Prove. 10.19.
; that is of rash, superfluous words; for in the multitude of pondered and
wel-sealoned words there wants not Grace. This Proverb directs us to a
Compendium of speech, pro re nata, as the matter does require. A vein of
speaking too much, causes speaking amiss, and venting of evil; and is
commonly attended and tainted with selfconceit, and vain glory, even in
speaking that which is good. Usually pride or passion sets the Tongue on work,
when it overfloweth with words. Therefore let your words be 1 Few to God. 2 Not
over many to men.


1 Few to God, in your addresses to him.

This is the Preachers Counsel Eccles. 5.2.
, Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty, to utter any
word before God (either in prayer or in vows) for God is in Heaven, and thou
upon earth, therefore let thy words be few. Do not over-word it in holy
duties, without sufficient matter, and suitable affections. When ye pray
(says our Savior Mat. 6.7.
) use not vain repetitions; that is, idle Tautologies, needless and heartlesse
multiplying of words; for so do the Heathen, who think to be heard for their
much speaking. Not that all ingeminations or repetitions are unlawful; for
there may be good use of them, both in prayer, to express earnestness of
affection, and also in preaching, and in conference, to make the people
understand and remember better, and to cause a deeper impression in them. But
they are idle (as one fitly expresses it) when men's words exceed their matter,
or both words and matter exceed their attention and affection. A man may pray
much, yet speak little, if fervent in spirit, as did the Publican.

2 Let not your words be over many to men, Prove. 23.2.
but rather serious and short. Avoid loquacity. As ye should put a knife to
your throat, if ye be given to appetite; so put a bridle into your mouth, if
ye be given to much talking. For the babbling of the tongue is like the
turning of a Cistern Cock; and the overflowing of words causes a current of
sin. Who has woe? who has babbling? vain frivolous talk? They that tarry long
at the wine, says the wise man Prove. 23.29, 30.
. Overdrinking produces over-talking. A babbler is no better than a Serpent,
that will bite the passenger, Eccles. 10.11.
if uncharm'd.

Reas. 3 Because an open mouth bewrays an empty, frothy heart, as an open
Vessel argues the commonnesse of the liquor that is in it. When a Chest stands
wide open, we conclude there is no silver nor gold in it. We keep our Coffers
locked, wherein we lay up our Rings, Jewels, and precious things; we keep the
mouths of pots and glasses (that have sweet or strong waters in them) close
stopped, lest the giving of them full vent, should let out, or diminish the
virtue of them. When the heart has a good Treasure in it, the mouth is kept
under lock and key; and will not lavish out words prodigally, to no purpose;
but lay them out frugally to the profit of others. When the Tongue speaks
without stint or restraint (quicquid in buccam venerit) the heart is common,
vain and vile.

The third Grace f the lips is Meekness and Humility, Meekness.
1 Pet. 3.15.
without pride, Ostentation or harshnesse. Be ready, says Peter, to give an
answer to every man, Tit. 3.1, 2.
etc. with meekness and fear. Put them in mind (says Paul to Titus) tospeak
evil of no man, to be no Brawlers but gentle, showing all meekness unto all
men; to wit, in word, as well as in deed. Meek and kind language purchases
good Will, and a good Name.

Reas. 1 Because Meekness makes both the Tongue and the words soft; dips them
both in oil.

1 The Tongue; and a soft Tongue breaks the bone Prove. 25.15.
, that is, peirceth and convinces, persuades and overcomes an angry,
implacable heart; a stout, stern spirit, which else would not buckle.

2 The Words; and a soft answer turns away wrath Prove. 15.1.
. As Abigails mild and meek answer diverted David's rage and resolution to kill
Nabal. Gideons gentle speech allayed the sharp chiding of the Ephraimites Judge
8.1, 2, 3.
, -- Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that.

Hard to hard (as the saying is) will never do. Hard speeches cannot break or
mollify hard hearts. Grievous words stir up anger; they add oil to the flame.
Soft words cast water upon it to quench it. Be courteous, or affable, says
Peter 1 Pet. 3.8, 9.
, not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing; but contrariwise,
blessing. Its water, not fire, that can put out fire, nor dirt, that can wash
off dirt. Soft words and hard arguments (proceeding from meekness of wisdom)
do convince and persuade powerfully.

Reas. 2 Because pride in the mouth is a rod to strike others; wherewith the
fool lays about him like a mad man; Prove: 14.3.
In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride, says the wise man. Such at
length shall be beaten with their own rod; for their own Tongue shall fall
upon them. A fools lips enter into contention Pro. 18.6.
, and his mouth calls for strokes. The Lord will cut off the Tongue that
speaks proud things Psalm. 12.3.
.

Though the Tongue be but a little member, yet it boasts great things, says
James Jam. 3.5.
. Boasting is the usual sin of the Tongue; and the Tongue is ordinarily the
Servant of pride. Therefore Hannah said to her adversary, who insulted over her
for her barrenness; Talk no more so exceeding proudly, let not arrogance
proceed out of your mouth 1 Samuel 2.3.
.

Reas. 3 Roughness or harshnesse of speech is an uncomlinesse, ill beseeming
the mouth, either of a great or good man. Nabals churlish answer to David's
Servants had like to have cost him his life. King Rehoboam by answering the
people roughly lost ten Tribes 1 King. 12.13, 16.
.

Harsh, uneven speech proceeds from a rough, unhewn spirit. Let the rich take
heed they do not answer the poor roughly, when he uses entreaties Prove. 18.23.
. To affect Masterfullness of speech, or speaking in an imperious, commanding
way, is to be a servant to pride and passion.

Reas. 4 Because meekness was the grace of Christ's lips. For he did not
strive, nor cry, nor did any man hear his voice in the streets Mat. 12.19.
, viz. in way of Contention, Ambition, Ostentation, Perturbation, or Clamor;
but he ever spoke meekly and mildly; yea, even to his enemies; to Judas that
betrayed him; to his apprehenders, accusers, condemners, and crucifiers. When
he was reviled, 1 Pet. 2.23. with 21.
he reviled not again. When he suffered, he threatened not.

The grace of meekness was poured into his lips; his mouth was ever full of it.
And he has left us an example of meekness in spirit and in speech, that we
should follow his steps, Mat. 11.29.
and learn it of him.

Meek speech is the Lambs blea, but bitterness and clamor is the Lions roar.
With meekness join Courtesy and kindness, which is an ornament to the lips.
In the virtuous woman's Tongue is the Law of kindness. Prove. 31.26


The Tongue anointed with the virtue of kindness and courtesy, will cure
distempers in others, and draw kindness from them.

A Mouth full of kindness is like a Comb full of honey, then the lips are
like Lillies dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

The Fourth grace of speech is Modesty, Modesty.
which is the Tincture of virtue upon the Tongue, and keeps the Mouth clean.

This Discovers it self,

1 In not speaking of filthy actions at all, or at least, not without great
loathing. Fornication and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not be
once named amongst you, says Paul Ephesians. 5.3, 4
, neither filthiness. This is modesty and Saintdecency. Verse. 12.
For it is a shame even to speak of those things which are done by Sinners in
secret.

To take liberty to speak filthily, is the practice of a people of unclean
lips. Isaiah bewailed his condition to live among such ^sa. 6.5.
, Woe is me, I dwell amongst a people of unclean Lips. Filthy lusts in the
heart taint the Tongue with filthy speeches, and both are polluted by Satan,
the unclean spirit, Mat. 12.43.
that delights in filthiness.

2 In speaking of (res pudendae) such things as are lawful, but secret, and
cause blushing, and should be concealed.

Observe the modesty of Scripture-phrases, or manner of speaking of such
things; as, concerning the use of marriage, Genesis 4.1
Adam knew his wife. I will go in to my wife into the Chamber said Sampson
Judge. 15.1.
.

The Holy Ghost forbids committing uncleanness, under the expression of
uncovering Lev. 18.8. etc.
nakedness. So concerning the natural evacuation of the body; Saul went in, to
cover his 1 Samuel 24.3. D^ut. 23.13
feet; that is, to do his easement. The Scripture calls it a sitting down.

3 In speaking of others faults and infirmities; covering and concealing them,
till Gods Providence puts us upon speaking of them. (When Cham had seen his
Fathers nakedness, Genesis 9.22
he told his two Brethren without; which procured a curse) extenuating and
excusing them, (either for fact, manner or intent) what we can in truth and
charity, not aggravating the same.

4 In speaking of our selves, our own virtues or praises. We should not
commend our selves, for that properly belongs to others. Let another man
praise thee (says Solomon) and not thine own mouth, Prove. 27.2.
a stranger and not thine own Lips. Modesty forbids the same. When Paul related
his extraordinary Revelations, he speaks of himself, as of another person 2
Cor. 12.2
; I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, etc. So did John. 19.26
John. When Jesus saw his Mother and the Disciple whom he loved (that was
himself) standing by, he says to his Mother, woman, behold thy Son.

When we speak of the good we have or do, or of any thing that tends to our
own praise, we should be very sparing therein, and speak rather far short,
or much too little, than a little over, or too much. So did Ephesians. 3.8
Paul, unto me who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace given;
1 Cor. 15.9
and -- I am the least of the Apostles, that am not meet to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God.

Modesty sets bounds to speech in matters that tend to self-praise. Except the
vindication of our innocence, of Gods Truth and glory require the same.

A man's praise smells sweet when it comes out of other men's mouths; but it
stinks in his own mouth.

Self-commendation is stinking breath; but when we have occasion to speak of
our own corruptions, we have free liberty to be large therein. But more of this
afterward.

The fifth Grace of Speech is, Reverence.
Reverence to God and Man.

1 To God, To God.
to speak highly and honorably of God, his Titles and Attributes, with holy
awe and reverential fear, debasing and vilifying our selves, before him; as
Abraham did -- Genesis 18.27
, Behold now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, who am but dust and
ashes. -- and Moses Exodus 15.11.
,

Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises, doing wonders. So reverently spoke John Baptist of Mar. 1.7.
Christ, He^is mightier than I, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to
stoop down and unloose.

To this end, let us consider Gods heavenly greatness, and our earthly
vileness, to make us speak to him and of him with holy reverence, as Christ
directs us to conceive and to say, Mat. 6.9.
Our Father which art in Heaven. All our words of God should be pointed and
accented with reverence to God. This is grace to the Lips, and glory to the
Tongue.

2 To Man.
Reverence to man. Give men their proper titles, just praises, and civil
respects, in word, as well as in gesture; which is due to them, upon a
Gospel-account. Paul says, Romans 13.7.
Render to all their dues -- fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, and --
in honor prefer one another Romans 12.10
. Pe^er says, Honor all men 1 Pet. 2.17.
; which stands not only in inward esteem, but in outward Expression thereof,
both in word and deed, to men, for the image of God, and for their superiority
in parts, or rank, or age.

This was the practice of the Saints in the times of both the Testaments.
Abraham's servant called him Master, Genesis 24.
no less than two and twenty times in Genesis 24. and the same Title he gave to
Isaac. Verse. 65
Sarah obeyed Abraham and called him Lord, ^ Pet. 3.6 Genesis 33.13, 14
for which she is commended in the New Testament. Jacob called his brother Esau,
Lord.

Not only Elisha called his Parents, 1 King. 19.20
and David his 1 Samuel 22.3. My Father, and my Mother. ^ King. 2.12
But Elisha a Junior Prophet, called Elijah a Senior (who was also his Master) My
Father. Joash King of Israel did the like, ^ King. 13.14.
as a Token of love and reverence to this good Prophet, when he lay a dying.

In the New Testament the giving of titles of Father and Master is employed,
when duties to them under these names are enjoined; for, cui competit natura,
competit nomen. They that have the nature or Relation of Fathers or Masters, to
them of due belong the Names thereof. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, Ephesians. 6.2
and, Servants obey your Masters, according to the flesh Verse. 5 1 Timothy 6.1.
. Therefore they ought to call them so.

Yea, upon a Gospel-account, we may call those Ministers Fathers, whom God has
used as instruments for our Regeneration. Though ye have ten thousand
Instructors in Christ, says Paul, yet not many Fathers, for I have begotten
you through the Gospel, 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19
My little Children, says he to the Galatians. They might call him their
Father upon the same account that he calls them his Children.

Paul and Silas did not prohibit the Jailer to call them Sirs, (...), Act.
16.30.
the word signifies Masters or Lords. Luke calls him, Luc. 1.3.
most Excellent Theophilus, to whom he writ his Gospel. John calls her, the
Elect Lady, to whom he writ his second Epistle. Paul calls the Heathen
Governor, most Noble Festus, Act. 26.25
which were titles more honorable than ordinary, than Master. Men, Brethren,
and Fathers, was Stephens compellation, when he made his defense before the
Council Act. 7.2
; and Paul's, when he spoke to the people Act. 22.1.
. How are they deluded who deny all reverence and civil respects, to others,
even to all sorts of superiors, in Titles, and speech, as well as in Gestures?
Phil. 4.8.
which is not lovely, nor comely, nor matter of good report among Christians,
no nor among Heathens.

Obj. Does not Christ say Mat. 23.8, 9.19.
, call no man your Father upon the Earth, neither be ye called Masters?

Answ. Our Savior forbids not the expression of civil respect, giving of the
Titles of natural or civil relations to others, as Fathers and Masters; for
then the Apostle should sin in calling them so. (...)
But he prohibits them here in that sense only in which they were given to
the leading-men of the Pharisees, (Those which sat in Moses chair, verse 2. of
that Chapter,) namely, as they respected matters of Faith or Doctrine; for upon
this account, were such men called Fathers and Masters, viz. that they were
Authors and enjoyners of the Pharisaical Religion.

1 Masters, or Leaders rather; for (...) (in the place alleged rendered
Master,) is of the same import with (...) diverse times applied to the
Pharisees in Scripture, as Mat. 23.16.24. Romans 2.19. and denotes the Leader of
a way, or the same with (...) Act. 24.5
, The Chieftain or Master of a Sect; a Dictator of Religion, upon whose
authority the Faith of his Followers depends.

2 Fathers, for their Dictates are called the Traditions Gal. 1.14
, and the Law of the Fathers Act. 22.3
. So peremptory were their injunctions, that it was not lawful to contradict or
disobey them yea, by their commandments they disanulled Gods. Mark 7.7, 8, 9.
etc.


The meaning then of the place objected must be this.

Verse. 8. and verse. 10. Be ye not called Rabb^, 2 Cor. 1.24
nor Masters; that is, be not Lords over the faith of others, to exercise
dominion therein, or to impose things upon men, in doctrine or in practice, by
your own or any man's authority. Neither expect ye that others should take up
things on trust from you, without due search into the truth thereof.

Do not ambitiously affect Titles, for herein the Pharisees discovered their
pride and folly.

Ver. 9. Call no man your Father upon the earth] that is, Let no man be the
Commander of your faith, by whom it should be wholly swayed, as a Child by its
Parents. Receive no Doctrine upon trust from any; but search the Scriptures
daily (as the Noble Bereans did) to try the truth of what is delivered. Act.
17.11
Pin your Faith upon no man's sleeve. Do not attribute too much to men in such
matters (either for their parts or pains) for that's a derogating from God.

The Sum of all is, neither affect your selves, nor give to any other
absolute belief and observance; for this is due to God alone, who only in this
sense, is your Father and Master.

Reverence to God and Man well beseems the Mouth of one that fears God and
reverenceth man. The unjust judge did neither; Luc. 18 4.
therefore he had no grace in his Lips nor in his Heart. Be ready always
(faith 1 Pet. 3.15
Peter) to give an answer to every man that as keth you a reason of the hope
that is in you, with meekness and fear, that is, with fear of God, and
reverence to man.

The sixth Grace of Speech is Caution; Caution.
to be so watchful over our spirits and ways, and over all occurrences, as we
be not surprised or distempered by them; and to speak so warily and advisedly,
as

1 Not to give offense to others, 1 Cor. 5.12 and 10.32. Phil. 2.15
whether they are within or without. Christians should be harmless and
blameless, without rebuke, viz. in word as well as in deed.

2 Not to give advantage to others against us, to entrap us in our words.
Christ was so cautelous in his Speech, as none that ever came to cavil or
catch, could get any matter against him. The lips of the wise shall preserve
them Prove. 14.3.
; from giving occasion of exceptions, aspersions, or ensnarements.

3 Yea, So warily, as if all were to be written which we say. It is observed,
that some of the Heathen thought it convenient and commodious, that men's
speeches at meals, and such like meetings, should be written. If those that
profess themselves Christians should do so, what strange kind of books would
there be.

The seventh and last grace of speech, is Constancy and steadfastness. ^
Constancy.
As a man should tread sure that he may not slip: so speak firmly that he may
not alter his words or say and unsay, or be fickle in speech, and in several
tales, so as no hold can be had of his words. This levity and Inconstancy of
speech is a disgrace to the Mouth, to the Mind, and to the man that ownes them.
2 Cor. 1.17.
Did I use lightness (says Paul) or the things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the flesh, that with me there should be yea, Verse. 18, 19
yea, and nay, nay? -- Our word toward you was not Yea, and Nay -- but in him
was yea. Paul was steadfast and constant in his words, with him there was nor
yea and nay concerning the same thing, but his speech of it was ever the same.
His Yea was always yea, and his Nay, nay. Not yea at one time, and nay at
another. The Jews have a Proverb. The Just man's yea is yea, and his nay, nay;
not now yea, and anon nay, as theirs is, who are light and inconstant in their
speech (and spirits) who will change their minds, and turn their Tongues on a
sudden and affirm and deny with a breath. A false witness shall perish, Prove.
21.28
(says Solomon) but the man that hears, speaks constantly. The true
witness that speaks no more than he hears, his testimony is ever the same,
he varieth not in it. So Paul was always in the same story in his Apologies,
viz. to the Chief-Captain, to Felix, Tit. 3.8
to Festus, and to Agrippa. These things, says he to Titus, I will that thou
affirm constantly. Christians should be steadfast and immovable, as in their
works, so in their words.

Fourthly, IV Season. Eccle. 3.7
Have respect to the season when you speak. For there is a time to keep
silence, and a time to speak. I will show you some special-seasons of both.

I. The seasons of silence.

1 When we are afflicted by God. This is Silence from murmuring. When Nadab
and Abihu were burnt by fire from the Lord, then Aaron their Father held his
peace, Lev. 10.3. I was dumb, Psalm. 39.9
says David (when Gods hand was heavy upon him,) and opened not my mouth,
because thou did it. The yoke of affliction must be born with silence Lam.
3.27, 28
. God puts us to silence when he gives us the waters of gall to Jer. 8.14.
drink.

2. When we are injured by men. This is silence from reviling or revenge. Its
probable Moses held his peace, Numb. 12.1. to 10
and put up the wrong when Aaron and Miriam spoke against him: therefore the
Lord spoke for him, and reproved them. When David's enemies spoke mischievous
things against him, etc. But I, says he, as a deaf man heard not, I was as a
dumb man that opens not his mouth Psalm. 38.12, 13, 14.
. Our Savior was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the
Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth Isa. 53.7
; -- when he was reviled he reviled not again 1 Pet. 2.23
. Answer not a Fool according to his Folly, says the wiseman Prove. 26.4
, that is, do not rage, revile, or speak idly as he does, lest thou be like
or equal unto him. For the answer a man gives another, is the picture or
measure of himself. A foolish answer shows a foolish man. The best answer to
a fool in such a case is silence.

3 When the times are perilous and men watch for iniquity, Isa. 29.20, 21
and make a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproves
in the Gate; that is, in public; both for Magistrate and Minister, to bring
them into trouble for their slips and failings in speech; or by wresting and
misconstruing their words, When what we speak is like to prove a snare to us.
This silence is forbearance to speak, at least, out or broad, except we be
called thereto.

The prudent shall keep silence in that time, Amos. 5.12, 13.
for it is an evil time. Then he that keeps his Tongue keeps his life. Micah's
counsel seems to refer to such times wherein men are like briars and thorns
catching (at others words) scratching and pricking them, Mic^h 7.4.
if they get hold or advantage against them. Then, trust ye not in a friend,
Verse. 7.
put ye not confidence in a guide: keep the door of thy mouth from her that
lies in thy bosom.

When others watch for our words to pick out of them matter against us, or ask
us tempting, ensnaring questions, silence may be in season for us. In this
case our Savior was sometimes silent, and gave no answer; as, when he was
accused before the High Priest and Pilate, Mar. 15.3, 4, 5. and 14.60.61.
and they earnestly provoked him to speak for himself, yet he would say
nothing, which made them wonder.

4 When the wicked are before us, who will scoff, and scorn, and reject what
we say? and we have no hope of doing them good thereby, but fear they will be
worse. This silence is a forbearance to instruct, reprove, or relate our
condition before such. I will keep my mouth as with a bridle, says David Psalm.
39.1.
, while the wicked is before me; that is, I will be silent, and not speak of
my calamity before them, lest they rejoice at it, and reproach me for it.

To reprove and admonish obstinate sinners, who will profane, but never profit
by holy things, is to cast pearls before swine, who will trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rend you; and to cast holy things to Dogs, who
will knarle at them, and bark and bite you for them. 2 King. 18.36.
King Hezekiah commanded his people to be silent, and not to answer a word to
Rabshekah's flatteries, or blasphemies. Christ notwithstanding his ability of
speech, and the efficacy of his words; in the presence of wicked men, kept
silence from good words.

Herod questioned with him in many words, Luke 23.9.
but Christ answered him nothing. He had no hope of doing him any good, and he
would not satisfy his curiosity. Upon this account we are forbidden to
reprove a scorner, because he will hate us, and be never the better Prove 9.7,
8.
, or to speak in the ears of a fool (that is wilful and obstinate) for he will
be no wiser, but despise the wisdom of our words Prove. 23.9.
, This is to offer light to the blind, or speech to the deaf. Ephraim is joined
to Idols, says God, let him alone Hos. 4.17.
, do not speak to him, it will do him no good.

5 When we are angry, and our spirits are distempered. Passion is no season
for speech, as appears in Moses, Jonah and others. Passion as one says is a
bad counselor, and as ill a speaker. Oh! that we were so much Masters over our
Tongues, as not to speak when we are angry. For we are prone at such a time
to speak rashly and unadvisedly; to speak over; to say unto our Brother, Racha
or Thou Fool; both which Gods Law (as Christ expounds it) prohibits Mat. 5.22.
.

A Christian should have a calm of meekness upon his heart, when he has a
storm of reproof in his mouth.

Let me add, It is a season to keep silence when the persons to be spoken
to, are in a distemper of heart or head, through passion, distraction or
drunkenness. Abigail told Nabal nothing, more or less, when he was drunk, 2 Samuel 25.36, 37.
until the morning when he had slept out his wine. Words are lost when spent
upon such as are incapable, or indisposed to receive them. Christ had many
things to say unto his Disciples, which he deferred to declare unto them,
until they could bear them Joh. 16.12.
.

6 When those speak, who are above us in age, gifts, grace, or authority. Unto
me men gave ear (says Job) and waited, Job 29.21, 22.
and kept silence at my counsel; after my words, they spoke not again, and my
speech dropped on them. Elihu because he was young, and Job, and his three
friends were all elder than he, therefore he kept silence as long as Job or
any of his friends had any thing to say Job 32.4. to 8.
. I am young, and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid, Verse. 6.
and durst not show you mine opinion. I said days should speak and multitude
of years should teach wisdom. Verse. 7.
See that phrase, of laying the hand on the mouth in such a case, Job. 29.9,
10. Judge. 18.19.

7 When we hear reproofs for our miscarriages; we should drink them in, as the
earth does rain, and bring forth the fruits thereof in amendment.

Its a fit season then to be silent, especially for Servants, when their
masters tell them of their faults. They should not answer again Tit. 2.9.
, but hold their peace, and mend their faults.

8 The last season of silence, is, when we are ignorant of the matters spoken
of; or they are above our reach; or they are such things as do not concern us:
(we should not be busiebodies with our Tongues, no more than with our hands in
other men's matters) or they be secrets, our own or others.

In these cases silence would better become our mouths than speech, as it
would have done theirs, who desired to be teachers of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.7.
yet understood neither what they said, nor whereof they affirmed.

Now its good to keep silence in the seasons thereof, Reasons for Silence.
for three Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because silence prepares for audience, and for learning what others
teach us either in public or in private. Then all the multitude kept silence,
Act. 15.12.
and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul, (that is, held their peace, to hearken
attentively) when they declared what miracles and wonders God had wrought among
the Gentiles by them. Paul's Rule holds true for men, as well as for women, Let
the Women learn in silence 1 Timothy 2.11.
, and so the man, Let both be silent, that they may learn. Eliphaz Job 4.16,
17.
stood still, and was silent, waiting to hear what should be spoken to him by
the spirit, then he heard a voice, saying, Shall mortal man be more just than
God?

Reas. 2 Because silence is a semblance of wisdom. Even a fool when he
holds his peace is counted wise Prove. 17.28.
, and he that shuts his lips is esteemed a man of understanding. Eloquere ut
te videam.
For speech discovers what men are. Fools would discover their ignorance,
folly and weakness, if they speak; which is covered by their silence. O that
you would altogether hold your peace, Job 13.5.
and it should be your wisdom, was the speech of Job to his friends.

Reas. 3 Because silence in its season is a grace to the lips, as well as
speech; and there is beauty in the one, as well as in the other. Gods word
teaches us the Art both of silence and of speech.

There is wisdom in keeping silence as in speaking. He that refraineth his
lips is wise, says Solomon Prove. 10.19
; -- and, A fool utters all his mind, but a wise man keeps it in till
afterward Prove. 29.11
. Till then is a time of silence. It is a true saying, he knows not how to
speak, who knows not how to hold his peace. If we speak when we should hold
our peace, then speech is our folly.

So much of the Seasons of silence.

2 Now follow the seasons of Speech; The seasons of Speech.
when its time to speak, I will name four.

First, when we are called to speak by God or man, 1 Pet. 3.15. when we are
stirred up in our spirits to speak, provided we keep within the compass of our
Callings therein, and do not stretch our selves beyond our line, let private
persons take heed how they undertake to speak publicly; or usurp the place of
Magistrate or Minister. They may question whence such a motion proceeds,
whether from Pride, passion, Envy, Bitter Zeal, or a mis-guided spirit, rather
than from the good Spirit of God, who is the God of Order, not of Confusion;
what men speak out of their place is spoken out of season.

Second Season, (...).
when God gives us the door of utterance, ability, freedom and boldness of
speech, which is a great grace to our Lips, when our words flow freely from us,
as water out of a Fountain, and fly swiftly, like arrows out of a bow. Ephesians.
6.19.
Paul begged the Ephesians prayers to God, to obtain this grace of Speech for
him; -- for me that utterance may be given me, that I may open my mouth
boldly.

Third Season; When an opportunity is given of speaking for the glory of God,
or for the good of Men.

1 For the Glory of God, as to defend his truth, plead his cause, advance
righteousness, and to disgrace, and suppress sin; to own God in the
particular dispensations of his providence, and to give him the praise of them,
whether mercies or judgments. To this end, turn your Tongues to Gods
Providence.

1 To sing praises for mercies, as the Jews did; When God turned again the
Captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.1, 2
then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our Tongue with singing. Then
said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them. When the
heart rejoices, the Tongue is glad Act. 2.26
, or the glory rejoices Psalm. 16.9
to glorify God.

2 To make Lamentation for miseries; so the Jews in Babylon did sigh, weep and
lament the miseries of Sion, but could not sing the Lords Song in a strange
land.

2 For the good of men, Psalm. 137.1, 4
as

1 To instruct the ignorant.

2 To reprove the disorderly. In this case Answer a Fool according to his
folly, Prove. 26.5
least he be wise in his own conceit. Stop his mouth by reproof. Stone him (as
one says) with soft words and hard Arguments.

3 To comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

4 To resolve the doubtful.

5 To reduce the Erroneous Jam. 5.20.
.

6 To Stablish the wavering, Act. 14.22.

7 To vindicate the Slandered.

8 To deliver the persecuted, Act. 12.5
as the Church did Peter out of prison, by their Prayers.

9 To help them to right that suffer wrong. To this end, we should speak for
them,

1 Who cannot speak for themselves, Prove. 31.8
open thy mouth for the dumb.

2 Who if they do speak, may not be heard. Prove. 31.9. and 24.11, 12
Open thy mouth, plead the cause of the poor and needy.

10 To procure and promote Sions Isa. 62.1, 6
welfare.

All these are fit occasions to speak on, and fit Seasons to speak in. And by
not speaking then, we betray the cause of God, the good of others, the credit
of the Gospel, and the conscience of our duty. Then silence is our sin and our
shame.

Fourth Season of Speech is, when the persons to be spoken too, are attentive,
willing to hear, and in a readiness or capacity to receive our words, as the
people did Jobs; Job 29.23
They waited for me (to hear me speak) and they opened their mouth wide ( i.
e. gaped for my words) as for the latter rain. Jobs speech was then in season.
When they, to whom we speak, seem to have an obedient ear, to take in that
Counsel, comfort or reproof we give forth to them, and to be wrought upon
thereby, and appear to be as metal melted, fit to be new molded; as iron
heated, fit to be hammered; as hungry, empty bellies, fit to be filled and fed.
In this posture Christ found the Woman of Samaria, John 4.
therefore he spoke to her many things.

Our Speech should be in season for three Reasons.

Reas. 1. There is beauty and sweetness therein. Ecel. 3.11
For God has made every thing beautiful in his time, that is, in the season
God appointed to it, every word, as well as every work. Silence in its season,
and speech in its season. Such are words of Delight, which the Preacher sought
to find out Eccl. 12.10
.

A word fitly spoken (says Solomon) that is, for time, as well as for place,
or persons, is like apples of gold in pictures of silver. Some think, it was a
kind of ornament used in those days; or, that golden Apples were set in silver
Cases or Dishes, so as the one did grace and let out the other. Gold and Silver
are precious metals. Apples and pictures are pleasant to the eye, lovely to
look upon. Apples are also sweet to the mouth. Words are the pictures of the
mind, drawn with the pencil of the Tongue; and the apples of the mouth are the
fruits of the lips. Good words spoken in season are precious and pleasant,
sweet and amiable; gold for their worth, framed (as one has it) to silver-like
opportunities. Herewith the Spouse craves to be comforted, Cant. 2.5
Comfort me with Apples; for the savor of these apples, (that is, of good
seasonable words) greatly refresh Languishing fouls that are sick of love to
Christ. Christ commends the smell of the Churches Nose (or mouth) her sweet
breath to be like apples for their redolency and fragrancy in the season of
them. Cant. 7.
Apples have a delightful breath or smell. Words inseason are like the apples
of Eden, that grow upon the Tree of Life, for, a wholesome Tongue is a Tree of
Life; Prove. 15.4
and the fruit of the righteous is a Tree of Life Prove. 11.30
; and seasonable words are a part of that fruit. They are like flowers in the
Spring, fresh and fair in their colors, (exceeding Solomon in his Glory) sweet
and pleasant in their Smell. Words spoken out of season are like withered
flowers, without color and smell. To keep Time in Music, makes it melodious;
to strike and stop every string, and sing every note in due season. So words
spoken in season are Music and melody in the ears of those that hear them.

Reas. 2. There is efficacy and acceptablenesse therein. Prove. 15.23
A word spoken in due season how good is it? how profitable and effectual? how
welcome and acceptable? even as rain in season, how does it refresh the earth,
and make it fruitful? Its as meat in season, which nourishes and satisfies
all living Creatures Ps. 145.15, 16
; as fruit in due season, (which God has promised the righteous shall bring
forth Psa. 1.3.) fully ripe, savoury and wholesome, yea, as a Coach upon the
wheels, for the words run thus in the Original, A word spoken upon his
wheels Prove. 25.11
; it moves easily and swiftly, goes smoothly and roundly away like a
Triumphant Chariot; being oiled with the fitness of the season, wherein it is
spoken, Abigals speech to David, and the wise woman of Abel's speech to Joab,
how good were they, being spoken upon the wheels, to save Nabals life, and the
City of Abel?

1 Words spoken out of season, are like a Cart without wheels, or like
Pharaohs Chariots, when the wheels were taken off; which made them go heavily;
They are uncomely and uncommodious, as snow in summer, and as rain in harvest,
which does hurt. The same words spoken at one time ( scil. in season) would be
butter and honey, yea kisses, which spoken at another time ( viz. out of
season) may prove wormwood and gall, yea stabs.

Reas. 3. There is art and expertness therein. It requires great wisdom and
skill to circumstantiate words well, or to fit them to time and place, etc. to
discern the opportunity of a speech.

It is a parcel of Tongue-skill or learning, to time a word well, as to time
notes and strokes in Music. Isa. 50.4.
God has given me, (says the Prophet Isaiah, and to Christ much more) the
Tongue of the learned (that is, a well-skild Tongue) that I should know how to
speak a word in season, or (how to time or season a word) to him that is weary.
If we speak not when we ought, then silence is our folly. Opportunity is the
quintessence of time, for speaking, as well as for acting.

Fifthly and Lastly, Have respect to the End why you speak; The end of Speech.
let that be pure and sincere, to wit, Gods glory. Others good.


As the Occasions that have in them a tendency hereunto are an opportunity of
Speech; So a fixed intention or aim at these two, is the right end of Speech.

1 Gods glory, whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, says Paul --
So, 1 Cor. 10.31.
whether ye keep silence or speak, or whatsoever ye say, say all to the glory
of God. To this end, account your Tongues your glory, as David; not to trumpet
your own excellencies or praises, but to declare the Majesty, and glory, and
honor of God.

2 Others good, for their instruction, Reprehension, Consolation, Direction,
Confirmation, Reduction, Resolution, Vindication Satisfaction.

Keep these, as the mark in your eye to take aim at, in what ye speak, as to
man, according to the Apostles Rule, which should be followed both in the
intention and execution of our Speech.

Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, Ephesians. 4.29.
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to
the Hearers.

Let your ends in speaking ever be to bring glory to God, and to do good to
others.

The Tongue is an useful instrument,

1 For Healing, Prove. 12.18 -- the tongue of the wise is health. (...)
Signifies a medicine or healing. So it is rendered in Prove. 4.22. A wise godly
man has an Apothecaries shop in his mouth, and healing Medicines therein, of
all sorts; for the cure of all kinds of distempers and diseases in the Spirits,
speeches, and carriage of others; And the time of speaking is a time of
healing, like Spring, and Fall, to give physic in. A holy Tongue has a
healing property to lick the sores of others whole; It has in it the Balm of
Gilead to heal wounds; and the Oil of gladness, to ease pains. A wholesome
Tongue (or the healing of the tongue) is a Tree of life, Prove. 15.4.
says Solomon, it cures blindness, by instruction; Corruption by
Reprehension; and Sadness, by Consolation; Hardness, by Lenitive; and
deadness, by Corrasive arguments. A charitable Tongue is medicinable to lick
others whole, who have been lashed sore with Scorpion Tongues.

2 For Feeding -- The lips of the Righteous feed many, says Solomon Prove.
10.21.
; Christians should have meat in their mouths to feed others (with wholesome
counsel, comfort, and the like) as Doves do one another, Thy lips, O my Spouse,
drop as the honeycomb, says Christ Cant. 4.11.
, honey and milk are under thy Tongue. These two were the blessings of Canaan,
and are the fruits of a godly man's mouth, to feed others with, both for
nourishment and delight. His lips are full of Hospitality, or a free Table
furnished with the dainties of heavenly, grace-ministring, Soul-nourishing
words. A godly man has a Dole of grace at the door of his mouth as well as of
Alms at the door of his house. Its bad and sad beyond expression to abuse the
Tongue, or not to use it to good ends and purposes. To propound a good end in
all we speak, is a means to order our words aright, to attain the same, and to
put our Tongues always to good use: As, to consider the end of our actions, is
the way not to do amiss.

The Third Rule.

Commit your Tongues (as well as your heads or hearts) into Gods hands, Rule.
to guide them aright, and to keep them from evil.

Reas. Because God is the Tongues maker (as he said to Moses Exodus 4.11.
who has made man's mouth? or who makes the dumb, or deaf, etc? have not I the
Lord?) and the Tongues Master, to, 1 Command it. 2 Guide it. 3 Keep it. 4 Purge
it. 5 Prosper it.

1 God is Lord over the Tongue to command it, to speak or to keep silence. His
Law binds our Tongues (as well as our hands) to obedience; and we must yield
subjection to God in the one as well as in the other. Our lips are not our own,
to use as we list, Psalm. 12.4.
but they are Gods who is Lord over us. God keeps the key of man's mouth, and
his hand opens and shuts it at his pleasure, as he did Ezekiels mouth,
cap. 3 26, 27. and cap. 33.22. and Daniels mouth, cap. 10, 15, 16. Luke 1.20.
Thus God shut Zacharias his mouth for his unbeleef, and opened it again, verse.
64.

If God open the mouth none can shut it, as he did the mouths of his Prophets;
Nations and kingdoms could not stop them, and of Christ's Apostles, neither
Imprisonment, nor the Councils command of silence, could make them hold their
peace; we cannot but speak (said Peter and John) the things which we have
seen and heard Act. 4.20.
.

And if he shut it, none can open it; Ezekiel, Daniel, Zacharias were all
dumb, till God pleased to open their mouths. God can open and shut the mouths
of Beasts at his pleasure. The Lord opened the mouth of the Ass to reprove her
master Balaam Numb. 22.28, 30. 2 Pet. 2.16.
. The dumb Ass spoke with man's voice -- God shut the Dogs mouths in Egypt, to
one moved his Tongue against any of the Children of israel, against man or
beast Exodus 11.7. Din. 6.22.
. God shut the Lions mouths that they should not hurt Daniel. God can put a
muzzle on men's mouths, and tie up or restrain their Tongues when he pleases,
as he did Labans from speaking to Jacob, either good or bad Genesis 31.24.
; and the Canaanites, none (of them) moved his Tongue against any of the
Children of Israel Josh. 10.21.
.

God can heal all Tongue-infirmities, and impediments of speech, as Christ
opened the ears, and loosed the Tongue of him that was deaf, and had an
impediment in his speech; and he spoke plain Mar. 7.33, 34, 35. Isa. 35.6. and
32.4.
.

God can make the Tongue of the dumb to sing, and the Tongue of the Stammerers
ready to speak plainly, or elegantly. Pray the Lord to keep the key of your
mouths ever in his own hand; to open them when he would have you to speak,
and to shut them when he would have you to keep silence. Pray with David Psalm.
51.15.
, O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise, to wit,
upon all occasions -- and heal, Lord, what is amiss in my mouth.

2 God is Lord over the Tongue, to guide it what to speak, and how and when.
That was a sweet and gracious promise of God to Moses, when Moses made excuses
to wave the service of God imposed on him, Exodus 4.10. O my Lord, I am not
eloquent (or a man of words) but I am slow of speech and of a slow Tongue --
God said unto him, Now therefore go, and I will be thy mouth, and teach thee
what thou shall say. -- Verse. 12. God can put what words he will into men's
mouths, and make them speak, not what they will but what he pleases; and some
time contrary to what they intend.

Thus God made Balaam to bless Israel, when he came to curse them, and he
could do no other, as he told Numb. 22.38. and 35.
Balak -- Lo, I am come unto thee, have I now any power at all to say any
thing? the word that God puts in my mouth that shall I speak. If Balak would
give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of the
Lord my God, Numb. 22.18 Chap. 24.13
to do less or more -- but what the Lord says that will I speak.

God is the Author and Doner,

1 Of Tongue-gifts, and lip-learning. The Lord has given me the Tongue of the
learned; says Isay. 50.4
Isaiah.

2 Of conceptions and of utterance. God enriched the Corinthians in all
utterance and in all knowledge 1 Cor. 1.5.
-- of right answers; both root and branch -- The preparations of the Heart in
man, and the answer of the Tongue, Prove. 16.1
is from the Lord. A man cannot prepare or dispose his heart to speak, nor
speak what he has prepared, without Gods assistance. This may comfort us
against our ignorance, that we may know what to say; and infirmities, that we
cannot speak what we would: as it did Moses against the impediment in his
Speech, that God would be with his mouth; Deuteronomy. 18.18
and teach him what to say, and put his words into his mouth, and Jeremy when
he complained Jer. 1.6.
Ah Lord God, behold -- I cannot speak, or I know not to speak, wanting wisdom
and experience, gravity and authority, in regard of my young years, therefore
unfit to be sent a Prophet unto the Nations -- But the Lord said unto me,
verse. 7. Say not I am a Child, -- for thou shall go to all that I shall send
thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou shall speak^ then the Lord put forth
his hand and touched his mouth, Verse. 7. Verse. 9.
and said unto him, Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. This was done in
visional appearance to Jeremiah, yet we may comfortably expect a real
performance thereof to us, upon the account of his promise; that God will put
his words (or right answers) into our mouths, or direct us what to say.

3 God is the Doner of his spirit, putting him within us, to guide our Tongues,
order our speech, and to speak in us, especially in evil times; when Christ
borrows the mouths of his Servants in his own cause, to give Testimony
thereunto; when ye are brought before Governors and Kings for my sake, says
Christ, Mat. 10.18, 19, 20.
take no thought (that is, be not anxious or perplexedly solicitous) how or
what ye shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak, for it is not ye that speak but the Spirit of your Father that speaks
in you -- or as Luke has it -- The Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same
hour, Luke 12.11, 12
what ye ought to say. Gods Spirit teaches the dexterity and safety of Answers
and Replies, and of queries also; The Disputants with Stephen, were not able to
resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke Act. 6.10.
; How well should we speak, to purpove, and to profit, yea unto victory, and
speak irresistably and invincibly, peircingly and powerfully, if the Spirit of
God speak in us? The tongue is a pen in the hand of Gods Spirit, to write as he
guides, what he will. We stand in need of light to let us see how to guide our
Tongues, as well as our hands or feet; of light to speak by, as well as to work
or walk by; Therefore Elihu said Job 37.19
, we cannot order our speech (to wit, to God) by reason of darkness, i. e. of
our Minds. Now it is the Spirit of God that inlightens us, in understanding, in
speech, and in actions, then let us pray, and resolve

1 Pray heartily, that God would be with our mouths (as he was with Moses) at
all times, and teach us what we should say, and touch our mouths, (as he did
Jeremiahs) and put his words into them; that he would give us the Tongue of the
learned, as he did Isaiah; and the door of utterance as he did Paul; that the
preparations of our Hearts, and the answers of our Tongues to every question,
motion, or whatsoever shall be proposed to us, may be from the Lord, given
into our hearts and mouths by Gods hand, yea, when we are put upon speaking by
sudden occasions, we should first lift up our hearts to God in an Ejaculation,
for direction what to say.

2 Let us resolve, voluntarily and obedientially with 2 Chronicles 18.13.
Micajah, As the Lord lives, even what my God says, that will I speak -- all
that, and only that, not constrainedly as Balaam, when he said. -- The word
that God puts into my mouth, that shall I speak.

3 God is Lord over the Tongue, to keep it from evil, to wit from 1 Evil words.
2 Evil Sprits.


1 From evil (yea and from idle words too) that they come not out: Great is our
propensity thereto.

2 From evil spirits, that they come not in, as a lying spirit did into the
mouths of all Ahabs 1 Kin. 22.22
Prophets, to delude them with lies in Gods just judgment, giving Ahab over to
be misled by their delusions, to his own destruction. As the Devil formed his
own words by the mouth of the Serpent; Genesis 3.1
So he uses the Tongues of wicked men to speak his words, and serve his turn.
As God spoke by the mouths of his holy Prophets, Luke 1.70.
(all agreeing as if they had but one mouth amongst them all) and Christ by the
mouth of his Apostles; So Satan speaks by the mouth of his Instruments, false
Teachers, Seducers, Deceivers, Gainsayers; of such as Contradict and blaspheme,
as the Jews did Paul's doctrine Act. 13.45
, as resist the Truth, as Paul foretold the enemies thereof should do in the
last 2 Timothy 3.1, 8
Times, as slander, and rail against Gods servants, 3 John. 10
as Diotrephes prated against John, and them he sent, with malicious words.
Satan that old Serpent, speaks in the mouths, and by the Tongues of all such,
of whom it may be said, -- it is not they only or principally that speak, but
the spirit of the Devil, of Falsehood, Lies Errors; the spirit of Envy, malice,
giddiness, perverseness and bitterness, that speaks in them, as he did in
Act. 13.8, 9, 10
Elymas.

Satan's design is, by the Tongues of his Instruments, to discourage men from
good, or to draw them into Errors, and delusions; or into lusts and
destruction; what a deal of mischief does the Devil in the world, by thrusting
evil spirits, (through Gods permission) into the mouths of men and women (which
is a means to fill the world with wickedness?) and they are so subtle and
insinuating as its as difficult to keep them out as to keep the serpent out of
Paradise; So easily and imperceptibly will they wind themselves in. They will
be creeping into our mouths continually, if our mouths be not kept close shut
against them: It is rare in our days, to meet with a mouth, that has no evil
spirit (of any kind) in it, neither spirit of Error, nor spirit of falsehood,
deceit, nor of perverseness, nor an unclean spirit.

What need have we to commit our Tongues into Gods custody and to pray with
David, set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep thou the doors of my Psalm.
14.^
Lips? q. d. Lord keep my Tongue, as under lock, and key, as with watch and
ward, So as no sinful or idle, or rash words may break forth to thy dishonor,
and so as no ill spirit (of any kind) may enter in to mis-lead, defile or
deprave my Tongue. strict watch is set at gates of Cities, and doors of houses,
in times of danger, to shut enemies out, and keep all safe within; now the
mouth is the door and gate of the man; when there is war in the gates of our
mouths, or fighting against God by evil words, there can be no peace with God
in our souls.

How safe and sure are our tongues to be well ordered, when our mouths are
kept and barracaded by God against evil within us, that it go not out of them;
and against evil spirits without us, that they get not into them. Desire God to
keep our keeping, and to watch over our watching of our Mouths.

4 God is Lord over the Tongue, to purge it from all pollution: for sin
defiles the mouth as well as the heart, the lips as well as the life; and
makes us not worthy that Christ should come under the roof of our mouths; or to
take his Name into our lips. Sin made not only the men in the midst of whom
Isaiah dwelt, a people of unclean Isa. 6.5.
lips, but himself also, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, by reason of some moral desect or default, as in the delivery of
his message; it may be his not reproving the sin of the prince and of the
people. Sin made Moses a man of uncircumcised Exodus 6.12.30. Ainsworth in Genesis
17.11.
lips, that is, unclean, unsanctified, or of many superfluous words, for (...)
signifies a superfluity or stoppage that ^ hinders the due effect or
operation of a thing -- All sin is signified by the superfluous foreskin, which
God commanded to be circumcised or cut quite off. This word as applied to the
lips, implies superfluity in speaking, which Stammerers use, and others also.
Moses lips were not free from faults; and the uncircumcision thereof hindered,
as he thought, the Reception and operation of his message, as he Spoke before
the Lord, saying; Behold the children of Israel have not hearkened to me, how
then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips? Exodus 6.12.
Corruption in the heart pollutes the mouth, and makes a man unfit to speak to
God, or from God, or to appear before God, yea the Tongue defiles the whole
body, says Jam. 3.6. Quod efficit tale, illud magis est tale.
James, therefore is it foul and filthy in it self.

A mouth full of iniquity or of vanity is a cage full of unclean birds, that
has need to be cleansed. Now only the Lord can wash our mouths as well as
our hearts from wickedness; our Tongues as well as our hands from all the
taint and filth of sin. He can create in us a pure lip, as well as a clean
heart; which he has promised Zeph. 3.9.
, -- For then will I turn to the people a pure (or purified) lip (or language)
that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one
shoulder.

Let us pray with David Psalm. 51.2.
, wash me thoroughly, O Lord, from mine iniquity, my tongue as well as my heart
or hand, and cleanse me from my sin, in word as well as in deed. Pray the Lord
to dip your Tongues in the blood of his Son, 1 John 1.7. then our language will
be pure, and our words precious, and our voice sweet, Cant. 2.14. to
circumcise our lips, or pare off the foreskin of them, that is, superfluous
words, folly and vanity, to touch our lips with a coal from this Altar, the
true type of Christ (as he did the Prophet Isa. 6.6, 7.
Isaiahs) that our iniquity may be taken away, and our sin purged; that is, to
purify them by his Spirit, applying to our lips the virtue of Christ's blood to
purge them from the soil of sin (as also to assoil from the guilt of sin) and
the grace of Christ to sanctify our lips as a coal of fire fetched from Heaven
to put out the helfire of sin, and to consume the dross of vanity out of our
Jam. 3.6.
Tongues, then we shall be as Gods mouth, Jer. 15.19. The Holy Ghost set on
fire the Apostles Tongues with zeal, that flame of God. Act. 2.3.


5 God is Lord over the Tongue to prosper it, and to make this little member an
instrument of doing great things, as some men's Tongues effect far more than
other men's hands; out of the mouths of Babes and sucklings have thou ordained
strength (said David to Psalm. 8 2.
God) to still the enemy and the avengers, that is, out of the mouths of those
that are such (or little more) for age as the Children that cried in the
Temple, Hosanna to the son of Mat 21.15, 16.
David, who thereby honored Christ, but sorely displeased the Scribes and
Pharisees; yet Christ did accept and own even the Childrens way of praising
him, as they were fit and able; -- or that are Babes and Sucklings not for age,
but for meanness of persons, and weakness of parts, natural or acquired; as
the Prophets and Apostles (some of them at least) were indeed, Act. 4.13.
or in appearance and in account, as Peter and John in the Pharisees esteem,
were idiots and illiterate men, yet out of their mouths God ordained strength,
strong convictions, to stop the mouths of enemies; strong reprehensions to
affright the hearts of the ungodly; strong persuasions to draw sinners out of
the World unto Christ; to move them to good, and to mould them aright; strong
arguments to confute errors, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
and to confound the wisdom of the world, to bring great things to pass. Out
of the mouth of the Child, Jeremy, God ordained strength, yea victory. See
(says God to him) I have this day set thee over the Nations, and over the Jer.
1.10.
Kingdoms, to root out, pull down, destroy, to build, and to plant. (These be
mighty matters) but how shall Jeremiah do them? with what tool or instrument?
even with his Tongue, or by the words that God puts into his mouth, Jer. 1.9,
10. And because the Jews said the Prophets words are but Jer. 5.13. Verse. 14.
Hos. 6.5.
wind -- behold, says God, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this
people wood, and it shall devour them. God hewed Ephraim and Judah by his
Prophets, and slew them by the words of his mouth. The word of God is a
two-edged sword in the mouths of his servants. It is foretold that fire shall
go out of the mouths of the two witnesses, and devour their enemies, that is,
Rev. 11.5.
the word of their mouths shall be as fire, to scorch and consume those that
oppose or contradict their Testimony -- and by their Tongues they are said to
have tormented them that dwell upon the earth, Verse. 10.

Let us pray, God would bless all the words that proceed from our mouths; that
they may pierce and persuade, prosper and prevail, to all good intents and
purposes, for which they are spoken; though they be weak as water, and light as
wind in expression, and yet that God would make them weighty as silver, and
mighty as fire in operation; both amiable and forcible; that the words which
come from our hearts, may go to the hearts of them that hear us.

Entreat the Lord to delight to use our Tongues as iustruments of much service,
praise and glory to his Name, and of good to others. For what God uses, he
will bless; and to that end, that God would speak by us, as he did by 2 Samuel
23.2, 3.
David, The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my Tongue;
though we can desire and expect it, but in an ordinary, not in an oraculous
way; which made David to be the sweet Psalmist of Israel, Verse. 1.
and a Penman of holy Scripture.

The Fourth Rule. Rule.
Observe, bewail and amend the errors of your Tongues.

1 Observe them; Psalm. 119.59.
what ye say amiss, as what ye do amiss. Christians should take account of
their words, as well as of their works; for both of them are equally their
ways, in which they walk on, toward either Heaven or Hell. Jer. 8.6.
God hearkens to hear you ask your selves what have I said, as well as what
have I done. For the Tongue is subject to more errors, slips and failings, than
the hand, or any other member of the body; because it is so moveable, voluble,
flexible, indefatigable; that speaks infinitely more words than the hand does
deeds, or the foot goes steps. The Tongue is never tired with talking, as
other members are with moving, viz. hand and feet.

Who can understand his errors? Psalm. 19.12.
(says David) his unadvised, inconsiderate sins, to wit, in speaking as well
as in acting or in thinking. Therefore think of your words, and recollect them,
after ye have spoken them, to find out the faults of them. Then

2 Bewail the same. Mourn for, not only evil speeches, but even for idle words,
impertinent, unprofitable discourse. Let us judge our selves for them; for, of
every idle word, Mat. 12.36.
that men shall speak, they shall give account in the day of Judgment. A
gracious heart will melt as kindly, and mourn as bitterly for sinning with the
Tongue, as with the hand; for unadvised words, as for unbeseeming deeds. The
errors of a godly man's mouth fill his heart with grief, and face with shame. He
can say, my Tongue has cost my soul many a sigh; mine eye, many a tear; and
put my cheeks to many a blush. Gods servants have gained hereby. When Moses
complained of the uncircumcision of his lips, God promised to be with his
mouth, and teach him what to say, and to make him a God to Pharaoh, to command
him in Gods Name to let Israel go; and if he refused, to execute judgment upon
him (by Gods power) and Aaron his Brother should be his Prophet, i. e. his
spokesman, for his readiness of speech, Exodus 6.30. with 7.1. Job 42.3.
When Job was convinced and humbled for uttering that he understood not,
things too wonderful for him, which he knew not, that is, for speaking rashly
and ignorantly of the passages of Gods providence, which were above his
capacity; Then God made out a clearer discovery of himself than formerly; for
(says Job). Verse. 5.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee.
-- When the Prophet Isaiah was sadly sensible of the pollution of his lips, woe
is me, says he. I am undone, ^^a. 6.5, 6, 7.
etc. then God touched his lip with a coal from the Altar (by the ministry of
an Angel) and took away his iniquity, and purged his sin. This is part of the
answer of a good conscience toward God, to say, I have sinned with my mouth,
but Lord, thou know I have sorrowed with my heart for it. Christians should
weep sin to death, sin in the mouth as well as sin in the heart or life.

3 Mark and mourn for the errors of your Tongue, to amend the same. Take
account of your speeches as well as of your ways, that you may turn your
tongue as well as your feet to Gods testimonies. So did Job 40.4.
Job, Behold I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will lay mine hand upon my
mouth. Once have I spoken (presumptuously against thy providential proceedings)
but I will not answer (or justify what I have rashly spoken) yea twice, but I
will proceed no further, I will never say so again. If you have spoken
foolishly or wickedly, idly or vainly, lay your hand upon your mouth, and say
so no more. Happy is that observation which causes repentance, and that
repentance which produces reformation of faults, in heart, tongue or hand.

The fifth and last Rule, ^ Rule.
keep a good and constant correspondence, as between heart and tongue, to speak
as ye think (as was showed before) so between tongue and hand to do what you
say, to pay what you vow to God, and perform what you promise to men, and to
say no more to either, than you can and will do; that there may be an harmony
between your words and your works, that as your Tongues are the interpreters of
your minds, so your hands may be the executors of your tongues, to perform the
Dicts and Engagements thereof. Good language joined with real performance is
(as one says) as a pleasant sauce to wholesome meat.

Reas. 1 Because this is a sign (...) downright and throughout sincerity, when
a man speaks what he thinks, or his words may be read by himself in his heart;
and when a man does what he says, or his words may be read by others in his
life. He that does not what he says, undoeth his sayings. He that lives not
what he speaks, kills his words, or unspeaks in his life what he has spoken
with his mouth.

Reas. 2 This is the image of God upon us, who spoke with his mouth to David,
and fulfilled with his hand what he promosed 1 King. 8.15.24. Isa. 46.11.
him. Gods Tongue and hand go together, what he says, he will do.

Reas. 3 This is a fruit and sign of love in deed and in truth, to which the
Apostle John exhorts 1 John 3.18.
us. When our love lies not in our lips only, nor terminates in our Tongues,
but comes forth into our hands, and makes out it self in real actions, as
well as in verbal expressions.

Reas. 4 This is the property of a Citizen of Psalm. 15.4.
Sion, He swears to his own hurt, and changes not. He will make good his
word, Tongue-ingagements by hand-performance, though it be to his damage or
prejudice. 1 John 3.7.
Let no man deceive you, says the Apostle, He that does Righteousness (not
he that says it only) is righteous. Not words, but deeds denominate a man
righteous. To say and not to do, is to be like the Nightingale, Vox and
praeterea nihil, a voice and no more.

Reas. 5 This is the practice of the wicked; not only their Tongues but their
hands (or doings are against the Lord, Isa. 3.8.
as Jerusalems and Judah^ were, to provoke the eyes of his glory; which brought
them to ruin. The wicked make their word good, even when they speak evil. The
Jews made wicked Vows, and made them good, and resolved to do so still.

Ye and your Wives (says the Lord to Jer. 44.25.
them) have both spoken with your mouths, and full filled with your hands,
saying, We will surely perform our vows -- to burn incense to the Queen of
heaven, etc. ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your
vows. One calls this a vigorous ingemination.

Shall not the godly then do what they say? hand their speeches, and turn their
words into deeds? ought not they to be as good as the wicked are bad? to do as
much for God, as the wicked do against God? should not their Tongues and their
hands be for the Lord?

Therefore be very cautious in making vows to God, Vo^vs.
or promises to men.

1 Vows to God; For, though vows be the free-will-offerings of your mouths in
making them (as David calls Psa. 119.108.
them) yet are they binding and obligatory upon your souls, to the keeping of
them. Thy vows are upon me, O God (says Psa. 56.12.
he) scil. as a bond upon my soul. Psa. 116.18 See Psa. 66.13, 14.
Therefore he resolved -- I will pay my vows to the Lord. Though Jephtah had
made a rash vow, and was much troubled at it, yet he durst not break it.

I have opened my mouth, says he, to the Lord, and I cannot go Jud 11.30, 3^,
34, 35.
back and his Daughter (upon whom the vow fell with a stroke) consented he
should keep it. Verse. 36.


My Father, if thou have opened thy mouth unto the Lord, do to me according to
that which has proceeded out of thy mouth. This is the Law of keeping lawful
Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22, 23.
vows, when thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to
pay it; for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee (vows are debts)
and it would be sin in thee] not to pay the same -- verse. 23. That which is
gone out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform, even a free-will-offering, as
thou have vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou have promised with thy mouth.
The Preacher disswades from rashness in making Eccles. 5.2.
vows, and from slacknesse in paying them; and he gives many reasons against
the same; as that,

1 This is folly, and God has no pleasure in fools. Ver. 4.


2 It is better not to vow, than to vow, and not to pay. Ver. 5.


3 The mouth, by making rash vows, causes the flesh to sin, that is, Ver. 6.
defiles the whole man, which should not be suffered.

4 God is angry at such words and it provokes him to destroy the works of our
hands, because we destroy our vows, Ver. 6.
the words of our mouths.

5 Rash vows are inexcusable before God and his Angels or Ministers by a plea
of error. Ver. 6.


But to vow and to pay is (as one faith) to give God the Tree with the fruit;
which is best accepted with him.

2 Promises.
Be cautelous in making promises to men; Speak no more than ye purpose to do;
for a promise is a debt of the mouth, which the man is obliged to pay; or a
bond for performance. Prove. 6.2.
By rash promises men are snared with the words of their mouth; and are drawn
thereby to defraud others, and to damnifie themselves. Judah will send the
Harlot Tamar, a kid from the flock, Genesis 38.16, 17, 20, 23.
to make good his promise to her, even for shame-sake. The Romans were so
careful to perform their promise, that (as some observe) the first Temple
built in Rome, was dedicated to Fidelity. It is much better not to promise than
not to perform; and to be slow in promising, rather than slow in performing.

The third Thing is the Reasons of it, Reason. For government of the Tongue.
why we should make it our work, or a business of it, to govern our tongues.

These may be drawn from five heads, 1 The Difficulty. 2 Excellency. 3
Necessity. 4 Commodity. 5 Convenience of helps.

Reas. Difficulty.
1 The difficulty thereof, because of the unrulinesse of the Tongue. The Tongue
(says Jam. 3.8.
James) can no man tame -- it is an unruly evil.

This he sets out by six comparisons.

1 He compares the Tongue with all the other members of the body, Verse. 2.
and implicitly affirms, that it is more difficult to rule the Tongue than them
all, when he says -- the man that offends not in word -- is able to bridle the
whole body.

2 Ve. 7.
With all kinds of Creatures (that have life and sense) as birds, beasts,
serpents, fishes, all these have been and are tamed by the art of man, Verse. 8.
but the Tongue can no man tame, it is more indomitable than a wild beast.

3 With Fountains (that flow) and Trees that grow, and bear fruit according to
their kind. Verse. 11.
-- Does a fountain send forth at the same hole sweet water and bitter, salt
water and fresh? can the Fig Tree bear Olive-berries, Verse. 12.
either a vine figs, much less can Thorns bring forth Grapes, or Thistles,
Figs, Mat. 7.16. But the Tongue will out of the same hole of the mouth send
forth blessing and cursing; Verse. 9, 10.
for therewith bless we God, and curse we men -- my brethren (says the
Apostle) these things ought not so to be; One calls this a monstrous abuse of
the tongue to contraries; which is contrary to nature, Pareus.
and most to God, out of whose moush proceeds not evil, and Lam. 3.38.
good, that is (as some understand it) only good, and no evil. This argues
great absurdity in the Tongue, and difficulty of governing it.

4 With the World, which contains variety, and multitude, yea all kind of
things in it. So the Tongue is a World of iniquity; Jam. 3. verse. 6.
which comprehends all sorts of sin in it.

Man's mouth, though it be but a little hole, will hold a world-full of sin.
For there is not any sin forbidden in the Law or Gospel which is not spoken by
the Tongue, as well as thought in the heart, or done in the life. -- Is it not
then almost as difficult to rule the tongue, as to rule a World?

5 He compares the Tongue with things that are great, yet are ruled by little
means, as Horses and Ships (as some understand James sense to be in those
three verses, Iam. 3.3, 4, 5.
though others think otherwise; of which afterward) The Horse is a strong,
stout, stateiy stif-necked Creature, Verse. 3.
yet made obedient to the will of the Rider, by a little Bit put in his mouth;
Ships are great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about with
a very small helm whithersoever the Pilot pleases -- Now the tongue, Verse. 4.
though it be but a little member, yet it is a harder matter to govern it, than
to ride a horse, or to guide a ship, for many who are expert at both, cannot
rule their tougues -- Its hard to find so strong a Bit as to bridle the tongue;
so stirring a helm, as to steer the course thereof aright. Franare linguam est
difficilius difficilimo, says Pareus. To rule the tongue is more difficult
than that which is most difficult.

6 He compares the tongue (that is ungoverned) to things that are little in
themselves, yet do much mischief, as fire, verse. 5, 6. and poison, verse. 8.
which two set forth the power of the tongue to evil; the vigorous force
whereof is very hardly restrained -- A little fire (even a spark) may consume
great houses, yea whole Towns to ashes very suddenly.-Behold how great a matter
(or wood) a little fire kindles, says James. Cap. 3.5.
Fire is (as we say) a good servant, but an ill Master; how hardly^s it stopped,
or quenched when it has got the upper hand, and prevails? as in scale-fires.
-- A little poison will kill a great man, destroy the whole body, and dissolve
body and soul, How difficult is it to temper poison that it may not hurt, to
conquer it that it may not kill? So the Tongue (though a little member) is full
of deadly poison. Jam. 3.8.
How hard a matter is it to correct and temper the Tongue well, that it may not
infect either our selves, or others? For the Tongue infects and corrupts the
whole World.

The Tongue also is a fire, says the Apostle; Jam. 3.6.
It is difficult to order it (or keep it within compass, as fire in the hearth)
that it may not break forth, as fire in the Thatch, or to the housetop; nor
undo, or consume our selves, or others; nor defile us with the black coals, of
evil, or idle words. -- As the fire not only burns but blacks; Iam. 3.6.
even so is the Tongue amongst our members -- it defiles the whole body, and
sets on fire the course (or wheel) of Nature, -- totius Naturae curriculum,
says Piscator, which comprehends,

1 The Members of our bodies. The Tongue is an Incendiary to lust; and by
wanton speech fets the whole man on a flame of uncleanness: and to revenge;
for it provokes the head to contrive mischief, the hands to fight, it makes the
eyes to sparkle, the feet swift to shed blood, yea it inflames the heart in
passion.

2 The course of our lives, and societies, by Divisions, Contentions,
Seditions, Combustions. Does not the Tongue both kindle, and blow the coals of
all these? -- It can do no otherwise till it be sanctified and well governed,
Verse. 6.
because it is set on fire of Hell, i. e. by the Devil, whence the Tongue has
all its guile and falsehood, for he is the Father of lies, its malice, clamor,
and bitterness, for Satan is the Author thereof; its venom and poison, for
Satan the old Serpent infuseth the same into it, who drives it, therefore it
must needs run.

As fire, so the Tongue is a good Servant, but a bad Master. For servants may
be ruled, so cannot Masters. When the Tongue is its own Master to speak what it
pleases, it is like a Servant on horseback, and the Understanding (which is
as a Prince) walking as a servant, Eccles. 10.7.
or Lackey to it, which is most unsafe and unseemly, yea preposterous, and
ridiculous. Verse. 6.
-- Then folly is set in great digmty. Seeing the Tongue is so unruly, there is
great reason, why it should be kept under good government.

Reas. The Excellency.
2. From the excellency of the good order, and use of the Tongue, in respect of
Action, Commendation, Perfection, Imitation, and Distinction.

1 Of Action, though the Tongue be but a little member, yet it acts, or can
do great things. So Calvin and Piscator understand those words, in James 3.5.
-- Even So the Tongue is a little member, and (...) its rendered boasts great
things, or does magnifically lift up it self; but signifies, and sets forth
the power of the Tongue to good, or comprehends the virtues of it as Veracity,
Modesty, Taciturnity, Constancy, etc. -- James his scope here (says Calvin) is
not to tax the vain boast of the Tongue (for that suites not with the Bridle,
and the Helm, to which he compares the Tongue) but to show Linguam esse
magnarum rer^m effectricem, ^t magna vi pollere, -- that the Tongue is a doer
of great matters -- that it bears sway with great force and authority. --

The most conceive the coherence of this fifth verse, James 3.
to be with the third and fourth verses, by way of similitude, as a reddition
to the proposition of the two former comparisons.

1. Of Horses, and bits; in verse 3. 2. Of Ships, and Helms, ver. 4.
Both which are very remarkable, therefore ushered in with two Ecce's, as
Trumpets, to sound forth the fame thereof. Behold, Behold, etc.

Behold --

As a little Bit will tame a great Horse, and a very small Helm will turn about
a great ship, Even so the Tongue is a little member, and effects great things;
of greater consequence than horses, or ships, or the service, or benefits of
both can be; Even such things as pertain to Gods Glory, and man's salvation,
and to the good of others both public and private.

2 In respect of Commendation, the Tongue well ordered bears the Bell away from
all the other members -- It is the praise of the righteous man, Psalm. 37.30
that his mouth speaks wisdom, and his Tongue talks of judgment -- and of
the virtuous woman, that she opens her mouth with wisdom, Prove. 31.26
and in her Tongue is the Law of kindness.

How was our Savior commended and admired for the grace of his Lips, as Truth,
Wisdom, Purity, Power, sincerity, etc? -- All bare him witness, and wondered
at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth -- Never man spoke like
him, Luke 4.22
Joh. 7.46. It was Jobs Job 2.10
praise -- in all this, that is, in all the calamities, and miseries that
befell him, Job did not sin with his lips, by murmuring, blaspheming, or the
like. -- It is a high Act of Grace, to guide the Tongue well in the deeps of
Affliction. -- God gave this Testimony of Job as matter of wonder in him, and
of honor to him -- Is there Iniquity in my Tongue (said Job to his Job 6.30
friends, q. d. have I spoken any thing contrary to Rule, or Right? --

It was Jeremiahs praise -- that which came out of his Lips was right before
Ier. 17.16
God, and the commendation of the 144000, the Lambs Company, standing with him
on Mount Rev. 14.1.5
Sion, -- in their mouth was found no guile; as it was the Character, and
praise of Israel. -- They are Children that will not lie, Isa. 63.8 Zeph. 3.13
neither shall a deceitful Tongue be found in their mouths. -- No part of Man
is esteemed more praiseworthy among men, than a good Tongue.

3 In respect of Perfection; for he is a perfect man, says James, James 3.2
that offends not in word, (which must be understood in a quallified sense, to
wit, comparatively, not absolutely, as if free wholly from all sin, which is an
impossible attainment on this side the Grave) either in being silent when he
should speak (which may at some Time be a crying sin) or in speaking when
he should be silent, which may be a loud sin.

The 144000 in whose mouth was found no guile, were without fault before the
Throne of God, Rev. 14.5. Ps. 16.9. and 30 12. and 108.1.
-- David counted his tongue his excellency, and called it often his glory, to
show forth the Majesty, Glory, Excellencies, and praises of God.

4 Excellent is the good use of the Tongue in respect of Imitation; for we
should be ensamples to others, in word (or speech) as well as in spirit, and
in 1 Timothy 4.12 Psalm. 45.1
conversation. This is the way to Excel. -- The Tongue is the pen of a ready
Scribe to set Coppies of wise, holy, and profitable Speech for others to write
after, or to teach them how to speak, as the Hand sets Copies to teach others
how to write.

5 In respect of Distinction; for as speech specificates man, and
distinguishes man from Beasts which have Tongues, and speak not; So the
government of the Tongue shows the difference between

1 A wise man, and a fool, as Solomon states it throughout his Proverbs, as
Chap. 15.2.7. and 29.11. Eccl. 5.3. Thou speak as one of the foolish women
speaks, Job 2.9, 10
says Job to his wife, when she said unto him, Curse God and dye.

2 Between a good man, and an evil man. O Generation of Vipers (says Mat.
12.34, 35
Christ) how can ye being evil speak good things? for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks, etc. A good man out of the good treasure of his
heart brings forth good things, etc. -- This is the character of an evil man,
Psalm. 50.16, 19. He gives his mouth to evil.

3 Between a man that is really religious, and him that is but seemingly James
1.26
so. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his Tongue,
this man's religion is vain. -- want of Government over the tongue makes a man
like a Brute (as Horse and Mule) in Mouth, as well as in mind, Ps. 32 9. yea
worse.

Reas. 3. The necessity.
From the necessity of Tongue-Government in, respect 1 Of God. 2 Of Religion. 3
Of our selves and others.


1 In respect of God, that our Tongues may obey him. God requires that service
of them, that they should be set apart for him; that holiness to the Lord
should be written upon our Tongues, as well as upon our hearts. For God made
with excellent skill, and Christ redeemed with great price, our Tongues for
himself peculiarly; and this word came out of Gods mouth in righteousness,
bound with a Solemn oath -- that unto me every knee shall bow; every Tongue
shall swear, says Isaiah 45.23. Romans 14.1^
Every Tongue shall confess to God, says Paul, or that every Tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Phil. 2.1^
Father -- God our Father requires, all his Children should give him their
Tongues, as well as their hearts, else the one will contradict the other. --
God expects to be eminently glorified, and well-pleased with our Tongues as a
principal part of the body. Therefore David Psalm. 19.1^
prayed -- Let the words of my mouth; and the meditation of my heart be
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, etc. and Paul prayed for the Romans 15.5, 6.
Romans, that they might with one mind, and one mouth glorify God. -- Paul was
excellent, and exemplary as a servant of Christ, and as a Master of his Tongue
herein -- He says in 1 These. 2.4. -- as we were allowed of God to be put in
Trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing men, but God which
tries our hearts. How needful then is it to Rule the Tongue aright, that God
may have service, and glory by it, which is his end of it? -- Without
government the Tongue cannot be made obedient to God, no more than the horse
can be to man without the bridle.

2 In respect of Religion, Tongue-Rule is needful, not only to adorn it, but
to approve the efficacy of it, and our sincerity in it; for if any man among
you seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own
heart, this man's Religion is vain, says the Apostle James 1.26
James -- whatsoever conceit ye have of your selves, or whatsoever ye pretend,
profess, seem, or boast to be for religion, If you cannot govern your Tongues.

1 You deceive your own hearts with a show without substance, thinking and
seeming to be that you are not.

2 Your Religion is vain, because it wants power over the Tongue to refrain it
from evil, as lying, swearing, cursing, reviling, censuring, scoffing,
detracting, dissembling, flattering, obscenity, and the like: -- That is vain,
which wants what it ought to have; and cannot effect what it ought to do, nor
attain its end.

That is a weak and useless Religion, which has not a powerful influence into
men's mouths, to bring their Tongues under government, or into subjection, to
order a discipline.

3 You cause Religion to be evil spoken of which suffers much by the
Tongue-miscariages of the professors of it. If your speech be not well
ordered, your Religion will be little valued. -- The Consequence of
Tongueguidance being very great (for the Tongue is the Primum mobile, or first
mover among the members, which carries them all about with it, and makes them
go his way, and follow his Trade, whether it be good or evil; and corruption
soon runs out of the heart, through the mouth, which defiles the whole body;
for there is a speedy intercourse between the heart and the Tongue) hence it is
that a great part of Religion stands in the good government of the Tongue. Pure
Religion puts forth it self in a pure lip, or Language --

Unbridlenesse of Tongue, is usually the Hypocrites sin; who is free to censure
others for things wherein he is faulty and guilty himself, but far from
owning, or acknowledging good in others; from confessing, or bewailing evils in
themselves.

3 In respect of our selves, and of others, for prevention of evil from both.

1 The Government of the Tongue is necessary to prevent evil from our selves,
both of sin, and of misery.

1 The evil of sin; want of government is the general cause why sin abounds
in familyes, Cities, Countries, in all places; as also in the members of man's
body; why the eye is full of adultery, the ear of vanity, the hand of blood,
and the mouth of iniquity. -- As when there was no King in Israel, Judges 17.6
every one did that which was right in his own eyes; So when the Tongue has no
overseer, or guide, it speaks what it lists, it multiplyeth sin, as fast as
words, yea, sometimes faster, wrapping up two, or more sins in one word; you
heard before, in the multitude of words there wants no sin. That saying has
(I believe) a truth in it -- A man's most, and worst sins are his words.

1 His most sins, because the Tongue forms and increases iniquity more
than any other member of the body.

2 His worst sins, as blasphemies against God, especially against the Holy
Ghost, the sin, of which man cannot repent, and which God will not forgive.
-- The lip of Truth has spoken it -- whosoever speaks against the Holy
Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, noither in this world, nor in the world
to come, Math. 12.31, 32. -- The Holy Ghost describes the sin of the Tongue
in a greater circumference or compass, than the sins of any other part of
the body. James says, the Tongue is (not a Hill, or Mountain, not a Town,
City, or Country, but) a world of Iniquity, Chap. 3.6. Paul anatomizing the
natural man from head to foot, in Romans 3.9. to 19. and declaring how all men
naturally are subject in all parts of them to all sins, discovers more evils
in the Organs of Speech, than in any other member of the body. There is a grave
in the throat (to bury others in quick) guile in the Tongue, poison in the
Lips, gall (or bitterness) in the mouth. -- The sins of the Tongue have an
universal influence, not only upon all the members of the body (as was showed
before) to pervert, pollute, yea poison them all, but over all callings,
conditions, relations, in which a man stands. The tongues of Tradesmenly for
gain, though Treasures gotten thereby are but vanity, tossed to and fro of them
that seek death, Prove. 21.6. -- Of Statesmen, drives on their design, and
self-interest -- Of Churchmen, preach their own parts, conceits ends, not
Christ, his truth, and glory. -- The sins of other members decay with age,
but the sins of the Tongue continue (if they do not increase) even in old
age, as swearing, cursing, frowardness, bitterness in the speeches of aged
men, and women. --

The sins of the mouth leave both a stain, and a sting in the soul. Therefore
perverseness in the Tongue is a breach in the spirit, says Prove. 15.4.
Solomon. -- Is it needful for us to keep our mouths from evil? so is it to
guide our Tongues well; Both are equally necessary, the one as the end, the
other as the means. The restraint of the Tongue will keep a world of sin out of
the mouth, and abundance of sin out of the World.

2 To prevent the evil of misery both 1 Here, and 2 Hereafter.

1 To prevent the evil of miseryhere, as 1 Gods anger. 2 Hatred. 3 Opposition.
4 Separation.

1 Gods anger at our words. Why should God be angry at thy voice? says the
Eccles. 5.6.
Preacher, that is, when thou speak rashly, and unadvisedly. -- Gods wrath
was kindled against Eliphaz, and his two friends, for (says he) ye have not
spoken of me the thing that is right, as my Servant Job Job 42.7. Ver. 8.
has, that is, So truly, and rightly of his providential proceedings.
Therefore God prescribed them a course to make their peace with him, scil. to
provide a great sacrifice, and bring it to Job to offer, and to pray for them,
lest I deal with you (says God) after your folly, (or punish your
foolishness) in that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right. --
Gods repetition hereof implies an aggravation of the fault, and an inflammation
of his anger against them for it. Gods anger was kindled against Aaron, and
Miriam, for speaking against Moses. Numb. 12.1.9


2 Gods hatred of our Tongues, and lips, for a lying Tongue is one of the six
or seven things which the Lord hates, and are an abomination to his Prove, 6.16,
17, and 12.22.23.
soul.

3 Gods opposition to our persons, or setting himself against us as an enemy,
for the abuse of our Tongues, as he did against the Prophets. Jer. 23.31.
Behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their Tongues (or
that smooth their Tongues) who speak placentia, pleasing, and plausible things,
to sooth up the people in their sins, and persuade them it is the word of the
Lord they deliver, when it is nothing but their own fancies.

4 A separation between us and our God, which is made by Tongue-sins, as well
as by Isa. 59 2.3.
hand-sins; your iniquities (says the Prophet) have separated between you, and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear --
what sins? 1 The sins of the Hands, and Fingers, 2 Of the Lips and Tongue; for
your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity, your lips
have spoken lies, your Tongue has uttered perverseness. --

How needful it is to govern our Mouths well, that our words may not be the
object of his anger, nor our Tongues of his hatred; that God may not estrange
himself, and hide his face from us as not a friend to us, nor set himself
against us as an Enemy? It were better for us to have all the World against us
than God. To keep our mouths with all diligence, is a means to keep our selves
in the love, and favor of God; in neerness to, and fellowship with God.

2 To prevent Gods Judgments denounced against an evil Tongue, or against man
for the evils of his Tongue, or evils executed upon that account -- as the
Tongue of frowardness shall be out out, Prove. 10.31. like a bad branch that
brings forth ill fruit. -- God will cut off all flattering lips (says Psa.
12.3.
David) and the Tongue that speaks proud (or great) things. -- King
Nebuchadnezzer for speaking proud Dan. 4.30. Verse. 31.
words. Is not this great Babylon that I have built, etc. while the word was in
his mouth, there fell a voice from Heaven like thunder (as one says) with a
bolt in it, -- that he should be dis-throaned or unking'd, yea unmanned, and
cast out of the society of men, to live as a Beast, Verse. 32, 33.
and eat grass among the Beasts of the field, for seven years, before his
Reason returned to him. A high and heavy punishment inflicted by God on a
mighty Monarch for a proud speech, the sin of his mouth, for which he was even
taken in his Psalm. 59.12.
pride, scil. as a bird in a snare. -- God shut Moses out of temporal Canaan,
for speaking unadvisedly with his lips; though he much desired to go over, and
see that good land beyond Jordan, Deuteronomy. 3.25, 26. -- The sins of men's mouths
prove the snares of their souls. The wicked is snared by the transgression of
his lips, says Pro. 12.13.
Solomon, that is, his Tongue brings himself into trouble. -- A fools mouth is
near destruction, how near? scil. at pits brink, ready to drop in, Prove. 10.14.
yea, a fools mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul,
Prove. 18.7. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life, but he that opens
wide his lips shall have Pro. 13.3.
destruction. Adonijahs petition, he asked of Bathsheba, and by her of Solomon,
to have Abishag to wife, cost him his life, 1 King. 2.16, 17, 23, 24, 25. --
Men's tongues are the Engines of their own ruin. Therefore are they said to
make their own Tongue to fall upon themselves Psa. 64.8.
, that is, the mischief their tongues have uttered against others, shall be
executed upon themselves. God will do to them what they have spoken against
others. -- Men had better a mountain should fall upon them, than the weight of
their own offending tongues. -- what shall be given or done unto thee thou
false Tongue? says the Psalm. 102.3, 4.
Psalmist, sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of Juniper, that is,
peircing, burning, lasting pain and sorrow -- The Princes of Israel, for the
rage of their Tongues (against God, and man) fell by the Hos. 7.16.
sword, because the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and Samaria, have spoken lies,
and their Tongue is deceitful in their mouth, therefore God will make them
sick even to death, in smiting them, and in making them desolate because of
their sins, even of the sins of their Micah 6.12, 13.
Tongue.

Histories are full of remarkable Judgments upon offending tongues. -- Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, having silenced many faithful Ministers, had his
tongue swelled so big in his mouth, that he could neither eat, drink, nor
speak for many days, and so dyed of hunger, after he had starved many
Christians, and burned others. -- Claudius president under Valerian the
Emperor, and his Agent to torment Christians, was afterward so tormented with
the Devil, that biting off his own tongue in small pieces, he dyed miserably.
-- Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, a bloody persecutor, dyed with his
Tongue thrust out of his mouth swollen, and black with the inflammation of his
body. -- Nestorius the Heretic his Tongue (which uttered Blasphemies) was
eaten up of worms. -- The Holy Scriptures declare several punishments
inflicted on all sorts for the sins of their mouth, by Law, and by Providence.
1 By the Law of God, the Blasphemer was to be surely put to death; all the
Congregation shall certainly stone him, Lev. 24.13. to 17. So were Enticers to
Idolatry, though they were very near, or dear, -- Deuteronomy. 13.6, to 12. --
Blaspheming and enticings to Idolatry, were sins of the mouth.

2 By Gods providence. Miriam (though a Prophetess, a Sister to Moses and
Aaron) was smitten with Leprosy for speaking against Gods Servant Number. 12.1,
8, 10.
Moses, for her reproof of him, and reproaches against him. -- It is Dr. Halls
observation, that Miriams foul tongue was punished with a foul face, since she
would acknowledge no difference betwixt her self, and her Brother Moses, now
sees his face glorious, hers Leperous. Now both Moses, and Miriam need to wear
a veil, he to hide his glory, she her deformity. -- Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram, for their seditious speaking against Moses, and Aaron, the earth opened
her mouth, and swallowed them Number. 16.1, 3, 31, 32. and verse. 35.
up, and the rest of the conspirators were consumed by fire. -- The little
Children of Bethel that mocked the prophet Elisha, saying, go up thou bald
head, or, ascend thou bald-head (which is interpreted) to be a blasphemous
scoff at the Prophet Elijahs miraculous ascending up to Heaven, q. d. ascend
thou, if thou can, as thy Master seemed to do by the providence of God, two
she Bears came out of the wood and tare two and forty of them, 2 King. 2.23,
24. -- Let Parents take heed to the ways of their Children, even whilst young,
that they sin not with their tongue, by swearing, cursing, mocking (Gods
Ministers or others) etc. lest some heavy Judgment of God fall upon them. --
God threatens to destroy Doeg for ever, for the evil office he did with his
tongue at Saul's Court against David, and the Lords Ministers, Psalm. 52.1, to 6.
1 Samuel 22. verse. 18. -- would you keep your tongues free from pain, and sorrow,
or your whole man safe from punishment, and misery? then govern them well, and
keep them pure from sin. If the mouth will not keep sin in, it cannot keep
Judgment out, as the one goes out, so the other comes in, at the same door.

Also the government of the Tongue is needful, not only to prevent evil from
it, but sin, when evil befalls it, especially murmurings and blasphemings
against God; -- when the fifth Angel powered out his vial, upon the Seat of the
beast, that is, Rev. 16.10, 11, 12.
either the City of Rome, as many understand it; or as some Eminent divines
conceive, that form and singular government which the Beast exercises in the
Church, that is, (says Mr. Cotton upon that Text) Episcopacy; the effect
thereof was, they gnawed their Tongues for pain (i. e. through indignation, and
vexation, grief, and wrath, being mad with malice) and blasphemed the God of
Heaven, for their pains, and sores (because providence has pulled down their
mountain which they thought so strong, as it could never be moved) and
repented not of their deeds, but still justified themselves, and their cause,
calling Reformation, Rebellion, and the Dissolution o^^con Goodness.

2 Tongue government is needful to prevent Miseries from our selves, as here,
so hereafter. Especially Judgment and Torment.


1 Judgment, scil. Of Condemnation. For God now hears and writes down all we
say, There is not a word in my Tongue (says David) Psalm. 136.4.
but Lo O Lord thou know it altogether. God will bring every word (as well
as every work) to judgment (God keeps a book of remembrance for both) The Lord
sink that saying of our Savior into the bottom of our hearts; that the sent
and savor of it may come up continually into our Mat. 12.36, 3^
mouths every idle word that men shall speak they shall give account thereof in
the day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy
words thou shall be condemned. Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee thou
wicked servant Luke 19.22. Enochs prophesy will be one day Jude 14 15
fulfilled. Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints to execute
Judgment upon all, to convince all (the wicked) of all their ungodly deeds,
and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Will God judge the world for iniquity, and will he not judge the Tongue which
is a world of iniquity?

Other Members are confined to the place where the body is, but the Tongue
walks through the Earth, says the Psalm. 73.9
Psalmist (...) bites, at every body as it pleases, verse. 9. while the body
sits still; shall not the judge of all the earth, call the Tongue to an
account?

Seeing all our words are recorded in Gods book, and we must answer to God for
them all, ought we not so to speak, James 2.12. (So well, wisely, warily,) as
they that shall be judged by the law of liberty (scil. from sin; Of this I
spoke before.
not to sin) that we may pass an account with comfort of our words to God
our judge, and stand in the judgment.

2 The government of the tongue is needful to prevent torment in hell. For as
the Tongue is by sin set on fire from hell, so it shall be tormented in hell
fire, for punishment. James 3.6


The rich man's Tongue was so scorched in hell Luke 16.24
flames, that he desired a drop of water to cool it; quia plus peccaverat
Lingua (says an ancient Author) because he had sinned most with his Tongue:
Whosoever shall say unto his Brother, thou fool, shall be in danger of hell
fire, says our Mat. 5.22
Savior, what shall be done to those Tongues in hell, that have sworn many
oaths, told many lies, belsht forth many blasphemies against God; slanders
against Men, all which were but the irruptions of an infernal fire on earth,
every member shall be punished in Hell, for the sins which it has been an
instrument to commit then. If that part shall be punished most which has
sinned most, then Tongue torments will be great in hell, because Tonguesinnes
have been many on earth.

Is there any need of escaping condemnation at Gods Tribunal, and torments in
hell? then there is a necessity of governing the Tongue well.

2 In respect of others.
The government of our tongues is needful in respect of others, to prevent, 1
Sin and 2 Mischief


That might accrue thereby to them.

1 Sin, Which came into the world at first by the mouth, scil Satan's
conference with Eve by the Tongue of a Serpent, Genesis 3.1, 2
tempting her to eat forbidden fruit; and disperseth it self abroad in the
world from person to person, and from place to place, by the Tongue more
abundantly, then by any other member of body, even all kinds of sin, both in
opinion and in conversation; Sin is of a spreading nature like Leaven, and the
Tongue is most diffusive and communicative of the evil that is in it.

As the mouth is the mother of words, and words the Children of the mouth,
conceived and formed in the womb thereof, (a fruitful mother that brings forth
abundance of such Children) So words (from us) beget words (from others) either
by persuasion, provocation, argumentation, imitation, or occasion, one or
other; and that by swarms. The Generation of words is innumerable and
unspeakable. One word can beget a thousand, and that which occasioneth a
multitude of words may be the cause of a multitude of sins. One evil tongue is
sufficient to fill a whole house, yea Town with wickedness.

The Harlots tongue inticeth to uncleanness, and into the snares of lust; to
that end all her Instruments of speech have alluring baits upon them; her
tongue flattereth, Prove. 6.24. her lips drop as an honey comb; her mouth is
smoother than oil; Prove. ^.3, 4.
but her end is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two edged sword. The Seducers or
false Teachers tongue, draws many from the Truths and ways of God into errors,
and bywayes; by their fair and plausible pretenses, and subtle insinuations (or
tongue craft, the Impostors Art) whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians.
4.14. Sinners inticements of others by their Tongues, to theft, murder,
Idolatry, conspiracy, drinking, gaming, excess, riot, or the like, may draw
many into sin, and so make themselves the Authors of much wickedness. My Son,
says Prove. 1.10.
Solomon, If sinners intise thee, consent thou not. Stop your ears against the
voice of these charmers; and shut your mouths upon them, except it be to give
them a flat denial. Is there not need we should watch over our mouths, that
our Tongues may be no means or occasion of sin to others. To spread abroad sin
is the design of Satan and his instruments; as it is the disposition of
infected persons to spread the plague. It is the godly man's care to prevent sin
from Breeding in himself. Spreading to others.


2 To prevent mischiefs to others, by our Tongues, both places and persons.

1 To places, as Towns, Cities, etc. The City is overthrown by the mouth of the
wicked (says Prove. 11.11.
Solomon) which fills the City with oaths, lies, blasphemies, cursings and
corrupt communications; and is as a Mine sprung under the wall of a City to
blow it up. Jerusalem was ruined by their Tongues as well as hands, which were
against the Isa. 3.8.
Lord. Evil Tongues (as well as evil hands) help to pull down houses, Towns,
Cities, and to lay them in the dust.

2 To persons, to do others no harm by our words, in their lives, names,
estates, cause, liberty, Relations, nor in the comfort of their Spirits, not to
make sad the hearts of the righteous whom God has not made sad, Ezekiel. 13.22. A
Hypocrite with his mouth (says Prove. 11.^.
Solomon) destroys his Neighbor; either by censuring and condemning him; (or
by flattering him) or drawing him into the way of dissembling like himself; or
by calumnies to blemish and blot out his good name.

Take heed we persecute not others by our Tongues, no more than by our hands;
either by mocking them as Ishmael did Isaak, Gal. 4.29. 2 King. 2.23. 2 Samuel
16.6, 17.
and the Bethelite -- Children did Elisha by reviling, railing or cursing them,
as Shimei did David by false accusing them, as Tertullus did Paul, Act. 24.5.6.
by lies, slanders, backbitings.

What sharp and bitter Tongue-persecutions have been raised against Gods
servants? Job was the song, and the by word even of base men, viler than the
Job 30.8, 9.
earth.

David's enemies fought against him with their Psa. 109.2, 3. and 35.15.
Tongues, scil. by lies, slanders, reproaches, they did tear him continually,
and he became their proverb. Jeremies Jet. 18.18.
enemies said, come let us devise devices against him, let us smite him with
the Tongue; let us contrive accusations against him; and lash him with
reproaches. This pitiful usage Israel found amongst the Ezekiel. 36.3.
Heathen, scil. that they were taken up in the lips of Talkers, and were an
infamy of the people. God pittieth and comfort them for it.

How were the mouths of men opened, and their Tongues sharpened and imbittered
against our Savior? Mat. 10.25.
-- they called the Master of the house Beelzebub. He endured such contradiction
(or Tongue-opposition) of sinners against himself, Heb. 12.3. such, as none
such, as never any did the like. Christ was crucified by the Tongues of the
Jews, or upon the cross of the Tongue (when they cried out, crucify him,
crucify him) before he was crucified by the hands of the Romans, or upon a
cross of wood. The primitive Christians under the Heathen Emperors were
extremely persecuted by malicious tongues. They spoke all the evil they could
devise against them. But the Saints shall get conquest over the Tongue of all
their enemies at the Isa. 54.17.
last, according to Gods promises. -- No weapon -- that is formed against thee
shall prosper, -- and every Tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment,
thou shall condemn, then their enemies shall be found liars to them. In the
Interim, Deuteronomy. 33.29.
whatever evils we suffer from men's Tongues, let us do them no harm with our
mouths in any kind. The Lord keeps us from avenging our selves with our own
Tongues. That much mischief may be done to others by the Tongue, appears

1 By Scripture-comparisons of the Tongue.

2 By the mercy of Deliverance from it.

3 By the final misery it draws others to.

1 By Scripture-comparisons of it. An evil (or ungoverned) Tongue is compared
in Scripture to things that are most hurtful, dangerous -- and pernicious,
even to instruments of cruelty, as

1 To a Scourge to lash ( Job 5.21.) and a rod to beat others, Prove. 14.3.

2 To a sharp Rasor ( Psalm. 52.2.) that in stead of shaving off the hair, cuts
the throat.

3 To a sharp Sword ( Psalm. 57.4.) which is as killing as any Engine of war,
Prove. 12.18. and 30.14. Psalm. 64.3.
to a drawn sword, Psalm. 55:21. -- which is ready to do execution; to a sword
whetted, to cut deep, and do great execution.

The workers of iniquity have swords in their lips, says David, Psalm. 59.7.

4 To Bows and Arrows, Psalm. 64.3, 4. Jer. 9.3, 8. to shoot suddenly, and wound
deeply, Tongues are bows, and bitter words are arrows shot out of them.

5 To a deep pit, or devouring Gulf, to swallow up both himself ( Eccles.
10.12) and others; the mouth of a Harlot is a deep pit, (Prove. 22.14.) he that
is abhorred of the Lord shall fall into it. Doegs tongue loved all swallowing
words, Psalm. 52.4. whereby he devoured the Priests and their City. -- Devouring
words will eat up a man's reputation as bread, 1 Samuel 22.18.
and his Good name at a bit.

6 To a burning fire (Prove. 16.27.) as was showed before out of James 3.6.
which consumes both it self and others, and can set families, Towns, Countries
on a flame. What a great fire of contention has been kindled sometimes by a
word, as to call one, fool, knave, or to say, thou lie, -- how far and long
has in burnt? and where has it ended? in blows, yea in blood, and in the
ashes or utter ruin of others.

7 To Poison (of which also before out of James 3.8.) for the Tongue is full of
deadly poison, Psalm. 140.3. it conveys poison by words to infect others, as
Serpents do by tooth or sting. Malicious words are spits of venom. Is there
need of ruling a rod or sword? of guiding an Arrow and Raysor? -- of covering a
pit, of keeping fire in? -- of expelling or tempering poison? that none of
these may do any harm? and is there not as great a necessity of governing the
Tongue well, that it may do no prejudice or hurt to any? These things to which
the ungoverned Tongue is compared, are not only nocive in themselves, but
diffusive of the evils that is in them. So is the Tongue.

Hence the acts of the mind and heart are attributed to the Tongue, because
whatsoever evil the heart can devise, the Tongue is ready to vent the same;
Therefore the Tongue is charged with devising of mischief, Psalm. 52.2. and with
loving all devouring words, verse. 4.

An unbridled Tongue is, vehiculum Diaboli, Mr. Greenham.
the Chariot of the Devil wherein he rides in triumph. One does describe the
Tongue prettily by contraries, or diversities: It is a little piece of flesh,
small in quantity, but mighty in quality: It is soft, but slippery; it goes
lightly, but falls heavily, it strikes soft, but wounds sore; it goes out
quickly, but burns vehemently; it peirceth deep, and therefore not healed
speedily; it has liberty granted easily to go forth; but it will find no means
easily to return home, and being once inflamed with Satan's bellows, it is like
the fire of Hell; The course of an unruly Tongue is to proceed from evil to
worse, to begin with foolishness, and go on with bitterness, and to end in
mischief and madness. See Eccles. 10.13. The Jews conference with our Savior
began with arguments, Joh. 8.33. ver. 48.
we be Abraham's seed, said they, etc. but proceeded to blasphemies, Say we
not well that thou art a Samaritan, and have a Devil? Verse. 59.
and ended in cruelty -- then took they up stones to cast at him. This also is
the base disposition of a bad Tongue to hate those whom it afflicts, Prove.
26.28.

2 The mischief of the tongue may further appear by the mercy of being
delivered from it, for

1 So God has promised Job 5.17.
it -- God saves the poor from the sword, Verse. 21.
from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty -- and thoushalt be hid
from the scourge of Tongues, or from being betongued, as some render it, that
is, from being, as it were, caned or cudgeld with the ^ongues of others. Psalm.
31.20.
Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of man; thou
shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of Tongues, that is,
from all calumnies, reproaches, evil speakings of all kinds. God will preserve
the good names of his people from the blots and bespatterings of malicious men,
as Kings protect their favorites against slanders and clamours.

2 So the Saints have prayed for it, as Psalm. 120.2.
David. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips -- and from a deceitful
tongue.

Thirdly and lastly, the mischief of the tongue appears by the final misery it
draws others into, that is Hell, and drowns them in eternal destruction. The
Tongue sends more souls to Hell by errors, Heresies, wicked counsel; bad
example, inticements and persuasions to evil, than any other member of the
body; when other members slay but their hundreds, the tongue slays thousands
of souls, and casts them down into the nethermost Hell. Therefore avoid ill
tongues, for they are bad company. Its the wise man's Prove. 20.19. Prove. 25.23.
counsel, meddle not with him that flattereth (or entiseth) with his lips: but
drive away backbiting tongues with an angry countenance from you, as the North
wind (that beesome of the air, as one calls it) does rain; brow-beat them, and
they will be gone.

Walk circumspectly, take heed to your spirits and ways, that malicious
tongues may find no matter to fasten an accusation upon you; 1 Pet. 2.15.
that by well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. The
Saints sanctity stops the wicked mouths of their enemies, Job 5.16.

The Fourth Reason, The commodity.
from the commodity of the good government of the tongue, which is great, in
respect 1 Of our selves. 2 Of others.


For the Tongue is either the best or worst member of the body, as it is
ordered; and an instrument of great good, or of great hurt; When it is well
ordered, it is an instrument of great good,

1 To our selves, to procure us four things, scil. life, salvation, joy, and
satisfaction.

1 Life, for God has intaild the promise of living long, and seeing good days
upon the refrayning of the Tongue from evil, 1 Per. 3.10.
and of the lips from guile. Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue
(says Solomon) and they that love it shall eat the fruits thereof -- in the
power, that is, Prove. 18.21.
in the government of the Tongue.

1 To save and prolong life, if it be well governed.

2 To condemn, and shorten life, if it be ill guided.

For though the tongue be but a little member, yet it has a great command,
what a great dependence is there upon a man's own tongue, for life or death; as
there is upon the Judges tongue, for passing sentence upon the prisoners, of
absolution or condemnation.

They that love life will use their tongues well, and they shall eat the
pleasant fruits of it. They that love death, let their tongues run at random,
have not mastery over them, and they shall eat the bitter fruits thereof. As
every one delights to use his tongue (well or ill) or as he sows his words,
so he shall reap fruit, good or bad.

2 Salvation; for as with the heart man believes unto righteousness (or
Justification) So with the mouth confession is made unto Romans 10.10.
salvation.

The well using or abusing of the Tongue is effectual, either for salvation or
destruction, to eternity.

As life and death, so Heaven and Hell, Salvation and damnation are in the
power of the Tongue, scil. thus far, that according as men rule their tongues
well or ill, so they shall be saved or damned; go to Heaven or Hell. Hence it
is that David describes a Citizen of Zion more largely by his Psa. 15.1, 2, 3.
tongue, as that he speaks the truth in his heart, he backbiteth not with
his tongue, nor -- does (any) evil (thereby) to his neighbor -- he swears to
his own hurt, and changes not, verse. 4. than by any other member of his body,
either foot, verse. 2. that he walks uprightly, or hand, that he works
righteousness, or ears, that he does not receive a reproach against his
Neighbor, verse. 3. or eyes, that a vile person is contemned therein, verse 4.

Tongue-properties and praises are tripple, if not quadruple, and the
commendation of the other members but single.

3 Joy, for a man has joy by the answer of his Prove. 15.23.
mouth, when he has spoken right words, suitable, seasonable and effectual
(as was declared before.) The wisdom of a man's speech is the rejoicing of his
heart. This is our rejoicing (says Paul) the testimony of our conscience
within; I may add; 2 Cor. 1.12.
the innocence of our Tongues, and the purity of our lips without.

4 Satisfaction, A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth,
says the Prove. 12.14.
Wiseman -- shall eat good by it, -- cap. 13.2. -- A man's belly shall be
satisfied with the fruit of his mouth, and with the increase of his lips shall
he be filled, Prove. 18.20. and verse. 21. -- he shall eat the fruit, scil. of
the tongue. This satisfaction is contentfull acquiescence, and comfortable
composure of mind and heart, upon a fourfold account.

1 That God has been with our mouths and directed our tongues what to say.

2 That God will reward as well the words of our mouths, as the works of our
hands; yea all the instruments of speech shall have their proper and full
reward, as the -- tongue, mouth, lips; which some conceive the cause, why
Solomon so particularly, and distinctly names them. The good usage of the
tongue to the glory of God, and good of others, the Lord God of Recompenses
will surely requite both here and hereafter.

3 That we shall reap good to our selves by speaking of that which is good to
others; by instructing, exhorting, counselling and comforting others, we teach,
excite, advise and refresh our selves, and may thereby grow better both in
knowledge and in practice.

By speaking of good things to others, we imprint the same more deeply upon
our own hearts, and our knowledge is made more clear, and our affections more
warm. Whereas the speaking of evil words make men worse; they corrupt their own
good manners.

4 That we may expect to receive good from others in way of recompense, for
the fruit of our mouths, and increase of our lips, bestowed upon them, in
wholesome instructions, counsels and consolations, as Paul writ to the 1 Cor.
9.11
Corinthians.

If we sow unto you spiritual things, ( scil. by our mouths) is it a great
thing if we shall reap your carnal things? (scil. with our hands) the mouth is
a field narrow in compass, but fruitful above measure (either with good or
evil, with wholesome or hurtful words) therefore Solomon speaks often of the
fruit of the mouth. It is very commodious to sow this field with good seed, and
it will yield you your own with great advantage.

Ought we not to govern our tongues well, as we desire to enjoy life or
salvation, joy or satisfaction?

2 Great is the commodity of a well ordered tongue, in respect of others, the
benefits and advantages, that redound to them thereby (as we showed before in
the second Rule for regulating speech, in the end thereof. Especially these
three)

1 Communication of our minds, gifts, graces, and experiences to others, were
it not for the tongue, one man should not know the mind of another, but be as
a vessel without vent, stopped up, a spring hidden in the ground, or a fountain
sealed; words are the image, and the tongue the Index of the mind; Psalm. 66.16.
we could not tell others what God has done for our souls, nor counsel others
what they should entreat God to do for their souls; nor provoke others to love,
or to do good works, if we wanted either the precious faculty of speech; or the
gracious government of the tongue, The lips of the wise disperse knowledge
says Prove. 15.7.
Solomon, how? as the Sun does beams of light, and influences; as a fountain
does water; fire does heat, and flowers do fragrant smell; -- and as they
desperse knowledge, so other gifts; a spiritual blessing for all to gather up,
and suck in, who are so wise as to know the worth thereof.

2 Is Salvation, both

1 Temporal, our tongues may sometimes save others sooner than our hands --
Abigail by her tongue saved Nabals life, and the wise woman of Abel by her
tongue preserved the City, as I showed before. 2 And eternal, No member of the
body can help others to Heaven so effectually and speedily as the tongue. God
uses and blesses the same as an instrument of the conversion, instruction,
edification, reformation and confirmation of those that shall be saved. Romans
10.17.
Faith comes by hearing the word preached. Paul (by Gods blessing upon his
ministerial tongue, and lip-labours) begat the Corinthians unto God, 1 Cor.
4.15. encouraged and established the souls of the Disciples, Act. 14.21, 22.
and licked whole the Churches sores. Edifying discourse is a great help
toward Heaven.

3 Consolation, for God creates the fruit of the lips to be peace, peace to
sad sorrowful Isa. 57.19.
souls, 1 These. 5.14

Barnab as by his Tongue was a son of Consolation, Act 4.36. God poures the oil
of gladness into disconsolate souls, and troubled spirits by the mouths of his
servants; But God seldom uses ungoverned, vain tongues, as Instruments of
spiritual good to others. If we would procure the temporal, or promote the
eternal good of others; their present comfort or future felicity, then we
should get, use, and keep a good tongue in our heads? which is compared by the
Holy Ghost in Scripture, to the most excellent and useful things, as

1 To choice silver, Prove. 10.20. To the Tree of life, Prove. 15.4. that would
have given immortality to the eaters, To a precious Jewel, Prove. 20.15. To
food, Prove. 10.21. To Physic, or medicine, Prove. 12.18. But of these something
was spoken before.

The fifth and last Reason is drawn from the convenience of helps, The
convenience of Helps.
afforded us for the government of the Tongue. As

1 Other Organs are double. God has given us two eyes, two ears, two hands,
two feet; but one tongue, which is more easily ruled than two. Alas, how can
we guide two tongues, that cannot govern one well?

2 God has set a double fence or guard before the mouth ( scil. of lips, and
of teeth) to keep the Tongue in, and has shut it up in he mouth as in a
Cloister or hole of the head, with doors, to signify there is a precious
treasure in the Tongue, linguam velut in specum abdidit, says Erasmus, to
teach it modesty, and keep it under restraint, and make it slow to speak. No
other member has the like. God has so framed the ears, as they should be
always open, and therefore swift to hear, and he has covered the eyes with a
thin skin only, for defense and for sleep.

3 God gives Reason to be a guide to the Tongue, and permits not the use of the
tongue, before the use of Reason in some measure, as we see in little Children,
who are not suffered to speak, till they have some understanding.

4 God has placed the Tongue in the head, which is the subject and seat of all
the senses, both interior, as imagination and memory, and exterior, as seeing,
hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. The Tongue has near to it the Organs of
all these senses, as the eyes, ears, nose; the faculty of tasting is peculiar
to the Tongue; and though the power of touching be dispersed through all the
parts of the body; yet the tongue has a more subtle, and curious touch than
other members, for the taste is made by the contact of the tongue; which can
perceive the least hair that is mingled with meat. Therefore our Tongues should
not speak, before we have consulted with all the neighboring senses, to get
what information they can give us concerning the persons or things spoken of,
or to; especially with the eye and ear which are called senses of Discipline,
to which the Principality is ascribed, because by reading and hearing we may be
not only informed of the matter spoken of, but instructed to speak wisely and
profitably.

Hence it is

1 Erasmus.
That the ministry of the Tongue should be the last (as one says) of all the
members, that is, a man should hear see, smell, taste, feel, before he speak;
as the sentence of the Judge follows after the evidence of the witnesses, the
pleadings of the lawyers, and the verdict of the Jury.

2 What a man speaks from the knowledge and experiences of the senses, he
asserts with confidence and boldness, 1 John 1.1.2, 3.
as John did. -- That which we have seen and heard (and our hands have
handled) declare we unto you.

3 Providence so orders it, as those that are deaf (many of them) are dumb
also; because they cannot hear instruction, nor learn wisdom to speak aright,
therefore they shall not speak at all.

5 God has placed the Tongue between the heart and the brain, in the confines
of both, to take counsel of and to be directed by, both, as well as to be an
interpreter of both.

6 God gives us his word to be a rule for our tongues to speak by, his Spirit
for a guide to direct them in all our words, and his grace to season all our
speech.

7 and lastly, God himself is willing to be the keeper both of our mouths (for
therefore David found in his heart to put up that request to God, in Psalm.
141.3. Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of my lips) and of
our keeping and watching of the same; for, Except the Lord keep the City (I may
say, keep the mouth) the watchman (over both) watches in vain. The more means
God gives us of eschewing evil, or doing good (with any member) the greater is
our sin, if we neglect the same.

To the general Rules of Speech I will add special directions in some
particular cases, as Confession, Reprehension. Communication.

1 In Confession 1 Of our sins to men. 2 Of Christ and his Truth before men.


1 In confessing our sins to men. This is a Text-duty James 5.16.
, confess your faults one to another, (says the Apostle James) and pray one
for another, that ye may be healed; not only to the Elders of the Church, but
to your Brethren also.

For this is to be understood of all the faithful, whether Pastors or people.

Confess your faults, (...), that is, non omnes uni^ sod quiliber alterl, not
all to one, but every one to another. Brother to Brother, and Neighbor to
Neighbor. All that are to pray one for another, ought to confess their faults
one to another. This duty is mutual and reciprocal.

As for Auricular Confession which the Papists hold absolutely necessary, scil.
for every one to confess all his sins, with all the circumstances of them, in
the ear of a Priest, once a year at least is a mere invention or design for
politic ends, scil. to know the secrets of others, to keep them in awe, and to
inslave the souls, consciences and devotions of the people to their Interests.

The Papists would father this their Doctrine upon James in the Text, but there
is no cause or color at all for it. By the Apostles Rule the Priest should
confess his faults to the penitent persons, as well as they theirs to the
Priest.

I will give you three directions in this duty.

1 In what cases 2 To what persons 3 From what Principle
Confession is to be made to others.

1 In what cases you should confess your faults one to another, eight
especially.

1 In scandal, Scandal.
given by persons either before or after their Reception into the Church, and
fellowship of the Gospel.

1 Before the same. Those that desire it, having formerly committed gross
sins, notoriously known, should solemnly acknowledge their sinful courses, and
godly sorrow for them, and resolution against them for future; to give
satisfaction to the Church that God has wrought a converting (or regenerating
change) in them.

As those whom John baptized in Jordan, and received into the Church of the
Gospel, confessed their Mat. 3.6.
sins.

The converts at Ephesus, that believed through Paul's Doctrine, came and
confessed and ^^ewed their Act. 19.18, 20.
deeds with detestation, and burnt their Conjuring books, which amounted to a
great value, Verse. 19.
openly renouncing their former life and course.

2 After admission to ordinances, and fellowship in the church of Christ, those
that give offense (by walking 2 These. 3.6.
disorderly) whether to the whole Church, or but to some particular members of
it, they ought to confess their faults to the whole society (or to the persons
in it to whom the same is known) to testify their repentance and thereby the
truth of Grace in them) that those who know their sin, may know their sorrow
also; and

1 If the offense be public, by their confession to preserve the credit of the
society, and roll away reproach and infamy from it, that it may not be
accounted an ulcerous body, a leprous company, nor a cage of unclean birds, and
to give warning and an alarm to others that hear it, to fear lest they offend.

2 If the offending Brother be cast out, or the Brethren withdraw from him,
they may receive satisfaction by the free ingenuous and hearty confession of
his offense, and receive him to fellowship, and renew their love and favor
toward him, as Paul entreated the Church at Corinth to do to the incestuous
person, upon the same 2 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8.
account, ye ought to forgive him, and to comfort him, lest he should be
swallowed up with over much sorrow. Wherefore I beseech you that you would
confirm your love toward him.

2 Is Injuries, which ye have done to others, Injuries.
ye should willingly acknowledge and be sorry for the same. For Confession in
this case is a kind of satisfaction, and a means of pacification. Christ
directs us to do thus. -- If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there
remembrest thy Brother has ought against Mat. 5.23, 24.
thee, leave thy gift there, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
Brother, then come and offer thy gift. God will accept no service at your
hands, till ye have confessed to your Brethren the wrongs you have done them.
Again, in Luke 17.34. If thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him, and if
he repent, forgive him, -- and if he trespass against thee seven times in a
day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee, saying, I repent thou shall
forgive him. Even wicked Saul confessed to David the wrong he had done him, in
persecuting him without 1 Samuel 24.17, 18, 19. Scruple.
cause.

3 Case is Scruple, about a sin that stings or burtheneth your consciences, as
whether you have committed it (how many are perplexed with doubts and fears
concerning the sin against the Holy Ghost) or are not some way accessory to it?
or whether your sin is pardonable? or a sin unto death? or how may you obtain
pardon and assurance thereof? and how your consciences may be quieted and
comforted?

Let me join herewith, Predominancy of sin.
the case of the predominancy of a lust, which assaults and afflicts you with
the vigorous stirrings of it, and is too hard and masterfull for you.

In both these cases you may disburthen your souls into the bolome of some wise
godly friends, and acquaint them with your scruples, what sins you fear you
have committed; and with your unruly corruptions, what sins you are strongly
tempted to commit, to obtain the benefit of their counsels, and of their
prayers, how to get sin pardoned to you, and subdued in you, ease to your
consciences, and rest to your souls.

The more free you are to unbosome your selves, and lay open your soul-cases to
others, the more forward will they be to pity you, advise you, and pray for
you, that you may be healed of your soul-sores and consciencewounds, which by
concealing may grow incurable. How can the Physician apply healing medicines,
if the patient do not discover his disease?

Oftentimes the very opening of men's grievances eases the conscience (says a
reverend Divine) as the opening of a vein cooles the blood: Dr. Sibs.
But it is neither wisdom nor mercy to put men upon the rack of Confession,
further, than they can have no ease any other way.

The Fourth Case is a common Judgment, or a particular affliction.

1 A common Judgment, when a man has had a special hand in pulling down the
same, common Judgment.
and is detected by the providence of God; he ought to confess his sin (that
procured it) not only before God, but before men also, who suffer with him, and
for his sake, to clear the Justice of Gods proceedings. The Israelites were
smitten at Ai, and could not stand before their enemies, for Achans sin, in
plundering the wedge of gold, Josh. 7.
and Babylonish Garment.

For the removal of Gods wrath and Judgment from Israel, Joshua said to Achan,
Verse. 19.
my Son give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession
unto him, and tell me now what thou have done hide it not from me. Observe

1 That Joshua required Achan to confess his sin, not only to God, but to man
also, even to Joshua the Ruler of the people.

2 That Achan by confessing his sin should give glory to God, and clear his
justice both in smiting Israel, and in drawing him out to deserved punishment.

Then Achan freely confessed his sin to Joshua, Ver. 20, 21, etc.
that he and no other had committed that heinous offense, -- and thus and thus
have I done, said he, etc.

Jonahs sin in flying to Tarshish, when God sent him to Nineveh, Jonah 1.
procured a mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like to be broken,
and Jonab with all the men and goods in it, were in danger to be cast away,
then Jonah confessed his fault even to the Mariners (that were Pagans freely
and fully, without pleading excuse for it, or extenuation of it; for the men
knew that he had fled from the presence of the Lord, Jonah 1.10.
because he had told them.

2 particular affliction.
A particular affliction; as sickness; In this case you must confess your
sins to God chiefly, and you may confess them (especially that particular sin,
which you conceive to be the cause of your sickness) to men also, as to the
Elders of the Church (and to other Christian friends) thereby

1 To justify God, that he is Righteous, faithful, yea and merciful in
laying his hand upon you.

2 To move men ( scil, the Elders, and others) your friends to pray more
fervently for you, 1 That your sins may be pardoned. 2 That your sickness may
be cured.


For the healing both of your sin and sickness of your soul and body, may be
a fruit of their prayers to God for you; and their praying for you, an effect
of your confessing your sins to them, which if they did not know, they could
not so fully and feelingly, or would not so freely and fervently spread your
case before the Lord, and wrestle with him for the remission of your sin, for
the recovery of your health, or for the removal of his hand that lies upon you
in any other kind.

This I apprehend to be the Apostle James his sense and scope, in the 14, 15,
16. verses of his fifth Chapter.

When men suffer as malefactors, they should openly acknowledge their sin,
that Gods justice may be cleared in their due, and deserved punishment; for
hereby glory is given to God (as was showed before in Achans case) the penitent
thief on the Cross by acknowledging his sin, justified God in condemning him,
and Christ in suffering with him; Luke 23.40, 41.
-- we indeed (says he to the other thief) suffer justly, for we receive the
due reward of our deeds, but this man (he means Christ) has done nothing
amiss. Confessing of sin to men is a clearing of God visibly before men. Psalm.
51.4. Reproof.


The Fifth Case is Reproof from others; when they tell you of your faults, you
should freely confess them, your grief for them, and purpose to amend them.
When Nathan said to David, Thou art the man, -- that have killed Uriah, 2 Samuel
12.7, 8.
and taken his wife to be thy wife, David said to Nathan, I have sinned against
the Lord. Verse. 13.


The confession of a fault is an Echo to a reprehension for it.

Sixth case is, Copartnership in sin.
Copartnership or consent with others in sin as Theft, murder, uncleanness,
drunkenness.

Those that have had fellowship together in sin, should confess their sins
one to another, to quicken and excite one another to consider their ways, (the
evils they have done together) to repent and amend, and to pray one for another
that they may be healed of their sinful courses, and do so no more, to help
one another out of the snares of Satan, wherein they have been taken captive by
him at his will.

Especially when any of their Consciences (who have been Companions in
iniquity) are awakened to repent of their wickedness, saying what have I done?
Jer. 8.6
they should confess their faults to their fellow-theeves, fellowdrunkards,
fellow-wantons, fellow-murderers, to awaken them also, to consider and lay to
heart what evils they have committed together?

It were to be wished, that all who have been like Simion and Levi, Genesis 49.5
brethren in evil, and have drawn one another into sin, and toward hell, would
by mutual confessing of their faults, provoke one another to Repentance and
Reformation, and help one another to heaven.

When affliction had awakened the consciences of Joseph's brethren, about their
Conspiracy and cruelty against him, whom they sold into Egypt, the guilt
whereof was (as some compute) about twenty years old, Annot.
though they felt not the smart of it till now, then they confessed their
sin, with grief one to another, when they were imprisoned by Joseph for Genesis
42.21, 22.
spies, they said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning our brother,
in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not
hear, therefore is this distress come upon us.

The good Thief confessed his sin to his Fellow-malefactor, and rebuked him
for railing on Christ, Luke 23.39, 40. and counseled him to fear God -- do
not thou fear God? q. d. thou ought to do so.

Seventh Case, To magnify Gods grace.
To magnify the riches of Gods free grace toward you, though you have
committed such and such sins; upon this account Paul confessed under his hand
to Timothy that he was before a Persecutor, a Blasphemer, and injurious, or a
contumelious person -- yea the chief of sinners, (...)
yet God enabled him, counted him faithful, putting him into the ministry,
verse. 12. -- he obtained mercy, verse. 13. and the grace of the Lord was
exceeding abundant to him and in him, verse. 14. and Christ came to save him,
verse. 15.

To this end Paul made several confessions of his sins, as to the people, Act.
22.4, 5. before King Agrippa, Act. 26.9, 10, 11.

Eighth Cafe, to prevent sin in others, To prevent sin
by confessing you^sins, and the evils you have found by experience in them to
make them to beware thereof.

It is seasonable, and may be profitable for condemned Malefactors at their
Execution, to make an open confession of their sins before all the spectators,
especially of those sins which brought them to that untimely end, and to
dissuade all from their sinful courses, as they would avoid their miserable
end.

Object. Are we bound to confess every sin (of which we are guilty) to
others? seeing hereby,

1 We may bring our selves into danger; Suppose a man has committed murder,
theft, or the like secretly, so that it is not known; his own discovery of it
may cost him his life, according to that saying, confels and be hanged. Is a
man bound to betray himself? Nemo tenerur prodere scipsum.


2 Hereby we may expose our selves to reproach and contempt, by publishing our
private and particular corruptions; and ought not a Christian to preserve his
own good name?

Answ. First, To confess all and every sin, (so far as we know or can
remember) unto God, is absolutely necessary, but confession thereof to men is
necessary only in some cases, and not of all sins. To impose the same (as the
Papists do in their Auricular confession) is to set Conscience upon the rack,
and to lay on a heavy burden intolerable to be born.

Secondly, We are required to confess such sins to others as are open, or
some way known to them; not such as are secret or hidden from them; as

1 Bosom sins need not be confessed to men, but to God alone, to whom they
are known as the injuries we have done others intrinsecally, by hard thoughts,
evil furmisings, causeless jealousyes, revengeful desires, or rejoycings, --
by heart-theft, heart-murder; heart adultery. These we should acknowledge with
grief before the Lord (the searcher of all hearts) and pray with David, Cleanse
thou me from secret faults. Psalm. 19.12


2 Sins actually committed, but secretly, so as they are unknown to men (as
secret murder, secret theft, secret uncleanness) we may conceal them while 1
Providence covers them. 2 And Conscience is quiet, and
does not constrain us to confess them, to men, but to God only who sees in
secret both our sins and our sorrow for them.

But when God in his providence brings our secret sins to light, when our
Consciences being awakened (by Gods word or judgments) do so terrify and
torment us for them, as we can have no ease nor quiet in our spirits, till we
have acknowledged them; then we ought to confess our sins, though we
suffer for them, as some have done many years after their sins were
committed; during which time, providence made no discovery of them, but let
them lie covered with a vale of secrecy; and their Consciences lying a sleep
were silent, or though awake, did not violently accuse for them.

The most of the forementioned cases of confession to men, concern such faults
as are some way known to men, either

1 Openly in the Acts of them; such are scandals given to the Church, or to
particular persons, so long as the same are kept secret, they are not
scandalous; and the wrongs we have done to others in word or deed, -- and the
evils we have done together with others, as companions in iniquity.

2 Or by the effect, consequent, or some discovering mark thereof.

Achans theft was kept secret; for he hid what he had stolen in the earth, Josh.
7.21.
in the midst of his Tent; but it was discovered, first, by the blow God gave
Israel for this sin of Achan, called the accursed thing, -- they were smitten
at Ai; After by casting of lots (a course of Gods prescribing to find out the
offender) and the lot fell upon Achans Tribe, family and person; thus his
iniquity found him out, then he confessed his sin to Joshua, and died for it.

Jonahs flight from the presence of the Lord, was a secret fault, known only to
God and himself at first, but providence afterward brought it to light; by the
Lords sending a mighty tempest upon the Sea, so that the ship Jonah was in, and
all that were in it, were in Jeopardie; and the Mariners casting lots to find
out who was the cause of that evil upon them, Jon. 1.6. Verse. 10.
the lot fell upon Jonah. Then Jonah confessed his fault to them, and was
willing to be cast into the Sea, Verse. 12, 15.
to calm it, and to save them.

Let me add this, Though open confession of secret wrongs done to others
(unknown to them how or by whom) be not necessary, yet Restitution or
Reparation thereof is necessary; which may be done as privately ( scil. by the
hand of a stranger, or the like) as the fault was committed; and it suffices,
though the person injured knows not who did him the wrong, nor who makes him
amends.

3 We may confess sometimes even our secret sins to others, to our own
advantage, as in the particular cases before specified; to wit,

1 Of scruple, when they burden our consciences.

2 Of Predominancy, when they tyrannize over us, and trouble us, or we are
strongly tempted to them.

3 Of affliction (be it sickness, or any loss or cross) the cause whereof we
conceive to be some secret lust, infirmity, or failing in us.

-- To obtain comfort, counsel, compassion and supplication from others, and
thereby help and remedy against sin and trouble, both of body and soul, as was
showed before. This is no more than for a patient to acquaint the Physician
with his secret disease (unknown to others) that he may apply healing
medicines, suitable and effectual thereunto; or for a beggar to uncover his
sore, to move others to pity him, and to contribute toward his healing. So
much of the cases in which confession should be made to others.

The second Thing is, the persons to whom we should confess our faults, to wit,

1 Our open faults to the persons or societies whom we have either 1 Injured, 2
Or scandalized, 3 Or consociated in sin.

2 Our secret faults we should confess to such persons (Ministers or others)
as we judge wise, godly and faithful,

1 To keep our counsel, conceal our infirmities, lock up our secrets in their
bosoms, and not divulge them to our prejudice.

2 To counsel us aright, concerning our bosome-cases.

3 To pity us, and to pray for us.

These are the properties of bosome-friends.

Object. Shall we not hereby lose our Repute, and blemish our name?

Ans. Confession of our secret faults to such, will not impair our credit, nor
impeach our good name with them, because

1 They will consider themselves that they also may be tempted, troubled and
exercised so as we are; and they will remember that Law of Justice and equity,
of doing to others what they would have others do to them, Mat. 7.12.

2 The confessing of our secret sins to them, upon such an account, will
represent us to them, to be tender in conscience, soft in heart, humble in
spirit, hating sin, fearful to offend.

Hereby we shall give them occasion

1 To discern more of the grace of God (of the truth, and workings of it) in us.

2 To think better, yea more highly of us (as Christ did of the Centurion, and
of the woman of Canaan) the worse we think, and the more evil we speak of our
selves this will not lessen, but greaten our esteem with them.

The third thing is, from what Principles, or in what manner, we should
confess our faults to others, scil. from Zeal, Hatred, Love, Humility.

1 Out of Zeal for God, Zeal.
to give him glory before men of his 1 Omniscience, knowing our sins, even the
most secret, and 2 Providence in detecting them.

2 Justice in punishing, or Righteousness and faithfulness in afflicting us
for them.

3 Free grace in pardoning them, and in accepting, employing and saving us from
them, or notwithstanding them.

4 Patience in sparing us, and mercy in doing us good, notwithstanding the
evils we have done.

2 Out of hatred of sin, Hatred.
we should confess it with grief for it, and aggravation and detestation of
it; as a man would speak of the most loathsome, abominable things, as of eating
or drinking Excrements, or touching of Toads; yea as we would tell or inform
others of a most notorious Thief, Murderer, or Malefactor, that he may be
executed, or of a Toad or Snake, that it may be killed.

Yea so as by confessing our sins, (to God or man) to cast them up with
loathing as nauseous stuff, as men do meat which their stomachs cannot digest,
but loathe. For confession is a vomit of the soul, whereby it casts up or spuos
out sin, and disburthens it self of it, which lay heavy upon it, and made the
soul sick.

3 Love.
Out of love to others to make sin odious and abominable to them; and to make
them abhor and eschew the sins we have committed, and escape shame and sorrow
that we have tasted for the same -- also out of grief, for wronging or
offending others, and from a just mind to give them satisfaction by confession
thereof to them, to obtain their pardon and favor.

4 Humility.
Out of humility, to humble our selves, for our faults even before men (in the
cases, or upon the occasions premised) to take shame to our selves, in
confessing them; and to make it appear how much we abhor sin, and our selves
for sin, and how vile we are in our own eyes; also, to prevent others thinking
too highly of us, which was Paul's desire, who would not have others to think
him better than he was, 2 Cor. 12.6.

We should bewail the neglect of, and averseness to this duty, in all sorts,
even from young to old, the most are more forward

1 To commit sin with others, or to encourage others unto sin.

2 To deny, hide, or excuse their sins; even when they are taxed and reproved
for them.

3 Or to outface their faults, and justify them, than to confess them to
others.

It is the property of sinners, and the infirmity of Saints (who are but as
Infants in measure, and sanctified but in part) to palliate and cover their
sins as much as they can; This has been their manner from the beginning; or
from sins entrance into the World. See it in our first Parents. Adam laid the
blame of his sin upon Eve, and Eve of her sin upon the Serpent, Sarah covered
her laughter with a lie; she feared a reproof for what she had done, Gen 18.15.
but she was not afraid to deserve it by denying what she had done.

What a miserable sort of excuses will be pleaded (says one) when men are
charged with sin, for all are graven out of Adam. Mr. Greenham.


I have read a Proverb, that sin seweth it self a garment (being ashamed to go
naked) that is, excuses, invented by Satan, but made by men and women, as the
suit of fig leaves were by Adam and Eve, who were the first offenders; but they
cannot cover sins nakedness, nor keep it warm, nor put any comeliness upon it,
for the excuse of sin multiplies sin, and makes addition thereunto.

Quest. Why are men so backward to confess sin?

Ans. 1. Because confession of sin contains in it, or brings shame and grief
along with it for sin, which sin cannot endure. They are as smoke to the eyes,
Vinegar to the teeth, bitter as Gall and wormwood to the taste of sin.

Sin has so perverted the soul, as to misplace shame in acknowledging
offenses, which should be placed in offending.

2 Confession is an Ejection of sin (as it is said) where sin is freely
confessed, it is fully cast out; It lays an engagement upon men, not to commit
sin again, when they have confessed it, but absolutely to hate it, to part with
it, and put it away. This neither Satan nor sin (its brat) can endure. They
hate putting away, where they have gotten possession, they desire to hold it.
Confession separates between sin and soul, and makes a divorce.

3 Because Confession is a bringing of sin (that horrid Monster) to light; an
open discovery of it in its shape and colors, which are most ugly and
deformed. Now sin hates the light, Joh. 3.20.
and hates coming to the light, and hates Confession which causes it; and
hides it self in the bosom of the sinner. Satan imploys all his policy, and
sin all its power and interest it has in us to conceal it, and to wave the
confession of it. Sin loves to wear a veil of secrecy, or a vizzard of
counterfeit piety, or a Garment of excuses, that the filth and shame of its
nakedness may not appear; or to wrap it self like the Devil in Samuels mantle.

As false Prophets come to us in sheep clothing, so does sin in the guise,
color or show of virtue, to deceive us.

Object. Sin is a filthy, shameful thing, it becomes Saints not once to name
it, as Fornication, Uncleanness, Covetousness, Ephesians. 5.3. why then should we
confess it?

Ans. 1. Though sin be filthy and abominable in it self, yet the Confession of
sin is clean and commendable.

2 There is difference between naming, and naming of sin, scil.

1 With delight in it, boasting of it, or indulgence to it, This naming of sin
is sin.

2 Or with detestation of it, and indignation at it, and grief for it, This
naming of sin is good and gracious.

3 To conceal sin, but not to confess it (when there is occasion) is sinful
modesty, (shameful shamefastness) to keep Satan's counsel; to hide and
harbor a Thief or murderer in our bosoms, that will rob our souls, and cut
our throats; this argues stubbornness of spirit, and self-hardening against
reproof. Such a disposition is the highway to destruction. For he that
covers his sins, Prove. 28.13
(that is, who will not confess them, no not when he is called thereunto)
shall not prosper -- and he that being often reproved hardens his neck
(refusing to confess or to amend his fault) shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.

4 A serious and religious confession of sin, is a Remedy to cleanse and heal
soul-maladies. The first piece of amends for our sinning is to confess our
sins. The hiding of sin is like the covering or skinning of a sore, which will
fester inwardly, and break out dangerously. What a restraint would this be to
sin, to take liberty to do nothing (no not secretly) which we would not take
boldness to confess even openly?

To Confess sin aright is an Herb of Grace which grows not in natures
Garden; when a man is condemned in himself through deep Conviction and sense of
sin, he will be free to accuse himself before others; when he feels the
bitterness of sin in his Soul, he will cast it up as loathsome stuff, though
he swallowed it down as a sweet morsel.

Many famous men (as Austine, Origin, and others) have been free to publish the
Errors of their opinions to the world.

Why should we be unwilling to confess the Errors of our manners?

Romans 10.10. -- With the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto Salvation.

HEre is a double duty annexed to two principal parts of man. --

1 The Duty of the Heart, that is faith, and the effect thereof is
Righteousness; that is, we are justified by faith, apprehending the
righteousness of Christ.

2 The Duty of the Mouth, that is, confession, and the consequent of it is
Salvation.

Observe the order and Connection of these two.

1 The order, the Heart goes before the Tongue, and Believing before
Confessing.

2 The Connection of them, as of the cause with the effect, for Faith in the
Heart is the Root, or principle of confession with the Mouth; both should go
together as fire and flame, as spring and stream, as Tree and fruit.

Doctrine;

It is a Gospel-Duty to confess with the Mouth, as well as to believe with the
Heart.

I desire to open four things.

1 What this Confession is, 2 When it should be made, 3 Why, 4 How.

1 What it is. This Confession is an open Profession of Christ, What Confession
is.
and his Gospel, Truths and ways and a pleading for the same.

1 Of Christ of whole Christ.

1 Of his Natures, or divinity and humanity. The woman of Canaan confessed
Christ to be Lord, and the Son of David, that is, to be both God and Mat.
15.22.
man. John the Baptist confessed him to be the Son of Joh. 1.20, 27, 34.
God, the Eunuch did the like, Act. 8.37. Peter confessed him to be (...), the
Christ, the son of the living Mat. 16.16.
God, Joh. 6.69.

2 Of his Offices, Rabbi, said Joh. 1.49.
Nathaniel, Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. The Samaritan
woman confessed Christ to be a Prophet, both to Joh. 4.19. Verse. 29.
himself, Sir, (...), I see that thou art a Prophet, and before the Samaritans
-- Come (says she) See a man which told me all things that ever I did, Is not
this the Christ? did not John confess Christ's Priestly Office when he said,
Joh. 1.29.
Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world. -- All that
confessed him to be the Christ, or Messiah, did implicitly (at least)
acknowledge his offices, (scil.) to be King, Priest and Prophet, to which he
was anointed.

3 Of his beauty, excellency and dignity. What a large confession did the
Spouse make of Christ's beauty to the Daughters of Jerusalem, when they asked
her, what is thy Beloved more than another Beloved? Cant. 5.9.
-- my Beloved is white, and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. -- John
confessed the dignity, Verse. 10, etc.
and excellency of Christ, when he said, I am not the Christ, but his
praecurtor, Joh. 1.20.
or harbinger -- and he is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not
worthy to unloose, Ver. 27.
-- and in his last testimony of Christ, in Joh. 3.28. to 33. -- he says, that
Christ is the Bridegroom of his Church, he was but the Bridegroomes friend;
that Christ must increase, he decrease; this was John's joy, that Christ came
from Heaven above, and is above all, and therefore has justly most high
pre-eminence. -- This is held forth in that Catholic confession of Christ's
divine Nature, Power, Sovereignty and Excellency; that he is worthy to receive
all honor, glory and blessing, in Rev. 5.11, 12, 13.

4 Especially of those things concerning Christ which others deny, or doubt of;
as his resurrection from the dead. In the times of the Gospel the Jews and
Gentiles confessed Christ's death, Act. 4.2.
but would not acknowledge his resurrection; the Priest, and Sadduces were
grieved that the Apostles preached it; Therefore Christians were required to
make confession of this Truth in those times (scil.) that God raised Christ
from the dead; Romans 10.9.
and they should be saved. -- Therefore Paul boldly confessed the resurrection
of the dead, Act. 24.15.
before the Council, Act. 23.6. and before Felix.

2 Confession is an open profession of our selves in reference to Christ, in
five Particulars.

1 Of our Faith in Christ, and his Gospel: as the Father of the Child, in Mar
9.24. cried out and said with tears, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief,
and the blind man, in Joh. 9.38. Lord, I believe; -- Paul confessed his Faith
and Hope before Felix, Act. 24.15.
-- I believe all things which are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and
have hope toward God. -- Surely shall one say (that is, confess) says the
Lord by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 45.23, 24. in the Lord have I Righteousness
and strength, -- and of our interest in God, and in Christ by Faith, as David
did upon all occasions, -- He is my God, my portion. -- Job made an excellent
confession of his Faith in Christ (as his Redeemer) before his Friends, Job
19.25, 26, 27. -- as Thomas did when he said, My Lord, Joh. 20.2^.
and my God; and the Spouse, my wel-beloved is mine, and I am his, Cant. 2.16.
This is the Name whereby Christ shall be called ( i. e. confessed by us)
Jehovah our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

2 Of the grace of Christ in us, of the work and workings of it. Such a
confession Paul made to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.10. By the Grace of God, I
am that I am (q. d) that gives me my specifical being, life, and operation, as
I am a Christian) and his grace in me was not in vain, but I labored more
abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.

And he made the like to Timothy, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.
that he had been a blasphemer, and a persecutor, etc. but the Grace of our
Lord was exceeding abundant, with Faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, q.
d. God wrought a wonderful change in me by Grace, to make me a new Creature;
by Faith and Love, to form Christ in me, and to conform me unto Christ. And
when he declared his conversion before the people, in Acts 22. 1 King. 18.12.
Obadiah professed his fear of God to Elijah -- I thy Servant fear the Lord
from my youth. Peter professed his love of Christ, yea Lord, thou know that
I love thee, Joh. 21.16. and David professed God to be his exceeding joy, Psalm.
43.4, and Paul his glorying in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. 2. Cor. 12.10.

3 Of our worship of God after a Gospel mode, purely and spiritually without
humane Inventions or superstitious vanities. This we should openly own, and
profess, though others dislike it, and call it Schism or Novelism. (...)
24.13, 14.
So did Paul before Felix, -- They cannot prove the things whereof they now
accuse me, -- but this I confess unto thee, that after the way that they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.

4 Of our Practice, or manner of life, what is the constant Bent, Act. 24.16.
or Bias of our Resolutions and endeavors -- Paul also confessed this before
Felix -- Herein do I exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of
offense toward God, Act. 23.1.
and toward men, -- and before the Council -- I have lived in all good
conscience before God until this day.

5 Confession is an open Profession of our experiences of God, and of his
gracious dealings with us; of Christ and of his Grace in us, love to us, and of
our fellowship with him. -- The account David gave to them that feared God was
a confession of his experiences, Psalm. 66.16.
-- Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he has done
for my soul -- Such was John's first Epistle, wherein he declares to all, 1 John
1.1, 3.
that which the Apostles have seen, heard, and felt. -- Relations of
experiences are Confessions of Christ before men. I may add, that to bear
witness against sin, is to give Testimony for God, which is good and
acceptable service to God, though we suffer for it, as John the Baptist lost
his head for witnessing against Herod's Adultery, and Incest, Mar. 6.18, 27.

The second thing. When.
When this Confession should be made, to wit, when we are called thereunto,
either publicly or privately.

1 Publicly, either by a Church, or by a Magistrate.

1 By a Church of Christ, either

1 At the Constitution of it.

2 Or at our admission into it.

1 At the Constitution of it; for the Lord Jesus makes the confession of faith
to be the Rock or foundation upon which his visible Church is built, Mat.
16.16. to 19. Therefore when he first was about to tell his Apostles of
building his Church of a new frame or model under the Gospel, the old Fabric
of the Jewish Church being then to be taken down about the time of Christ's
passion, and the new to be set up after his assension, according to his
commission and direction given to his Apostles to that purpose, Act. 1.2, 3. --
being seen of them forty days, (after his Resurrection) and speaking (to
them) of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, that is, his Church, he
first requires an account or confession of their Faith. Whom say ye that I am?
Verse. 15.
Then Peter answered in the name of all the Apostles, (as our sound, Orthodox
Divines conceive) Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Therefore Peter
says, in John 6.69. not I only, but we (Apostles) believe and are sure that
thou art that Christ, the Son of the Living God, and Christ replied, thou art
Peter, (...) (that is a stone in this spiritual building, yea a pillar in the
Church, Gal. 2.9.) and upon this rock, (...), Mat. 16.18
that is, upon this confession made of me to be the Christ, or upon me the
rock as confessed, I will build my Church and the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it -- Hence we may collect two things.

1 That a good confession of Faith in Christ should be made and laid as a
foundation at the gathering or constituting of Churches (to build them upon)
which may be effectual to keep them sound in the faith, and free from errors,
and to engage them to hold fast their principles, and not to swarve from the
same; but to preserve the doctrine of Religion pure therein, and to strengthen
the whole building that is raised upon it --

2 That those are the fittest stones for the building of a Church, that can
give the best account of their faith in Christ.

2 At our Admission into a Church of Christ, to which we desire to join our
selves, and they require us to give an account of our faith and holiness, that
we are Saints and Believers -- This we should be free and ready to do.

1 Because as to believe with the heart, makes a man a member of the invisible
Church, so to confess with the mouth; or open profession of faith, qualifies
him to be a member of a visible Church of Christ.

2 This will give the Church knowledge of us, and satisfaction in us, yea move
them to glorify God for us, and to receive us in the Lord unto fellowship with
them in all Christ's Ordinances, without which they may be afraid of us, as the
Church of Jerusalem was of Paul, when he assaied to join himself to it until
Barnabas had satisfied them concerning him, Act. 9.26, 27.

3 This seems to have been the practice of the Primitive Church (as now it is
of the reformed Churches) -- The 3000 converted at Peter's Sermon, did not they
confess Christ, Act. 2.
or make a profession of their faith, and of a change wrought in them? Else how
could the Apostles know that they gladly received the word (to wit, of faith,
repentance, Verse. 41.
and obedience to the Gospel) and distinguish them from all others, and upon
that account baptize them? -- I am apt to think that those who believed at
Ephesus, confessed their Savior, as well as their sins, and their Faith as
well as their Repentance.

4 What is done at the planting of a Church is proper and suitable to be done
in the augmentation of it, that is, confession of Faith -- whosoever would be
a Peter, that is, 1 Pet. 2.5
a lively stone, fit to be laid in this building, should be a confessor of
Christ.

2 When we are called thereunto by a Magistrate, or secular powers, or brought
before Rulers, and Governors for Christ's sake, and examined about our
Religion; then we ought to bear witness to Christ, and his Truth, as Christ
and his Apostles did. --

1 Christ who witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate (then President
in Judea) recorded in John. 18.37. 1 Timothy 6.1
-- when Pilate said unto him art thou a King? Jesus answered; Thou say that
I am a King. This is an Hebrew manner of confession, aequivalent to an
affirmation, q. d. that thou say is true, I am so indeed; Christ did the
like before the Council, Luke 22.70.
when they all said, art thou the Son of God? and he said unto them, ye say
that I am, q. d. I am what you say -- and before the High Priest when he asked
him, Art thou the Christ the Son of the blessed? Mark. 14.61, 62
And Jesus said, I am.

2 The Apostles witnessed a good confession of Christ, and of that main truth,
scil. that Salvation is only by Christ, as Peter and John before the Council,
Act. 4.5. to 16. and cap. 5.27. to 33. and Steven, Act. 6.12.15. and 7.
chapter, and Paul before Felix the Governor, Act. 24.14. to 22. before King
Agrippa, Act. 26.2. etc. especially 22, 23. verse. and before Festus, 24, 25, to
30. verse.

2 When we are called to it privately; especially in three cases.

First, When we are asked by a single person, who desires to be informed by
us, and seeks not to lay a snare for us.

Be ready always, 1 Pet. 3.15
to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you with meekness and reverence. Now to give a reason of our hope what is it,
but to yield an account of our faith? which we are bound to do upon a private
demand: or when just occasion is given, though but by a private person, as
Christ made confession of himself to the Samaritan woman, and to a blind man.
John 4.25.
-- When she made confession of the Messiah to Christ, as, 1 That he would
come. 2 That he was now upon coming. 3 That when he is come, he will tell us
all things. i. e. teach his Church more fully and perfectly -- though she was
a woman, Trap in John 4.7.
and a Samatan, and a poor Tankerd-bearer; a sinner, one that lived in
fornication, yet Christ rejects her not, but takes occasion from her Confession
of the Messiah, John 4.26
to confess or make known himself to her to be the Christ or Messiah she
spoke of. Though he did not manifest himself so plainly to the Jews, no not
when they pressed him, saying, How long do thou make us doubt? John. 10.24
if thou be the Christ tell us plainly. But he would not in plain Terms tell
them that he was he, because he knew their hearts, that they asked not
sincerely to believe in him, but captiously to get advantage against him;
though he told the woman, because Christ knew, she was now a Convert, and
would be a means of the conversion of others. -- When the blind man asked
Christ, who was the Son of God, that he might believe in him; though the
Pharisees had excommunicated him for confessing Christ, yet Christ confesses
himself to him -- and tells him -- It is he that talks with thee, Joh. 7.35,
36, 37. And he said, Lord, I believe, and he worshipped him.

Second Case. We are called to confess Christ, when we are engaged in
disputes or reasonings with others about the matters of Christ and his Gospel,
Jud. 3
then we should contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered unto
the Saints; for defense of the Truth, and to convince gainsayers. Even as
Isaacks Servants strove with the Philistims for the well of water they had
found, Genesis 26.21
-- knowing that every Christian in his place, Phil. 1.17
is set for the defense of the Gospel, as well as Paul. -- How plainly and
boldly did Paul confess Christ, and how strenuously did he contend for the
Truth as it is in Jesus, Act. 19.29
in his disputes with the Grecians at Jerusalem? but they went about to slay
him. He being too hard for them at arguments, they would be too sharp for him
at weapons; -- with the Jews and devout persons in the Synagogue, and in the
market daily with them that met with him, Act. 17.18
and with certain Philosophers at Athens, wherein he stoutly maintained, that
the God who made heaven, Verse. 24, 25, 28
and earth, and preserves all things, Verse. 30, 31
is the only true God, -- and the doctrine of repentance, of the last judgment,
and of the Resurrection. Verse. 18, 19, 20
For which dispute, the Philosophers persecuted him, and brought him unto
Areopagus (that was the high Court of Justice in Athens) as a violator of their
Religion, to be judged. -- Paul and Barnabas were stout Champions for the
Truth in their Disputes at Antioch with the Jews, Act. 15.2
that maintained the necessity of Circumcision -- Stephen in his dispute with
the Doctors of five several Classes, Act. 6.9.
Verse. 10.
so confounded them, that they were not able to refist the wisdom of the
Spirit by which he spoke; then they fell to Satanical Artifices, as to
subornation of false witnesses against him, Verse. 11, 12, etc.
and persecution of him, even unto death. Contending for the truth of Christ,
is confessing of Christ before men.

This is a Gospel-becomming conversation among Christians, Phil. 1.27
which Paul pressed upon the Philippians, that whether he was present or
absent he might hear of their affairs; that they stand fast in one spirit,
with one mind, striving together for the Gospel, (...), or wrestling together
for the defense of the Truth -- Paul's Zeal in striving for the Truth, and for
every parcel of it (because precious to him) does further appear by four things.

1 He chid the Galatians for their Levity, Gal. 1.16.
that they were so soon drawn away from the Truth; -- and he curses them that
bring any other Gospel (than what has been preached unto them) whosoever they
be, whether men or Angels -- and? in Chapter 3, verse 1, Gal. 3.1
He rebukes them sharply for being carried away from their obedience to the
Truth of the Gospel. O foolish Galatians who has bewitched you?

2 Gal. 2.4, 5
The false Brethren that crept in privily to spy out the liberty which the
Apostles had in Christ Jesus (from legal observances) Paul yielded not an inch
to them, Gal. 2.5
no not for an hour, that the Truth of the Gospel might continue with the
Galatians, and they might resolvedly continue therein.

3 When Peter dissembled, and halted between two Opinions ( scil. his eating,
and nor eating with the Gentiles) and he (and others following his example) did
not (...), walk with a right foot according to the Gospel; Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14
-- Paul withstood Peter to the face (that is, Verse. 11. Ver. 14, 15, 16.
openly and professedly) because he was to be blamed -- and he reproved him
sharply and boldly before them all.

4 Paul wished that the corrupters of Christ's Truth, or vehement Urgers of
Circumcision (who troubled or unsettled the Galatians) were cut off, Gal. 5.12.
to wit, as superfluous flesh, that themselves might suffer what they do.

The Third Case, when we are in company where the Name of Christ is blasphemed,
or his Truths, ways, Servants, are evil spoken of, contradicted, or
calumniated, Then ought (...) stand up in defense of Christ, and of what is
Christ's person, or things, to speak as much for them, as others speak against
them, yea more; to out-speak them, and put them to silence, else we should
betray Christ and his cause by our silence (for that would seem to be a
consent) and the wicked would thereby be imboldened to continue, yea to
multiply their evil speakings, and weak ones would be occasioned to fall from
the Faith, and strong Christians would be much offended, and the glory of
Christ, and the splend or of his Truth would be greatly darkened and impeached
thereby. In this case confession of Christ is necessary, though we be not
examined about him, or his. -- Thus I have showed when we ought to confess with
our mouths; at other times we have liberty to conceal our Faith, and opinions,
yea, our persons sometimes, as Christ himself did.

The Third Thing, why ought we to confess with the mouth? The Reasons may be
drawn from God, Christ, our selves, and others.

1 From God, they are three.

1 Because Confession is a homage, service, and fealty which God requires of
us, and swears he will have from us, Isa. 45.23. compared with Romans 14.11. --
As I live, Isa. 45.24.
says the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess
to God -- and surely, shall one say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and
strength; By denying, or not doing the same, we make God falsify his oath, or
provoke him to punish us.

2 Because God the Father did confess, or give Testimony, even by a voice from
Heaven; to his Son Jesus Christ, both at his Baptism, Mat. 3.17. and at his
transfiguration, Mat. 17.5. saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased. This voice (says Peter) came from the excellent glory, when Christ
received from God the Father, honor and glory. Our Savior says often, The
Father that sent me bears witness of me, Joh. 5.32, 37 and 8.18. As we
should receive the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son, 1 John
5.9, 10. else we make God a liar; So we vhould be followers of God, as dear
Children, in giving Testimony of Christ our Savior, and elder Brother, as God
our Father did.

3 By confession of God and Christ, and his Truth, we give glory to God --
Every Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, Phil. 2.11.
to the glory of God the Father. Josh. 7.19. Romans 15.6.
If by confessing our sins (as Joshua said to Achan) much more our Savior --
and by joint confession, we glorify God with one mouth.

Reas. 2 From Christ, they are two.

1 It is his privilege to be confessed.

2 It was his practice to confess.

1 It is Christ's privilege to be confessed; or a high Exaltation, or
honorificall event, which was either conferred by the Father on his Son, as a
reward of his deep humiliation, as Piscator, and others think; or at least was
a consequent of it as Calvin conceives, quod dictio illativa, in Phil. 2.9.
consequentiam hic magis sonet, quam causam. That wherefore in Phil. 2.9.
denotes rather his exaltation to be a consequent of his humiliation, Phil. 2.9.
Verse. 9.
than his humiliation to be a cause of his exaltation. He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, etc. -- Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and
given him a Name which is above every Name, Verse. 10.
-- that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, that is, all things in
Heaven and Earth should be subject to his Dominion and Power, and that every
Tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, either voluntarily here, or
coercively hereafter, to wit, at the day of Judgment -- Confession of Christ
before men is an honor due to Christ's Name from us, Verse. 11.
even upon the Account of his Passion or Humiliation; and not to confess him,
is to rob him of that glory which is justly and peculiarly his own. (...)
Hence Christ is called the Apostle, and High Priest of our profession, or
confession, that is, He whom we should principally confess, or profess, and
our Faith in him for salvation; As the Author of our Salvation, and of our
Faith, and the Apostle of that Evangellical Doctrine which we profess.

2 It was Christ's practice both in life and death; for with his mouth he
confessed his Father, himself, and the Truth.

1 His Father. Christ both gave knowledge and bare witness of him before men;
for, Joh. 1.18.
No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom
of the Father, Joh. 8.38.
he has declared him, -- and I speak (says Christ) that which I have seen
with my Father, -- what was that Christ saw, and spoke?

1 His Fathers Essence, or being, Joh. 4.24.
that God is a spirit.

2 His mind, and will, as how he will be worshipped, to wit, in spirit and
truth, and what he would have us to do, scil. Verse. 23, 24.
what soever he has commanded us, -- for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made known unto you, says Christ. Joh. 15.15.
John Baptist witneded this of Christ, Joh. 3.32.
what he had seen and heard he testifies.

He made confession, or bare witness of himself; as before Pilate, that he was
a King, before the Council, that he was the Son of God, before the High Priest,
that he was the Christ the Son of the blessed, and before all, -- that the
Father sent him.

Object. Dath not Christ say, Joh. 5.31.
If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true?

Answ. Beza says this is a Rhetorical concession, as if Christ had said (the
Jews will object that I testify of my self, therefore my testimony is unfit,
and invalid, for men suspect self-testimonies. If I only should testify of my
self, ye might distrust me, but I have other witnesses, greater than all
exception, as John. Ver. 33, 36, ^^.
and the works I do, -- and the Father himself. Afterward Christ said, Joh.
8.14.18.
Though I bear record of my self, my record is true, because God is witness
sufficient of himself; I know whence I came, and whither I go, I am a divine
person, exempt from Error, and falsehood.

3 He confessed, and bare witness to the Truth, Joh. 18.37.
To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I
should bear witness unto the Truth, says Christ. Lest Pilate (before whom he
had confessed himself to be a King) should conceit him to be an earthly King,
Non regem agere, sed servum potius. Rolloc.
he shows the end why he was born, etc. was to act the part, not of a King
(deposita ad tempus regis persona) but to give testimony (as a Servant made
obedient to the will of the Father) to the word, and to the Truth of God, and
to this in particular, that he was King; and that his Testimony should not be
in vain, for every one that is of the truth, hears my voice, says Christ,
Rev. 1.^. and 3.14.
that is, all that are regenerated by the word of Truth. -- Hence Christ is
called the true and faithful witness, because he has truly and faithfully
revealed the whole Will of God (necessary for salvation) and has attested the
verity thereof, yea sealed it with his blood. Hence the Doctrine of the Gospel
is called a witness, Joh. 3.11. Christ's Testimony, verse. 32. -- Seeing this
was Christ's practice. For this cause he came into the World, that he might
confess the Truth; and upon this account he went out of the World, because he
did confess it (as that he was King) he died for his Testimony, ought not
Christians to do the like? Is not confessing with the mouth a Christ-like duty?
Does Christ bid us do more herein, than he did himself? Has he not left us an
example of confession, that we should follow his steps? Is not this part of our
conformity to Christ? Is not confession high and honorable employment, not
unbeseeming the Son of the most high God?

Reas. 3 From our selves, They are four.

1 Because we are Gods witnesses, Isa. 43.10.
ye are my witnesses, says the Lord, and my Servant whom I have chosen; and
it is our task or office to give testimony of God, and of his Truth, and grace,
before men. To this end God gives us plain, pregnant, plentiful proofs
thereof, more discoveries of himself, and his Truth, and more of his grace than
to others, that we may speak more of, and for God than others. Our eyes see,
and our ears hear that of Christ, and his Gospel, which others do not (as
Christ told his Disciples, Mat. 13.16.) Therefore God expects a larger
Testimony from our mouths, than others can, or will give of him. -- To this
end we are born again, and are made partakers of the divine nature, and are of
the Truth, that is, of the stock, and Lineage of Truth -- and for this cause
were we sent into the World to give testimony to Christ, and to the Truth in
our Generation. It is great dignity to be a witness of Christ. John Baptist
(that great Prophet) came for a witness of the light, that is, Christ, John
1.7 John the Evangelist the beloved Disciple, was an eminent witness of Christ,
both by word and writing, Joh. 21.24. So was Paul, who was not a whit behind
the very chiefest Apostles. 2 Cor. 11.5.
Christ appeared to him for this purpose to make him a Minister, and a
witness, Act. 26.16. and accounted him a chosen vessel to bear his Name, (by
confession thereof) before the Gentiles, Act. 9.15.
and Kings, and children of Israel.

And for this use we should count our Tongues our Glory, scil. to confess God,
as well as to give thanks to God.

2 Because if we confess God, and Christ, and the Truth, etc. we shall be
confessed by both.

1 By the Father, he will own, and avouch us to be his, his people, portion,
Jewels, his Servants, friends, sons, and that before Men, and Devils.

1 Before Men; If we testify for God, he will give testimony of us, as he did
of Abraham, that he was the friend of God; of Moses, that he was the meekest
man upon earth; of David, that he was a man after Gods own heart; of Daniel,
that he was a man of desires; of Abel, Heb. 11.4, 5
that he was righteous; of Enoch, that he pleased God. Hence Gods servants
have appealed unto God as their witness, as Job -- Behold my witness is in
heaven, and my record is on high, Job 16.19
and as their examiner and judge, as David did, Ps. 139.23, 24 and 7.8. and
26.1, 2. If we plead for God, God will plead for us against our enemies, Numb.
12.8
as he did for Moses against Aaron and Miriam. -- Wherefore then were ye not
afraid to speak against my Servant Moses -- and for Job against his friends --
ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, Job 42.7
as my servant Job has, and as he did for the faithful, Psalm. 37.6
in Lament. 3.58. -- O Lord thon have pleaded the causes of my soul -- God will
bring forth our righteousness to the light, clear our innocence, and judge our
enemies.

2 Yea before Devils, as he confessed Job. Job 1.8. and 2.4.
The Lord said unto Satan, have thou considered my Servant Job, that there is
none like him in the earth, a perfect, and upright man, one that fears God
and escheweth evil; and still he holds fast his integrity, although thou
movest me against him to destroy him without cause?

2 By the Son. If we confess Christ, Christ will retaliate, and recompense
confession with confession; his of us, with ours of him; between which there is
no proportion nor comparison; Mat. 10.32 Luke 12.8
for he will confess us before his Father, and all the Angels of God, and
say, These are my servants, members, Spouse, people, who did believe in me
with their heart, and confess me with their mouths before men, to be their
Savior, Lord, and Master, head, and Husband; that were not afraid of men in my
cause, nor ashamed of my cross. Whereas if we deny Christ before men (or his
Truths or ways) he will also deny us before his Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 10.33. and before the Angels of God, Luke 12.8. Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, Mark. 8.38
and of my words (says Christ) of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels.

3 Because, If we confess God and Christ, we shall be encouraged, defended,
and honored, even here.

1 Encouraged and strengthened by Christ, to and in our Testimony; as Paul was
at Corinth, to whom the Lord spoke in the night by a Vision, Acts 18.9
Be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace -- and at Jerusalem -- The
night following (after Paul had like to have been pulled in pieces for his
confession before the Counci^) the Lord stood by him, Act. 23.10, 11.
and said, Be of good cheer Paul, for as thou have Testified of me at
Jerusalem, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17
so must thou bear witness also at Rome. -- And at Rome, at Paul's first
Apology, all men forsook him, none stood by him, notwithstanding (says he)
the Lord stood with me and strengthened me. Rev. 11.5, 6 10
-- God bears witness to the Testimony of his two witnesses, by infusing great
power both into them, and into it.

2 We shall be defended, and delivered from the assaults, and designs of our
enemies, as God promised Paul at Corinth -- I am with thee, Act. 18.9, 10
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee, and at his Conversion, when Christ
tells him, I will make thee a Minister, and a witness, Act. 26.16. and
promises to deliver him from the people, Chap. 23.10, 11, 20, 21
and from the Gentiles, unto whom he has sent him, v. 17. and performed to
him, both at Jerusalem, where he was rescued by the Captain from violence, and
saved from the Jews conspiracy lying in wait to kill him, and at Rome, where
he was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17
that was Nere. God has a wing of special protection to spread over his
witnesses. And though the two witnesses be slain for the Testimony of Jesus,
Rev. 11.11
yet after three days and an half the spirit of life from God shall enter into
them, and they shall stand upon their feet, and great fear shall fall upon them
that see them. Hence some think, that their killing, and reviving are in
respect of their prophetical life.

3 If we honor God by confessing him, he will honor us.

1 With favor, affection, and respect from men; Christ's Confessors and Martyrs
have been very highly esteemed, dearly beloved, 1 Pet. 4.14
and longed for, and greatly rejoiced in; for the Spirit of God, and of glory
rests upon them; which makes them very amiable in the eyes of others. --

When the Apostles gave witness of the Resurrection of Christ, Act. 4.33
great grace (that is favor and honor) was upon them all -- Because the
Church of Philadelphia kept Christ's word (that is, in her mouth by confession,
Rev. 3.8, 9
as well as in her heart by belief) and denied not his name, Behold (says
Christ) I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan which say, they are Jews,
and are not, but do lie, Behold I will make them to come, and worship before
thy feet, (not in way of Religious Adoration, Pareus.
but of external reverence) and to know that I have loved thee; that is, to
reverence and honor her, as one beloved of Christ. --

When the two witnesses of Christ are revived, Rev. 11.12
they shall hear a great voice from heaven, saying to them, Come up hither;
They shall be received triumphantly with great joy and honor into the Church,
even to the Admiration of their Enemies, when they are restored who have been
silenced, ejected, imprisoned, banished, or the like, for the Testimony of
Jesus.

2 With victory over Satan, for the holy Martyrs and Confessors under the Roman
persecutions, overcame the Accuser of the Brethren, (as Christians do now) by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, that is, by the
Testimony, or Confession they gave to Jesus Christ, and to the word of God,
Rev. 12.10, 11.

3 Yea God will honor us with mutual inhabitation, which implies intimate
communion, and the continuation thereof between him and us; 1 John 4.15
for whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in
him, and he in God.

Fourthly, Because if we confess Christ aright we shall be saved. Confession
is unto salvation (says Paul in the Text) in the tendency, and efficacy of it,

1 As a way appointed us by God to walk in toward heaven.

2 As a character, property, and practice, of such as shall be saved.

3 As a furtherance of salvation, because it is a means or help of our
perseverance in the faith, Mat. 24.13
even unto the end, and he that endures to the end shall be saved -- For if
we did not confess Christ before men, we should deny him, and so fall off
from him, and short of Heaven --

To hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering, Heb. 10.23
is the way to die in faith, and at death to receive the end of our faith, even
the salvation of our souls. -- Then to confess with the mouth is a business
of great consequence, and commodity, which reaches even to eternity, for great
shall be our reward for it in heaven.

Reas. 4. May be drawn from others, who may from the Confession we make of
Christ and his truth, receive instruction or confirmation therein, and
encouragement to speak thereof boldly, without fear.

The fourth thing is, How this confession should be made, which shall be laid
forth in seven particulars.

First, Freely without compulsion; Confession of Christ should be a free
wil-offering of our mouths, as well as thanskgiving. God loves a cheerful
giver of Testimony to Christ, as well as of Charity to men-God loves not
extorted confessions, that are wrung from us by violence. He would have them
flow freely from us like water out of the fountain, not to be forced from us
like wine forth of the press.

2 Plainly and fully without obscurity, or partiality, without hiding, or
mincing the Truth. Like John the Baptist, when the Jews sent Priests and
Levites to ask him, who art thou, he confessed and denied not, but confessed;
John. 1.19 Verse. 20
(that is plainly, openly, expressly, fully,) I am not the Christ -- But behold
there comes one after me, whose shoes I am not worthy to loose, (Act.
13.25) Hence our confession of Christ should grow and flow from Faith, and
experience, as the Root and Fountain thereof.

1 From our faith in Christ; Confession in the Mouth (as was noted before)
should proceed from faith in the heart. -- We having the same spitit of Faith
(says Paul) as it is written, 2 Cor. 4.13.
I believed, therefore have I spoken (that I, was David) we also be leeve,
Psalm. 116.10.
and therefore speak. -- We should show our Faith by works in our lives, and
testify it by confession in our mouths, for that is a fruit and sign of
Faith. We should say of Christ only what we know and believe, else we do but
speak of Christ, not confess him. If Christ live not in our hearts by Faith
(as one says) he will not dwell in our mouths by confession.

Object. Romans 14.22.
Does not Paul say, Have thou Faith? have it to thy self before God; therefore
we need not confess it before men.

Ans. The Apostle there speaks not of a justifying Faith (as he does in my
Text) for that must be declared by confession, but of a Faith or persuasion of
Christian liberty in things indifferent (as eating flesh, and drinking Wine at
that time) this Faith a man may keep to himself, or so show and use it, as he
shall not thereby offend his Brother.

2 From our experience (in some measure) of Christ and his grace, or of what we
testify. This will provoke us to confess Christ before men, as it did Peter,
and John, when they were commanded silence -- We cannot but speak the things
which we have seen and heard. Act. 4.18, 19, 20.
-- They that have experience of the sweetness and efficacy of Christ's Word,
Truth and Ways, they must and will say all they can for the Truth, and nothing
at all against it, as Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 13.8. -- Hence Christ gave his
Apostles experience, or made them some way witnesses (either by the ear, or
eye, or hand) of such things as he required them to confess, or bear witness
to for him before men, as he did his Apostles, John, and the rest, 1 John 1.1.
Act. 26.16.
and Paul at his conversion -- I have appeared unto thee, for this purpose, to
make thee a Minister, and a witness both of these things which thou have seen,
and of those things in the which I will appear unto thee. Act. 22.14.
As Ananias told Paul -- The God of our Fathers has chosen thee, that thou
should know his will, and see that just one, Ver. 15.
and hear the voice of his mouth -- For thou shall be his witness unto all m^n
of what thou have seen and heard.

3 Boldly without fear, or shame, (...). Act. 13.6. eum 24.21.
Paul cried out in the Council (to wit, with a loud voice) for the word
signifies an intension of clamor, -- of the Hope, and Resurrection of the
dead, I am called in question, (...) when we open our mouths to speak for
God, we should do it with undaunted, and invincible courage, with an Heroic
spirit (like Paul, Act. 20.23.24, and 21.13. Phil. 1.20.) not learing the faces
of men. In this business of Confession, we should be bold as Lions, and bid
defiance to shame, and count it a high dignation to confess Christ, and to
suffer for Christ, as the A poll^es did. Act. 5.41.


Boldness sets off the Confession of Christ's witnesses with great grace and
power, to make them penetrate, and to convince. -- As it did the three
Childrens profession of Faith in God before King Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3.16, 17,
18.
and their resolution not to bow to his golden Image, for fear of his fiery
furnace -- When the Council saw the boldness of Peter and John (confessing Act
4.8, etc. 13.
Christ before them) they marvelled and took knowledge of them, Psalm. 119.46.
that they had been with Jesus. David resolved, I will speak of thy Testimonies
even before Kings, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21, 22.
and will not be ashamed. He owned his dancing before the Ark, though Michal
mocked him for it. It was before the Lord, etc. that I did it; and he resolved,
if this make me vile, I will yet be more vile than thus. -- Fear and shame are
great Impediments to the confession of Christ. These made Peter deny his
Master, and Nicodemus to come to Christ by night. Joh. 3.2. Joh. 12.42.
And many among the chief Rulers who believed (because of the Pharisees, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue) durst not confess Christ. Chap. 9.22.


4 Constantly without giving over, till we have finished our Testimony, Rev.
11.7.
as the two witnesses did, until which time, the Beast had no power either to
hinder them, or to hurt them; yea till we have finished our course, as Paul
kept the Faith (in his mouth as well as in his heart) till he had finished
his. 2 Timothy 4.7.
When John fulfilled his course (that is, drew near the period thereof) he
renewed his Testimony of Christ -- Remember therefore what you have received,
Act. 13.25.
Rev. 3.3.
and heard, and hold fast, and speak out the same, even to the end. We should
confess Christ with our Tongues while we are able to speak -- yea choose to dye
with a Testimony of Jesus in our mouths, of our Faith, and Hope in him, and
love to him; and for the Truth against Errors, for the straight and holy ways
of God, against all false, and bywayes, Then we may boldly look God in the
face, and go triumphantly to Heaven. -- We should confess Christ in evil
times, when others deny him. When Christ and his truths and ways are opposed,
despised, and persecuted, and his servants for them -- Then to own Christ, and
to speak for him, 2 Timothy 1.8.
and for his; and not to be afraid of his Cross, nor ashamed of his cause or
Testimony, will be kindly taken by Christ; as Paul^ witness of him at
Jerusalem, and Rome, and elsewhere was; Rev. ^.1^.
and the Church of Pergamos, her not denying his Faith, but holding fast his
Name, even in those days wherein Christ's faithful Martyr Antipas was slain,
Rev. 3.^.
and in that place where Satan dwelt, and had his Throne. -- The Church of
Philadelphia, though she had but a little strength, yet she kept Christ's word,
and denied not his Name (though she had adversaries) and because she kept the
word of Christ's patience (that is, Verse. 1^
with great patience she held and maintained the Truth of Christ, and her
profession of it) Therefore Christ will keep her from the hour of Tentation
which shall come upon all the World.

5 Innocently, without giving offense or occasion to any, to speak evil of us,
while we are speaking good of Gods Name, or for his Truths and ways. This was
Paul's care, Act. 24.20.
and for this he challenged his enemies -- Let these same here say, If they
have found any evil doing, (...).
(or thing amiss) in me, while I stood before the Council, scil. to give
Testimony of Christ -- the Scribes that were of the Pharisees part, said, Act.
23.9.
we find no evil in this man. To this end we should give a reason of our
hope, or an account of our faith with meekness and fear. 1 Pet. 3.15


1. With meekness; from an humble lowly spirit, without any show or
appearance, first of pride, ostentation or vainglory; or secondly, of passion,
or bitterness in us; for the wrath of man as it works not, so it testifies
not the righteousness of God; it does not at all adorn the Truths or ways of
God; nor our profession, or confessions of them, which meekness of spirit does.

2 With fear of God, of offending him while we are confessing him; of saying
or doing any thing that may cause the way of Truth to be evil spoken of, for
our sakes; and reverence of men, to give all due respect to them, before whom
wespeak.

Sixth Sincerely, Out of Love, and Zeal.

1 Out of Love to Christ and his truth; for what we love, we will own, or
avouch openly. -- Confession, and commendation are fruits of love. Love knows
no shame in acknowledging, and praising its beloved Lovers are the freest and
largest Confessers, and Commenders. See it in the Spouse, her Encomium of
Christ, her beloved (from head to foot) when the Daughters of Jerusalem asked
her, what is thy beloved, more than another beloved? Cant. 5.9. to the end;
when love to Christ, and to his truth move us to confess him and it, then we
will speak liberally, yea all that we can possibly for them, whosoever says
nay thereto. Love is strong as death, and the love of Christ will constrain us
to confess Christ to death; yea though we die for it. -- Hence John who was
the best beloved, and most loving Disciple, gave special Testimony of Christ,
Joh. 19.35. and 21.24. -- Those that leave their first love, grow loath, and
averse to confess Christ.

2 Out of Zeal for God; for the glory of his name, the credit of his cause, the
honor of his truth, the propagation of his Gospel; for the encouragement, and
comfort of Christ's Friends, for the conviction and obstruction of his enemies;
-- not to get praise to our selves, nor to seek our own glory, for love of
praise is a great prejudice to the confession of Christ. Joh. 12.42, 43
Some among the chief Rulers did not confess Christ, for they loved the praise
of men more than the praise of God. -- The Sanctuary fire of zeal kindled from
heaven in our hearts, will burn out that Lukewarmness, Neutrality, and
indifferency of spirit, which makes us to be of Gallio's temper in the things
of God, careless of such matters, what any say, or do against the Name, or
truth, ways, or Kingdom of Christ; what errors, heresies, and blasphemies are
broached, dispersed or maintained. -- This will also consume to ashes, the
Conceits of the Libertines and Familists, who think it lawful to dissemble
their faith, even before the Magistrate; and of the Nicodemites of these days,
who count it sufficient to believe with the heart taking liberty to confess
what they list with their mouth.

Seventh and last, We must confess Christ patiently, with a disposition and
resolution to suffer for our Testimony, if God call us to it; because the
confessing of Christ before men may cost us dear, the loss of Liberty, goods,
Friends, yea life and all; as it did the Apostles, Mat. 10.37, 38, 39.
and many other the faithful witnesses of Christ. Christ requires we should
be willing to part with all upon that Account. -- Confessing of Christ has
been a cause of suffering for Christ, ever since Christ's time. Satan and his
instruments have raised opposition, and persecution against the profession of
Faith, as well as against the practice of piery, and against the persons that
have held forth the same, even from Generation to Generation. -- The Jews
agreed that if any man did confess Christ, Joh. 9.22 Rev. 1.9
he should be put out of the Synagogue. -- John was banished into the Isle of
Patmos for the word of God, and for the Testimony (he gave) of Jesus Christ --
When the Lamb had opened the fifth Seal, Rev. 6.9
John saw under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain (under the Roman
Emperors) for the word of God, and for the Testimony which they held. Rev. 11.3
-- The two witnesses of Christ prophecy in Sackcloth; and when they have
finished their Testimony, Verse. 7
they shall be slain by the Beast (to wit of Rome, that is Antichrist) and
the inhabitants of the earth (that is of the Malignant or Antichristian Church)
shall rejoice thereat, and make merry, and as a congratulation of their
riddance, send gifts one to another. -- This was the cause of the Dragons
quarrel with a remnant of the Woman's seed (scil.) Rev. 12.17
they kept the Commandments of God, and had the Testimony of Jesus Christ.
Rev. 20.4
-- John saw (also) the Souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, which had not worshipped the Beast, etc. and
they lived, and reigned with Christ a thousand years. -- They that would
overcome the Accuser of the brethren by the word of their Testimony, should not
love their lives unto the death; Rev. 12.11.
but undervalue them (and be willing to expose them to danger) in comparison
of the confession of Gods truth.

Obj. Men will not receive our Testimony of Christ and his Truth.

Answ. 1. No more would many receive Christ's testimony, Joh. 3.32. nor the
testimony of his Prophets, and Apostles, verse. 11. which made them complain,
Lord, who has believed our report.

2 Yet being called to it, we must give Testimony to Christ, and his truth,
Ez^k. 2.5, 7.
whether men will hear, or they will forbear, but they shall know, there has
been a witness of Jesus Christ before them, and our Testimony for Christ will
be a witness against them, Mat. 10.18.

THe Third particular case (in which I am to give Direction) is Reprehension.
To reprove, is to tell another of his fault, to the end he may repent and
amend, Mat. 18.15. Luke 17.3.

Let me give you 1 Preparatives to it. 2 Rules for it 3 Reasons of it.


1 Preparatives to it, which are four; Wisdom, Righteousness, Faithfullness,
and Boldness. The qualifications of a reprover.

1 Wisdom.
Wisdom to understand the whole business of reproof, what belongs to the
Substance and Circumstances to the matter, manner, and opportunies thereof,
wisdom is profitable to direct herein, Eccles. 10.10. for the regular
performance of reproof. The wise man commends wisdom upon this account, -- As
an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold; so is a wise reprover upon
an obedient ear, Prove. 25.12. It has a redoubled excellency. A wise reprover
is such a one as can fit the reproof to the ear of the reproved, and hang it on
handsomely (as a Jewel) and fasten it to stay. A wise man's reproof thus taking
effect, becomes a great ornament to the reproved, who is thereby reformed, even
as a Diamond in a Diadem. Wisdom is required in a reprover, and obedience in
the reproved. A seasonable reproof is more beneficial to him that receives and
obeys it, than if the reprover should adorn his ear with an ear-ring, or bestow
a precious Jewel upon him; spiritual garnishings with grace are far more
glorious than all external deckings of Nature or Art. It is better to hear the
rebukes of the wise, says the Preacher, Eccl. 7.5.
than the songs of fools; their jeasts, fancies or flatteries. Wisdom makes
Christians able or potent to admonish one another, as it did the Romans, and it
sends forth a reproof with force, Romans 15.14.
as an arrow out of a Bow, to make it fly and hit the mark. The words of the
wise have weight.

2 Preparative is Righteousness; Righteousness.
we are fit to reprove faults in others, when we are free, especially from
those faults in our selves; to blame others, when we are blameless, else they
may say to us, Physician heal thy self; begin at home, first to reform thy
self, then reprove us; shall vice reprove sin? Thou Hypocrite (says Christ)
first cast the Beam out of thine own eye, Mat. 7.5.
then thou shall see clearly to pull the mote out of thy Brothers eye. It was
David's not only concession but petition, Let the Righteous (that is, he who is
godly and unblameable in himself) smite me, scil. with a rod of reproof, and
it shall be a kindness. The reproof of the Righteous carries healing under its
wings, and authority to cause (yea to command) entrance and obedience.

3 Faithfulness.
Preparative is Faithfulness to God and man.

1 To God, to tender his glory, and by reproof to prevent sin in others, and
the dishonor that might come thereby to Gods Name.

2 To man, To love our neighbor as our selves, and to seek his good as our
own, even the salvation of his Soul; (the chief good of all) and to prevent
evil from him, as well as from our selves, especially sin which is the
greatest evil; and that by reproof, which is a means of prevention of it, as
well as of recovery from it. It is good service to prevent sin. Prove. 27.6
Faithful are the wounds of a friend (that is reproof) says the wise man, but
the kisses (that is fawnings and flatteries) of an enemy are deceitful. Then
faithfulness fits us for reproving. As wisdom gives direction, so
faithfulness lays an obligation to the duty. He is a faithful man who
zealously indeavoureth to keep dishonor from God, and sin from man, or man
from sin. It is faithfulness to reprove a brother, or neighbor, when he
offends.

Fourth, Boldness.
Is boldness and courage not to fear the faces or frowns of others, for that
will stop our mouths from giving even just and necessary reproofs. Now wisdom,
righteousness and faithfulness breeds boldness.

II Rules for reproof, which respect

1 The matter what. 2 The persons whom. 3 The manner how. 4 The season when we
should reprove.

1 The matter.
The matter to be reproved. The Rules for it are two.

First, The chief matter or principal object of reproof is sin against God or
man; Any thing that is a transgression of the Law of God, or a violation of the
just laws of men, not only heinous crimes, but lesser faults, as disorderly
walking, idleness, talkativenesse, 2 These. 3.11
rudeness in behavior, as Levi. 19.32. not to rise up before the hoary-head,
nor to honor the faces of the Elders; and busy meddling in other men's matters.
If a man do evil (as God said to Cain) sin lies at the door, Genesis 4.7.
to be reproved in him, or punished upon him, if he do not repent and reform.

Second Rule, Be sure the thing we reprove in others be a fault in it self,
and also a fault in them, or that they are guilty of it. We should not go upon
mere conjectures, and suspicions, or bare rumors, and hear-sayes which are
often false. Our Savior did not so, Is. 11.2, 3, 4
He did not judge after the sight of his eyes, nor reprove after the hearing
of his ears; that is, not from outward appearances or reports, but upon certain
knowledge, else we do not admonish but either mistake the matter (if it be
not a fault) or we falsely accuse and slander the person whom we reprove, if
he be not guilty of the fault we charge upon him. So we break one
commandment ( scil. in bearing false witness) to keep another, to wit, that
of reproving: and we may be justly reproved for reproving unjustly, Mat. 16.21
as Peter was by Christ, when Christ showed to his Disciples that he must go
to Jerusalem, and suffer and be killed; Then Peter took him aside, ((...)) to
chide or charge, as a master does his servant (as some, understand the word)
for it, as a fault in him but Christ reproved him sharply for his reproof, Get
thee behind me, Satan, scandal to me, etc. It was a fault in the Israelites to
reprove the Reubenites, about building the altar of witness, before they had
examined the matter, Josh. 22.16 1 Samuel 1.14, 15
and in Eli to admonish Hannah to put away her wine from her, when she was
filled with a spirit of grief and of prayer. To this end we should consider
one another, (...), Heb. 10.24
that is, understand one another well. Study others cases, as well to reprove
them for evil, as to provoke them to good. To reprove a fault in another before
we certainly know it to be so in it self, Prove. 18.13
and in him, is like the answering of a matter before we hear it, which is
folly and shame to us. Some conceive that Jacob understood not the mystery of
his Son Joseph's dream (concerning the Sun, (...) 37.9, 10
Moon, and Stars, making obeisance to him) whence it came, and how it should
be accomplished, when he rebuked him for it. It was a great fault, even in
Christ's Disciples, Mar. 10.13. to 17.
to rebuke others for that which was no fault in them, as those who brought
little Children unto Christ that he should touch them. Christ was much
displeased at them, and reproved them for it. Yet in case of strong jealousy or
suspicion, a man may prudently insinuate to his neighbor what is suspected of
him, Ames. Cas. cons. L. 5. c. 9
and how it ought to be removed.

2 The persons to be reproved. All that offend and deserve reproof, whether
they be great or small ought, to be reproved, though not by every one, but by
fit persons qualified for it.

As first superiors as well as inferiors, Kings and great men, as well as mean
men. Herod the Tetrarch was reproved by John for Herodias his Brother Philips
wife, Luke 3.19.
and for all the evil which he had done. The Lords Prophets were Reprovers even
of Kings. Neh. 5.7. Chap. 13.17.
Nehemiah rebuked the Nobles and Rulers for usury, and for profanation of the
Sabbath day. Masters as well as Servants, yea sometimes by their Servants, as
Naaman (though a great man with his Master, the King of Siria, 2 King. 5.13, 14.
and honorable) was reproved by his Servants, and he took it well. Ministers
may be reproved as well as their people; yea by their people when they deserve
it. Paul bad the Collossians say to Archippus (their Minister) if he grow cool,
formal or negligent, Col. 4.17.
Take heed to thy Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou
fulfill it; much more by their fellow Ministers, Gal. 2.11.
as Paul reproved Peter sharply at Antioch for dissembling.

2 Even good men as well as bad, and the wise as well as the foolish, are to be
reproved when they offend, because there is none so Righteous, as not to sin at
all, Eccles. 7.20. and none is wise at all times, so as never to show folly.
Pro. 9.8. Chap. 19.25.
Rebuke a wise man (says Solomon) and he will love thee, and again, reprove
one that has understanding. David a man after Gods own heart desired reproofs
from the Righteous, when he deserved them, Psalm. 141.5.
and declares how profitable and acceptable the same will be to him. To this
end Christians should watch mutually one over another, to deal freely and
plainly one with another, in reproving their faults, or telling them what they
see to be amiss.

3 Equals; fellows or companions in any kind should reprove one another when
they transgress, as the good Thief did the bad on the Cross, when he railed on
Christ; he rebuked him, saying, do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? Luke 23.40.


4 Not only Brethren in Christian societies, or members of Churches ought to
observe and admonish one another, as Paul writ to the Church of the
Thessalonians; we exhort you Brethren, 1 These. 5.14.
warn the disordered. See also in 2 These. 3.11, 14, 15. but Neighbors, yea
strangers, such as are not of ours, nor of any Church society (to our
knowledge) may and ought to be reproved by us when we see them sin. For though
an Ecclesiastical Admonition is proper to them that are within the Church; do
not ye judge them that are within? 2 Cor. 5.12.
says Paul, yet a private admonition or reproof may be given to them that are
without, as there is occasion. Abimeloch King of Gerar was a Philistine, an
Alien from the common wealth of Israel; Abraham and Sarah were a precious pair
of Gods people, yet there was an intercourse of Reproof between Abimelech and
them, Genesis 20.16.
for Abimelech reproved Sarah for dissembling; And Abraham reproved Abimelech
for wrong-doing, because his Servants had taken a Well violently from Abraham's
Servants. Gen 21.25.
Then may not Christians reprove Pagans, and Pagans reprove Christians, when
they say or do amiss? Lot reproved the filthy Sodomi^es. Genesis 19.7.
Paul reproved Elymas, Act. 13.10.

There are four sorts of persons whom we ought not to reprove.

1 Idiots, fools, and mad folks, such as have not reason to understand a
reproof; To whom it is to no more purpose to speak than to Brutes.

2 Scorners, such as will jeer and scoff at our persons and reproof; that scorn
to be reproved, or that a reproof should do them any good; Pro. 9.8.
reprove not a scorner, says the wise man; for he that does it

1 Gets to himself both hatred and shame, lest he hate thee; for A scorner,
loves not one that reproves him, neither will he go unto the wise; Prove. 9.7.
he that reproves a scorner gett^h himself shame, that is a reproach or scoff
from him.

2 He loses his labor, Prove. 13.1.
for a scorner hears not rebuke.

3 Wicked obdurate persons, such as are hardened in their sins, and hate to be
reformed, and will stubbornly reject admonition, and receive no good thereby.
Mat. 7.6.
Such as Christ calls Dogs and Swine, before whom he forbids us to cast the
holy things and pearls of Reproof; such as are like to fall upon us for
reproving them, and tear us, either with their Tongues, or their hands; such as
Paul calls absurd or unreasonable men. Pro. 9.7.
He that rebukes a wicked man gets himself a blot, to wit, of some
disgrace, which he out of his malicious wickedness will cast upon him. It is
said in Hosea 4.4. let no man strive or reprove another, they were such
refractory and obduratte rebels.

4 Obstinate Heretics, who have been admonished, but remain refractory. A man
that is an Heretic after the first and second admonition, reject, says Paul

3 The manner how to reprove, for this I will lay down five Rules.

1 A reproof must be ministered in love, pity, meekness, and respect
manifested to the parties reproved.

1 In love to their persons, and desire of their good, Lev. 19.17.
yet with dislike of their fin. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart,
thou shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Then
rebukes must not be given in hatred, but in love; They should be ushered in
with prefaces of affection, and enforced and driven on with evidences of love;
For Reproof is a bitter pill, which should be rolled in the Sugar, or lapt up
in the pap of love, else it will not be easily taken, nor go down well. And
when we reprehend their faults, its good sometime to commend their virtues,
parts, deserts, or to intermix the due praises of their dear friends, to
sweeten and facilitate their reception of our reproof. A commendation of what
is good in others, will insinuate a reprehension of what is evil in them. A
reproof as it begins, so it should end in love, that the party reproved may not
depart discontented, but in love with our persons, and in hatred of his own
sin, being dismissed with an affectionate and friendly farewell.

2 In pity to their infirmities, show bowels of compassion in reproof, that we
have a fellow feeling of their weaknesses, considering our selves that we have
in us the seeds of all sin, Gal. 6.1.
and that we have been or may be tempted even as they.

3 In meekness, without pride, passion, bitterness, not in wrath, Jam. 1.20.
for the wrath of man works not the Righteousness of God, by reproof; not in
hot blood, or furious zeal, which vents it self in fiery and furious rebukes.
Though there must be some warmth (says a reverend Divine) in a reproof, Mr.
Whately in his Archetype.
yet it must not be scalding hot. Words of reviling and disgrace, they scald as
it were; words that tend to stir up the conscience, to a due consideration of
the evil reprooved, they be duly warm, and tend to make the Physic work more
kindly. Nor in an imperious, domineering, provoking, exasperating manner, but
in a mild winning way, as it were, subjecting our selves to them, to serve
them, by reproof. Reproof should come not from an arrogant humor of censuring,
nor from an ambitious desire of credit or repute, both which are roots of
bitterness; but from a spirit of meekness and lowliness, For meekness
qualifies reprehension as well as instruction. 2 Timothy 1.24, 25.


The Minister of Christ (who is the public reprover) must not strive (or
fight) (...). Chide or wrangle, but be gentle unto all men, in meekness
reproving (as well as instructing) those that oppose themselves. Shimeies
malice against David made him a Rayler rather than a reprover. 2 Samuel 16.7.


4 With respect to their credit, not to reprove them before others, to their
disgrace (except the aggravation of their offense require it) but choose rather
to cover than to bare their infirmities, Genesis 21.22.
as Ham did his Fathers nakedness in telling his Brethren of it, while we
seek to heal a wound in their spirits or manners, we should leave no skar of
reproach behind upon their persons, much less set a brand of ignominy upon
them. All these be taking things, and will file and oil, and edge a Reproof,
and make it enter easily, and prevail effectually.

The Second Rule. Rule.
Reproof of a fault in others must be seconded with arguments (if need require)
to set it off with evidence, and to set it home (to the offenders head and
heart) with power.

2 To convince him of the sin he is told of, and of the greatness of the evil
and danger that is in it, and of his guilt of it, in case he should deny or
dissemble, excuse or extenuate it.

2 To persuade him to repent and amend, and do so no more. Pro 6.23.
These are the reproofs of instruction, that is, convincing, instructing
reproofs, that carry meat in their mouths, to feed those we reprove, with
wholesome counsel, and show them the means of their recoverie. Mat. 18.15. Luke
3.19. Ephesians. 5.11.13. Joh. 3.22.
This is (...), the word often used to signify Reproof in the new Testament,
which imports a convicting another of his fault by evident arguments and
reasons, so as nothing can be pretended or alleged for it.

The Third Rule. Rule.
A Reproof should be formed in Scripture terms, or founded on some plain Text
of Scripture, so as the party admonished may see himself reproved rather by God
than by us; Zeph. 2.5.
and that the Word of the Lord is against him. 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, (says Paul) and is profitable
for Doctrine, and for reproof. Gods Word is a light to make manifest men's sins,
and the filthiness of them. All things that are reproved are made manifest by
the light, Ephesians. 5.13.
for whatsoever does make manifest is light; Paul exhorts the Colossians to
teach and admonish one another, Col. 3.16.
and that in the word of Christ dwelling richly in them. To deliver the words
of our admonition out of the word of God, is to draw the evil doer to the
light, that his deeds should be reproved; therefore he hates the light and
reproof, Joh. 3.20. and this is also not only to persuade a man to repent of
his fault, and amend, but to command him in the name of the Lord to do it. This
is to reprove with all authority, Tit. 2.19.
cum omni imperio, says Beza.

The Fourth Rule. Rule.
Reproof should be begun and ended with prayer, that is, either solemn
supplication, or secret ejaculation, or lifting up the heart in request to God
for guidance and success. 1 Begun with prayer to God, for direction in it,
that God would be with our mouths in reproving, and teach us what to say, and
put only those words into them, which he would have us speak, and none else,
that our reproofs may be fitly spoken to the person or occasion, to time and
place; 2 Ended with prayer to God for a blessing upon it, that our reproof may
profit and prevail for the recovery, amendment and salvation of the party
reproved; that we may not lose our labor, nor he the benefit thereof; prayer
should be both in the front and rear of reproof; Because every word of
instruction, Counsel or reproof is sanctified and blessed by prayer. Hereby God
is interested in it, and it is sent forth in his name and power. Prayer
ingageth Gods presence in our reproof, and draws down his blessing upon it.
It shall not miscarry in the fruit of it, or at least we shall not miscarry in
the Act of it, so long as we commit our way of reproving wholly to God by
prayer, Psalm. 37.5.
and trust also in him -- he will bring it to pass. Reproofs guarded with
prayer, both before and behind, come with great force (even in the strength of
God) upon the person reproved, and are most regarded, and best entertained by
him. One reproof managed with prayer may prevail more than twenty without it.

Let me add, reproof should be accompanied as with prayer, so with patience,
to wait on God for a good Issue thereof -- (...), 2 Timothy 2.25.
If God peradventure, or siquando, at any time will give those whom we have
reproved Repentance to the amendment of their faults, and recovery out of
Satan's snares, for Admonition like Physic may work afterward, though not
presently, as soon as it is taken, when the persons reproved have better
considered what was said to them. We should patiently wait for the fruits of
reproof, as the Husbandman does for the fruits of the earth; knowing that the
best seed comes not up as it is sown.

The Fifth Rule. Rule.
Reproof for the manner of it should be suited.

1 To the quality of the person. 2 To the nature of the offense.
1 To the quality of the person to be reproved by us. The Apostle Jude directs
us to make a difference of persons in this business of reprehension, of some
have compassion, Jude 22, 23.
making a difference, and others save with fear pulling them out of the fire:
we should consider the person in respect

1 Of his state and age, if he be our superior.

2 Of his temper, if he be of a soft tender spirit.

3 Of his Relation to us, if that be near or dear, as a Brother or special
friend, such an one we must reprove very meekly and mildly, with a soft Tongue,
and gentle touch, and with due reverence and respect. A Venice glass must be
handled more tenderly than an earthen Pitcher; As Naamans servants reproved
their Master, my Father, said they, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great
thing, 2 King. 5.13.
would thou not have done it, etc? Is it fit to say to a King, thou art
wicked or to Princes, Job 34.18.
ye are ungodly? Of some have compassion says Jude, that is, deal gently and
pitifully with them that are tender and flexible? when we perceive that our
former reprehension takes effect, our latter reproof should be gentle and mild,
such was Nehemiahs to the Usurers, Neh. 5.7.
he reproved their oppression or dealing hardly with their Brethren with an
aggravation, we after our ability have redeemed our Brethren the Jews which
were sold unto the Heathen, and will you even sell your Brethren? or shall they
be sold unto us? then they held their peace (being convinced of their sin, and
confounded with what he spoke) and found nothing to answer. Nehemiah perceiving
they were something ashamed of their sin, then he dealt very fairly and mildly
with them. Verse. 9.
Also I said, it is not good that ye do; ought ye not to walk in the fear of
our God, 1 Timothy 5.1.
because of the reproach of the Heathen our enemies? Rebuke not an Elder, says
Paul (...), do not lash him with Tart sharp chastening or chiding
reprehensions, but entreat him as a Father (with all humble observance) and the
younger men (that is either inferior officers in the Church, or the members of
it) as Brethren that is, with fraternall reproofs full of kindness and
friendlinesse, not harshly or rigidly. Even a member of the Church, that is to
be withdrawn from, for disorderly walking and disobedience, must not be
counted as an enemy, 2 These. 3.15.
but admonished as a Brother. But if the party to be reproved be an inferior
to us, or of another spirit, scil. wilful and stubborn, then we must deal
otherwise with him. Jude. 2.3.
Save such with fear, says Jude, that is, terrify them with sharp reproofs,
pulling them out of the fire. Obstinate sinners deserve bitter and biting
Reproofs, Mat. 3.7.
such as John the Baptist gave the Pharisees and Sadduces, when he called them
a generation of Vipers. And Christ the Scribes and harisees, when he said thus,
ye Serpents, Mat. 23.33.
ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of Heh? Act. 13.10.
And Paul gave Elymas when he called him, Thou Child of the Devil, and enemy of
all Righteousness; yea how sharply did Christ sometimes reprove his Apostles?
Mat. 16 8.
O ye of little faith. Especially Peter, Mat. 16.23. yet if he be of so
fierce and furious a spirit, as there may be fear of doing him more hurt than
good by reproving him, or of inraging him against us, then we must go a more
mollifying way to work to win and gain upon him, rather to stroke him than to
strike him with a reproof, as Lot did the Sodomites. There be two ways of
reproving.

1 Directly and plainly to tell others of their faults, as Nathan did David,
Thou art the man, etc. 2 Samuel 12.7, 9, 10.

2 Indirectly, in a more covert way, by intimation or circumlocution. There is
great skill in shaping reproofs of several fashions suitable to the several
estates, and tempers of the persons reproveable, and there be sundry Artifices
therein. Especially four, in giving covert reproofs, scil. by way of
obsecration, insinuation, illustration, and exemplification.

1 Do it by way of obsecration and exhortation rather than of objurgation, not
to child them expressly for doing a miss, but to entreat them not to do so
(which is an implicit, or an oblique reproof) as Lot did the vicious Sodomites,
when they encompassed his house, Genesis 19.5.7.
and demanded the men that came in to him, to satisfy their lust on them; how
lovingly did he entreat them? I pray you Brethren, do not so wickedly. As when
one swears, there is not need always to say you do very ill to take Gods Name in
vain but, I desire yea, and nay, may serve among Christians.

2 By way of Insinuation, to the party to be reproved, thus; I wish your good;
oh that you would take notice of such a thing you do or say, and consider
seriously with your self, whether you do well therein, or whether it would not
be better to forbear the same, or to do otherwise.

3 Of Illustration, when we represent the person and his fault in the guise or
shape of a comparison before him, as Nathan did David's sin (of taking the wife
of Vriah) in the parable of the Ewe-Lamb, whereby he did covertly and
artificially reprove David, and caused him to judge himself in the person of
another, 2 Samuel 12.1, 2, 4, 5.
to convince him of his sin, and bring him to repentance. Thus Christ reproved
the Jews in parables; whereby he convinced them of their sins, Mat. 21.28. to
33. Verse. 33. to 36.
and made them judge themselves for the same. Two instances we find in one
Chapter. scil. of a man that had two sons, and of a householder that let out his
Vineyard to Husbandmen.

4 Of exemplification, when we reprove a mans-fault before his face; but either
in a third person, as by telling him a story of a man that committed such an
offense (as the person to be reproved is guilty of) and what a great blemish
and dishonor it was to him, and how ill he was thought and spoken of for it;
this may sting him to the heart, and set conscience on work to make the
application.

2 Or in our selves, Mr Perkins in government of Tongue. C. 6.
as though we which reprove were faulty. Paul practiced this in 1 Cor. 4.6. --
these things I have in a figure transferred to my self, and to Apollo, for your
sake^, that is, the Corinthians, where he substitutes his Name, and Apollo's in
the room of the Ambitious Teachers, to reprove arrogance in them. Or when we
comprehend our selves in the same fault, as that we forget our selves, and we
ought not to say or do so, or thus; should I do so (as the person to be
reproved has done) I should transgress greatly, and deserve blame and shame
for it. I should humble and judge my self for it.

The Second branch of the fifth Rule is, we should suit our Reproof to the
nature of the Offense, under a fivefold consideration, scil. according as it is

1 Open or secret, public or private, so should the Reproof be. Open sins
deserve open rebuke, Those that sin openly to the scandal of the Church,
rebuke before all, 1 Timothy 5.20. Gal. 2.14.
that others also may fear. Paul rebuked Peter (not secretly, but) before them
all, because he sinned openly and scandalously, and by his example induced
Barnabas and others to dissemble. But private monition will serve for private
faults, else in laboring to heal our Brothers conscience, we may wound his
name. Our Savior gives this Rule, in Mat. 18.15. If thy Brother trespass
against thee, go and tell him his faults between thee and him alone, then take
with thee but one or two more.

2 As the Offense is great, or small, so should the Reproof be sharper or
milder; we should deal with others faults, as we do with our own sores or
swellings, if the prick of a pin will let out the corrupt matter, cutting or
lancing shall not be used; we must not deal with beams as with moats. Christ
heightened and sharpened his Reproofs of Peter, and Paul his of Elymas,
according to the greatness of their faults. Old Ely offended greatly in
reproving his lewd sons too lightly. Reproofs should be commensurate to the
offense; yet we must not aggravate it beyond what may draw the sinner to
repentance, lest we should drive him to despair. Tit. 1.13.
Paul bids Titus rebuke the Judaizing Cretians sharply, (...), cuttingly, that
they may be sound in the Faith.

3 As the fault is committed out of weakness or wilfullness, Gal. 6.1.
of ignorance, or of knowledge; the former we should reprove in a spirit of
meekness, as tenderly as Surgeons set arms and legs in joint, with so soft a
hand that the patient can scarce feel when the bone falls in again, we should
show much compassion and fellow-feeling in dealing with such; and great
tenderness to set them in joint again. The latter we should reprove with a
spirit of Zeal, Power and Boldness, like sons of thunder.

4 As it is a fault but once or seldom committed, or frequently; as it is
newly fallen into, or long continued in; Reproof with a still voice will suit
and serve for the former, but it must be louder and sharper, more awakening
and peircing for the latter; we should lift up our voice as a Trumpet to tell
such of their sins.

5 As this is the first time the party was reproved for the fault; Prove. 29.1.
or he has often been reproved, yet hardens himself; such an one is a
knotty piece, there is need to take the hard Mall and sharp wedges of Reproof
to rive him. Thus the quality and quantity or degrees of sin must be well
considered, and Reproof must be accommodated and proportioned thereunto; By
reproving amiss in the manner we may commit as great an error, as the fault is
which we reprove.

4 The Season when we should reprove. It is difficult to give any certain
Rules for that, because of variety of circumstances which may alter the case as
to the time; wisdom must direct herein. Yet I shall give two Rules.

1 It is good to reprove an offender as soon after the fault is committed, as
may be conveniently, as it is to apply a plaster as soon as the sore breaks
forth, or the wound is made; whilst the fault is fresh in remembrance; because
the conscience is then usually most stirring, and apt to be convinced, and set
on work to smite the offender, and he is more inclinable to be made sensible of
his fault, and to hearken to Reproof, who by the delay thereof may multiply his
sin, and contract a habit of it. Heb. 3.13.
-- As we should exhort, so reprove one another daily while it is called to
day, lest our Brother be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. Reproof
should follow sin at the heels, yet in two cases we may defer a Reproof for
a time.

1 To get the offending Brother alone, and so a fitter opportunity to do it.

2 Till our blood be cool, and Passions calmed.

2 Its a Season for Reproof, when the offender is in a capacity to receive the
Impression thereof, or to be wrought upon thereby, -- as

1 When he is himself, and not distempered either with drink, Abigail deferred
to reprove Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. Pro. 18.19.
till he had slept out his wine -- or with passion, A Brother offended (that
is, provoked to passion) is harder to be won (even by reproof) than a strong
City.

2 When he is more than himself, or better than his ordinary, and usual self
(scil.) in a humble, tender, melting or malleable frame.

It is good striking while the Iron is hot. Then deal with thy dearest friend
when he has an open ear, a teachable and tractable Spirit, as men sometimes,
and more usually have, when the hand of God is upon them in sickness, or some
other affliction, as Job 33.22, 23. Psalm. 141.6. -- But of this I spoke before
in the seasons of speech. -- The opportunity of time, and place, greatly
advantageth the prevalency of Reproof. Abigail showed her prudence in
apprehending the same.

3 When he is Reproached by others for his faults, and is troubled and vexed
at them, and it may be made worse than he is by others raylings, and
revilings. -- Then we should strike in with a pertinent and pithy reproof, to
heal his infirmity to the bottom, and his credit to the top; and by wise
application and friendly admonition to make an Antidote of the poison of others
bitter speeches against him, to preserve him from the Infection of those sins
to which he is subject, and to expel the venom thereof.

4 Its not a Season to reprove others as soon as they have reproved us, lest it
should savor of disdain in us to bear Reproof, or of malice to revenge it, by
returning quid pro quo, like for like, as it were bite for bite, or scrat for
scrat, because we would have them to be no better than we, but both to lie
under the same guilt -- Such a retorting of Reproof does not heal, but hurt
both the parties, scil. the Reprover, and the Reproved. -- Therefore first take
a Reproof kindly from another, and digest it well; afterward give him a gentle
Reproof (as there is occasion) and hereby thou may both set him a Pattern, and
lay an engagement upon him to take a Reproof well from thee.

The Third thing follows, scil. Reasons of it, which may be drawn from the
Necessity, Commodity, and Excellency of Reproof.

1 From the Necessity of it in it self, Necessity.
for both the Law and the Gospel command it, Levit. 19 17. Mat. 18.15. and that
in respect 1 Of our selves. 2 Of others. --


1 In respect of our selves, its needful for us to reprove others that offend.

1 To bear witness against sin in others, and not to contract the guilt or
soil of it to our selves. -- Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart,
rebuking thou shall rebuke him, that thou bear not sin for him, i. e. guilt and
punishment for his sake, for not reproving him. -- To leave others in their
sins unreproved, is to be partakers of other men's sins, Qui non verat peccare,
cum possit, jubet. Ephesians. 5.
which we should not be by our silence, no more than draw others into sin by
our speech. -- Have no fellowship (says Paul) with the unfruitful works of
darkness, but rather reprove them. -- The evils we reprove in others cannot
cleave to us, nor be charged upon us; but hereby we keep our selves free and
fair from the Taint, spot, and attainder of them.

2 To discharge our selves from the blood of others souls, which God may
require at our hands for suffering sin upon them unrebuked. -- That threat in
Ezekiel. 3.18. lies, though mainly against the Minister, yet not only, but against
private persons who neglect their duty therein. -- If thou speak not to warn
the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life, he shall dye in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. The ruin of others will
be imputed to us, if they perish through want of our admonition.

This Menace should set home the duty of Reproof, Act. 20.26.
and the danger of neglect, to our hearts, -- Paul could not say -- I am pure
from the blood of all men, If he had not been a faithful Reprover, as well as
a diligent Instructor.

2 Reproof is needful in respect of others, either that offend or that stand
by.

1 Of them that offend.

1 To save them from sin, death and Hell. He who (by wise Reproof) converteth
the sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall
hide a multitude of sins, Jam. 5.20. -- Reproof is Gods Physic, as needful
for the cure of souls, as purging, or letting of blood, or plasters are for
men's bodies. Reproof is Gods ordinance to pull a soul out of the fire of sin,
and Hell, which else would be burnt (or rather be burning) everlastingly --
out of a pit of corruption, which without such a hand of Reproof reached forth
to recover him, would sink and be drowned -- to save a soul, that else may
perish, -- to gain a soul to God, and godliness, to his Truths, and ways, and
to our selves in true affection, that is in danger to be lost. -- Tell thy
Brother (says Christ) between thee and him alone -- If he shall hear thee,
thou have gained thy Brother, Mat. 18.15. -- Now to gain or save a soul is a
more worthy work than to win or save a World, because one soul is more worth
than a World -- If there be need of lifting up a Brothers, Deuteronomy. 22.4. Exodus
23.5.
yea enemies Ox, or Ass that is fallen, or lies under his burden -- Thou
shall surely help him up, Verse. 4.
-- or bringing it back when it goes astray, -- Is there not great need of
restoring, and reducing a Brother when he is fallen or wanders? and of Reproof
as a means thereof? should we take pity and care of a Neighbors Ox, and
Ass, and not of his soul?

2 Reproof is needful to keep back the great Judgment from them, to wit, of
not being reproved. As it is a great mercy of God to send his servants to
reprove us for our faults; and not suffer sin to lie upon us, nor us to lie in
it; and for us to carry us so, as no Righteous person may be afraid, or
unwilling to tell us of what they see amiss in us: So it is a grievous
Judgment for God to take away Reprovers from a Nation, or a person; for God to
give over reproving of men by his Servants, or to forbid them to do it; It is a
sign he has a purpose to destroy them. -- When God threatens to plague Judah
for their Rebellion, and utterly to cast them off, Ezekiel. 3.26.
he imposes silence upon the Prophet Ezekiel, as a heavy Judgment to them;
so as he should reprove their miscarriage no more -- I will make thy Tongue
cleave to the roof of thy mouth? that thou shall be dumb, and shall not be to
them a Reprover; for they are a Rebellious house. -- Ephraim was in a desperate
state, when God gave forth that Prohibition -- Let no man reprove another, Hos.
4.4.
for this people are as they that strive with the Priest, that is, will endure
no Reprover. -- Therefore, says God, Let them alone, If they will sin, let
them; if they will go on in their wickedness, and so destroy themselves, let
them, I will contend no longer with them by Reproofs. -- This is the high way
to Hell, yea to go post to the Devil without stop, or let, or any turn; when
God forbids others to reprove us; that we may go on to fill up the measure of
our Iniquity; and run to the pit of Hell, and no body stay us. -- Then God
passes that hardening sin-sealing sentence upon men, Rev. 22.11.
-- He that is unjust, let him be unjust still (and never amend) he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still, and never be made clean; when he takes away
Reproof from them, which might have been a means of their amending, and
cleansing. -- Then it is no privilege to any man not to be reproved for his
faults, no more than it was to Cain not to be killed, to live a miserable life
(worse than death) to be a spectacle of Gods wrath, and judgment. -- To want
Reproof is a fearful judgment from God, and a lamentable state of man. Is not
then Reproof needful?

2 As in respect of the Offenders, so of bystanders or of others, that see and
hear of their offense, that they may take warning by their Reproofs, not to do
the like, as they would avoid the blame, and shame thereof. -- Them that sin
(to wit scandalously, and openly) rebuke before all, that others also may fear,
says Paul, 1 Timothy 5.20. that is, be awed thereby, and kept from falling into
the like sins. -- By a public Reproof many may receive Profit, and much evil
may be prevented thereby to others, as well as advantages may come to the
offenders themselves. Commodity. 2 Pet. 1.13.


The Second Reason from the Commodity of Reproof in the effects thereof; as

1 To awaken and rouse up such as slumber, and a means to keep them waking and
watchful. To this end Reproof has both a cry (or call) and a rod in it to
smite the offending Brother on the ear, and heart, as the Angel smote Peter on
the side to waken and raise him up. -- Let the Righteous smite me, Act. 12.17.
Psa. 141.5.
says David, that is, reprove me. -- Reproofs are not only words but blows to
drousy souls. Solomon calls them the wounds of a friend, Prove. 27.6. Hereby
Nathan awakened David who was fast asleep in his sin, 2 Samuel 12.7. and Christ
the Woman of Samaria, by telling her of her filthy sin of Adultery, Joh. 4.18.

2 To quicken and sharpen dull, dead spirits. -- A wise and holy Reproof has
spirit and life in it, and conveyes both into them that receive it -- Turn you
at my Reproof (says wisdom) what then? Pro. 1.23. Chap. 6.23.
Behold I will pour out my spirit unto you -- and the reproofs of instruction
are the way of life, that is, both to quicken and to save. -- Reproofs are
lively, and life-giving -- the ear that hears the Reproof of life abides
among the wise, Prove. 15.31.

3 To heal distempers and disorders in others. -- Reproof is a sovereign
medicine, an Antidote against sin. David calls it an excellent oil, Psalm. 141.5.
which shall not break his head, but give it a plaster. -- The oil of Reproof
being well rubbed in, does cure, comfort, and refresh a diseased soul. It has a
peircing, sinking, soaking property; -- for a Reproof enters more into a wise
man (says Solomon) than a hundred stripes into a fool, Prove. 17.10. Tat. 1.13.
and it is a means to make men sound in the faith, and to purge out corrupt
humors.

4 To rectify those that go wrong, and to keep them from evil, and from the
path of the wicked, Prove. 4 14. and from the evil woman, Prove. 6.23, 24.

5 To suppress sin. Many transgressions may be prevented, if a by-stander
would give but a check thereto by Reproof; for Reprovers are a terror to
evildoers; and keep them in awe that they do not offend, when such are present
whom they know will rebuke them. -- The wicked keep their mouths with a muzzle
while the godly are before them. The Majesty of a Reprover will tame the
Insolency of a sinner.

6 and lastly (to give the Remainder in a cluster) Reproof is a means of Grace,
1 To beget wisdom. (The Rod and Reproof give wisdom) Prove. 29.15. 2 And to
increase knowledge. Reprove one that has understanding, Prove. 19 25.
and he will understand knowledge -- Reproof has an instructing, and
prudentizing quality. 3 To cherish love among the wise. Rebuke a wise man, and
he will love thee, says the wise man, Prove. 9.8. 4 To procure favor. He
that rebukes a man, afterward shall find more favor than he that flattereth
with his Tongue, Prove. 28.23. -- A wel-given, and well-taken Reproof, does
greatly endear and engratiate the Reprover to the reproved. 5 To adorn those
especially that hearken to it; for to reprove another wisely, is to hang a
Jewel, or gold Ring at his ear, Prove. 25.12. -- A wise, and well-taken Reproof
is a great Ornament both to the Reprover, and the reproved. 6 To obtain comfort
and a blessing; for to them that rebuke the wicked, shall be delight, and a
good blessing shall come upon them, Prove. 24.25.

1 Delight from the discharge of their duty, and the testimony of their
consciences, and from hope of Gods acceptance, and of the prevalence or good
success thereof with man.

2 A good blessing from God, and from good men shall come upon Reprovers, as a
reward of their faithfulness herein, for the godly will set their affections on
them, give testimony of them, and offer prayers, and praises to God for them.

Reas. 3 From the excellency of Reproof. Excellency.


1 This is Gods manner of dealing with his Children for their good, scil. to
reprove them for their faults. -- As many as I love, I rebuke, (...), says the
Lord, Rev. 3.19. -- My for, faint not when thou art rebuked of the Lord. --
This is the Method of the Spirit, Heb. 12.5. ver.
to bring men to comfort by Reproof. When the COmforter is come, the first
thing he will do is this, He will reprove, etc. Joh. 16.8. God reproves his
people to humble, and reform, and save them, and he reproves the wicked, to
convince, restrain and condemn them; Psalm. 50.21.
To them God says, These things have thou done, etc. but I will reprove thee,
and set them in order before thine eyes. -- Thus God reproved Kings for Isreal's
sake, 1 Chronicles. 16.21. -- What God does is excellent. Gods example, or exercise
of Reproof puts sublimity, and excellency upon it, as it is man's duty.

2 This is one of the highest acts of amity, and fidelity, scil. to reprove a
Brother when he offends. Though it be a fruit and flower of love, yet in some
cases it is better than love.

Open rebuke is better than secret love, Prove. 27.5. or an open reproving love
is to be preferred before a secret silent love; for the former delivers a
Brother from sin, and Satan, and the latter delivers him up to both. The former
is fruitful, the latter barren; -- Love without rebuke when our Brothers case
requires it, is like a Bow without an Arrow to shoot in it, like a knife
without an edge to cut, a hand without a plaster to heal, or like a Be
without a sting, a drone, or slug, good for nothing. --

3 David calls Reproof a precious Oil, Psalm. 141.5. Christ calls it a pearl,
and holy thing, Mat. 7.6. Solomon prefers it before silver and gold, and
rubies. It is the Merchandise of Wisdom, which is better than precious
Treasures, Prove. 3.14, 15. -- He calls it an earring of gold, an ornament of
fine gold, Chap. 25.12.

The Reasons enforce a double duty upon us, scil. To give and take Reproof well.

1 Duty to give Reproof to those that offend. Great is our averseness to it;
the common causes whereof are

1 Ignorance and folly, we know not how to do it aright.

2 Want of love to men's souls, and of hatred to their sins.

3 Self-guiltinesse of the same faults.

4 Unfaithfulness to God and man.

5 Fearfulness or want of zeal and courage. Godly men have much bewailed it in
themselves as it is reported of Mr. Hieron, a faithful Minister of Christ in
his Generation, that he did say, when he lay on his deathbed. -- I confess
that in public I have been somewhat full in Reproof, Admonition, Instruction;
but in private, my backwardness, my bashfulnese, my dastardliness has been
intolerable, and I may truly say, that if any thing lie as a burden upon my
conscience, This it is. -- These Reasons should be as Nails to fasten this
duty of Reproof to our hearts and as Goads to prick us forward to the practice
of it -- To this end we should be Children of Light, Spiritual, and
Unblameable.

1 Children of Light, begotten of the Father of Lights, having Christ the day
star, yea the son of Righteousness risen in our hearts; to love the light of
knowledge and Grace, and to hate the darkness of sin and ignorance; to walk in
the light of Gods word, and to come to the light thereof, for the Trial, and
discovery of our deeds, Joh. 3.20, 21.
that they are wrought in God, else we will not reprove, and cannot reprove
the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.8, 11, 13. ye were sometimes darkness, but
now are ye light in the Lord, walk as Children of Light, and have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. --
All things that are reproved are made manifest by the Light, for whatsoever
does make manifest, is Light, -- else we do but vapor, and our words are
wind, and it may be said to us, as was by Job to his friends, what does your
arguing reprove? Job 6.25, 26.

2 We should be spiritual, Brethren, says Paul, Gal. 6.1.
if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an
one in the spirit of meekness; set him in joint again -- Such are fittest to
be soul-Chirurgeons, for they will handle their Patients (whom they seek to
heal by Reproof) very tenderly, and skilfully. Now to be endued with a Spirit
of Grace, Love, Meekness, and of wisdom, will make a man spiritual, and he
that is spiritual discerns all things, 1 Cor. 2.14.15. as

1 Himself clearly, what faults are in him, what beams are in his own eyes, to
pluck them out.

2 Then he discerns others, espyes faults in them, motes in their eyes.

3 The Spiritual man discerns the Nature and circumstances of Reproof, as

1 What offenses to reprove, and what to cover and pass by in silence, as small
matters. It is the glory of a discreet man to pass over a Transgression, Prove.
19.11.
personal injuries at least, as Christ did Thomas his speech (which as some
conceive proceeded from fear and discontent) Come and let us dye with him. --
Joh. 11.16. without giving him a check for it, or seeming to take notice of it.

2 How to order a Reproof; and set in edgewise, to convince the judgment and
Conscience of the offender concerning his Trespass: and what it is to reprove,
and what to reproach an offender, whereby he is rather hardened in his
wickedness, and made worse, then better.

3 How to deal with men of several spirits, and Tempers, and how to frame and
fashion reproof to the several kinds, and degrees of sin.

The Art of reproving is like the Husbandmans skill, which his God does teach
him, Is. 28.26, 27, 28
in respect of several grains, as to beat out Cummin, and fitches, with a
staff or little rod; and to bruise out the bread-corn, as wheat, and Rye, by
the force of the flail, or Cart wheel. So God does teach the spiritual man whom
to touch with a Twig of reproof; whom to smite with a rod, and whom to thresh
with a flail of reproof. Not to overcharge others with reproof; and to this end
to consider not so much, what he is able to speak, as what others are able to
bear; least if his Reproofs be too harsh sharp, or bitter for them, they cannot
digest, or keep them, but presently cast them up again as weak stomachs do
physic that is too strong for them.

4 When to reprove, and when to keep silence, as when we see no hope of doing
good by reproof; which caused Paul (as is conceived) to forbear speaking
against the great Diana at Ephesus, at least directly, and by name, and that
Idolatry, as the Townclerk attested for him. Act. 19.37


3 We should be unblamable and unreprovable. -- To this end

1 We should endeavor to reform things amiss in our selves, before we
reprove the same in others. For it is hypocrisy to reprehend others, before we
have labored to amend our selves. Observe how Christ puts it home to a man's
Conscience, why he reproves his brother, when he is faulty and guilty himself.
Mat. 7.3.4, 5
Why see thou the Mote in thy Brothers eye, and considerest not the beam in
thine own Eye? Thou Hypocrite, etc. q. d. thou can not see to do it in a
right manner, from a good principle, or for a good end. -- This leaves a man
inexcusable, and exposes him to the unavoidable judgment of God, and to
self-condemnation, when a man judges and reproves another, and does the same
things himself, Rom 2.1, 2, 3.

2 Or if we be guilty of, or subject to the same faults which we reprove in
others, we should freely confess the same to them, and profess our hatred of
grief for, and striving against the same; and declare we reprove our selves as
well as them, and that we seek a mutual Reformation.

Object. Some may say, It belongs to the Calling of Ministers to reproove, not
to private persons? Cas. cons l. 5 c. 9


Answ. 1. The Duty of Reproof (says Doctor Ames, pertains in some sort to all
men, who have the use of Reason by a natural precept. It is a work of charity
and a general Office of Neighbor to Neighbor. Hence Believers may reprove
Infidels, and Infidels may reprove Believers, as I showed before. Though (as
he says) the duty lies especially upon them, who in regard of office are
bound to take charge of others: or are fitter in regard of parts to perform the
same with good success.

2 Though Ministers must admonish of authority, or by office, yet all others
may and ought to admonish of brotherly charity. Every private Christian (as one
says) may bear the person, though not the office of a Reprover. -- Though he
has not authority over another, yet he has this duty incumbent upon himself
to reprove his brother, or neighbor when he offends.

The second Duty is to take Reproof, well. Indeed our first care should be not
to deserve it, but to be blameless, and harmeless, Phil. 2.15.
the Sons of God without rebuke, etc. and to exrcise our selves, Act. 24.16.
(as Paul did) to have always a Conscience void of offense toward God and
man. So shall we take away the cause of Reproof, and save others the labor of
reproving us. But if we deserve it, we should embrace it, and improve it. To
this end take notice 1 Of our Averseness to it. 2 The manner 3 Matter of it. 4
Motives to it.

1 Our great Averseness to take Reproof well; the World abhors it, Christians
have much to do to bear it. Men are backward to receive Reproof from God, or
man.

1 From God, when he reproved Jonah for his anger, Jonah 4.9.
do thou well to be angry for the gourd? he said, I do well to be angry,
even unto death. The men in Mallachies time quarrelled with God for reproving
them for their Blasphemies, (...) ^3.
your words have been stout against the Lord, yet ye say, what have we spoken
so much against thee?

2 From man, as

1 From Superiors, (...). 10. (...). 21.
either Magistrates or Ministers. Israel hated him that reproved in the Gate,
that is, both the Prophets who reproved in the open Assemblies, as in the Gates
of the Temples, Jer. 7.2. and in other places of public resort; and the
Magistrates who reproved in the place of Judgment, or in the Gates of the
Cities. -- John Baptists Reproof of Herod the King, for keeping his Brother
Philips wife, was hateful to him, and it seems he was willing to put him to
death; before Herodias provoked him to it, Mat. 14.3, 4, 5. Luke 3.19. It cost
him his liberty, for he was imprisoned, and his life, for he was beheaded.

2 Much less can men bear Reproof from Equals and Inferiors. The Sodomites
rejected Lots fair and friendly Reproof, and offered violence to him -- They
pressed sore upon him, and came near to break the door, Genesis 19.9. Hence when
we reprove others, they will retort it upon us, and recriminate, or seek
occasion to reprove, or reproach us; or if they have known any thing amiss in
us, though twenty years ago, which God and man have pardoned, and is healed,
they will revive it to our disgrace, or tell us in the general that we have
faults as well as they, as the Pharisees said to the blind man -- Thou wast
altogether born in sin, and do thou reprove us? Joh. 9.34.
and they cast him out, and we are apt to do the like to others, when they
reprove us. -- Now consider the causes of our backwardness to bear reproof,
which are great Impediments of our taking it well. Especially four,

1 Prejudicate opinions harbored in our bosoms of those that reprove us, as

1 That they are proud, and usurp authority over us as our Judges or Lords, and
would seem better, and holier than we; as Korah and his company said to Moses
and Aaron (the Reprovers of Israel) ye take too much upon you, Numb 16.3.
seeing all the Congregation are holy, and the Lord is among them. -- As the
Sodomites said to Lot, Genesis 19 9.
This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge. -- When
Moses midly admonished the Hebrew that smote his fellow, he said, who made thee
a Prince, Exodus 2.13.14.
and a Judge over us? intendest thou to kill me, as thou killedst that
Egyptian? -- When the Prophet reproved Amaziah King of Judah for his Idolatry,
presently the King reproved the Prophet with a scoff, Art thou made of the
Kings Counsel? forbear, why should thou be smitten? q. d. will thou meddle
with state affairs? 2 Chronicles. 25.26.

2 Or that they hate us, and tell us of our faults out of malice, or ill will
to cast disgrace upon us. We are apt to count Reprovers our enemies, as Ahab
did Elijah, 1 King. 21.20.
Have thou found me, O mine enemy? and the Galathians did Paul for reproving
their backsliding; Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the
Truth? Gal. 4.16. -- These Jealousies and prejudices should be plucked up by
the roots, else they will imbitter Reproofs to us; though they be mild, and
sweet, and they will imbitter our spirits against our Reprovers, though they
be loving and faithful to us.

The second Cause is Pride of heart, self-love, and self conceit, that we
think our selves as good as others, not inferior (whereas the reproved is some
way under the Reprover) and therefore we take it ill to be told of our faults;
We would have a Noli me tangere, written upon us, that none may come near us
to touch us with a Reproof. -- Man is a cross Creature, and cannot abide to be
checked or controlled.

The Third Cause is too much love, or liking of sin (especially a Delilah) or
loathness to part with it (as with a right eye) or to have it touched.

The fourth is unwillingness to bear shame, and grief for sin, that makes us
unwilling to bear Reproof for sin. -- The removing of these Impediments will
make way for receiving admonition with much fruit and comfort.

2 Consider the right manner of bearing Reproof, for the modality of an act
has a great Influence into the Efficacy and success thereof. To take Reproof
well, will make it work well, as Physic does. But to take Reproof wrong, is
like the taking of a dagger or knife by the wrong end, scil. by the point, or
edge, and not by the heft, then it may do us more hurt than good. -- We should
receive Reproof, 2 King. 5.13, 14.


1 Humbly, even condescend, and stoop low to take an Admonition even from an
inferior or mean person, Job 31.13. 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
as Naaman did from his Servants, and Job from his. David from Abigail.

2 Thankfully, and affectionately, as David did, he took Reproof as a
kindness; bless God, and thank him for it; Bid it welcome to our ears, and
hearts. We should receive Reproof as sick folks do Physic, with earnest
desire it may work well with us, to cure our Spiritual diseases, and procure
our souls health. -- Receive Reprovers as the Angels of God, as our
soul-friends, who should be dear to us above all.

3 Effectually, to make use of Admonition for the emendation of our ways and
doings, that we may not need to be twice told of, Heb. 13.22
or reproved for one fault.

4 Patiently, I beseech you Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation, and
Admonition, bear it patiently, and wear it as a Jewel in your ear, by reforming
and conforming your selves thereunto. Reproof seems a burden, therefore we have
need of patience to bear it, He that heaneth Reproof possesses his heart,
Luke 21.19.
says Solomon, Pro. 15.32. that is, in or through patience.

3 The means of taking Reproof well, are three, which we should labor for.

1 A wise heart to understand the nature, and end, the use, and benefit of
reproof, that it is an effect of mercy, and means of grace, and of much good
from God to us; an argument and expression of love, and faithfulness from man
to us.

2 An obedient ear, Prove. 25.12.
to hearken to reproof as Gods ordinance; to receive Admonition, and
Instruction, as to what God speaks to us by them that reprove us.

3 A tractable spirit, to comply with a reproof, as soft wax with the seal; to
receive a full and deep impression of it: to apply it close as a plaster to
the sore, to heal our manners; to yield our selves freely to it, as metal
heated to the hammer, or melted to the mould, to be new wrought, or new cast;
to submit to a rod of Admonition, as meekly as a child does to a rod of
correction; to be drawn from evil to good, from vice to virtue, as effectually
by a coard of reprehension, as we can be forcibly by a cable of compulsion.
To give up our selves as servants to Admonition, to obey it, is the way to
become Masters over our selves, to have rule over our own spirits, and to
command our corruptions.

4 Is Motives to this duty, from two heads, 1 The good of receiving Reproof. 2
The evil of rejecting it. 1 The good of receiving Reproof.


1 It is a sign of a gracious heart to take reproof well, as David did from the
Prophet Nathan, he affected and respected him more for his plain, and
home-reproof of him, Thou art the man, than before. He had liberty of access
into King David's presence, who communicated to him the secret, and weighty
affairs of his Kingdom, 1 King. 1.23, 27. and afterward from the Prophet Gad,
David's Seer, 2 Samuel 24.11. to 15. to whose Admonition with a Kallender of
judgments annexed to it, -- for David's sin in numbering the people, David
hearkened with meekness and submission. Yea David took a blow of reproof well,
not only from Gods Prophets, but from any righteous man, even as head-Oyl,
Psalm. 141.5.
a heart-kindnesse; though reproof be a dry morsel, yet he could relish it,
and digest it well: yea from a woman, as Abigail, whose wise reproof he
embraced with all thankfulness to God, and her, and took her afterward to be
his wife, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33, 34. If you would be David like, men after Gods own
heart, then write after his Copy, take reproof well whosoever gives it. You
may read in the life of John Gersin, Chancellor of Paris, that he rejoiced in
nothing more, quamsi ab aliquo fraterne, and ut ait, Charitative redargueretur,
than to be brotherly and lovingly reproved by any. Though Paul reproved Peter
sharply, and recorded his reproof, yet Peter took it well, else he would not
have commended Paul, and his Epistles afterward, 2 Pet. 3.15, 16. -- Christ as
a stranger reproved the two Disciples, going to Emmaus for their folly and
unbeleef, yet they constrained him by entreaty, to come in, and eat with them,
Luke 24.25, 29, 30.

2 To take reproof well, is, and will be

1 Our wisdom; For he that regards Reproof is prudent, Prove. 15.5. Verse.
31, 32. (...)
and the ear that hears the reproof of life, abides among the wise. In medio
sapientum pernoctabit, shall lodge among the wise, that is, he shall be
received, regarded, and rewarded as a fellow servant, with other wise men in
Gods household.

2 Our Profit, for great is the benefit, and blessing of reproof (as has been
declared) and to receive it readily, is the means to reap it wholly.

3 Our comfort, that reproofs have been healing medicines to us, as Abigail
said to David, 1 Samuel 25.30, 31. when the Lord has done to us according to all
the good he has promised us; then it will be no grief unto us, nor offense
of heart, that we have hearkened to counsel, and been reformed by reproof.

4 Our honor; For he that regards Reproof shall be honored, Prove. 13.18.
scil. among the wise, and holy, and such as fear God, -- and our Ornament (as
I showed before) for it is a greater grace to a man to have an obedient ear,
that is an ear open to the Discipline of reproof, to take it in freely, than
any Jewel, Ear-ring, or ornament of gold can be.

Object. How can I bear Reproof well, seeing it wounds, and cuts me to the
heart?

Ans. 1 Reproofs are but the wounds of a friend which are faithful (or
nutrienda, Prove. 27.6.
as some think the word signifies, to be nourished and received with
thankfulness) even deep peircing reproofs; but the kisses ( i. e. fawnings and
flatterings) of an enemy are deceitful, or deprecanda, as Junius renders it,
to be prayed against.

2 The wounds of a faithful reproof are but like the wounds which a Surgeon
makes when he cuts the flesh to cure the sore; not like the wounds of an enemy
which tend to kill and destroy. -- To have thy sin discovered, and thy heart
pricked with grief for it, by the point of a reproof, is the way to have thy
soul healed of sin, and saved from hell, whereas to think thy self so whole,
as not to need the Physic of reproof, may prove a Corrasive to thy Conscience,
and a stab to thy heart another day.

Second Motive; Consider the evil of rejecting reproof, both the evil of sin,
and of punishment.

1 The evil of sin that is in it, which appears in six particulars.

1 Not to bear reproof is a fault in a King, (who if any person, might think
himself to be above reproof, and exempted from the lash thereof) much more in
an inferior. Better is a poor, Eccl. 4.13.
and wise Child (says the Preacher) to wit, who will receive reproof, and
correction, than an old and foolish King who will no more be admonished, or who
knows not to be admonished as yet, that is, to take it well. For he that is
past reproof for his faults, is past hope of amendment. It is the Character of
a self-conceited and wilful man, to be so wedded and wedged to his opinion, or
way, as that he cannot endure any man's advice, or reproof.

2 It is folly; for he is a foolish King (though a King, and old) who will not
endure to be admonished. Untractablenesse of heart against Reproof, is a fruit
and sign of folly. For Reproof is an instructive and corrective of wisdom. It
is folly and madness to storm and rage against it, and not to justify the
Lord in what is spoken against our sins, or against us for them. If we will
not bear verbal Reproofs, how can we bear real blows or stripes when we are
buffeted for our faults, 1 Pet. 2.20
Is it not great folly in us wilfully to deprive our selves of the means of our
good, or of good by the means? To cast off reproofs, is to cast up meat as soon
as we have eaten it, how can it nourish us, or physic as soon as we have
taken it, how can it purge us? or to pull off a plaster as soon as it is laid
on, how can it heal us?

3 It is bruitishnesse. He that hates reproof is brutish, Prove. 12.1
says Solomon, he is a beast, he has not the understanding of a man. He is
like a dog that barks, and bites, when his master takes a Thorn or prick out of
his foot, or like a horse that kicks and strikes, when the Ostler does but rub
the dirt, and mire off him, or when the Rider spurs him for his slowness, or
stumbling Thou have no more understanding than an Ox or Ass that lifts up thy
heel, or opens thy mouth to find fault with him that reproves thee friendly and
faithfully for thy sins; thou art a beast in man's shape that chooses to live in
such families, and societies, where all things are lawful, or where there is
liberty for every one to live as he list, and do what seems good in his own
eyes, and no man is to reprove another, or say, ill thou do -- Is not this to
live like a Beast, or in a herd among beasts? Such have cause to judge and
humble themselves before the Lord, and say with the Psalmist So foolish was I,
and ignorant, I was as a beast before thee? -- Nabals servant accused his
master of folly, Psalm. 73.22
and brutish stupidity, that he would endure no body to admonish him of his
sin, or danger, he was so harsh, and churlish, and had not the patience to
bear it. 1 Samuel 25.17
-- He is such a Son of Belial, that a man cannot speak to him.

4 The refusal of reproof is the way to multiply sin, to persist in sin, to
live and dye in sin. Because reproof is a remedy of Gods appointment against
sin, to give a stop to it, or put in a bar against it. Now the refusal of
reproof is a removal of this let, or impediment and opens a door to let in all
iniquity. How have I hated instruction, will he that has been enticed to
whoredom, at last mourn and say? and my heart despised reproof; Pro. 5.11. to
15
and have not obeyed the voice of my Teachers, etc. I was almost in all evil,
in the midst of the Congregation and assembly, which words may be understood
as expressing the greatness of his sin ( q.d. there is almost no sin, which
I did not commit, without shame or blushing, openly in the sight of others) as
well as the greatness of his misery, q. d. I am made a public spectacle of
ruin for all men to gaze at. To reject reproof is the way to go astray, do
amiss, and to go on in iniquity, without stop or let, and not to return, nor
reform, to fall and lie in sin, and not to recover, nor rise again; to be
hardened and rooted in evil, to be lulled asleep in the Cradle of security, and
settled on our Lees, without means, or hope of being removed, transplanted, and
awakened, Prove. 10.17
He is in the way of life, says the wise man; that keeps instruction or
admonition, that holds it fast, and makes use of it; but he that refuses
eproof erreth, that is, he not only is out of his way, but without help, or
hope to set him right, or bring him into it again, which reproof would do.
There is no end of erring to him who refuses to be reproved; for he causes
to err (as the word may be rendered) or wilfully makes himself to go out of
the way, and keep out, and not come in again, whereas Reproof would reduce him.

5 The rejection of reproof is a great aggravation of sin, an adding of sin to
sin, God urged this against Israel, to make their sin out of measure sinful,
that he had rebuked them by his Prophets, and labored their reformation The
Revolters are profound to make slaughter, Hos. 5.2
though I have been a R^buker of them all. It argues a height of impiety for a
man to harden himself against reproof, Prove. 29.1.
to persist in a fault, although often admonished for it Such an one will be
like an Heretic after several Admonitions, Tit. 3.10, 11
(...), self-condemned.

Sixth Evil of sin, herein is this, in despising reproof, we despise not man
but God, whose Ordinance it is, and who speaks to us in and by the same. They
would none of my Counsel, Prove. 1.30
says God, they despised all my reproof, when we despise Gods servants whom
he sends to reprove us, we despise God, and such shall be lightly esteemed;
1 (...). 2.30
-- we reject the Counsel of God against our selves, and forsake our own
mercy.

2 Consider the evil of punishment that accompanies it. Rejecting of reproof
is the way to calamity without pity, and to destruction without remedy. -- It
is (as one calls it) an express and explicit sign of everlasting ruin to
despise reproof. -- When King Amaziah taunted Gods Prophet, because he
reproved him for seeking after the Gods of Edom; then the Prophet said -- I
know that God has determined to destroy thee; because thou have done this, and
have not hearkened to my Counsel, or reproof. 2 Chronicles. 25.16
Amaziah King of Judah, would not hear the admonition which Joash King of
Israel gave him, which provoked him, and procured ruin to himself, verse. 21,
22. 1 Samuel 2.25.
-- Elies Sons would not hearken to their Fathers too mild Reproof, because
the Lord would slay them. It is a sign God has left men to themselves, when
they become deaf to reproves, and admonitions.

How does wisdom complain, and threaten the contemners of her reproofs, Prove.
1.24. to 33. He that hates reproof shall dye, Prove. 15.10
says Solomon; is in danger to be surprised with some sudden, dreadful
judgment, or shameful miserable end. Hell gapes for such, and earth groans
under them. Deur. 17.12
The Law of Moses appoints that the man that will do presumptuously, and not
hearken to reprovers, to wit, the Priest and the judge, that man shall dye.
Some think Solomon has reference thereunto: he that hates reproof shall dye
because that is the high way to do presumptuously. A Man of reproofs, that is,
Prove. 29.1.
a man that has been reproved again, and again, as Daniel is called a man of
desires, that is, greatly desired, and hardneth his neck, that is, will not
submit to the yoke of reproof, he shall be destroyed suddenly without remedy,
or recovery; because he that refuses to be reproved, hates to be reformed,
and therefore shall surely, and severely be broken to pieces, as the word
signifies. -- Refractarinesse to reproof can look for nothing but ruin. If
the stripes of reproof cannot make us bow to reformation, the strokes of Gods
judgments will break us to destruction.

THe fourth Particular case is, Communication; Christians should confer
together of the matters of God, as the two Disciples did by the way, as they
went to Emmaus concerning Jesus of Nazareth, his prophetical Office, and power
in word and deed, Luke 24.14, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 Verse. 15.
in doctrine, and in miracles, his passion and resurrection. -- These were the
subject of their discourse, of which they did, (...) talk familiarly together;
-- and (...), inquire, dispute, and reason together, or question one with
another about the things that had happened, Verse. 21
whether Christ was risen indeed, and whether it was he that should have
redeemed Israel. Verse. 17.
-- and (...), they did bandy, or toss discourse one to another, as when two
play at ball. -- Christ and the woman of Samaria had conference together about
soul-affaires with good success, for that proved an effectual means of her
Conversion, and an occasion of the salvation of many Samaritanes, who believed
on Christ for the saying of the woman, Joh. 4.39. and Christ was so forward
thereunto, that though he was then hungry, yet he forgot to eat meat; what
conferences had Christ and his Apostles and Disciples before his Passion, and
after his Resurrection, Act. 1.3, 6, 7 2 King. 2.11
Of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God? Elijah and Elisha, walked and
talked together, when the fiery Chariot came to part them asunder. Its like
Elijah informed Elisha, of such things as should fall out in Israel after this
transumption. In Malachies time, when men's words were stout against the Lord,
and said, Its in vain to serve God, then they that feared the Lord, Mal. 3.13,
16
spoke often one to another. Thus Christians should speak together often yea,
even in evil times, to confirm, comfort and strengthen one another, when
blasphemies and all iniquities abound, yea, daily, while it is called to day,
that is, Heb. 3.13
continually, and upon every occasion, and at meat, as Christ did familiarly.
The Christians in Tertullians time, as he reports in his Apology, c. 39. in
their Agapes or love feasts, did so confer together, as making account God
heard all they said. Ita fabulantur, ut qui sciant Dominum audire. Also in
journies, as the two Disciples did by the way as they were going to Emmaus; and
at home, Deuteronomy. 6.7
when they sit in their house, or rise up, or lie down; many texts in the new
Testament imply this duty, which I have mentioned before, as Ephesi. 4.29. Col.
3.16. and 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 12.7. 1 These. 5.14. Heb. 3.13. and 10.23. I shall
give somes Rules for it, and Reasons of it.

1 Rules for Christian conference, wherein I shall be very short, because the
general rules premised for the Government of the Tongue, serve fitly for this
particular.

The First Rule. In company improve the time for profitable, edisying
discourse, thereby waving sinful, worldly, or vain talk, corrupt
communication; let us redeem time, for so beneficial a business, to drive so
thriving a trade, remembering how much precious time we have formerly squandred
away in worthless, foolish frothy speech. The least minute of time, is too
good to spend in speaking an idle word.

The Second Rule. Observe the dispositions, tentations, afflictions, and
conditions of the persons present, to suit and apply your discourse to their
necessities and capacities.

1 To their necessities, as to instruct the ignorant, comfort the
feeble-minded, and convince gainsayers, support the weak, quicken the dull,
awaken the drousie, to counsel them that are in doubt, to confirm them that
stagger, and reduce such as wander. Conference is a bow in which we may shoot
all sorts of arrows (as lessons, comforts, checks, reproofs, restraints,
excitements, encouragements) with force and vigor, and take aim aright to hit
the party (and that part of him (whether his head, heart, or hand) which we
intend, and make our speech come home to his bosom, and stick upon his spirit,
with good success. One says, Speech of touch toward others should be
sparingly used, Sir Francis Bacons Essays.
for discourse ought to be as a field, without coming home to any man. I
conceive if speech do not touch, it will not take, if not applied home to the
party, it will not work so effectually.

2 To their capacities, who are dull and slow of apprehension; we should stoop
to the understanding of the meanest, which is to condescend to them of low
estate and parts, Romans 12.16.
and to put milk into the mouths of babes; that is as necessary as to set meat
before strong men? to impart spiritual gifts to them, as the rich give alms to
the poor. Christ accommodated his discourse to the capacity of his hearers, as
they were able to hear it. Mar. 4.33.


The Third Rule. Raise spiritual discourse from temporal occasions, either then
present, or spoken of, whether creatures, or occurrences, either by way

1 Of Allusion, or reference, thus, As food cannot nourish, nor clothes keep
warm the body, except eaten and put on; no more can Christ, unless applied to
the soul. As physic cannot heal the body if not taken, no more can the means
of grace, cure the soul if not used; and the like.

2 Of Conclusion, or inference from what is said or done. Luke 14.7. to 12.
Christ took occasion from the ambition he observed in the bidden Guests, to
teach them humility in choosing rooms, scil. to sit down in the lowest, and to
teach the maker of the Feast charity, in bidding Guests; scil. the poor, the
maimed, the lame, the blind. Ver. 12, 13, 14.
When one of the company petitioned him, to command his Brother to divide the
inheritance with him, Christ cautioned them against Covetousness by the example
of the rich man, who built greater barns, Luke 12.13, 14, 15, 16, to 22.
and lost his soul. Thus Christ took occasion from Gods providence to birds and
flowers, feeding the one, and clothing the other, to speak of Gods provisional
care for his Children; shall he not much more feed and cloth them? Mat. 6.26,
28, 30. Joh. 4.10.
are not they much better than these? -- from the water of Jacobs well, and his
asking of it to speak to the woman of Samaria, of the water of life, and to
provoke her to thirst after it, and to ask it of him -- from meat, and his
Disciples putting him in mind of it, when he was hungry, faint, and weary, to
speak to them of spiritual meat he had to eat which they knew not of; Joh.
4.31. to 35.
my meat is (says he) to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work, from the mention of b^ead, Mat. 16, 5, 6.
which the Disciples had forgotten to take, he presses on them a caution to
take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees; Joh. 6.26, 27.
-- from the peoples secking him, not for love, but for loaves, he persuaded
them to labor not for perishing, but for enduring meat; from the example of a
little child, Mat. 18.1.2, 3, etc.
whom he set in the midst of his Disciples, he taught them to be humble,
harmless, and to avoid offenses. Thus we should in imitation of Christ, watch
for any occasion which the company or any present, their words, Acts, Gestures,
or any accidents may afford us, of speaking what may conduce to their souls
good; take any hint we can for the same, to scrue and wind in good discourse by
degrees, that the company may be better for us, or we for them, before we
part. As Benhadads servants diligently observed whether any thing would come
from King Ahab (that they might make advantage of) and did hastily catch it, 1
King. 20.32, 33.
to promote their Masters business, therefore when he said he is my Brother,
they said, thy Brother Benhadad. Paul praised what he perceived was
commendable in Agrippa, and watched to take hold on every word he spoke, Act.
26.27, 28, 29.
to persuade him to become a Christian; we should learn the art of transition,
to pass from worldly to heavenly discourse, or turn the current of it into a
spiritual channel.

The Fourth Rule. Observe what subjects Gods Providence puts into your minds,
and mouths as Themes of meditation, and communication, as common mercies, or
calamities judgments felt or feared, the Churches afflictions, or the death of
the Righteous, etc. Such things as God would have the hearts of all, especially
of his people to be affected with, to make an impression on them.

The Fifth Rule. Get some common heads into your minds, and hearts; that may
be of general use to all, and at all times; as the sinfullnesse of sin, the
excellency of Christ and Grace, the vanity of Creatures, the uncertainty and
troubles of life, the approach and great consequence of death, the last
judgment, the joys of Heaven, and torments of Hell, the piety and felicity of
the godly, the iniquity and misery of the wicked; especially, get not only your
heads fraught with notions, but your hearts filled with affiance in, affection
to, and experience of Jesus Christ; and speak of him freely, and frequently to
others, to carry Christ to them, or to draw them to Christ. As the Spouse did
of her beloved, Cant 5.10. and 6.1, etc.
to the daughters of Jerusalem; as the two Disciples going to Emmaus did of
Jesus of Nazareth; and the Prophet did of that good matter his heart had
indicted concerning Christ the King of Saints; Psalm. 45.1.
for Christ is a most sweet, profitable, and successful subject of discourse,
and ever in season.

The Sixth Rule. The asking and answering of questions aright, may conduce much
to mutual edification; As when others have doubts, and desire to be resolved
in matters of Religion, or in cases of conscience, we may help them greatly,
by giving them clear and sound answers, or solutions thereof. This is a
fruitful way of improving time and talents, abilities and opportunities. This
we find under precept in the old Testament, and under practice in the New.

1 Under Precept in the Old Testament, there are commands for asking and
answering questions about the word, and works of God.

As, 1 Children of their Fathers, concerning

1 Gods Providence, ask thy Father and he will show thee; D^u 32.6, 7, 8.
thy elders, and they will tell thee, to wit, the wondrous works God did for
Israel, as in their redemption out of Egypt; in dividing the land of Canaan
among them by Lot; when your Children ask their Fathers in time to come, what
mean you by these stones (set up in the midst of Jordan) -- Then ye shall
answer them, Josh. 1.6, 7.
that the waters of Jordan were cut off, and those stones shall be for a
memorial unto the Children of Israel for ever. scil. Verse. 21, 22
That Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. As the Children were to ask the
meaning of Gods great Works, so their Parents were enjoined to answer them, and
instruct them in the knowledge thereof.

2 Concerning Gods Ordinances, or religious Services, and the meaning and
reason of them, as of the Sacraments and administrations of them; Children were
to ask, and their Parents were commanded to teach them, the occasion,
signification, and use thereof, as of the Passover; Exodus 12.26, 27.
When your children shall say, what mean you by this service? ye shall say, it
is the Sacrifice of the Lords Passover. In like manner should Christians teach
their Children the meaning of Gospel-Sacraments, scil. Exodus 13.14, 15.
Baptism and the Lords Supper; so concerning the consecrating of the
firstborn, see what that meant.

3 Concerning the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 6.20
When thy Son asks thee, what means the Testimonies, Statutes, and Judgments
which the Lord our God has commanded you? That is, the whole Law, Moral,
Ceremonial, and Judicial? Ainsw.
One calls this, A brief Catechism, containing the Grounds of Religion. Verse.
21. to the end.
Then thou shall show unto him the occasion, end, and benefits thereof; the Law
was given to the Fathers, psalm. 78.5, 6
that they should make it known to their children.

2 People of their Ministers, Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth. Not only in public by hearing his Doctrine, but in private also, by
propounding their Doubts and Queries to him.

3 One private person of another, Thus shall ye say every one to his
neighbor, and every one to his brother, Ies. 23.35.
what has the Lord answered? and, what has the Lord spoken? It is said in
Zech. 3.10. Ye shall call every man his neighbor under the Vine, and under
the Fig Tree. Some understand this not only of a secure State, without all
danger and fear, but of their communion together to promote the salvation one
of another.

2 The duty of asking Questions, we find under practice and example in the
New Testament; this was an edifying course to the Disciples of Christ, and
Primitive Christians, when Christ spoke these words concerning the removing of
his bodily presence from them, Joh; 16.16, 17
A little while and ye shall not see me, etc. The Disciples first enquired
among themselves what these words meant, and because they could not satisfy
themselves, they were desirous to ask Christ to explain himself, Verse. 19, 20.21
which he perceiving, did; when the Disciples heard Christ deliver any thing
which they understood not, they asked him the meaning thereof when he was
alone. Mark 4.10
As of the Parable of the Sower, and of that Parable or sentence, Mar. 7.15.17
That which goes into a man cannot defile the man, but the things which come
out of him. Mar. 10.9, 10.11 Mar. 13.1, 2, 3, 4
And of what he spoke concerning the indissolubleness of marriage, and the
destruction of the Temple.

When the Eunuch understood not what he read in Isaiah concerning Christ, Isa.
53.7
he asked Philip the meaning, Acts 8.34, 35
I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet this, of himself, or of some other
man? Then Philip opened the Scripture to him. Let Christians take notice of
their doubts and scruples, and wait for an occasion to propound them to such as
are able to resolve them. To question much is the way to learn much, especially
if the questions be suited to the Askers necessity, and to the Answerers
faculty; this is the way to glean up knowledge. Col. 4.6
There is a dexterity in asking and answering questions aright.

1 Questions should be asked, not out of curiosity to show wit, or please
fancy, or to scratch an itching humor; but in sincerity, out of love to the
truth to know it, to the end we may do it, and readily to submit to it, when it
is discovered to us.

2 Not about things that are vain and unprofitable, but what may tend to godly
edifying, in faith and love, 1 Timothy 1.4
in holiness and obedience.

3 Avoid subtle and acute Questions in common discourse, which as one says,
resemble Crafishes, where there is more picking work, than meat to eat. These
engender strife of words, vain janglings, and animosities.

4 Questions of Religion should be debated without pride and passion, or
desire of praise or victory, but in a spirit of love and meekness, that truth
may be made to appear; to strike fire, that by the sparks of Arguments, we may
light the lamp of truth. 1 Timothy 6.4
Hereby we should not contend who should get the better, but that truth may
prevail, and get the victory over ignorance and error, or be drawn forth to
light, out of the Pavillion of darkness, or obscurity, under which it has lain
hid; but obstinacy in opinon renders a man culpable of great imperfections, and
liable to many exceptions.

Seventh Rule. It is lawful, and may be sometimes needful to discourse of
Natural, Moral, and Civil matters to improve our knowledge in them, and to get
direction for the better manageing of such affairs, whether public or private,
respecting our bodies, relations, or estates; or common business, which we have
one with another. Psalm. 112.5
Discourse about them may help us to guide our affairs with discretion. 1 King.
4.32, 33
The three thousand Proverbs Solomon spoke were of Natural and Moral Philosophy
(and it is like of policy) as well as of Divinity. But it is good to
intermingle some Spiritual discourse to season it with, and to take heed that
earthly things be not made the whole and sole subject of our speech, as the
most do in their meetings; which speak them to be mere worldlings in their
hearts, Os hominis sublime dedit, etc.
when they have nothing but the World in their mouths. As God has given a man
a sublime countenance, to look up above earth to Heaven, so an excellent
faculty of speech, to speak of Heaven as well as earth, of Divine and
Spiritual, as of Temporal and Terrestrial things, for the glory of God, and
good of souls, as well as for external commodities.

Of Urbanity.

Yea, it may be convenient sometimes to use Recreational speeches (or mirth in
conference) this is urbanity, or pleasantness of speech, which is lawful.

1 Because there is a time to laugh, Eccles. 3.4
as well as a time to weep; to be merry, as to be sad. And God has given a man
a power and faculty for the one as well as for the other, and Gods people have
used it, as the Jews, Psa. 126.1, 2
When God returned the captivity of Zion, then our mouths were filled with
laughter, and our tongues with singing.

2 Because the Preacher commands mirth, and says, Eccles. 8.15. and 3.22.
There is nothing better under the Sun than for a man to eat, and drink, and
be merry, for this is a man's portion; which he speaks not as a sensual
voluptuous Epicure, but as a sober discreet experienced man. There is nothing
better under the Sun than for a man to have and use what he enjoys with
delight and cheerfulness. Now pleasantness of speech is one means of honest
mirth, and may conduce as to the cheerfulness of the mind, so (in the
Consequent) to the healthfulness of the body.

Obj. Says not the Preacher, Eccles. 2.2
I said of laughter it is mad, and of mirth what does it?

Ans. The Preacher speaks of such mirth, as is

1 Sinful in the cause, occasion, or manner of it, and excessive in the measure.

2 Merely carnal in the end, without any further profit or benefit, and is made
the end of it self, and happiness is placed in it, as the sole or chief delight
or comfort of life; such mirth is madness, folly, vanity, unprofitableness,
what does it?

3 As is not accompanied with,

1 The fear of God, for Christians even in their merriments ought to rejoice
before God with trembling; Jude 12.
and as to feast themselves, so to make themselves merry with fear, scil. of
offending God therein.

2 With sorrow for sin.

3 With sense, Amos 6.6 Luke 6.25
grief, and pity for the miseries of others, as those to whom Christ says,
Woe to you that laugh (thus) for time will come when ye shall weep. Prove. 14.13
And in the midst of such laughter the heart is sad, and the end of such mirth
is heaviness, says Solemon.

I will lay down four Rules for ordering Recreational speeches.

1 For the matter of them, they must be harmless, without any scurrility,
obscenity, bitterness, or abusiveness in any kind, or just offense to any,
without girds, or taunts at some, to please others; we must take heed of
jeasting, either of sacred things, as Religion, or Scripture, for that is the
badge of a profane spirit, Julian the Apostate used it; or of things serious,
for that would argue petulancy of wit, or of things calamitous as the miseries
of others, for that would show inhumanity in us; Ephesians. 5.4
such is foolish talking and jeasting, which is not convenient, Paul prohibits
it, Annot.
(...) signifies facetiousness of speech, taken by Philosophers in a good
sense, but the Apostle uses it in an ill sense; for scurrilous jeasting in an
unseemly manner, which consists not with the sanctity and gravity of a
Christian. Thus as some Critics observe, men's ill manners have spoiled the use
or sense of good words, as I could instance in several particulars.

2 Recreational speeches must for the manner of them be seasoned with salt,
scil. not of wit only, but of wisdom, modesty, Col. 4.6
love, and gravity, and be rightly suited to the circumstance of time, place,
and persons.

3 For measure, they must be moderate and sparing, we should use pleasantness
of speech not as meat to feed the company with jeasts, but only as sauce to
meat, to quicken their appetites to more solid and wholesome discourse, or to
fit their spirits for higher duties. The refreshing of the mind with factious
speech, is but like the whetting of a Sith; as he is an idle Mower who is
always whetting, so is he a vain person who is always jeasting.

For the end, they should be useful two ways.

1 For sober and honest delight, for recreation of the mind, and refocillation
of the spirits, to make them quick and nimble, when they are dull and heavy,
and us fitter and fresher for the duties of our callings. Recreational speeches
should be as a Whetstone to edge us, as the whetting of the Sithe sharpens it
to cut better; and as Bellows to blow up sparks of cheerfulness in the spirits
of our selves and others. We should make it the end of our mirth, to move such
a delight as has profit or advantage joined with it to our selves and others,
and make us more serious and quick in what we have to say or do. Sampson
propounded a Riddle to his friends at his Marriage Feast, Judge. 14.12
to minister occasion of mirth to them, to whet their wits, and busy their
minds to find out the meaning of it, and with it to prevent or banish bad
discourse.

2 We may use Recreational speeches sometimes, to instruct, admonish, reprove,
or comfort others, in a pleasant way; for that may be spoken home to another in
jest, which would not be well taken, if spoken in good earnest. Gods servants
have used to reprove others in an irony, or in way of jest or taunt, thereby to
cast some shame or scorn upon them for their sins, 1 King. 18.27
as Elijah did upon Baals Priests, in a heat of zeal, scoffing at them; Job on
his friends to check their pride, and conceit of their own wildome, No doubt
ye are the People, Job 12.2
and wisdom shall dye with you. And Paul upon the Corinthians, for their
Laodicean conceit; and boast of fullness. -- Now ye are rich, 1 Cor. 4.8. 1
Cor. 14.36, 37
full, etc. and for their pride, what, came the word of the Lord out from you,
or came it to you only? Beza says, this is a sharp objurgation of them, least
they should think themselves the only wisemen, and all fools but they; or that
they were the first Christians, none before them, or none beside them. God
taught the Jews, to take up a taunting Proverb in way of derision against the
King of Babylon, Isa. 14.4
his state and City. The Preachers speech to the young man, was Ironical,
Rejoice in thy youth, Eccl. 11.9
q. d. seeing thou art wilful, go on and take thy course, but know that for all
these things God will bring thee to judgment. Such was Micaiahs answer to King
Ahab when he asked him, 1 King. 22.15
shall we go against Ramoth Gilead to battle or not? he said, go and prosper,
q. d. thy Prophets have bidden thee go, and thou have a mind to go, go thy way,
no doubt but thou will prosper, -- Ahab resented it as a scoff. An Irony is a
nipping jest, or a speech that has the honey of pleasantness in its mouth,
and a sting of rebuke in its tail. There is a texterity in speaking truth in
an Irony; or in a pleasant sentence, which may be taken sometimes with less
offense then a plain downright speech to be so addicted to joycing, as to loose
a friend rather than a jest; this becomes Jewish friendship (says one)
rather then Christian love. Mr. Bain^.


Eighth Rule; In speech speak not so much to show wit or eloquence, as
efficatious power of speech, to persuade others to good, and to dissuade them
from evil. Speak not out of affectation of praise, or delight to hear our
selves speak well, but out of desire of doing good, or of drawing others to do
well. Many speak against eloquence, as they do against learning, out of
ignorance, because they know not the worth or use of it, for Art has no enemy
but an ignorant person; but I speak only against the proud and vain use and
show of it.

Of Eloquence.

HEre I will show you, first That eloquence may be used, and secondly how.

1 Eloquence may be used, yea there may be good use of it, because

1 Eloquence is the gift of God; which he bestows on some of his servants, not
on others, as on Aaron. I know (says God) to Moses, of him, Fxo. 4.14 Verse. 16
Verse. 10
that he can speak well, and he shall be thy spokes-man to the people, and
instead of a mouth to thee. Not on Moses, for he was not eloquent but slow of
speech. Paul was eminent in eloquence, therefore the people of Lystra, Act.
14.12
called him Mercurius, because he was (...), the chief speaker, or Master of
speech, Apollos was an eloquent man and mighty in the scriptures. Act. 18.24
None of Gods servants should open their mouths to speak against any of God
gifts, of which, eloquence or the faculty of speech is one.

2 Eloquence is a flower of speech, both for beauty and sweetness, which sets
off speech with greater grace, obtains audience with greater delight, and
insinuates with more efficacy.

Though the Gospel was preached at first, with greatest plainness of speech, 1
Cor. 1.17 and 2.4
yet God has blessed it since to the furtherance of the gospel The sweetning
of speech with eloquence has been a means sometimes of winning others to hear
and embrace the Gospel, and Christ in it. Doctor Sibs says, Souls Conflict
while Augustine out of curiosity delighted to hear the Eloquence of Ambrose,
he was taken with the matter it self, sweetly sliding together with the words
into his heart. Peter Veretus sometime preacher at Geneva, was so sweetly
Eloquent, that he drew many to be his hearers, who were no friends to
Religion, and chained his hearers ears to his mouth, so as they never thought
him tedious, but always wished his Sermon longer, he converted thousands to
the truth and faith in Christ. One says of Gregory Nazianzen, that the true
beauty of his Soul did shine forth in his eloquence. Rhetoric being both his
Companion and his servant. It is reported of Mr. Rogers and Mr. Bradford,
Martyrs, that it was hard to say, whether there was more force of Eloquence,
and utterance in their preaching, or holiness in their lives and
conversations. Both historyes and experience declare, that God bestowed an
excellent faculty of elocution upon many of his servants, (both ancient and
modern divines) whose labors he blessed to the Conversion of many souls, and
to the edification of the Church.

4 God threatens it as a judgment to take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah,
Isay. 3.3
the eloquent Orator (or the man skilful in speech, and powerful to persuade)
as well as the wise Counselor or cunning Artificer, Ornamentum maximum
reipublicae est eloquentia Philosophorum, says Plato. Thus its made to appear
that eloquence is lawful and useful.

2 I must show how it should be used.

1 Eloquence should flow from us, (...), by a nattiral kind of facility, as
water out of a fountain; some command good language, as freely as others do
speech. Though it be acquired, yet it should not be strained or forced, as
some use it in imitation of others, which to judicious cars sounds harsh and
ungrateful.

2 Whether our eloquence be natural or acquired, how ever we come by it, we
should use it without affectation, and ostentation, and not pride our selves in
wit, words or phrases. An humble Christian will forbear, or change such
expressions, as he conceives may seem elegant to others, and he feels, or
fears his own heart, would be puffed up therewith; when Eloquence is affected,
or boasted, then it shows swelling vanity in the minds of the speakers, and is
not pleasing in the ears of the hearers.

3 We should strive to be rather solid then florid in our speeches, yet we
may use elegance therein, so that our end and aim be more to affect the
hearts, than tickle the ears of our Auditors. Eccl. 12.10
The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, or words of delight, such as
are apt not only to sink into the mind (like David's stone into Goliahs
forehead) but also to pierce to the heart like a dart of delight. Good matter
clothed with good phrase procures acceptance; and suavity of elocution,
produces efficacy of persuasion.

Ninth Rule; Speak of good things at home in your own families (as ye have
occasion) to inure your selves unto, and to get an habit of fruitful discourse
abroad. This was Solomon's practice, therefore the Queen of Sheba, said to him.
1 King. 18.8
Happy are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee, and that
hear thy wisdom. These words which I command thee this day shall be in thy
heart, and thou shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when
thou walk by the way, Deuteronomy. 6.6.7
when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

Tenth Rule. Let your discourse proceed 1 From good principles, as

1 The fear of God, and thoughts of his name, as it did in the godly in
Malachies time. Mal. 3.16


2 Love to others souls, and care of their good, as brethren or fellow members,
ought to have one for another (for speech is the instrument of charity, and
from desire of imparting some spiritual good to them, Romans 11.11
which was in Paul to the Romans; that they might be established.

3 From delight in spiritual things, for every one will take or make occasion
to speak of such things wherein they delight, Ps. 119.24
so did David, Thy testimonies are my delight, what then? my tongue shall speak
of thy word. Verse. 172
I will speak of thy testimonys before Kings, Verse. 46
and will not be ashamed. Having finished the rules, I proceed to the Reasons,
why Christians should confer together of the things of God, which are five.

Reas. 1. This is part of the Communion of Saints, to which God has promised
the blessing. Psalm. 133.3
It is a Gospel duty and a Gospel privilege; yea, this is the end of the
faculty of speech, and of society; upon this account, two are better than one,
but woe to him that is alone. Eccl. 4.9, 10
Christian conference is a loadstone to draw others to us, in the truth and
ways of God, to love and like, and embrace the same; (for hereby seducers draw
many into errors, and false ways) to set them in, and to keep them in. Its
difficult for one to go right alone, 1 Kin. 11.3, 4
It is a warning stone, to kindle, keep in and increase holy heat (warmth of
spiritual affections, love and zeal,) one in another. It is like Abishag that
lay in David's bosom, to keep him warm. Christians are like coals, which laid
together kindle one another and burn, but being scattered go out and dye. Such
a warming stone was Christ's discourse to the two Disciples hearts, they said
one to another, did not our hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by
the way, and while he opened to us the Scripture? Luke 24.32
If two lie together, then they have heat, Eccl. 4.11
but how can one be warm alone? Christian conference is a whetstone, to edge
and sharpen one another (as Iron sharpneth Iron, though both be blunt) to whet
one another to love and to good works. It is a Sleetstone, or a smoothing
stone, to make the ways of God plain and even, smooth and easy to others, (to
whom they appear rough and rugged) and to take off the roughness that is upon
the spirits of them, who are not even cast. It is a Touchstone, for the trial
of opinions, spirits, graces, ways and state of others. Hereby (It is
probable) the Angel of the Church of Ephesus tried them that said, Rev. 2.2.
they are Apostles, and were not, and found them liars and pulled off their
masks and Vizzards. Christian discourse is a precious stone, (...) a stone of
grace, Prove. 17.8.
to communicate spiritual gifts and graces, or the virtues of him that has
called us, one to another, Romans 1.11.
(as Paul desired to do to the Romans) which prospers whithersoever it turns,
whether to instruction, reprehension, or consolation. It is a resting stone,
for many that come weary and heavy laden (under loads of pressures, by reason
of troubles inward or outward) into the company of Christians, some or other
may lend an helping hand to take off their burdens by Christian conference, and
give ease to their spirits, and send them lightaway; even as those that carry
burdens, find much ease by sitting down on stones in the way; and setting their
pack or sack thereon. It is Eben-ezer a stone of help; lastly,
Christian-conference is a burdensome stone, to all the enemies thereof that
spite it, and oppose it, as Satan and his Instruments, the wicked, seducers and
deceivers (as God threatened to make Jerusalem, Zach. 12.3.
to all people that gathered themselves against it) and all that burden
themselves with it (by setting themselves against it) shall be crushed by it.

Reas. 2 Because all sorts of persons confer about their own matters, as
Merchants and trades men of their goods and traffic. To this end they have
exchanges and common Halls, to meet in, and discourse together, how to manage
their merchandising with best advantage. Hunters will speak of their game,
soldiers of their marches and ingagings, Fellow travelers of their journey,
business, and place whither they are going; Country men when they meet will
talk of their own Country affairs. And shall not Christians who are or should
be wise Merchants trading in heavenly Commodities, the goodly pearls of grace
for eternity, speak together of their Merchandises, which is better than that
of silver and gold? who are Country men that belong to heaven, from whence they
are begotten and born again, where their Fathers house, and their inheritance,
yea their Crown and Kingdom is. And fellow-travellers that journey toward
Heaven, shall not they confer together of their heavenly Country matters? of
the things pertaining to the Kingdom of Heaven, whither they are a going?
Phil. 3.20.
This is to have our conversation in Heaven, for spiritual speech is a fruit
of heavenly mindedness; and the language of Canaan. And hereby we declare
plainly that we are strangers on earth, and Citizens of Heaven. Let me add,
the wicked speak evil one to another familiarly, to corrupt good manners,
carry on wicked designs, to draw some to evil, and discourage others from good
by their evil communications. The Devil drives a mighty trade of iniquity; by
the tongues as well as by the hands of the wicked, who are diligent, and
constant, and unwearied in this service, shall the Devils instruments speak
evil often one to another, to advance the works and Kingdom of darkness, as
they are going toward Hell together? and shall Gods servants speak good seldom
one to another, of God, or for God, to promote the Kingdom of Christ, and
salvation of souls?

Reas. 3. Because to this end variety of gifts are given by the Spirit of God,
1 Cor. 12.7. to 12.
who divides to every one severally as he will; for mutual converse and
communication to profit withal (As one Country has some commodities which
another Country wants, that there might be mutual trade and commerce among
all) that one member may not say to another, I have no need of thee, not the
eye to the hand, nor the head to the feet, and that the abundance of parts in
some, 1 Cor. 12.21. 2 Cor. 8.14.
may supply the defects of others, without any diminution of their own store.
The communication of our gifts by conference, is the way to bring them into a
common stock, out of which every one may take forth supplies according to his
needs. God lays up treasures of knowledge and experience in the heads and
hearts of some, not to bear them up in themselves, but to lay them forth freely
to the enriching of others. Hence Peter exhorts, 1 Pet. 4.10.
As every one has received the gift, even so minister the same one to another,
as good Stewards, of the manifold grace of God. He is not fit to be a member
of Christ's body, that is not fit to be useful to the body, by the exercise of
such gifts as God has given him. This diversity of gifts is an upholder of
unity; and dispenser of commodity in Christian society, for it enableth and
ingageth men to mutual help fullness.

Reas. 4 This will augment our parts, and further our accounts. How shall I
hide from Abraham (says God) the thing that I do? seeing he will teach others
what he knows. Genesis 18.17, 18. Prove. 11.24.
This is to gather by scattering, to get more by well using what we have; for
to him that has, in the use of what he has, shall be given more, to trade
with our gifts for spiritual gains, to wit, the increase of them. For in
spiritual things, no man is a looser but a gainer by communication, for that
tends to mutual thriving; by instructing others we increase knowledge, by
kindling or blowing up zeal in others, we inflame zeal in our selves, by
comforting others, we grow more expert and experienced therein, and get more
comfort to our selves, by teaching we learn to teach. Gifts exercised even in
conference are like (as one says) the Widows cruce of oil, Mr. Downam.
which filled in emptying, or like milk in the Mothers breast, which if it be
sucked by the child, continually increases, but if it be not drawn, it soon
fails and dries up.

Reas. 5. Because this service of godly discourse is very acceptable, not only
to the Saints, but even to God, and to Christ.

1 To God, Mal. 3.16.
who hearkens to hear what his people say in their meetings, and keeps a book
of remembrance for their words (as if they were his delight) as well as works.
Its an allusion to the Records of Kings, who use to set down the good services
done to them, Esthar 6.1.
as Ahasuerus did Mordecaies, and when the book shall be opened, out of which
the dead shall be judged at last day, it will be then known to all the world,
what good communication Gods people have had among themselves. This should make
us careful what we say, because God is an ear-witnesse of every word we
speak, he hears and writes down all, and records them to requite them, even
good words as well as good works, and we shall have a good reward from God for
our labor; Eccles. 4.9.
for the good we do by our words, as well as by our works.

2 This is acceptable to Jesus Christ, who the same day after he was risen
again, associated himself (above all others) with the two Disciples going to
Emmaus, who were talking together of Christ, Luke 24.15, 16.
as they went by the way. Jesus drew near, and went with them, concealedly and
covertly as to their knowledge of his person, in the guise of a stranger, for
their eyes were held that they should not know him, but very comfortably, as to
his discourse with them.

1 Verse. 17.
He asked them what discourse they had of him, by the way, of which they gave
him a particular account. Verse. 18. to 25.


2 Then he reproved their folly and unbelief. Verse. 25.26.


3 He expounded unto them all the Scriptures in Moses and the Prophets
concerning himself. Verse. 27.


4 He spoke so powerfully and effectually to them, as made their hearts burn
within them. Verse. 30.


5 Then he condiscended, or suffered himself to be overcome by their
entreaties to abide Ver. 28, 29, 30
with them at Emmaus.

6 in conclusion, Verse. 31.
he made himself known to them by opening their eyes; and by breaking of
bread, Ver 35.
and by some expression, gesture or action, which he used in his thanksgiving
at meat, Ver. 30.
and then he vanished out of their sight, or ceased to be seen of them.
Hereby Jesus Christ gave a most pregnant Testimony of his acceptance, and
complacence in Christian conference. How well he is pleased, and what pleasure
he takes in his people, when they are talking together of him, and of the
things of God, as he did in these two Disciples to whom he joined himself,
and made a third. From hence Christians in their conferences, may verily expect
from Christ four things.

1 His special presence with them (in a spiritual not corporal way) though
they be but two or three met together in his name, to confer as well as to
pray together, Mat. 18.20.
there am I (says Christ) in the midst of them.

2 His assistance of one or other to expound the Scriptures, to open the
matters concerning Christ, or to speak something to edification.

3 His blessing upon what is then spoken, to set it home, to them that hear it,
for their good, either to open their eyes, or to warm their hearts.

4 Some clear discoveries of Christ to them therein to make them know him
better, that they may declare to others afterward their sweet experiences
hereof, as the two Disciples went immediately to Jerusalem to the eleven
Apostles, Luke 24.33, 34, 35.
and told them and those that were with them, what things were done in the way,
and how Christ was known of them, thus they became witnesses of his
resurrection.

The Fifth Particular case is consolation. Consolation.
Christians ought to comfort one another; this should be mutual and
reciprocal amongst them, -- Comfort one another, 1 These. 5.11.
and edify one another, even as also ye do; this duty has a double
confirmation in the text.

1 The Thessalonians practice, they did so already.

2 Paul's Precept to continue therein, or to do so still; for perseverance
Crowns holy practices; It may be Paul meant more than he spoke, to wit, that
they should grow and increase therein, as in love. 1 These. 4.9, 10.
As touching brotherly love -- ye are taught of God to love one another, and
indeed ye do it toward all the Brethren in all Macedonia, but we beseech you
Brethren, that ye increase more and more.

Touching this duty, I shall give you 1 Rules. 2 Reasons.


Rules for comforting others.

First Rule, we should know their case, what is the kind and cause of their
trouble, whether it be inward, or outward, spiritual, or temporal,
respecting soul or body, friends, goods, or name; and the dimensions of their
sorrow, else we cannot tell how to deal particularly and effectually with
them; the Physician must know his patients disease; and the Surgeon his
sore, before they can apply proper healing salves or medicines, we must take
measure of their condition, before we can cut out or shape a suit of
consolation fitting for them. Paul sent Tychicus unto the Colossians for the
same purpose, Col. 4.8.
that he might know their estate, and comfort their hearts.

The Second Rule. When we know their estate, we should pity them, and
sympathize with them, Col. 3.12.
for comfort comes out of the bowels of mercies (which we should put on) as
the fruits thereof; Job 19.21. c. 6.14.
which Job^ friends wanted toward him in his miseries (though he begged it
earnestly of them; -- have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends,
for the hand of God has touched me; therefore they proved miserable
comforters, Job 2.11.
though they came to mourn with him, and to comfort him. God is first a Father
of mercies, then a God of all consolations, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
he comforts his people because he pities them; Consolation flows from
Compassion both in God and man, except we lay others cases to our hearts, we
will not speak to their hearts.

The Third Rule. When we know their cases and pity them, we should apply
comforts suitable to their needs, as

1 Mat. 6.
If their case be necessity, observe how Christ comforts his Disciples against
outward wants.

1 From Gods Providence toward fouls of the Heaven, Verse. 26.28.
and flowers of the Earth, how he feeds the one, and clothes the other, and
are ye not much better than they? will he not much more feed and cloth you?

2 From Gods Knowledge of their necessities, Your heavenly Father knows all
things ye have need of. Verse. 32


3 From Gods Promise, Verse. 33.
First seek the Kingdom of God, Psalm. 34.9, 10
etc. and all these things shall be added to you, scil. as an overplus. Mark
how David comforts them that fear God, against want.

2 Or if the case be death of friends, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. to the end.
Paul prescribes several comforts to prevent immoderate grief upon that
occasion; As,

1 That Christ dyed and rose again. Verse. 14


2 They that dye in the Lord sleep in Jesus.

3 Christ at his glorious coming will bring their souls with him, Verse. 15, 16
and raise their bodies out of the dust, and reunite them for ever, and the
dead in Christ shall rise first; they that have lain long in the dust shall
have their bodies first raised, and clothed with immortality, glory, and
incorruption, which is the privilege of the dead above them that are found
living at Christ's coming, those shall rise before these shall be wrapped up.

4 Those that are then living, and their formerly deceased friends shall be
caught up together in the Clouds, Verse. 1^
to meet the Lord in the air.

5 So shall they ever be with the Lord; that imports perpetual fruition of
glorious felicity. Dear friends, whom Death dissundered, shall then meet, and
never part again, Verse. 18
Wherefore (says the Apostle) comfort one another with these words. This is a
duty, 2 S^^. (...)
to comfort others when their friends dye: David sent to comfort Hanun after
Nahash his Fathers death. Many of the Jews came to comfort Mary and Martha for
their brothers death. Joh, 11.19, 31 Jer. 16.6, 7
It is threatened as a sad affliction, that none shall comfort the living in
their mournings for their deceased friends, Parents, or others, by sending them
meat, or cups of consolation, to eat and drink with them (according to the
custom of those times) to put away their sorrow. How does our Savior labor to
comfort his Disciples against his death, Joh. 14.1, etc. and chap. 16
and departure from them by several Arguments.

3 Mat. 5.10, 11, 12
If the case be Persecution, Christ applies suitable comforts to his Disciples
in such a condition; as

1 That they are therefore blessed.

2 Great shall be their reward in Heaven.

3 The Prophets before them suffered the like things.

4 They have cause at present to rejoice, and be exceeding glad. Peter gives
sundry consolatory Arguments to the dispersed Jews, ^ Par. 4.12. to the end.
to cheer and bear up their hearts against or under persecution, which was the
primary scope of his Epistle.

1 That the end of persecution is to try them, Verse. 12
their faith and patience, sincerity and constancy, as fire does silver and
gold.

2 In suffering for Christ they are partakers of Christ's sufferings, in way of
community and conformity, Verse. 13
who suffered like things for confession of the truth. Those that have
fellowship with Christ in his sufferings, Verse. 13
shall have communion with Christ in glory, and joy at his appearing, and to
eternity.

4 They are happy, their sufferings being both a means, and a sign of their
happiness, Verse. 14
no evils they endure can make them miserable.

5 They that are reproached for the name of Christ, have the communion of the
Holy Ghost, or the glorious spirit of God resting upon them, which is glorified
not only by them, but in them, Verse. 14
and makes them glorious, Gloria vobis contingit, says Piscator.

6 Suffering in Christ's cause is no strange thing, but what is common and
usual, Verse. 12 Verse. 13 Verse. 16
nor matter of grief, nor of shame, but of joy and honor; to suffer as a
Christian; they have cause to glorify God, for that dignation that they are
counted worthy to suffer for Christ, and to suffer as a Christian.

7 It is the will of God they should suffer, Verse. 1^
and to bear the cross of Christ patiently, and to suffer according to the will
of God.

8 In ^^^h sufferings they may safely commit the keeping of their fouls to God
in welldoing as a faithful Creator, Verse. 19
gracious redeemer, and fulfiller of his promises.

4 If the case be desertion, soul troubles, terrors or horrors, observe how
Christ applies comforts to such, Isa. 6^.1, 2, 3
by the mouth of his Evangelical Prophet Isaiah. The Lord has anointed me,
and sent me to bind up the broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the
Captives; etc. -- to comfort all that mourn in Sion, to give them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning; the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, See Isa. 54.7, 8. and 50.10. and 57.15, 16, 17, 18.

5 If the case be any other affliction or castigation, Heb. 12.5. to 14
take to your selves and give to others, Paul's grounds of Consolation, as

1 Verse 5
All chastisements are the rods of a Father; who will not forget either mercy
or measure.

2 Verse. 6
They proceed from Gods love.

3 Verse. 6, 7, 8
They are signs and pledges of Adoption, that we are Sons not Bastards.

4 Verse. 9
Submission to chastisement is the way to life and salvation. Act. 14.22


5 Gods end therein is your profit, to make you partakers of his holiness.
Verse. 10


6 Though afflictions be sad and troublesome at present, yet afterward (or in
the issue) they will be comfortable; for ye shall reap the peaceable fruits
of righteousness thereby; and be both bettered and comforted thereby; the rod
of correction is like a tree that bears righteousness (that is Reformation) as
the fruit of it, and pea^^ of Conscience, or inward tranquillity, and comfort of
soul, as the quality or effect of the fruit.

Fourth Rule; Choose the best means to comfort others by, as kind and loving
specches, Consolatory speeches will revive and refresh the spirits of a
disconsolate friend. Thus Joseph comforted his brethren, when cast down with
fears, scil. he spoke kindly to them, saying, ye thought evil against me,
etc. Now fear ye not, I will nourish you, and your little ones. Genesis 50.20, 21
Boaz comforted Ruth by speaking friendly to her, to the heart of his handmaid,
Ruth. 2.13
that is courteously and kindly. The Lord answered the Angel that talked with
me (says Zachariah) with good words, Zach. 11.13
and comfortable words. Hence it appears that good words, are comfortable words.

2 Strong Reasons or Arguments drawn from the several heads of Consolation, as
the Author, end, and benefits of affliction, and comparison thereof with what
they deserve, and what others suffer, and the like; Arguments to overcome the
reason, and overpower the passions of the disconsolate, that may be stronger to
support and refresh the drooping spirit, than the affliction is to deject and
contristate the same.

3 Means; Plain Scriptures properly and fitly applied (unto the afflicted, and
their condition) as precepts, promises, and examples recorded therein. The Holy
Scriptures are the Eden, or Garden of God, full of the flowers of consolation,
to make sweet Posies on, to refresh sad and heavy spirits; they are a Treasury
of comfort, that furnishes not only the Man of God, but every godly man, with
all kinds of Cordials, and with the choycest consolatory arguments. For this
end they were written, Romans 15.4
that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. David
experienced the same, Psalm 119.50.82, 93
This is my comfort in my affliction, thy word has quickened me. Scripture
comforts are the chiefest comforts, they have most spirits and life in them and
come home to the heart, and are most efficacious to revive, and recover
fainting swounding souls; they are commonly watered with the dew of Gods
blessing, for they have the consolations of God in them, they being the Word of
the God of all consolation; they are the Wine sellars, and the Orchards into
which Christ brings his Spouse, when she is sick of love, and sad, where her
stays her with Flaggons, Cant. 2.5
and comforts her with Apples. Hence Paul says, Comfort one another (against
death of Friends) with these words; 1 These. 4.18
and he might have added the same conclusion to his consolations against
corrections, in Hebr. 12.

4 Means of comforting others, is experience, both our own and others.

1 Our own experience of Gods dealings with us, in such like conditions, and of
the comforts wherewith God has comforted us, to the end that we should
comfort others therewith, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4
as Paul and Timothy did; Blessed be God, etc. who comfort us in all our
tribulations, that we may be able to comfort them that are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God, ver. 6. whether we
be afflicted, or comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation.
Experiences are principles of strong consolation, these made Christ himself a
more sympathizing and compassionate High Priest. The heart is the place from
whence comfort comes in experience, ^eb. 4.15
and whither it goes in influence; the greatest experiencers are the greatest
comforters; yea, we may comfort others, not only with the comforts we have
received immediately from God, but which we have had in others, 2 Cor. 7.6, 7
God comforted Paul not by Titus his coming only, Verse. 13
but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in the Corinthians, for his
spirit was refreshed by them all; Verse. 13
Paul was comforted in the Corinthians comfort. To this end we should comfort
our selves, be Physians, and practice upon our selves, by applying Cordials of
reason, Scripture, and experience to our selves, according to our needs,
looking up to God, for his blessing, to set them home to our hearts, and make
them effectual. This will make us able to comfort others which are in any
trouble, and that not from our heads, but from our hearts also, when we can
tell others what supported, revived, or refreshed our spirits under such and
such distresses and droopings. Psalm. 119.1^
I remembered thy Judgments of old (says David) and have comforted my self.
This is the way to prescribe Cordials to others with a Probatum est, or experto
creed, when Peter is converted that is, recovered from his fall, Luke 22.31
then he must strengthen his brethren, help them with his experience.

2 We should comfort others by the experiences others have had of Gods mercies
to them.

5 Means of comforting others. The exercise and evidence of our Graces, for
that is matter of great joy and comfort to the godly, who see or hear the same
of us; as

1 Faith and love. Romans 1.18, 12
I long to see you (says Paul to the Romans) that I may impart unto you some
spiritual gifts, that is, that I may be comforted with you by the mutual love
both of you and me; thus writes Paul to the Thessalonians, 1 These. 5.6, ^
when Timotheus came from you unto us, and brought us good tidings of your
faith and charity, and that ye have good remembrance of us, always desiring
greatly to see us, and we were comforted over you in all our affliction and
distress, Phil. 2.1
by your faith. There is great comfort in love, not only in the exercise, but
in the evidence of it to others. We have great consolation in thy love (says
Paul) because the bowels of the Saints are refreshed by thee brother. Philem. 7
And other holy affections, as Desire, and Grief: God comforted us (says Paul)
not by the coming of Titus only, but by the consolation wherewith he was
comforted in you, When he told us your earnest desire, 2 Cor. 7.7
your mourning,) our servent mind toward me, so that I rejoiced the more.

2 Constancy in the truth and work of the Lord. Now we live (says Paul)
meaning the life of consolation, 2 These. 3.8, 9
if ye stand fast in the Lord. Aristarchus, Marcus, and Jesus who is called
Justus, were a comfort unto Paul, because when others forsook him, these only
continued to be his fellow-helpers unto the Kingdom of God. Col. 4.11 2 John
4. and 3 John 4
This was John's great joy, that he found of the elect Ladies children walking
in truth; that made Paul so desirous to hear of the Churches state, that he
might have joy and comfort in their perseverance, Phil. 2.19
and progress in holiness, I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly
unto you, that I may be of good comfort when I know your state.

Sixth means, of comforting others, is prayer to God.

1 For comfort to be conveyed into the hearts of others, ^ol. 2.1, 2
Paul (its probable) wrestled with God by prayer for the Colossians, and for
them of Laodicca, that their hearts might be comforted.

2 For the gift or faculty of comforting others to be given to us, Isa. 50.4
the tongue of the learned, which God has promised, that we may know how to
speak a word in season to him that is weary. It is a special and excellent gift
to be able to comfort afflicted souls, worth beging of God by prayer.

Fifth Rule. Consider the persons who are fit to be comforted, as

1 In general, Gods people above all others, for it is their portion, it is the
childrens bread that must not be given to dogs. Isa. 48.22
There is no peace (nor comfort) to the wicked, Cap. 40.1, 2
says the Lord. But, comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God, speak
ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is
accomplished, and her iniquity is pardoned. Paul sent to comfort the Saints,
and Believers at Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Colosse, and Thessalonica, Christ said
to the Woman diseased twelve years, Daughter be of good comfort, Mat. 9.22
thy says has made thee whole. They are the fittest subjects, and best
bottles to pour the water of comfort into, to them of due it belongs, therefore
give it to them.

2 Weak and faint souls, 1 These. 5.14
We exhort you brethren (says Paul) comfort the feeble minded, support the
weak. Such as are dejected with fear or feeling of tentations, or afflictions,
or duties, or tossed too and fro with fluctuations of mind, that have little
strength to perform Duties, or bear Crosses, or resist Tentations, or wait for
Promises, such should be supported, strengthened, Isa. 35.3, 4
and encouraged. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees,
say to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not, etc. The
Shepherds of Israel are sharply reproved for this. Ezekiel. 34.4 2 Cor. 7.6
They strengthened not the weak, God himself comforts them that are cast down,
scil, in their minds, and hearts, and lie low in their own eyes; the humble,
or the abjects, as the Old Translation has it; if this be a glorious act of
mercy in God, sure it can be no less than an honorable duty in man.

Third sort are Mourners for sin, for want of Gods presence, and for misery.

1 Mourners for Sin, who are deeply humbled in the sight and sense of their
sins, and in the apprehension of Gods displeasure against them, such have need,
and are fit to receive comfort, Acts 2.37, 38
as the Jews when they were pricked in their hearts at Peter's Sermon, and the
Jailer when he came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas, Act. 16.29,
30, 31
saying, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? And the Excommunicated person, when
he was a true penitent for his sins. Paul writ to the Church of Corinth to
forgive him, and comfort him, lest such a one should be swallowed up with
overmuch sorrow, even for sin; for sorrow is a Gulf, which when it exceeds,
will devour. And the Woman in the Gospel, that had been a notorious sinner,
Luke 7.37, 38
when she stood at Christ's feet behind him, weeping, washing them with her
tears, wiping them with her hairs, and kissed them, that is, humbled her self
low before him, then Christ comforted her, -- he said unto her, thy sins are
forgiven; Verse. 48. Mat. 5.4.
Christ has pronounced them blessed that mourn, and promised they shall be
comforted, and his servants (not only Ministers but people) must be his
instruments to perform the same. Isa. 57.18.
God promises to restore comfort to penitential mourners.

2 Mourners not only for sin, but for want of Gods presence, and the light of
his countenance, as those that walk in darkness, and see no light, or go
mourning without the Sun, as wives when their husbands are gone from home, Job
30.28.
and Children when their Parents are in a far Country. The Children of the
Bridechamber have need of Comfort, when the Bridegroom is taken from them, and
they mourn for his absence. Mat. 9.15.


3 Mourners for misery ought to be comforted, as for necessities, death of
friends, persecutions, or any outward afflictions, as the Jews Captives in
Babylon, God gave charge they should be comforted (so some understand that
place) by publishing to them the approach of their deliverance, Isa. 40.1, 2.
that their warfare was accomplished; that is, their seventy years captivity
were expired, or drew to an end. Job implies this when he says, he dwelt as a
King in the Army, as one that comfort the mourners. Job 29.25.
To him that is afflicted pity should be showed, that is, comfort should be
given from his friend (says Job) and he that refuses to do it, Job 6.14.
for saketh the fear of the Almighty. Comfort is as needful as Wine to be
given unto those that be of heavy hearts, Pro. 31.6, 7.
that they may drink and remember their misery no more.

The Fourth Sort are seekers of Christ, Cant. 3.1, 2.
these are objects of comfort; as the Spouse when she sought her Beloved up and
down, night and day; in her bed, and in the broad ways. The watchmen should
have comforted her with tidings of her beloved, but did not; yea they smote and
wounded her, Ver. 3. Cap. 5, 6, 7, 8.
while she was in pursuit of him, and sick of love for him. And the women that
came to the Sepulcher to seek their dead and buried Savior. See how an Angel
comforts them, fear not, for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified,
Mat. 28.5.
he is not here, Christ himself appeared to Mary Magdalen, Joh. 20.11. to 19.
Mary, says he to her, Rabboni, that is Master, says she to him. Cryers
after Christ should be comforted, as blind Bartimeus was (probably) by the
Disciples, when he cried vehemently; Jesus thou son of David have mercy on
me, -- they said unto him, be of good comfort, behold he, i. e. Christ,
calls thee, and he casting away his garment arose, and came to Jesus. Mar.
10.49, 50.
These four sorts, to wit, Saints, weak ones, mourners, seekers, are sons of
Peace, and capable of comfort, to be sons of Consolation.

The Sixth Rule. Write Letters, send Messengers, and take journeys of purpose
to comfort others.

1 Write letters of consolation to the afflicted, as Paul did Epistles, which
are consolatorie letters to the Churches, Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Collosse,
etc. and to particular persons, as Timothy, Titus and Philemon, and the other
Apostles, James, Peter, John, and Jude, writ Epistles purposely to comfort, as
well as to instruct. Jesus Christ did write letters by the hand of his
Secretary John, to the seven Churches of Asia to comfort them that were capable
of it, and fit for it, Rev. 2.10, 11. cap. 3.10, 11.
as the Church of Smyrna, and of Philadelphia. God uses the tongue to comfort
them that are present with us, and God blesses the pen to comfort those that
are absent, and at a distance from us. Some have done God and his people much
good service this way, as Divines both ancient and modern; The Martyrs in
prison, and many since, as Mr. Paul Baynes, whose Christian pithy letters full
of divine Counsels and Comforts, have been and are of singular use.

2 Send Messengers to comfort others, as Paul a Prisoner at Rome sent Tichicus
a faithful Minister, Col. 4.7, 8, 9.
and Onesimus a beloved Brother to the Colosians, purposely to know their
state, and to comfort their hearts, Ephesians. 6, 21, 22.
to persuade them to patience, and perseverance; and Tichicus to the
Emphesians. 1 These. 3.1, 2, 5,
Paul sent Timothe us from Athens to the Thessalonians, to establish them, and
to comfort them concerning their faith. Paul was greatly comforted by the
return of his Messengers from the Churches, and by the tidings they brought him
of their gracious state, and prosperous affairs, 2 Cor. 7.6, 7,
as by the coming of Titus from the Church at Corinth, and of Timothy from the
Church of Thessalonians. 1 These. 3.6, 7.


3 Take journeys to comfort such as are cast down, and disconsolate, even the
presence and visits of friends are comfortable. Paul begged of God he might
have a prosperous journey to the Saints at Rome, (for he longed to see them,
to impart, some spiritual gift to them, to establish them, to comfort them,
and to be comforted in them, Romans 1.10, 11, 12.
by the mutual faith of them, and him. For the same end and purpose Paul
prayed exceedingly night and day, to see the Thessalonians face, 1 These. 3.9,
10, 11.
and that God the Father, and God the Son would direct his way unto them. So
much of the Rules. Now follow the Reasons why we should comfort others, which
may be drawn from four heads.

1 The necessity and commodity of comfort, in respect of others.

2 The misery of them that want it.

3 The excellency of the duty it self.

4 The equity of it in respect of our selves.

1 Reas. The Necessity and Commodity of comfort in afflictions, in respect of
others, both souls and bodies, as well as our own.

1 Comfort is needful and useful for the spirits of others, in six respects.

1 To support them, or bear them up from sinking under the pressures of
troubles inward, or outward. Comfort is that to an heart (that is loadened with
grief) to uphold it, which a prop or shore is to a house, that is ready to
fall; which a hand is to one that is oppressed with a heavy burden to take it
off; or which a shoulder being put under, is, to help him to bear it. Pro.
18.14.
The spirit of a man (being shored up with Comfort) will sustain his
infirmities, but a wounded spirit (that wants the healing plaster of
Consolation) is intolerable; it is like a prick in the shoulder that has a
heavy burden upon it, who can bear it?

2 To quicken them, or keep life in their spirits; and to preserve or recover
them from fainting, and swounding. Comforts are reviving cordialls. Comfort is
the life of our spirits, yea the life of our lives; without which life would
be no life, but a lingering death. Now we live (says Paul) if ye stand fast
in the Lord, that is, 1 These. 3.8.
our lives are made comfortable to us by the joy and comfort we take in your
steadfastness, that is, we enjoy the comfort of our lives, by the joy and
comfort we take in your perseverance. The damned though they live in Hell, are
said to dye eternally, because their state is void of all joy and comfort,
whereas to make the hearts of them sad, by slanders, revilings, bitter
speeches, or otherwise, and to impair the cheerfullness of their spirits, and
dead them, Ezekiel. 13, 22.
is a kind or degree of murder. It is murder in divinity, though not in civil
policy.

3 Comfort is needful and useful for others, to cheer, refresh and rejoice
their drooping spirits, to raise them up from their sorrow and sadness, which
has bowed down their souls even to the dust. In the multitude of my (sad
troubled) thoughts within me, says David, Psalm. 94.19.
thy Comforts (which are breathed into me by thy spirit, or handed to me by
thy servants) delight my soul. Comforts pour the oil of gladness into hearts
full of heaviness; take off their mourning garments, and cloth them with
cheerfullness. Joy is (as one calls it) the spring of our year, Mr. Caryl.
the light of our day, the Sun in our firmament. Comfort is honey in the mouth,
melody in the ear, and a Jubilee in the heart. Comforts in season, that is
(when others stand in need of them, and are fit to receive them) are very
sweet, like flowers in May, or apples fully ripe, or like the singing of birds
in the Spring. Right Comforters are birds of joy, that sing most sweetly to sad
souls, to cheer them up with their pleasant Notes, Cant. 2.12.
when the season of comforting the afflicted comes, then the time of the
singing of birds is come, that is, a time of great refreshing.

4 Comfort is needful to quiet and compose the spirits of others, when
inwardly disquieted, and perplexed. Comforts cause a calm in a tempested,
tumultuated soul, which is like a troubled Sea, they make all quiet, they say
to the winds, and waves, or storms of inward troubles, peace, and be still.

5 To establish, confirm, and settle others in a good frame of spirit, and in a
right course of life, in Gods truths and ways, and in the exercise of grace;
to hold their spirits fast and close, from being shaken, or removed, or tossed
too and fro, as unsettled and unstable souls are. 1 Cor. 16, 13.
Paul writ consolatory Epistles to the Corinthians, that they might stand fast
in the faith, quit themselves like men, and be strong; to the Ephesians, that
thy might not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
weather-cock-like; -- to the Colossians, that they might be rooted and built
up in Christ, Co^. 2.6, 7.
and stablished in the faith. Paul sent Timotheus to the Thessalonians to
establish them, and comfort them concerning their faith, that is, to establish
them in the says by comforting them. 1 These. 3.2.
Paul prayed God would comfort the hearts of the Thessalonians, and establish
them in every good word and work, that is, establish them by comforting them, 2
These. 2.17. Ver. 2.
and that they may not be soon shaken in mind, nor troubled; Consolation is a
means of confirmation.

6 Comfort is commodious to edify others in holiness, and obedience; for
consolation is a means of Edification. Comfort, as well as Counsel builds men
up further into the body of Christ, Phil. 3.13.
for it corroborates the heart, it heightens and raises up their spirits to a
higher pitch of resolutions, and endeavors, with Paul, to forget those things
that are behind (former seize and performances) and to reach forth unto
those things which are before, that is, a greater measure of grace from God, or
of actings for God Hence the Churches in Judea and Galilee were edified (and
multiplied) while they walked in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the Holy
Ghost. Act. 9.31.
Paul exhorts the Thessalonians to comfort and edify one another, that is, to
edify by comforting. 1 These. 5.11.


1 For Comfort is a great encouragement to duties, as Hezechiahs comfortable
words were to the Levites hearts that taught the good knowledge of the Lord, to
excite them to go on; 2 Chronicles. 30.22.
and to the hearts of the people, commanders and soldiers, to fortify and
animate them against the fear of the King of Assyria and his multitude. 2 Chronicles. 32.6, 7, 8


2 Consolation is a means to lead others forward toward perfection, therefore
Paul joins them together, 2 Cor. 13.11
finally brethren farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort.

Secondly,

1 Comfort may be needful also in respect of the bodies of others, or outward
man; which would perish in their afflictions, were not their souls strengthened
by comforts to stand under the weight and pressure thereof. Comforts are
sinnews to the Soul, and great repairers of strength, and refreshers or
cheerers of spirits, even to the body.

Reas. 2. From the misery of them that want comfort. Its a most sad condition
to be in affliction and to have no comforter; Eccl. 4.10
for such are alone; and woe to him that is alone; and they bear their burdens
alone, and so are like to sink under them. This was a great aggravation of
David's troubles, when reproach had broken his heart, Isal. 69, 19, 20
and he was full of heaviness. I looked for some to take pity, but there was
none, and for Comforters, but I found none. And when he was in the cave, Psalm.
143.3, 4
whither he fled from Saul's persecution, and his spirit was overwhelmed within
him. I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would
know me, Lam. 1. verse 2.8, 16, 17.21
no man cared for my soul. -- And of Sions miseries, that she had no
comforter, which is five times repeated in the first Chapter of Lamentations.
Solomon considered this to be a great evil under the Sun, scil. the tears of
the oppressed, and the power of the oppressor, Eccl. 4.1
and the oppressed had no Comforter; This was the deplorable estate of the Jews
in their captivity, Isaiah 54.11
so some understand that in Isaiah -- O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest,
and not comforted. This was Ninevehs said case in her miserable ruin, she --
had none to bemoan her, nor to comfort her. Nah. 3.7


Reas. 3. From the excellency of the duty in it self, this is high and
honorable employment to comfort others; for it is 1 The work of God. 2 The
practice of the godly.


1 It is the work of God to comfort poor souls; Isa. 57.15 2 Cor. 7.6
of the highest God to comfort the lowest hearts, even abjects. God is not
ashamed of the business, no he gloryeth in it, as in a title of Excellency, 2
Cor. 1.3 Isa. 51.12
to be called the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort; -- as in a
beam of Majesty, stream of mercy, and exercise of delight. I, Ver. 3
even I am he that comfort you -- and the Lord shall comfort Sion, as a
Father does his Son, Psalm. 103.13
and a mother does hers. As one whom his mother comfort (says God) So will
I comfort you, Isa, 66, 13
and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem; yea Gods compassions and comforts
toward his people, far exceed those of the most tender hearted mother, to her
sucking child, Isa. 49.19
Can a mother forget her sucking child, etc. yea they may, but I will not
forget thee (says God to Sion.) To comfort is the act, as of the Deity, so of
the Trinity, and of every person in it.

1 Of God the Father; 2 Cor. 1.3
The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Father of mercies, and the God of
all comfort.

2 To comfort is the act of God the Son, for he (as God-man and Mediator)
is the fountain of all consolation, -- If there be any Consolation in Christ
(says Paul.) Phil. 2.1
He does not question it, but suppose it, or takes it for granted, q. d.
seeing there is, or as ever ye look to receive comfort from Christ, fulfill ye
my joy, Isa. 61.1, 2
etc. Christ is appointed by the Father, and anointed by the Holy Ghost, to
comfort his people, by office as their Prophet. Christ suites comfort to the
sufferings of his people, for kind, and proportions them for measure, 2 Cor. 1.5
as Paul says, -- As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also abounds by Christ. Joh. 14.18
Christ promises comfort to them, as he did to his Disciples -- I will not
leave you comfortless, Joh. 16.20, 22
I will come to you.

3 To comfort, is the act of God the holy Ghost. It is his proper work to speak
or apply comforts to the hearts of Gods people, from the father and the Son.
Hence

1 He is called the Comforter (...), the prime and principal of all comforters.

2 He is prayed for, by the Son to the Father, and promised both by the
Father and the Son to be sent as from both, John 14, 16.26 and 15.26. and
16.7
under this name and Notion, or for this purpose, to be a comforter to his
people. God the father is the author of all comfort by destination or
appointment of it to us; for he has appointed us to obtain, as salvation, so
consolation by Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5
and he comfort us by his Son, hence our consolation is said to abound by
Christ.

2 God the Son is the Author of Consolation.

1 By redemption or purchase, as of us, so of joy and comfort for us, by his
blood, as the price thereof; so that the Christians comfort is a dear-bought
commodity to Christ, it cost him not only exceeding sorrow, but his blood, and
his life.

2 By reception of it, as Christ bought it, so he took it, and keeps it for our
use; when he ascended up on high, he received as gifts, Psalm. 68, 18
so comforts for men, to give forth the same to them; thus it pleased the
Father that all comfort should be laid up in Christ, as in a Treasury, or
Store house, for all his people, and that Christ should send forth the same to
them as the fountain does water.

3 By Dispensation (or by Office) as he is our Prophet, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3
which he executes (and so comfort us) by his Spirit which he has given us.

3 God the Holy Ghost is the Author of Consolation, by application of it to us
(for that is his proper work) of all that comfort to our hearts, which the
Father has appointed to us, and which Christ has obtained and keeps for us.
As by Baptism we are dedicated to the service, and committed to the protection
of the Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit, so we should devote our selves freely
to the imitation of the blessed Trinity, as in Sanctification, to be holy, as
all the three Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit are holy; so in compassion, and
in consolation, to be merciful as they are merciful, and to comfort others as
they are all comforters, we should count it our glory to be followers of the
glorious Trinity herein.

Secondly, To comfort others has been the practice of the godly, even of the
most eminent Servants of God; as of Job the most rich, and religious man in the
East. Behold, Job 4.3, 4
says Eliphas, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak
hands, and the feeble knees, thy words have upholden him that was falling. Thus
to support the weak, and comfort the faint, was not only Jobs practice, but his
praise; therefore it is ushered in with an ecce, Behold, etc. for so Eliphas
speaks of it, as a thing that many could attest to Jobs commendation; and of
the Prophets in the Old Testament, Isa. 40.1, 2
to whom God gave charge to comfort his people. And of the Apostles in the New
Testament, and of their Ministers and Fellow Laborers, as Timotheus, Tychicus,
Titus, and others. And of the Primitive Christians, no doubt, according to
Apostolic injunctions. Paul had confidence in Philomous obedience, Philem. 21
knowing that he would do even more than he said; and great joy and
consolation in his love, because the bowels of the Saints were refreshed by
him. Verse. 7.
How? Ans. By commiseration consolation, contribution, intercession, and the
like.

Reas. 4. From the equity of the duty in respect of us; we ought to comfort
others,

1 Because we would be comforted by others in our distress, and whatever we
would that others should do to us, we should do the same to them, Mat. 7.12
for this is the Law and the Prophets. This duty should be mutual and
reciprocal among Christians, even those that comfort others may stand in need
to be comforted by others, as Eliphaz told Job. Job 4.4, 5
Thou comfortedst others, etc. But now it (that is, the affliction and misery)
is come upon thee, and thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou art troubled,
i.e. Thou now have as much need to be comforted by others, as others had to be
comforted by thee, Is not this thy fear, and thy confidence? etc. Verse. 6.
This was the error of Jobs friends, to lay down good premises, and to infer
bad conclusions, by misapplying the same to Job, as if he were an Hypocrite,
Verse. 7
and all his Graces counterfeit.

2 Because all true Christians have an interest in comfort, it is their
portion; in comforting them we give them that which is their own; and in not
doing it we withold from them what of due belongs to them.

3 To this end God gives us abilities and experiences, that we may be able to
comfort others; upon the account whereof we are Debtors to others; 2 Cor. 1.4.
God comfort us in all our Tribulations (says Paul) that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God; that even as persons of ability keep Bottles of Strong
Waters, Cordials, and other comfortable things, to refresh their friends, or
strangers, when sick, or faint; we should keep the like in the closets of our
hearts, to comfort others in their afflictions. As the Moon and Stars receive
light from the Sun, not to hoard it up in themselves (like dark Lanthorns) but
to reflect it upon the earth, and things below; so we receive comfort freely
from the Lord, to the end we should give comfort freely to others.

4 Lastly, This is our Office as we are members of the same body with others.
As the Stomach first feeds it self with the food it concocts, then communicates
nourishment to all other members, the Heart and Liver send forth spirits and
blood throughout the body, when they have received nourishment and strength: so
every Joint or Member in Christ's mystical Body, should make a supply of
consolation, or instruction, etc. that is, of what may nourish, strengthen, and
increase to his Fellow Members, Ephesians. 4.16
according to the measure of that gift or grace he has received from his head
Christ Jesus. The bond of Brotherhood that is among Christians ties them
thereunto, to communicate what they have received from the Lord to the good of
others, Jude 20.
Edify your selves in your most holy faith. To this end Love knits Christians
together, to make them communicative of good one to another, and receptive
thereof one from another, to make them partakers in the graces and comforts one
of another, as the members of the body being tied together, receive nourishment
one from another.

Q. How may we comfort afflicted consciences that are wounded, and dejected
with sense of sin, and of Gods Wrath, and want of grace, and draw nigh to the
pits brink of despair, and refuse to be comforted?

Ans. 1. Set before them, and apply to them (as before our selves in the like
case) these Eight Grounds of consolation.

1 The boundlesness, and freeness of Gods pardoning, reconciling, accepting,
healing mercies to Sinners, infinitely exceeding all their sins, Psalm. 103.11,
12 Verse. 17
and all their unworthinesses in multitude, and in magnitude, in all
dimensions, and in duration. Gods mercy is like the great deep Ocean (without
bank or bottom) which can as easily swallow up mountains of sins, as
mole-hills, or motes. Therefore to doubt, or despair, or to give way to
despondency of mind, is to forsake our own mercy, to sin against mercy, which
is one of the highest, and most confounding aggravations of sin. Lam. 3.22
Set also before them the bowels of Gods compassions, which are most tender and
yearning, and fail not; the riches of his free Grace (which are the Treasures
of Eternity) that cannot be diminished by distribution, but rather like the
five Loaves wherewith Christ fed the five thousand men, beside women and
children, they multiply with breaking; and the freeness, unchangeableness, and
everlastingness of his love to poor sinners, Hos. 14.4 Jer. 31.3
that never deserved it, or any thing from God, but Wrath and Judgment.

Obj. But God is just as well as merciful, how can he justify and save great
sinners?

Second Ground. The infiniteness of Christ's Merits, of his Death and passion,
or obedience, which is sufficient to satisfy Gods Justice, pacify his Wrath,
and fulfill his Law perfectly, and is as able to take away the sins of the
whole World, as of one man, and more able to save you than your sins are to
condemn you; Act. 20.28
his sufferings being the obedience of a God or of him that was God as well as
man, whereas your sins are but the finite acts of men, poor, silly, shallow
Creatures, that are before him, (or in comparison of him) as nothing, Isa.
40.14 Psalm. 130.7, 8
yea less than nothing, and vanity. Set before them also the plentiousness of
Redemption that is in Christ, that he can and will deliver them from all their
sins; and from all the evils that accompany them, or arise from them; and the
prevalence of his intercession in Heaven, to make application of his
Redemption, and the benefits thereof to sinners on earth; Heb. 7.29
whereby he is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him. Tell
them, that to refuse Jesus Christ his merits and benefits, who came from Heaven
on purpose to save them from their sins, and from Hell, and to receive them to
glory in Heaven, is to refuse salvation, and how can they escape great
damnation, who thus reject great salvation? Comfort cost Christ dear for them,
and should they cast it away?

Obj. What though the merits of Christ's Death be of infinite value, and virtue,
they do not belong to us, what shall we be better for them.

Ans. Set before them

Third Ground. The free, gracious, and general tender of Christ, and of pardon,
peace, grace, joy, and glory with him, to all and every one that will receive
him, without respect of persons, made in the Gospel, and in the promulgation or
preaching of it, as, God so loved the World, Joh. 3.16.
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have everlasting life -- And, Mark 16.15, 16
Go ye into all the world, preach the Gospel to every Creature; what is the
Gospel? He that believes in Christ shall be saved, and he that believes not
shall be damned; 2 Cor. 5.19, 20
that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them
their sins. And Christ sends his Ministers as Ambassadors, to beseech sinners
in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God, and commits unto them the word of
Reconciliation. To this end, as Moses lift up the Serpent in the Wilderness, so
Christ is lift up upon the Pole of the Gospel, in the sight of all sinners,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish. If ye thrust these tenders
of Christ, and Salvation away from you, when made to you, yea threaped upon
you, then you judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, as the Jews of
Antioch did, Act; 13.46
when they put the Word of God away from them.

Obj. How can we expect Christ should be willing to receive us, or to be
received by us? What face can we have to come unto him, or what hope to be
welcome?

Fourth Ground. Set before them Christ's gracious invitation of all to him, that
feel any want of him, or have any desire to him; as Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest -- I said, Mat. 11.28
behold me, behold me, Isa. 65.1
unto a Nation not called by my name, that is (as some interpret it) I invited
the Gentiles, and called upon them to look after me, and come in to me; I am
sought of them that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not,
that is, the Gentiles whom he called to be his people, or to his Covenant of
grace, who before were not his people, or had no relation to him, either of
name or interest. He prevented their seeking of him by his seeking and finding
them, of his own good will and pleasure. Together with Christ's invitation, set
before them, Christ's promise of Reception, and of non rejection to any that
will come unto him. All that the Father gives me shall come to me (says
Christ) and him that comes to me, Ioh. 6.37.
I will in no wise cast out; Joh. 5.40.
and his complaint, that men will not come unto him, that he might give them
life.

Object. Did ever any obtain mercy and pardon, that were so vile and unworthy
as we are?

The fifth Ground. Set before them the experiences or examples of Gods mercy
manifested, 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 3, 11, 12, 13.
and of Christ's merits applied to the greatest of sinners, as, to Manasseh a
mighty sinner, witness his idolatry, diabolical arts of several kinds, his
cruelty, for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, 2 King 24.4.
and he made Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to err, and to do worse
than the Heathen. Yet for all this he besought the Lord in his Affliction, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, and he was entreated of
him, and heard his supplication. And to Paul, who was before a Blasphemer, a
Persecutor, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14.15.
and Contumelious, yea the chief of sinners; But I obtained mercy (says he)
and the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward me. To Mary Magdalen,
Mar. 16.9.
out of whom Christ had cast seven Devils; to whom he appeared first after his
Resurrection; Luke 7.37, 38. 48. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
And to the woman in the City that had been a notorious sinner. -- and to some
of the Corinthians -- and if to such, why then not to you? why will you exclude
or cut off your selves from Gods mercy, and Christ's merits, which were held
forth to others (as bad or worse than you) yet they embraced the same, why may
not, yea, why should not you do the same?

Object. Never any were plunged so deep in distress of soul as we are; Is
there any sorrow like unto our sorrow?

The sixth Ground. Set this before them, that some of Gods dear servants have
drunk very deep of the cup of soul-troubles, or of trembling, and of the wine
of astonishment; sc. inward anguish, horrors and terrors, and gone down (to
their sense) even to the gates of Hell; whom God raised up afterward, and
ravished with joy (as if they were in Heaven) having given them a full cup of
Consolation to drink. Such was Jobs condition, Job 13.24.
when God hid his face from him, and held him for his enemy, Verse. 26
and writ bitter things against him. When God skared him with dreams, Chap.
7.14, 15.20.
and terrified him through visions, so that his soul chose strangling, and
death rather than life -- when God set him as a mark to shoot at, Job 30.18
so that he was a burden to himself; and when he went mourning without the
Sun; when the arrows of the Almighty (that is the pricking stinging sense of
Gods displeasure) were within him, Chap. 6.4
the poison whereof drunk up his spirits, and the terrouts of God set
themselves in array against him; yet afterward God shined upon Job, graciously;
Job 42.4.
turned his face and favor toward him, and Job saw God with the seeing of the
eye (which imports clearer discoveries of God to him, than he had formerly)
and the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning. Verse. 12
Heman the Ezrahite who was one of the wisest men in all Israel, 1 King. 4.31
Psalm. 88.
next after Solomon, who is described to be under as heavy a condition of a
deserted wounded spirit, as any we read of, complains as grievously in that
sad Psalm of terrors and anguish, as if he was in Hell. Verse. 3.
My soul is full of troubles, and my life draws nigh to the grave. Thou have
laid me in the lowest pit, Verse. 6.
in darkness, in the deep; as if he was already possessed of the torments of
hell, Verse. 7.
and in the gult of despair. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have
afflicted me with all thy waves; the waves of Gods wrath, beat with endless
and violent dashings upon his soul. Verse. 14.
Lord why castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me? I am
afflicted and ready to dye, Verse. 15.
from my youth up; while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted, Verse. 16
thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off, etc. What a
deep sense had Heman of Gods wrath, and the effects thereof? as 1 That it was
fierce wrath. 2 Overwhelming, it went over him. 3 Affrighting, cutting, killing
wrath, thy terrors have cut me off. 4 Surrounding wrath, compassing him about
like deep waters -- They i. e. thy wraths came about me like water. Verse. 17.
5 Continuing wrath, all the day, yea many years, even from his youth up, was
he exercised with the terrors of the Lord, with the fears and feeling of his
wrath, so that he thought the reviving of his soul by comfort, would be no
less than wonders showed to the dead (a miracle of mercy) and causing of the
dead to arise, and praise God. Verse. 10.
Now though Heman was cast down so low, yea cast off, as to his sense; yet not
indeed, for he had support in the deeps of his distress, because he (could in
some measure) exercise faith, and prayer. O Lord God of my Salvation, Verse. 1.
I have cried ngiht and day before thee, let my prayer come before thee, etc.
Verse. 2.
yea he resolved to continue praying till God gave him an answer of peace, and
comfort. Verse. 13.
Doubtless God compensated his delay with exuberancy of comfort. David a man
after Gods own heart, Psalm. 143.4. and 42.11. and 119.25.
yet even his heart was sometimes full of heaviness, and desolate, and his soul
was disquieted and dejected within him, and did cleave unto the dust. Psalm.
38.2.3
Thine arrows (says he to God) stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me
sore. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is
there any rest in my bones, because of my sin, for mine iniquities are gone
over my head as an heavy burden, Verse. 4.
they are too heavy for me, -- I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go
mourning all the day long. Uers. 6.
I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared by reason of the disquietnesse of
my heart. Uers. 8.
Yet in duetime God quickened him according to his word; and made him full of
joy with the light of his Countenance.

Jesus Christ was a perfect Anatomy of an afflicted soul (as Mr. Mat. 26.38.
Greenham calls him) in his agony, both in the garden, when he said, my soul
is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; which made him pray thrice most
fervently, Luke 22.44
to his father, If it be possible let this cup pass from me, and made him
sweat great drops of blood falling down to the ground; -- and on the cross
(for his agony continued less or more till his death, when he cried out,
being ready to breath out his last) my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
when the wrath of God for our sins lay upon his humane soul in the weight of
it, the Godhead withdrawing it self for a while as to sense, not to support.
Christ's example in this case is most comfortable for an afflicted conscience,
you may read of such dreadful desertions storied in the lives of many, who were
dear to God. I will relate three remarkable examples, which are well collected
by Mr. Bolton in his instructions for comforting afflicted consciences, because
this little piece may come into some hands, who have not read the same in any
other book. Mr. Peacock, a worthy servant of God, when he reckoned with
himself about some smaller sins, for these (says he) I feel now an Hell in
my conscience; upon other occasions (as the visits and speeches of his friends)
he groaned and cried out lamentably. Oh me wretch! Oh, mine heart is
miserable! Oh, Oh, miserable and woeful, the burden of my sins lies so heavy
upon me, I doubt it will break my heart! oh, how woeful and miserable is my
state, that thus must converse with hell hounds? -- But before his end he was
wonderfully recovered, and raised up, from his depth of spiritual misery, to a
height of heavenly joy and comfort, as appears by his speeches. -- I do (says
he) God be praised; feel such comfort from that, what shall I call it? Agony,
said one that stood by, nay, says he, that is too little; had I five thousand
worlds. I could not make satisfaction for such an issue. Oh the Sea is not more
full of water, nor the Sun of light, than the Lord of mercy; yea, his mercies
are ten thousand times more; what great cause have I to magnify the great
goodness of God that has humbled, nay rather exalted such a wretched miscreant,
to an estate so glorious, and stately. The Lord has honored me with his
goodness. The joy that I feel in my heart is incredible. Mr. Glover, of whom
you may read in the Acts and Monuments, was exercised diverse years with
tentations, stings of Conscience, unexpressible pangs of grief, and buffetings
of Satan. Upon apprehension of some backsliding, he was so perplexed, that if
he had been in the deepest pit of hell, he could almost have despaired no more
of his salvation, which exceedingly wasted his body, decayed his senses, so as
he could have no joy of his meat, yet he was forced to eat against his
appetite, to defer the time of his damnation, so long as he might; conceiving
he should be thrown down into hell, as soon as the breath was out of his body;
yet afterward he was so raised, ravished and spiritualized, that as (Mr. Fox
relates) he was like one placed in heaven already, and dead in this world,
both in word, and meditation, and he led a life altogether celestial. This also
you may read in the narration of the holy life, and Christian death of Mistress
Katherine Bretergh. The sorrows of Hell seized upon her soul, before her death
she said a roaring wilderness of woe was within her, that her sins had made her
a prey to Satan, and wished she had never been born, or that she had been made
any other Creature, rather than a woman; she burst out many times, saying,
woe, woe, woe, etc. a weak, a woeful, a wretched and forsaken woman; with
tears continually trickling from her eyes; But afterward God came to her with
fullness of joy, and abundance of Consolations, and put triumphant songs into
her mouth; as, oh, Blessed be thy Name, my Lord, and my God, the joys that I
feel in my soul; O, they be wonderful, as certain as thou art the God of
truth, even so sure do I know my self to be thine, O blessed be the Lord that
has thus comforted me, and brought me now to a place more sweet to me than
the garden of Eden, Oh the joy, the joy, the delightsome joy that I feel. Lay
your sorrows in the balance of sound judgment with theirs, and see whether
theirs or yours be heavier. Are you better than all or any of these holy
servants of God, that you should think your selves exempt from the like
soul-troubles? can these be a sign of Gods rejecting wrath to you, which befell
these that were the objects of Gods special love? Yea is not this your
conformity to Christ, in agonies or inward distresses of spirit, which you may
expect, as well as in outward Tribulations, Phil. 3.10
and to know the fellowship of his sufferings in both?

Object. Such may further say, God himself has hewed and wounded us, who then
can heal us? yea slain us (or taken the life of Comfort, or the Comfort of our
lives from us) who can quicken us? he has hid his face from us, and laid us
in darkness, how can we then behold him (no more than we can see the Sun by
Candlelight) God has forsaken us, departed from us, cast us off, we fear he
will never come to us, nor own us again? He has caused trouble and grief to
our souls, who then can give us peace, and joy?

The Seventh ground of Consolation. Set before them (and apply to them) Gods
promises of healing, quickening, illightening, and of returns, of peace, and
joy, to such.

Gods

1 Promises of healing, Deuteronomy. 32.39. Psa. 147.3. Job 5.18. Luke 4 18. Isa.
57.19. 1 Pet. 2.24.
to wounded spirits, and broken hearts: I wound and I heal, says God. He
heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds or griefs; He has
sent me, says Christ, to heal the broken hearted -- By his stripes ye are
healed. God has the oil of gladness to pour into the wounds of your souls,
which is the most sovereign balsome for healing, and closing up the same, Hos.
6.1.
far more precious than all the balm in Gilead. Come, say the repenting people
of God one to another (who give no place to despair) and let us return to the
Lord, for he has torn us, he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will
bind us up.

2 Promises of quickening made to dead souls buried in the graves of desertion
and low languishments, Deuteronomy. 32.39.
to revive and raise them up. I kill and make alive, says the Lord, The Lord
brings down to the grave, 1 Samuel 2.6, 7.
and brings up, says Hannah, out of the deeps of spiritual misery, as well
as of external captivity and tribulation; we may conceive the one to be
involved in the other; Ezech. 37. v. 11
When the house of Israel said in Babylon; Behold our bones are dried, (or we
are in Babylon like dry bones in a grave, or scattered at the graves mouth) our
hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts, therefore prophecy unto them,
Ver. 12.
Thus says the Lord God, Behold O my people, I will open your graves, and
cause you to come out of your graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel,
and ye shall know that I am the Lord, Verse. 13.
and I shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, Verse. 14.
then shall ye know that I have spoken, and performed it, says the Lord. All
those promises of giving his Spirit, are promises of life and comfort to
dead-spirited, sad-hearted sinners, Joh. 6.63.
because the Spirit is the Comforter, and it is the Spirit that quickens. To
this end God dwells in broken hearts, and in contrite spirits (as his Heaven
upon Earth) to quicken and comfort them; Isa. 57.15.
I dwell, says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, in the high
and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the hearts of the contrite ones.
Hos. 6.1, 2.
This was the confidence of Gods people in Hosea. After two days will he
revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his
sight, that is, after a short time of our troubles, he will so restore and
cheer us, as if he had given us a new life; Psalm. 71.20.
and of David, Thou which have showed me great and sore troubles shall quicken
me again, and shall bring me up again from the depths of the earth, from
gulfs of grief and distress, and in Psalm 138.7. Though I walk in the midst of
trouble, thou will revive me.

3 Promises of illightening made to benighted souls, that walk in darkness,
and see no light.

1 By causing his face to shine upon them, after he has hid it from them, on
whom he has turned his back. Isa. 54.8.
In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee (says the Lord) thy Redeemer; mark how God
opposes the perpetuity of his kindness to the momentaniness of his displeasure.

2 By making Christ Jesus his sun of Righteousness to arise with healing under
his wings, and great joy to them on whom he has seemed to set to their great
sorrow, who have gone mourning without the Sun. Compare those two texts
together; Isa. 50.10.
who is among you that fears the Lord -- that walks in darkness, and has
no light, Mal. 4.2
let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. And -- Unto you
that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with healing under his
wings. Christ will send forth such Beams of heat, light and life into dead,
dark, cold hearts, as will make them lightsome, joyful, growthfull, fruitful,
thankful. This was the Churches confidence, when I fall, Micah 7.8.
I shall arise when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

4 Promises of returns to the souls of his servants, after his departure from
them. God will not forsake them for ever, nor leave them altogether. Isa. 54.7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee but with great mercies will I gather
thee says the Lord. 1 Samuel 12.22.
The Lord will not forsake his people for his great Names sake (says Samuel to
Israel) because it has pleased the Lord to make you his people. This was the
confidence of the faithful in their calamities. Lam. 3.31.32.33
The Lord will not cast off for ever, but though he cause grief, yet will he
have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies, -- for he does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of men. Herewith the Psalmist
comforts the godly. The Lord will not cast off his people, Psalm. 94.14.
neither will he forsake his inheritance. Is God gone away from your souls? or
has he withdrawn the wonted influence of his grace, peace, and joy, and the
comforts of his love, favor, and presence from you? and does he seem to
reject you? If ye were once his by federal right or faith in the Covenant, you
are his for ever, because that is an everlasting Covenant, founded upon Gods
free grace, and Christ's precious blood, which are immovable, unchangeable, and
eternal. Isa. 9.6.
If ever you did cry Abba Father, you may call God Father for ever; for he is
the everlasting Father. Psa. 31.22
David said to God, I am cut off from before thine eyes, but he confesses it
was in his haste (he did it rashly and unadvisedly) and God consuted him
presently. -- Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications, when I
cried unto thee. And though to your sense he has left you, he will turn
again, he will have compassion upon you, he will cast all your sins into the
depths of the Sea. Micah 7.19
Christ's promises of returns hold as true and firm in respect of his spiritual
presence to his people now, as of his corporal presence to his Disciples then,
Joh. 14.18.
I will not leave you comfortless (or Orphans) I will come to you. And ye now
have sorrow, but I will see you again; to wit, Joh. 16.22
after my resurrection, and your heart shall rejoice. Consider poor souls, you
cost Christ too dear for him to cast away. Let me give you one pregnant
instance of Christ's return to a deserted soul, that is Mr. Robert Glover, a
holy Martyr, who having a little before his death lost the sense of Gods
favor, and comforts of his spirit, which filled his heart with grief, and his
mouth with moans, when he came within sight of the stake, at which he was to
suffer death for Jesus Christ, suddenly he was so exceedingly ravished, and
replenished with holy comfort, and heavenly joys, that he cried out, claping
his hands, he is come, Heb. 13.5
he is come. Though God be ever with his people in his presence, according to
his promise, yet in respect of the influence of his grace and favor, he
sometimes suspends and withholds the Act thereof, and in respect of appearance
or discovery, he sometimes manifests himself to them, and sometimes hides
himself from them, and seems to be coming and going, as Christ said to his
Disciples, A little while and ye shall not see me, and a gain a little while
and ye shall see me.

5 Lastly, set before them Gods promises of peace and joy.

1 Of peace, and a calm to troubled disquieted souls by inward or outward
afflictions; Isa. 57.16
I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, lest the spirit
should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. I create the fruit of
the hips peace, Verse. 19
peace to him that is a far off, and to him that is near (says the Lord) and
I will heal him. Phil. 4.7
The peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your minds and
hearts, as with a garrison, and when he gives quietness, Job 34 29
who can cause trouble? This was the Psalmists expectance and confidence, I
will hear what God the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85.8
for he will speak peace unto his people.

2 Psa. 38.5, 11, 12
Promises of joy to sad sorrowful souls. His anger is but for a moment, in his
favor is life; weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning;
Psa. 97.11.
light is sown for the Righteous, Psa. 126, 5
and joy for the upright in heart. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
Consolation shall follow affliction to Gods people, as Harvest does seed-time,
Mat. 5.4
and the one is as sweet as the other is bitter. Joh. 16.20.
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted; ye shall weep and
lament says Christ to his Disciples, Verse. 22
but the world shall rejoice, and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow
shall be turned into soy; and ye now have sorrow, but I will see you again,
and your heart shall rejoice, Act. 2.28
and your joy no man takes from you. This was David's Faith and hope in God.
Thou shall make me full of joy with the light of thy Countenance. Apply these
several promises unto afflicted consciences and rub them, as oil of gladness,
into their benumbed spirits. Argue the case with them. Are not these promises
as good security for Gods performance of the mercies promised to you, to wit,
healing, quickening, illightening, returns, peace and joy, as your hearts can
desire, yea better than all the world is able to give you by hand and seal? yea
are they not stronger pillars to build your confidence for comfort in God upon,
Mar. 13.31.
than those that bear up Heaven and Earth? For Heaven and Earth says Christ,
shall pass away, but my words (that is, 2 Cor. 1.20
promises) shall not pass away. All Promises (of Comfort) are in Christ, yea
and Amen.

Object. If we were the Lords by special right, or shall be saved, then we
should have grace in our hearts, which is the characteristical distinguishing
quality of all Gods people from all others, but we can discover no such thing
in our selves, we have no grace.

The eighth Ground of Consolation. Set before them, and apply unto them two
things.

1 Grace may be hid for a time in the heart, and not be discerned by them that
have it, like sparks of fire in the ashes, or life in a swound, or bits of gold
in a dust heap, or pearls in the mire; like stars in the sky in a dark night,
they are all there, yet not one of them does appear; like stones in the bottom
of a Vessel, or River, which are not seen when the water is troubled, thick or
muddy; like stools or chairs in a room where there is no light; for that which
makes manifest is light. There is a difference between the being of a thing in
it self, and the appearing or discovery thereof to us. As many things seem to
be which are not, so some things are (or really exist) which sometimes seem
not, or appear not to be, as what things are under ground, or locked up close,
and laid out of sight, or though they lie open, they lack light to manifest
them; when the soul is in a troubled state of strong temptations or stirring
corruptions, or in a spiritual swound of desertions, and wants the beamings
forth of light from the Spirit of God, to evidence to it the good work God has
begun in it; In such a case the truth and life of grace may abide in the heart,
though it do not appear to the eye of the soul, and what afflicted souls cannot
discern in themselves, they are apt to deny to be in them. Christians have
their several states, as the year has its seasons, to wit, their winter or
dead time of Tentation and desertion, wherein all seems dead and withered with
them as with the earth; and grace is hid in the heart, as sap in the Roots of
Trees, as flowers and fruits are hid in the seeds, or Roots, in the Earth, in
the winter, as well as their spring of growth, and summer of joy; Hos. 14.5, 6,
7
when the Lord is as dew to them, and they revive as the Corn, and grow as the
Vine, and blossom as the Lilly, and cast forth their roots, spread their
branches, and their beauty is as the Olive Tree, and their smell as Lebanon.
Mr. Peacock (of whom I spoke before) in the time of his fore and sad tentations
complained to some of his best friends, that God had cursed him, being asked
how he knew it, he answered, the event shows it, I have no grace, I have no
more sense of grace than these Curtains, than a Goose, than that block; when a
friend requested him to be of good comfort, and to pluck up his spirit, I
cannot, said he, why can you not? Because I have no grace, no more than a
stake; why think you so? by this Affliction. Its certain this holy man of God
had grace in this his deep and dreadful plunge, but because he could not
perceive it, he did deny it. Press these home to afflicted souls, not to judge
themselves by present sense, or what they see or feel, for grace may be in
them of a truth, and they not see it, and they may be the Children of the day,
and not discern it; but by former experience, to recollect themselves, whether
they have not heretofore discovered the work of grace in them, by the effects,
signs, and symptoms thereof. Then persuade them into the belief hereof, as a
sound certain truth of God, that true grace, wheresoever it is may be in an
eclipse or laps, or decay for a time; but they that have it cannot lose it, nor
fall from it totally or finally. Because

1 Its the seed of God which remains in every Child of God, 1 John 3.9
and keeps possession of the soul for God; and can never be wholly rooted out.
Grace may be to seek sometimes, or out of the way, when we have occasion to
look at it, or to use it, but it cannot be lost, as things in a house may be
to seek, yet are laid up safe, and found afterward, as a knife, or gloves.

2 Romans 11.29
The Gifts and calling of God are without repentance, that is, the gifts of
grace, and effectual calling, God does not give these and take them again from
any of his servants, but to continue to be theirs, and to abide with them for
ever.

3 The perpetuity of grace in them is founded upon the immutability of God, and
his free mercy, good will, and everlasting love to them; Heb. 13.8 Joh. 13.1
that as he is for ever the same in his Affection to them, so he will
continue them to be ever the same in their relation to him, scil. his
Confederates, Sons, Saints, Servants.

4 Because both they and the grace of God in them are kept by the power of God
unto salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5
So that they that once had the grace of God can never lose it wholly, though
they would; because it is kept by the arms of eternity in them and for them.
None is able to pluck grace out of them, Ioh. 10.28, 29
no more than to pluck them out of Gods hand. They may fall in the state of
grace, but they cannot fall out of it.

5 Because the golden chain of Salvation is irrefragable, and all the Links in
it are inseparable, Romans 8.30. -- Whom he calls, them he has
predestined, and them he will certainly justify and glorify.

Acquaint such poor souls that grace has its seasons of hiding it self, and of
appearing or showing it self, as the Sun has his time of setting and rising;
The Moon has her times of eclypse, and of the full. As the fruits of the Earth
have their times of being under ground and above ground. As night and day have
their Vicissitudes. Now for you to conclude the non existence of grace in you
from the non appearance of it to you; that you have it not, because you see it
not, is as if you should say, because the Sun is set, it will rise no more,
because it is night or dark, it will not be day or light again; because it is
Winter now, we shall have no more Summer; because the Moon is in an eclyps,
therefore she will shine no more, at least never be in the full again.

Persuade them to defer passing sentence upon themselves until they be in a
calm estate, or in a capacity to make a right judgment of themselves. Then let
them search their hearts, which is like raking abroad of the ashes to find out
the sparks of grace, and dig deep by self-examination, to discover the root of
the matter to be in them; and wait upon God, to this end, to light the Candle
of their spirits, to look into all the corners of their hearts, and see what is
there; and discern what is gold, and what dross, what is precious, and what
vile in their souls.

While their spirits are in a confused perplexed state, Importune them to
hearken to the Counsel of Christian friends, who may (at such a time) be
better able to judge of them, and their case, than they are of themselves (as
Physicians do better understand the state of their sick Patients, than
themselves) and who may more clearly discern grace in them, than they can in
themselves; and therefore ought to declare and make out the same to them, scil.
that they have grace in deed, though not in view, or though they deny it, or do
not see it. -- When you have to deal with such, set your selves to observe, and
discover Aliquid Christi, what you can of Christ, and grace in them, watch
diligently if any word fall from them that may give you hope or a hint thereof.

The second Thing to be set before them is this, The desire of grace is grace.
Desires after Christ and grace, to believe, repent, obey to serve, and please
God, to be delivered from the dominion of sin, are Grace.

Reas. 1 Because true desires have the nature and truth of grace in them,
though in a scantling, and small measure; As there is true fire in a spark, as
well as in a flame, and true water in a drop, as in a stream, true light in a
Beam, as in the Sun. The filings of gold, are true gold, as well as the whole
wedge. -- The least of any thing partakes of the nature of the whole.

Reas. 2 Because Desires are the seeds or beginnings of grace in the soul, out
of which grace grows up to its measure of stature; as a Corn sown in the Earth,
whence grows the blade, Mar. 1.28
stalk, Ear, and full Corn in the Ear, according to its kind. -- As a Grain of
Mustard Seed is the least of all seeds when it is sown, but the greatest among
herbs when it is grown, Mat. 13.31, 32
it becomes a Tree. -- So desires are grace in the feed, Habits are grace in
the blade, or stalk; Acts or works are grace in the Ear, and perfect works are
full Corn in the Ear. -- Grace is one of the least things at first, but it is
the property of grace, even when it is lodged in desires, or in the first, and
least degree of it, to grow up, and rise higher.

Reas. 3. Because good desires are accepted, and rewarded with God as well as
deeds, yea for deeds, when power to perform and actuate them is wanting. 2 Cor.
8.12
If there be first a willing mind (says the Apostle) it is accepted according
to that a man has, and not according to that a man has not. God estimates his
people rather according to their affections than their actions, for ordinarily
their hearts are larger than their hands, and they desire to do more than they
are able. The first fruits of desires are well-pleasing to God, as well as the
whole lump of performance. God took it kindly from David, 1 King. 8.18
that it was in his heart to build him a house (though he would not accept it
at his hand) and for a recompense, God promises to build him a house; 2 Samuel
7.11
and from Abraham, that he was willing to offer up his only Son Isaac to God,
he accepted it as done, and blessed him for it, Genesis 22.12, 16. saying, Because
thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, in
blessing I will bless thee, etc. How highly did Christ commend the poor Widow
that cast in her two Mites into the Treasury, Mar. 12.42, 43, 44
because she did it out of plenty of good will, though out of penury of her
estate, for these were here wealth, all she had, even all her living. As on the
contrary, the evil desires, and concupiscence of the heart are reckoned, and
punished by God as deeds, Mat. 5.28
Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery already
with her in his heart, says our Savior. A man may commit Murder, Theft,
Adultery, as well in desires, and affections in his heart, as in deeds, or
action, with his hand. So a Christian may believe, repent, and do new
obedience, in desires after Christ and Grace, to be made able to perform all
these, as in deed -- A Christians perfection here lies more in his Affections
than in his Actions; therefore Gods Servants have pleaded their wills, and
desires before God, rather than their deeds as Nehemiah did, Nehem. 1.11
Lord let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy Servants, Psalm. 38.9
who defire to fear thy Name; and David, Lord, all my desire is before thee,
and, my groaning is not hid from thee -- And Paul* Romans 7.16. to 21.
To will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find not.

Reas. 4. Because good desires are the work of God in us as well as deeds,
Phil. 2.13
for God works in us both to will, Chap. 1.6
and to do, of his own good pleasure. They are the beginning of Gods good work
in us, which he will perfect until the Day of Christ; God does not his works
by halves, when I begin, 1 Samuel 3.12
I will also make an end, says God, which is as true of the work of Grace, as
of Judgment, Psalm. 138.8
The Lord will perfect that which concerns us; he will nourish up desires into
habits, and draw them both forth into Acts, and increase the actings thereof
unto perfection -- Christ is, Heb. 12.2
as the Author of our faith in desires after it, so is he the finisher of it
in assurance -- Desires are the smoke of the Flax (or Wick) which Christ will
not quench, the bruise of the Reed which he will not break, Mat. 12.20
but nourish, and cherish the same until he send forth Judgment unto
Victory; that is, till he has brought the small beginnings of grace (even in
desires) unto perfection; notwithstanding all obstructions, and oppositions by
the enemies of our Salvation -- Christ despises not the day of a Souls small
things.

Reas. 5. Because God has made many promises to Desires, as of acceptance, 2
Corin. 8.12. of supply, and satisfaction, Psalm. 145.19. He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him, he will hear their cry, and will save them. To
this end God gives, or stirs up desires, that he may satisfy them; as in
Nature, so in Grace -- Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of
every living thing, says David, Mat. 5.6
verse. 16. -- Promises of blessedness, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after righteousness, for they shall be filled -- Promises of the Water of Life
-- of the Spirit, Rev. 21.6
Luke 1.53
Joh. 7.37.39 -- of Spiritual Wine and Milk, Isa. 55.1, 2. of all good things
are made to hungrings and thirstings of soul; true desires entitle a soul to
all these by virtue of Gods Promises -- Ask poor, doubting, distressed souls,
who complain they have not a Christ, nor Faith to believe; they cannot repent,
nor obey, nor depart from iniquity -- Are not your souls carried upon a wing of
desires after Christ, to look and long for him? -- Do you not with your souls
desire to believe, to repent, to do good, and no evil? Then spread the promised
Reasons before them, to convince, and conclude them under the power and comfort
of the present truth, that true desires are grace. Sometimes God lays a soul so
low in darkness, and in deeps of tentation, as it cannor discern so much as
desires in it self, as Mr. Peacock, who uttered a strange speech, when his
friends asked him, Do you desire grace? I cannot, says he, I can as well leap
over a Church.

Obj. If desires be grace, who will want it, or perish for lack of it? for, do
not all desire to be saved, and to go to heaven?

Ans. Not all desires of grace are true grace, but only true desires, which may
be discerned by the root, fruit, and properties of them.

1 By the Root; -- True desires of Christ, and grace do spring and grow,

1 From a heart humbled before God in the sight of its sins, and misery by
them, and of its own vileness, and unworthiness -- Desires are sparks that fly
up from inward smitings, and breakings of heart for sin -- Lord, thou have
heard the desires of the humble, Psalm. 10.17
says David.

2 From a soul sensible of its Spiritual necessities, or from sense of
soul-wants, scil. of Christ, and Grace, and of the things that accompany
Salvation, pardon of sin, and power over sin, etc. that it has them not, or
that in him dwells no such good things, -- as in Nature, so in Grace, a
feeling of the want of meat, or drink, (or any thing that tends to preservation
of life) makes men hunger and thirst.

3 From a mind illightned to see, as the want, so the worth and excellency, the
necessity, and commodity of Christ, and Grace for the Soul, as there is of the
soul for the body, without which the body would be a dead Corpse; or of the Sun
for the World, without which the World would be but a dark heap.

2 By the fruit or effect; true desires put forth serious, and suitable
endeavors in the use of means to obtain the things desired. Such were David's
desires -- One thing I have desired of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4
which I will seek after; -- the desires of the righteous are dilligent, and
industrious -- True desirers are a generation of Seekers -- Right desires of
Christ, and Grace, will make a soul seek them diligently, and wait on God for
them in all his Ordinances, as the Word, Seals, Prayer, the Communion of
Saints, which is called, Prove. 8.34
Watching daily at Wisdoms gates, waiting at the posts of her doors -- The
wicked may have desires of good for themselves, but they are not good desires,
because lazy, and idle, they separate between the end and the means, Prove.
13.4 Cap. 21.25
like those of the Sluggard -- The soul of the sluggard desires and has
nothing, but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat. The desire of the
slothful kills him, for his hands refuse to labor. Numb. 23.20
Balaam desired to dye the death of the righteous, but he would not live their
lives.

If by a wish the wicked could get Christ, Grace, and Heaven, they would not
want them, but they will not work for them; not seek the Kingdom of God in the
first place, nor labor for the meat that endures to everlasting life, nor work
out their Salvation with fear and trembling -- The desires of the wicked are
but a bare wish, or willingness without a purpose of using the means.

3 True desires after Christ, and grace are discernable by the properties of
them, which are Four.

1 They are sincere.

1 For ground, when they are carried out after Christ, and Spiritual things, as
well for their sakes as for our own; for the goodness of them in themselves, as
well as for the good we may get by them; for the beauty, and excellency we see
in them, and a suitableness to our necessities, or out of love to them.

2 For ends, when desires have Spiritual aims, as the mark they shoot at, in
the objects about which they are conversant, to wit, to make us holy, and
humble in our hearts, obedient and serviceable in our lives, conformable in
both to Christ, and acceptable through Christ to God; and they do not scope at
Temporal advantages, as to get our selves name, or fame, credit, or profit
thereby in the world.

2 True desires are stirring, vigorous, and vehement for temper and measure,
Matthew. 5.6
therefore called in Scripture, Hunger and Thirst, which are the strongest
desires of Nature. Such like does Grace put forth -- Holy desires vent, and
pour out themselves in deep sighs and groans, in earnest pantings and
breathings of soul, in strong cries, and tears to God for Christ, to Christ for
grace, Psalm. 42.1
strength, spirit -- As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my
soul after thee, Genesis 30.1, 2
O God, says David; -- they are like Rachel her desire of Children, Give me
Children. said she, else I dye; or Sampsons thirst, which was great, Shall I
dye for thirst? Judge. 15.18
said he --

True desires must needs be strong -- because they come from the bottom of the
heart, and rise up to the top, and the whole force of the soul is united, and
put into them, Isa. 26.18.
and carried forth in them -- The desire of our soul (says the Prophet) is to
thy Name, and to the remembrance of thee -- with my soul have I desired thee in
the night; he means the whole soul. This is to search for God with all our
heart, which is a sure sign that we shall find God, Jer. 29.13. the strength
of holy desires appears,

1 In preferring Spirituals before Temporals, Christ and Grace, and things
above, before Riches, Honors, Pleasures, and all things here below, in being
willing to part with our darling lusts, and whatsoever is dear to us to get
Christ -- to sell all to buy the Pearl of great price, that is, Christ; Luke
18.18.22 23
and the goodly pearls of Grace, which the Ruler that came to Christ was not
willing to do, who pretended a great desire to be saved, but preferred his
possessions, and his desires to keep them, before his Salvation, and desires to
obtain the same -- Desires after Christ will make a soul say with that Martyr,
None but Christ, John Lambert.
none but Christ.

2 In exceeding all other desires in us in heat, and height, in metal and edge,
in swallowing up, or abating all desires after earthly things, Exodus 12.7.
as Aarons Rod swallowed up the Magicians Rods.

3 True desires are seasonable for time, while the things desired may be
obtained; what a man desires fervently, he will labor for presently without
delay, as the hungry man does meat, and the thirsty man drink; hence proceeds
seeking God early, to wit, while he may be found, and calling upon him while
he is near. Psalm. 63.1.
-- Desires love not delays, either of pains for, or enjoyment of wh^^ is
desired, for the accomplishment of desires is sweet to the soul, but delays are
bitter. -- Though true desires are never too late, yet late desires are seldom
true, as when men defer their desires to believe in Christ, to repent of sin,
and depart from sin, till they be sick, or lie on their deathbeds. -- Esau
desired the blessing, but too late, therefore he lost it, and his labor,
though he sought it with tears. The five foolish Virgins desired to enter into
the marriage-chamber, but too late, when the door was shut.

4 And lastly. True desires of Christ, and grace, are constant, and continual
for duration, not by fits like Agues, nor by flashes like lightening, or stird
only upon some Emergencies, or special occasions, as hearing of the joys of
Heaven, or torments of Hell, pathetically described, or of remarkable
judgments of God, or from inward affrightments; for such desires (not having
an inward root in the heart) commonly cool, and wither when the occasion of
them cease. -- But true desires, flowing out of the heart, are sed with the
lasting spring of grace in it, the waters whereof shall not sail. -- They are
restless, never quiet till they be satisfied; uncessant till prevalent; ever
rising and rolling till they rest in the Center of obtaining. -- They that
desire Christ, and grace, pardon, and peace, etc. aright, are not only
importunately, but uncessantly greedy for them, and will be Gods Remembrancers
night and day, and give him no rest, till he give them their hearts desires.
-- Neither delays nor repulses can crush, or quash sincere desires. Mat. 15.
See this exemplified in the woman of Canaan. -- Desires are true when they are
the bias of the soul, which inclines, or leads it the right way, scil.
Christ-ward, Graceward, Heavenward; when they do (as by a proper Motion) carry
out our souls freely, and constantly after these; as sparks fly upward, as the
stone moves downard, and waters run forward. Psalm. 119.20.
-- My soul breaks for the longing it has to thy judgments at all times,
says David -- and my soul thirsts after thee, Psalm. 143.6.
as a thirsty land, that gapes continually till God give Rain -- So much for
the first direction, for the right comforting of afflicted souls.

The second Direction is this, Caution them against four evils, to take heed.

1 That they do not dishonor God in the time of their desertions, and
distractions, by unworthy thoughts of him, or hard speeches against him, by
murmurings at him, or quarrelings with him, for his assaultings of them with
Terrors, and anguish; for his withdrawings from them of light and influences;
and for his far distance, and long absence from them. -- Hereupon they are apt
to think, and say, that God is not so loving, and kind, tender, and ready to
help, as his word reports him to be. -- The Psalmist when his spirit was
overwhelmed, his soul troubled, and refused to be comforted, then he began to
call Gods mercy, Psalm 77.2. Verse. 7, 8.
Truth, and faithfulness into question -- will the Lord cast off for ever? will
he be favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise
fail for evermore? Verse. 10.
-- But he checks himself for it -- I said, this is mine infirmity, or this
does make me sick -- It should be the chief care of Gods people, what ever
they suffer from God, not to sin against God; whatever God does to them, to
think, and speak only the thing that is right, and to justify God when ever
they judge themselves. -- This was Jobs comfort and commendation in his great
affliction -- In all this did not Job sin with his lips, Job 1.22. with cha.
2.10.
nor charge God foolishly -- Despair of Gods mercy is high treason against his
Majesty, and a flat denial of his Deity. -- Gods glory should be dearer to us
than our lives, souls, or the salvation of them, and the more tender we are of
it, the more will God tender the comfort of our souls, and lives. -- It was the
frequent, and fervent petition of a Godly man in his tentations. -- Lord
maintain honorable thoughts of thy self in me.

2 Caution, that they do not destroy their own souls, either

1 By denying what God has done for them, to wit, the work of grace begun in
their hearts, his love to them, his choice and calling of them (saying, they
have no grace, they are Reprobates, cast-awayes) whereby they bear false
witness

1 Against themselves, which is unnatural.

2 Against the grace of God, and against the God of grace, his work in them,
and goodness to them, which is most unworthy and ungrateful.

2 Or by refusing what God would give to them, scil. grace, mercy, peace, and
joy, wilful refusal whereof, is wilful murder (like cutting of the throat, or
stabbing to the heart) yea self murder, It isblood-guiltinesse, yea guilt of
the blood of souls, yea of their own souls; and should not your precious
immortal souls be dearer to you than all the world? labor to convince them,
that by such a denial, or refusal, they make themselves false witnesses, and
murderers.

3 Caution, Joh. 8.44.
that they do not gratify Satan who is 1 A Liar, and the Father of Lies,
because there is no truth in him. 2 A Murderer, sc. of souls from the
beginning, and will be so to the end. 3 An Accuser of the Brethren (the
children of God) unto God their Father, Job 1.9.
as he was of Job to God, that he was an Hypocrite, or hireling -- Does Job
fear God for naught? and an accuser of God unto them, as if he was a hard
Master, cruel to crush poor souls under his feet, and took pleasure in their
destruction, or at least that God does not with them all the good, or so well
as he might. Thus Satan (in the Serpent) calumniated God to out first Parents,
of untruth, as if the word which he had spoken in threatening death was not
true, Genesis 3.4. -- ye shall not surely dye -- and of envy, as if God had out
of ill will forbid them that Tree; or for fear lest by eating thereof they
should become as wise as himself. -- Press, and persuade poor afflicted souls
to beware they do not gratify Satan.

1 By entertaining parley with him, as Eve did, which was the cause of her
foil, and fall. -- The old Serpent being full of all subtlety, will be too
hard for them. -- It is the first game he desires to play with troubled souls,
to argue the case with them about their spiritual condition, to circumvent and
deceive them with his wiles.

2 By harkening to his tentations, and suggestions, as these and the like.

1 To cast off ordinances, neglect duties in public, and in private (which are
the means of grace, peace, and comfort) to hear, read, pray, meditate, etc. as
if these were needless, or to no purpose, and they should be no better for
them. -- This is Satan's plot to starve poor souls by cutting off provision from
them, or them from it. This persuasion comes not from God that calls you,
but from the Devil who seeks to subvert, and devour you.

2 To harbor Jealousies, and evil surmisings of God, or derogatory,
dishonorable thoughts, such as Satan casts into your mind, as if God was not
merciful, pitiful, faithful etc. -- These and the like suggestions are the
bolts which Satan makes for disconsolate, discontented souls to shoot at God;
or a coat of dis-honour, which Satan shapes, or cuts out for them to few, and
put upon the Lord.

3 To cast away their confidence, and lay hope aside, and give over seeking,
and waiting on God any longer, and to throw themselves into a Gulf of despair.
This is to do the Devil a real kindness, and to give their souls a fatal blow,
for hereby they make themselves a prey to Satan.

4 To make a wrong judgment of themselves, and of their condition, by false
Reasonings (which are Satan's Sophistry) to conclude themselves out of the state
of Grace, out of Christ, out of Heaven, as if they had no grace at all, because
at present they can see none in themselves; or were not the Lords, because they
are so deeply distressed as none of his ever were.

5 To follow Satan's prescripts, or take Physic of him for the cure of
Soul-troubles, which is to lay aside all thoughts, or cares about Soul-affairs;
to go into merry company, and to give themselves to the pleasures of the flesh;
which remedy is far worse than the disease. This is to leap out of the pan
into the fire -- Satan's receipts are rank poison. To hearken to Satan in any of
these suggestions, or persuasions, is to do his lusts, and his works for him;
to carry on his designs, which mainly oppose, and strike at Gods glory, and the
salvation of souls.

4 Caution. That they do not satisfy their disquieted hearts.

1 By taking offense at the Lords dealings with them, or at their present
troubled state to be angry at God, or to be froward and sullen.

2 By giving way to sad perplexed thoughts (sufficient to sink them) which is
to prepare a Chariot for Satan to ride in, triumph over their heads and hearts,
and to tread them both down to the dust.

3 By venting, or justifying the discontents, and distempers of the heart, as
Jonah did his Anger before God, Jonah 4.
that they do well to be angry.

4 By putting away comfort from them, in a froward peevish humor, when it is
tendered to them, as Children throw away their Butter and Bread when they are
pettish, or displeased, lest the Lord deal with them according to their desert,
Psalm. 18.26
and with the froward show himself froward, and fill their souls with Wormwood
and Gall.

Third Direction. In dealing with afflicted souls (or with your own souls in
such afflictions) have special respect to Three Graces, to nourish and cherish
the same in them which are their vitals in such a condition.

The First is, Repentance for their sins, those especially which are the cause
of their troubles, that their sorrow may be sound, and deep enough, and go to
the root, or bottom of their hearts, and of their lusts, that their souls may
lie low in humiliation before God for them, for that is a foundation to build
strong and high consolation upon; those that are not rightly or thoroughly
humbled for their sins, are not fit for, or capable of comfort.

The Second Grace is Faith; labor to cherish and strengthen that in them by
all means; to trust still in God, and his Mercies, and Promises; in Christ, and
his Merits and Mediation; to lay fast hold on them, and to stay themselves by
them, which are strong refuges to fly unto, and sure foundations, impregnable
rocks, to rely and rest their weary souls upon, what evils soever they either

1 Feel; So did David, Psalm. 42.5
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me?
trust thou in God, for I shall yet praise him.

2 Or Fear; So did Job, Though he slay me, Job 13.15 Psalm. 56.3
yet will I trust in him -- And David, What time I am afraid, I will trust in
thee -- Life is kept in poor souls, and their heads above water, that they
shall neither faint nor sink, though the sorrows of death compass them about,
so long as the actings of faith are maintained, and encouraged in them, for
Faith is their life -- The just shall live by his faith -- they cannot be
overcome of any evils, Romans 1.17
desertions, tentations, corruptions, or of the evil one Satan, so long as they
believe; for, this is the victory that overcomes them all, 1 Ioh. 5.4
even their faith. When faith fails, souls faint and dye away; when Peter began
to doubt, he began to sink.

The Third Grace is Patience; Persuade them to the constant, Iam. 1.4
and continual exercise of Patience (that it may have her perfect work) in
bearing his hand, submitting to his will, in waiting his leisure, for
refreshings from Gods presence, for bringing their souls out of troubles, for
an answer of peace, which will be life to their souls -- So long as Patience is
kept in work, Satan is kept out, and they keep their souls in their own
possession. -- Tell them, that by giving way to impatience they give place to
the Devil, who thereby gets within them, and gets great advantage against them;
that heightens and greatens any affliction, and makes it grievous to be born --
Let me add, labor to cherish good desires in them, that the smoking Flax (or
Wick) may b^ lighted, and made to ^urn, and shine, and grow up to a flame --
When you see their poverty of spirit, that they see their Soulwants, and
breathe after supplies, tell them from Jesus Christ, Matthew. 5.3
that upon this account they are blessed, and theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Fourth Direction. Take a right course for healing their distempers, and
troubles of Soul.

1 By searching the Sore to the bottom, to find out the core, and the cause
thereof. -- Till Physicians discover the cause of a Disease, they cannot apply
fit and proper Medicines for the Cure; and by drawing the troubles of their
heart to a head -- as their sorrow for sin in general, to grieve for some one
sin in special, to let out the foul blood, or corruption of the Soul; -- as a
Surgeon seeks to draw a tumor or swelling in the body to a head, that the
bad matter may issue out.

2 By turning the stream of their passions into another Chanel, as Physicians
turn the course of their Patients blood, when they bleed much at the Nose, by
letting them blood in the arm -- So labor you to turn their fear of Gods
wrath, and vengeance, of Hell and Damnation, into the chanel of holy fear of
God, and his goodness, of offending God, or sinning against him -- and their
grief for paenal evils, inward or outward, into the chanel of godly sorrow for
sin.

The fifth and last direction is this, bear with their infirmities, as
ignorance, frowardness; Become all things to them for their refreshment, and
recovery, like Paul, 1 Cor. 9.20.
who to the weak became as weak, that he might gain the weak -- stoop low in
condescension to the lowest step of their dullness, and dejection, show love to
them with pity, and patience to bear all, and hope all, -- speak to them as
sympathizing with them, as having a fellow-feeling of their troubles, and
sorrows, -- make it out to them, that your words come more from your bowels,
than from your brains.

The sixth and last particular case is selfcommendation. Self-commendation.


Its lawful for Gods people in some cases to commend themselves; or to declare
what God has done for them, and by them; to speak of their graces, God has
bestowed on them, of their labors, or works which God has wrought by them,
yea also of their sufferings for God.

This has been the practice of the most holy humble servants of God, both in
the old and new Testament, some of which have spent) whole (or the greatest
part of) chapters upon that subject.

As that good governor Nehemiah did the thirteenth chapter of his book, as a
Naerrative of the good deeds he had done for the house of his God, and for the
offices thereof (which he entreats the Lord to remember, verse. 14.) against
the profanation of the Sabbath, and the marriages with strange wives; and the
fifth chapter in relating his pity and bounty to the poor Jews, in freeing
them from their oppressions, verse. 1. to 14. and from their charge of
provision, which they were bound to bring in to their governor, verse. 14, 15.
he forbore his own allowance, yet kept hospitality, and he prays in the
close of the chapter; Think upon me my God for good, according to all that I
have done for this people.

Job makes protestation of his innocence and integrity, not only here and
there, often in his book, but the 29. and 31. chapters contain his continued
vindication thereof, or a catalogue of his good works.

Paul spends many chapters in declaring what he had received from God, and
what he did and suffered for God and his people, as Act. 20. Phil. 3.1 These.
2.2 Cor. 11. and 12. chapters.

Quest. In what cases is self-commendation allowed to Gods people?

Ans. I shall name eleven.

First case is, of afflictions from God, wherein they have professed their
faith in God, First Case.
their patience, obedience, sincerity, constancy, notwithstanding the same; so
did Job when he took his flesh in his teeth, and put his life in his hand --
Though God slay me (says he) yet will I trust in him -- I will maintain mine
own ways before him -- and my foot has held his steps, Job 13.14, 15. Chap.
23.10.11, 12.
his way have, I kept and not declined, neither have I gone back from the
commandment of his lips, no not when God laid a load of sorrows upon him. And
the Church in Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19, etc. All this evil is come upon us (from the
Lord) yet have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt falsely in thy Covenant -- our
heart is not turned back, etc. And Jeremy when afflicted and humbled under the
hand of God, As for me, Jer. 17.1^.
I have not hasted from being a pastor to follow thee, neither have I desired
the woeful day, thou know, Verse. 17.
that which came out of my lips was right before thee -- be not a terror unto
me, thou art ray hope in the day of evil.

The second Case is, Second Case
Injuries from men in word or deed.

1 In word, by scoffs or reproaches, 2 Samuel 6.2^
as David when Michal mocked him for dancing before the Ark, he justified his
Act as done before the Lord, out of zeal for his glory, joy in him, and
thankfullness to him, Verse. 21.
and if this make me vile, I will yet be more vile than thus.

-- Or by slanders and false Accusations of our good conversation, In this case
it may be needful to make just Apologies for defense of our innocence, and
vindication of our good names, as Paul did before the people of Jerusalem, Act.
22.1, 2, etc. Act. 21.27, 28.
when the Jews of Asia cried out against him that he taught all men every
where against the people, and the law, and the temple; And when he was brought
before the Council in Act. 23.1. men and Brethren, says he, I have lived in
all good conscience before God until this day. When, Tertullus the Orator
accused him before Felix the governor -- we have found this man a pestilent
fellow, and a mover of sedition, Act. 24.5, 6.
among all the Jews, etc. what a large Apology did Paul then make for his
faith, Verse. 10. to 22.
life, doctrine and conscience, and afterward before King Agrippa in the 26 of
the Acts?

Thus we may and ought to plead our cause, and defend our innocence, to wit,
the grace of God we have received, and the work of God which we have done,
when we are called before Rulers, and Governors for Christ's sake; Mic. 10.18,
19, 20.
when we are accused to them or examined by them of our faith, holiness, or
conversation.

Jacob made an Apology for his faithfullness in Labans service, Genesis 31.36. to
42. when Laban compelled him to commend himself, and thereby to defend himself;
as Job did frequently when his friends charged him wrongfully. David did the
like to clear his slandered innocence, and Paul to vindicate his person, office
and doctrine from the aspersions and calumniations of his emulous Adversaries
the false Apostles, whereby they labored to cast an odium upon him, which
forced him into a commendation of himself, as in the 11. and 12. chapters of
the second Epistle to the Corinthians.

Yea Christ himself did commend himself to defend himself against the Jews, --
which of you convinces me of sin? (says he) Joh. 8.46, 48. and when they
said to him -- say we not well that thou art a Samaritan, Verse. 49.
and have a Devil? Jesus answered, I have not a Devil, but I honor my Father,
and ye do dishonor me.

3 In case of Injuries from men in deed, we may protest our innocence to prove
we suffer wrongfully, as Daniel did his, before King Darius, when he was cast
into the Lions den, for calling upon his God. My God has sent his Angel, and
has shut the Lions mouths, that they have not hurt me, Dan. 6.22.
for as much as before him innocence was found in me; and also before thee O
King have I done no hurt. When the Jews took up stones to stone Christ, he
pleaded his innocence, Joh. 10.31, 32.
many good works have I showed you from my Father, for which of those works do
you stone me? and -- now ye seek to kill me, a man that has told the truth,
Joh. 8.40.
which I have heard of God.

The third Case, Third Case.
wherein it is lawful to commend our selves, is this, To show forth the
infinite riches of Gods free grace and mercy to such vile unworthy Creatures as
we are; in giving us grace to be what we are; and inabling us by grace to do
what we do, to encourage weak believers unto dependence on God for grace and
mercy, and against despondency, notwithstanding all their infirmities and
unworthiness. Upon this account Paul commended himself before the Corinthians
and Timothy, and all that read his Epistles to them, that he might commend the
great love and kindness of God to him, before them all; and to propound himself
as an example of Gods free and rich mercy to them all. I persecuted, says he
to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10.
the Church of God, -- but by the grace of God I am that I am, and I labored
more abundantly than they all, that is, the rest of the Apostles; and to
Timothy he says -- I was before a Persecuter, a Blasphemer, 1 Timothy 1.1^.
and injurious -- yea the chief of sinners, Verse, 15, 16
but I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long
suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting. Paul commends himself for his grace, and labor through grace; to
commend God for his mercy and grace to poor sinners, that none may despair of
either (but apprehend a possibility and hope thereof) seeing he obtained both,
who was so unworthy of it.

Fourth Case is, Fourth Case.
To give others occasion, and provocation;

1 To pray for us, as the Apostle did the Hebrews, Heb. 13.18
Pray for us, for we trust we have a good Conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly; Paul speaks of his good Conscience, and honest living to them,
to bespeak their prayers to God for him.

2 To praise God for us, and glorify God on our behalf; Paul craved the
Corinthians not only prayers but praises, that thanks may be given to God by
many on the behalf of him and Timothy; 2 Cor. 1.11, 12
Why so? For our rejoicing is this, the restimony of our Conscience, that in
all simplicity, and godly sincerity, and by the grace of God we have had our
conversation in the World, and more abundantly to you wards. The conversion of
sinners, Gal. 1.24 Ephesians. 1.15, 16
and the graees of the Saints, are just occasion of great thanksgiving to God.

3 To glory on our behalf before others, especially those that seek to traduce
and slander us. 2 Cor. 5.11, 12
We are made manifest in your Consciences, says Paul to the Corinthians, that
is, we have attested and manifested our sincerity to you, not to get praise
from you, Verse. 12.
but to give you an occasion to glory on our behalf, that you may have somewhat
to answer the false Apostles (the enemies of our credit and comfort) which
glory in the face, and not in heart; 2 These. 1.4
Paul gloried in the Thessalouians, in the Churches of God, for their faith and
patience in all their tribulations.

Fifth case is, Fifth Case.
when others require an account of our faith, holiness, obedience, or
experience, as Christ asked the Disciples, Mar. 16.19 Ioh. 21.15
Whom say ye that I am? -- and Peter, Simon, thou Son of Jonas, love thou
me? or when any ask us a reason of the hope that is in us, either for their
satisfaction, to know what manner of persons we are, whether the root of the
matter be in us, or what progress we have made in Christianity; or for their
instruction, to learn something from us, concerning Gods dealings with us; 1
Pet. 3.15
in this case we should be ready always to give an answer to every man; be free
and open to them.

Sixth Case. Sixth Case.
When we would propound our selves unto others as examples of faith, patience,
godliness, or the like, to draw others to follow our steps. To this end we
should invite them to us, and tell them what God has done for our souls, as
the Psalmist did, Psalm. 66.16. Paul commended himself to the Philippians as a
pattern for their imitation, or copy to write after. Phil. 3.17
Brethren (says he) be followers together of me, etc. Wherein? He declares
his steps throughout the Chapter, in worshipping God in the Spirit, Verse 3.
Verse. ^.
and rejoicing in Christ Jesus, in counting all things dung for Christ, in
being found in Christ, having on his righteousness, Verse. 9, 10 Verse. 12, 13,
14, 20
and being made conformable to him, in forgetting what is behind, and pressing
toward the mark; in having his conversation in heaven.

Christ's Ministers do often preach their own Graces, Lives, Experiences, that
the hearts and lives of their Hearers may be fashioned and ordered accordingly.

Seventh Case. Seventh Case.
When our enemies accuse us falsely, and our friends, who can and ought to
vindicate us, refuse, or neglect to do it, then we may commend our selves, and
bear witness to our selves, 2 Cor. 12.11
as Paul says, he was compelled to do, because the Corinthians would not do
it for him, when the false Apostles did slanderously asperse him, I am (says
he) become a fool in glorying, ye have compelled, or necessitated me (...):
for I ought to have been commended of you. It was your duty to have attested my
uprightness, and unblameableness, and to have maintained the honor of my
Ministry, and to have contested for me with my undermining false accusing
Opposers; but ye would not commend me, therefore am I forced to commend my
self, and if I be a fool in glorying, ye have made, yea constrained me to be
so.

Eighth Case. Eighth Case,
To show, and approve our integrity, and reality, that we are Israelites
indeed, sound at bottom, not almost, but altogether Christians; before those to
whom we relate, or with whom we have to do; to make our selves manifest in
their Consciences, as Paul did to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5.11
to stand right in their opinion, and make it appear that we seek not theirs,
but them, 2 Cor. 12.14. 1 These. 3.4, 5, 6
not their praise, nor their Temporal good, but their Spiritual profit, that
they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10.33. that we may appeal to God and them as
witnesses thereof, as Paul did to the Thessalonians, Ye are witnesses, and God
also, Vors. 10.11.
how holily, justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that
believe -- Thus we may commend our selves.

1 To uphold the credit of our Callings, as Paul did of his Ministry.

2 To further the success of our labors, as Paul did in his Epistles to the
Churches, to add weight to his Doctrine.

3 To promote the efficacy of the Counsel, or charge we give to others, and
make it penetrate, as Paul related to Timothy -- That he served God from his
forefathers with a pure conscience, and had remembrance of him in his prayers
night and day; To what end? 2 Timothy 1.8
To persuade him to hearken to his advice, which was to stir up the gift of
God which is in him, 2 Timothy 1.6
by the putting on of Paul's hands, i. e. execute the office to which he was set
apart, by imposition of hands.

4 To manifest our love to others, by unbosoming our selves, or opening our
hearts, or the cabinet of our souls to them, to let them look in and see the
treasures of graces, comforts, and experiences; the Jewels God has laid up in
them, 2 King. 20.13
as Hezekiah showed the Ambassadors of the King of Babylon the house of his
precious things, to testify his respect to them; and as men show their best
Rooms, and Furniture, Jewels, and Ornaments to them they love best.

Also to gain their love to us, to insinuate into their bosoms, and be a means
of doing them more good; to take prejudice off their spirits against us, and
jealousies of us, and to obtain kindness from them. Receive us, says Paul to
the Corinthians; 2 Cor. 7.2
Why so? for we have wronged no man, defrauded no man.

Let me add, we may commend our selves in some things, to approve our sincer^y
in other things; as David praised his unblamableness -- I kept my self from
mine iniquity (that is, the Sin to which he was most subject) to approve his
uprightness, Psalm. 18.23
I was upright before God, and he commended his wisdom which he had gotten by
Gods Law, wherein he excelled his e^emies, his Teachers, yea the Ancients, Psalm.
119.98, 100 Verse. 97
to show the sincerity of his love to Gods Law; Oh, how love I thy Law, it is
my meditation all the day. Nehemiah pleaded his mild and merciful deportment as
Governor, that he did not exact, nor oppress the Jews, as their former
Governors had done, to approve his fear of God -- but so did not I, Nehem. 5.15
because of the fear of God.

Ninth Case. Ninth Case.
When the Cause, Truth, Ways, and Church of Christ, and Name of God are like to
suffer by us, if we be silent, and do not vindicate our selves in our
sufferings from men. It is the grand design of Satan and his Agents, by
Reproaches, Lies, and Slanders, to disparage Gods Servants (those especially
who are most eminent in place or parts) thereby to bring Gods Truth they
defend, and Gods ways they walk in, into disgrace, and through their sides to
wound the same, to darken those in their reputation, who shine in their Graces,
good Works, and conversation, and by aspersing their Persons, to weaken their
hands, and discourage their hearts, in the work or service God has called them
to do. This made Paul not only to maintain, but to magnify his Office, Romans
11.13
or Ministry, and to speak both of it, and of himself at the highest rate, when
he saw the false Apoples did vilify both his Person and his Office, and by
undervaluing the same, sought to trample upon the truth and glory of Christ.

Tenth Case. Tenth Case.
When we leave the place or people where we lived, or over whom we were set,
or give over the Office we did bear; it may be seasonable to give an account of
our diligent and faithful discharge thereof, and of our unblamable carriage
therein. When Samuel surrendered his Power or Government over Israel into the
hands of Saul, their new elected King, he appeals to them as Witnesses, in the
presence of God, and his Anointed, King Saul, how faithfully and uprightly he
had performed the duty of his place, and provoked them to challenge him for any
defaults in his administration thereof; Behold, here am I, 1 Samuel 12.
(says he) witness against me before the Lord, etc. Whose Ox or Ass have I
taken? whom have I oppressed or defrauded? etc. Verse. 4.
And they said, thou have not oppressed nor defrauded us, neither have thou
taken ought of any man's hand. This he said, not to celebrate his own praises,
but to clear his innocence before them, and to stop their mouths for future,
and to set their new King a Pattern. When Paul took his leave of the Elders of
Ephesus, Acts 20.25
telling them, that they should see his face no more, he makes a large
commendation of his life and labors, of his doctrine and fidelity, piety, and
patience, etc. among them, calling them to record, that he was pure from the
blood of all men; and had declared to them all the Counsel of God -- That he
had coveted no man's silver or gold, Act. 20.17. to 36
etc. Hereby he left a sweet savor behind him.

Eleventh Case is, Eleventh Case
To convince others of their Sins, either

1 Against God, by declaring to them that they see no such evil in us, but the
contrary Graces and Practices, that we dare not do or say as they do for a
world, to draw them to repentance.

2 Or against our selves, by rejecting or abusing us, appealing to their
Consciences, what iniquity they have found in us, to deserve the same at their
hands.

Some conceive this was one end of Samuels forementioned protestation of his
innocence, and fidelity, to tax and convince the people of their gross
ingratitude, in casting off his Government that was so just, and him as
unworthy to continue in his Office, who had been so faithful.

Obj. Prove. 27.2
Is not this condemned by Scripture? Let another man praise thee, and not thine
own mouth, 2 Cor. 10.18
a stranger, and not thine own lips. And not he that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends?

Is not this the practice of the wicked, to commend themselves? Simon the
Sorcerer and seducer gave out that himself was (...), Act. 8.9.
some great one -- of Hypocrites who would seem Righteous before men, as the
Pharisee who said, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, Luke 18.11.
or even as this Publican. A boast of perfection is the badge and brand of a
proud Pharisee.

And the false Apostles, who were full of proud brags, and vaunted of things
they neither had nor did.

Do not proud vainglorious persons boast, and blow the trumpet of their own
fame, by commending the good qualities they take to be in themselves; and the
good works they do to others? Prove. 20.6.
most men will proclaim every one his own goodness, says Solomon; But a
faithful man who can find? Seeing then the Scriptures prohibit it, and the
wicked practice it, how then can it be either credit or comfort for Gods
people to commend themselves?

Ans. 1 Such Self-commendation as this, which proceeds from pride, vain glory,
and Hypocrisy, yea or from a distrust of providence, as if God would not take
care of our good names, to preserve, and clear them, is vain and sinful, and
for the most part the sound of an empty Vessel; the stinking breath that comes
out of a man's mouth; which is very loathsome to holy humble souls. Laus propria
sordet. -- Proud boasting is mere foolishness, which Paul intimates in calling
himself fool so often in 2 Cor. 11. and 12, chap. for glorying, to wit, -- 1 That
he might appear to the Corinthians to be so. 2 That he should be really a
fool in himself, if the principle of his boasting was pride of heart, and the
end of it his own praise. This is childishness, or to do like Children, that
tell every one where they are fine. -- This is for a man to make his spirit a
bladder, and then to blow it up, or fill it with his own breath; or a
weathercock, or Windmill, and then to turn it about with his own wind. --
This is to do others a treble wrong.

1 To take another office out of their hands; or to take that to our selves,
which is another right to give us, that is to praise us. Let another man
praise thee (says the wise man) not thy own mouth.

2 To give others a bad example; for such a practice will easily pass into an
example.

3 To weary them; for it is tiresome, and tedious to an ingenuous spirit to
hear another brag, and boast of himself. -- For us by commending our selves to
seek our own praise, is as much as to suck our own breasts, which is a strange
thing. -- Let us take heed to our spirits, for desire of praise is a sin to
which we are all subject, and is most suitable to corrupt nature; and it is
one of those corruptions that is last conquered in us. -- We have diverse
ways and wiles to get praise. -- As to praise our selves if no body else will;
and to commend others mightily for such things as we had a hand in; to speak
of what we have said or done, to give others occasion to commend us for the
same. This is (as one says) to open a back door to take praise into our
selves, When a soul is lifted up in pride, the mouth is opened wide in praise
of it self.

Answ. 2 The abuse of a thing does not debar, or decry the lawful use of it,
which God has permitted, and the Saints have practiced. As Self-commendation,
Idem fit and a pio, and ab impio, says Peter Martyr. In 1 Samuel 12.
-- Both the godly, and the wicked commend themselves, but not with the same
mind, or intent, which God the searcher of all hearts does discern, and will
discover. -- There is as great a difference between them, as between right and
wrong, good and evil. -- This is a tender point, and must be very warily
handled, and practiced. -- Here I shall show what Self-commendation is lawful,
in four respects, to wit, of the matter, measure, manner, and end thereof.

1 For the matter; when the things for which we commend our selves are 1 Good
in themselves. 2 Really ours.


1 Good in themselves and praise worthy; for if they be evil, we glory in
our shame, as they do that boast of their drinking, whoring, cheating! -- And
not for our temporalls, as Riches, Honors, Strength, Wit, or Learning. -- In
boasting of such things a man is little better than sounding brass, or a
tinkling Cymbal. -- A Heathen could say, Seneca.
a man should not be commended for such things as may be taken from him,
which all temporals may; But Spiritualls, as the Righteousness of Christ, the
Grace, Love, and Favor of God, the work and service of God, or doing, and
suffering for God. These are a man's own for ever. -- Thus says the Lord, Let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, Jor. 9.23.
nor the mighty man in his might, nor the rich man in his riches; but let him
that glories glory in this, that he understands, and knows me that I am
the Lord; that is, in the sound and saving knowledge of God. Paul might have
gloried in his external privileges which were many, and great, ( Phil. 3.4, 5,
6. 2 Cor. 11.21, 22, 23.) in which he was inferior to none, but he waves
them all as not worth naming, in comparison of Christ, and his grace and
fellowship with him. -- Paul would glory only in things pertaining to God, Romans
15.17.
not to the World, as in his office, and the diligent discharge, and good
success thereof; in his uprightness, faithfulness, unblameableness, good
conscience, for virtue is the proper subject of praise, Phil. 4.8. -- and in
his sufferings for Christ. -- I take pleasure in infirmities, reproaches,
persecutions, for Christ's sake; of which Paul makes large Catalogues, 2 Cor.
11.23. to 28. 1 Cor. 4.9. to 14. 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 8, 9.10. -- which sufferings of
Paul were spiritual things in the cause and end of them; and in his manner of
bearing them; though temporal in the matter of them.

2 When for the matter, we speak only of things that are really ours, or what
we have in truth, and do indeed; when for the truth of what we speak, in the
justification, or commendation of our selves, we can appeal to the Testimony
of Gods Spirit, and our own consciences, as Paul did to the Romans, 9. cap. 1,
2, 3. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing me
witness in the Holy Ghost -- and of men also, as Paul did to the
Thessalonians, -- ye are witnesses, and God also, 1 These. 2.10, 11.
how holily, justly, and unblameably we have behaved our selves. -- Though I
would desire to glory, 2 Cor. 12.6.
I shall not be a fool (says Paul) for I will say the truth -- the false
Apostles who gloried in the face, commended themselves for vizzards, shows,
shaddows, appearances; for what they seemed to be or do, but without truth, or
reality. -- We see it in experience, that great boasters are many times gross
liars.

2 For the Measure, when it is our care, and fear not to overreach herein, but
to speak rather under than over, of any good we have or do. 2 Cor. 10.13.
The Apostles would not stretch themselves (or the praise of their abilities,
labors, and successes) beyond their due bounds, that is, Ver. 14, 15, 16.
They would not boast of more than God had given to them, or done by them, no
more than they would stretch themselves beyond the line of those places to
which God sent them; nor boast of things beyond their line, and measure, nor
arrogate to themselves the praise of other men's labors, but contain, and
content themselves within their own compass. -- Paul durst not speak of any
thing God had not wrought by him in his Apostolic function. Romans 15.18.


3 For the manner, in a Threefold respect, scil. of our selves, of God, of
others.

1 In respect of our selves, when we commend our selves forcedly, humbly, and
modestly.

1 Forcedly, not forwardly; when we are not free, and forward of our selves to
commend our selves, but we are necessitated, or strongly moved thereunto, as
Paul was, I am a fool in glorying, 2 Cor. 12.11
ye have compelled me; and in Chap. 11.23. Are they Ministers of Christ? I
speak as a fool, I am more, q. d. my words would savor of folly, and vain
glory, or carry a show thereof, if spoken spontaneously of my own accord, and I
was not necessitated thereunto, as I am for the defense of my Office, and
Doctrine, for the credit of the Gospel, and the glory of God, because the
Corinthians think more highly of the false Apostles, and more meanly of me than
was meet -- It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory (says Paul) that is,
^ Cor. 12.1
in, and of my self voluntarily -- There is great propensity in proud persons
to praise themselves, it is their proper dialect, and delight; it is the air
they choose to breathe in they seek occasion of Self-commendation, being full of
themselves they seek a vent this way, they travel with ambition of their
spirits as a Woman with child, longing to be delivered by Self-commendation.

2 Humbly, out of sense of our own infirmities, the evils that are in us, and
of our vileness, and unworthiness, notwithstanding all the good we have or do;
and out of fear, lest others should think better of us than we are, Cor. 12.6
or deserve; -- This was Paul's fear, Lest any man should think of me above that
which he sees me to be, or hears of me -- Gods holy humble Servants take
notice of the evils as well as of the good that is in themselves, of their
sins, as well as of their virtues, they can say, Our transgressions are with
us, Isa. 59.12
and as for our iniquities we know them; and they are as free, and forward (as
they have occasion) to confess their sins before God, and Man, and take shame
to themselves, and to bewail their wants and failings, as to show forth their
virtues; yea they have usually conjoined Selfvilification with
Self-commendation, that pride of heart might not be either the Mother, or the
Daughter of their own praises, that is, that commending of themselves might not
proceed from inward pride, nor their spirits be puffed up with outward praises
of themselves, or from others. -- When they have commended themselves for their
Graces, or labors, they have manifested a base esteem of themselves for their
infirmities. -- As Job, when he had pleaded his integrity before God, and
righteousness before man, as strenuously as he could, he says, Behold I am
vile, Job 40.4
what shall I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. When God lift up
Job, by giving him a sight of himself -- Now mine eye sees thee, Job 42, 5
Job cast down himself in sense of his own vileness -- Wherefore I abhor my
self, Verse. 6
and repent in dust and ashes. -- Paul discommends himself for his former
sinfulness, and present unworthiness, in 1 Cor. 15.8, 9. I am the least of the
Apostles, not meet to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of
God, before he commends himself for his Grace and labors, in verse. 10. By the
grace of God I am that I am -- I labored more abundantly than they all, etc.
Though he magnified his Office, yet he vilified himself, as unworthy to bear
it, Unto me, who am less than the least of all Saints is this grace given,
Ephesians. 3.8
that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ --
Paul calls himself the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14, 15
when he speaks of the superabundant grace of God to him at his conversion, and
in him afterward, as faith and love; and of Christ's making him a pattern of
his mercy, and patience to future believers -- when he said, Verse. 16.
I am in nothing behind the very chiefest Apostles, he adds, Though I be
nothing -- when he declares his delight in the Law of God after the inner man,
in Romans 7.22. and his serving it with the mind, verse. 25. he exclaims himself
miserable from the sense of sin, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me, etc. -- It is good to mingle our commendations with an allay, or addition
of something to testify the sense of our infirmities, and to keep our spirits
low and humble.

3 Modestly, when we speak of our Graces and performances soberly, not in a
boasting way, Dan. 4.30
or vauntingly, as proud Nebuchadnezzar did of his great Babylon which he had
built. Dan. 4.30
-- Mark the modesty of the Saints expressions in their Self-commendations,
they have used to extenuate their praises, and to aggravate their sins, and
unworthiness -- as Job, Job 12.3
when he says to his friends, I am not inferior to you, or as it is in the
Hebr. I do not fall before you, to wit, in wisdom, holiness, integrity, when he
might have really asserted himself superior to them herein. -- How modest, and
sparing was Paul in speaking of matters that concerned his own praise? and how
often does he call himself a fool for his glorying, though he was justly moved,
yea provoked and compelled thereto? -- I suppose, 2 Cor. 11.5
(says he) I was not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles, q. d. I wanted
not a hair breadth of their stature, when indeed he was above, or before them,
both in labors, and in sufferings, 2 Cor. 11.24. to 29. so, I think, says he,
to the Corinthians, I have the Spirit of God; he might have said, I know it, I
am assured of it; but he speaks thus modestly, but thinking to confute the
confidence of their vainglorious boasting Teachers, as if they certainly had
the Spirit of God, yet had it not; and the Corinthians too good conceit of
them, and their slighting of Paul, Heb. 13.18
as if he had not the Spirit, or boasted of it -- Pray for us, says Paul to
the Hebrews, for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, desiring
to live honestly. Paul might truly have spoken often of himself after a higher
rate than he did.

2 The manner of Self-commendation in respect of God, when we speak of the good
we have, or do, thankfully.

1 With a free acknowledgement of God as the sole Author of all, that
whatsoever we have, we have received it from the Lord; 1 Cor. 4.7
that it is his grace that makes us to be what we are, that makes us to differ
from others; Phil. 4.13
and that whatsoever we do it is in his strength that it is God who works in
us both to will, and to do of his own good pleasure, Isa. 26.12
and that works all our works for us. -- Let us ever speak of our havings, or
doings, not as if they were originally our own, but the free gifts of God
bestowed on us, and the works done through Gods assistance of us.

2 When we declare the same out of a sense of Gods goodness to us herein, with
high and honorable thoughts of God, and fear of his Name, and a heart inflamed
in love to God, and joy in God.

3 The manner of Self-commendation in respect of others; when we commend our
selves charitably, and tenderly, not to despise, or disgrace, or discourage
others who are weak, for whom God has not done so much as for us, not to
insult over them. -- The proud Pharisee, when he praised himself, he
contemned the poor Publican, whom God approved, and justified, but condemned
the Pharisee.

4 For the end. Self-commendation is lawful, when our aim therein is

1 In respect of us, to do our selves Justice, and right, and to preserve our
good Names, not to get our selves praise from men, nor to lift up our selves in
the opinion of the world. -- Hence Self commendation should proceed not from
love of the praise of men, nor from desire of vain glory, but out of love of
virtue, and desire of doing good to others thereby, and it should be
accompanied with Self-abnegation, or a renouncing of all Self-conceit,
Self-sufficiency, Self seeking, or Self worthiness; to prick the bladder of
pride in us. Luke 17.10
-- When we have done all we can, we should say (as Christ teaches us) we are
but unprofitable servants; and as Paul did, -- yet not I, 1 Cor. 15.10
but the grace of God that is with me -- When we commend our selves before men,
we should not receive praise from men (not suffer our spirits to be tickled, or
puffed up therewith) for that is a prejudice to faith. Joh. 5.44
-- How can ye believe, says Christ, which receive honor one of another, and
seek not the honor that comes from God only? much less should we seek it; 1
These. 2, 6
Paul sets us a good example therein -- Nor of men sought we glory, neither of
you, nor yet of others.

2 In respect of God, when whatever we speak of our selves that is good, we do
it for the glory of God, we commend our selves principally for this end, that
God may be glorified in us, and by us, and for us, and we give God the praise
of all our praises, and the glory of all the commendations men give us for our
gifts, or for our works; -- and if God be glorified, and his Name exalted, we
can be content to be abased, and to have our Names and Honors laid in the
dust, and to pass through dishonor as well as honor, and bad report as good,
for Christ's sake, -- This my joy is fulfilled, Joh. 3.29, 30
says John the Baptist -- He must increase, but I must decrease. Joh. 3.29, 30
-- That self-commendationis lawful, 1 Cor. 1.31
which is a gloriation in the Lord, According as it is written, let him that
glories glory in the Lord; that is,

1 In Jesus Christ in the first place, that he is made unto us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. and that
we are in Christ; and in God as reconciled to us through Christ.

2 In the next place, we may glory in the graces which Christ has conveyed
into us, and in the works Christ has strengthened us to do, and in glorying in
these, we glory in the Lord, when we speak of our graces and good works.

1 As what we have received from the Lord, as the first efficient thereof, or
as our Heavenly Masters goods.

2 As what we have used or done for God, his glory, as the last end, or as our
Masters advantage. -- This was Paul's care and aim not to glory in himself; 2
Cor. 12.5.
of his natural, moral, ministerial self, no nor of his spiritual, or
sanctified self, that is, he would not glory in these, as either efficiently,
or finally his own; as if he had them from himself, or used them for himself
only; nor of himself upon that account, for them. -- But he gloried in the
Lord, as the only Author, and Doner of them, and that he might have the whole
praise, honor, and glory of them all. -- We may glory in Christ as the
Bridegroom of our souls; and in our graces and good works, as in the Jewels and
ornaments Christ bestows on his Spouse; -- we should glory in Christ's
Righteousness as our title to Heaven, and in our graces, and the exercise of
them, as our evidences, that Christ and his Righteousness is ours, and that
we have thereby a good and sure title to life eternal.

3 In respect of others, when in commending our selves we aim at others good by
way of example, experience, conviction, encouragement, or comfort; -- when the
commendation of our selves is thus ordered for matter, measure, manner and end,
then our own mouths and lips may warrantably prais^eus, though another man do
not, or will not. And those that thus commend themselves are approved of the
Lord.

Object. 2 Does not Job say, Job 9.20.
If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me; If I say I am perfect,
it shall also prove me perverse?

Ans. Yet God restified of Job, that he was perfect, Job 1.8. and 2.3. might
not Job say the same of himself? and Job justified himself frequently in his
book, and continuedly in some Chapters, why does he condemn himself for it now?

Ans. We must find out an expedient (sense) to reconcile these seeming
Repugnancies, which is this.

1 If I justify my self (says Job) that is, before God; If I should plead
justification by my works, in the Court of Gods justice, then my own mouth
would condemn me, for the justification of my self (upon the account of my own
righteousness) would be an accusation against me, and bring just
condemnation upon me, Job 9.2, 3.
For how should man be just with God; If he will contend with him? that is,
If God will draw up a charge against him, or call man to an account, he cannot
answer to one thing of a thousand. -- It was David's petition to God, Psa 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. -- It was not permitted to an Abraham, though the friend
of God, Romans 4.2.
to be justified by works, Romans 4.2. -- Job in these words (as the best
Epositors conceive) holds forth that famous fundamental Truth of the Gospel, to
wit, free justification before God, not by the works of the Law, Phil 3.7, 8, 9.
Romans 3.20. -- Paul accounted all his graces and good works but dung, and
dross in the case of justification, or in comparison of the Righteousness of
Christ, by which alone we are justified in the sight of God.

2 If I say I am perfect, that is, in my self, If I should plead absolute
perfection, or boast that I have no sin, it shall also prove me perverse, (...)
the word signifies to walk in crooked ways, or to wander from the true way,
or way of truth; This will prove me unperfect, wicked, a vagrant, or wanderer
from Gods ways. If I say I am perfect, that is, wholly free from sin, I shall
sin greatly, and discover much imperfection, pride, vainglory, Hypocrisy, and
folly in saying so; yea I should lie, for I have confessed my sins, Job 7.20,
21. I have sinned -- and why do thou not pardon my transgression? -- who can
say, I have made my heart clean I am pure from my sin? says the wise man. He
challenges all the world for it, Pro. 20.9. If thy people sin against thee, for
there is no man that sins not, 1 King. 8.46. There is not a just man upon
Earth that does good, and sins not, says the Preacher, Eccles. 7.20. -- If
we say we have no sin (says the Apostle John) we deceive our selves, 1 John
1.8, 9.
and the Truth is not in us. If we confess our sins, he is faithful and
just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. All
of us offend, James 3.2. in many things and many of us in all things. All we
have here is but in part, we know in part, and we prophecy in part, but when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done away, 1
Cor. 13.9, 10. -- which of the real Saints ever said they have not sin, Prove.
30.12.
but only such persons whom God has given up to strong delusions, if not to a
Reprobate sense? -- The concurrent constant experience of all true Saints
witness against this fancy, dream, or vain-conceit of absolute perfection in
this life, though Catharists, Papists, and spiritual Antichristians hold the
same.

But Job did often, and might justly

1 Justify himself before men.

2 Say he was perfect, that is, upright before God.

1 Justify himself before men, or plead his own Righteousness in the Court of
conversation, or at the bar of men's consciences, that he had wronged no man,
and to convince them of the wrong done him, as he did before his friends, who
accused him unjustly of Hypocrisy, and iniquity, because of his afflictions,
and miseries. -- Jobs Justification of himself was against the false
accusations of his friends. -- Yea Job was confident that God upon the hearing
of the Debate between him and his friends, would pass sentence for him, and
acquit him upon this point, that Job was not an Hypocrite, or wicked, because
the hands of God did lie heavy upon him. -- Behold now, Job 13.18.
says he, I have ordered my cause, that is, the controversy between my
friends and me, and I know that I shall be justified, even by the Lord, as
Judge in this business. -- And God in his decision thereof gave Job the
better, for he said to his friends, Job 42.7, 8.
-- my wrath is kindled against you, in that you have not spoken of me the
thing that is right, as my Servant Job has.

2 Job did and might say, He was perfect, that is, upright, before God; for in
Scripture sense, and in Gods account, a man's uprightness is his perfectness in
this life. Job 1.8. and 2.3.
-- Have thou considered my Servant Job (says God to Satan) a perfect, and
upright man, Why perfect? Because upright, the latter is added to explain the
former -- and both of them by that which follows, -- One that fears God, and
escheweth evil, that is, who desires and indeavoureth so to do, though he has
his infirmities, and failings, yet God crowned him, and chronicled him for
sincerity and for patience. -- Job did plead 1 The Righteousness of Christ
alone before God, and his faith in him for his justification and salvation. --
This he implies -- when he says, I know that my Redeemer lives, etc. chap.
19.25. This Job laid as the foundation of all. 2 His Integrity before God at
the Throneof Grace, and in the Court of Sanctification, that he was not an
Hypocrite (as his friends censured him) but he was really what he seemed, and
seemed only what he was. -- I will maintain mine own ways before him, Job
13.15.
(that is, the sincerity of them) that my heart is upright, and my ways are
right in the main, I am not a compound, One that says one thing, and thinks
another; whereas an Hypocrite shall not come before him (to appeal, or approve
himself to God, as I desire to do) He shuns Gods sight and presence.

3 Job did plead his innocence; Thou know, says he to God, that I am not
wicked, Job 10.7.
he does not say that I am not a sinner, or that I have no sin in me, for Job
harbored no such conceit of himself, nor had God any such knowledge of him; --
But I am not under the power of sin, nor do I make a trade of it; I do not
love, nor delight, nor live in any known sin. -- I am innocent from great
Transgressions.

4 Job did also plead his constancy, or his resolution to hold fast his
integrity, and innocence, both in practice and in plea, even till death, at
lest in desite, purpose, and endeavor. -- Till I dye I will not remove my
integrity, my Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live, Job 27.3. to 7. -- Now the ground he
went upon in his pleas was the Covenant of Grace, that was the Principle upon
which he acted, pleaded, and resolved, which was a sure, and safe bottom -- In
these cases Job durst come to the trial, and dispute upon these points with
any, even in the presence of God. -- These two have been the usual Pleas of
Gods faithful Servants before God and man, especially when injured by word or
deed, to wit, Uprightness, and unblameablenesse. Integrity, and Innocence, as
of Hezekiah, 2 King. 20.3. David, Psalm. 18.23. Daniel, chapter 6.22. of Paul, 2
Cor. 1.12. 1 These. 2.10. -- But they durst not plead either Self-Perfection, or
Self-Justification before God. This is plain in Paul -- I know nothing by my
self, that is, my conscience does not check, 1 Cor. 4.4.
or charge me with negligence, or unfaithfullness in the discharge of mine
office, yet am I not hereby justified, -- this cannot acquit me before God,
who can discover many faults, and failings in me, which I do not discern in my
self, and judge me for them. -- In the same sense we may understand those
words of Job -- Though I were perfect, Job 9.21.
yet would I not know my soul, Though I be not conscious to my self of any
great miscarriage or offense; or though others should report me perfect, yet
would I not take notice of my self under any such notion, yea I would discharge
the thoughts thereof out of my mind.

Object. 3. Why may we not say, we are perfect in this life, seeing Gods
Servants are often styled so in the Word of God, as Noah, Genesis 6.9. Job 1.1.1
Cor. 2.6. Phil. 3.15? and we are exhorted to be so, Gen 17.1. Mat. 5.48. 2 Cor.
13.11? Is not then Perfection attainable here?

Answ. Satan transforming him into an Angel of light, seeks in these days to
deceive and destroy many by drawing them into this Delusion, of Perfection in
this life; that they are without sin, through mis-interpretations of
Scriptures, perverting and wresting those Texts, wherein the word Perfect
occurs.

For the Vindication of Gods Truth from Satan's contradiction, and of Gods word
from wrong constructions in this matter, J shall (through Gods assistance)
clearly make out

Two things.

1 In what sense we are said to be perfect in Scripture.

2 That no man can be fully perfect, or without sin in this life.

First, In what sense we are said in the holy Scriptures to be perfect; we are
said so to be in respect of our being in Christ, of our justification, and
sanctification

1 In respect of our being in Christ, as our Head and Root, Suerty and Savior;
or as we are ingrafted and incorporated into Christ, in whom all fullness
dwells; Col. 1.19.
not only of personal perfection in himself; but for plentiful communication
to all his people, Col. 2.9, 10.
of all things pertaining to grace and glory; -- ye are complete in him, says
Paul (though not in your selves) In Christ ye have complete wisdom, for your
Direction; Verse. 3.
for in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, even for you,
Isa. 45.24.
complete Righteousness for your Justification. Surely shall one say, In the
Lord I have Righteousness and strength, Chap. 64.6.
though none in my self, but what is as filthy rags. Complete Holiness for your
Sanctification; Ioh. 1.16.
for his grace is sufficient for you, and of his fullness ye all may receive
Grace for Grace. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Of him are ye in Christ Jesus who of God is made unto us Wisdoms,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, that is, All. Thus all Believers
are perfect here, to wit, as they are in Christ; because they have a fullness
laid up in him, of all things needful for salvation, though they receive
thereof but by degrees, according to their Necessity, Capacity, and Aptitude.
Therefore they are all imperfect in themselves, while they live here below.

2 In respect of our Justification before God through Christ, which admits no
degree, properly, but Unico actu simul and semel exist it perfecta, says
Doctor Ames, Ames, Medul l. 1. c. 27
that we are justified at once, and once for all; that all our sins past,
present, and to come, are remitted at once by the gracious fentence of God,
absolving a Believer from them all, though as to manifestation, sense, and
effects, or to the assurance thereof in the Court of Conscience, it has diverse
degrees.

Other Divines conceive Justification to be a continued Act of God from our
Vocation to our Glorification; because while we continue sinners we have still
need to be justified, viz. to this end Christ continues his intercession in
Heaven for us, to obtain the continued imputation of his righteousness to us,
and a continued justification of us thereby; yet we are not justified by
degrees, or by little and little; but our justification before God (in the
Court of Heaven) is perfect, at first, as well as at last. Downam of Justif.
lib. 1. cap. 1. page 5, 6. and 236. so soon as a Soul believes in Christ, with
a true justifying faith, the righteousness of Christ (which is perfectly
perfect) is imputed to him, and upon that account he is reputed perfectly
righteous before God unto life eternal. Therefore the Apostle says, Christ by
one Offering has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; Heb. 10.14
that is, perfectly justified and redeemed them, or purchased pardon of sin for
them, by that one full price of his blood, once paid for all.

Now though a Christian be perfectly justified in this Life from Sin and Death,
yet he is sanctified but in part here (as shall be demonstrated afterward)
Persons now justified before God by imputed righteousness through faith in
Christ, are yet sinners in themselves, by reason of hereditary, inherent
pravity in them; of habitual corruptions, and actual transgressions. Though the
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. that is, from guilt by
Remission, yet if we say that we have no sin (still dwelling in us) we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, verse. 8. or that we have not
(or do not) sin actually, we make him a Liar, and his Word is not in us, verse.
10.

Justification absolves from Guilt, Curse, Rogers practicil Catech. part 2. p.
123
and Condemnation, and acquits a Soul at Gods Tribunal, as fully and perfectly
as if he had never transgressed; but not from all the effects of sin, as the
dominion and pollution of sin. It does not take away that vicious quality, or
corruption of sin inherent in the Soul, for that is the work of Sanctification,
which is in this life imperfect. This is a difference between Justification and
Sanctification, the one cleanses us from all our sins wholly, in respect of
guilt, and obligation to punishment, the other purges us from the spot and
power of sin, but in part here, not wholly till hereafter. Sanctifying grace
abates the power of sin, but does not eradicate the being of it in us; it puts
down sins reigning, but cannot wholly hinder sins dwelling in us till we dye.
Justification leaves no place to Condemnation, no nor to Accusation, Romans 8.1.
verse. 33, 34
as appears by Paul's triumphant challenge, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies. -- therefore it is perfect in
this life. Sanctification leaves some place or room to corruption in us
(because we are sanctified but in part here) therefore it is imperfect.

3 In reference to our Sanctification; we are said to be perfect even in this
life in Six respects; to wit, of parts, of progress; of uprightness, of
furniture, of desire and endeavor, and of establishment.

1 In respect of Parts; There is a Twofold perfection, the one of Parts, the
other of Degrees.

1 Perfection of Parts.

1 When the whole man is fanctified, though not wholly; or is sanctified
throughout, 1 These. 5.23
or has some grace in every part, to wit, in Spirit, Soul, and Body (as Paul
prayed for the Thessalonians) though not thoroughly; and no part be perfect in
him.

2 When a Christian has the Seeds, or beginnings of all the Graces of the
Spirit in him; all the limbs of the New Creature, of Gods newborn Babes; all
the Lines of Gods Image, so that no necessary grace is lacking in a Babe of
Grace, no more than any faculty or member is wanting in a Child of Nature.
Thus a Christian is perfect in this Life, to wit, by perfection of Parts; in
that all parts of him are sanctified, Spirit, Soul, and Body, and that he has
all sorts or seeds of Grace requisite to Salvation in him in some measure, as
of Repentance toward God, faith in Christ, love to God, and fear of him,
hatred of sin, etc. As a child when it is born is perfect, because it has all
the parts of a man both essential and integral, a child is a man for parts
though not for measure or action. Upon this account he is called a man. Joh.
16.21
-- The mother remembers no more the anguish for joy that ((...)) a man is
born into the world.

2 There is a perfection of degrees, Thus a person or thing is perfect, when it
has attained to its (...) or utmost pitch or period of growth, either in
quantity or quality, of which it is capable, which wants nothing homogeneal, or
of its kind, that appertains to it: to which nothing can be added to make it
greater or better; or which has nothing heterogeneal in it, or with it, that
ought to be separated from it. 1 Cor. 13.10.
When that which is perfect is come, says the Apostle, then that which is in
part shall be done away.

Thus a man (not a child) is perfect, when all the members of his body are
grown up to their just measure of stature, strength, and agility, and the
faculties of his soul unto maturity. Thus a Christian is perfect, when he is
come to his full age in Christ, and his graces and obedience are come up to
their full growth and highest pitch of perfection, and he is so good that he
can be no better; and all sin or imperfection in habit and act, is utterly
abolished in him. Thus no man living is, or can possibly be perfect on this
side the Grave, or before he come in heaven.

2 We are said to be perfect here in respect of Progress; when we have attained
to some good degree or measure of grace, and proficiency in the knowledge of
God, and practice of Piety, though it come far short of complete perfection.
Thus the holy Scripture frequently call grown Christians in understanding and
wisdom, in grace, obedience, and experience, perfect, that is, in comparison of
VVeaklings, Novices, New beginners, or Non-proficients in Christianity, Heb.
5.12.13, 14
Or of Babes, who have need of Milk, and not of strong meat; but strong meat
belongs to the perfect, who by reason of habit (got by long practice) have
their senses exercised to discern both good and evil. In this sense we are to
understand, Perfect, in the following places -- We speak wisdom among them
that are perfect. 1 Cor. 2.6.
Let as many as be perfect be thus minded, Phil. 3.15. If any man offend not in
word, the same is a perfect man, Jam. 3.2. The Apostle John makes three several
Ages of Christians, to wit, Children, Young men, and Fathers; John writ to each
of them, 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. and a higher Age may be said to be perfect in
respect of a lower, as young men in comparison of Children, and Fathers being
compared with Young men.

Thus high acts of Graces (attainable in this Life) are called the perfection of
them; as,

1 Of Faith, as Abraham's leaving his Country, in obedience to Gods call, going
he knew not whither, Heb. 11.8. and his offering up Isaac, verse. 17. and his
believing he should beget I saac in his Old age, when his body was dead, and
his Wives barren, Romans 4.19, 20. these were high acts of his faith, the
sincerity, officacy, excellency, or sublimity whereof, was manifested by his
works. Jam. 3.22
By works, says James, his faith was made perfect, that is, declared so to be.

2 So high acts of Patience, as to endure many, and heavy, and tedious
afflictions, and persecutions for Christ's Name, are the perfection of Patience;
that is called perfect patience. Let patience have her perfect work, Jam. 1.4
says James, that ye may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

3 So high acts of Love, as to love God with all our hearts, to love others as
our selves, even our enemies; to lay down our lives for the Brethren, to serve
God without servile fear, these and the like are called perfect love, 1 John
4.17, 18. This is called, Perfectio viae, the perfection which the Saints can
attain unto, in or by the way to Heaven. That is, the greatest measure of God,
which God has decreed to give to every one of his Elect in this world; which
some conceive to be Paul's meaning in Ephesians 4.7. The height of our grace here
proceeds from the measure of Christ's Gift -- To every one of us is given Grace,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ. To this perfection Paul
labored to bring the Colossians by his Ministry (as every faithful Minister of
Christ should do his people) that hereby he might prepare them for, and lead
them forward to, their absolute perfection in Heaven; Col. 1.2^.
We preach Christ (says Paul) warning, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ.

That which is called, Perfectio patriae, is that plenary perfection, which the
Saints enjoy in their own Country, when they go home to their Fathers house in
Heaven, not before.

3 In respect of uprightness; This is generally called perfection, both in the
Old and New Testament. To be sincere, and simplespirited, without guile in our
Principles, and intentions, or aims, this is not Legal perfection, which is
absolute conformity to the Law of God, exacted in the Governant of Works; but
Evangelical, required in the Covenant of Grace, wherein new obedience performed
with a sincere heart, and willing mind, is accounted perfection; 2 Cor. 8.12
yea, God has promised therein to accept of us in Christ according to that we
have, and not according to that we have not, even of the will for the deed;
and not to impute unto us our imperfections. For God measures not our new
obedience by the perfection of our performance, but by the sincerity of our
affections, and purpose of our hearts. In this sense Perfection is opposed, not
to imperfection, but to Hyprocrisie. A sincere Christian is a perfect, that is,
a true real Christian. An hypocrite is but the picture of a Chri-Christian. In
our militant state, integrity, and infirmities are consistent in the same soul.
What is done uprightly is said to be done with a perfect heart, Job 1.1 Psalm.
37.37
and with the whole heart; in this sense (as I showed before) Job was called a
perfect man, and Noah, Genesis 6.9. Mark the perfect man, behold the upright,
says David, Asa's heart was said to be perfect with the Lord all his days, 2
King. 20.3
1 King. 15.14. Hezekiah walked before God in truth, and with a perfect heart.
1 Chro. 28.9.
David commands his Son Solomon to serve the God of his Father with a perfect
heart, and with a willing mind. Paul's simplicity and godly sincerity was his
perfection in this world, 2 Cor. 1.12 Revel. 3.2
I have not found thy works perfect before God, says Christ to the Church of
Sardis, that is, sincere, but hypocritical.

4 We are said to be perfect in respect of Furniture, when we are furnished
with Gifts and Graces, for the place God has set us in; or for the work God
has called us to do, and we are made able and ready thereunto. All Scripture
(says Paul) is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine,
reproof, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.
instruction in righteousness, that the man of God, (that is, the Minister) may
be perfect; What is that? Thoroughly furnished for every good work, that is, the
discharge of his whole duty. A supply of what is lacking in Grace (attainable
here) or a furnishing to duty, is called perfection in Gods Word. Ephesians. 4.12
When Christ ascended on high, he appointed Ministers in his Church for the
perfecting of the Saints; that is, to supply what is wanting in their holiness
and obedience, to build them up further. Acts 20.32
Paul's earnest desire and endeavor was, to perfect what was lacking in the
Thessalonians faith, 1 These. 3.10. Heb. 13.21
The God of peace (prays Paul for the Hebrews) make you perfect in every good
work to do his will -- or prepare and fit you for every good work, or
accomplish that in you which yet is defective, as the word (...) intimates. To
be able in some measure to do his will on earth, is a Christians perfection on
earth; a setting of things in good frame, and comely order in the Church, which
formerly were amiss is called perfection. 2 Cor. 13.9 (...).
So Beza expounds that place -- This also we wish, even your perfection, your
restoration or reconcinnation; that the members which were shaken out of joint
might be restored, and things amiss among them in faith and manners rectified.

5 In respect of desire and endeavors after perfection, to advance in Gods
ways as far and fast as we can, and to grow up in grace, and in all things
into him that is our head, Ephesians. 4.15
Jesus Christ; as in Knowledge, Wisdom, and Spiritual understanding, to be
filled with it, Col. 1.9. in faith, to increase it, 2 Cor. 10.15. in hope, to
abound in it, Romans 15.13. in love, that it may abound yet more and more in us,
Phil. 1.9. in good works, to stand full and complete in all the will of God,
Col. 4.12. Heb. 13.21. to be fruitful in every good work, Col. 1.10. always
abounding therein, 1 Cor. 15.58. To go forward, and get as near perfection, as
near Heaven, as we can while we live, though we cannot come up to the top of
it, or attain it fully till we dye.

Growing in grace, is perfecting of holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
(...), which denotes a continued act, and is done by degrees; for we cannot be
perfectly holy at once, nor in this life. Growing in grace is building us up,
even to heaven, Act. 20.32. the Metamorphosing of us into the Image of the Lord
from glory to glory; 2 Cor. 3.18
that is, from one degree of grace to another (by the Spirit of Sanctification
in us) until we be perfectly renewed in holinese and righteousness; for grace
is glory begun, and glory is grace perfected. In this sense we are exhorted, to
be perfect, as our father in heaven is perfect; that is, to strive after
perfection, and to be merciful as our father is merciful, Luke 6.36. that is,
Col. 3.12
to put on bowels of mercy, kindness, etc. as the Apostle exhorts, and to put
forth the acts thereof, as God gives us ability and opportunity -- and to be
holy as God himself is holy, that is, (...). Heb. 12.14
to follow after holiness, with an eager pursuit, and earnest endeavor.
Mortification-work, and Renovation-work (both which are perfectionwork in the
beginning, and proceeding, or tendency thereof in this life) are gradual works,
or wrought in us, and carried on by degrees, and daily; and they are still in
progress in this life, 1 Cor. 15.31
until we attain to the perfection of the life to come. This is to dye to sin
daily, or to put off the Old man more and more, Ephesians. 4.22. to mortify our
earthly members, Col. 3.5. to crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts,
Gal. 5.24. to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2
Cor. 7.1. to repent of sin, resist and strive against sin while we live,
though sin cannot be wholly crucified and dead in us and purged out of us, nor
we be absolutely freed from it till we dye; for sin cannot be abolished till
body and soul be dissolved.

This is to put on the New man, or to be renewed into the Image of God, which
is to be done daily in a constant and continued course, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. 2 Cor.
4.16. this is a going on unto perfection, Heb. 6.1. Paul's example is very
pregnant and alluring, that we should not take up, Phil 3.12, 13
nor acquiese in present seize, I count not my self to have already
attained, or that I am already perfect; but this one thing I do, forgetting
those things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are
before, Verse. 14.
I press toward the mark, etc. We must shoot at the highest mark (as one
says) though we take our arrows up short enough daily. Baines.


A Christian at his conversion is like the Moon after the Change, at her first
appearance, how little a part of her is enlightened, how much of the old Moon?
how much Dark still? but she grows by degrees to the Full.

So he (as the Moon) receives Light from Christ the Sun of Righteousness, but
little at first, much of the Old man, and many dark spots of corruption still
remains in him; yet is he wexing daily toward the Full, (though as one says,
at the best here we reach not the first quarter) by increase of illumination,
and sanctification here, though he cannot attain to be filled with all the
fullness of God, to have his whole soul full of the Image of God in knowledge,
righteousness, and holiness; all enlightened, and all-over pure without any
spot, or any wrinckle of the Old man, till he go into another world, where all
perfection is always in its prime and full; and where no imperfection or
corruption can find any place, no Eclipses, interruptions, or Diminutions;
where there is fullness of Grace Peace, Joy, and Glory in the presence of God
for evermore, whereof there is so little appearance here, that the Apostle
tells us, It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.2.

The sight and sense of our imperfections and serious desires and endeavors
after Perfection are counted our Perfection in this life.

6 And lastly, we are said to be perfect here, in respect of establishment in
good, and perseverance in well-doing, even to the end. The God of all Grace,
after ye have suffered a while, make you perfect (prays Peter) what is that?
strengthen, stablish, settle you. 1 Pet. 5.10.
Perseverance is our Perfection.

All these six we should seek for; for they are kinds of Perfection on earth;
the Word of God calls them so; and they are our way to full and final, yea
eternal Perfection in Heaven.

Obj. 1. Has not Christ bidden us be Perfect as our Father which is in Heaven
is Perfect? Mat. 5.48. therefore we may be perfect here, for the Gospel
injoyns no impossible things. Did not Christ pray for all Believers, that they
may be made perfect in one, Joh. 17.23? and does not the Father hear his Son
always?

Ans. 1 Many things are commanded us to do, yea are prayed for, for us, and
promised to us, which have their beginning in us in this life, but not their
fulfilling, or full accomplishment, till the life to come; which we must seek
on earth, but cannot find to the full till we come in Heaven. Let me instance
in four things, scil. Sanctification, Obedience, Union, and Glorification.

1 Sanctification. This God commands us on earth, 1 These. 4.3, 4. -- yea to bec
holy, as God is holy, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. This Christ has prayed for, for his
people, Joh. 17.17. -- Sanctify them through thy Truth, etc. This God has
promised in the Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. yet sanctification (for
all this) is but inchoated in us on earth, not perfected till we come in
Heaven. The Grace of Christ is like Jacobs Ladder; it has several steps
ascending, which reach up to Heaven; the foot whereof is on earth, it is begun
in our Regeneration, and the top of it in Heaven, it is finished in our
glorification. This might be exemplified in particular Graces, but I will
mention knowledge only. We are commanded to know the Lord; and God has
promised, All shall know him from the least to the greatest. This is begun on
earth, but not perfect, 1 Cor. 13.12.
for here we know but in part, but in Heaven we shall know as we are known,
and see Christ as he is, 1 John 3.2. The knowledge we have of God and Christ
here, is the beginning of life eternal, Joh. 17.3.
but the end or Perfection of it is in Heaven.

2 Obedience. Christ directs us to pray only for that, which God would have us
to do. For Christ framed his platform of prayer he gives us in Mat. 6.10.
according to the Will of God his Father. Now he has taught us to pray -- Thy
will be done on Earth (by us) as it is done in Heaven, by Angels and Saints,
to wit, cheerfully, sincerely, holily, fully, constantly, or as we shall do it
in the Kingdom of glory, when we shall sin no more. This Petition implies,
that no man's obedience is perfect; because that we pray for is not yet
attained; the good things we do we cannot perfect them. Prayer presupposes
both want of that we ask, and Impotency in our selves to attain it, or that it
is out of our power. A thing is said to be done, which is so in doing, that it
shall certainly be finished.

In doing Gods Will, we should endeavor to write after the copy, and to come
as near the pattern Christ set us, or proposed to us, as we can here, though
we cannot perfectly conform to it, till we come in Heaven.

3 The Saints Union or Unity. This is

1 Very much pressed as their duty, Ephesians. 4.3, to 8. Phil. 2.1, 2. I beseech
you Brethren, says Paul to the Corinthians, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, that there be no divisions among
you; but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

2 It is prayed for by Christ for all believers, That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, -- that they also may be one in us, Joh.
17.21. -- I in them, and thou in me, (...).
that they may be made perfect in one (or perfected into one) that is,
perfectly compacted and conjoined, verse. 23. Piseator in Joh. 17.23.
That they may by one faith be tied together as Members of one body, whereof
Christ is the Head; and by love be knit together, and cleave one to another.

But though the Saints Union among themselves be begun and carried on, on
earth, yet not brought to Perfection till they come in Heaven.

For four Reasons.

1 Because the means of their Union (as Faith and Love) are both of them
imperfect here, and something is still lacking in them both.

2 There are remains of darkness and corruption in them, so long as they
continue here; which cause divisions, and differences in opinion and affections.

3 Till we all come into the Unity of the Faith, Ephesians. 4.13.
and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man; unto the measure
of the Stature of the fullness of Christ (which cannot be, till we all come into
Heaven) we cannot come to perfect Unity in Judgment and Affection. Ioh. 17.23.


4 Christ seems in that petition to have respect to the consummation of this
Union in Heaven, not only among themselves, but with him and his Father,
because he prays in the next verse for their glorification -- that all true
believers may be with him, Ioh. 17.24.
where he is, and behold his glory, that is in Heaven, where they shall be
companions with him in glory, Col. 3.4.
for ever.

Though the Union between Christ and Believers here be very near and sure, and
indissoluble, yet it is not so full and clear, nor perfected, until we be
joined unto the Lord by sight in Heaven, as we are by faith on earth, 2 Cor.
5, 6, 7. knowing, says the Apostle, that while we are at home in the body,
we are absent, or from home, from the Lord.

4 Glorification. This should be sought for here, though it cannot be found
or attained till hereafter. We are commanded to strive in this life to enter
in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. Yet we cannot come to this gate (to wit, of
Heaven) much less enter in at it, till we dye. Paul labored by all means,
while he lived, Phil. 3.11.
to attain to the Resurrection of the dead, that is, to the estate of Grace,
and Glory that follows after it, for both body and soul.

Obj. 2 Did not Christ command or counsel the young man to be perfect here,
who asked him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal
life? Mat. 19.16, 21. Is not Perfection then attainable in this life?

Ans. Christ's Counsel or Command to the young man, If thou will be perfect, go
sell that thou have, etc. was special to him, for Trial, Conviction and
Discovery, like that of God to Abraham, Go offer thy Son Isaac for a burnt
Offering, not general given to all. The man glorying in his works (that he had
kept all the Commandments from his youth up) affected the praise of
perfection, what lack I yet? Christ to convince him of his pride, error and
vanity therein, said unto him, If thou will be perfect, etc. as if he had
said, if thou art really that which thou boastest thy self to be, to wit,
perfect, give a proof hereof in selling and giving all that thou have, and
following me. Or if thou would be (as thou pretends) perfect, in
Righteousness and Charity, then go and sell all, and give to the poor, and
come and take up the Cross, and follow me. So Mark has it, chap. 10.21. Or
Christ spoke this, to convince him of his imperfection, when he boasted of his
Perfection. All these (Commandments) have I kept from my youth; yet lackest
thou one thing, says Christ -- Sell all and distribute to the poor, Luke 18.21,
22. Christ might have said, thou art therefore guilty of breaking all the
Commandments, because thou bragst, thou have kept them all, and thou therefore
lackst every thing, because thou art conceited that thou lackest nothing.

Having declared in what sense the Saints are said in Scripture to be perfect;
I proceed to the

Second thing, That no man can be fully perfect, or without sin, in this life,
which I shall prove by six Arguments.

The first Argument. To be fully perfect without sin in this life, is contrary
to Scripture, to Experience, yea to the state of the Saints here.

1 To the holy Scriptures, which expressly deny the same, as was declared
before, 1 King. 8.38, 46. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 7.20.

2 This is contrary to the universal experience of all Gods servants, who have
felt and bewailed corruption in themselves, even till death, and have
acknowledged the same before God and man, and have disowned, Job 9 20.
yea disclaimed all thoughts of their own Perfection in this life, as Job did;
and Paul at large in Romans 7.14. to the end, though a holy Apostle, complains
bitterly of the sinful corruption that did cleave close to him, and hang fast
upon him; and would do unto his dying day; and disavows Perfection, when he
had been in the third Heaven -- Not as though (says he) I had already
attained, Phil. 3.12.
or were already perfect. In many things we offend all, Iam. 3 2^
says James. If we (says John) we Apostles who have seen and heard, and
handled the word of life, 1 John 1, 8, 9.10.
verse. 1. who have fellowship with the Father, and with his son Jesus Christ,
verse. 3. who are cleansed by the blood of Christ, from the guilt of all sin
here by our justification; yet if we say we have no sin, not now in the state
of grace wherein we are; no sin dwelling in us, no remains of corruption in
our nature, but that sin is utterly abolished in us, we deceive our selves,
and the Truth is not in us. We are not sincere but Hypocrites, deceiving both
our selves and others. The bosome-experience of all the Saints, is sufficient
to confute this vain conceit of Perfection here. The light, not only of the
Scriptures, but of conscience, or that light which is within men (if it be not
darkness) does witness the contrary to every man, -- Video meliora, proboque
-- Deteriora sequor. All the Saints will say, Perfection is not in us; we
carry a body of sin up and down with us, in these bodies of clay. Romans 7.15.
To will is present, but power to Perform that which is good, we find not. Yea
such are the iniquities of our holy things, or our failings in best
performances, as nothing but the blood of Christ can purge them away; nor save
us from that condemnation, we deserve for them, though we should never sin
besides. The best actions of the best men, cannot abide the strict examen of
the just Judge, in point of Perfection (of sincerity they may) therefore have
they deprecated the same, as David. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified, psalm. 143.2. and 130.3.
-- and If thou Lord should mark iniquities, who shall stand? Thoughts of
our own purity and holiness, render us impure, Job 9.30, 31.
and unholy before God. -- which some collect from that speech of Job, If I
wash my self in Snow-water, and make my hands never so clean, yet shall thou
plunge me in the ditch, yea mine own clothes shall abhor me.

God not only sees but marketh their Iniquity, who think they can wash
themselves from all sin. Their very clensing is their polluting. See Jer. 2.22.
Where the habit is imperfect (as inherent Grace is here) the action cannot be
perfect.

3 This is contrary to the state or Constitution of all the Saints in this
life, who have flesh as well as spirit in them; and the one lusts against the
other, and these are contrary the one to the other, Gal. 5.17.
so that they cannot do the things they would, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
-- who have two men in them, an old man as well as a new; and the one must be
put off, and the other put on daily; and the doing of both is a work of time,
even of their whole lives. Romans 7.23.
They see two laws in them, one in their Members, rebelling against the law in
their Mind, bringing them into captivity to the law of sin. They have sin as
well as grace; the qualities of the Old and New man are complicate in every
faculty of the soul, -- whence arises a continual combat in them, like the
struglings between the Twins in Rebekahs womb. Romans 7.15.
So that the good they would do, they do not, and the evil, they would not do,
that they do. They have two contrary Principles in them, from whence proceed
two manner of Actions, Motions and Inclinations, continually opposite one to
the other. Hence it is that they are in part carnal, and not perfectly renewed
or spiritual here. Old things are done away, and all things become new in them,
not on a sudden, or at once, but by degrees. Grace imitates Nature, which in
all Creatures that have life, as fruits of the earth, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, is
very little at first, but has a vegetive quality put into it, to grow up by
degrees in time to its Perfection; and the more excellent a Creature is, the
longer it is before it come to its full growth. This is manifest in a Child. In
like manner God gives his Children but a little Grace, a seed, a kernel, like a
grain of Mustardseed, at first; but he puts a growing quality into it, to make
it grow up daily toward perfection; and God gives them a charge to grow in
Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. and means to grow by, and time to grow in.

Though Grace reign in them while they live, yet corruption prevails often, and
will dwell in them till they dye, Romans 7.17. There can be no absolute
Perfection, where there are remains of corruption.

Obj. 1 Why are Gods people called Saints, Righteous and perfect, seeing they
have sin and imperfection in them here?

Ans. 1 Denominations are rightly taken from the better part. As man is called
a rational Creature, scil. from his soul, though the body be a brutish thing,
and void of Reason. As Wine having Water mingled with it, is called Wine. The
heap is said to be wheat, though there be chaff among it; and the Swan is said
to be white, though her feet be black. So a Christian is said to be a Saint,
and perfect, because his better part is spiritual, renewed into the image of
God, and partaker of the divine Nature, The best part, gives denomination to
the whole.

2 Upon a Gospel score, or the Covenant of Grace, God accepts and accounts them
so.

3 That they may know whither they are to go or strive; and not dream that they
are come thither already, that is to Perfection.

Obj. 2 Why does God suffer sin to remain in his people here, seeing he is
able to sanctify them throughout, and perfectly?

Ans. Though sin be evil in it self, yet God suffers it to be still in us for
holy and righteous ends, to bring good out of it, to us, and glory to his Name.
Though Imperfection be not so comfortable an estate, yet God sees that it may
be safe and profitable for us, to be encumbered with corruptions, and subject
to Tentations while we live here.

1 To manifest and magnify the riches of his free Grace in taking away our
Iniquities and receiving us graciously, in accepting our persons,
notwithstanding our Imperfections and unworthiness.

2 To keep our spirits humble, and make us vile in our own eyes,
notwithstanding all the Lord gives to us, 2 Cor. 12.7.
or does by us. Lest Paul should be exalted through abundance of Revelations,
there was given to him a Thorn in the flesh, the m^ssenger of Satan to buffet
him. Which some conceive to be a strong Tentation; but others, a Corruption
edged with a Tentation.

3 To exercise our Graces continually, as Faith, Repentance, Holiness and
watchfulness; to keep us in constant dependence upon Christ for Remission,
Reconciliation, and strength against corruption; and for the mortification of
it; and to keep us in continual conflict or war with sin; and in use of the
whole Armor of God.

Second Argument. Absolute Perfection was proper to Christ, and is peculiar to
Heaven.

1 It was proper to Christ, as he was man whilst he was upon earth, to be
perfectly holy and free from sin; to have a fullness of grace in the greatest
extension for kind, and excellency for degree. He knew no sin, says Paul, 2
Cor. 5.21. he did no sin, says Peter, Heb. 4.1 ^^
neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22.

2 And Perfection is peculiar to Heaven, and to the triumphant state of Gods
elect, reserved there for them. There only is grace made perfect in all
degrees; and the will of God is done perfectly. There alone we come to our
full age, and full growth. Ephesians. 4.13.
Unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
There that which is perfect is fully come, and which was imperfect is wholly
done away. 1 Cor. 13.10.
There the Spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. Heaven is a high,
holy, privileged place, where no unclean thing can ever come. There is no
Tempter, nor Tentation, neither Sin nor Satan. To hold Perfection in this life,
is to confound and jumble Heaven and Earth together, or the state Militant with
the Triumphant state of the Saints; which are distinct in time and place, in
order, measure and concomitants.

Third Argument. Those that plead their Perfection here, and say they have no
sin, discover much sin in their spirits, speech and carriage, as ignorance,
error, spiritual pride, passion, uncharitableness, Bitterness, Censuring
and condemning others, vilifying them by opprobrious terms, malicious cavils,
and railing Accusations. Rude, uncivil behavior. Besides, some of these
deluded perfectists hold many dangerous, yea blasphemous opinions (as their
scandalous Pamphlets, which better deserve to be burnt, than to be read, do
publish to the world.) They place Religion in trivial matters not worth the
naming; and other things, which I take no delight to rip up or relate. Are
these things, and the like, the properties, or concomitants of perfection? Do
they become such persons, as say they have no sin? Do not their own mouths
condemn them? Are not these, and such like, the Generation who are pure in
their own eyes? Pro^. 30 12
who fancy themselves to be righteous, yet they are not washed from their
filthiness. But because they embraced not the love of the Truth, God has given
them over to strong delusions, to believe the lies of their own seduced hearts,
and are indeed infatuated. They think they have light enough within them;
therefore they reject Gods Word from being a lamp to their feet, and a light
unto their path. I would gladly see the face of that man, who can truly say, I
find no darkness in my mind, no guile nor perverseness in my spirit, no
disorder in my affections, no aversness to good, nor proneness to evil; that
cansay, I find all that is within me sweetly tuned to the obedience of the
Gospel, without any jarre of corruption.

Fourth Argument. This opinion of perfection in this Life shakes the
Fundamentals of Religion, and wounds the vitals of Christianity, and
over-throws the Gospel. For it takes away the need and use of Christ's
satisfaction, of Faith, Repentance, of Ordinances, and of Christian
watchfulness. They that say they have no sin, have no need of Christ's blood to
cleanse them from sin, nor of Christ himself to save them from sin. No need of
faith to believe in Christ for imputed righteousness to justify them; if they
have a righteousness of their own which is perfect. No need of Repentance, if
they be righteous and without sin; for Christ came not to call the righteous,
but sinners to repentance; nor of Ordinances, as the Word, Sacraments, Prayer,
etc. that they may grow thereby, if they be perfect already, or so good as they
cannot be better.

What need have they to keep watch against sin that have no enemy, that are
free from sin? How soon and easily may they be surprised by Satan, and drawn
into sin, that do not take heed to their spirits and ways, lest they should be
led into tentation, and fall into transgression; Security lets them in, but
fear and vigilance keeps them out. Blessed is the man that fears always. He
that thinks he has no sin, makes himself a prey to Satan; Let him that thinks
he stands take heed lest he fall. Is not this opinion of dangerous consequence,
both in respect of the Truth, and of the Persons that hold it? Besides, they
that hold it, condemn the Generation of the righteous, as workers of iniquity,
who are not of their way. The tree is known by its fruits, so are persons and
opinions discovered by the fruits and effects of them.

Fifth Argument. In every place of Scripture where perfection is spoken of in
reference to the Saints here, something either goes before, or follows
after, which expresses or implies their imperfection, and clears the sense of
those places, as meaning perfection of parts, or growth, or uprightness, or the
like; but not perfction of degrees, to be without sin in this life. Be ye
perfect (says Christ to his Disciples) Matthew. 5.48. in chap. 6.12. he teaches
them to pray for pardon of sin every day, as often and as long as they need daily
bread, that is, as long as they live; surely then his meaning is not, that
they, or we may be perfectly perfect here, but that we should strive after
perfection, and repent of and beg pardon of our sins, to which we are subject
every day, even during life.

Let as many as be perfect be thus minded, says Paul, Phil. 3.15. How is that?
as Paul was, verse. 12. to think our selves imperfect, or that we have not
already attained, scil. to our full measure in Christ: yet Paul, though he was
not fully perfect propounds himself to the Philippians as a pattern for their
imitation. If any offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, Jam. 3.2. he
means no absolute perfection, or exemption from sin, for he had said before,
In many things we sin all. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, says
Paul, 1 Cor. 2.6. Who are they? Such as Paul exhorts, 2 Cor. 7.1
(jointly with himself) to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit (therefore they were not perfectly pure) and to be perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, that is, (...)
by degrees; therefore they were not perfect already, or at once. He that is
born of God sins not, 1 John 3.9. but hear what the same Apostle says, in
chap. 1.8, 10. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, etc. Therefore
the former text must not be understood of a Saints not sinning at all, or of
absolute immunity from sin in this life, but of his not sinning in such a
manner as the wicked do, that is, wittingly, and willingly, with consent, and
with delight.

That place in Ephesians. 4.13. Ephesians. 4.13
Till we all come into the unity of the faith, etc. unto a perfect man, etc.
holds forth the perfection of the Saints, for number of Persons, and for
measure of Graces in Heaven, as both the ultimate end, and the term of duration
of a Gospel Ministry. When Christ ascended up on high, he gave some Apostles,
some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers. To what purpose? Verse. 12.
For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the Body of Christ. For what time, or how long to continue in the
Church? Even till we all come into the unity of the says. There will be
constant use, and need of all Gospel Ordinances, and of the Ministers and
Ministry of the Gospel, till all the Saints, (or Gods Elect) be gathered up to
Christ their Head, in Heaven, and made perfect there.

The fourteenth verse. Ephesians. 4.14
-- That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro, and wherried
about with every wind of doctrine -- is one end or effect of Christ's appointment
of Gospel Ministers respecting this life, to wit, as to instruct Gods people in
the truth, so to confirm and stablish them therein, and to keep them from
errors, as well as from other sins, to wit, lying, verse. 25. rash anger, verse.
26. Theft, verse. 28. corrupt communication, verse. 29. bitterness, wrath,
malice, clamor, verse, 31. and to exhort them to gradual mortification of sin,
and renovation of soul, ver. 22, 23, 24.

Sixth Argument. The Saints who are styled perfect in the Scriptures, are noted
for their infirmities; Genesis 6.9
as Noah, a just man, and perfect in his generations, and walked with God, in
the the old World -- yet Noah planted a Vineyard, Genesis 9.20, 21
and drank of the Wine, and was drunken, and uncovered within his Tent, in the
New World. Numb. 12.3
Moses was commended to be the meekest man upon earth: Now a meek man is a
perfect man; yet when his spirit was provoked, he spoke unadvisedly with his
lips. Psalm. 106.33
David was a man after Gods own heart (that amounts to as much as a perfect
man) yet it is well known he was not without sin, witness his Adultery with
Bathsheba, and Murder of Uriah, and pride in numbering the people. Job was a
perfect man, yet subject to infirmities, he cursed his Birthday, etc.

Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days, 1 King. 15.14
2 Chronicles. 16
2 Chronicles. 15.17. yet in the very next Chapter four faults of his are registered;

1 Verse 2, 3.
That the sought to Benhadad King of Siria for aid against Baasha King of
Israel, not to God.

2 That he imprisoned Hanani the Lords Prophet, for reproving him for his sin.
2 Chronicles. 16, 7, 8, 9, 10


3 He oppressed, or crushed some of his Subjects at that time. Verse. 10. Verse.
12.


4 In his Disease, he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians.

Hezekiah walked before God in truth, 2 King. 20.3
and with a perfect heart, yet when God left him (a little) to try him, what
was in his heart, then he discovered his imperfections -- He rendered not again
according to the benefit done unto him (in his recovery) for his heart was
lifted up (in pride) for his own recovery, 1 Chro. 32.25
verse. 24. and for the ruin of his enemies, verse. 21. and for his great
Treasures, which he too vain-gloriously showed to the Ambassadors of the King
of Babylon, 2 King. 20.13. Therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah
and Jerusalem. For this sin of Hezekiah God threatened the Captivity, yet he
respited it in his days, to his sons time.

Yea, even Abraham, the Father of the faithful, and the friend of God, to whom
God said, Genesis 17.1
Walk before me, and be thou perfect, had his imperfections; for he fell twice
into the same fault, to wit, of denying his Wife, for which he was reproved by
two Heathen, scil. Pharaoh King of Egypt, Genesis 12.12, 13, 18, 19. and
Ab^melech King of Gerar, Genesis 20.2, 9 therefore Abraham sought to be justified
by faith in Christ's Righteousness, Romans 4.2, 3
not by his own works; which might have passed, had he been perfect without sin.

Elias, that famous Wonder-working Prophet, Jam. 5.17
was a man subject to like passions as we are.

Zacharias was righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments, and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. yet he was stricken dumb for his
unbeleef, verse. 20.

None of the very chiefest Apostles of Christ, were free from sin.

If absolute perfection were attainable in this life, surely some at least, of
these holy eminent Servants of God would have obtained it, which none of them
ever did; for the holy Scriptures impeach them all of humane frailties and
infirmities.

It were easy to add humane testimonies to this truth, but that there is no
need of a Candle when the Sun shines.

Bernard says, Bernard.
Minime bonus est qui melior esse non vult, and ubi incipis nolle fieri melior,
ibi desinis esse bonus: He is not at all good, who would not be better; and
when thou beginnest to be unwilling to be made better, then thou ceasest to be
good. And in his Epistle ad Drogonem Monachum he says, Nemo quippe perfectus,
qui perfectior esse non appetit. Et in co quisque perfectiorem se probat, quod
ad majorem tendit perfectionem. No man is perfect, who desires not to be more
perfect; and herein every one proves himself more perfect, in that he reaches
after a greater perfection. Prosper.


Nemo in hac vitae perfect perfectus est, non enim adhuc san^t a est, sed
quotidie sanatur plorum infirmitas, says Prosper. No man is perfectly perfect
in this life, for the infirmity of the godly is not yet healed, but is healing
daily.

Augustine has many pretty pithy sayings to this purpose; as, Augustine.
Augustine in Psalm. 38
Aliter hic non potes esse perfectus, nisiscias hic te non posse esse
perfectum; Otherwise thou can not be perfect here, unlses thou know that
here thou can not be perfect.

And in another place -- Secundum is it ius vitae modum est quaedam perfectio,
eique perfectioni hoc deputatur, si se quisque noverit nondum esse perfectum --
It is a man's perfection to know his imperfection. Nullus justus caret peccato,
nec tamen ex hoc desinit esse justus, cum affectu teneat sanctitatem. No
righteous man wants sin, yet does he not hereupon cease to be just, seeing he
holds fast sanctity in his affection.

Hierom says, In Epist. ad Theoph.
Haec est in omnibus sola perfectio, suae imperfectionis cognitio. The
knowledge of his imperfection is the sole perfection of all.

Also, Tunc justi sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur. Then we are righteous,
when we confess our selves to be sinners.

Imprimatur

Edm. Calamy.

FINIS.
The Table, or Series of the particulars in this Treatise.
1 IN the General part, Of the Government of the Tongue, which contains three
things. 1 Preparatives to it. 2 Rules for it. 3 Reasons of it.
First, Preparatives to the Government of the Tongue, which are three, p. 2 1
Wisdom, required by Reason 1 Of the difficulty of the Task. 2 Of the Commodity,
or Discommodity of the event, p. 3
And how this wisdom may be obtained, p. 4 2 Resolution, p. 5 3 The
wel-ordering of the heart, p. 6 Required for three Reasons. 1 The Heart is the
guide of the Tongue, p. 6 2 The Heart is the root and treasury of it, p. 7 3
Errors in the Tongue proceed from disorders in the heart, p. 8
Second thing. Rules for Government of the Tongue, which are five. 1 Rule,
Consider before you speak, p. 9 2 Rule, In speech have respect to Five
particulars. 1 To the Principle from which you speak. p. 10 Which should be 1
Reason, not passion, p. 11 2 Love, not malice, envy or hatred, p. 12 3 Grace,
as faith, zeal, Conscience, sincerity, purity, and the fear of God, experience,
not wit or parts only, p. 13
2 Have respect to the matter what you speak, and therein to two things, p. 15
1 To Truth, which is twofold. 1 Logical truth, to speak as the thing is. 2
Moral truth, to speak as ye think, p. 16
2 To goodness. 1 That your speech be good and sound, not evil and corrupt, p.
19. for three Reasons. 1 A man is known by his speech, p. 21 2 Evil words
corrupt good manners, p. 23 3 Gods Law obliges the tongue as well as the hand
to obedience, ibid.
2 That it be profitable, not vain or idle, p. 26 Reas. 1. Because vain speech
proceeds from a vain mind. Reas. 2. Men must be countable to God for idle
words. Reas. 3. Vain speech is the language of strange children. Reas. 4. Idle
words are not convenient, unbecoming the Saints, p. 27 3 Have respect to the
manner how ye speak, to this end seven Graces of the lips, or of speech are
commended, p. 28 1 Grace of the speech is fitness of speech, p. 29 right words
are, 1. effectual. 2. Comely. 3. Pleasant, p. 30 2 Is, fewness of words, p. 32
Reas. 1. Because words are like money, p. 33 Reas. 2. In the multitude of words
there is, 1 Folly, 2 Vanity. 3 Iniquity, p. 34 Reas. 3. An open mouth bewrays
an empty heart, p. 36
3 Is, meekness and humility. p. 36 Reas. 1. This makes both the tongue and the
words soft. Reas. 2. Pride in the mouth is a rod to strike others with p. 37.
Reas. 3 Harshness of speech is an uncomliness. p. 38. Reas. 4 Meekness was the
Grace of Christ's lips. ibid.
4 Is, Modesty in speaking. 1 Of filthy actions. 2 Of things that are secret.
p. 39. 3 Of others faults. 4 Of our selves, and of our own virtues and praises.
p. 40.
5 Is, Reverence. 1 To God, to speak highly and honorably of him. p. 41. 2 To
man, to give men their due in titles, praises and respects. p. 42.
6 Is, caution, to take heed what you say. p. 45. 1 Not to give offense to
others. 2 Not to give others advantage against you. 3 So warily, as if all were
to be written which ye say. p. 46.
7 Is, Constancy and stedfastness, not to say and unsay. p. 46. 4 Have respect
to the season, when you speak. p 47. There be seasons for filence, which are
eight. p. 47, etc. And three reasons for keeping silence therein. p. 52. There
be also seasons of speech, which are four. p. 53 And three reasons for speech
therein. p. 56. 5 Have respect to the end of your speech, which should be 1
Gods glory. 2 Others good. p. 58, 59
The usefulness of the tongue 1 For healing. p. 59. 2 For feeding. p. 60.
3 Rule. Commit your tongues to Gods guidance. p. 61. Reas. Because God is the
tongue-maker, and Master, to 1 Command it. 2 Guide it. p. 62. 3 Keep it. p. 66.
4 Purge it. p. 68. 5 Prosper it. p. 70. 4 Rule. Observe, bewail and amend the
errors of your Tongues. p. 72. 5 Rule. Keep a good and constant correspondence
between tongue and hand, to do what you say. p. 74, 75. 5 Reasons for it.
Cautions, first, in making vows to God. p. 76. secondly, In making promises to
men. p. 78. The third thing is the Reasons of the Government of the Tongue,
drawn from five heads. p. 78. Reas. 1 From the difficulty of Tongue-Government,
because of the unruliness of the tongue, set out by six comparisons. p. 79,
etc. Reas. 2 From the excellency of the good order, and use of the Tongue in
five respects. p. 82. 1 Of Action. p. 82. 2 Commendation. p. 84. 3 Of
Perfection. p. 85. 4 Of Imitation. ibid. 5 Of Distinction. ibid. Reas. 3 From
the necessity of Tongue-Government. p. 86. In respect 1 Of God, that our
Tongues may obey him. p. 86. 2 Of Religion, to adorn it, and show the efficacy
of it. p. 87. 3 Of our selves and others.
1 Of our selves, to prevent the evil 1 Of Sin. p 89. 2 Of Misery, both Here.
p. 91. and Hereafter. p. 97.
2 The Government of our Tongue is needful, in respect of others, for the like
prevention 1 Of Sin. p. 99. 2 Of Mischief, both to places and persons. p. 101.
The mischief of the Tongue appears 1 By Scripture comparisons of it. p. 103. 2
By the Mercy of being delivered from it. p. 105. 3 By the final misery it
draws others into. p. 106.
Reas. 4 From the Commodity of the good Government of the Tongue, in respect of
Our selves, and Others. p. 107
1 Of our selves, to procure us, four things. 1 Life. p. 107. 2 Salvation. p.
108. 3 Joy. p. 109. 4 Satisfaction. p. 109
2 Of others, three Benefits redound to them thereby. 1 Communication of our
minds, Gifts, Graces, Experience. p. 110, 111 2 Salvation, both Temporal. p.
112 and Eternal.
3 Consolation. p. 112 Reas. 5 From the convenience of helps afforded us for
the Government af the Tongue, both Natural and Spiritual. p. 112 II A Table
of the Directions in particular cases relating to Speech, which are six. The
first Case is, confession of our sins to men. 115 Three Directions are given in
this duty. 1 In what Cases. 2 To what Persons. 3 From what Principles. 1 In
what cases, we should confess our faults one to another, which are eight. p.
116 1 Scandal, before Admission into Church Fellowship. ibid. or after p. 117
2 Injuries done to others. p. 117 3 Scruple about a sin that burdens the
conscience. p. 118 4 A common Judgment. p. 119. Or a particular affliction. p.
120 5 Reproof from others. p. 121 6 Copartnership in sin. p. 122 7 To magnify
the free Grace of God. p. 123 8 To prevent sin in others. p. 123
What faults we ought to confess to others; and what we may conceal. p. 124,
125, etc. 2 To what persons we should confess our faults. p. 127 3 From what
Principles, and in what manner this should be done. p. 129 The causes of men's
backwardness to confess sin. p. 131 How sin is to be named. p. 132 The second
case in which Direction is given, is, The confession of Christ before men. p.
134. Four Things concerning it are opened. 1 What this confession is. p. 134. 2
When it should be made. p. 139 3 Why we should confess with the mouth. p. 146
The Reasons are drawn. 1 From God, they are three. p. 147 2 From Christ, they
are two. ibid. 3 From our selves they are four. p. 151 4 From others. p. 151
4 How this Confession should be made. p. 157 In seven Particulars. 1 Freely,
without Compulsion. 2 Plainly, without obscurity. p. 157, 158. 3 Boldly,
without fear. p. 159 4 Constantly, without giving over, p. 160 5 Innocently,
without giving offense. p. 161 6 Sincerely, out of Love. p. 162 Zeal. p. 163
7 Patiently, with a resolution to suffer for our Testimony. p. 163
The third case is Reprehension. Touching which, three things are declared,
scil. Preparatives, Rules, and Reasons. 1 Preparatives to it, four, 1 Wisdom.
166 2 Righteousness. 167 3 Faithfullness. 167 4 Boldness. 168
2 Rules for Reproof, which respect four things. 1 The matter to be reproved,
that is, 1 Sin, the chief object of Reproof. p. 168 2 What we know to be a
fault both in it self, and in them whom we reprehend. p. 169
2 The persons to be reproved. p. 170 And who are not to be reproved 172, 173
3 The manner how to reprove, that is, by observing five Rules. 1 Rule. Reproof
must be given, 1 In love to their Persons. 174 2 In Pity to their infirmities.
174. 3 In Meekness, without Pride, passion, bitterness. 175 4 With respect to
their credit. 175
2 Rule, Reproof must be seconded with Arguments, p. 176. to set it home. 3
Rule, Reproof should be formed in Scripture-terms 176 4 Rule, Reproof should
be begun and ended with prayer. 177 5 Rule, Reproof for the manner of it,
should be suited. 1 To the quality of the person to be reproved. 178 There be
two ways of reproving. 181 1 Directly. 2 Indirectly, by way 1 Of obsecration.
2 Insinuation. 181. 3 Illustration. 4 Exemplification. 182
2 To the Nature of the offense, as it is, 1 Open or secret. 183 2 Great or
small. ibid. 3 As committed out of weakness or wilfullness 184 4 As committed
seldom or often. 5 As the party offending has been reproved, either not
before, or often, 184 4 The Season, when to reprove others. 185 The third thing
is the reasons why we should reprove others, drawn from three heads. 1 The
Necessity of it in respect 1 Of our selves. 187 2 Of others. 188
2 The Commodity of Reproof in the effects thereof, which are six. p. 191 3 The
Excellency of it. 193 The Reasons enforce a double duty upon us. 1 To give
reproof to others. Five Causes of our Averseness to it. 195 What is required of
us hereunto. 195, 196 2 To take Reproof well. 199 To this end take notice of
four things. 1 Of our backwardness to it. 199. and four causes thereof. 201 2
The right manner of bearing Reproof. 202 To wit. 1 Humbly. 2 Thankfully. 3
Effectually. 4 Patiently. 203 3 The means of taking Reproof well, scil. three.
1 A wise heart. 103 2 An obedient ear. 3 A tractable spirit. 204
4 Motives to this duty, from two heads. 1 The good of receiving Reproof, in
four particulars. p 204 2 The evil of rejecting it. 1 The evil of sin in six
particulars. 207 2 The evil of punishment. 210 The fourth case is
Communication or conferring together of the matters of God. 212 1 Rules for it.
2 Reasons of it. 1 Rules for it, which are ten. 1 In company improve time for
profitable edifying discourse. 214 2 Observe the dispositions and conditions of
the persons present to suit your discourse. 1 To their Necessities. 214 2 To
their capacities. 215
3 Raise spiritual discourse from temporal occasions. 215 4 Observe what
subjects Gods providence puts into your minds and mouths. 217 5 Get some Common
heads into your minds and hearts, that may be of general use to all, and at
all times. 217 6 The asking and answering of questions aright, conduces much
to mutual edification. 218 This we find 1 Under Precept in the old Testament.
218 2 Under practice and example in the New. 220
The right manner of asking questions. 221 7 Its lawful to discourse of
natural, moral and civil matters. 222 Urbanity, or the use of Recreationall
speeches is lawful. 223 Your Rules for ordering the same. 1 For matter. 224. 2
For manner. 3 For measure. 4 For end. 225. The use of Ironies. 226, 227 8 In
speech, seek not so much to show wit or eloquence as efficacious power of
speech. 227 Eloquence may be used, proved by four Reasons. 228 and how, 230 9
Rule. Speak of good things at home in your own families. 230, 231 10. Let your
discourse proceed from good Principles, as 1 The fear of God. 2 Love to others
souls. 3 Delight in spiritual things. 231 2 Reasons of it, why Christians
should confer together, they are five. Reas. 1 This is part of the Communion of
Saints. 231, 232 2 All sorts of persons confer about their own matters. 233 3
To this end, variety of gifts are given by the Spirit of God. 235 4 This will
augment our parts, and further our Accounts. 236 5 This service of godly
discourse is very acceptable 1 To God, 236, 2 To Jesus Christ. 237
The fifth Case is Consolation, to comfort one another. 239 Touching which are
delivered 1 Rules. 2 Reasons.
1 Rules for comforting others, which are six, 1 Know their case, what it is,
and the cause of their trouble. 239 2 Then pity them, and sympathize with them.
240 3 Apply comforts suitable to their needs. 240 1 If their case be Necessity.
ibid. 2 If it be death of friends. 241 3 If Persecution. 242. 4 If desertion.
243 5 If any other Affliction. ibid. 4 Rule, Choose the best means to comfort
others by, as 1 Kind and loving speeches. 244 2 Strong reasons or arguments.
245 3 Plain Scriptures fitly applied. ibid. 4 Experience, both our own. 246.
and others. 247 5 The evidence and exercise of our Graces. ibid. 6 Prayer to
God. 248
5 R^le Consider the persons who are fit to be comforted. 1 Gods people above
all others. 249 2 Weak and faint souls, ibid. 3 Mourners for sin 250. For want
of Gods presence. 251. For Misery. ibid. 4 Seekers of Christ. 252
6 Rule, write letters of Consolation. 252. Send Messengers. 253. And take
journies to comfort others. 254 II Reas. Why we should comfort others, drawn
from four heads. Reas. 1 The Necessity and Commodity of comfort, in respect of
others in six, respects. 254 Reas. 2 The Misery of them that want comfort. 258
Reas. 3 The Excellency of the duty in it self.
It is 1 The work of God to comfort poor souls. Of God the Father. 259 Of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost. 260 2 The practice of the Godly. 262
Reas. 4 The equity of the duty in respect of us, in four particulars. 262
Quest. How may we comfort afflicted consciences? 264 Ans. Take these five
directions. 1 Set before them these eight grounds of Consolation. 1 The
greatness and freeness of Gods pardoning and reconciling mercy. 265 2 The
infiniteness of Christ's merits. 265 3 Gods gracious and general tender of
Christ and his benefits to any that will receive him. 266 4 Christ's invitation
of all to him, that feel any want of him, or have any desire to him. 267 5 The
Examples or Experiences of Gods mercy manifested to the greatest of sinners.
268 6 That some of Gods servants have drank deep of this cup of soul-troubles.
269 7 Gods promises of healing. 275. Quickening. 276. Illightning. 277. Of
returns. 278. Of peace and joy. 280 8 Set before them, and apply to them, Two
things. 1 Grace may be hid for a time, and not discerned by them that have it.
281. And they that have, cannot lose it wholly, for five Reasons. 283 2 The
desire of Grace is Grace. 286. Proved by five Reasons.
True desires may be descerned. 1 By the root from which they spring, which is
threefold. 290 2 By the fruit or effect of them. 291 3 By the properties of
them, which are 4. 292 1 Sincere for ground and end. 2 Vigorous stirring and
strong. 3 Seasonable for time. 293 4 Constant and continual for duration. 294
2 Direction, Caution them against four evils, to take heed 1 That they do not
dishonor God. 295 2 That they do not destroy their own souls 296 1 By denying
what God has done for them 2 By refusing what God would give to them. 297 3
That they do not gratify Satan. 297 1 By entertaining parley with him. 298 2
By harkening to his Temptations, which are five. ibid.
4 That they do not satisfy their disquieted hearts in four things. 299

3 Direction. In dealing with afflicted souls, cherish three Graces in them, to
wit, 1 Repentance. 300. 2 Faith. 3 Patience. 301 4 Direction. Take a right
course for healing their distempers. 1 By searching the sore to the bottom. 302
2 By turning the stream of their passions into another Channel.
5 Direction. Bear with their Infirmities, as ignorance, frowardness. 303 The
sixth and last Particular case is self-commendation. This has been the
practice of Gods servants. 303 This is lawful in eleven cases. 304 1 Of
Afflictions from God. 2 Of injuries from men. 305 3 To show forth the infinite
riches of Gods free Grace. 307 4 To give others occasion and provocation. 308 1
To pray for us. 2 To praise God for us. 3 To glory on our behalf. 5 When others
require an account of our faith, holiness, etc. 309 6 When we would propound
our selves to others, as examples for their imitation. 309 7 When enemies
accuse us, and friends will not vindicate us. 310 8 To show and approve our
integrity; to uphold the credit of our callings; further the success of our
labors, promote the efficacy of our counsel. 310 and to manifest our love to
others. 311 9 When the cause of Christ, or his Church, and Name of God is like
to suffer if we be silent. 312 10 When we leave the people, or place where we
lived, or the office we did bear. p. 312 11 Case. To convince others of their
sins against 1 God. 2 Our selves. 314
What Self-commendation is sinful. 314, 315 What Self-commendation is lawful,
in four respects. 1 For the Matter, when the things for which we commend our
selves are 1 Good in themselves. 317 2 Really ours. 318
2 For the measure, to speak rather under than over. 319 3 For the manner, in a
threefold respect. 1 Of our selves, when we commend our selves, 1 Forcedly, not
forwardly. 319 2 Humbly out of a sense of our own Infirmities. 320 3 Modestly
without boasting. 322
2 Of God, thankfully out of a sense of Gods goodness to us, 323 3 Of others,
charitably and tenderly. 324
4 For the End. Self-commendation is lawful when our aim therein is, in
respect 1 of our selves, to do our selves right, not to get praise. 324 2 Of
God, to give him glory. 325 3 Of others, to promote their good, by our example
and experience. 326

Of Perfection in this life.
How Job did justify himself as if he was perfect. 327 In what sense we are
said to be perfect in Scripture. 332. scil. 1 In respect of our being in
Christ. 333 2 Of our justification before God. ibid. 3 In reference to our
Sanctification, in six respects. 336
1 Of parts. 1 When the whole man is sanctified in every part, though not
wholly. 2 When he has the seeds of all Grace in him. What the Perfection of
degrees is, 337 2 Of progress. When we have attained to some good measure of
grace here. ibid. 3 Of uprightness, that is called Perfection. 339 4 Of
furniture with gifts and graces for our work. 341 5 Of desires and endeavors
after perfection. 342 6 In respect of establishment and perseverance in well
doing. p. 345. Perseverance is perfection. Object. God commands us to be
perfect here. Answers thereto, in p. 345, etc. No man can be without sin, or
fully perfect in this life, proved by six Arguments. 1 Argu. This is contrary
to the holy Scriptures. 350. To the experience of all Saints. ibid. To the
state or constitution of all the Saints in this life. 352 Object. 1 Why are
Gods people said to be perfect, if they be not so? Ans. In three particulars.
p. 353 Object. 2 Why God suffers sin to remain in his people here? Ans. In
three particulars. p. 354 2 Argu. Absolute Perfection was proper to Christ, and
is peculiar to Heaven. p. 355 3 Argu. Those that plead their perfection,
discover much sin in their spirits, speeches and carriage. p. 356 4 Argu. The
opinion of Perfection in this life, shakes the fundamentals of religion. p. 357
5 Argu. In every place of Scripture where Perfection is spoken of the Saints
here, something goes before, or follows after, which expresses or implies
their Imperfection. p. 358 6 Argu. The Saints who are styled perfect in the
Scriptures are noted for their infirmities. p. 360 Humane Testimonies against
Perfection in this life. 362



FINIS.
Reader, Take notice
1 That there are sundry literal faults, which thou may easily amend, and
pass by; as speakin for speaking, babbling for babbling, irresistably for
irresistibly -- and for or, and or for and; a change of Numbers, as word for
words, forces for force; and of persons, sometimes, as, -- he for the. -- And
such like.

These, as I have observed are the greatest.

Page. 31. line 34. read reins, p. 38. l. 32. r. bleate, p. 62. l. 8. r. not,
p. 63. l. 7. r. I will be with thy mouth, p. 64. l. 1. r. that we know not
what to say, p. 70. l. 1. r. his Altar, p. 164. l. 13. r. piety, p. 166. l. 16.
r. opportunities, p. 178. l. 29. r. as soon as it is sown, p. 201. l. 30. r. 2 Chronicles. 25.16. p. 214. l. 2. r. some, p. 223. l. 13. r. commends, p. 227. l. 14.
r. dexterity, l. 18. r. jocing, l. 22. r. seek. p. 231. l. 13. blot out 1. p.
258. l. 8. blot out 1. p. 260. l. 23. r. (...), p. 344. l. 16. r. waxing.

2 That there are some Marginall faults, as Page 8. for Psalm. 30. read 39. 3.
p. 51. for 2 Samuel r. 1. Sam. 25. p. 67. r. Psalm. 141. 3. p. 94. for Psalm. 102.
r. 120. 3, 4. p. 97. for Psalm. 136. r. 139. 4. p. 103. r. Deuteronomy. 33. 29. p. 105.
r. Jonah 1. 3. p. 145. r. Gal. 1. 6. p. 173. l. 11. add Prove. 15. 12. p. 175.
for Genesis 21. 22. r. Genesis 9. 21, 22. p. 231. for Romans 11. 11. r. Romans 1. 11. p.
245. for Zachary 11. 13. r. Zach. 1. 13. p. 311. for 2 Timothy 1. 8. r. 2 Timothy 1.
3. p. 340. for Job 1. 1. 5. Job 1. ^.


