AN ANSWER TO THE London Ministers Letter: FROM THEM To his Excellency and his
Counsel of War; As also an Answer to JOHN GEREE'S Book, entitled, Might
overcomming Right; With an answer to a Book, entitled, The Armies Remembrancer.

Wherein it appears the accusations of the Army are unjust, and the Armies
proceedings justified by the Word of God, and by the light of Nature and Reason.

Also a discovery of that Learning, and Ordination these Ministers have, and
the vanity and insufficiency thereof, by the Word of God, and that those are
the things with which they delude and deceive the people.

They have seen vanity, and lying divination, saying, The Lord says, and the
Lord has not sent them, and they have made others to hope that they would
confirm the word. My hand shall be on the Prophets that see vanity, and divine
lies. Ezekiel. 13. 2. 3 4. 6. The Lord frustrateth the tokens of liars, and makes
diviners mad; turns wise men backward. and makes their knowledge foolishnes,
Esa, 44. 25. But God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound
the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the
things that are mighty, 1 Cor. 1. 27. By Samuel Richardson. London printed by
I. C. for Hanah Alin, at the Crown in Popes Head Alley. 1649.

To the GENERAL, and his excellent Counsel of War.
Right Honorable, and worthy Sirs:
HOnest and faithful Fairfax, and Cromwell, etc. That Counsel cannot but be
excellent, Judge. 6. 12, 13
that is righteous, for; Pro. 12. 26
the righteous is more excellent then his Neighbor: Let it therefore please
your Excellencies to consider, that not any thing will become you, but that
which is excellent, singular, extraordinary; Wisdom, Justice, Micha 6 8
Love, Mercy, Nobleness, Self-denial; Do good to them that hate you, Pro 16.
9
love your enemies. He has showed thee O man, what is good, Eccl. 4. 1
what does the Lord require of thee to do, Numb. 23. 22, 23
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. It shall be said,
what has God wrought, Esaias 26. 18.
we have not wrought any deliverance in the earth. You are a terrible Army,
Psalm. 46. 11
for the Lord is come down among you, the Lord of Host is with you, Esaias 42.
8. to 17
the God of Jacob is your refuge. All that were incensed against thee shall
perish, See Ier. 1. 9
they that war against thee shall be as nothing, Psa. 98. 1, 2, 3
and as a thing of naught. You have undertaken to lay a foundation of Peace,
Exo. 34. 14
if you do it not, you deceive your selves and us, Esaias 40. 17
the work you are a doing is of the Lord; you have a good Cause (you are
against Tyranny and injustice, they are for both) stand to it, fear not, stand
not still, go forward, make haste, be faithful in a little, Heb. 13. 5. 8
keep that which is committed to thee; put no power into their hands who know
not the righteous, or look upon them to be wicked. We cannot help our selves
if you should leave us, it had been better for us to have wandered in the
Wildernesses, if you should (as we trust you will not) betray the Work of God
in your hands, by leaving it to them that will spoil it; What will become of
the people of God? the Generations to come will say; Ye began well, and lost
much blood, but your hearts fainted, proved back-sliders, suffered all to come
to nothing, lost your end, and the glory of your former faithfulness; Verily,
every man at his best estate is altogether vanity. Selah, We acknowledge you to
be a Mercy of God to us, Psa 39. ^. 11
and this Kingdom; your entire love and fidelity is a small thing to many,
Psa. 144. 4.
but not so to us; that which you have done for to prevent persecution in
matters of Religion, is a singular thing, extraordinary: The loves and
kindnesses you have showed to us herein, the God of Heaven takes it as done to
himself. I heartily thank you in the behalf of my self, and a hundred
thousand, for your entire and sincere love to us; you have indeared our hearts
to you, we think not our Lives too much for you, because you have saved our
Lives, and more, and have not esteemed your Lives too much for us, but often
have offered them up for us; we resolve to live and dye with you. Esaias 65. 8.
Sweet friends, I present you with the best I have, its a little one, Zac. 4. 10
yet who knows but you may see something of God in it. Have you never read,
Out of the mouth of Babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise. The Lord
will bless and preserve you, there shall not a hair of your head perish, Mat.
6. 16
much less your Lives, without your Father. psalm. 48 14
When you have served your time, and done the work God has appointed you to
do, 1 These. 4. 17 18
then, and not till then he will send for you home, then shall we be for ever
with the Lord, wherefore comfort one another with these words.

I am your Friend and Brother: Jan. 23. 1648, Samuel Richardson.

To all that love the TRVTH in sincerity.
Dear Friends:
THe Lord is doing a great and wonderful work for his People, and this
Nation, by the Army; when the Ministers heard of it, that the breaches began to
be stopped, like Tobias and Sanballat, then they were very wroth, and conspired
all of them together, to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it, Nehe. 4.
7, 8. See verse 4. 5. So do these Ministers, to obstruct, and hinder the Army
from stopping up the breaches others have made. There arose out of the
bottomless pit, smoke, and the smoke was as the smoke of a great furnace;
and the Sun and the Air was darkened, by reason of the smoke of the pit: and
there came out of this smoke Locusts, and to them was given power to do hurt.
Revel. 9, 2, 3. and 5. 8. This smoke is the learning of the Ministers, this is
the wisdom of knowledge, that perverts them, Esaias 47. 10. This is not the
wisdom and knowledge of God, Locusts comes up, and out of this smoke, in
their learning men grow up, and become Ministers; this; smoke, this learning,
darkened the Sun; obscure Christ he cannot be seen for this smoke, and the Air
was darkened by reason of this smoke: Men's minds are darkened and clouded they
cannot see, nor understand the knowledge of the light of the Sun, viz. of
Christ; by reason of it, it has been often observed, that the greatest
Scholars are the worst men, and where they are, the people are the most
ignorant of God. To do hurt to those men that have not the seal of God upon
their foreheads, ver. 3, 4, 5. see the description of them is in ver. 7, 8, 9,
10, 11. This smoke blindes men's eyes that they cannot see God, nor his works,
there is a veil over men's eyes that they cannot see by reason of it: the
Priests, and their Learning, is this veil, forty seven appear in Print in one
Book against the proceedings of the Army, from these Learned men there has
come such a great smoke, that some that did see are now made blind. So as they
profess they cannot see as they did The god of this world has blinded their
eyes; yet if they can but hear, we hope they shall see better then ever;
therefore hear and consider these things:

1 That you must not judge that to be truth, which the greatest number of
Ministers are for, but the contrary: The Prophets of Baal are four hundred to
one true Prophets of the Lord, Micaial^, 1 King. 22. 6. 24. So now wonder not
though there be four hundred against one Peter's, who is a true Prophet, rude in
speaking, not in so knowledge, 1 Cor, 11. 6, he is led by the spirit of God,
and the others not. Many say do the Rulers, the Ministers, approve of what the
Army have done? So said they in Christ's time, have any of the Rulers or of the
Pharisees believed in him, John 7, 48. this deseives many, see Zach. 13. 3. 4.

Secondly, Thou think that the wise and learned men, know more then other
men; but the truth is, they know least, if you will believe Christ. Thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes.
see Luke 10. 21. The Scripture is sufficient to furnish every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 16. without their learning.

Thirdly, Thou think the learning these Ministers have, is that learning the
Scripture commends, to enable men to know the truth; but its not so, do but
consider Christ's Apostles were ordinary men, ignorant unlearned Tradesmen,
Fishermen etc, When they saw Peter and John, and perceived that they were
unlearned and ignorant men, they marvailed, and perceived they had been with
Jesus. Act. 4. 13. the anointing is that which teaches us, the spirit leads
us into all truth, and searches the deep things of God. This alone is
sufficient, see 1 John 2. 26. 27. 1 Cor. 12. 7. John 16. 7. 2. Cor 2. 10. 14.
the gifts of the Spirit Simon Magus would have bought, with money. se Acts 8.
18. the tongues and arts which these ministers have, are bought with money and
industry, nor are they such The tongues* the Apostles had were not so come by,
they in a moment were inspired, nor were they like these, See Act. 22. 8. 27.
10. 44. 19. 6. None are the nearer to the knowledge of the mind of the spirit
for having all this learning and humane arts these ministers have; Nicodemus
was a Pharesee, a learned man as these Ministers are, a Teacher and a Ruler,
yet was as blind in the understanding of being borne again, as the greatest
fool in the world, Popes and Cardinals, Priests, enemies to God, and his
Truth, and people. Are Learned men good Scholars? the Jesuits are so by these
Ministers confession; this learning is that Knowledge that puffs up, makes men
proud, God resists the proud, S^ Pet. 5. 5. These Ministers are not ashamed to
say to the army, It is suitable for private persons to have propounded, and for
the Msnisters of the Gospel to have resolved, Behold the pride of these men,
they are high-minded, they would have the Army to know that they are but
private persons, and that themselves are ministers of the Gospel, and that
their knowledgo and understanding, is above theirs; For they have not the
learning they have, and therefore if there be a question to be propounded, they
must be sent for to resolve it; they may not have so much liberty as to speak
what they understand, to their own questions that concern them, because they
are private persons; But dare these Ministers say, such as are private persons
have not the Spirit of God? Or will they deny the sufficiency of the Spirit,
teaching so much as to answer to a question. Oh the pride of these men! blush
oh heavens at their blasphemy, for they attribute it to their learning. This
savours strongly of the flesh, Phil. 2, 3. and is contrary to the word of the
Lord which says The Spiritual man discerns all things, yea the deep things
of God. 2 Cor. 2. 14. we are warned to take heed of Philosophy, it spoils men,
Col. 2. 8. Men say their learning is a good help if sanctified; No man is able
to prove, that God did approve of the use of it, for to be a help to know the
mind of God, much less that he ever did, or ever will sanctify it for such an
use; The Scripture prove the contrary. Learning is a wise thing in the eyes of
the world; therefore God rejects it. God has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the world
to confound the things that are mighty. 1 Cor. 1 27. God will not have his
Gospel preached in wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ should be made
of no effect. 1 Cor. 1 17. it is contrary to Christ, v. 18. its never blessed
by God to be a help in spirituals, God destroys it, 1 Cor. 1. 19. The Gospel
is not to be taught at, in excelency of speech or man's wisdom, Declaring unto
you the testimony of God, which things also, we speak not in words which man's
wisdom teaches but which the Holy Ghost teaches, comparing spiritual things
with spiritual. 1 Cor. 2, 1. 3. not with natural; God chooses foolish people
to salvation, Jam. 1. 9. 10. and such Christ chooses for Ministers, else if
they were not foolish ministers, according to man's wisdom, worldly wise men
would not esteem there preaching to be foolish, as they did (1 Cor. 1. 25.)
and now do, a little Pedlers French, or wild Irish, does foolish people as much
good as Greek and Hebrew, such a one is a great Scholar, and what else?
nothing: that is enough, or its a hundred to one but he is mad (much learning
has made them mad) or proud, and what then. Then God resists him, and gives
grace to the humble, God will confound the wise, that no flesh should rejoice,
1 Cor. 1. 29. Man's teaching is a poor thing, 1 Cor, 13. 1. 2.

Fourthly the learning of the spirit humbles men, and causes them to glory in
the Lord, 1 Cor. 2, 8. 1 Cor. 1. 31. 1 John 9. 10. and not in humane learning
as they do, Learning is a great treasure with some, Heb. 11. 26, 27. Learning
is a worldly treasure Acts 7. 22. a rudiment of the world.

Fifthly, If knowledge be spiritual it savoreth the things of the spirit. Romans
8. 5. they saver truth and the people of God, these ministers do not so, they
are like mad men at the truth and people of God, a carnal mind is enmity to
Gnd, cannot be subject to him, Romans 8. 7. If God please to give thee
understanding of these things, thy eyes shall be opened. Consider this and that
which follows, and take heed of Idolatry, Search the Scripture, and see
whether these things be so or no, See that ye call not darkness light, and light
darkness, Little children And concerning the Armies proceedings, if you consider
the grounds they bring against the Army, it will appear to be contrary to
reason and scripture, they alleadg for proof, the intention of the Parl. to be
binding to the Army, which is against scripture and Reason; for by the same
reason it will follow, that if the Parl. did not intend, that they and we
should do good, we must not do any: so they allege authority against them, a
few private persons, so they condemn what good was done in Scotl. by Argyle and
Crumwell etc. they were not the Parl. nor the whole people, nor nor the major
part, yet approved of by the Parl. of England all the best men in Engl. and
Scotl: so the Ministers would have the Army, not to act a^cording their own
understanding, but contrary which is against the light of nature, so they say,
all acts of justice is to be by the Magistrate; yet they who were to thrust
them through were no Magistrates; see Zack. 13. 3. Tyrany, wickedness and
oppression, they urge us to be subject for conscience sake, because they are
Magistrates, and all power is of God; but all power is not in the Magistrate,
some is else where, Isa. 40. ^9. 1 Cor. 1. 18. 1 Cor. 4. 9. its well some is in
the Army farewell.

S. R.

An Answer to the London Ministers Letter to the General, and his Council of
War.
As also an Answer to John Gerees Book* and the Armies Rememberances.
MInisters charge the Army, as intermedling with the affairs that belong not
unto you, to usurp Authority over the King and Parliament, seazing and
imprisoning the Kings Person, without the knowledge and consent of Parliament,
unparalleld violence offered the Members of Parliament, violating their
Privileges, injurious and destructive to the Kingdom, and that by an Army
raised for, and by the Authority of Parliament, for the preservation of the
Privileges thereof, our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, contrary to their
trust and engagements, do that which tends to the manifest subvertion of them
all, the Parl. torn a pieces by professed friends in one day.

Answ. The Armies Commission was from the Parliament: therefore the Authority
of it, is the same with that; and as Soldiers, they were to act for, and
against all that opposed the peace, liberty, and safety of the Kingdom: so that
if they have not gone further, nor done nothing contrary to their Commission
(of which more in the ensuing discourse*) Then they have not exceeded their
Calling and Commission, and therefore are not to be charged with sin.

2. Grant the Parl. did not intend (when they gave the Army Commission) that
the Army should judge of their Councels and imprison their persons: nor no more
did the King when he gave his Commission to call this Parliament, he did not
intend that they should leavy War, and raise forces against him, etc. the cause
is the same, and the Reasons that will justify the Parl* in opposing the King
in his evil will, justifies the Armies proceeding against the Parl. in theirs:
what is alleged concerning the Parliaments intention^, is irrational, they
are unknown to us, nor binding, if they intended well, or ill* their intentions
could not change the nature of things, nor cause good to be evil, nor evil to
be good: if they had then resolved that they would not for the future do any
act, but what was then in their minds, they had gone too far, no man can tell
what he shall do to morrow, much less 7. years hence.

3. The Army had no Commission from the people so to act, it may be made
appear, that they had the consent of the people, as appeared by the many
Petitions presented to the Army, from many parts of the Kingdom: if it be said,
they were but a small part, we answer, they were the better part, wise, and
faithful, who were friends to Parl. no Parliament man had the consent of all
where they were chosen: that the Kings party who are against the Parl. and
Army, that they should consent to the actions of the Army, it is not to be
expected nor desired, the Army themselves are to be considered, to be a greater
number then 2. or 3. of a few private persons as they say, not because they
think so, but because they would have been so; but if the people had declared
against that they have done, y^^ is it to be justified, to be necessary, good,
and lawful.

4. Men may, and ought to do good without Commission, but not evil with
Commission, if the Kingdom may not be delivered without a Commission from man,
then not a City. I demand of all these Ministers what Commission or Calling the
poor man had that delivered the City by his wisdom, Eccles. 9. 15. there is no
mention of any, but the contrary appears, for the wisdom of the poor is
despised, and his words are not heard. verse 16. if so, then they gave him no
Commission. 2. None remembered him for delivering the City; if they had given
him Commission to do it, was it likely they could so easily forget, so as none
could so remember him.

5. Necessity is above the Law of God, therefore (above the Law of man) David
eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat: his necessity is
above Law, and that made it lawful, Mat. 12. the Scripture approve of his
doing of it; but I require of you what express word, (excepting the general
duty, what Command) had he to warrant him to eat it. 6. A course in it self
singular, and unjustifiable, by reason of some circumstances falling in, may
not only become lawful, but a duty, and sin to neglect it, public things are
to be done by public Authority, the dictates of reason and common consent of
all counsels, allow to those entrusted with the supreme authority of a state or
Kingdom they allow not, to a multitude of private persons, though they have
strength in their hands to effect it, grant it in case they will do it, but
what if they will not do it, (then the cause is altered) but do that which will
endanger all; if this be your mind, I desire to know upon what ground you will
justify Phineas Act lawful; I doubt not, but what the Army has done, may be
justified upon the same ground, and Gerees argument against the Army condemns
the Act of Phineas; all exercise of jurisdiction, where neither by God or man
we are clothed with Authority; is usurpation breach of Order injurious, and so
greatly sinful; but Phineas act was an exercise of jurisdiction, and he was
not clothed with Authority, not from God or man to do it: therefore that his
act was us^rpation, a breach of order injurious, and so greatly sinful, we
challenge you to prove if you can, that Phineas had any express Command from
God or man, jurisdiction, or Commission to run them through as he did with his
jaulin, he was no Magistrate, he was but the sun of a Priest, it was an act of
Judicature: also they were his superiors, for they were Princes that he killed,
Numb. 25. 7. 8. 15. condemn it you cannot, because God does in express words
commend it, and reward it. v. 11. 12. 13. you use to say, it is an
extraordinary cause, but the Scripture says not so: therefore its but an
extraordinary put off, so shift your hands of it, tell us how we shall know
when we have such an extraordinary cause, that we may do so in that cause: the
Lord does not say, he did well because (he was a Magistrate, and had
jurisdiction, and clothed with authority, but) he was zealous for his God,
ought not the Army (as well as others) to be zealous for God. But if after that
act of Phineas, so such act could be lawful, why is this act of his,
Recommended to all Generations for evermore, Psalm. 106. 30. 31. God had
appointed such parsons as he slew to death: the Magistrate did not do Justice,
therefore God sent the Plague among the people, he knew none else would do it,
all ealse refusing it, fell to be his duty, and he did it, and the plague
ceased, and it is recorded for after generations, for a righteous act: this is
the Armies cause, and though you condemn it, we pass not, so long as Gods word
warrants it, and shall be a righteous act to all Generations for evermore,
wisdom is justified of her Children.

I am no Magistrate, it belongs not to me to pass sentence upon any man, much
less to put him to death; but suppose I be set upon in my journey, so as I see
not how I can escape with my life; but I must kill or be killed: now the cause
is altered, I may murder him, as you call it, and the Law says, its no
murder; I had sinned, if I had not done it; for that Law that requires me to
preserve my Neighbors life, bids me preserve my own first, charity is to begin
at home, though not to end there upon this ground, if the cause were the same:
there be them that would put no difference between a Priest and another man.

7 If God discover his Will to men, and give them hearts and opportunities,
wisdom and power to do it, its there calling and commission to do it. I
know no calling that I have to take care, and provide provision and clothes for
another man's wife. Besides, it is not of good report, but rather a scandal to
do it; but suppose her Husband cannot, or will not, nor any else provide them
for her, and she cannot help her self; now the cause is altered, I must be
merciful, and if I be able to help to provide those things for her, and if I
suffer her to perish, will it not be my sin also? This is the cause of the
Kingdom, the King should have helped, etc. but did not, then it became the
duty of the Parliament to have releeved the Kingdom, but they did not; her
necessities great, and many Petitions concerning th^^ were slighted and burnt,
waited many years for help; our oppressions not removed, all complain dangers
increase, no remedy appears, they not help us, nor tell us how long it will be
before this Parliament will be at an end that we may have another, to see if
they will help us* when all fails, no ground of hope of life is left: danger
eminent, and no other means of help left, this is a cause of necessity. Now
it is the duty of the Army to help, and if they had not, it had been their
sin, if not their overthrow; if they had suffered it to perish, the Kingdom
had been well helped up with a remedy in extremity.

If the Army had been as the Priest and Levit, that allowed no help to the man;
this the wounded and dying Kingdom, I would, if I could, have done it my self
alone, and not ask no leave; God requires me to do all the good I can to my
self, and others, if I can do good without man, I will not ask his leave; I
need not, suppose I see one a robbing of another, or has taken his Cloak,
etc. from him, I will require him to give it him again, if he will not; if I
can, I will take it by force and give it the owner: If he, or any say, You are
out of your Calling* what, and who gave you commission to meddle with me? So
long as I do that which is just I pass not for such words, it is my duty, as
a man, and as a Christian, to releeve the oppressed, and do what good I can;
if I were able I would quickly remove all the oppressions in this Kingdom, and
the next, and if I could the next to that, and I should sin if I did not do
it. Who gave Cromwell Commission to do so much good as he did in Scotland? I
doubt that the old Cavise, and the new ones, the Priests are unsatisfied,
scrupeled, and very much doubt of his call into Scotland, etc.

8 The Army had a clear call to do what they did according to the London
Ministers Principle, as appears clearly from their own confession; they say,
A necessity of a Letter must be framed to the General* etc. but observe (upon
what grounds they make it appear, they have a call from God to do so) We
apprehend our selves obliged thus to appear for the maintenance of, and settling
the Government of the Kingdom; to testify our utter dislike and detestation,
it is most apparent to us your way and practice is unlawful and irrigular, in
zeal for Gods glory we have discharged our duty.

This is in their Judgments and Conscience a clear call, so that if the Army
can say the same things, they have the same call they have; I should be
heartily sorry if they had no better call then the Ministers, whose Conscience
I appeal to, whether if they had power in their hands to reform all things,
that (in their Consciences) are amiss, whether they do not judge that they
ought to do it, and should sin if they did not do it, though they are no
Magistrates; if they say, ye, then they justify the Army (for they do but
according as they are persuaded by God in his Word, and their own Conscience)
if they say no, if I did believe them, I am persuaded their judgments would
change the very first day that the power comes in their hands.

9 The Army had an express command of God to warrant their not disbanding, and
ceazing on the Members, and the sixth Command injoynes, that they should do no
murder; this general command comprehends all the particulars under it by way
of precept are enjoined, I must do no murder, therefore (...) must use all the
means of the preservation of my life, and my Neighbors; but the ceazing on
these Members is a means of preventing this evil; I see disbanding and
permission of these Members is inconsistent to the safety of our lives and
others; by the Law of Nature every one is to use all lawful means to preserve
himself and others, the blame must rest on them that caused it; that is, these
Parliament Men, for had they done well they should not have been meddled with,
all means, with too much patience have been used but nothing prevails.

10 All Actions agreeable to the Word is lawful, but to put a stop to prevent
the shedding of innocent blood is agreeable to the Word; for its the way to
prevent much blood to ceaze on these Members, therefore they were bound in
conscience to do it.

So that the Kingdom have great cause to justify and thank them for what
they have done.

Its apparent to us there was no necessity of these your irrigular practices,
its discerned only by your selves, and your own Party: We say the same to you,
its apparent to us that there was an absolute necessity to do as we did, none
think otherwise but the Cavies, and their Party, I Geree, who is fittest to
judge the People; or the Parliament, the Army do but pretend an apparent
necessity of danger, its but a fancy, an uncertain fancy, a private conceit,
visible to them and their Party, the Army is vanquished by this one poor dart
of pretended necessity, the danger is greater this way then in the Treaty. Are
you more able to judge then the Army, and their Party? Are you infallible, you
presume you know better then the Parliament, who has declared, That what the
Parliament men did, was highly dishonorable to the proceedings of Parliament,
and apparent destructive to the good of the Kingdom, and that their Votes
destructive to the Kingdom, and that some of them regarded not the glory of
God, and the good of the Commonwealth.

The Paliaments determinations are uncontrovleable by inferiors: if the power
of Judging, and restraining, is only in the Representatives, then they may do
what they will, and destroy the Kingdom by authority, you allow not the people
in no cause whatsoever, not the least privilege, or liberty, to help
themselves: then to what purpose have we fought for the liberties and
privilege of the people, when it seems they are notto have any, if it be as
you say, we are absolute slaves without any liberty; for liberty turned into
necessity, is liberty no longer; your principle is large and dangerous, when
iniquity runs down like a mighty stream, you say, let it run, they are
Rebels and Traitors that offer to stop it; this principle will please Tyrants,
that they may do what they will, none may call them to account, nor meddle
with them, if they act contrary to the end and intent of a Parliament, if they
refuse to consider the tears of the oppressed, and the cries of the poor, and
burn our Petitions instead of grantting them, increase our burdens and
oppressions, they may commit as much sin, and do as much mischief as they
please, and be sheltred under ally, which you call the privilege of
Parliament; but if it be not a sin in the people to suffer those in Authority
to sin; why did God punish the people, for the sins of those in authority,
as appears Jer. 15. 1, 2, 3, 4. 2 King. 21. 11. 12. and 24. 3. Your Doctrine
is exceedingly contrary to Scripture, for if the Saints may bind Kings in
chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron; to execute on them the Judgments
written, this honor have all the Saints, Psalm. 149. 7, 8, 9. Then I hope they
may put a stop to wicked Rulers. You cry, its against the freedom of
Parliament* they have had freedom enough to sin, a breach of Privilegde, to
remove and punish evil doers is abomination to you; you should have proved by
Scripture, that they are to have such a privilege: but what you say is but
suitable to what once one of the Bishops Ministers told me, that it was the
Magistrates sin, if he commanded that which was evil, but not ours in
obeying an unlawful command; and that if the Magistate commanded me to kneel
to a Crucifix, I might lawfully do it, and we must be subject to Authority,
for conscience sake.

This is one of your Ministers of the Gospel, this Fig-leafe will not hold,
The woman gave me, therefore I did eat; The Parliament bid me, therefore I did
it; I was not to judge, I am under the command of my Superior a sworn
servant, to do his will right or wrong, my Ooth is indispensible, the Ship of
the Commonwealth must be steared as the Master thinks best, I see he runs it
upon the Rock, and it will be spilt; but he can tell better then I, I am not to
judge, not to take it out of his hand. Besides, the Ministers say it must be
so, therefore I am content to suffer with a good Conscience; all power is Gods,
and its all in the Magistrate; God requires me to do good, but I must not do
it without his consent. God appointed Magistrates for our good, Romans 13. 4.
therefore he may ruin all: this is the sum of your Exposition.

The Word of God is to be his Rule in Commanding, and mine in Obeying; we are
both limited to the Rules of Scripture, Gods glory, and the good of others, it
must appear unto us.

If the people may not Judge, but the Magistrate, then the people are inslaved
to their judgments, and we must act our own Ruin if they bid us, which is
contrary to the Scripture: For the Children of Israel sinned, in that they
obeyed unlawful Commands: Epharim is oppressed and broken in Judgment,
because he willingly walked after the Commandment, Hos. 5. 10, 11. For the
Statute of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk
in their Councels, that I should make them a desolation, and a hishing;
therefore ye shall be are the reproach of my people, Micha 6. 16. The wisdom
of the prudent is to understand his way, Prove. 14. 8. Therefore the Army did
well, to consider what they did, in obeying, or not obeying; else we should
equal the Parl. with God, yea, and prefer them before him, in obeying them
against God. Every thing in the use of it, is either good, or evil; the most
indifferent thing when it comes to action is so, when the circumstances of it
is good, the action is good; if any of the circumstances of it are evil, the
action is evil.

Is no act binding unless it be sufficiently cleared; is a tenent destructive
to all Government: how can we judge it our duty to do that which we know not;
your doctrine tends strongly to blind obedience, to do we know not what.

All actions without Faith is sinful: that which we know nor what it is,
cannot be done in Faith, I must be fully persuaded of the lawfulness of that I
do, Romans 14. 27. which I cannot be, unless it be sufficiently cleared.

The whole People should Judge the whole Nation, who made them Trustees should
cast them off.

Bravely spoke, then they may for ever do what they list, for if there be but
two Persons for them, then the whole are not agreed, and so all must be as it
was, etc.

Danger of inconvenientie should not cause persons to be Controulers of
Magistracy. What no inconveniency? If so, we must then quietly, and contentedly
suffer our selves to be destroyed. The pleae, of necessity, is of the less
weight in your cause, because (we fear) the ends you aim at, are no more
justifiable then the means you use, the necessity pleaded is either merely
pretended, or at least, contracted by your own miscariage: who made you a
Judge of evil thoughts; as for the necessity and the means they use, its
justifiable by the word, this is above answered.

Power of executing is committed to the Army, to execute the uncontrollable
Decree of Parliament, then the Ministers shall Decree, the House confirm, and
the Army be the Executioners: Are not the two last highly promoted.

If the Parliament had not done well, the Army should not have upheld it in
dead ways, the Charge being true: but how could that be known, seeing none but
themselves must judge: besides, how is it lawful for them to leave them;
seeing, as you say, they are sworn servants, not only, for 7 years, but for
ever: and they must obey them: therefore if they had left them; the exceptions
might have been the same: It had been nobly done of the Army to have laid down
their Commission: then should we have had our Government set up in full power.

They that resist Authority, the Power, resist the Ordinance of God, shall
receive to themselves damnation. The golden coard of Government broken asunder;
the honor of Magistracy laid in the dust; what threatenings against them that
oppose Gods Ordinance, Jude 8. manifest opposite to lawful Authority, God
has set over us, it was the Armies sin and Rebellion in not disbanding at
the Parliaments command.

By these and the like Scriptures, ye wrest and pervert the Scripture: are we
to obey Authority because they command it, or because of the goodness of that
they command? if the first, (for that is your charge or voting, the other we
grant) why are the people reproved for obeying, Mica 6. 15. 16. Hos. 5. 11. If
it be sufficient that the Authority command it, it was not their sin in
obeying; or if the Magistrate has power over our bodies, then the 3. children
sinned in not bowing to Nebuchadnezars Image, as he commanded: by this rule we
may sin if the Authority command it, if we must be subject to them, as not to
oppose the will of those in Authority in no cause, then if they set the
Kingdom on fire, and will have it burnt, we must not offer to quench it but
suffer it to be burnt into ashes, nor never question them for it if they are
not accountable.

If the command must be lawful, I demand who must judge of the unlawfullnesse
of it: if ye say the Magistrate, then the cause is the same with the former: if
ye say, he that is to obey it, is to judge of the lawfullnesse of that he is to
do, it is fit he should, why then do ye cry out of sin for not doing that they
do not see to be lawful: neither is it sufficient that the thing commanded be
in the nature of it lawful, for one circumstance may make it unlawful: to eat
meat is lawful, yet God forbids the eating of it when my weak brother is
offended at it: Suppose the Magistrate command me to eat it, though he be
offended if he do, I may not eat it, unless I may prefer Man before God: if
you say, God commands me to obey Authority, and that I sin if I do not do it, I
deny that I am in this cause bound to obey the Magistrate, though the thing be
in it self lawful, man cannot bind when God will have us free; also if that he
has power in such things, then he may take away and restrain me from
indifferent things, and take away my liberty; which were to set up Gods own,
commanding things absolutely necessary, the other in things indifferent, how
then shall I stand just in the liberty wherein Christ has made me free, Gal.
5. 1. We are tied to do what they should command more, then because they
command it, the Magistrates power reaches not to all civil things: it is my
liberty when to eat and what I shall eat, when I shall go to bed and when to
rise, and what color my clothes shall be, and no man may bind wherein God
would have us free, nor can they make any part of Gods Word to cease to blind,
and be of no force to me, which before their command was of force to us,
unless he can dispense with the Law of God. If the Parliament require me to
betray the Liberties of the People; I know he has no power from God to command
me any such thing, because it is injurious to my neighbor, and contrary to the
Law of Nature, which requires not to do, nor consent, nor permit that which is
destructive to others, though Magistrates are a lawful authority: it is a right
stamp, but if the metal be not that it should, I will not take it unless it
be good metal, as well as good coin; that we should be subject to the wills
of men in commands not convenient, that we should sin and defile our selves,
and incur damnation, because we will not sin, is strange Doctrine which the
Bible never knew: it is lawful for the Magistrate to bid me run a horse, but if
in the place, children are so scattred, that I see I cannot do it with safety,
I had better break his command, then murder or hurt children, and if he would
do it, I ought to stop him: God says Let every one be fully persuaded in his
own mind. I am to judge of the lawfulness and expediency of that which I am
to do; for all things may be lawful that are not expedient, so much as a thing
is not expedient it is unlawful; the Army were not satisfied that it was for
their own and the Kingdoms safety for them to disband at that time, if they
had but doubted of the lawfullnesse thereof, they should not do well to
disband, unless we are more strictly tied to the command of men then to Gods:
but many reasons have been given that it was not safe or best for them so to
do, therefore the Army are not to be blamed but commended for what they have
done, unless it be lawful for them to do that which tends to their own and
the Kingdoms destruction: if you say then they should suffer; I deny it, but
more of this anon.

Moreover it may so fall out that one may break the Letter of the Law, and keep
the Law, if he observe the intent of it, as Mal. 10. 1. to you the intent of
the Law is more the Law then the letter of it: Suppose he that keeps the Gates
of the City is commanded not to open them (without their order) to keep out the
enemy, he sees betwixt the Gates and the Camp some differences and strives,
and it is evident to him he can let them in and keep out the enemy, and if he
does it he has broak the Letter of the Law but kept the substance of the Law,
if he had observed the Letter he had not kept the intent of it: Suppose the
Magistrate find fault with him for not doing as he bid him, it is without a
cause, he has done no hurt but good in saving their lives, who are without
liable to perish, and so did the Army in not disbanding, had the Army been a
cause of their own and our sufferings, and they had lost the fruit of all
their victories if they had laid down their Arms some others would have taken
them up.

You have engaged your selves by Oath to preserve his Majesty's Person and
privilege of Parliament; this is most clear that no necessity can justify
perjury or dispense with lawful oaths, the bond and tie of an Oath and
Covenant is religious and sacred and invincible, who will require it at your
hands broken, Ezekiel. 17. 14. And necessity cannot dispense with an oath, nothing
can give one leave to be forsworn, an oath is of an absolute indispensible
authority.

If what you say be true, are you not perjured, miserably forsworn? have you
forgot what you have sworn, covenanted, Canonical obedience, etc. But of this
more when you write again.

Secondly, You take that for granted which is to prove; we deny they are
forsworn, your saying so is no proof; we are willing to put it to the trial,
and able to prove the contrary: The Oath (Covenant) is to be interpreted
according to his sense that gave it, and not in his sense that took it: this
you would have; but it is not lawful to grant it; it is not to be interpreted
neither in his sense that gave it, nor in his that takes it, but according to
the express words of the Covenant. If it were granted to either to put what
sense they thought fit, they might swear one thing and do another, if he
intends it to inslave. If a Presb^ter give or take the Covenant, he thinks he
swears to maintain Presbyterian Government, of which there is not the least
word mentioned in the Covenant: there is mention of a government according to
the Word of God, and that is not their Presbytery, by their own confession. The
Assembly of Divines confess it is not jure divino, (I am mistaken if they did
not swear the government of Archbishops was agreeable to the Word of God) but
the Presbytery is the nearest to it; if so be but near to it, then it is not
it. In the Scriptures is prescribed a Government for the Church, the House of
God; Presbytery they say is not it, but near to it. If then Presbyterian
government had in express words been in the Covenant, and I had taken it, I
could with a good conscience have broke my oath, for that oath that is not
lawful to take, is not lawful to be kept: it is not lawful for me to swear
to maintain a government for Christ's that is not his, though it be never so
near it or like it. But say they, we swore to maintain that government that is
according to the best reformed Church; for each of theirs is the best in their
judgments and consciences, else I should wonder if they should approve and
practice contrary to their consciences: yea and he that denies all
Church Government, may take the Covenant without scruple, because the Covenant
expresses none, and he believes there is none; and when he sees which it is,
he will own it and defend it; and before it is unreasonable to expect it from
him. I wonder the Priests should so take the Covenant for the text, and preach
so on it: there is nothing in that which is so clear to them; what is plainly
expressed, they cannot agree how the words are to be read: the Priests read, to
protect the person of the King, and there make such a full stop, and go no
further* others say they must read on, and take with it, in the defense,
maintenance and protection of the King in his just Rights; and what they are,
men cannot agree. Some say his just Rights are to be King, others say he has
lost all his just Rights: others say, it is his just right to lose his life:
the Covenant resolves this not; I cannot tell what are his just Rights, nor can
learn what the Covenant means or requires: I must leave it to the Scholars,
and those that can tell. The like may be said for the other branches of the
Covenant.

If an oath be indispensable, then persons must sin rather then break it; and
then the vow of single life binds, be the cause what it will; and so if any
have sworn to murder a thousand persons or more, it seems they must do it: is
not this the Popes Doctrine to murder Kings and others, which is to be
detested. That an oath binds more then the Law of God we deny, and put you to
prove it. Is there not the highest authority in Gods commands? can any thing
bind us more then his commands; yet ye see Matthew. 12. 1* to 7. they are
dispensible. You say, an oath is part of the worship of God: if it be but a
part of it, it is not more then the whole: also Gods worship must give place to
acts of mercy and love; I will have mercy (...) not sacrifice; Hosea 6. 6. Mal.
12. 7. it was lawful to neglect the public worship and command of God to give
suck, etc. in that they were not blamed for not going to Jerusalem to worship,
though all were commanded to go thither: No necessity is sufficient to
dispense with a moral Law: is it not a moral duty to worship God? swearing is
a part of instituted worship, but merely natural or moral, as you call it:
we need not be enforced to do that which is natural; an oath that is
detrimentall to a particular Law, must be kept, Psalm. 15. 4. I grant it, if it
be in that or the like cause, but not in all causes that can be named: for,
what is not lawful to swear, is not lawful to be done because they have
sworn to do it. No hunger can make stealing no stealing, Proverbs chap. 6.
verse. 30. We allow not men when they are hungry to take that which is not
their own; yet we say, that which in it self is stealing, may lawfully be
done without sin, if the hunger be of that extremity as to endanger life, and
no other help or remedy can be had, then it is not stealing; yet restitution is
to be made, to affirm it is stealing, is to maintain that a man may sin to
save his life; (if I ought to break the Oath, I am not forsworn to do it) when
two duties come together at one time, and I cannot do both, the one for that
present cease to be a duty* this was David's cause it eating the Shewbread;
no man may tell a lie nor commit any sin to save his life, and that men should
take such oaths as are so intricate and disputable, I would see Scripture for;
I read an ^ath is to put an end strife, but not to begin one, that I may swear
what I shall do for the future is not so clear as some would have it, if it be
a duty, a restriction is as perfect or included as this you grant, I may swear
I will protect and defend the Magistrates person, etc. but not in evil: if he
after set upon me to rob and kill me in the highway, I will kill him rather
then be killed, the Law counts this no murder: if this be granted the whole
argument is granted. For he is as much a Magistrate in the highway as in
another place, and if he may be resisted in evil in one place more then in
another.

In small matters (therefore in greater) if men bind themselves by oath, it
concerns every one to take heed what they do, to have a good ground for taking
them* and great heed lest they break them. It is no slight matter to do and
undo: if lawful, it is a sin to break it; if unlawful, it was a sin to make
it. I heartily wish that men were more backward in taking them, and more
forward in keeping them, if they can can keep them without sin: if lawful, to
swear and not to keep it is a great aggravation.

Remonstrating against proceedings of Parliament, if it be your duty to
Remonstrance against the just proceedings of the Army, why may not they
Remonstrance against evil proceedings? wickedness in high places is worst of
all, and most dangerous, Moses calling it a gathering together against the
Lord, and warnes the people to avoid their company, Numb. 16. after the earth
opened and swallowed them up, we have more cause to say the same of you, we do
seriously beseech you to recede from these evil ways, and content your selves
within your own bounds, put none in fear, we say the same to you, if you
persist in these ways, your sin shall find you out, if ye suffer as busy
bodies in other men's matters: this is fitly applied to your self, who daily
persist to stir up the people to sedition, it concerns those in Authority to
prevent it, whom I earnestly beseech not to suffer you in the Pulpits to meddle
with matters Civil, or that which concerns the State* it is like the simple
that believes every word will believe you to their own ruin; it is a cause of
conscience to maintain those I judge enemies, and whether if I look upon you
to be so I ought not to proceed further: I hope they will take an order with
you; but for liberty to print, I wish you as much liberty as any, the more you
print, the more your wickedness will appear, three of you have written
against the Army, and it is one and the same thing, you all sing one song, if
not in the same words, you have spit all your poison, you cannot say no more
then is in the Armies remembrances against them; we ask you no favor, be
silent in the Pulpit and do your worst, you require proof of the spirits
falling upon the multitude of persons, to act contrary to manifest Precepts,
you would have them prove your notion, I dare say, they never said no such
thing, much less alleged it to prove their practice; do you present this to
make them odious? be not deceived God is not mocked, they who have usurped
authority, seldom or never promoted public weal or liberty, who knows what
the Armies design may come to? you do not know, therefore if any ask you, say
you cannot tell: we know no usurpers of Authority but the Presbyters, all this
life is for their unworthy interest, one of you said in Sion College they
would rather side with the Kings party the Army; for then your Government will
be a going on, but the Army of Sects would not do any thing for your
Government, before I heard it I thought something was the matter when I heard
that you spoke the language of the old Cavees, now it is apparent to all that
know you, that you that oppose the proceedings of the Army are possessed with
the same spirit they are.

The Armies Principles are wicked, they that have the power is to judge, what
will follow?

This will follow, that Masters will take account of their Servants what work
they do, this is the conclusion, we see it was needful to have a President,
right or wrong, he that has the longest sword will judge; if these Ministers
judge and determine, and pronounce the sentence, the curse, what would they do
if they had the power in their hands? we dare not say the blessing of the Lord
be upon you, there is not any that I know desire you to say so, we know it is
little worth, they have had your blessing, have not prospered, the blessing of
God is upon them, God has blessed them, and they shall be blessed, now are the
faces of Gods servants covered with shame, and their hearts filled with sorrow,
and like to become a scorn and reproach to all the Christian world: our hearts
rejoice in what they have done, you judge your selves godly, confusion,
profaneness, irreligion, now is Religion made to stink by reason of your
miscarriages, unwarrantable courses, this belongs to you.

When they have done their work he will visit them with his loving kindness
and send for them home.

It was once a crime of the highest nature to endeavor the subversion of
fundamental Laws, it was not the Parliaments purpose to overthrow the
fundamental constitution of the government of the Kingdom, or to give power
to any to do it: if they would have taken away bad ones, and given us better,
they had not done us any hurt: is the purposes of men Laws and Rules to
themselves and others? if no, why do ye urge it, if ye deny it, and if you
please to try what truth is in it.

1. It is a breach of privilege to arest and imprison a Member of Parliament*
it is contrary to Law, he is an enemy to the State: I grant it* in a cause of a
particular debt the intent of the Law is good to prefer the public before a
particular, better one person suffer then the Kingdom, for they are many: it
is the privilege to the State for the Members freely to sit, if this be the
intent of the Law, the Army kept this Law: for they preserved the public
before particular persons: it is a privilege to the Kingdom, for the
Parliament to sit and do them good, for to that end they were sent to sit, but
if their sitting does the Kingdom mischief, then it is privilege to the
people to hinder their sitting: reasons undeniable have been given to prove the
truth of this, namely that their sitting tended to the destruction of the
Kingdom, therefore in hindering them they have kept the Law, and done good
service to the Kingdom, therefore the Kingdom are beholding to them for it:
also the people are not made for the Magistrates, but the Magistrates for the
people: therefore they must give place or be forced to do so, when it is for
the Kingdoms good: the Parliaments privileges are the peoples, therefore they
did them no wrong when they took them from them, and so reserved them for the
people, as if all that I have is not my own, but others, when they take it from
me, they take but their own* I know your judgment is contrary to mine, but
mine is as infallible as yours: if you can prove the contrary, I will give you
leave to judge, in the mean time, if you will judge what you please, I will
take the same liberty: the Parliaments power which they acknowledged lawfully
set over them, then their expressions and practices declare they are not
enemies to authority.

If at any time a Precept of God must be suspended with upon a necessity, yet
we suppose that you will grant that this necessity must be absolute* present,
clear, not doubtful, and conjecturall; We grant it, and they declare it was
clear to them and their Party, though it be not so to you, whose eyes the god
of this World has blinded so that you cannot see.

The Members seized on were not mad, nor out of their wits, but sober, then the
greater was their fact; and the more necessity there was to seize on them, for
if they do so, when sober, we cannot expect no better, but much worse, when
they are mad.

We appeal to your conscience, if you would not have condemned others, if done
as you have done; if upon the same Grounds and Reasons, I do not believe, we
ought to condemn them, it appears to us they have done well.

I desire to know if the cause did appear so to you, to be of so great
necessity, and you were able in the same way to help your selves and others,
whether would you not act according to your understandings and consciences? If
no, then you in effect say, that if you felinto a ditch there would you lie,
and not get out; If you would use the best way for your self and others safety,
we do no more: They say, The Army are despisers and destroyers of Authority,
injurious, and usurpers of it; we are as fully persuaded that they are lovers
and affectors of it, securers and Saviors of an authority from being useless
in good, and from being lost. You say, We are bound by oath to preserve with
our lives and estates, the Privileges of Parliament and Covenant; were you of
this mind, when you Petitioned the Parliament, you might be free in Person and
Purse from any part of the charge of this War: When I heard of that Petition
at the beginning of this Parliament, I thought it was either covetousness or
hypocrisy to be freed both in Person and Purse, and yet so vehemently press
others; to both, I desire those in Authority to consider, that you may
according to your ability bear the burden with the rest: Geree asks, If
the High Sheriff because he has power to rescue one whom he in his conscience
knows is unjustly sentenced to death by the Judge, etc. I ask him, If the
people did well or ill, in rescuing Jonathan that he dyed not, 1 Samuel 14. 45.
If a man's life is endangered in a legal way, though unjustly, he nor others
may not rescue him; the command of Authority, if legal, are obligatory to do,
or if unjust, patient to suffer.

What, for not obeying unlawful commands, God has given them no such power,
for they are for the praise of them that do well, therefore its not Gods will
that we should be destroyed for doing well; If ye do well who will harm you,
1 Pet. 3. 18. Therefore they have no authority from God to do it; You must
submit and suffer* not resist, as servant duty is, 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. So in
higher powers we may not resist, 1 Pet. 4. 15. if God has given him no such
power, if I resist, I resist not the ordinance of God, nor the power of God. If
I can avoid it, do not I increase his sin, and am guilty of my own death?

If I must suffer and not resist, if the Magistrate will take away my life
unjustly, its not lawful for me to make an escape from the present danger? if
not, nor may a servant do so; I, according to your opinion must be so.

New Lights tell us, That we need not suffer, but when me are evil doers; We
say, He need not if he can help it, if he cannot, there is necessity for it;
This was not the Doctrine of the Primitive Churches that you affirm, was not
the Doctrine* of Christ, That we are to suffer for for well doing, when we may
lawfully prevent it; Did not Paul use means to escape when he was let down
from the window in a basket? So the Church met privately because of the Jews:
the Saints suffered and they could not help it. If a servant in strength can
preserve himself, he runs himself into a greater inconvenience by reason of
the Magistrates power, which he cannot prevent, the Christians when but a few
were helpless, and so suffered, the Waldenses were so persecuted by the Popes
power that they fled into the Mountains, where on hundred dyed in a night with
hunger, and cold, and much suffering, they, had they after gathered themselves
together with Bows and Arrows, and fled and took the vantage of a narrow
passage, the Popes Army was twenty thousand, they were divided in two or three
Companies in their pride, but the Christians was glad they were not all in a
Body: At the narrow passage they shot, and slew so many of their enemies as
they were put to flight. In their slight on the Mountain of Piedimont God sent
a thick Mist that they could not see before them, so that they fell from the
edge of the Mountain and brake their necks* and dyed, Horse and Rider* Here
God appeared from heaven and encouraged them, and gave them the victory; and at
several times the Popes Army had such ill success, that one of the Politicians
of the Popes side said, that they lost ten to one of the Waldenses, and that if
the Pope did not cease Warring with them it would in danger the loss of the
Popes Dominion, so that the Pope was glad to make peace with them; and each
side consented to Articles. See the History of the Waldenses, and Abbigenses,
written by Luther. So the Thabirites in Bohemia* under Zi^ca, John H^se, and
Jeremy Pragus, were bu^^^ for Heretics at the Council of Constance, they in
defense of them, and that they fell to wars, John Zisca was their Captain, he
fought eleaven pitched field Battel^, and ever conquered; they were good people,
and God was with them, Connade Butherbridge in the word of Orphan^s, these men's
practice God owns, but you condemn. Also* suppose a Thief beset me to rob or
kill, am I not to escape from him if* I can? Shall I suffer my self to be
killed, or robbed if I can help it? Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions
of thieves, every one loves gifts, and seeks after rewards; they judge not
the Fathe^lesse* neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them, Esaias* 1.
23, 24.

That were to take away the opportunity of Martyrdom, not to suffer its
rashness, self murder, to dye if I can help it, either by strength or escape,
to preserve my self is a duty, and a sin to neglect it.

You say you are against murdering of Kings, if you be for murdering of other
men's, I should oppose you in that, for I hold it not lawful to murder any man,
no more do I believe do they. So you say, They are treacherous, persidious,
unjust, and their dissimulation is without comparison; to all your hard words
and railing accusations; for answer, see Jud. 9. 14, 15, etc.

The King demanded but 5. Members, a small number to those secluded by you, and
it was voted Treason, a breach of privilege; but this of the Armies seizing on
so many is worse: the 5. were unjustly accused, these justly* therefore the
King did ill, and the Army well; these were let alone long enough, if they
should have let them alone, hoping they would do better, what help had we, if
they proved otherwise? what good have they done us, can a Blackamore change his
skin; no, nor can they that are accustomed to do ill, do well, forsake the
foolish and live, Eccles. 4. 13. if they had not then seized on them, they
might for ought they knew, miss their time, and proved two late* there was no
reason to put it off to the adventure, when we may be sure, and freed from the
fear and danger itself, you judge the seizing on them, to be unjust, and
unlawful; but we judge it just and lawful, you would have them to be let
alone; we believe their liberty is the destruction of the people of God and the
Kingdom; you allow us no remedy, in no cause of danger to help our selves; we
believe it is against Nature, Reason, and Religion, to have away of preserving
our selves, and not to take it, and that it is not wisdom to choose that way
that is least safe. A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hides himself, that
is, he uses means to escape it, its wisdom and prudence to foresee an evil,
and prevent it; but the simple pass on, and is punished, he believes all will
be well, and he is punished. Proverbs 23. 3. I know what we call good, you call
evil, and what we call evil you call good: therefore so let it rest, till you
have the longest sword, and then we will give you leave to deside it: the
longest sword you know is ever Orthodox in whose hand soever it is. They cast
contempt upon the Parliament, they do not, nor need not cast none upon them,
nor change them with any thing, but that which is true and known to the
Kingdom long before: threatening to put a period to the PARLIAMENT, Would you
have them continue perpetually, if they should be let alone, they would have
sat until themselves had been destroyed, and the people ruined, its a great
grief to you that this Parl. on which you have bestowed so much falsities and
flatteries, for so many years together to convert them into Presbytery, that
they should be removed and put to a period before they have effected your
design of setting up Presbytery withal the Iron instrument, and monopolized
all the living and preaching into your hands* it grieves you to the very heart,
because nothing less can satisfy your scruples, and where to have it now, you
know not, but be content, its well ye may escape and be quiet, seeing you are
Cavies, and are possessed with the same ipirit that is in the worst Malignant,
and spit as bad poison.

The Parliament put the sword into their hands not to destroy themselvers but
the Kings party and enemies of the State; then they gave them Commission to
destroy themselves, for those they seized on, if not all the most of them
proved both; Therefore instead of seazing on them, they might have destroyed
them by the authority of the Parliament; the Kingdom do not approve of what you
do, its like they will when they understand it, and see the fruit of it: seeing
God approves of it, if the high Caves the Presbiter and the low Caves the
Malignants descent, we are content, the best I doubt not but will be satisfied.

Sins against the City in marching through it with bays in their hates, Why
not through the City as through another place? What sin call you this? In what
place of the Bible may I read that this is a sin? taking the Tower putting in a
new Lievtennant, etc. Who might better do it then the General? Impeaching and
imprisoning some Aldermen, etc. the great Cavies must suffer as well as the
poor ones: Would you have them not to be punished? Or would you have as many
punishments, one lesser then another, as there are degrees of riches, honor
and greatness? taking away the Sheriff, It had been better for the City if it
had fewer such Members, unreasonable demands of money in such sums, none judge
it unreasonable but Cavies ignorant and corrupt men, against the Kingdom by
taxes and free quarter: ye see, to starve the Army is agreeable to the
judgment and conscience of the Presbyter, Is it unreasonable for them to eat,
or to require the money that is their due to keep them? little sums will not
maintain a great Army; the Army had not now had a being if it had not been for
you and your brethren the Cavies, and then they would have had no taxes, sums
nor freequarter; the enemies of the Army judge all the army has is to much; if
the Presbyter were to set down the sum it should be a little one if any at all.
Its like if there sums had bin denied, I would have given my consent that they
should have fetched it, and if they be hungry and cannot get victuals, that
they should come into our houses, and take it whether we will or no; and I
believe it is as lawful as it was for David to enter into the house of God,
and eat that which was not lawful for him to eat, Do not think you will
approve of this doctrine, but I care not whether you do or no, so long as God
does, as you may see, Matt. 12. 1. 2. 3. 4. Judge. 11. 20. 21.

Possessing your selves of the gates of the City, the City is beholding to them
for that, it was an act of love, if they had not done it, its like they feared
they would have killed one another, or effected the destruction of the City;
decay of trade, Who have undone the Kingdom and caused so much loss of blood
and treasure, and decay of trade as the King and his party* the Bishops and
their Priests, Mr. Presbyter, etc. must be considered in this work? Who but
the Bishops and the Priests in their pulpits have set the Kingdom together a
fighting, sending Messages to the house prescribing them a time to answer? the
Parliament were something slow they need be quickened. I perceive you are not of
their minds that conceit they waited on them too long, and so continued (or
permitted) them to sin, yet they must be let alone; to let loose a Lion and a
bear is not so dangerous to the people as your principle is, it is so large
and dangerous in denying, that they are countable for what they do. Dan. 5. 20.
The foundation altering the foundation of Government, are the laws, are not
some of them unjust othersome ill framed: are there not tricks in Law that
occasion long and chargable suits? the law makers are not perfect, by
experience men so the inconveniences of them; its no injustice to alter for the
peace and welfare of the Kingdom; God was pleased in his Government to change
some laws, and must not ours admit of no change the peoples judgments and
dispositions change: do you think so much blood has been shed, and to have
nothing changed? When the righteous are in authority, then there will be a
great change; if a new moddell of Law and Government be best for the Kingdom,
there is no hurt done.

The Army say one thing, and do another, I cannot tell what they have said* man
does often do so, God is unchangeable, its suitable to him to be of one mind,
and not to be turned, Job. 23. 13. 14. they should not say and promise to do
that which they cannot do, or may not lawfully do: its a fault to say it, but a
greater to do it: promises that cannot be kept without sin, are better brook
then kept: as the vow of single life; David said he would destroy Nabal, etc.
but he did well to unsay it again; we may not neglect doing good, though not
engaged by promise, nor do evil, if engaged by Covenant.

There is not a word of tolleration in the Remonstrance, the fitest place for
that is in the Agreement, they make the profession of Religion stink, the
injustice of your accusations cause you to stink. I could discover the
unjustifiablenes of your charges; but I count them not worth the answering, you
say they walk by providence without a precept, the providence of God is often
pleaded in justifying your way; its an observation not a rule, I am confident
they do deny that the providence of God is not the rule and ground of their
actions, much less contrary to the word; the ground of their actions is the
word of God, and if they had not acted by counsel, they had not done that they
have; its but a false accusation, they observe both. The rule of the Word of
God, and the rule of his providence, God is seen in both: the providence of
God declares his will as well as his word, although not in the same way; by his
providence we come to see his will. Christ would have us to take notice of a
small matter as the falling of a bird of half a farthing, Matt. 6. He that is
Wonderful in Counsel and excellent in working; God does instruct him to
discretion does teach him, Isa. 28. 26. 29. The way of man is not in himself.
Ier. 10. 23, Man's goings are of the Lord. Pro. 20. 24. If two Armies fight, and
the one get the victory, does not God by his providence declare, that it was
not his will the other should have the victory. See Jeremiah 1. 9.

That Sedgwicke should condemn the Armies proceedings, and so suddenly
exceedingly justify them; the providence of God herein, is more to be observed
then what he has said. When Abraham's hand was stayed, it did appear it was the
will of God he should not kill his Son. When I know one is dead, then I know,
and can say, it was not the will of God, that he should live any longer: So
when two fight and the one is overthrown, by that I know, it was the will of
God he should get the day.

We have withdrawn from you as brethren, that walked orderly, which should
something affright you, though you be good Soldiers, and will, if you be
spiritual. This, We (as I am informed) are the Presbytery that met in Sion
College, where Calamie. with the black guard, were commanded not to come at
the Army, least they should honor or countenance the Army. When you have done
all you can, its one of the Popes Bulls, informer times, it did something
fright the simple, but the wise laugh at it: The curse causeless shall not
come, Prove. 26. 2. Our God will turn the curse into a blessing. Nehe. 13. 2.
The more of your curses, the more is our comfort, none but children and fools
will be troubled at any thing you can say or do, there is no difference between
the Popes Bull and yours.

Since against the Ministers in taking away Tithes to starve them; It seems,
though you would have the Army starved, you are not willing to be starved, it
appears you have some love in you, 1 Peter 5. 1. 2. Neither is it sufficient
for you to writ your selves Pastors, and Ministers of the Gospel, as you do:
seeing you are not so, have you any other Ordination then that you have
received of the Bishops, and of each other of your selves. Can he that has a
false ordination, or none at all, make a true Official Minister, that will not
endure the trial, nor will it prove you to be the Official Minister and
Pastors of Christ, if ye do the same work they did; no more, then if a
stranger should do all that a husband does to his wife, will prove him to be
her husband, who were never married, yet it will be hard for you to prove that,
to read Service, Church women, Matry, and Bury the dead, sprinkle Infants, give
the Supper to the Parish, etc. is the work of the Ministers of Christ. Did the
Ministers of Christ in the Scripture, perfect the Saints after this manner; nor
will it prove you are Ministers of Christ* because of your humane learning,
have been at Cambridge or Oxford, and wore a rough or black garment to deceive,
and to make people believe you are Ministers, you say you are the learned men,
and therefore you make the people believe, you are the Min^sters of Christ; but
it appears it is but humane, not spiritual, and that will not serve; you call
your selves Devines: pray what is that which makes you Devines, is it because
you are exercised in matters devine, or is it because you are made pertakers of
the devine nature; you give us great cause to question both, because the
spiritual man discerns all things: but you make it appear, that you are
blind in the things of God and man, if both be true, many Tradesmen may be
called Devines, as well as you, seeing the reason is the same; it seems you
cannot tell your own name: you are so learned as appears Esaias. 44. 25. Nor
will that which you call Conversion, prove you to be Pastors, for conversion,
belongs to God not to men, So Psalm. 78. 6. and 19. 6. Romans 1. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 23.
Psalm. 147. 19. 20. Math. 13. 11. 1 Cor. 3. 22. Its from above, as James says,
have you not read of one Famentius, a Lay man, a private man as you call them,
who in his travels converted many to the Christian faith. Many other Instances
might be given. I am in haste, therefore I will present but one more. Doctor
Fulke confesses in his Confutation of the Remish Testament, of a Woman who
converted a great many in the Island, where she was carried Captive: Tell me,
was she a Pastor, or an Official Minister.

None were to have Tithes but the Leviticall Priesthood, and when that Ministry
ceased, their maintenance ceased: so that to take or pay Tithes is to deny
Christ in the flesh. Heb. 7. and Genesis 22. are Prophets, Ministers, Pastors, any
thing, every thing, nothing.

Mock and scorn the Prophet, false Prophets, despise the ministry of Christ,
of Antichrist, false Prophets transformed, calling them Antichristian, the
Parliament has noted you to be so, and you are so; for if the Bishops calling
be Antichristian, and all the Offices depending on the Hiryarchy, your Offices
and ministry is a branch of the Hiryarchy, the Statute Law is against any
Seminary Priest, or Eclesiasticall person whatsoever, made or ordained, without
or within her Majesty's Dominions, by any authority derived, challenged, or
pretended from the Sea of Rome, by any, or of what use, name, degree soever the
same shall be called or known to be, or remain in any part of her Highness
dominions, and every person so offending, shall be judged a traitor, and shall
suffer as in case of high Treason. And every person that shall wittingly and
willingly receive, relieve, comfort, aid and maintain any such Priest, or
Eclesiasticall person, shall be judged a fellon, and shall suffer without
benifit of Clergy and suffer death, loss, and forfeieure as in case of
Felony.

So that it does appear that such as own the Pope to be a true Minister, and
retain any ordination derived from him, are guilty of treason, and such as
receive or maintain them, are guilty of felony and treason: and that the
Ministry of England is derived essentially from the Pope, see Francis Mason of
Consecration, published by Authority 1514. and Yates Model of Divinity* page
157 printed 1622. Doctor Cranmer was ordained a Priest and Bishop by the said
Pope's authority, and others received it from him. Add to this Statute the
National Covenant, and see how they agree; wherein the Nation is required and
have sworn to use all means according to the word of God, and their place and
calling to extirpate the said Popes priesthood, the words of the Covenant are
these; That we shall in like manner without respect of persons endeavor the
extirpation of popery, prelacie, and all other ecclesiastical offices
depending on that Hierarchy: In which number are all the Bishops, and
Ministers, by what names and titles soever they be called, or however reformed,
so that to worship them, is to worship the beast, Rev. 15. 9, 10, 11. The
Priests say, they receive their ministry from the Apostles by succession; they
confess it comes through Rome through the Pope* but its not of, nor from the
Pope; ye see how hard they are put to it, to find a shift also.

It cannot be denied, but the Bishops did ordain men Priests, a full Priest, or
a half Priest, as appears by the Book of Ordination of Ministers. Many are so
simple and plain naked, that they writ themselves Priest of such a place, so
that you have no offices but a Priesthood; what priesthood is it? is it the
Popes? are you Moses priesthood, then ye deny Christ to be come, for they were
types, and that Priesthood was a shadow of it, and was to cease, when Christ
the substance came. If ye have more calling to it then Uzza had, then you must
burn Incense upon the Altar that is your work as appears 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. if
you say your offices of Priesthood is Christ's Priesthood, tell us in Christ's
Testament where we may read that the official ministry of Christ under the
Gospel is called a Priesthood; if you will I will try it out with you, and see
if it do not prove you are such ministers as is expressed in the 2 Cor. 11.
13. 14. 15. Who were formerly prised by you, they prised you indeed till they
came to a fuller knowledge of you and your Ordination.

Buffe-coated Chaplins are they the worse because they have buffe-coats, its
like your meaning is, that they are not the Bishops Priests, and have not (...)
learning you have, its like they have a more spiritual learning which is a
better, we cannot but conceive something is the matter that they choose such,
it may be they find that the knowledge of Greek and Hebrew is not so necessary
as you would seem to make it.

The Priests say that we know not the original, and our Bibles are not rightly
translated, nor cannot be pronounced according to the original, besides in
translations there are errors, no translation is simply authentical, and the
undoubted word of God, we demand of you, answer if you can? how know you that
your Hebrew and Greek copies are true copies is it not possible for any to
write contrary to their copy, if copyes may be Printed false, they may be
written false, the art of Printing is not above 350 years old; can you produce
the first original copy, or any of those the Apostles wrote; if no^, the cause
is the same* and you know the original no more then those that know not Greek
nor Hebrew? if you may depend upon the faithfulness of the Writer and Printer
of your Copies, why not others upon those that did it upon oath, Doctor Fulke
in his confutation of the Rhemish Testament justifies the English translation
of the Bible. But we receive not the truth by tradition: I would know of you
that are so for Hebrew and Greek, etc. if the knowledge of the tongues be
sufficient to teach those that have those tongues the mind of the spirit of God
in the Scriptures or no? if yea, then all that know these tongues know the mind
of God, if no, then it is but an insufficient help, and what is an
insufficient help worth more then nothing, the knowledge of Greek and Hebrew
is a help to Read a Greek and Hebrew Bible, because else they cannot read them.
So the knowledge of the English tongue is of necessity to read the English
Bible: the cause is the same: but the understanding the English tongue* and
reading it in the Bible cannot give them to understand, the meaning of it no
more than the knowledge of the toungs Greek and Hebrew though it helps them to
read the Bible in those toungs, yet is not able to give them to understand the
meaning of it* that this is so, some of them, who know the toungs confess: for
Apollo was a learned man he saw the first copies of the Bible if that could
have caused him to know the mind of God what need had he to learn of Aquila a
tradesman (one of the layety as the Priests use to say) and Presilla his wife
the mind of God as he did, Acts. 18. 26. also what is the reason that those
that know the toungs cannot agree among themselves, what is the mind of God in
his word, that some of you in your expositions are as contrary to each other as
light is to darkness, the natural man cannot perceive the things that be of
God a natural man may be, and some are learned men its confessed, some of the
Jesuits are good Scholar, etc. they know the toungs, etc. then it will follow a
man may be such a learned man and yet cannot understand nor perceive the things
of God: Nicodemus was a great Scholar and teacher in Israel yet how simple was
he concerning the meaning of Christ's words, tell me then what a help their
humane learning is to them in spiritual knowledge in the things of the spirit;
the word says he Reveals to us the deep things of God by his spirit, 1 Cor. 2.
10. he says not by Greek and Hebrew, if our translation be true then we can
tell the meaning of it as well as you; if it be not true tell me what is that
Preaching worth that is proved by a false translation, and if we must believe
contrary to our translation because you say so, what is this but an implicit
faith and humane? and seeing you so differ among your selves about the meaning
of the word or the mind of God in it, tell me, how I may know which of you I am
to believe? also you confess someone word will bear nine or ten diverse
significations* how know you which of them is the mind of God in that place,
unless he reveal it to you? and if God please he can reveal it to a simple
man, and God does do so, and this is that for which Christ thanks his father,
because he has hid these things from the wise and the learned, and revealed it
unto babes, the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book that
is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying read this I pray
thee, but he says I cannot for it is sealed, and the book is delivered to him
that is not learned, saying read this I pray thee and he says I am not
learned, Esaias, 29. 10. 11. 12. neither of them can read it* both put it off
they cannot understand it, the unlearned thinks as he has bin taught, that if
he were learned in Greek and Hebrew he could understand it: but the former who
was such a learned man could not do it, its hid from the learned its not in
being learned, nor in not being learned: what then will some say, it is because
God has not revealed it to them* therefore they do not know it; God says
None can know the things of God but he to whom the spirit will reveal them see
Ps. 119. 99. 100.

The knowledge of Greek, Hebrew and English are all humane learning of equal
excellency, necessity, and use for the translation and Reading of the Bible:
and as without the knowledge of Greek and Hebrew, the Bible could not be
translated into English, so he that translated the Bible into English, could
not have done it without the knowledge of the English tongue; therefore there
is the same use and help and necessity of the English tongue as of the Greek or
Hebrew tongue; so there is the same to be said for the French and Dutch tongue,
and all other tongues and why the Greek and Hebrew tongues should be of any
more use and excellency then other tongues, there is no reason to be given for
it, as Aron the Priest set up the golden calfe it was called a God and Aron
made Proclamation, Exo. 32. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. etc. and the people Idolized it and
danced about it, so the Priests have set up Greek and Hebrew as a God, and the
people rejoice exceedingly in it, they Idolize it and fall down and worship it,
because the Priest have made a Proclamation for it and commended it for such a
rare thing to help them to the knowledge of the mind of God: a golden
business by custom is turned into necessity and it is in such an esteem as
they do idolize it and worship it, as they they did the calfe, verse. 8. because
some of the Army see this Idolatry, the Presbyter is not pleased. Instead of
allowing some errors, as we fear some among you endeavor an universal
tolleration of all Religions, it seems some errors may be allowed, do the
Scriptures allow it, or are you willing to allow of a few, they endeavor for
tolleration for all apostates; then you shall have tolleration, but that will
not content you, though its doubted to allow your Religion openly, we see your
principal is that you would have none tolerated but your selves, will not you
be of the true Religion, unless ye be forced to it, or are you willing to be
of a false. Religion, and to think it will be a sufficient excuse for you to
say you are compelled to it or do you love to see the bodies of others
tortured, and their estates ruined, because they are not of your Religion.

In stead of preserving the purity of Religion and the worship of God, we
fear you are opening the door to desperate and damnable errors and heresies
against the truth of God: and so for fear of letting in of errors we must keep
out the truth: it is better to let in twenty errors, then to keep out one
truth: for truth is more good then evil is evil: its better to suffer errors
then to persecute the truth, and the Professors of it, always by such fine
pretenses and glosses we have been deprived of our liberty. We have fought for
it our treasure, persons and friends, and brethrens blood was laid down for to
be freed from the cruel Taskmasters of Egypt, the Bishops and P^esbyters yoke:
Hear you not the wife say, my husband lost his life for the freedom of the
people of God. Many children may truly say, my father spent his estate and laid
down his life for my liberty, and the people of God, the Parliament and Army
promised us the liberty, and for this they fought, if the Army had not provided
for our liberties herein, they had not given us that which their consciences
tell them is our due, they had deceived us, the equity of the thing pleads for
us, many of the chief of them had never been soldiers, but to break asunder
this Iron yoke that was upon our necks and the Kingdoms: To what purpose think
ye has God slain so many of our enemies, Psalm. 16. 8. One cause surely is,
that his people may dwell quietly and safely, etc. God has blasted them that
would have kept us from our sweetest liberty. The King and his Bishops denied
it to us, and God has blasted them, those of the Parliament promised liberty
to us, but did not give it us, God has blasted them; the Synod, with the
Ministry of England should have spoken for us, and they spoke against us, and
God has blasted them, many of them are as the dung upon the earth abhorred,
and if the Army had neglected us herein God would have blasted them, Jerusalem
is a burndensome stone, all that oppose it dash themselves in pieces, if they
had neglected us it would have been their sin, grief and trouble hereafter,
if they could have escaped that we had met with all, besides what persecution
had come upon us by their neglect had bin their persecution, besides if they
had not been for us they had bin against us.

If you say ye desire liberty for the people of God, but not for others, You
could not provide for the one and exclude the rest. If the Children have any
bread, the dogs will have some, something is their allowance. Truth Lord the
dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the childrens table. Though men's mouths
cannot be stopped from exclayming against them there are grounds sufficient to
warrant and justify what they have done herein: say some what liberty for all
errors heresies and blasphemies, and Papists: we desire not that idolatry to be
allowed publicly* If you can tell us how liberty for the truth and people of
God may be had, that the Saints may not suffer, nor the truth suppressed, but
errors heresies, etc. suppressed, and I dare venture my life the Army will
gladly hearken to you. He says the Army rob the Parliament of their coercisive
power in matters of Religion; you say they have such a power but we could never
see you prove it.

Let the Magistrates coersive power in Religion be debated in Parliament by a
native liberty debate truly before a free Parliament, if we convince them not
let them carry it: this is but a brag, this Parliament to you, and the Cavies
is no free Parliament* speak plainly what you will stand to, make your
challenge if you have the truth on your side, and see if there be not them that
will debate it with you, or bring forth your strong reasons, and if they cannot
be answered, by my consent you shall carry it. Answer these reasons, if you
can: if the Parliament are to Judge what is truth, and what is error in
Religion, then it does follow that the Magistrate must have a certainty of
knowledge in all opinions and causes in Religion, else how is he able to judge
which is the truth, and if he has not such knowledge, may he be owned fit for
a Magistrate, it will be a doubt whether it be lawful for any to be a Magistrate
that has not such knowledge as his work requires: and by this rule we shall have
no Magistrate at all, because no man has ability of knowledge to determine in
all causes and doubts in Religion.

2. If the Magistrate is to determine what is truth, whether it will not follow
that we must believe and live by the Magistrates faith, and change our Religion
at their pleasure, and if they will approve of no Religion, it seems we must
have no Religion at all: the Saints in Scripture are commanded to worship God,
whether the Magistrate like it or no, see Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. Heb. 10. 25.
Acts 45, 18, 19, 20. 23. Acts 5. 20. 22. 28. Contrary to authority, Acts 17.
and 18. 49. Dan. 13. Acts 4. 5. 48. Acts 17. 7. Acts 40. 4. 19. 29, 40. Acts
21. 30. 31. If the Magistrate as a Magistrate may lawfully punish those that
they are persuaded in their consciences are erroneous, and heretical, then
Queen Mary and her Parliament did well in burning the Martyrs, for they in
their consciences were persuaded they were so: If the Magistrate have power in
spirituals, why call you not him a spiritual Magistrate, the Magistrate has
his power from the people, and then it will follow that the people as a people
have originally as men a power to govern the Church, to see her do her dury
to reform and correct her; and so the Spouse the wife of Christ* who is a
Kings daughter, and a Queen must be whipped or corrected according to the
pleasure of the world, who by wickedness, 1 John 5.

3 Are they to make Laws concerning Religion, or to appoint any material
prisons for Blasphemers of Christ: we require you to prove it in Christ's
Testament, if the old Testament is to be their rule, then see what they must
do^ Deuteronomy. 13. 3. 9. 15. 16. you will not do so: you are to prove that Christ's
Church is to be planted by violence and bloodshed, and that Christ would have
men compelled by fines and imprisonment to serve him,

4. Uniformity in Religion in the State do trouble the consciences of many, and
impovrish the Saints, and cause them to lose their lives, for laws concerning
Religion catch the best men who make conscience* witness Daniel and the three
children, men in zeal for Religion persecute Christ, and think they do good
service when they kill them, if they must judge what is truth, we must always
be persecuted, they will call truth blasphemy; the truth has but a few to own
it, the world are like to outroot them, and then we are judged and noted
heretics and must suffer: the army desired persecution of the truth and people
of God might cease: they saw the name of settling Religion to be but a pretense
to establish error and persecution, and that so long as laws were made
concerning Religion, the Kingdom could not be quiet, they are against suffering
of errors as much as you, they desire some might be appointed to write against
errors, they knew that the judgments and consciences of men do so differ,
that it is not possible they could submit to one way of Religion, and that we
ought to do as we would be done unto: if one man is to be punished for his
errors, then all men must be punished, because no man is free from error: all
truth is not among one sort of men: there is no man does judge his own
judgment erroneous; they that now hold errors, may hold the truth: if there
were no error, it could not be known what is truth, or not be so glorious, it
is not in the power of man to believe what he will, and as he will: the mind of
man is persuaded with great reasons (truly so or so apprehended) will he, nil
he, if he should do contrary, he should do contrary to his own judgment and
conscience, which God forbid, Romans 14. They could not see it, that it was fit
to make such sole Judges in matters of Religion, who are not infallible, and as
liable to error as others; they could not find a man that could show his
authority from God that he should punish with corporal punishments men for
their errors: if ye say that every man may live as he list: had not he as good
live as he list, as live as you list; but, we are bound by oath to a
Reformation in suppressing of errors etc. but it is to be according to the word
of God, not against it. Show us the pattern in Christ's Testament to punish
such as hold errors with corporal punishment: then errors must be suffered.
Woe must suffer that which we cannot help, necessity has no law: it is no more
in our power to hinder errors then it was in the Bishops, power to hinder men's
speaking and writing against them: if you can say to the blind and set, open
the eyes of their understanding; expel the darkness that is in men, and
command the heart and Reform it, and descry the vain imaginations of men's
hearts, and prevent Satan's suggesting error into men, and hinder men from
speaking each of other, and place light in the soul, and give the holy Spirit
to men to direct and reform them. If you cannot do these things, you cannot
suppress errors, then errors will prevail if truth may be suffered, it will
prevail against errors: If they heart (...) Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they be persuaded if (...) rise from the dead, Luke 16. 31. See 2 Timothy 2.
24. 25, 26.

If you say the Magistrate are not fit to judge, then they are not fit to
punish for they know not what, its like the Priests desire to judge and
determine what is truth and error, and what the punishment shall be (...) each
error and the Magistrate to be the executioner, and so they be, the Judges, and
the Magistrate the Hangman, is not this an honor to them* and ^o the
Magistrate must in his blind obedience do as they bid them, though they do
not know whether it be right or wrong: We require Scripture to prove that you
are to appoint and determine what is truth and error: you are our enemies, must
we put out our eyes, and see by yours? you are as liable to err as others,
your seat is not the infallible chair, you turn with the wind, if the Cross,
Surplis, Masse-book, Episcopacie* etc. be in fashion, you will justify them
all to / be jure divino, or at least lawful if the tide turn, then you turn,
and if the tide tum again, we may guess where we shall have you: and yet you
would have all that differ from your Presbitery arraigned at your bar, before
your dreadful tribunal: to receive your reproof which is sharp and terrible,
it will strike through our liberties, states and lives: your argument is
authority what you say must be an oracle to be believed of all men without
opposition or c^ntradiction what is contrary to you, is heresy ipso facto, to
be punished with faggot and flaming fire, what you (approve is Catholic)
condemn (...) heresi^, you have been above this hundred and twenty weeks a
heating the oven for your Heretics you expected by this time to have been as
the old trade of persecuting now your oven is ready, you want no will but power
to catch them, and to cast them in: We had as live be under the Pope, as under
the power of your Presbitery, are you gentle toward all, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Luk 9.
54. 55. Your weapons are carnal, 2 Cor. 10. 4. To what purpose are we to have
Bibles in English, if contrary to our understandings of them? we must believe
as the Church believes, whether it be right or wrong: we had as lieve that a
patent should be granted you, that all the Corn and Cloth should by you be
monopolized, and that you measure it out to us at your price and pleasure
(which were intolerable) as that you should appoint and measure out to us what
and how much we shall believe and practice in matters of Religion. In my
judgment your judgment is a ly, will ye compel me to believe a ly, or to do
that which I believe is sin? there is not the least reason to counsel in
England can enjoy their rights and Liberties so long as any one Religion is set
up, and men forced under great penalties to be subject to it. So much for this
time, I intend you more when you write again, when you bring forth your strong
Reasons.

FINIS.

