THE VVOUND'S OF THE KIRK OF SCOTLAND In her head, heart, hands, and feet; Held
forth In a Sermon preached AT EDINBURG

BY Mr JAMES RUE.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-Gard, Anno Dom. 1650.

Notes of a Sermon preached at St Gile's the great Church in Edinburgh upon a
Fast day, the last Sundaie in Julie 1638. By Mr James Rue.
The Preacher began thus.

Merciful Lord! I have two questions to speire at thee, etc. Text JEREM.
30.17. I will restore health unto thee, and will heal thee of thy wounds, says
the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This is Zion, whom no man
seeks after.


I Need not mickle to trouble my seln, whea is meant by Zion; ye aw ken it
well eneugh: it is the pure Kirk of Scotland: The Kirk of Scotland is wounded
in her head, in her heart, in her hands, and in her feet.

1 In her Head, as in the Government. 2 In her Heart, as in the Doctrine. 3 In
her Hands, as in the Discipline. 4 In her Feet as in the Worship.
I The Kirk of Scotland is wounded in her Head: the Kirk of Scotland has
gotten sike a clash on her head as has made her harnes swape in at her senses.

1 In her Seeing: The Kirk of Scotland was a seen as well as any Christian
Kirk; but now she cannot distinguish benance black and white; bring Paperie
before her, she cannot discern between that and true Religion.

2 The Kirk of Scotland is wounded in her Hearing: The Kirk of Scotland cud a
distinguished of sounds, but since the Organs were brought in, she is grown as
deaf, as a dure-nail.

3 The Kirk of Scotland cud a smel't as weel as any Christian Kirk in the world.
The Kirk of Ream smelt sea strange, that at first she cud a tell'd ye, that
she smelt of the Whore of Babylon; but now bring the stinkingst Paperie to her
nose, it will smell as sweet as an apple.

Now poor Saul, ye ha seen her wounded: there she ligg's, a ruful spectacle:
pity her an ye will: But what will ye say to the curing of her senses?

They Will tell ye, she is in as good a case as e're she was: and how say? I Will
tell ye.

The Kirk of Scotland see's better then e're she did; of awd the Kirk of
Scotland saw her Ministers in good and little short cloaks with black
velvet-necks; and thur little cloaks turned more saul's to God, then ere the
lang gowns did: but now ye sall see their prideful Prelates hurled up and down
the Town in bra coaches: There Is a bra sight for the Kirk of Scotland! She
see's better, I Will swear, then e're she did.

The Kirk of Scotland smel's better then e're she did, and how? I Will tell ye:
The Kirk of Scotland smell's sea weel, at she can sent ye a Bishopric ten
years before it faw: but it may be he at smell's best, will never lick's
fingers ends on it.

The Kirk of Scotland tast's better then e're she did; and how? I Will tell ye:
a good honest Minister wud a been content wea a plain dish of milk, and bread,
heamli^ meat: but now your Prelates will ha a lick of the best on it; so ye see
the Kirk of Scotland tastes better an e're she did.

II I ha don with her senses; now I Will tell ye how she is wounded in her
Hands, and that I caw'd the Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland. They slighted
the Kirk of Scotland: ye know weel, we use to sleighter only thievs and
runawaies; the Kirk of Scotland was both. First, she was a Runawaie, and that
was the time of the glorious Reformation: then came she clear away fra Ream;
and hard did they follow her, and fain wud they a been at her; for an they had
getten her, they wud a gi'n her their lead attyes, but God be thanked, they
cud not overtake her. Secondly, the Kirk of Scotland was a Thief too; alate
she has gean to Ream, an stawn away all the trash and trumperie; all is in
their buke of Common prayer, and Canons: weel away! what traw ye? they
slighted her, but with a silken cord of a Canonical obedience to the
Ordinary: and we ha taken great delight to be bun: wee's ha a bunny Kirk: But
after they gate us fast, they made the silk rape a Cable too, with whilk they
girded us sea fast, that we cud not sea mickle as steir, but auther we must
run into the danger of blind obedience o'th twea side, to accept of awl the
Idolatry and Superstitious Ceremonies they imposed on us: or else o'th to'ther
side be main swern men. Na, the Kirk of Scotland is sea wounded in her hands,
that for thur twenty year by-gon she cud not make her hummack on a caud day:
sea, the Kirk of Scotland for thur twenty year together cud not have a meeting
in a lawful Assembly.

III. I ha don with her hands: now I Will shaw ye how she is wounded in her
feet, and that I cau'd the worship of the Kirk of Scotland. The Kirk of
Scotland was eance a bonnie trotting nagg: but then she trotted sea hard, that
never a man durst ride her. But then the Bishops, thur hard-riding Lowns, they
got on her back: and they cross-langel'd her, and hopshackled the Kirk of
Scotland. And then she became a bonnie-paceing beast: and they took great
pleasure to ride on her: but with their jogging her up and down between
Edinburgh and London (it may be, and Ream too) they ha gi'n her sike a hait
coat, at we a been this twelv month by-gon, stirring her up and down for
keeping her fra foundring.

Na, they made not only an Horse but an Ass of the Kirk of Scotland: how say
ye by that now? I Will tell ye how they made Balaam's Ass on her; ye ken weel,
that Balaam was ganging an unluckie gate: and first the Angel met him in a
bread weay: and then the Ass boggled and started; but Balaam got by the Angel,
and he tull her, and battoon'd her sufficiently; that was when Episcopacie
came in: and then they ga the Kirk of Scotland their pricks. Efterward Balaam
met the Angel in a straighter gate, and the Ass startled more then she did
before: Balaam, he tull her again, and paid her soundly: that was when the five
Articles of Perth were brought in: the third time the Angel met Balaam in sea
straight a gate, as the Ass cud not get by him: and then it pleased God to open
blind Balaams eyn: and that is this happy day: Now God has opened aw our
eyn: well war blind Balaam ganging an unlucky gate, ridden post to Ream: and
what had they gotten behind o'th Ass traw ye? they had gotten on a poak
mantle, and in that there was the buke of Cannons, and buke of Common-praier,
and the high Commission; Now as soon as ere the Ass saw the Angel, she fawe's
a flinging, and over gea's the poak-mantle, and it hing's by the two strings of
ea side, and up gea's blind Balaam, and he hing by the hough o'th the other
side; and fain wud the blind Carl be in the saddle again, and be content to
leav the poak-mantle. But beloved, let not the fau Zwinger get on again: for an
he do, he will be sure to get up the poak-mantle again.

IV. The Kirk of Scotland is wounded in her Heart: and that I tell'd you was
the doctrine of the Kirk of Scotland; and that is Papery, and Arminianism,
that is sea rife in our Kirk and Scules. Nay there are some of ye sitting here,
at hear's me, at has wished emselvs an hundred times to ha been out o'th Kirk,
when ye heard the pawtry stuff at came fra him. Ye ha heard me many a time,
my brethren, compare the Kirk and our Lord Jesu together; and I gea not very
far for my simile: for he is the head, and the Kirk is the body. Ye know,
that our Savior, ever he entered on the Ministry, he was carried by Lucifer
(God save us!) into the Wilderness, where he was tempted forty lang days (O
the mickle Devil!) where he was rejected, and set light off by aw; But then
as soon as ever he began to wark his Miracles, than he was carried in Jerusalem
in triumph, there was nothing in their mouths then but Hosannae's; blessed is
he that comes in the name of the Lord: the neust news ye hear of him, they
com with hawbeards and jather'd staves fraw the high Priest to apprehend him:
just sea it is with the pure Kirk of Scotland: for this year by-gon she has
sit desolate and in the Wilderness, contemned by aw, cared for by neane: Now is
the glorious day at she is ridden in triumph to Jerusalem, now there is
neathing in aw mouths but Hosanna's: but take heed, when they com with swords
and staves fra the high Priest, at they do not with Peter shaw a pair of heels,
and forsake him.

They ha not only made an Horse, and an Ass, but they ha betrayed the Kirk of
Scotland. Ye know whea betrayed our Savior: they betrayed him at were silent
in sea good a cause; they betrayed him at accused him, at judged him: they
betrayed him at forsook him. But whare sall we find the fau Judas aw the
while? And now I Will tell you a tale, I dare not say it is true, but ye sall ha
it as I had it. When I was a little lad at Scule, there was a young hopeful
Theologue (whea is now nea small man of this land) and being to preach the
very words of Judas, what will ye give me, and I will betraie him? the young
man learned his text sea weel, as he tell'd it in both Latin and Scottish:
quid dabitis mihi, and tradam illum? what will ye give me, and I will betraie
him? There was a good man sitten at fute o'th Pulpit, whare standing up and
lewkin full in's face, said, marry I Will gi' ye a good fat Bishopric, and then
I Will sure yee'l betraie him. And sea ye see whea ha betrayed the Kirk of
Scotland.

The Kirk of Scotland was eance a bonnie Grammar Scholar: and wate ye weel,
she had skill in Regimen and Concordantia, and cud a made a bonnie piece of
Latin: for every thing she did, she was forced dareregulam; or if she
offended, she was sure of pande manum: but efterward when she went to the
College, she had mear liberty, or wud take it: and first of aw, she began in
her Rhetoric, and in stead of true proper speaking, she learned neathing but
allegories and hyperbolies: then she come's to her Logic, and instead of true
demonstration, she learned nothing but homonomies and captious syllogisms:
Efterward she came to Ethics, but she did not mickle trouble her seln with
them; but studied the Politic, and that sea weel, at she turned aw Religion
into mere State-policie: for Metaphysics she knawe's there is Ens, and that
must be unum, verum, and bonum: sea there must be ean Religion, true
Religion, and good Religion; but this was too high and honest for her:
wharefore she studied mear the Physics, and turned aw into materia prima; and
made it capable of any form, as she pleased to impress upon it.

After he had don with his Sermon and Prayer, standing up to give a blessing,
he said thus:

I Know weel enugh at it is not the custom of this place to say any thing
after prayer; but because I had mickle to say, and ea thing dang another out of
my head, tharefore sall ye gi' me leav to add a word or two mear.

And first of aw, I will speak to you that are called by the College of
Justice; and why, I pray, do not ye subscribe to the Covenant? Yee'l say to
me, ye are employed by his Majesty in some special affairs, and ye cannot
wea your Honor subscribe to the Covenant: here is a bra answer indeed! there is
not the meanest man that gather's up 20 marks per an. for the King, but may ha
this hole to gea out at, and than we sall ha bra subscribing to the Covenant:
Yea, yea, there is but ea man at stand's between God and thee, get by that man,
and gang to God.

And in the second place, why do not ye Noblemen subscribe to the Covenant?
You Will say, noli me tangere: howsoever I Will gi' ye a twitch. It may be an ye
be put to it, yee'l say, ye must ride in Parlament-order, the meanest must
gea first, and subscribe to the Covenant, and then yeel com after. There Is a
bra answer indeed! Ye ha a fashon in thur Suthern parts of Scotland, and when
ye com tull a foard the pear Jack-man must venture over first upon his weak
weay-nagg to try it; and if he can gea, and com back again, the Lord com's
mounted on his gaie steed, and then he gea's over. This is not right beloved.
We at are Hilanders ha a better fashon, we usuallie gea a feut, and when we
com tull a ford, we are loath to leav a man, therefore we join other to
other, arm in arm, and loupe aw together into the foard; and if ea man drown,
aw drown; ean sea here, set your hands to the Covenant; and if ean man perish,
aw perish.

Thirdly, I speak a word to ye that are the Town-Counsel; and although I see
two of the chief chairs empty; Yea ye shall ha it: And why do not ye
subscribe? It may be ye will say, ye are in office; now stay to the neust
year, till your office be out, and then yee'l subscribe to the Covenant too.
Here Is a bra answer indeed! It may be God will get his wark don before that
time, and then whare will your thanks be? Get your Clark's Register, and
search over the roll, and see an ever the Town of Edinburgh suffered with
joining with the Kirk of Scotland.

Last of aw, I must speak a word or two to ye that are strangers, (and then
turning himself to the Scaffold, where the Provost and Bailiffs of Aberdeen
sat, who had not subscribed) and what is the reason ye do not subscribe to the
Covenant? It may be ye be com hither about your civil affairs, an when ye
came out, ye resolved not to subscribe to the Covenant: We Will take my advice,
I say, Aberdeenmen, and They use to upbraid Aberdeen men with not standing to
their bargains, saying, then take your word again.
take your word again; and gea heam, and drink the Boon-accord is the Motto of
the Town; when any man is made free of Aberdeen, they use to drink a large cup
of Sack, which they they call the * Cup of boon-accord.
cup of boon-accord, and join to the Kirk of Scotland, and subscribe to the
Covenant.

FINIS.

