Colonel Rich's LETTER TO The House of COMMONS, Of a great VICTORY Obtained
against Eight hundred of the Princes Forces, Lately landed in Kent by Sandown
Castle.

Where were One hundred and eighty killed in the place, One hundred Prisoners
taken, Three hundred Arms, and all their chief Commanders, as by A LIST
herewith appears.

Which Letter was Read in the House of Commons, and by the Honorable William
Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the said House, appointed to be printed and published.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
August 16. 1648.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the Honorable House of
Commons.
Mr. Speaker,
UPon several reiterated Intelligences of some hundreds of men for the
land-service, which the Prince had come from Holland, and lay ready in the
Ships here to be put on shore and attempt us, I drew what Horse we had here
together, and after five nights expectance of them, began to conceive their
intentions of landing here altered, though the Ships continued; this I was
confirmed in by Captain Battin's going two days since with some five or six
Sail and many Boats, toward Sandgate-Castle, whither I sent a Troop to prevent
inconveniences, and accordingly came thither very seasonably, which together
with some of a Troop (as yet not quite raised) belonging to Dover-Castle,
forced the Seamen to betake themselves to their Boats, and so came into the
Downs again; in the like manner another of my Troops went to possess Rye, and a
third toward Portsmouth; so that having but three here, this morning came from
Sandown-Castle in good order and equipage about 800 men, very confidently
toward upper Deal (which were landed in the night unknown to us) and waving
our Fort toward the Sea, intended to come upon the back of our Leaguer at
Deal-Castle, which so soon as in view, we drew what Horse and Foot of a sudden
we could get together, which were not above 300. Foot, and 100. Horse (the rest
being ordered to reinforce the Guards in and near our Trenches before
Deal-Castle, expecting a Sally at the same juncture) and charged them; after
some time of dispute with Musket shot, the Bodies closed nearer, the horse
pickering up and down in their flanks as well as they could over the ditches,
together with the foot who gave on freely, forced them to run, ours pursuing
them up to the very Castle bridge, killing in all about One hundred and forty
at least upon the place, as is the opinion of all else besides my self in the
action, and have taken about One hundred prisoners, and about three hundred
Arms; in this action I have lost the quartermaster to my own troop, that was
slain upon the place, and no other officer; the Lieutenant to my Majors troop
shot in the Knee, about three Horsemen killed, and three or four Foot Soldiers,
ten or twelve Horses shot, whereof my Majors was one, who through the whole
Action performed his duty with much diligence and boldness; neither did Col:
Hewsons Lieut: Col: neglect any advantage either in the Field or Trenches: A
perfect List of the prisoners is not yet come, though many of quality are
taken, as Major General Gibson who commanded the whole party, as appears by the
Princes Order taken in his pocket to command all; Sir John Boyce, Sir John
Knotsford, Col: Linsey, Lieut: Col: Bale, Lieut: Col: Walker, Lieut: Col:
Gamlin, Major Den, etc. many Captains and Lieutenants, one more notable then
the rest, Lieut: Lendal, Lieutenant to the present Admiral, Boatswains mate to
Col: Rainsborow, the chief Agent to manage the Revolt of the Seamen, who
commanded now the party of the Seamen, which as the prisoners inform, were
most for action before they came on shore, but in time of Service failed their
Leaders.

Colonel Hewson going up to solicit the necessary supply of his Regiment and
guns, and many other things which we want here, requisite to these Castles
reducement, after a months expectation of them, will bring a List of the
Prisoners names that are of quality, and the exact number of Soldiers: This is
all at present from

Your most faithful and humble Servant, NATH: RICH.
Deal, August 14. 1648.
The List of the Prisoners Names.
MAjor General Gibson. Sir John Boys. Sir John Knottesford. Col: Lindsey.
Lieut: Col: Bale. Lieut: Col: Gamlin. Major Burridge. Major Den. Capt. Hull.
Capt. Wright. Capt. Bowman. Capt. Coary. Capt. Pool. Lieut: Lindol, Lieutenant
to the Admiral, formerly Boatswains Mate that betrayed the Ships. Lieut: Nock.
Sir John May his Son, Servant to the Prince. Mr. Blithe. Mr. Corrame. Mr.
Howson. Mr. James. Mr. Bennet.
Seventy three private Soldiers, One hundred and eighty killed upon the place,
about Three hundred Arms taken.

Most of those that escaped are wounded.

No Officers of ours lost, but my own Quartermaster, Majors Lieutenant wounded,
Three Horsemen killed, Four Foot killed, and about Ten Horse shot.

FINIS.

