Some brief CONSIDERATIONS On Doctor Featley his Book, entitled, The Dipper
Dipped, Wherein In some measure is discovered his many great and false
accusations of diverse persons, commonly called Anabaptists, with an Answer to
them, and some brief Reasons of their Practice.

In seven Sections, viz.
I. Dr. Featley his secret and heinous accusing the honorable Parliament. II.
That he is guilty of greater errors, then to go into the water to be dipped. III.
His false Accusations against the Anabaptists, examined and answered. IV. How
in a Disputation he discovered his subtilty and pride. V. That he justifies
dipping in rivers to be a lawful manner of baptizing. VI. Some Reasons
alleged against Infants being baptized.

A question proposed to consideration, that if it be an error to be baptized
again, whether the punishment, some would have infflicted upon them, and some
have suffered, be not too great?

VII. How many sorts of Anabaptists he says there are, and what they hold.


Whererunto is added, what is conceived the Doctors mystical Frontispice may
more properly declare.

Blessed are ye when men revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all
manner of evil against you falsely for my sake: Rejoy^^, and be exceeding glad,
for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you, Mat. 11. 12. See Mat. 19. 29. By SAMUEL RICHARDSON.

London, Printed, Febr. 25. 1645.

Some brief CONSIDERATIONS On Doctor FEATLEY his Book entitled, The DIPPER
Dipped.
Section I. Doctor Featley his secret and heinous accusation of the honorable
Parliament.
DOctor Featley, under the color of aiming at Anabaptists, strikes the
Parliament, and secretly wounds them with his malignant pen, in his Epistle to
his friend, he complains of his corporal thraldom, and that his pressures
are unsufferable, his person confined, his estate sequestered, his losses
unvaluable, his books and both his pulpits taken from him, that his friends and
himself sought earnestly, but could not obtain that liberty which Paul enjoyed
when he was in prison in Rome, to preach the Gospel to his fellow prisoners:
observe, what does he not say, that the Parliament are hinderers of the
preaching of the Gospel of Christ? What, are they worser then Heathen Emperors
and Magistrates? can they not be prevailed with, to yield that the Gospel
should be preached to prisoners? etc. O heavy charge! It seems he has a great
mind to preach the Gospel, but the honorable Parliament have had cause enough
to fear that he would so mix it with the leaven of malignancy till he had so
sowred it, that all that should taste of it, were in danger to be poisoned with
it; and so they did justly, in hindering him from preaching such a Gospel as
this is: and in page 32. the government of Archbishops, etc. is not
Antichristian, contrary to the Ordinance of Parliament, and nicknames them
Brownists and Barrowists that hold so: and in p. 214, 215, 216. he says, this
kind of sacrilege we speak of, whereby Churches and Churchmen are defrauded of
their due, is no better nor worse then robbing God, and pronounces a curse
upon a curse to them; what does he less, then charge the Parliament with
sacrilege? what punishment he deserves, I leave it to them whom it concerns:
Also he says, p. 70. (speaking of the Separatists and Anabaptists) that the
Magistrate, who, though by present connivence seems to give them line, yet no
doubt it is, that they may the more entangle themselves, and more easily be
caught; as if the Parliament ^ought to ensnare any that are loyal to the
State. Suppose they conceive they are in an error, how knows he, but that
their forbearance is out of a desire and hope, that upon their better
information they will gladly ^^forme what is amiss, themselves considering
that many of the Separation and Anabaptists are well known to be honest and
conscionable men, both toward God and man? and concerning the Doctor, when he
reckons up the enemies of the State, in his Epistle to Mr. Downam, he does
not name the malignants to be any of them, which declares he is not yet healed
of his malignancy.

Sect. II. Wherein it appears that the Doctor is guilty of greater errors, then
to be dipped in the river.
DOctor Featley holds these errors, viz. that Archbishops, etc. are not
Antichristian, p. 32. and that the Ceremonies of the Church of England are not
Idolatrous nor Antichristian, p. 32. that Baptism is a means of salvation, and
p. 40, 41, 50. that it is the remedy of original sin, p. 41. that regeneration
by water, is to take away the filth of sin; p. 41. that children of faithful
parents receive some measure of grace in their infancy; p. 59. that there is
no command or example, that women took the Sacrament, that the river is defiled
by dipping a man or woman into it; he says, baptizing of Infants began in the
Apostles days, p. 19. and yet no man can name the time when it began, p. 52,
53, 66. (which is so high a contradiction, as no illiterate man can reach it)
also he says, that those children which cannot be taught, may be made
Disciples by their parents, p. 39. or God fathers, p. 57. and that children
make a profession of their faith and repentance at their baptism by these
sureties, p. 76. might he not as truly say, that the faith of their parents or
godfathers is given to the children, and so it is theirs? illiterate men must of
necessity refer these things to the Schoolmen, as Tho. Aquinas, etc. Also he
says, that Baptism is the entrance into the Church, p. 23, 46. 63. and he
that is cast out of the Church, upon repentance must be received in again, p.
29. then it seems he must be rebaptized, else how shall he get in if it be the
entrance? so by the Doctors doctrine he holds re-baptizing, which we deny, and
so he is an Anabaptist, and not we: also the Doctor says, that Christ is the
Son of God, not only in respect of his temporal generation, but also in
respect of his eternal generation, p. 3. and that the Spirit is said to
proceed from the Father, because he proceeds from the Father originally; and
that the Spirit has a dependence from both, page 23. But if Christ, as he was
God had a beginning, he could not be God if he had no beginning. How can
Christ, as he is God, be the Son of God in respect of his eternal generation
any more then the Father is his Son by eternal generation? Secondly, if the
Spirit of God be God, (as he is) equal with the Father and the Son, all three
infinite, without beginning, each having the whole divine essence, and yet
there is but one essence: how can the Spirit proceed from the Father
originally, any more then the Father from the Spirit? and how can the Spirit of
God have any more dependence upon the Father and the Son, then they have upon
him, seeing whatsoever is infinite, can have no dependence upon any thing?
Therefore the Doctors words contain in them the nature of blasphemy; and to
define how one can be three, and three but one, and always so remain, is above
the reach of any man: I may say to him, as Mat. 7. 3. Luke 6. 41, 42

Sect. 3. Wherein is contained Doctor Featley his large conscience in laying so
many and false accusations and wicked errors, which he (like a mad man) shoots
desperately against the Anabaptists (as he calls them) to wound their
reputation, that they might appear more vile in the eyes of the ignorant, and
procure their destruction.
THe Doctor charge the Anabaptists in the Title page of his book, with high
attempts against the State, which I confess were an impiety insufferable, and
all that are guilty of this charge, ought to die for it: But in no place of his
book he does so much as offer to prove the least part of this charge against
any one of this Kingdom, or the next to it; he speaks as if two or three in
Germany whom he pleases to call Anabaptists, which he says were guilty of
this sin: But what is that to us if they be guilty of these and the like
wickednesses? should not the Doctor have done better to have written his book
in their language (if he be not illiterate in it) and sent it into those parts
of the world as a means to reform them? As for our parts, we can justly plead,
Not guilty, and challenge all in the world to prove it against us if they can.
If the Doctors meaning be that we are guilty of rebellion, because we side with
the Parliament against those that go about to destroy the Kingdom: We
answer, we do so to preserve the State, and this is not against the State. But
the Doctor says, that we are a cruel and bloody Sect, by imbroyling Kingdoms
in wars, and by raising persecutions against Gods servants, page 210. Answ.
It is well known that we were not the causers of these wars, and our desires
are, that God would end them, and settle truth and peace in all places in the
world. And it is well known, we desire no man might be forced against his
judgment and conscience in any way of worshipping of God; no not to the true
worship, but rather to pray to God to open their eyes, and wait with long
patience till God persuade them; and if they never see the light to walk in
it, to leave all to God. And if so, which way does this tend to persecution of
the Saints, let all judge. But he says, we are a lying and blasphemous Sect,
yet he alleges not one proof to prove us so, and we are content that your
books with ours may be examined, to see which is the lying and blaspheming
Sect. Also he accuses the Anabaptists to be an impure and carnal Sect, p.
207. yet he brings not any one instance of any one act of uncleanness of any
one Anabaptist in all England. And seeing he could not produce any witness of
such a thing here, he for proof steps to Rome to search the Popes, and names
three of them, Sergius, Gregory, and Leo, and that the Pope tolerated Stews,
(he might as well have said, a Priesthood with holy Orders.) But the Doctor is
not ignorant that these Popes were not Anabaptists: but suppose they had, is
this a good reasoning to say the Churches of Christ in the Apostles days, were
a filthy unclean Sect, and for proof name 1. Cor. 5. 1. that one was guilty of
fornication, yea one who had his fathers wife: And to say the Priesthood of
England are a filthy and unclean Sect, and for proof allege what the Priests
of England have been guilty of, near our doors, as one John Wilson, committed
buggery with fifteen men. See the first Century of scandalous Ministers, p. 1.
etc. And, Doctor Featley, if you please to join issue with us, we will confine
our selves to this Kingdom, whether your Sect of Priests, or us be most guilty
of uncleanness, and upon that side it falls by the clearest proof, shall with
my consent, be chronicled for the filthy and unclean Sect. So he makes a
dreadful noise of the fearful judgments of God that befell the Ringleaders
of this Sect, and of their deaths; and to prove this, he names Elymas the
Sorcerer, who was struck with blindness, p. 218. but he was not an
Anabaptist, but withstood the Apostles, and the truth they professed, and they
practiced dipping. So that he is recorded for an example for others, that they
oppose not Christ's servants, and the truth they profess, lest God meet with
them also in like manner; but he names 200 and odd were put to death, who
were, as he says, Anabaptists. Answer. This is no more then the Scripture
says, Rev. 13. 7. They shall make war with the Saints and overcome them. He
says in Vienna some Anabaptists were tied together with ropes and drowned, two
were burned beyond Southwarke, and a little after five Dutch Anabaptists were
burned in Smithfield, page 55. It rejoices us that men suffer for any truth;
behold how he honors those men that suffered: But he says, they dip one
another after their manner with a kind of spell, containing the heads of their
erroneous tenets, and their engaging themselves in their schismatical
covenants. We answer, The manner of our baptism is as the Apostles was, and
there is no other words expressed in our baptizing, then what is expressed in
the 28 of Matthew part of the 19. verse, and no mention of any tenets, much
less erroneous ones: nor no words of any covenants are mentioned at all. We
confess when any is to be baptized at the water side, the administrator goes
to prayer suitable to the occasion, and after go both into the water, and uses
the words Mat. chap. 28. part of the 19. verse; and coming forth again, they
go to prayer again, and also return thanks to God, and how this can be a
spell we cannot see. But he further accuses the Anabaptists, for running into
corners to meet in. We answer, If he mean houses to be the corners, we confess
it, and they are the best places we have; but if he or any other will do us so
much favor to procure more larger and public places for us to meet in, we are
ready to embrace them with much thankfulness. But, says the Doctor, they go
men and women together stark naked into their Jordans, page 36. and 203. We
answer, we abhor it, and deny that ever any of us did so, and challenge him to
prove it against us, if he can; and if he cannot, it is fit he should be known
for a slanderer, if he deserve no punishment for it. But he says, the
Anabaptists are an illiterate and sottish Sect. We answer, Some of them know
many letters, and if they can do no more, I see not how it can be truly
affirmed they are illiterate. Yea but it seems in the Doctors account they are
not so good scholars as he is* I freely confess it, and I perceive the Doctor
has skill in one tongue that will never do him good, and I desire to be
ignorant of it; but one may wonder that he so much inveyeth against illiterate
men, seeing he says, in p. 200. that God in the first planting of the Gospel,
made use of illiterat men, that all may know, that he that planteth and he that
waters is nothing; and further says, p. 14. I confess we read of one
Fumentius, a layman, who in his travels, converted many to the Christian
Faith: (and Dr. Fulk confesses in his Confutation of the Rhemist Testament, of
a woman that converted a great many of them who lived in the Island to which
place she was carried captive) But Dr. Featley says, the learned men have
proved the worthiest Instruments (bravely spoken) 2 Cor. 10. 17, 18. the sum
is, therefore now all illiterate men must for ever hold their peace, at least
in England, and in case any travel into any Island, where there are some
unconverted, if there be no Doctors there, illiterate men may see what God will
do by them. But the Doctor charge the Anabaptists, p. 10. to be uncertain of
their grounds, because sometimes they plead one thing, and sometimes another.
Answ. No, variety of grounds and reasons against a thing, may arise from the
clear discovery of the truth to them and from fullness of persuasion in the
judgment, as illiterate men conceive. But, says the Doctor, in his Epistle,
the Separation and Anabaptists upbraid the State with their merit, in hazarding
their lives and estates in these present wars. Answ. No such matter, they do
but only declare their loyalty to the State, being urged to it by some, who
falsely accuse them to be enemies to the State; and I conceive they accuse them
to be enemies, out of a desire that they be less friends to it; and some
conceive, the Doctor, and such as he is, seek the destruction of the State, in
seeking to deprive the State of the help of many (who are faithful and loyal
to it.) But, says he, Anabaptisme was condemned long since by the Greek and
Latin Churches; mark how the Doctor bears himself upon humane authority; then
it seems you cannot say it is condemned by Jesus Christ in his Word; but the
Doctor confesses, that general Councels have sometimes most grossly mistaken
error for truth, and Idolatry for true Religion, p. 92. then it is no wonder, if
the Doctor err with his Greek and Latin Church: and seeing the Doctor affirms
that the example of Christ and his Apostles does not bind us without a precept,
p. 37, 38. with what reason or conscience does he urge against us, yea, and
against Christ's command, his Greek and Latin Churches, without a precept? does
he not set them herein above Christ himself? The Papists pretend antiquity, and
brag of their universality against the truth. We know error is ancient, and
spreading; but truth was before error, and baptizing by dipping was before
baptizing by sprinkling; he may name to us as many men as he pleases, but he
must tell us where it is so written in the Scriptures, so as we may read it,
before we shall believe them, Luke 10. 26. But the Doctor charge us in his
book, with many things that we hold: That no malefactor ought to be put to
death, That it is lawful to have more wives then one at once, That a man may
put away his wife if she differ from him in point of religion, That we are to
go naked, and not be ashamed, That we hold it lawful to slay wicked
Magistrates, That no Christian may go to law, but right himself by violent
means, That wicked men have no propriety in their goods, but all things ought
to be held in common, That we maintain pretended Revelations, That Christ took
not flesh of the virgin Mary, That there is no original sin, That men have
free will in spiritual actions, That election is for foreseen faith and
repentance, That God gives all men sufficient grace to be saved, That a man
has free will of himself to accept or refuse grace, That Christ died
indifferently alike for all, That a true believer may fall away from grace
totally and finally, And that we hold Libertinisme and Familisme, and such
like stuff which we utterly abhor and detest; and if God permit, we shall
in the next impression of the Confession of our Faith, more fully declare
jointly what we believe, and therefore I will not answer his exceptions, which
he makes at some of the Articles, but leave it to them to answer for
themselves, which will be ere long, if God permit; but sure I am, all this
poison (which he charge upon us) is drawn out of the impure fountain of
diverse Heretics, in which he labors to drown us in; and I wonder how his
conscience would permit him to heave so many untruths into the Press: but (as
Christ says, John 16. 2. and) he was encouraged by Sleiden, Gabriel, Abres,
Alstedius, and others, oh me thinks I hear the Press groan, if not sweat
under the burden of so many heavy charges; and sure his groans will be much
greater when God opens his eyes, and shows him what he has done, which the
Lord in mercy do, if it be his will. I hope I may say as Christ did, Father
forgive him, for he knows not what he has done, ( Matthew. 5. 44. ^1* 12.)

Sect. IV. Whererin appears in the Doctors disputation, his subtilty and pride.
AFter he had condemned the point in question for an error, the Doctor says, I
could wish you had brought Scholars with you, who know how to dispute, which I
perceive you cannot do. Answ. Observe, how before he disputes, he vilifies the
point in question, and those that maintain it. But says the Doctor, there are
but two ways of disputing: first, by authority: secondly by reason. First, by
authority, if you will dispute in Divinity, you must be able to produce the
Scriptures in the original language. Answ. But why may you not as well say
none can dispute in divinity unless they can produce the same copy of the
Scriptures which the Apostles wrote, and seeing you cannot do that, you are not
fit to dispute your self: for, says he, in translations there may be, and are
errors, for no translation is are simply authentical, and the undoubted Word
of God. We may say the same of your Hebrew and Greek copies, seeing you cannot
produce the first copy, how know you but your copies are written and printed
false? see page 109. Can no Writer, if he pleases, write contrary to his copy?
as for printing, I may say the same, printing is not above 250. years standing.
Dr. Fulk in confutation of the Rhemist Testament justifies the English
translation of the Bible, and you have the same reason to doubt of the writing
or printing of your copy as we of our translation; and if you may depend upon
the Writer or Printer of your copies, why may not we do the same of our
Translators, they doing it upon oath? but truth must not be taken by tradition;
and if the knowledge of Hebrew, Greek, etc. be sufficient to teach them the
mind of the Spirit of God, then all that know the tongues must of necessity
know the mind of God in the Scriptures, and if so, Apollo being a learned man,
and saw the first copy of the Bible, should not need to learn of Aquila a
tradeseman (one of the Laity) and Priscilla his wife, the Word of God more
perfectly as he did, Acts 18. 26. And what is the reason you agree not among
your selves about the mind of the Spirit of God in his Word? so that some of
you in your Expositions, differ as much as light and darkness; and if our
translation be true, then we may know the meaning thereof as well as you; and
if it be not true, tell me, what is that preaching worth which is proved by a
false translation? And if we must believe contrary to our translation, because
you that know the original say so; (what is this but an implicit faith, and so
human?) And seeing you so differ among your selves about the meaning of the
Spirit of God in them, tell me how I shall know, which of you I am to believe:
also some who know the original, affirm some one word will bear 7 or 10 diverse
significations, how do you know which of them is intended by God, unless he
reveal it to you? and if he please, he can reveal it to illiterate men; God
has hid that from the wise, which he has revealed unto babes; God says, the
natural man cannot perceive the things that be of God (though he be learned)
surely no man can know the things of God, but he to whom the Spirit will
reveal them unto. The Word, says he, reveals to us the deep things of God
by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 10. he does not say by Greek and Hebrew, etc. But it
will be objected, Cannot learned men understand the Scriptures as well as
illiterate Asses, as the Doctor calls tradesmen? I answer, yes, both alike, not
at all of themselves. But are there other means and helps to the understanding
the Scriptures without Greek and Hebrew? yes, only the self-evidencing light of
the Spirit of God, which first inspired the Penmen of Scriptures, is in the
hearts of the Saints, the only Interpreter of the Scriptures. Secondly, the
knowledge of the body of Divinity, or the Analogy of the faith, to which the
Scripture is to be referred for its right interpretation. Thirdly, the Law of
God written in the hearts of the Lords, which savoureth the truth, and
disrelisheth errorr. Fourthly, help to the understanding the Scriptures, is the
manifold experiences of varieties of temptations, and the experiences of the
work of Grace in the soul. Lastly, to compare Scriptures that are dark with
Scriptures of the same nature that are more plain, and so to let the Scriptures
expound themselves. I conclude this, all men are pur-blind, yea dead, till God
gives life, and opens men's eyes. And although humane learning is necessary for
translating the Scriptures, etc. yet many Idolize it, as the children of Israel
did their golden Calf; the issue of the conference, as he says, p. 18. was,
that they were not able to withstand the truth; it seems he was, he says, the
Knights and Ladies thanked him, but he cannot say he did deserve it: and he
says, the Anabaptists went away discontented and grieved. Answ. It seems they
were very sorrowful, to see his great blindness and hardness of heart; and
he says none of them ever after that troubled him any more; it seems they
could do him no good, and so they resolved to leave him to God, till he shall
please to open his eyes, Luke 11. 25, 26.

Sect. 5. That Doctor Featley justifies dipping in Rivers to be a lawful
manner of baptizing; in which he justifies the practice of the Anabaptists in
their manner of baptizing.
DOctor Featley in p. 33. 71. 223. 224. says, Whatsoever is alleged for
dipping, we approve of, I grant that Christ and the Eunuch were baptized in the
river, Matthew. 3. 16. Acts 8. 38. John 3. 23. And the Church of England approves
of dipping, and that such baptizing of men has been, and is, and may lawfully
be used; yea, and is fit to be used in warm seasons, and the word Baptizo
sometimes signifies to dip. Answ. Now you justify our practice (for we do no
more) in warm seasons: and as for those that choose cold seasons to be baptized
in, do they not suffer sufficiently for that falt? I believe you would judge
so if the case were yours, though your Epistle declares the contrary, and page
70. I conceive he should have declared to us when the times are, the word
signifies dipping, or what Scriptures they be that will bear that
signification. Also, it is worth the observing, that baptizing of believers in
rivere, by dipping, is so clearly expressed in the Scriptures, that the enemies
to it are forced to confess it; and may not one wonder how he durst condemn
any for doing of that which he confesses the Scriptures approve of? but I leave
him to consider Romans 14. 22.

Sect. 6. Some Reasons alleged against Infants being baptized.
WE contend for the perfection of the last will and testament (of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ) that it is as perfect to direct in the administrations of
the ordinances thereof, as the old Testament was to direct in the
administrations of the ordinances thereof, in which was expressed, first, who was
to administer circumcision, Genesis 17. 9, 11. and 21. 4. Secondly, who should be
circumcised, every male child, born in the house, or bought with money, Genesis 17.
10. 12. 13. Thirdly, the time when, he that is eight days old shall be
circumcised, etc. Genesis 17. 12. Fourthly, the place of circumcision; ye shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskins, Genesis 17. 11. Fifthly, the manner, which
was to be cut. But if Infants are to be baptized, because they are the
subjects of baptism, then if the new Testament do not expressly command
infants to be baptized, the time when they are to be baptized, and by whom they
are to be baptized, and the manner how they are to be baptized; but if the new
Testament expresses any of these things, with the manner of sprinkling, and
the place where they are to be sprinkled, we desire they would show it us, which
they confess they cannot, it follows by their doctrine, the new Testament
gives us not as express direction in the administration of the ordinances
thereof, as the old Testament did for the ordinances thereof; and so the new
Testament to come short of the old. But the new Testament expressly commands who
shall baptize, Matthew. 28. 19. Go ye, teach and baptize. Secondly, the persons
who are to be baptized, such as repent and believe, and confess their sins,
and profess their faith, both male and female: Make Disciples baptizing them,
Matthew. 28. 19. When they believed they were baptized both men and women, Acts
8. 12, 13. If thou beleevest with all thy heart, thou may be baptized, Acts
8. 36, 37, 38. Repent and be baptized, Acts 2. 38. And they that gladly
received the Word, were baptized, verse. 41. And they were baptized in Jordan,
confessing their sins, Matthew. 3. 6. Mark 1. 4. 5. Such as have received the
holy Spirit, are so to be baptized, Acts 10. 44, 47, 48. Thirdly, the time when
they are to be baptized, when they declare their faith, Acts 8. 37. 38. they
are not to tarry, but to be baptized as soon as possibly they can, as Acts 22.
16. Fourthly, the Element, water. Fifthly, and the manner how they are to be
baptized, they were to be dipped in the name of the three Persons, Matthew. 28.
19. they were dipped in Jordan, Matthew. 3. 6. Jesus being baptized, went
straightway out of the water, Matthew. 3. 16. John was dipping (that is,
baptizing) in Aenon, John 3. 23. And they went both down into the water and
baptized him, Acts 8. 38. So you see it is plainly set down what persons are
to be baptized, who are to baptize them, when they were to be baptized, and the
manner how they were to be baptized: therefore the new Testament is as clear
as the old, and Christ as faithful as Moses to appoint how every thing should
be done; and also that such persons that are so qualified as aforesaid, have
right to baptism, and none but they, because God excludes all from his holy
covenant, and to have any right in the outward dispensations thereof, but only
such as believe, Romans 11. 20. Heb. 3. 18. 19. and 4. 1, 2, 3. and 11. 5. 6.
Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 22, 26, 29. God denies fellowship and communion with them
that do not believe, John 3. 5, 6, 36. Heb. 11. 6. Romans 8. 9. only such as he
has elected in Christ, and so appear by some fruit and effect of the same, as
appears, Romans 8. 29. 30. Romans 11. 7. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5, 6. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13, 14. 1
Pet. 1. 2. Acts 2. 47. Acts 13. 48. Those that God owns for his, are purchased
by his blood, who are called, chosen and faithful, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. Jam. 4. 23.
Ephesians. 2. 19, 20, 21, 22. and 4. 16. 1 Cor. 12, 12, 13. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27.
Acts 20. 28. Rev. 17. 14. And because infants have not repentance from dead
works, and faith toward God, which precedes baptism, as appears Heb. 6. 1,
2. Acts 8. 36. 37. Acts 2. 38. So also rising with Christ is an act required of
all that are baptized, which act infants cannot perform, Col. 2. 12. therefore
they are not fit subjects of baptism; also infants are not to be accounted
such as believe, as appears Romans 10. 14. If any say, we cannot require faith
and repentance of infants; I answer, no more can we require them to be
baptized. Baptism presupposes it, being an ordinance to confirm grace, and
none can rightly presuppose grace without some appearing ground, seeing faith
and obedience to Christ, is not natural: but baptism is forced upon infants
against their wills, contrary to Zeph. 3. 9. Object. But infants may have
grace. Answ. What does not appear, is secret, and secret things belong to God,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. what infants may have, is one thing, and what they can be proved
to have, is another: we pronounce nothing of infants, but leave them to the
Lord. Object. Baptism succeeds Circumcision, therefore as infants were
circumcised then, so are infants to be baptized now. Answ. Circumcision of the
heart succeeds in the place of circumcision in the flesh, as appears, Romans 2.
29. Circumcision made without hands, comes in place of circumcision made with
hands, as Col. 2. 11. with Ephesians. 2. 11. As circumcision of the flesh was an
earnest of the inheritance of the land of Canaan to the Israelites, the holy
Spirit of promise is the spiritual seal and earnest of our inheritance,
Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. And if baptism did succeed circumcision, yet the subject of
the new Testament does not succeed the Old: for no rejected Esau or Ismaelite,
are to be admitted either to union or communion with the Church of Christ under
the new Testament: the two Testaments are as two Wills, containing legacies
bequeathed to such whose names are expressly set down in the same, as Rev. 21.
27. In the old Testament, as the first Will, a male of 8 days old, or a
Proselyte, Exodus 12. 48, 49. Genesis 17. 10. -- 14. 23. 25. John 8. Phil. 3. 4. 5.
So in the new Testament, as the last Will of Christ, the legacies therein
contained are given to such as believe, and none else, Gal. 3. 14, 23, 29. Romans
8. 17. and 14. 11, 12. Gal. 3. 6. 7. these are begotten again by the Word, born
of the Spirit, the children of God, the true heirs of the kingdom of Christ,
with the privileges thereof, as Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 23. John 1. 12. 13. 1 Jo^.
3. 9. 10. Those that believe are the seed of the righteous, and of the promise,
Esaias 43. 5. with Rev. 12. 17. Gal. 4. 26. 31. Infants not being such, are not
to be baptized. The new Testament succeeded the old, therefore must we observe
the same order they did, all the whole household of every family among the
Israelites in Egypt, as well children as others, were to eat the Passover,
Exodus 12. 3. 4. and the Lords Supper succeeded that, then it follows children
and all must eat the Supper: besides, God did never take in the body of the
Gentiles to be his Church, as he did the Jews; ergo, the argument is not the
same. The Jews Church stood not by faith and circumcision of heart (as the
Church of the Gospel does) but stood merely upon nature and circumcision of
the flesh. Object. But baptism is as large as circumcision, Ergo Infants.
Answ. Baptism is both to male and female, therefore larger: circumcision was
only to males. Baptism is both to Jew and Gentile, and so is the covenant, yet
infants are not to be baptized. Obj. But Believers children are holy, 1 Cor. 7.
14. therefore are to be baptized. Ans. This doctrine takes away the being of
actual sin, else they could not be holy; this is contrary to Psalm. 51. 5. the
unbelieving wife is termed holy in the same place, therefore she must also be
baptized as well as the child: so the unbelieving Jews were termed holy, when
they were broken off, Romans 11. 16. What is it to be holy? it may be, you will
say, to be under the Covenant. I demand, when do Infants come under the
Covenant? when they are conceived? or when they are born? or when their parents
are converted? if it be answered, that Infants begotten of believing parents,
come under the Covenant in their conception, Psalm. 51. 5. and Infants borne
come under the Covenant when their parents are regenerate; then it appears,
that the Covenant is conveyed to their children by generation, and by filial
relation; but that which is a means to bring an Infant under the Covenant, is a
means to bring them under Justification and Sanctification, then it must
follow, that we must account all the children of (believing parents) natural
birth, to be under Justification and under Sanctification, because they are
holy, that is, as they say, under the Covenant: but prove by Scripture that
this holiness signifies true sanctification, or to be under the Covenant. The
holiness of the child here, is meant lawfully begotten, which is called holy
or godly, Mal. 2. 14, 15. the sanctity or holiness of the wife, is meant
lawful marriage, contrary to Ezra 10. 2, 3. as 1 These. 4. 3, 4. there is other
kinds of holiness; one of things dedicated to holy uses, as 1 Samuel 21. 5. so
there is a sanctification by the Spirit, which is called holiness, Heb. 12.
14. so there is a holiness being free from sin; and thus was Christ in the
Virgins womb, this is called holy, Luke 1. 35. there is a holiness of actions,
when they are outwardly according to the Word that makes an outward holiness,
etc. let them prove which of these holinesses is meant by this Scripture. Obj.
But children are in the Covenant, and so are to have the seal of the Covenant.
We demand what Covenant it is they intend, if to the old Covenant, to the old
Covenant seals we send them; if they say they be in the new Covenant, I deny
it: for Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were believers, as the Scriptures affirm, yet
of their children God testifies, that but a remnant of them shall be saved:
Romans 9. 27. considered with Romans 9. 13. Genesis 17. 19, 20. Now if the new
Covenant be as Jeremy reports, Jer. 31. 32, 33, 34. and as is expressed, Heb.
8. 8. and 10. 15, 16, 17. then God, who keeps Covenant, must (needs be true in
what he promises) writes his Laws in the hearts of all believers children,
they being within the Covenant, and their children must also be saved, which
yet the Scripture denies: Romans 9. 27. Isa. 1. 9. Romans 9. 29. but it is believing
the doctrine of the Gospel proves persons to be in the Covenant, the promises
are all confirmed in Christ; no interest in Christ, no interest in the Covenant
and promises thereof, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Romans 10. 4. 1 John 5. 11, 12. Romans 8. 9. we
are in Christ (visibly) first by faith, and then in the Covenant and
privileges thereof, Gal. 3. 29. and they that were born in the Covenant are
never out of it; if the parents faith instates his child into the privileges
of his faith, Salvation being one privilege, it must needs partake of that
also. Men talk of a privilege, O it is a privilege! but what privilege is it
for an Infant to have a name to live, and yet to be never the more alive for
it, and to be dead for for all that any one knows, they are the chidren of
Abraham, who walk in the steps of Abraham, see Acts 3. 25. and 13. 26. 33.
Joh. 8. 37, 39. Romans 9. 7, 8. and concerning Genesis 17. 7. I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed; to expound and apply this, and the like places, to the
natural posterity of believers, such an exposition of it is an heresy, as we
conceive, and strikes at many express Texts of Scripture; to name some: 1. If
it be so, that by being born of a believer, the word (of God which is truth it
self) says they are born in the Covenant of Grace and life, then shall all
such children be saved, or else God is unfaithful, because the Covenant of
grace is a covenant of life, in and by Jesus Christ, which is absolute and
unconditionall, therefore none can miss of glory, if God be faithful; but it
is impossible for God to lie, Ergo, they shall all be saved, or they were never
in this covenant; this doctrine makes void the stability of Gods covenant of
grace it self: thus, If the covenant of Grace be absolute and stable, then all
within the same must be saved, but all within the said covenant were not saved,
Ergo, the covenant of Grace is not absolute and stable. The major is confessed,
that a believers seed is in the Covenant of grace without exception; the minor
is proved from Ishmael and Esau, and the rejected Jews, all which were the seed
of believers, and yet not all saved. 2. It Is a ground of falling from grace;
thus all that God took into his Covenant of grace, were in an estate of grace;
but all that God took into his covenant of grace did not there continue, Ergo,
3. It Is a ground of universal redemption; this doctrine makes the death of
Christ equal as well to such as perish, as to such as are saved, all that are
in the covenant of grace Christ died for, but all that were in the covenant of
grace were not saved, Ergo, Christ died for such as are not saved. 4. This
doctrine offers to make God the author of man's believing a lie, in enjoining
him to believe the salvation of such as he knows, and reveals the contrary,
Romans 9. 27. God requires no man to believe an untruth; but for a believer to
believe that all his seed is in the covenant of grace, is to believe an
untruth, Ergo, God requires no such thing. But here some are constrained to
confess they are not in the covenant of grace and salvation; for all that are
in this covenant shall be saved. See, can you find another covenant whereof
Baptism and the Supper are the seals of it? and seeing they cannot prove them
to have by their natural birth right in the covenant of life by Cheist, they
cannot prove they have any right to the seals of it. 5. If by their natural
birth they be borne in the covenant of grace, then are they not by nature the
children of wrath as well as others who are born of unbeleevers, which is
against Ephesians. 2. 3. Now can one be under the covenant, and under grace, and
under wrath at one and the same time? 6. Then there is two ways of entering into
the covenant of grace, one by natural birth, another by faith. 7. That there
is two ways to enter into the Church of God, one by a natural birth, and
another to another by the second birth, without which none is to enter into the
kingdom of God: this latter enters by profession of faith and repentance. 8.
That sa of old, so now there is some fleshly privilege as by which we become
members of the Church now, viz. by being borne of a believer; therefore all old
things are not done away, and all become new, which is contrary to diverse
Scriptures: as they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God, but the children of the promise are counted (by God) for the
seed Romans 9. 7, 8. with Gal. 3. 9. 9. If by fleshly birth some have right to
the Ordinances, etc. then we may know some after the flesh, that is, in a
fleshly consideration, but that is contrary to 2 Cor. 5. 16. Phil. 3. 45. 10.
This abuses the Word of God, by making every believer to come in the place of
Abraham, and so assuming to each believer to be the Father of the faithful;
yea, the woman to have this privilege, which never any believer had besides
Abraham: Now they say, if one of them be a believer, the woman and not the man,
yet this promise they will apply to her seed, Gal. 3. 29. not considering that
the parents themselves, though believers come not in the place of Abraham, but
in the place of his seed, it is an high contempt of Jesus Christ, as he is the
husband of his Church, to force upon him a natural wife (himself being
spiritual) to found the Church upon natural birth. 11. It tends to overthrow
this doctrine, that the matter of the Church of Christ to be Saints, living
stones, contrary to 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. Ephesians. 2. 19. 20. 21. 22. and 46. 1 Cor.
12. 12, 13, 25, 26, 27. Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27. John 4. 23. Acts 20. 28. P^ 17. 14.
the natural posterity of believers are not so much as in appearance such. 12.
This inforceth such matter upon the Church, as tends to the destruction of the
form of it, and bring the Saints in bondage: for to found the Church of Christ
upon natural birth, seeing to one born in the Spirit, there appears to be
twenty born in the flesh: what then the major voice is like in a small time to
be the worst, and so oppress those who are borne the second time, it is
apparent it is the next way to make the Church become carnal, and tends to a
National Church. And how shall the lesser voice in the Church cast out the
greater, if they sin? 13. It tends to make Gods holy ordinance a lying sign,
to confirm that which visibly is not, secret things belong to God, and revealed
things to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. and seeing such infants appear not to have any
right in the covenant, they are not to have the seal of the covenant, it being
against the light of nature to set a seal to a blank. And that any should have
a visible right to the seals, etc. and yet not godly, is strange doctrine. 14.
It tends to prove either, that infants may eat the Lords Supper (it being in
the same nature, end and use for kind:) or else that the Church may withhold
from the members the privileges and ordinances of the same, this is to
acknowledge them fit for union, who are not fit for comunion with the church;
and seeing it puts an infant into a state of grace and remission of sins
before calling, contrary to 2 Timothy 1. 9. Acts 26. 28. Romans 8. 30. Heb. 9. 15.
And it constitutes them visible members of Christ's body before calling,
contrary to 1 Pet. 2. 9. Romans 6. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. It upholds a National Church,
as Circumcision did of old, contrary to Rev. 1. 20. And it maintains infants of
believers to be born in a covenant of grace, and to have a right to a promise
of life in Christ Jesus, contrary to Romans 9. 9. 7. 8. Gal. 3. 9. 26. 28. 29.
Romans 9. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. Psalm. 51. 5. John 3. 6. Ephesians. 2. 3. And it
maintains that grace is intaild to generation, and not regeneration, contrary
to John 3. 5. 6. And it holds that believing Gentiles natural seed have a
right to the promise of life before faith is received, contrary to Gal. 3. 21.
John 1. 12. 13. And that infants of believers may be saved by their parents
faith, contrary to Heb. 2. 4. Gal. 3. 11. And crosses Christ's commission first
to sprinkle them, and after to teach them, contrary to Matthew 28. 19. Mark 16.
15. And declares that believers infants are fit subjects of baptism before
faith and repentance is manifested, contrary to Acts 2. 38. and 8. 36. 37. And
crosses the practice of the Apostolical Churches Acts 2. 41, they that gladly
received the word, were dipped, Acts 8. 12. 36, 37, 38. Acts 10. 47, 48, 16.
15. 33. Therefore we cannot conceive that this their exposition is right of the
17. of Genesis. To conclude, many of our opposites confess, there is no
express command or example to baptize infants, and that infants sprinkled by
one of the Priests, is sufficient baptism; and yet they cannot tell us where
we may find the place of Scripture where we may read it, that it is so as they
say: but if any desire further satisfaction, I refer them to John Spilsbery's
book of Baptism, and other books of the same subject.

A question proposed to consideration, that if it be an error to be baptized in
the River, whether the punishment some would inflict upon them, and some have
suffered for it, be not too great.
SUppose infants sprinkling to be sufficient dipping, and some were not so
persuaded, because they cannot find the place in the Scripture where they may
read it (that it is sufficient) as Luke 10. 26. is this so great an evil, that
for this a man shall be more hated, and suffer more from some men, then the
basest livers where they dwell; because they went into the river to be (ducked)
dipped, and that but once more then they needed? Is this so heinous an offense as
to turn a believer into an heretic, and sufficient to deprive them of all
hope of salvation, and of breathing in the air of their native country? shall
this one act of theirs turn a tender heart into hardness, and be sufficient to
accuse them of all errors and blasphemies, and turn near kindred, and entire
loving friends to be bitter enemies, and force an unwilling separation of
husband and wife, who are but one in affection and relation; and the little
ones, who know not the right hand from the left, shall they also suffer hunger,
cold and nakedness, and their posterity beg their bread, and if it be
possible, be more miserable then themselves, because their progenitors were
stripped of all, and could by no means obtain so much favor as to enjoy the
fruit of their labors which they sweat for; but in stead thereof have been
confined where they might have a dying life, and after that suffer death, page
70. and all this for so small a fault, if any at all, Matthew. 19. 29. But they
should consider Romans 14. 23. what is not of faith is sin, and that which has
no precept or example, cannot be done in faith.

Sect. 7. Doctor Featley his three sorts of Anabaptists, and what they maintain.
DOctor Featley says, Alstedius makes 14 sorts of Anabaptists, yet there are
but 3. to whom the name properly appertains, p. 24. Ans. Then you have done
very improperly and unworthily, and scarce honestly, to stretch your conscience
to make the world believe there are 14. sorts by 15. pictures in the title of
your book: if this be equal dealing, let all that behold it judge, Mat. 7. 15.
16. D. Feat. The first sort broached their doctrine about the year 250. which
was that all those who had been baptized by Novatus, or any heretic, ought to
be baptized by the orthodox Pastor of the Church: and Cyprian, a famous Bishop
affirmed the same, that baptism of heretics was invalid, and null, and
Erasmus would not condemn these, page 24. 25. Ans. And Dr. Fealey does not
greatly condemn these. See ibid. D. Feat. The 2d. sort broched theiss about the
year 38^* that none were rightly baptized, but those that held with Donatus:
and that all others who had received baptism of the Catholic Church, ought
to be rebaptized. Ans. I know not whom they and you call the Catholic Church,
and therefore can say the less unto it: and it is a question whether D.
Featley hold any any are rightly baptized, unless it be by such as have
received holy Orders: and if he do, he must be reckoned for an Anabaptist of
the 2d sort: for this is the same in substance. D. Feat. The third and last
sort broached theirs 15^5. which was this, that baptism ought to be
administered to none, but ^uch as can give account of their faith, and such as
have been baptized in their infancy, they ought to be baptized when they come
to years of discretion, p. 25. Answ. And this last sort the Doctor is not able
to allege so much as one place of Scripture that speaks one word against
them, therefore he speaks many.

What Doctor Featleys mystical frontispice may more properly declare.
UPon consideration of the frontispice of the Doctors book; there is the
picture of a Serpent, which is very remarkable, and yet he has said nothing in
his book to unfold the mystery thereof: also considering he contradicts the
truth of the substance of his pictures, which is, as he declares, to signify
14. sorts of Anabaptists, yet says in p. 24. there is but three sorts in all,
so according to his own confession, his explanation thereof cannot be true, nor
hang together, I shall therefore propose to your consideration, what I conceive
they may more properly hold forth unto us: The great headed Serpent is the old
Serpent, which is the Devil, near to his mouth is written in great letters,
the name Anabaptist, it signifies to us, that the name Anabaptist came first
from the Devil, and that he will own whatsoever is written against them; this
name is written, as it were, in a white curtain, which the Serpent stretches
wide open: the meaning is, that what is held out by any against the Anabaptists
for submitting to Christ, is from the devil; and that the devil would have all
to take notice what is written against them: the spuing that proceeds out of
his mouth, is mystically, all his abominable lies and devilish errors, which
is the filth of his stomach, which he labors to cast upon the Anabaptists, to
make them odious, which declares the devil has much malice against them; and
the mouth of the Serpent is wide open, which shows he never cease raging and
accnsing them, and his tail is sharp, and it points toward the Anabaptist, it
shows his willingness to give them a deadly wound with it, but his tail is
short of them, that is, they are safe from his hurting them, being out of his
reach; and the Anabaptist is set in the midst, and is enclosed close in the
East, West, North, South, with men and the devil, it declares that they are
beset with enemies in all the four quarters of the earth, and the men have
several names, this signifies several religions and opinions of several
persons, yet they all are as one joined together to oppose the truth and people
of God, especially against the Anabaptist; and on the top on the right side of
the Serpent, he seems to be very still, his picture declares, that either he
has wearied himself against the people of God, and so is glad to be quiet, or
else he is one that observes the event of things, and perceiving no good can
come of it, he chooses rather to do nothing then to meddle with them; the
second, by the posture he seems to be in, is preaching, he holds up his hand,
and from it falls something like drops of water, he seems to preach that
sprinkling is sufficient for Baptism, but he has no pulpit, it is like he has
had two pulpits, and both justly taken from him for his malignancy to the
State. The third is not ashamed of his name, and he is a Separatist. Surely, I
believe he is an honest man, I wonder what he does here, he means honestly,
and intends to do good, it seems he is in a pulpit; it is like he is preaching
against the Anabaptist. How! is it possible? if it be so, I fear he has not
well studied the point he has spoken against them, and the devil has tempted
him to preach against the Anabaptist openly; it may be also, that he might not
be esteemed an Heretic, and out of a hope of doing good, has yielded, but his
face seems to be turned something backward, which holds forth, he will not be
able to stay there long; but why should the Devil desire honest men to preach
against them? Ans. Because he knows one word from an honest man, will more
prevail with some, then many from a loose fellow. The 4th holds up both his
hands; surely he stands amazed, wondering at the silliness of such as will in
cold weather go into a river to be ducked or dipped. The 5th he stands as one
that holds something against his mouth; he represents them that will neither
speak for them nor against them; he is indifferent, yet one of the same
company. The 6th staggers, he will fall off from them ere long. The 7th
stretches out his hands both ways, that is, he cars not, let all go which way
they will. The 8th appears naked, the meaning is, he is so foolish in
defending his practice, as all that hears him sees the folly of the man, and
what he contends for, or he conceives he is innocent, and no persecutor. The
9th is compassed round with a Serpent, signifying eternity; this represents all
those whom God in his just judgment has given up to their wickedness, and
shall to eternity perish in it. The 10th has the Sun touching him; this shows
the light is come, now he sees that he never saw, he points to the light, it
shows he is affected with it, and that declares he uses means that others
may see it also, and he has a key in his hand, that is, now God has
enlightened his mind, he is able to open such places of Scripture which others
cannot: also he seems to represent Paul, who being a persecutor, God has mercy
on him, and with a light from heaven converts him. The 11th picture is a
Chariot with two in it, drawn swiftly with horses, this signifies they make
haste, as if they were coming from some remote part of the kingdom to London,
to do some of the people of God a mischief, and the Chariot seems to be all on
fire; this declares their great zeal and malice, which fire came from the
devil; and there being two of them, declare they are for witnesses, sure it is
a conspiracy against them. The 12th has a Serpent at his mouth, which shows
the near familiarity they have with the devil, that are enemies to the people
of God, and that they are counseled by the devil what mischief they shall do,
and how they shall effect it. The 13th has a pen, and he is a writing; this
holds forth, that the devil has always one or other to write against the
truth, and them that profess it. The 14th is pictured with two, like women
embracing them, that is, he is so taken up about his wenches, that he is not
at leisure now to meddle with them. The 15th and last, seems to be out of his
wits, he has persecuted the people of God so long, that he is distracted, or
so terrified in his conscience, that he stands in water ready to drown himself.
In the middle of all is a river, named Jordan, this declares that much water
is required to baptize in, a few drops being not sufficient; the men in it,
seem to be the Anabaptists, so called, a man and a woman are about to be
baptized in the presence of all the aforesaid enemies; this holds forth their
loyalty, courage and constancy, of both men and women, that they are not afraid
nor ashamed to own Jesus Christ and practice his truth in the presence of the
Devil and his instruments. And they are almost naked: this was done to make
them odious to the world, by an enemy of theirs, mystically they have forsaken
all fathers, mothers, friends, land, to submit to the ways of Jesus Christ.
Thus they have denied themselves to be Christ's Disciples, and that their
enemies have stripped them of all, and that none may expect outward riches nor
glory, in submitting to the ways of Christ: And thus being stripped of all
outward comforts, now they seem to a carnal eye most miserable. One puts
another head under water so baptizing him: this to a learned Doctor (that can
see but the outside of things) seems, yea, esteems it a mere ducking, that
deserves drowning: there is no money nor figures set down near the dipper, it
seems they are so silly, that they do not compound what they shall have for
their labor. And under the men is written Proselytes, that is, they are
converted to the faith of Christ. And under the women is written, Virgins of
Sion: virgins* because they are chaste to God and man; and they are named
virgins of Sion, that is, they belong to the Church of Christ by the confession
of their adversaries.

FINIS.

