A True CATECHISM Concerning the word of God, and the Power of it, which is
quick and lively in the heart: The manner of its working, by dividing and
setting before the Creature good and evil; And also commanding to Choose the
good and shun the evil.

Also several Questions answered by the experimental working of the Spirit;
Useful for such as truly desire to be acquainted with the way to life eternal.

Written by one who is brought into the true Christian faith; and for the
Testimony of the same Faith, has been cast into prison, and continued also,
through the envious Priests of Ely, above one whole year, and remains at
present in Wisbitch Goal, and scornfully called Quaker, whose name is

Thomas Richardson.

Wisbitch Goal, the 24th of the 2d. Month, 1664.

Printed in the Year 1664.

Deutromouie 30. 1^. See I have set before thee good and evil, life and death:
Verse 19. I have set before you life and death, blessing and Cursing, choose
life, that both thou and thy soul may live.


Reason Questioneth.
I would be satisfied herein, has the Creature power to Choose the good and
Shun the evil, or to Choose the evil and Shun the good? yea or nay?

Light Answers.
The Creature man has in his own will or in his own strength, he has power to
do evil; but the power to do good stands in the gift of God; and not in the
will or wit of man.

Question.
But the word, Choose life, implies as if the man had power to Choose.

Answer.
The Creature in the fall has chosen death, or the sin that brings death;
but now the gift of God is given to discover the sin and the death, and the way
of restoration, and requires the heart and mind from the sin; and fo from the
death; showing the danger of the proceeding in the sin and evil; And that the
Lord has no delight in the sinner, and therefore it is Gods gift in man, that
is the power to destroy the devil and the sin.

Question.
If God do the work alone, what must the Creature do, or why does he say Choose
life?

Answer.
Man in eating the forbidden fruit has chosen the sin, and so death entered;
And in this estate there is a free will, or a willing mind in all men naturally
to sin: But the gift of God which is free from God is of another nature, it is
revealed in the heart and reveals the sin, and also the mind of God in the
heart of man, to draw the heart from the sin, and out of it up to God; and it
is Gods gift in the heart that cries Choose life rather then death; and this
gift of God does afflict the soul, and heart, and Conscience, if the sin be
lived in; and this is the word that is nigh thee in thine heart, that thou
may hear it and do it, ver. 14. this word is lively, it is placed in the
heart that thou may hear it and do it.

Question.
How may I know this word that is quick, that is nigh in the heart; and what is
the thing required of me to do:

Answer.
The word is Gods gift; the Son of God is the gift of God; God so loved the
world that he gave his Son whose name is called the word of God; the life is in
the Son, and he that has the Son has life; who has given a manifestation of
his spirit to every man; the spirit is the word; the spirit is quick, this is
the word that is in thine heart, that thou may hear it and do it, and this is
Gods gift.

Question.
How may I know the voice of the word or Spirit; Seeing that I am commanded to
hear it and do it?

Answer.
The Son is life in himself, and the Spirit is life, the life that is in the
Spirit, it shows what leads in the way to life, and the way to death also;
and the word being in the heart is a speaking voice that reveals every sin;
and reveals the righteous judgments upon the sinner; for it convinces the
conscience after the manifestation, and makes the heart to understand what the
Lord has no delight in, and it calls for a return and to forsake thy evil
ways, as evil Worships, and evil Actions, Words, Customs, and Traditions; and
so the word in thy heart that thou art to hear, it abides in thy heart and
stands a witness against all manner of sin that the heart can delight in, and
if thou hear it, and do it, then thou may feel what peace of conscience it
brings, and life to thy soul, but if thou hear it, and do it not; but live
still in the disobedience, then thou shall go with a wounded conscience and
shall feel the voice behind thee saying, this is the way, and it will affiict
thee and condemn thee in thine own heart for grieving of Gods holyspirit,
therefore to live in sin and know it, such goes with a wounded Couscience, and
such must needs have a heavy burden.

Question.
What is that which burtheneth, and whence comes it or what is the burden thou
speak of.

Answer.
That which burdens is sin which arises from the lust which causes the war,
and that which is burdned is the life of the soul, the delighting and living in
sin burdens the soul, and burdens the conscience, And such goes bowed down in
spirit, the life of the soul cries under the burden being pressed as a Cart
with sheaves, and all that feels this burden goes with a wounded Conscience;
and the further they go in any known sin the greater the burden and torment.

Question.
I could gladly choose life, but it seems to be a straightway.

Answer.
The way is straight to that which must never enter, but it is easy with such
as are willing and obedient; for life is obtained through love, for God is
love, and has shed his everlasting love in our hearts, and by hearing and
feeling the strength of his love, the heart is overcome, this thinks no evil
but overcomes evil; all that come under the yoke of Christ and takes up his
yoke, such dare not stand to look at the straitness of the way, for the Lord
makes it easy, for his yoke and burden to such as are of a ready mind, is
love and mercy; but the unbeleivers stands looking at the straitness of the
way, what reproaches and what persecutions, saying in heart, it may cost goods
and lands and life also, and having the heart fixed in the earthly, such are
not brought into the true faith, for the care and confidence is more in the
earthly then in the heavenly, their minds and hearts are not redeemed from the
earth, but the believers has a yoke that yokes the heart, and mind, and soul
to God, and yokes or binds the earthly part under, and such knows their
redeemer lives, that has redeemed from the vain Conversation, of the world:
And such feels the soul, redeemed from death, and how there is a passing, from
death to life.

Question.
True it is many people in these days do not walk up to what they are persuaded
in their heart is truth, they being full of fears, but if many do so for fear
of the Law, may not the Lord ardon such, and show mercy afterward.

Answer.
It is in God to pardon, and to show mercy upon repentance and forsaking sin,
and transgression, but it is a dangerous thing to tempt and provoke the Lord,
by disobeying his voice, and slighting his visitation, for it is with him to
harden, and to give the creature to unbelief, as he sees Cause, so to day if
you will hear his voice harden not your hearts, for they that neglect the day
of their visitation wherein God calls them to repentance which is the day of
mercy and healing, his justice will find them out, and how can it stand with
the justice of God to own such as deny him: has not the Lord called many this
day that will not hear, may not the day come that such may call and cry and he
will not hear? are not such as know the truth and not obey it, the fearful and
unbelieving whom God will judge? how dare thou, who art afraid to confess him
before men count thy self a believer? or how dare thou build upon a hope in thy
heart that he should hear thee when thou call, and thou deny him now he
calls? not this the hippocrites hope that must perish.

Question.
Thou speak of a call, that the Lord calls unto his people by, how may I
know when God calls me? or what is Gods call that I may know it.

Answer.
Gods call is by his word which is nigh in the heart that thou may hear it, and
do it, it is so nigh thee, that thou can neither swear nor lie but the word
is so nigh it will reprove thee and condemn thee.

Question.
Is that Gods call, I have known that many times, but whether does it call me.

Answer.
The word in the heart calls from the sin, it is nigh to discover every sin,
it is a living word, it is quick, in making the sin known and calls to
abstain, there are many are called but few are chosen.

Question.
What is the reason that many should be called and few chosen.

Answer.
The want of love to Gods word; how should God Choose such as hates to be
reformed, for God has placed his word in the heart; to reform the heart, and
many will talk of the word with their mouth, but hates to be reformed by it in
their hearts, so as it is written, every one that does evil hates the light,
but he that hears the word, and does it, such makes their calling and
election sure, such yeildeth to the word that is so nigh to discover every oath
and every lie though it might bring much gain the word is so nigh that calls
to forsake, and rebukes also with such strokes of Judgment in the Conscience,
the righteous smites, the Lord has smitten; and in smiting the fear of the
Lord is learned, the word is nigh in the heart that thou should hear it, and do
it: the hearers and doers are such as yields, and is willing to be taught by
it, but such as hears the word and does it not, the word is as an hammer, and
smites them in their conscience that they go with a wounded Conscience, and
falls under the wrath of God through disobedience.

Question.
Is there ability to be obtained as in matter of salvation, as by hearing and
doing* or is it a matter of condemnation to hear it, and not to do it.

Answer.
Yea there is matter of salvation in hearing and doing for it is written, he
that hear eth my word and does it, is compared to a wise man that built upon a
rock; but such as hear and do it not are compared to build upon the sand.

Question.
Has man power to do the one and leave the other undone: or may it not be
imputed that it is a matter of works, seeing that man may do it, or leave it
undone, because thou say hear and do, or hear and not do.

Answer.
Yea there is power in man given him of God, and he that is of God, hears
Gods word, the word is quick, it is a speaking word, and is revealed in the
heart and speaks against all manner of sin, that arises in the heart; so he
that has an ear to hear what the Lord says, such dare not lend an ear to the
sin or to the wicked, so the word is a law to the lawless, the power stands in
the word which is Gods stroke to the sinful part; the love of this being felt
in the heart, Constrains unto obedience and so begets a willingness in the
mind, for the word being powerful over-pours the heart, which has had its life
in evil; and overcomes the heart by love, so that what by its love, and what by
its judgments, the honest heart is made subject; and this is none of man's
works nor man's righteousness, but the power of the word that the upright in
heart hears and does by yielding obedience in heart unto it: But he that
hears the word and does it not, are such as ^ive in Pride and Pleasures, as
Swearing, Lying, and even all manner of evil; and has many secret reproofs in
their Consciences, but will none of its reproofs, and hates to be reformed by
it, for every one that does evil hates the light, so that their is a
willingness in man naturally (as being fallen) to do evil; and being wholly
inclined in heart thereunto, there is power enough to do evil, but has no
power of himself to do good; but to leave all without excuse, the Lord who has
no delight in the death of a sinner, has caused his light to appear in the
sinful heart; who by the word makes the sin manifest, so that many can
acknowledge they do live in gross sins, and that they are condemned in their
own Consciences many times, that the custom or habit of sin carries their
hearts away to delight in iniquity; so that the love of the evil carries or
draws the heart after it and into it, and that the creature has power
naturally to choose the evil, the heart being wholly bent thereunto; yet this
man or these sort of evil men are ready to confess upon examination that they
many times do hear the word in their hearts that afflicts them and condemns
them in their Consciences for not doing of it; thus with many their is a
Confessing but not a forsaking: And therefore it is that they do not find mercy.

Question.
I astance some particulars, that I may understand more plainly.

Answer.
For instance, some men are given to Drunkenness, and have an habit in that
sin, does the Spirit of God lead into that sin (nay) then it must needs be an
evil Spirit that leads into evil ways: Now the word of God is nigh such a one,
even in his heart at the very time when the mind is running after strong drink
or bad Company, and the word shows the man the sin and the danger, yet the
lustful mind rusheth into the sin as the horse to the battle; and many times
when man is overcome with strong drink, then the word that forewarned of the
evil when the creature is overcome with evil, then the word in the heart
afflicts the heart, and soul, and conscience: What torment is there in body,
and soul, and spirit, who through the wilful mind in vexing God. How does the
Lord vex such even in the very time, and after such evil actions are brought
forth; yet the word that warned of the evil, and from it remains in the heart,
and condemns the creature many times for the misdeeds, so as it is written,
Tribulation and Anguish upon every one that does evil, and to be short, there
may be felt in the heart good and evil; the gift of God is the word of God,
every good gift and every perfect gift comes from above, and God is the Author
of it; and there is an evil principle in the heart, and that the Devil is the
Author of, and both these will move upon the heart, the good moves unto that
which is good, and the evil moves unto that which is evil, and as their is a
yielding to either of these, his servant thou art whom thou do obey, whether
of sin unto death, or obedience to righteousness, but that which moves to good
if it be not obeyed it remains in the heart and changes not its property,
but stands a witness in the heart against all wickedness and uncleanness, and
such as regard iniquity in their hearts the Lord will not hear their Prayer,
but he will make such to fear his wrath because of disobedience.

Question.
I perceive that man of himself has not power to choose the good and shun the
evil; but no want of strength to run into evil.

Answer.
Nay, man's heart being overcome by the Serpents subtilty; to redeem the heart
again to God Christ the Way is to be made known in the heart, who opens the
understanding, and enlighteneth the heart, and causes man and woman to see
into their own hearts; what the hearts delight is in, and whether they do to
all men as they would be done by, in outward dealing or no; for he that is not
faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to him the trust of the
true riches.

Question.
It is true, to deal justly, and to love mercy is required, and many men I hope
who are in several forms of worship, are endeavoring thereafter, if that
sacrifice be acceptable with the Lord.

Answer.
The acceptable sacrifice is from a Believing heart; who believes that God is,
and that he is a rewarder, which is beyond a self righteousness which does to
be seen of men, or to be so and so accounted; for the just Spirit of God in the
heart believed in, constrains the creature to deal justly in all his dealings,
as in the sight of God; for Gods fear stands in the heart, which awes the man
or woman who believe in Christ, to deal justly; and the same spirit
constrains to love mercy, and also to walk humbly with God; and this humility
that I write of goes before honor.

Question.
How may I know a believer and an unbelieliever assunder, seeing that the
believers saerifice is accepted, and the unbelievers rejected?

Answer.
By their fruits, for a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit; neither can an
evil tree bring forth good fruit; for such as the tree is such is the fruit; a
good man out of the treasure of his heart brings forth good fruit; and an evil
man out of the treasure of his heart, brings forth evil fruit, even as Cain and
Abel, for Abels sacrifice was accepted, and Cains sacrifice was rejected.

Question.
What is the fruit that a good man brings forth out of his heart, that I may
take notice of it?

Answer.
The fruits of the Spirit, is Love, joy, peace long-suffering, gentleness,
patience, and the like, according to the Scripture.

Question.
What are the fruits that an evil man brings forth out of his heart?

Answer.
Murders, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, idolatry, witchcraft, malice,
hatred, variance, strife, and the like.

Question.
Why do thou tell me of Abel and Cain that were so many years ago; what does
their sacrifice resemble unto me?

Answer.
Abel and Cain they resemble two generations, the wicked and the righteous:
Cain in envy persecuted the just; as it is written, He that envies is a
murderer, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him: and such as live
in envy this day perfecuting the just, are of Cains spirit, and of Cains
generation, and their sacrifice is rejected by the Lord.

Question.
Why, or to what purpose does the wicked offer sacrifice if it be rejected by
the Lord?

Answer.
Nay to no purpose, the very prayers of the wicked are abomination with the
Lord.

Question.
But in case I be a sinner, and in Cains nature, finding in my heart much envy
and wickedness; wrath, and malice, and the like; is there no way to find mercy
and forgiveness, and redemption from sin?

Answer.
Yea by true repentance and godly sorrow which works true desires in the
heart after the Lord, and a true hunger and thirst after righteousness, and
also a hatred of evil, feeling Gods fear placed in the heart; for in the true
fear standing, that is the godly awe that keeps from sin, the fear restrains
from evil; and whosoever is restrained from evil, it is by an invisible arm of
God that rebukes the sinner, by a secret reproof in the heart and conscience;
and this secret reproof being owned and loved, and the sin forsaken, the same
arm that reproves the sin begets life in the soul: so that the same arm that
brings destruction to the sin in the heart, the same arm which is the Spirit
of God, does bring salvation to the soul: for, for this purpose is the Son of
God come to destroy the works of the Devil, and to work out man's salvation, by
placing the fear of God in the heart; and so the fear of the Lord is to depart
from iniquity: and iniquity departing from a love and belief is raised up in
the heart by the Spirit of God: and this is the Faith that God is the Author
of And such as come hither finds the mind changed and turned from darkness to
light, from the sin and vanity to be guided by the Spirit, and such come to see
that to be spiritually minded is life and peace, such feels the true Faith
that removes mountains, and reconcileth the heart to God: and there is no other
name under heaven whereby salvation comes but by the Spirit of Jesus in the
heart, believed in, that brings down pride, that brings down envy and strife,
and every evil work, and breaks down the partition wall, and reconciles the
heart to God, and brings life to the soul, who comes and his reward is with
him.

Question.
It appears that true Faith God is the Author of: But I would learn how this
Faith comes, and how it works in its power and efficacy, that I may know the
difference of a Believer and an Unbeliever; and also whether I be in the Faith
or no?

Answer.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; the Word and the
Spirit is one, but the Spirit and the Letter is two; for the Letter kills,
but the Spirit makes alive: the Spirit is a free gift, the manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; the nature of the Spirit is
light, and with this light are all men enlightened, that all men through him
might believe the manner of the Spirit working in the heart. First, a discovery
of the sin, and the want of life in the soul. Secondly, it begets a true desire
after the Lord, and a secret hunger and thirst after righteousness, and draws
the heart to be affected into the love of the Spirit, as it is written; He that
loves the light brings his deeds to the light, and through love the Spirit
begets a belief in the heart to its self; and as it is written, He that
believes in the light shall not abide in darkness: all sin is darkness. Mark
the manifestation of the Spirit that searches the heart, and makes the sin
known, the same sorts the sins and evil deeds; the light makes them manifest of
what sort they are; and as the sin is made known to be sin, the manifestation
of the Spirit that shows the sins and sorts them: the same Spirit convinces
the Conscience of every sin and every evil deed, and the same manifestation of
the Spirit abides in the heart, which is the only means to work out man's
salvation, and the manner of its working in the heart: as its nature is light,
and love, even so it begets the heart into union with it self. As it is
written, Of his own will begot he us, by the word of truth: and as the heart is
drawn through love into union with the Spirit, it is drawn from the sin, and
from the evil; for the love of Christ constrains: and the same manifestation
of the Spirit which is Gods free gift to work out man's salvation, that begets
the heart into unity with it self, the same begets a belief in the heart to
believe in Christ the Light, who is the light of the world, who has enlightened
every man, that all men through him might believe, and the honest heart
receives the truth in the love of it; the Spirit begets a belief in the heart:
and this is the Faith that comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God;
and this faith is that which works by love; and this is the faith that
purifieth the heart: the strength of this faith removes the sin, removes
mountains, and gives victory; as it is written, He that believes in the light
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life: and this is the
promise and the portion which the believer receives; he shall have the light of
life, and the life gives assurance, for every believer has a seal in his soul,
of life eternal, through the working of the Spirit by its power and efficacy,
in mortifying and destroying the works of the Devil, that sin and death may
have no more dominion in the heart; and so death comes to be swallowed up by
victory, and the promise of God accomplished in Christ, who says, I am come
that you might have life, who is the life, and brings life, who comes, and his
reward is with him.

Question.
Thou speak that Christ has enlightened every man, that all men through him
might believe; what is the reason that all should be enlightened, and yet some
come short of Faith in Christ?

Answer.
The defect it not in the light, but their rejecting it is the cause. The mercy
and justice of God through Christ by enlightening all, that in the day of
account all may be left without excuse, man's misery will be found to be of
himself: here lies the matter, all are enlightened, but all men have not faith,
many, will not believe that the light is truth, or that it is sufficient to
save the soul, and such hates the light; every one that does evil hates the
light, and calls the good evil, and evil good, and puts light for
darkness, and darkness for light, and such becomes reprobates concerning the
Faith; so that it is plain, one sort loving the light, believing and obeying
it, and another sort hating, rejecting, resisting, and denying; so that such as
hates to be reformed, and rejects the motions of the Spirit, and resists the
Holy Ghost, and denies the Lord that bought them, their destruction is of
themselves, and the Lord and his faithful people will be clear of their blood
in the day of Judgment.

Question.
But is the light of Christ sufficient to save the Believer?

Answer.
Yea, the light is the author of the faith, and the faith stands in the
light, and so it is saving faith; and the light is the grace: and it is
written, My grace is sufficient for thee. This grace was, and is the Saints
teacher, which taught, and teaches the believer to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts.

Question.
If the light be the author of the true says in the believer; and so the
author of man's salvation, what is the portion of the unbeliever, seeing thou
say that all are enlightened?

Answer.
The unbelievers that hate the light, the light is their condemnation: as it is
written, This is the condemnation, that light is come, and men love darkness,
because their deeds are evil; as also the grace that was the Saints teacher:
the unbelievers denied the grace and turned to wantonness, and heaped up
teachers to themselves, having itching ears, as many do at this day: so the
grace that taught and justified, and justifies the believers living in it, the
same grace condemns the unbelievers, denying to be taught and guided by it,
who have it in their hearts, but hates to be reformed by it.

Question.
I am much satisfied that the word of God in the heart is the Spirit of God,
and that it is Gods free gift, and the only means to work out man's salvation,
and also that by this free gift which is the manifestation of the Spirit: every
unbeliever in the day of Judgment shall be left without excuse?

Answer.
Thus the questioner is answered in the truth concerning the word of God in the
heart, and the power and efficacy of its working, by deviding betwixt the joint
and marrow, and by giving a discerning of the thoughts and intents of the
heart; the discerning is the eye, by which eye the power of the word in the
heart is discerned. A separation being made in the heart, by the word whereby
good and evil is divided; and the word in the heart gives a discerning of the
evil in the heart; and so the light of the body is the eye: this is that eye
that the god of this world had blinded, which the power of the word has
opened, and anointed with eye salve, that it can see and discern the thoughts
and intents of the heart.

And also to discern words and actions, oaths and lies, and the intent of the
heart in all carriages toward God and man; now to discern the intent of all
words, and to discern the intents of the thoughts, and the intent of a lie, and
the like, as in this manner how the devil works, who abode not in the truth,
who was a liar and murderer from the beginning, who is the author of all
evil; that is to say, to draw the mind and heart of man from God to believe
lies.

And thus the Serpent did to Eve by alluring her to eat of the forbidden fruit,
saying, it is good: and Adam in like manner by eating thereof lost his blessed
estate. Thus the author of sin, the author of evil, deceived and deceives
mankind, by drawing the mind from the good to the evil, and in presenting the
evil delightsome to the eye of the mind, and alluring the heart thereafter to
be affected therewith, as into one lust after another, and also diverse lying
vanities, diverse lies to get ungodly gain; and so into pride of heart, and
oaths, and the like, as covetousness, oppression, envy, and malice, and
persecution.

Thus the author of sin has allured the heart of man from God, and enticed it
to sin and sinners, that such and the like above mentioned lusts which war
against the soul. Man in the fall is overcome with evil, and where the Devil
sits as king in the heart, who is called the prince of the air that rules in
the children of disobedience.

It is his work to blind the eye, that such should not see the light of the
gorious Gospel shining in their hearts, and such are carried captive by Satan
at his will into such strong holds, and hurtful lusts, as is before mentioned.

And being blind, they cannot see nor discern the thoughts and intents of
their hearts, their eyes being shut up in unbelief, in departing from the
living God, and lending an ear, an eye, and an heart unto the author of sin,
and so into the fleshly lusts that war against the soul.

And such whose eyes are blinded, whose ears are stopped, and hearts hardened by
the deceitfulness of sin; in that state such cannot believe that the truth is
the truth: but as the unbelieving Jews that rose up against the Lord of life,
even so now do such unreasonable men who have not faith, persecute those who
bear testimony to the truth as it is made manifest in them; so that as it was
it is; they that are born after the flesh persecute them that are born after
the spirit, in such a manner, that many have thought they have done God
service, as Saul did.

Thus man in the fall being drove from God in the state of degeneration, his
eye is blinded and heart hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, committing
wickedness with greediness, until the Lord opens his eyes by the manifestation
of his Spirit, whereby the understanding comes to be enlightened, and a
discerning given into his heart to discern his own estate that he is fallen
into by the temptations of Satan and his instruments.

And also that which gives a discerning of the heart, shows how the heart is
run with delight into several fleshly lusts, strong holds, and wicked
practices, and lying vanities, which the Devil is the author of, and by so
doing is overcome with evil; and as the Serpent told Eve, that the forbidden
fruit was good, she might eat; so has the Devil taught many to call evil good,
and to eat thereof; and so by eating thereof the sin is committed, and so death
entered, as it was to Adam and Eve, and so it is with all the sons and
daughters of Adam in the fall, as it is written, As in Adam all dye, so in
Christ shall all be made alive.

But to know how all in Christ are made alive is a mystery, for the wages of
sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life; which gift of God is the Son
of God: and he that has the Son has Life, but he that has not the Son has
no life; for the Son is the way, the truth, and life, to the believer, which
way is described how it may be obtained, by the answers of several questions in
this Book, which may be useful to the honest hearted for their recovery out of
the state of Adam in the fall, unto Christ the second Adam that never fell.

HEre follows a declaration of an opening in my heart, as by vision in me as
I lay in bed in the night season in the twelfth Month, 1663. in which Vision
there appeared unto my view a sumptuous building, in form like to a spacious
Lords Palace standing on a hill: and I beholding of it, delighted in it; and
as I looked upon it, it appeared to me, that there were several pipes of lead
laid round about the walls of that building, ordered in mine eye to serve the
whole house with water: And I stood considering from whence this water should
come to serve such a spacious place, being it stood upon a hill: And it further
appeared to me, that the water that served the whole house came from a
Fountain; and the Lord of that building had ordered conveyance from the
Fountain to serve the whole house. And it being such an excellent work, I
greatly desired to see the Fountain, and how the water was conveyed from the
Fountain. And then I was showed an excellent place called a Porters Lodge,
where the Porter abode continually; and it was showed me that that Porter was
highly esteemed of the Lord of the building; and commission were given to him
to serve the whole house with water, and that both the Fountain and the
conveyance of the water were to be ordered at his pleasure. Then I greatly
desired to see into the house, how the house was supplied with water, and
withal, way was made for me to enter into the house; and as I walked into
several rooms, there were several servants, and every servant had his office;
and I looked for the water, and in some of the rooms the water came in
abundantly, and those servants of those rooms kept all things under their
charge in good order, very pleasant to behold, to the great honor of the Lord
of that house; and then I walked further in the house, into other rooms, and I
looked for the water, and the water came into those rooms very slowly, and the
servants of those rooms were not industerous in their places, for their Lord,
but were part for their Lord, and part for themselves, and their rooms were not
clean: and it was showed me that there were many of those unfaithful servants
and unclean rooms. Then I desired to see further into the house, and going
further along into other rooms, I looked for water, seeing the rooms exceeding
foul, and the servants of those rooms wholly at ease; and it was showed me that
there was pipes to convey water unto them as the other rooms had, but the water
was stopped, which caused the uncleanness: Then I were something troubled in
mind, and desired to know the reason why some of the rooms should have such
abundance of water, and some but a small quantity, and some none; but it were
showed me that the Porter that were in high esteem had power to serve the whole
house with water, and according to desert he supplied the rooms thereof; and
all those servants that were faithful to their Lord had water in abundance; and
those servants that had had an eye to themselves their water abated, and if
they did not stand up and show themselves faithful whilst they had water,
their rooms would grow unclean, as well as those that had their water course
stopped already: then I enquired in my mind what might become of those
servants that were at ease, or sloathful; and it was showed me that the Lord of
the building would come, and the unfaithful servants he would cast forth of his
house, and place others in their rooms, for he could not endure unfaithful
servants; and it seemed to me that it would be much shame, trouble, and terror
for them that were cast out of such a Lords service for their unfaithfulness to
their master. And so I awaked, and it were opened to my understanding, how my
spirit has been in this exercise as aforesaid: and it being cleared to my
understanding afresh, I am constrained to write the substance of the matter,
that the learned may read, and in reading every one may read themselves, lest
they lose their learning and can obtain it no more.

Wisbitch Goal. Tho. Richardson.

The fruits of the Priests of Ely, in the County of Cambridge, published;
wherein Priest Brunsel, and Priest Holder, called Justices, and Priest Langhorn
their Brother by Trade, the fruits of their Ministrey, and their practice also
described, as fol^oweth, That people may judge whether such as these be able
Ministers of the Gospel, or whether such are fit to be judges of the Law, yea,
or nay; if not, whether people ought not to beware of them, and such like, as
Jude has exhorted us, much more because the Spirit of the Lord has made them
manifest both in doctrine and practice.
Daniel Langhorn Priest of Ely,
THis is to thee, who were at Ely Goal door, speaking to a friend of God, and
I being a Prisoner, told thee the Tree was known by its fruit; and that both
thou and thy fruits was manifest: and thou went away, and bid me look in the
Epistle of Jude, as if Jude described such as we are to be out of the truth:
therefore to satisfy thee and others, I have read Judes Epistle, and do herein
write a testimony of Judes testimony, that thou and all other who shall see
this Letter may be persuaded, or however, left without excuse, what sort of
people Jud^ wrote against, or exhorted the Saints to beware of, as may be seen
being upon record. Jude a servant of Jesus, to them that are sanctified,
(saying) when I gave diligence to write unto you of the common salvation, it
was needful for me to write unto you, and to exhort you, that you earnestly
contend for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints; for there were
certain men crept in unawares, who were ordained of old for condemnation,
ungodly men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the Lord
Jesus: How can thou clear thy self here (Daniel) art thou not one of those
that are crept in, or art thou entered in by the door; (if not) what are they
that climb up another way, or such as are crept in at unawares into a
Steeple-house for so much a year: though some of the world are not aware of
you, yet the children of Light can see you: And Jud^s exhortation we dearly
own, as to beware of such as Jude describes, who were ordained of old for
condemnation. Likewise Judes exhortation is to the Saints to beware of the
filthy dreamers that defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities. Now (Daniel) would thou turn these words upon us, or they stand a
witness against thee and thy brethren; for I testify as before the Lord, that
we whom thou in scorn call Quakers, do not deny dominion, but are real in
heart for the establishing thereof: therefore own thy own Scriptures, which is
for thee and thy Brethren, who are the filthy dreamers for filthy lucre: and
upon thy head I leave it; he that has a dream let him tell a dream, says the
Lord; and he that has my word let him speak it faithfully. If thou can not
believe that thou and thy beethren are of that number before mentioned, whom
Jude has sentenced filthy dreamers like the Sodomites, who were ordained of
old for condemnation. For a further description mark the 11th. ver. for the
proof and confirmation, and also thy portion: thou art used to divide the
Scriptures for money, divide this verse amongst thee and thy brethren: Woe unto
them (says Jude) for they have gone in the way of Cain, and runned greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core:
Did not Cain persecute about Religion, and did not Balaam love the wages of
unrighteousness? does not thou and thy brethren run greedily after the error
of Balaam for reward: therefore in Cains way and Balaams way own your own
Scriptures, and Judes sentence, which is perishing in the gainsaying of Core.
Did not Cain in envy persecute about Religion? does not the Doctor Priests in
Ely and thou also persecute about Religion in Goales and Pulpits; your tongues
and actions make you manifest to go in the way of Cain: and further, for the
clearing of your practice, Jude in the 12. verse describes such out, how they
may be known, speaking of the spots in your Feasts of Charity, feeding without
fear, clouds without water, carried about with winds, trees without fruit,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots: how can thou clear thy self here.
Daniel, do thou not use to feast? I heard thou were at a Feast in Ely, and
called for the other Song; is not this one of thy spots that thou art known by?
what could a drunkard have done more: is this the practice of a Minister of
Christ, or of such an one as Jude has sentenced, which is crept in at
unawares, who were of old for condemnation. Again, carried about with winds,
is not thy Doctrine windy? how has it wrought effect so in any of thy hearers
as to change their hearts from evil; or what fruits are brought forth to God in
thee and thy brethren or in your assemblies: Thou may read what the fruit of
the Spirit is, it is love, joy, peace, and the like: how little of these fruits
does appear, either in you that are called teachers, or in those whom you
etach: but instead of love and peace, we find pride, envy, strife, and
persecution abounds: and these fruits shows that you are carried about with
winds, without fruit, as to God. And further in the 13th. verse, Jude
describes such more at large, as raging ways of the Sea, foaming out your own
shame, wandering stars: and your portion he has described, saying, To whom is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

And further, Jude brings Enochs prophecy of the Lords coming with ten
thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all the ungodly, for their
ungodly deeds and hard speeches. And Jude further describes them, that the Lord
would execute judgment upon, stiling them that they might be known, in the 16.
ver. These are they which are murmurers, complainers, walking after their own
lusts speaking great swelling words, having men's persons in admiration because
of advantage: Do not you Priests believe that you are of this number whom Jude
has described in matter of practice; yet further Jude opens such more in the
18. and 19. verses, saying, how the Apostle spoke of such before, how there
should be mockers in the last time who should walk after their own ungodly
lusts, saying, These be they who separate themselves sensual, having not the
Spirit. (Mark) Jude says these who walk after their own ungodly lusts; such as
are sensual, separated from the Spirit. Consider therefore if Jude have not
given a clear description who they are that the Saints are to be aware of; and
how such as thou may be discerned from them that fear the Lord, both by
doctrine and conversation.

Now consider if thou can contrary this, and bring a proof of any of the
Ministers of Christ that persecuted any about Religion, for an example for thee
and thy brethren, who profess your selves Ministers, but prove your selves
persecutors. Then show me who they are that Jude wrote to the Saints to be
aware of, that goes in Cains way, and Balaams way; or who they are that turned
the grace of God into lasciviousness; who are crept in at unawares, and who are
the filthy dreamers; as bruit beasts separated from the spirit, and know
nothing but what they know naturally, that walks in Cains way and Balaams way,
and loves to feast, and the upper rooms also; raging waves, foaming out their
own shame, fruitless trees who lives in their own ungodly lusts, ^aving men's
persons in admiration because of advantage.

Now Daniel, if thou and the Doctor Priests of Ely called Justices, can clear
your selves to be none of this number abovesaid, whom Jude has described how
such might be known, both by doctrine and practice, and also set forth their
portion; then let us whom you cast into Ely Goal hear from you who they are
that walk in Cains and Balaams way; for it will lie upon you to clear your
selves by doctrine and example, according to Scripture Rule, or else own your
own Scriptures and Iudes sentence, your portion.

For Daniel, according to thy words I have read Iudes Epistle, and do bear my
testimony against all such as walk in Cains way, persecuting the just; and also
against all such as run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and
against such filthy dreamers which are crept in at unawares, who were ordained
of old for condemnation; and against such as are sensual, having not the
Spirit, who live in their own ungodly lusts.

And for a farther testimony that you are of that number that Jude has
sentenced, who walk in Cains way persecutig the just, remember Ely Goal, and
all that take notice of your actions stand witness against you: have you not
cast fourteen men into prison, and kept us twenty weeks from Sessions to
Sessions, when no evil can he proved against us, done either to God or man; and
you Priests have set on the Bench both to be our Accusers and Judges: how much
false imprisonment have we received by you must not a record of this be kept
think you with the Lord, who assuredly takes notice of all your proceeding
against the Innocent.

And thou Daniel cried, keep them up Jailer, who came by the Goal door and
smote a prisoner on the face: where is there any such persecuters in England as
you Priests show your selves to be: Well might Jude say, Woe unto such as go in
the way of Cain, and run greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, such
murmurers and complainers: do you not murmur and grudge that we whom you
persecute should live amongst you; and do you not complain to the Magistrates
against us; have you not informed the Judge of the Assize to keep such and such
in prison whom your envy is against; let the witness in you speak: for
whatsoever is committed in darkness is made manifest in the light: do you not
believe that the Lord will avenge for these things.

Now Daniel, its like thou will call this a railing accusation; but Jude did
not rail when he said such and such were to perish, and that such as were crept
in at unaware were ordained of old for condemnation and that such as walked in
Cains way; a^ Balaams way, dreamers, murmurers, complainers, and the like, that
walked afte^ their own ungodly lusts, that to such was reserved the blackness
of darkness for ever this was, and is no railing accusation, bu^ the words of
truth which is and must b^ fulfilled.

Be warned therefore, O ye Priests, an^ take heed of fighting against the Lord,
(...) persecuting his people; for what is done unto his is done unto him, for
the Lord is on our side: In vain it is for man to strive against him, who will
by no means acqu^^ the wicked: and if you have any regard unto your own souls;
take heed what you do, the day of account hastens; and I never knew any fight
against God and prosper.

Tho. Richardson

The End.

