THE Wall and Glory OF JERUSALEM, IN A SERMON Preached in St. PAULS-Church
LONDON, Before the Right Honorable The Lord Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen,
Common Council, and Companies of the Honorable City of London, February 28.
1659. Being a Day of Solemn Thanksgiving unto God, for restoring the Parliament
and Common Council, and for preserving the City.

By Edward Reynolds D. D.

London Printed by Tho: Newcomb, for George Thomason, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS ALEYN Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON, The
Court of Aldermen and COMMON COUNCIL.
Right Honorable,
AMongst all the exceeding great and precious Promises which the Lord has made
unto his People, these are of a very radiant Luster, and special Magnitude; 2 Samuel 7. 10.
That he would appoint a place for them, and plant them, that they should dwell
in a place of their own, and move no more, neither should the Children of
Wickedness afflict them any more as before time. That he would build them and
not pull them down, Jer. 24: 6, 7.
and plant them and not pluck them up, and give them an Heart to know him, and
to return unto him with their whole Heart. Whereby we understand, that
Stability and Sanctity, Healing and Holiness, are two most Eminent and Signal
Mercies of God unto a People, who have been long exercised with Breach upon
Breach, and emptied from Vessel into Vessel. How sad the Condition of these
discomposed and dilacerated Nations has been; how doleful the Earthquakes and
Concussions both in Church and State; how daring the Insolences and Attempts
of men of unstable minds destitute of solid and steady Principles, acted by the
various and quotidian Conduct of changeable and domestical Interests, have been
against our Jachin and our Boaz, Authority in our Parliaments, and Ministry in
our Churches, has been so well known both at home and abroad, as to render
these Nations a Shame to themselves, and a Ludibrium to the World. What the
great Works are which the Lord by the wonderful Series and Vicissitudes of
Providence is doing in the midst of us, the Hearts of his Servants, hanging in
suspense between Hope and Fear, do tremulously attend upon, and labor to
understand. When we consider the maturity of our mighty Sins, we have great
reason to fear his Wrath; and when we observe the progress of his Wonderful
works, we have some comfortable Encouragement to hope for the renewall of his
Mercy. And that so much the rather, because he has stirred up your hearts in
this great City to return unto him the glory due unto his name for his goodness
to these Nations, in restoring the Parliament, and unto your selves, in
restoring your Council, and healing the Wound inflicted on the Honor of this
Renowned City. That the Lord will be graciously pleased to crown and consummate
the Mercies which he has begun, in guideing the hearts of the people to choose
for this next Parliament, men of Eminency for Piety and Prudence, who may come
with healing Spirits, and make it their business to repair our Breaches, and be
the Restorers of Paths to dwell in, who may lay to heart the Interest of Christ
and his Church, and promote purity of Doctrine and Worship, due Administration
of Holy Ordinances, and whatever may conduce to the Power of Godliness, and the
Comfort of all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; That he will be pleased
to set his Eye and his Heart upon this City for good, and to dwell in it night
and day, to be a Wall of Fire about it, and the Glory in the midst of it, to
appoint Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks unto it, is and shall be the hearty
Prayer of

Your most humble and Faithful Servant in the Lord, EDWARD REYNOLDS.
March 14. 1659.
THE WALL and GLORY OF JERUSALEM, In a SERMON Preached in Paul's Church London.
Zach. 2. 5. For I, says the Lord, will be unto her a Wall of Fire round
about, and will be the Glory in the midst of her.
TWo gracious Visions the Lord gives our Prophet in the former Chapter: One of
a man riding amongst the Mirtile-trees in the bottom; Christ in his despised
Church at Babylon: The other of Four Carpenters, sent to fray and cast out the
Horns which had scattered the Church, by both giving an assurance, that he
would disappoint the Enemies of his afflicted people.

We have here in this Chapter another Vision, of a man with a measuring Line in
his hand, to show that the Lord was now in a readiness to build and restore the
City and Temple, the former we find accordingly done by the care of Nehemiah,
cap. 3, and cap. 6. 15. the latter by Joshua and Zerubbabel. Ezra. 6: 14, 15.

Now whereas it is here said, ver. 4. That Jerusalem should be inhabited as
Towns without Walls, which may seem first to cross the History, Neh. 6. 15.
where we find that the Wall was finished. 2. To discourage the people, who
having such potent and malicious Adversaries, round about as they had, should
by that means be exposed to all the assaults and impressions which they should
make upon them: The meaning is, that though the city within the Walls were very
spacious, yet the people should return in so great abundance (as Josephus
reports they did) that multitudes should be constrained to lie without the
Walls, Antiq. l, 11. c. 4.
unto whom the Lord promises to be himself a Wall and Defense. Isai. 60. 12.


Jer. 31. 27.
They were now called to build the city and Temple: two great discouragements
they ^ Scorn, Nehem. 4. 8. 1. 3. 7, 8, 9. Nehem. 6. 1. 10. Ezra. 4. 4, 5. The
Lord here by a gracious promise fortifieth them against the fear of both;
against the fear of Danger, by promising to be their Protection, and against
the fear of Scorn, by promising to be their Glory. When they are without Walls,
I will be their Wall; when they are without Gates, I will be their Gate, my
Salvation shall be a Bulwark unto them, they shall call their Walls Salvation,
and their Gates praise. Isai. 26, 1. 60. 18.

The Words set forth the Lord opposing all the Enemies, removing all the fears
of his people, by a double promise, of Protection, against all powerful
oppositions, of Honor against all reproachful Insultations.

In both is considerable; First, The Author and Substance of it, I, says the
Lord. 2. The Subject of it, Jerusalem, I will be unto her. 3. The Description
of it. 1. Of the Protection, by the Metaphors of a Wall and of Fire, and the
place of that, in Circuitu, round about. 2. of the Honor, and the place of
that, I will be for Glory, or the Glory in the midst of her.

A weak people met together about an hated and invidious Enterprise, opposed by
strong, subtle, vigilant, active, malicious Adversaries, had need have a help
to defend them I says the Lord will be an Help, a Wall unto them.

But potent Enemies can batter Walls and scale them: Ezekiel. 21. 22. Prove. 21.
22. nay says the Lord, I will prevent that fear, I will be a Wall of Fire,
which the Enemy shall not dare come near or touch.

But a Wall may have gaps and breaches in it, the Gates may be pulled down and
consumed, as we find they were, Nehem. 1. 3. 6. 1. and then whatever the Wall
be, the breaches will let in the Enemy; the poor Church is never without some
Breaches or other, called the Breaches of the City of David, Isai. 22. 9. Some
Gates pulled down, to lay them open to danger. But every work of God is
perfect. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Where he is a Wall, he will be a Wall, in Circuitu, round
about, no Breach, no Gap, no Gate or Portcullis pulled down, by which danger
may enter in.

But if the Wall be Fire, what will become of the Houses of the City? I will,
says the Lord, be a Wall unto her, not a Wall against her. It is Dativus
Commodi, a beneficial fire to the City, a consuming fire to the Enemy that
assaults her. Dan. 3. 25. 22.
A fire for the three Children to walk in; Exodus 3. 2.
A fire for their Enemies to perish by; A fire in the bush to Moses; Genesis 19 24.
A fire in Brimstone to Sodom; 2 Reg. 1. 10. 12.
A destroying fire to the Captains of Ahaziah, 2 Reg. 2. 11.
and a Triumphal fire, a Chariot of fire to the Lords Prophet.

But a Wall may shut men and their misery in together, the Wall of a Prison or
Dungeon is no great Comfort to those that are shut within it. It may be sad
enough in medio, though there be a Wall in Circuitu.

We have a relief against that too; As the Lord is a Wall of Fire round about
to keep out the Enemy, so he is The Glory in the midst of Jerusalem, to
comfort his people. Providence is expressed by a Circumference with an Eye in
the Center. God is here both in the Circumference, and in the Center of
Jerusalem; a severe Providence in circuitu to keep off the Enemy, a Gracious
providence in medio, to Honor and Revive his people. Ignis and exitium
hostibus, Gloria and subsidium Ecclesiae.

The poor Church was miserably opposed and oppressed by the potency of their
Enemies on every side. But against them All they have a God to put into the
other part of the Balance: God alone is eminently unto his people, whatever
good thing else they want. In Widowhood he is an Husband; Thy Maker is thine
Husband, Isai. 54. 5. In Orphanship he is a Father; A Father of the Fatherless
is God in his holy Habitation, Psalm. 88. 5. In darkness a Sun, in danger a
Shield, Psalm. 84. 11. A Refuge in trouble, a River in drought: Psalm. 46. 1: 4.
A safety where there is no Wall, a praise where there is no Gate, a Light where
there is no Sun, Isai. 60. 18, 19. A God of Salvation in whom his Servants can
triumph where all other Comforts in the World are wanting. Habak. 3. 17, 18.

Let us hold fast our God, and we need not fear our Enemy. If God be for us,
who can be against us? Romans 8. 31. If he justify, who can condemn? If he love,
who can separate? Many will be against us to hate us, but none can be against
us, to hurt us. Many will girde and girde again, many will take Counsel, and
make a decree, many will raunt it with Pharaoh, I will pursue, I will overtake,
I will divide the spoil, my Lust shall be satisfied, I will draw my Sword, mine
hand shall destroy. Exodus 15. 9. agam, ruam, rapiam, tundam, prosternam, as the
proud Confident in the Comoedian: But if he be Immanuel, God with us, they
shall be broken, their Counsels shall not stand, their Decrees shall come to
naught, he will strengthen, he will help, he will uphold with the right hand of
his Righteousness, Isai. 8. 9, 10. Isai. 41. 10. Let the name of your City be
Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there, be zealous for his truth and worship, for
his name and Glory, let him be in medio, in the midst of your Hearts to fear
him, of your Counsels to follow him, of your Houses, your Trades, your
Conversation to walk with him, provoke him not by your Impieties against him,
by your unrighteousness against men, and then, if there be any Help or Comfort
against Danger in Heaven or Earth he can command it, if there be none he can
create it, Psalm. 44. 4.
whatever is wanting he can supply and make it good out of himself, Isai. 4. 5.
I will be a Wall.

1. A Wall of Partition to separate the Church from the World, as the Land of
Canaan was divided by the Mediterranean Sea West ward, by the Inland Seas, and
the River Jordan Eastward, and at each end North and South with Mountains: So
the Church of God is severed and shut up from the rest of the World. Aug. de
Bap. l. 5. c. 27, 28.
Israel dwelt alone, and was reckoned amongst the Nations. Number. 23: 9. they are
chosen out of the World, John 15: 19. A Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, a
Fountain Sealed. Cant. 4: 12. their Laws diverse from all people, Ester 3. 8.
They are not to conform to the World, Romans 12: 2. nor to walk (...). Ephesians. 2. 2.
the World knows them not. 1 John 3. but looks on them as prodigies and men to
be wondered at, Zach. 3: 8.

2. A Wall of Conjunction, uniting the parts together in one Common Interest,
as the Brain is walled in by the skull, the vital parts by the Ribs and the
Breast, to keep them firm and close together, that they may not be scatered nor
divided, though the Members of the Church are called out from the World, and
are to separate from that: Yet they are to be compacted and united within
themselves. Psalm. 122. 3. to be of one Heart, and of one Soul, Act. 4. 32. To
hold the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace: to have a coagmentation and
joining together, Ephesians. 4. 16. Factions and Divisions in the Church, are usually
the Fruits of the Flesh; when one is of Paul, another of Apollo, are ye not
Carnal? 1 Cor. 3. 4. The Apostle warns us to take heed of such as cause
Divisions and Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine received, as those that serve
not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies: 1 Cor. 3. 3. Romans 16. 17, 18. We
have seen by very sad experience, when there has been no wall nor enclosure to
bound and keep within some principles of unity, the wild and exhorbitant
spirits of men, who either acted by Interest, or driving on Designs, or
possessed with prejudice against received Doctrines, have departed from sound
Truth and brotherly Love: what Flames and Confusions have overspread these
Nations, once famous for Unity in orthodox Truth; what forsaking of Ordinances,
what magnifying of deceitful Lights, what rage against Ministry, what
violations of Magistracy, what bleeding of Princes, what breakings of
Parliaments, what Phrenetick and furious Extravagances and Disorders have
stained the Glory of the Reformed Religion amongst us. The evidence of these
doleful effects should now at last awaken the Spirits of all wise, godly and
sober persons, to close in some healing and uniting Counsels, not to foment
animosities, nor cherish jealousies one against another, but studying every man
his own failings, to be the more remiss in censuring, and the more inclinable
unto closing with their Christian Brethren; why should we shut any out of our
love here, whom we dare not exclude from the Common Salvation hereafter? And
indeed when the Lord is pleased to send a Spirit of Unity and Agreement amongst
a people, to make them tender of each others safety, and to look on the welfare
of the parts, as the common Interest of the whole, they are hereby a Wall unto
one another, as Nabals Servants said of David and his men, 1 Samuel 25. 16. Every
thing is best preserved when most united. It is easy to break the sticks of a
Faggot when the bond is loosed, and they severed each from other, but while they
are bound together, they mutually preserve each other. Love is a Bond, Col. 3.
14. The Integrity of the Body is preserved by the Love of the Members unto one
another; therefore Nature has taught weak Cattle to keep together in Flocks,
and Fishes in sholes, and Birds in flights, whereas Beasts of Prey live
commonly alone, as Lions, Whales, Eagles, Kites. A Kingdom divided within it
self cannot stand: Therefore as Christ is not divided, 1 Cor. 1. 13. would not
have his bones broken, nor his garment parted, so neither should his Church.
She is never so terrible, as when she is an Army with Banners, united and
compacted into one Body.

3. A Wall of Protection and Defense. Psalm. 18: 2. Psalm. 144: 2. Deuteronomy. 33: 29.
Isai. 26: 20. Isai. 8: 14. Justin Instit. l. 2 Tit. 1. Sect. 10. Diodor. Sic.
lib. 11.
As the Lord promises to encamp about his House and to defend them, Zach. 9:
8. 15. He is a Rock, a Tower; a Shield, a Chamber, a Sanctuary, and here a Wall
to preserve and protect his people. Great has ever been the care of States, to
keep the Walls and Gates of Cities inviolable; in the Roman Law they are called
Res Sanctae and divini Juris, sacred things and in no case to be injured, and
it was a capital crime, to climb over them. We read in Diod: Sic. what care
Themistocles took to build a Wall about Athens, Bec. Walls are a great defense
and protection to the Cities to which they belong.

The Lord does thus as a Wall protect his Church. 1. In a way of Promise, I
says the Lord; his saying it, is doing it. His Word is Operative and
Efficacious, Gods Promises are the Walls about his Church. Every thing is
preserved by the same word whereby it is created. He upholdeth all things by
the word of his power Heb. 1. 3. His Servants count themselves safe under his
promise, they trust in his Word. Psalm. 119. 81.

2. In a way of Power, making bare his Arm in their Cause, then when all second
Helps fail and are at a stand, such a defense he was to Israel at the Red Sea,
when Death was before and behind, and on every side of them, so that they were
able to do nothing, but only to stand still, and see the Salvation of God.

3. In a way of Providence. 1. By Creatures, with whom he makes a Covenant in
behalf of his people, that they shall not but in all his holy Mountain. Of this
League we read, Job 5: 23. Hos. 2: 18. Ezekiel. 34. 25. 2. By Enemies, making Moab
a Covert from his Outcasts. Isai. 16: 4. as dead Thorns are a fence about a
Garden. He does sometimes not only restrain the wrath of Evil men, as he did
Labans and Esaus from hurting Jacob, but does make them helpful and beneficial
unto them, as the dissension between the Pharisees and Saduces was to Paul,
Act. 23. 6, 7. As the Egyptians lent their Jewels unto Israel to hasten them
away, Exodus 12: 35, 36. 3. By Casualties, ordering contingent Events, and
various incoherent Emergencies to the protection of his people, as the noise in
the Mulberry Trees, 2 Samuel 5: 24. The shining of the Sun on the Waters, 2 Reg.
3. 22. The sudden incursion of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 23: 27, 28: The Chain
of fortuitous Events, which we may observe in the History of Joseph, and in the
book of Esther.

4. In a way of Grace, the Lord planting such beauties and rays of spiritual
Majesty upon his Servants, as causes their very Adversaries to reverence them,
and fear to annoy them, as Herod did John, and Felix Paul, for wisdom makes a
man's face to shine. Eccles. 8: 1. There are Flowers which they call
Wall-Flowers, and there are Graces, which I may call Wall-Graces, which have a
special protecting virtue in them. Innocence, whereby we put to silence the
frowardness of foolish men. 1. Pet: 2: 15. Wisdom, which God has given for a
Defense. Eccles. 7. 12. by this Abigal diverted the ruin intended against
Nabal and his Family. Meekness and Humiliiy; for the lowest things are safest.
A Tempest breaks an Oak, but not the Ears of Corn which yield unto it. A Canon
Bullet battereth a lofty Tower of Marble, which is deaded by a raw mud wall. A
soft Spirit turns away Wrath, Prove. 15: 1. Holy fortitude, which is a fence
against Terror. Pro. 28. 1: Spiritual peace and joy which is a Garrison to the
Heart, Phil. 4. 7. The Joy of the Lord is the strength of his Servants, Nehem.
8: 10. The invincible power of Faith, which is a Shield against Satan, and our
Victory over the World, Ephesians. 6. 16. 1. Joh. 5: 4. Hope, the Anchor of the
Soul, the Whetstone of Christian courage, the more we expect for the future,
the securer we are for the present against the fear of evil. Lastly the Spirit
of supplication, which flies to the name of the Lord as a strong Tower, which
wrestles and prevails with God, vincit invincibilem, ligat omnipotentem, and
therefore is a principal part of the Christian panoply. Ephesians. 6. 18. And thus is
the Lord a Wall of protection to his Church. In a way of promise, in a way of
power, in a way of providence, ordering Creatures, Enemies, Casualties to the
defense of his people, and in a way of Grace.

And his protection is like that of a Wall in these two respects. 1. He is a
near, present, Ready Defense. Exempla divinae custodiae in praesentissimis
periculis vide in Philippi Camerarii horis subcisivis part. 2. cap. 7.
Evil may be at hand, when Help is too for off to come seasonably in. But the
Wall joins, and is near unto the City: Such a Defense the Lord is, a present
help in trouble, Psalm. 46. 1. A God near at hand, not in a journey, or a sleep,
or out of the way, when he should help us, Jer. 23. 23. Nigh unto his people in
all that they call upon him for, Deuteronomy. 4: 7. Psalm. 85: 9.

2. an Adequate and proportionable defense. A Wall defends a City on every
side. As the Enemies compass the Church about with Danger, Psalm. 22: 12. 16.
Psalm. 118: 10. 12. So does the Lord compass it with mercy, Psalm. 32. 10.

But the strongest Walls, though of Iron or Brass (for such we read of, Ezekiel.
4. 3. Jer. 15. 20.) may by Military Engines be scaled, battered or demolished.
Therefore the Lord, to show that he is an impregnable protection, says, that
he will be a Wall of Fire, which cannot be scaled nor broken down, which
consumes all Engines that attempt any thing against it, as the Flaming Sword
kept the way of the Tree of Life. Gen 3: 24.
The Pillar of Fire secured Israel. Exodus 14. 19, 20.
Fire in the Bush kept any from coming near to cut off the boughs, and yet did
not it self consume them. He is a fire in the Enemies Wall to overturn it, Jer.
49. 27. but to Jerusalem, he is a Wall of Fire to defend it. He once defended
the Church with a Wall of water, Exodus 14. 22. And still defends it as a Wall
of Fire. By himself, who is a consuming Fire. (...) vocavit. Plato Diog. Laert:
in Platone. vid. Raynold. Lect. Apocryp. Lect. 47.
Heb. 12. 29. By his Angels, who are a flaming fire, Psalm. 104. 4. Therefore
Solomon carved Cherubims on the Walls of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3. 7. to signify
that Angels are the Walls of the Church; the Angel of the Lord encampeth round
about them that fear him to deliver them. Psalm. 34. 7.

And his protection is like Fire in these four respects.

1. It is Terrible and conspicuous, which in a wonderful manner does strike
fear into his Enemies, as he promised to go before his people as a consuming
fire, Deuteronomy. 9. 3. The Prophet describes the terrible majesty of the Lord by a
Throne of Fire, Job 37. 22.
Ezekiel. 1. 26, 27. And the glorious coming of Christ, by flames of fire, 2 These.
1. 8, 9. We are bid to praise him in the fires, Isai. 24. 15. For those
conspicuous mercies whereby he has showed himself a consuming fire in behalf
of his people. He answers his people by terrible things, Psalm. 65. 5. things
which they looked not for, Isai. 64. 3. To make his name known unto his
adversaries.

2. It is an impregnable and invincible defense. Other Walls, though high,
though broad, by battering Rams have been demolished, and by Mounts scaled. The
Walls of Babylon were two hundred foot high, and fifty foot broad, Diod. Sicul.
lib. 1. cap. 4.
as Diodorus Siculus, Pliny, and Herodotus report, Plin. Hist. Not. l. 6. cap.
26.
yet even these were broken down, Jere. 51. 58. but no man dare climb, Herodot.
lib. 1. page 74. Edit. Graeco-Lat.
no Engines can be applied against a Wall of Fire, it will devour the batteries
that are made against it.

3. It is a constant and perpetual defense, for this is not a wasting, but a
sixed fire, like that in the Bush, which did not consume it, but dwelt in it,
Deuteronomy. 33. 16. He is a Sun and a shield, his protection is an enduring thing, as
the fire of the Sun, Psalm. 84. 11. 89. 36. the defense which is over his Glory,
upon the Assemblies of Sion, viz. The Pillar of the Cloud, and of fire is never
taken away. Isai. 4. 5. Exodus 13. 22.

4. It is an Active, an Offensive, an Efficacious defense. Other Walls are
defensive only, to prohibit and hinder Assaults, but a Wall of Fire does fight
for those whom it does defend; it is not only a Wall, but a Magazine; not only
a fence, but a Weapon; not only a muniment, but an Army. As Isreal's wall of
water did drown Pharaoh, so the three Childrens Wall of Fire, did devour those
that threw them into it. The protection of God about his Church, is a most
operative, and a most efficacious protection.

We have taken a view of the Wall, Let us consider the City thus walled, the
Subject of this Defense; I will be unto Her, unto Jerusalem, the City of the
great God, where his dwelling is, there is his defense, as men use to mound the
places of their Habitation. The more a people have of Gods presence, the more
they have of his protection. His Covering is upon his Glory. Isai. 4. 5. His
Angels guard us in viis, non in praecipitiis. Psalm. 91. 11. Aug. Quaest. Evang.
lib. 2. qu. 19.
When we go to appear before the Lord, the Enemy shall not desire our Land,
Exodus 34. 24. but if we have our back upon Jerusalem we are out of his
protection, as he that went from Jerusalem to Jerico. Luke 10. 30.

Consider in the Church property and preciousness, Ennarat in Psalm. 60.
they are Gods own. Hypognostice: lib. 3. c. 8.
Judea was called Immanuels land, Zion his rest, Psalm. 132: 14. They are in
special manner his people, Isai. 63: 19. 64: 9. Ezekiel. 16: 8. And they are his
precious and peculiar Treasure, Psalm. 135: 4.
his Jewels, Mal. 3: 17. And property in precious things, will certainly
procure protection. Consider in the Lord his Love, and his Promise, his Grace,
and his Fidelity. His Eyes and his Heart are perpetually upon his Church, 1
Reg. 9: 3. She is graven on the Palms of his hands, Isai. 49: 16. They that
touch her, touch the apple of his Eye, Zach. 2. 8. He will never suffer his
beloved to be unprotected, especially having engaged his promise, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Mat. 16: 18.

And that they may not prevail against it, the Protection must be complete, a
Wall must be round about it, the Defense must be answerable to the Assault. The
Church in the Wilderness marched in a four square body with the Tabernacle of
the Congregation in the midst of them, Exodus 17: 15.
and their Standards one very side, as we find Number. 2. The Standards were as a
Wall of Fire, Jehovah Nissi, and the Tabernacle the Glory in the midst of them.
The Enemies of the Church are on every side. Impius in Circuitu, Psalm. 12: 8.
Satan in Circuitu, Job. 1: 7. 1 Pet. 5: 8. To devour the Church, and therefore
here ignis in circuitu, and Deus in circuitu, Psalm. 125: 2. To defend the
Church Angels in circuitu, Zach. 1: 11. The Eyes of the Lord run to and fro, in
every place, to behold the Evil and the Good. 2 Chronicles. 16: 9. Prove. 15: 3. When
there are four Horns on the four sides of the Church to scatter it, there are
four Carpenters in a like proportion on every side, to fray them away and to
rescue it, Zach. 1: 18-21. Our protection is ever suitable to our danger, the
stronger the assault, the greater the assistance. With every temptation the
Lord opens an escape, that we may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10: 13.

We see all is well about the Church, a Wall of Fire round about it. If all be
well within it too, it must needs be an happy body, and so certainly it is, for
he who is murus in circuitu, is likewise Gloria in medio. I will be the Glory
in the midst of it.

Glory passively, in nothing is God glorified so much as in building,
restoring, protecting his Church, glorified in all his Creatures, but admired
in his Saints, 2 These. 1. 10. No where is his name so great as in Israel, Psalm.
76: 1. When he builds up Sion, then it is, that he appears in his Glory.
Psalm. 102: 16.

Glory Actively, by making his Church Honorable and Glorious, as he says he
will do. Isai. 11: 10. 43: 4. 60: 13.

Every Nation has some one or other good thing which rendereth them
considerable in the Eyes of others, and is esteemed their Glory. Some famous
for Gold and Silver, as Ophir; some for Spices and precious Fruits of the
earth, as India; some for Corn, as Egypt; some for Balsomes, as Palestine; some
for Valor and Justice as the Romans; some for Arts and Learning as the
Graecians; but the superlative Glory of Jerusalem is, that their God is their
Glory. Isai. 60: 19. Jer. 2: 11.

It is true, worldly Glory is in much more abundance amongst other men. The
great Monarchies of the World have been amongst Assyrians, Chaldeans, Persians,
Graecians, Romans; and therefore Symmachus an Heathen, uses this as an
Argument, why we should adhere to the Old Roman Heathen Religion, because that
flourished, but Christianity was persecuted.

But this External Glory, though it dazzle the Eye, and tickle the Fancy, has
no solid and permanent Goodness, or proportion to immortal Souls. It cannot
remove the guilt of one sin, it cannot give one grain of quiet to a troubled
Conscience, much less replenish the Soul in the Latitude of its desires. God
alone brings fullness with him, Ephesians. 3. 19.

All other people of the World, have the Glory of his Works, and so he is not
far from any of them, Act. 17: 27.

Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum. And yet they are said to be without
God in the World, Ephesians. 2: 12. But the Lord is in the midst of his Church. 1. By
his Spiritual Residence, and gracious presence with them. Moses Prayers, I
beseech thee show me thy Glory, Exodus 33: 18. and God answers, I will make all
my goodness to pass before thee, he shows his Glory when he proclaims his
Goodness. In Israel is the perfection of Glory, Psalm. 50: 2. to Israel pertains
the Adoption, and therefore the Glory, Romans 9: 4. Of the Church only are
glorious things spoken, Psalm. 87: 3. The Church is his Throne, the World but
his Footstool, Jer. 17: 12. In the Church is the splendour of his Royal Majesty
principally seen: Evidences whereof in the Tabernacle and Temple, were, the
Cloud which filled the House, 1 Reg. 8: 11. and the voice which spoke from off
the mercy seat, Number. 7: 89.

2. He is the Glory in the midst of his Church by his Holy Ordinances, the
means of Life and Salvation. The Apostle calls it a Glorious Gospel. 1 Timothy
1: 11. And frequently makes mention of the Riches of the Glory thereof, Romans
9: 23. Ephesians. 3: 8. Col. 1: 27. to take off the scandal and contempt which
ignorant men might be apt to cast upon it. Therein all Divine Excellencies are
more radiant and resplendent, then in all his other works, he has magnified
his word above all his name, Psalm. 138. 2. Therein is conspicuous his manifold
Wisdom, in contriving a way to punish the sin, and yet to save the sinner, to
reconcile the seeming Cross demands both of Justice and Mercy, that the one may
be satisfied, and the other magnified, Ephesians. 3:10. His free and glorious Grace,
so superabounding above all the abundance of our sins, Ephesians. 1: 6. Romans 5: 20,
21. His mighty power in rescuing us out of the Kingdom of darkness, in changing
our Wills, subduing our Lusts, captivating our Thoughts, cleansing our
Consciences, pulling down Strongholds and imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God. 2. Cor. 10: 4, 5. Ephesians. 1:
19, 20. His glorious Holiness, transforming us into the Image of his dear Son,
2 Cor. 3: 18. Luke 1: 74, 75. His Eternal Blessedness, who in the Gospel is set
forth, as the Hope and Treasure, the Life and Salvation of those that trust in
him. Col. 1. 27. 3: 3, 4. For Glory arising from a manifestation of
Excellencies, all the Divine Virtues and Excellencies of God, are more
conspicuous in the Gospel of Grace, then in all other his works or
dispensations. The saving Light of supernatural Mysteries, the heavenly
beauties of spiritual worship, the shining Luster of Evangelical Obedience, all
set forth the Glory of those Ordinances wherein they are discovered and
prescribed.

3. As by his gracious presence, and his Divine Ordinances, so by the most
Happy State whereinto we are translated, is the Lord the Glory in the midst of
his Church. That State stands in glorious Relations, glorious Habits, and
glorious Privileges.

There are two Glorious Relations belonging to this Happy State. 1. A Relation
of Righteousness the Guilt of sin being removed, and the sinner by the Gift of
the Righteousness of Christ reconciled unto God, and so enabled to Glory,
though not in himself, yet in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1: 31. 2. A Relation of Sonship,
whereby we are estated by gracious Adoption, in an heavenly Nobility, and have
right to a glorious Inheritance, 1 John 3: 1. are a kind of first fruits of the
Creatures, Jam. 1: 18, Fellow Heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. Princes of the
people, Psalm. 47: 9. Nobles of men, Act. 17. 11. All the World is not able to
heap so much Honor upon a man, as this one (...) or dignity, of being the Sons
of God. 2. In Glorious Habits; whereby we are transformed into the Image of
Christ, who is the glory of God, for God does most notably express his Glory in
any Creature by fashioning that Creature to the likeness of his Son. This Image
stands in these three things.

1. In Holiness, Ephesians. 4: 24. Holiness sets forth Gods own Glory, he is Glorious
in Holiness. Exodus 15. 11. The Angels are honored with the Title of Saints,
Deuteronomy. 33. 2. and our primitive condition wherein we were created after the
Image of God, is called a State of Honor, Psalm. 49: 20. 149: 9.

2. In Peace and spiritual Joy, for faith in the promises of Salvation, giving
a kind of Pre-existence unto the Glory to come, and causing a Believer to wait
with quiet assurance in the hope thereof, does thereupon fill the Soul with the
Peace of God, which passes understanding, and causes it to rejoice with joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1: 8.

3. In Blessedness, which is the consummation of Holiness and Peace in the
presence of God, which is, (...) called by the name of Glory, Ephesians. 2: 36.
Col. 3: 4. John 8: 36.


3. In Glorious Privileges and Immunities belonging to the Citizens of
Jerusalem. Liberty from the Tyranny of Satan, and powers of darkness. Communion
in the Love and prayers of all Saints, 1. John 1: 7. Boldness to come unto the
Throne of Grace, Ephesians. 3: 12. Heb. 4: 16. Victory over Enemies and Temptations,
nothing being able to separate us from the Love of God, the Spirit of Glory
resting upon us even in our sufferings, and enabling us to glory in them. Romans
5: 3. Act. 5: 41. As the Cloud in the Temple is called the Glory of the Lord, 1
Reg. 8: 10, 11. So the Lord is the Glory of his people, even when they are
filled with Clouds of affliction. It is a great Glory to suffer Honorably as
well as to do so, and facere and pati fortia Romanum est. The Lilly is as
beautiful in the midst of Thorns, as in a bed of Spices.

We have seen how the Lord is a Defense and protection to his people, a Wall of
separation from the World, of conjunction within themselves, of protection from
danger by his Promise, by his power, by his Providence, by his Grace, a present
Defense, a proportionable Defense. A Wall of Fire, by a Terrible and
conspicuous, an impregnable, and invincible, a constant and perpetual, an
active and efficacious Defense. A Wall of Fire to Jerusalem, his most proper
and most precious resting place, unto which he is by choicest Love and Fidelity
engaged. A Wall round about to prevent Enemies which are round about: The
protection suitable to the danger.

The Glory in the midst of it, by his gracious presence, by his Holy
Ordinances, by the happy State of the Church, in the glorious Relations of
Justification and Adoption, in the glorious Habits of Holiness, Peace, and
Blessedness. In glorious Privileges, of Christian Liberty, communion of
Saints, Boldness in prayer, Victory over Temptations and Afflictions, with many
other the like. I shall add but a short word of Application and suddenly have
done.

1. We Learn hence what a folly as well as wickedness it is for Samaritans to
oppose the building of Jerusalem or the Temple, for any Enemies to set
themselves against the Church of God, as great a madness as for Briars to
contend with Flames, for stubble to wage War with fire, for a Sheafe (as the
Prophet makes the instance, Zach. 12: 6.) to enter into battle with a flaming
Torch. Isai. 27: 4, 5. The Whale may swallow Jonah, but it shall not digest
him, The Grave may devour Christ, Act. 2: 24.
but he will kill Death in its own dominion, 1 Cor. 15: 57.
as Benaiah did the Lion in his own Pit. 2 Samuel 23: 20.
A man may drink down a Cup of Poison, but it will suddenly be revenged on him.
Zach. 12: 2.
It is madness to provoke the Lord, being weaker then he, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Woe
unto him that striveth with his Maker, Isai. 45. 9.

2. We need not make use of carnal Wisdom and sinful means for protection
against Danger, for God can be alone a Wall of Fire unto his people. Use not
oppression or violence to help your selves, for Power and Mercy belong unto
God, Psalm. 62. 10. 12. David was advised by those about him once and again, to
kill Saul when he was in his power, and so to secure himself; but he answered,
God forbid that I should touch the Lords anointed, he trusted in God, and
would not use Carnal Wisdom for his own safety, 1 Samuel 24. 47. 26. 8. 11. This
Wall of Fire can better protect us, then all the broad or high Walls of Jerico
or Babylon: It is good keeping in Jerusalem, in Gods presence, in his way, so
long we are within a Wall of Fire.

3. This is great Comfort unto Holy men, That the very Terrors of God are their
protection. The Terrors of God at Sinai and in the Wilderness, were for the
Salvation of Gods people. Habak. 3: 13. As the mercy of God will not save those
that despise it, so the fury of God will be a defense unto those that tremble
at it. No attribute of God, but faith can suck comfort from it.

4. Envy not the Glory of the World, nor the Pomps and Pleasures thereof, to
those whose Portion is in this Life, but rest abundantly satisfied with the
Glory of Gods presence shining in the face of Christ, and those unmatchable
Riches wherewith he endoweth the Church, in comparison whereof, all the glories
of the World, are but dross and dung. If God would have the Honor of his Church
to stand in outward things, The Silver is his, and the Gold is his, Hag. 2: 8.
The Cattle on a Thousand Mountains his, Psalm. 50: 10. But as Abraham gave
portions to his other Children, but the Inheritance to Isaac, even all that he
had, Genesis 25: 5. As Princes at their Coronation give Wine and Money to the
Multitude, but Honors to their Favorites: So the Lord gives Earthly things
many times more liberally to the men of the World, but bestows himself for a
Portion and exceeding great reward unto his own people, and they esteem him
precious, 1 Pet. 2: 7. And his Promises precious, 2 Pet. 1: 4. and his
Redemption precious, Psalm. 49: 8. And the very Afflictions which they suffer
for his sake precious, 1 Pet. 1: 7.

5. Above all things, hold fast God and his presence. A City is never without
Walls or Gates, without glory and splendour, till they are without God. Your
glory departs when his Ordinauces are removed: You may confidently promife your
self his protection, while you make his Habitation in the midst of you your
greatest Glory. And therefore, as he has a long time been a Wall of Fire about
you; in all the confusions of a bloody War, no alarm has startled or stormed
you, though there were angry men, who shook their Arm against London, as the
Assyrian against Jerusalem, Isai. 10: 32. That said it would never be well with
England till London were in a flame, yet you have had no flame about you but a
Wall of Fire, and Chariots of Fire, as the Prophet had, 2 Reg. 6: 17. As
therefore the Lord has protected you, and been the Glory in the midst of
London, (for I am persuaded it is a sober Truth, that no City in the Christian
World has had a more glorious presence of God by the Light of his Word, and
the purity of his Worship and Ordinances then London has had:) So make it your
business in an answerable proportion to bring Glory to God, by zeal for the
Truth, by Love to the Ordinances, by comforting the Ministers, and encourageing
them in the work of the Lord, by executeing Justice and Judgment, reforming all
abuses, setting up the Name of God in your Families, preserving those that
belong unto you from the Contagion of dangerous and dividing Doctrines God will
be with you while you are with him, he never breaks with a people first, do you
give Glory to him, and he will be Glory to you.

Lastly, If God be thus your Glory, let your glorying be in him alone, Glory
not in your Strength or Wisdom or Wealth, or Splendour in your Ships or Trade,
or in the Harvest of the River, glory only in your Wall of Fire, and in this
that the Lord has been hitherto so nigh unto you. And truly you have great
Reason to bless the Lord, and to make your boast of him all the day long, as
for Remoter mercies which you must not forget, though I cannot now recount
them, so for those signal Mercies for the celebration whereof you are met
together at this time.

What a deluge of Confusion these poor Nations were running into, how deep the
discontents of the people, how ready the Tinder of unsatisfied Spirits in all
parts of the Nation to take Fire and break out into a Flame, in what danger the
Function of a Learned and Orthodox Ministry and the maintenance thereof was to
be devoured, How desperately the Ordiances were despised, the Truths of
Religion rejected; what dangerous divulsions daily more and more made from the
Unity of the Church of God amongst us, How near we were brought unto the brow
of the precipice, it is now our Comfort that we can with thankfulness, recount,
as surviving so great dangers, as well as with sorrow bewail our exposedness
unto them.

How should our Hearts be enlarged, and our Mouths filled, and our Lives acted
with the Praises of the Lord, what Memorials, and Monuments, and Eben-Ezers,
should we every where erect of those wonders, and terrible things which we
looked not for, which the Lord has wrought for us in a kind of Pararel and
proportion to those which he wrought for Israel at the Red Sea?

That then when force after force, and breach after breach, had been made upon
the solemn Conventions of the Nations, and the Ancient Honor of the English
Parliaments had been ravished and prostitated to the Will and Passions of their
own Servants; when the Licentiousness of the times, made way for men of corrupt
Principles and daring Confidence tantum non, to spit in the Face of Magistracy
and Ministry, and all sobriety of Judgment amongst us; then for the Lord to
stir up the Spirits of all the people of the Land as one man, solemnly to own
their Native Liberties, and with united Affections to implore the Vindication
of them; then for the Lord to awaken an Honorable Instrument to assert the
Privileges and Dignities of conculcated Parliaments, and to restore the many
grave and Eminent Members there of to their long interrupted right, and to the
administration of their Trust again; To stand by this Famous City who had
cheerfully with their Treasures, their Swords, their Lives, their Counsels
aided and asserted the public Engagements; That then when your Hearts were
ready to sink at the demolishing of your City Gates, immediately they should be
revived with the opening of your Parliament gates, that those worthy Patriots,
Lovers of Truth and Righteousness, might enter in; as we ought with great Love
and Honor to respect the Instruments, so ought we to ascribe the whole glory
unto God alone, who only does wondrous things, Psalm. 72: 18.
at whose presence the Mountains have flowed down and become a plain. Isai. 64:
1.
Who, Hos. 6: 3.
if we follow on to know the Lord, if we provoke him not by murmuring against
Instruments or by deifying of them, but second their Endeavors with our
prayers, and Gods Mercies with our Praises, will perfect what he has begun;
And as he has laid the Foundation, will so consummate the whole structure of
our Settlement, Zach. 4; 7.
that we shall at last bring forth the Head-Stone thereof, with Shouting and
Acclamations, Crying, Grace, Grace unto it!

FINIS.

