THE CAUSE OF THE POOR PLEADED.

Pro. 19. 7. All the brethren of the poor hate him, how much more do his
friends go far from him; he pursues them with words, yet they are wanting to
him. Prove. 31. 11. Open thy mouth, plead the cause of the poor and needy. Col.
3. 14. Above all things put on charity. Gal. 2. 9, 10. James, Cephas, and John
would that we should remember the poor, the same also I was forward to do.
Dan. 4. 27. Let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by
righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be
a lengthening of thy tranquillity. Luke 16. 31. And he said, if they will not
hear Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rise from
the dead. Job 30. 15. Was not my soul grieved for the poor? Job 12. 9. The
hand of the Lord has wrought this. By Samuel Richardson.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for Livewell Chapman, at the Crown in
Pope's Head Alley, 1653.

The Cause of the Poor pleaded.
AND the people asked him saying, what shall we do? and he answered and said
unto them, he that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none, and
he that has meat, let him do likewise, Luke 3. 10, 11. If two coats, impart
one; I need one, and he needs one that has none: and he that has meat, let
him do so likewise.

Obs. 1. We learn the cause why God has given unto some more then unto others,
is not because they need more then others, nor that they should keep it for
themselves, but that they should supply the want of others, distributing to the
necessities of the Saints, given to hospitality, Job 31. 15. Romans 12. 13. Do
good to all, Gal. 6. 10.

If two coats, let him impart, and he that has meat let him do so likewise.

Obser. 2. We may not give both, nor keep both; it is the will of God, that
what we can spare, or have more then our necessities require, is to be given to
supply the wants and necessities of others.

If two coats, impart to him that has none, and he that has meat, let him
do so likewise.

Obs. 3. The wants of others should be considered, and laid to heart, cared
for, and supplied by us, as if they were our own, Job 30. 25. 2 Cor. 11. 29.

Reasons why we should impart and give to supply the wants of others, are,
because

1. It is Gods command that we do so: Thus says the Lord, deal thy bread to
the hungry, Isa. 58. 7. Leave for the poor, that the poor may eat, Lev. 19.
10. and 23. 22. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, give him bread to eat; if he
thirst, give him water to drink, Pro. 25. 21. Romans 12. 20. When thou see the
naked, that thou cover him, Deu. 15. 10. Give to him that asks thee, Mat. 5.
42. Lu. 6. 34. If thy brother be waxen poor, and fallen to decay with thee,
thou shall relieve him, and also a stranger, Lev. 27. 35. Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self, Romans 13. 9.

2. Christ did so: Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, though he was
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be
made rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. see Isa. 25. 4. He says, learn of me, Mat. 11. 29. He
that follows not after me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10. 38. Christ had
compassion on the multitude, Mat. 15. 32. Mar. 8. 2. should not thou also
have had compassion, Luke 18. 33, 34.

3. Believers did so. Cornelius gave much alms to the people, Act. 10. 1, 2* I
brought alms to my nation, Act. 24. 17. Dorcas was full of good works, and
alms deeds which she did, Act. 19. 36. 39. She stretches out her hand to the
poor and needy, Pro. 31. 20. I was a father to the poor, Job 29. 16. The
righteous shows mercy, and gives, Ps. 37. 21. Has given his bread to the
hungry, and has covered the naked with a garment, Ezekiel. 18. 16. Zacheus was a
miserable, wretched, covetous extortioner; but when he was converted,
immediately he became liberal; Half my goods I give to the poor, etc. Luke 19.
7, 8, 9. So they sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men,
as every man had need, Acts 2. 44. 45. and 4. 32, 33, 34, 35. 37. Exo. 16. 18.
15. 2 Cor. 18. 14, 15. The righteous gives, and spares not, Pro. 21. 26.
Beyond their power they were willing, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3, 4. Let the same mind be
in you which was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 15. God grant you to be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus, Romans 15. 5. Beliveers have the
mind of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 16. Phil. 2. 19, 20. They are merciful, Mat. 5. 7.
Col. 3. 12. So much as we are like Christ, we love, are pitiful, and have
bowels of mercy; so much as we believe, we love; love is full of labor,
bountiful, and spares for no cost, 2 Samuel 24. 24. How are we like Christ and
his people, if we have not the same spirit, mind, and heart they have? If we
walk not in their steps, and do as they did, if necessity so require?

4. What we have is Gods, Ezekiel. 16. 17. what we have to spare, if others need
the same, God has bidden us to give it them, Pro. 25. 21. If he has ordered
it for them, it is their due, it is injustice and theft to detain it. Withold
not the goods from them to whom it is due, though there be power in thine hand
to do it, Pro. 3. 27.

5. The liberal soul shall be made fat, Pro. 11. 25.

6. They in want are our own flesh: Hide not thy self from thy own flesh, 2 Timothy 2. 3. Prove. 17. 11. Not to supply their wants to our power, to be without
natural affection, 2 Timothy 3. 3.

7. Give and ye shall sin less. Break off thy iniquities by showing mercy to
the poor, Dan. 4. 27. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged, Pro. 16. 6.

8. To give is a proof of the sincerity of your love to God and man, 2 Cor. 8.
9. 24. Philem. 5.

9. Not to give, or to give sparingly is a cause of poverty. He becomes poor
that deals with a slack hand, Pro. 10. 4. So to withold more then is meet
tends to poverty, Pro. 11. 24.

10. To give is the way to have more. There is that scatters, and yet
increases, Pro. 11. 24. Give, and it shall be given you, Lu. 6. 38.

11. What you give is not lost, but lent, God has promised to pay it again. He
that has pity on the poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given,
will he pay him again, Pro. 19. 17. Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after
many days thou shall find it, Ezekiel. 1. 3. 6. A good man shows favor, and
lends, Ps. 11^. 5. Many men will trust men with thousands, but not God,
because they do not know him.

12. To show mercy to the poor may be a lengthening of thy tranquillity, Dan. 4.
27. The merciful man does good to his own soul, Pro. 11. 17.

13. We should give, because we may come to want our selves. Give a portion to
7. and also to 8. for thou know not what evil shall come upon the earth.
Fire may come, thieves, oppressors, sword, famine, overflowing waters, etc. may
come, therefore give; for such measure as you meet to others shall be meeasured
to you again. Make friends by giving to the poor, Lu. 16. 9, 10.

14. If the clouds be full they empty themselves upon the earth, Eccl. 11. 3.
the very Indians, Heathen, wild Irish, give freely such food as they have to
all comers; the very Lions, Wolves, etc. will not devour the prey alone, they
call their fellows to what they get. Will a Lion roar in the forest when he
has no prey? will a Lion cry out in his den, if he have taken nothing at all?
Am. 3. 4. It appears when he has taken something, he calls by roaring and
crying to his fellows, to come and share in what he has taken.

15. If you omit this duty, it will be a sin unto you, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Romans 15. 26.

16. How do we love our neighbor as our selves, if we take not care for them as
we do for our selves.

17. To give is a joy to the Saints. We have had great joy and consolation in
thy love, because the bowels of the Saints are refreshed by thee, Phile. 7.

18. To give is a means to cause others to do so also. Your ministering to the
Saints the forwardness of your mind has provoked very many, 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2.

19. To give is pleasing to God and man. God loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor.
9. 7. To do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God
is well pleased, Heb. 13. 16. An odor of sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
well pleasing to God, Phil. 4. 18. It pleased them to give, Romans 16. 26. It
pleases them that receive, it pleases all good people that hear of it.

20. To give is an honor and glory to God. He that honors him has mercy on
the poor, Pro. 14. 31. They glorify God for their liberal distribution unto
them, and unto all men, 2 Cor. 9. 13. They seeing your good works, glorify
your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. Mat. 15. 8.

Consider the evils and miseries they bring upon themselves, who have this
worlds good, and do not supply the wants of others. 1. They are guilty of all
the sorrows and sufferings which their not giving has occasioned; consider
what account will thou be able to give of that estate God has betrusted thee
withal to supply the wants to others whom thou have neglected, and have and
do consume it upon thy lusts and pleasures, ere long it shall be said unto
thee, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou may be no longer steward,
Lu. 16. 22. do thou think that if some other had the estate thou have, that
they could not, and would not do more good with it then thou do? many in
these our days have had great estates, now they have them not; one cause is,
they did not supply the want of others, therefore they are taken from them, and
are in great want themselves.

2. So long as we omit our duty herein, we cannot enjoy the sweet peace of a
good conscience.

3. All your religion is vain, impure, and false. Pure religion, and undefiled
before God, is to visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, Jam. 1.
27. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and to bring the poor that are
cast out to thy house, Isa. 58. 7, 8, 9. To love mercy, Mica 6. 8.

4. It was the sin of Sodom, that she did not strengthen the hands of the poor
and needy, Ezekiel. 16. 49. And if we commit the same sins, may we not expect to
meet with the same punishment, fire and brimstone? or that which is worse,
hardness of heart, and everlasting punishment? Mat. 24. 46. I fear this nation
lies under a curse for this sin, though many see it not, or consider it not.

5. We hurt our selves by keeping that we should give. A sore evil I have seen
under the sun, namely riches kept by the owners thereof to their hurt, Eccles.
5. 13.

6. The cry of the poor is against you; God hears their cry, and will take
their part, Ps. 104. 1. Ps. 72. 12. Ps. 69. 13. If the oppressed be silent,
their oppression does cry, Ps. 12. 5.

7. Ye have not the love of God in you, 1 Cor. 3. 17. Pro. 29. 7. Whosoever has
this worlds goods, and sees his brother in need, and shuts up his bowels of
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Whatsoever you or any
think or say, it is not in you at all, 1 John 3. 17. If you did love, you would
supply the wants of your brethren. He that loves not his brother abides in
death, verse. 14. 15.

8. What you have is unclean to you, Luke 11. 41.

9. The Lord will not hear your prayer. Whosoever steppeth his ears at the cry of
the poor, he shall cry himself, but shall not be heard, Pro. 12 13. He has
forsaken the poor, Lev. 20. 19.

10. Ye are not subject to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but ye oppose and deny
the same, 2 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Taking vengeance on them that know not God, and
that obey not the Gospel, who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, 2 These. 1. 8, 9. This is your portion; for he
that is not merciful, has not the spirit of Christ, and he that has not the
spirit of Christ is none of his, Romans 8 9.

11. You bring the judgment of God upon your selves, and upon your posterity.
Let his days be few, his children fatherless, and his wife a widow; let their
children be vagabonds, and beg their bread; let the extortioner catch all that
he has, let the stranger spoil his labor, let there he none to extend mercy
to him, neither let there be any to father his fatherless children; let his
posterity be cut off, let their name be blotted out, Because he remembered not
to show mercy, but persecuted the poor, Ps. 109 8. to 16. For the oppression of
the poor, and sighing of the needy, now will I arise says the Lord, Ps. 12. 5.
Because he has oppressed and forsaken the poor, sarely they shall not feel
quietness in the fullness of his sufficiency, he shall be in straits, Job 20.
19. to 25. If I have withheld the poor from his desire, or have caused the
eyes of the widow to fail, or have eaten my morsel my self alone, and the
fatherless have not, eaten thereof: If I have seen any perish for want of
clothing, if his loins have not blessed me, if he were not warmed with the
fleece of my sheep, let my arm fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be
broken from the bone, Job. 31. 16. 23. Go too now ye rich, weep and howl for
the misery that is coming upon you, your riches are corrupt, your garments
motheaten, your gold and your silver, and the rust of them shall be a witness
against you, and shall eat your flesh as it were fire, Jsa. 5. 1, 2, 3. We to
them that are at ease, and drink wine in bowls, and are not grieved for the
afflictions of Joseph, therefore they shall go into captivity, Am. 6. 1. 7, 8.
They are waxen fat, they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherles, yet
they prosper, and the right of the needy do they not judge; shall not I visit
for these things says the Lord? shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation
as this? Jer. 5. 28, 29. I am sore displeased with the Gentiles that are at
ease, for I was a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction,
Zech. 1. 15. He shall have judgment without mercy that showed not mercy, Iam.
2. 13.

12. You are they against whom shall be pronounced that most terrible and
dreadful sentence of Go ye cursed. He shall say to them, depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his angels; for I was a
hungry, and ye gave me no meat, thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, a stranger,
and ye took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not, sick and in prison, and
ye visited me not, these shall go into everlasting punishment, Mat. 25. 41 46.

Oh that men would hear, and be persuaded to their duty herein, Knowing
therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. To whom shall
I speak and give warning, that they may hear. Behold their ear is
uncircumcised, they cannot hearken, behold the word of the Lord is to them a
reproach, they have no delight in it, Jer. 6. 10. But whosoever is wise will
consider these things. They that regard the word of the Lord will be persuaded,
if they have but two coats, to impart, and he that has meat to do likewise to
those that have none; as you desire not to have the omission thereof brought
against you at the last day, let it be your care to feed the hungry, cloth the
naked, take them into your houses, or provide dwelling for them. Thou shall
love thy neighbor as thy self, Lev. 19. 18. Mat. 19. 19. (a hard lesson for
those in these last days, wherein the love of many waxes cold to God and man)
if he need, and cannot help himself, I am to care for him, and provide for him,
as I would do for my self, else how do I love him as my self; love is
liberal in giving, for he that loves, is wholly drawn to the service of him
whom he loves: we are willing to share in all that Jesus Christ has, though
we deserve it not; it is but equal that he in his and others should share in
all we have, if they deserve it not; we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren, 1 John 3. 16, 17. Aquila and Precilla, who for my life laid down
their own necks, Romans 16. 3. 4. If so then we are to lay down our estates for
them, for that is less, Pro. 21. 26. Praying us with much entreaty to receive
the gift, 2 Cor. 8. 2, 3, 4. It is not so now, many need to be prayed with much
entreaty [to give] to supply the wants of others, it cannot but be a great
grief to all good men, that the poor should want bread, yea and some of our
brethren and sisters, if we belong to Christ, should be so neglected (that many
a dog is better provided for then they are) and that contrary to the word of
the Lord. I wonder at that seeming comfort and peace of conscience some have
that so abound in great plenty, who fare like Dives, deliciously every day, and
have all things in excess, while others are in great extremity and want, the
destruction of the poor their poverty, Pro. 10. 15. Two or 3 l. lent to an
industrious man, might preserve a family from sinking; I have heard sad stories
of the great extreamities of some who beg not. We ought to part with our
superfluities, to supply others conveniences, and with our conveniences, to
supply others necessities, yea and to part with some part of that which is
necessary for us, to supply others in their extreamities; those that will not do
so, will not sell their possessions (much less dye for their brethren) to feed
the hungry belly, and cloth the naked body of Jesus Christ, who is hungry and
naked, Mat. 24. 42, 43. Christ and his people are one, Heb. 2. 11. 1 Cor. 12.
12. If ye neglect them, ye neglect him, if ye grieve them, ye grieve him; if ye
refuse to help them, ye refuse to help him; if ye afflict them, ye afflict him.
In all their afflictions he was afflicted, Isa. 63. 9. In as much as ye did it
to one of these, ye did it to me, Mat. 24. 44. He that receives you, receives
me, Mat. 10. 40. How can thou say thou love Jesus Christ whilst thou have
clothes, and food enough and to spare, and give Christ none, or the worst;
the Jews give to the poor the best of what they have, because God is to have
the best; what is given to the poor for Gods sake, is given to God.

Surely many would give much, and enough to supply the wants of others; but
until things be put into some good way and order; if some who have great
estates should sell them, and give all away, it would soon come to nothing. If
the poor were set to work, etc. and the rich jointly help, the poor might be
comfortably provided for without burdening any; it were better to wear less
costly apparel, to fare harder, cut off needless expenses, then not to supply
the wants of others.

Defend the poor and fatherless, Ps. 82. 3. Deliver them, and oppress not the
poor, for he that is higher then the highest regards it, Eccl. 5. 8. The Lord
makes poor, Iam. 2. 17. The poor are despised, Lam. 2. 6. Eccl. 9. 19. ha^ed,
Pro. 14. 20. and 19. 7. taxed, Ezekiel. 22. 29. Oppressed, Am. 4. 1. They buy the
poor, Am. 8. 6. tread upon them, Am. 5. 11. grind their faces, Jer. 3. 15. and
10. 2. vex them, Ezekiel. 22. 29. devour them, Hab. 2. 14. As it was then, so it
is now, but know for all these things God shall bring thee to judgment, Eccl.
11. 2. The wants, necessities, and miseries of others have not been enough
considered, and laid to heart, and helped; the poor able to work, are suffered
to beg, the impotent, aged, and sick, are not sufficiently provided for, but
almost starved with the allowance of 3 d. and 4 d. a piece a week; why cannot
this Nation set their poor on work, and provide necessaries for those poor not
able to work as well as Holland? that there may be no begging in England, nor
just complaint by reason of want; this were a good work, a blessed work, very
comfortable, of great necessity, attainable and honorable to this Nation, very
acceptable to God, and to those in want, and to all good men. The Lord preserve
those precious and blessed men who have power and hearts to do so, great good
for those who cannot help themselves, God shall give them a full reward, 2 John
8. Surely God will greatly bless them that further so blessed a work; God
delights in mercy more then in sacrifice. A merciful man is stricken to the
heart with the miseries of others, and is compelled to help them if he can. Let
no man seek his own things, but every man another wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24.
Mordecai seeking the wealth of his people, Est. 10. 3. When this Nation shall
seek the wealth thereof, that each may enjoy the same mercies and comforts
which they desire for themselves, England shall be indeed a Commonwealth. Many
say they have little enough for themselves, wives and children, all seek their
own things, Phil. 1. 2. They are lovers of themselves, 2 Timothy 3. 2. The wicked
rich man was all for himself; Soul take [thou] thine ease [thou] bast goods
laid up for many years, Luke 12. 19. he laid up all for self; they leave their
substance to their babes, Ps. 17. 14. They put wife and children into their
Wills, but leave out Christ and his children, because they love wife and babes
more then Christ; but know, He that loves father or mother more then me, is
not worthy of me; and he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not
worthy of me, Lu. 10. 37, 38. If any man come to me, and hate not his father,
and mother, and wife, and children, yea and his own life also, he cannot be my
disciple, Lu. 14. 26. Behold we have forsaken all and followed thee, Mat. 19.
27. 29. Knowing in our selves that we have in heaven a better, and an enduring
substance, Heb. 10. 34. 2 Cor. 4. 18.

He that provideth not for his family is worse then an infidel. If thou art a
believer, Christ's family is thy family, Ephesians. 3. 15. Heb. 2. 6. They are thy
brethren and sisters; brethren and sisters are ever counted of one stock,
kindred, and family, and brethren are to provide for their brethren, Lev. 25.
25. Number. 27. 11. Lev. 27. 35. If we be all members of one body, we should think
the discomodities of our brethren pertain to our selves: men do well to provide
for wife and babes, but not then when the present necessities of others cannot
be supplied without the same; how did they in the 2. and 4th of the Acts
provide for their families, wives, and babes, when they sold their houses and
lands, and gave away all the money: Were they worse then Infidels because they
were more careful to supply the present wants of the Saints, then to provide
for themselves, wives and children? 2 Cor. 8. 14. The leaving great estates to
children, makes them so much the greater sinners, to spend their days in
pride, pleasure, idleness, uncleanness, tyranny and oppression, and in all
excess of wickedness, but this the rich father will not believe. If men be
not able to give, it is excepted according to that a man has, 2 Cor. 8. 12. We
should labor, working with our hands to have to give to him that needs, Ephesians.
4. 28. Many spend so much on their lusts, that they are not able to supply the
wants of others; The lusts of the flesh, the lust of the ey^, and the pride of
life are chargeable, they devour all, and make poor, they are able to spend
thousands a year. One said I have 12000. a year, yet I want money as much as
another man; One sinner destroys much good, Eccl. 11. 18. Romans 18. 18. They
have sought out many inventions, Eccl. 7. 29. to consume their estates.

Obj. None do their duty herein.

Answ. That will not excuse any; we are to follow the word of the Lord, and not
men that walk contrary to it; if none obey God, the greater is thy sin not to
do it.

Obj. I would give, but I fear I shall want my self.

Ans. If you keep what you have, you may want the comfort of it, and the
blessing of it, and the peace of conscience. You had better give and want it,
then keep it and sin, but the Lord says, He that gives to the poor shall not
lack, Pro. 28 27. In the days of famine they shall have enough, Job 5. 20. If
you cannot trust him for your body, how do you, or how can you trust God with
your soul, which is the greater trust; It Is only the unbelieving heart which
says, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Can he give bread also? Ps.
78. 19, 20. Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we
drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed. Your heavenly father knows that ye
have need of these things, all these things shall be added unto you. Take
therefore no thought for the morrow, for to morrow shall take thought for it
self, sufficient to the day is the evil thereof, Mat. 6 31.

Some say they know none in want, but it will not be sufficient to say so; so
they will say, Lord, when saw we thee hungry and naked, (...) 25. They knew no
such thing, nor did they enquire, nor come wh^re they might have seen it. Luke
9. 23. They were willingly ignorant. The righteous considers the cause of the
poor, but the wicked regards not to know it, Pro. 29. 7.

Many say professors of Religion are as covetous and miserable as others; some
have two or three great places of profit besides their own estates, but little
good they do: Alas, what answer shall we give to this, save only that there are
many professors of Religion that are not possessors of it; they have not heard
Christ, and so not learned of him as the truth is in Jesus, therefore they have
not known God, nor the power or Religion: If indeed they were converted, and
had the spirit of Christ, they could not but be merciful and liberal, witness
Zacheus, and they in the 2d and 4th of Acts.

These are the last times indeed men generally are all for themselves, and some
would set up such: Having a form of Religion without the power of it,
deceiving themselves and others, whose end is destruction, who mind earthly
things, Phil. 3. 19. They pant after the dust of the earth, Amos 2. 7. After
these things seek the Gentiles, Mat. 6. 23. Those who are risen with Christ,
set their afections on things above, and not on things on the earth, Col. 1, 2.
The power of religion and godliness lies in the practice of it, Jam. 1. 22. By
this shall all men know ye are my Disciples if ye love one another, Joh. 13.
25. Every one that loves is borne of God, 1 John 4. 7. Where love is, there is
no lack. If we have it, we will not suffer, nor can we endure they should want
whom we love.

We desire again the Ordinance of God and of the Gospel, of relieving the poor,
and that we might be much and often touched with a compassion and fellow
feeling of the sufferings of others. Do you not think that it is the will of
God that the poor, distressed, and miserable should be relieved; if you believe
it, why then do you not do it.

It seems some think they provide well enough for the poor, when they allow
some that are destitute 3 d. a week to keep them; some have 4 d. a week; I knew
one of 80. years old wholly destitute, had 8 d. a week for a sufficient
allowance; That is 4. (...) a week (...)elling (but (...)ere shall it (...) had
so in (...)) ndon) a (...)my a week (...) apparel, a (...)any a week (...),
washing, (...)penny a (...)ek firing, (...)enny a (...)eke for (...)ate and
(...)ink. (...)f (...) selves (...)re confi(...)d to thy(...)owance (...)w
soon (...)old we be (...) of it; (...)e poor not (...) to work, (...)ed and
sick (...) London, (...) at least (...), a week^.
but it is not sufficient to give something, unless they have sufficient for
their need. Thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor
brother, but thou shall open thine hand wide unto him, and shall surely lend
him sufficient for his need in that which he wants, Deuteronomy. 15. 7, 8. So they
parted their goods to all men as every man had need, Acts 2. 44, 45. Neither
was there any among them that lacked, distribution was made according as he had
need, Act. 4. 34, 35. 37. If ye give not those things that are needful to the
body, what does it profit, Jam. 2. 16. 1 John 3. 17. That their abundance might
be a supply of their want, that there might be an equality, 2 Cor. 8. 13, 14. I
say not such an equality for every one to (...), and wear, and fare alike, but
that the necessities of every one may (...) supplied; yet it may be observed,
that when God sed his people in ^^e wilderness, there were among them Princes
and Rulers; God ^ould, but would not provide more, nor better for them then
others, ^^e meat for all, one Manna; also God prescribed a like measure, a
homer for each man; the poorest in the wilderness could, and did eat as good
Manna, and as much as others; what else does it signify to us besides his
bounty, but this, that it is the will of God that there should not be any
inequality of living among his people, Ex. 16. 16, 17, 18. Also that we should
not think any thing too much nor too good for the meanest of the Saints; for
Manna is called Angels food, and meat from heaven.

It is not enough to do some good, or much good, unles we do all the good we
can; we should render according to what we have received, 2 Chr. 32. 35. To
whom much is given, much is required, Luke 12. 48. We need to provoke one
another to love and good works, especially in these days, wherein the love of
many waxes cold to God and man; that although there be many places where there
is a famine of the word, yet how few are there that will break unto them the
bread of the Gospel; it is great mercy to do it, yea the greatest mercy that
men can show. For where no vision the people perish, Pro. 29. 28.

Many give so little, because they think the having abundance of riches will
make their lives more sweet and comfortabl. This is a great mistake, because
riches pierce them through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 5. 9, 10. They are
vexation of spirit, Eccl. 14. 16, 17. and 2. 11. The more sorrows and vexation
of spirit, the less comfortable life also. The abundance of the rich will not
suffer him to sleep, Eccl. 5. 12. His life cannot be comfortable that wants
sleep, his heart takes not rest in the night, Eccles. 2. 23. When riches
increase, they are increased that eat them; what good to the owner, save only
the beholding with their eyes, Eccles. 5 11. What is one the better for that
others eat, so men vex themselves with a sore travel to get riches that they
shall not spend, Eccl. 1. 13. and 2. 17. But a stranger eats it, Eccl. 6. 2.
and who that stranger is he knows not. They heap up riches, but know not who
shall gather them, Ps. 39. 6. Eccl. 1. 3, 4. Surely they are disquieted in
vain. I shall leave it to the man that shall come after me, and who knows
whether he shall be a wise man or a fool, Eccl. 2. 18, 19. What has man of all
his labor wherein he has labored under the sun, verse. 22. Neither says he,
for whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good, Eccl. 4. 8. To the sinner
he gives travel to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him that is
good before God, this also is vanity and vexation of spirit, Eccl. 2. 26. A man
may have riches, and not have power to eat thereof, Eccl. 6. 2. Riches cause
envy. Isaac waxed great, and the Philistims envied him, Genesis 26. 12, 13, 14.
Riches cannot satisfy; he that loves silver shall not be satisfied with
silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase, Eccl. 5. 10. and 4. 8.
These riches are called filthy lucre, T(...) 11. They are the portion of the
wicked, Psalm. 37. 16 Eccl. 5. 11. Psa(...) 12. A man may have them, and yet be
miserable, poor, blind and ^^ked, if not rich toward God, Luke 12. 21. If not
rich in faith, Jam^^^ 6. and good works. Worldly riches are vanity, Eccl. 5.
10. They (...) not durable, Pro. 8. 18. They are not for ever, Pro. 28. 24.
They have wings, and they often fly away, Pro. 25. 5. Uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6. 17. They profit not in the day of wrath, Pro. 11. 4. Zeph. 1. 8. They
perish, Eccl. 5. 14. A good name is rather to be chosen then riches, Prove. 22.
1. The reproaches of Christ are greater riches, Heb. 11. 26. Take heed and
beware of covetausness, for a man's life consists not in the abundance of
riches which he possesses, Lu. 12. 15. Also if men did see the evil and sin
that riches cause and do us, we should not be so unwilling to part with them
as we are. Riches are called the mammon of unrighteousness, Lu. 6. 9. because
they cause much sin and unrighteousness; they cause pride. Thy heart was lifted
up because of thy riches, Eccl. 28. 5. Pride and highminded, Pro. 18. 23. They
boast themselves in the multitude of their riches, Psalm. 49. 6. They cause
covetousness; for the more men have, the more they desire, Heb. 13. 5. He
has swallowed down riches, Job 20. 15. 18. Riches fill men with cares to get,
to keep, to improve them, and with fears of losing them, Lu. 8. 14. 33. and 21.
34. It is harder for them that have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God
then others. It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, then
for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 19. 21. to 26. Mar.
10. 24, 25. They cause to oppress; Do not the rich men oppress you? Jam. 2. 6.
They cause the h(...)art to be set on them, Psalm. 62. 10. and to trust in their
wealth, Ps. 49. 6. 1 Timothy 6. 17. Ps. 52. 7. The rich man's wealth is his strong
City, Pro. 10. 15. Riches cause to despise Christ and his poor Saints: A man of
sorrows, acquainted with griefs, he is despised and rejected of men: We hid as
it were our faces from him, he was despised, we esteemed him not, Isa. 53. 3.
Ye have despised the poor, Jam. 2. 6. The rich often choose for their
companions such as are rich, though worldly wicked and covetous, whom God
abhors, Psalm. 10. 3. See the companions of the Saints, Heb. 10. 33. Psalm.
119. 36. Romans 1. 9. The rich will no more be admonished, Eccl. 4. 19. Riches
cause to err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6. 10. And to deny the faith rather then
to suffer and loose all, Luke 18. 28. Riches choke the word, and cause it to
become unfruitful, Mat. 13. 22. Mar. 4. 19. Riches hinder men from receiving
and obeying the Gospel, Lu. 18. 22, 23, 24. and hinder many from preaching the
Gospel. Riches hurt them that keep them, Eccl. 5. 13. They hinder believing;
they have too much sense to have much faith. Riches cause men to desire, and
seek, and to receive honor one of another. How can ye believe, seeing ye
receive honor one of another, Joh. 5. 44. Riches cause persons to flatter
themselves. I said in my prosperity I shall never be moved, Ps 30. 6. Who shall
bring me down? O^^e. 3. Riches cause others to flatter the rich, and to put
them upon (...) ways of pride and pleasure to please them, Ps. 5. 9. Riches
cause to deny God: Lest I be full and deny thee, Pro. 30. 8, 9. Riches cause
those that have them not to be reproved, and so suffer sin upon them, Lev. 19.
19. A sore evil; they cause men to be wise in their own conceits, Pro. 28. 11.
and not to visit the poor Saints, Mat. 25. 43. Riches cause persons to be idle,
and to take their ease, Am. 6. 1. and to settle upon their lees, Jer. 48. 11.
Riches cause them less to seek God, and less to serve him, and less to mind,
love and delight in God, and in things above. Riches cause spiritual deadness
and coldness in Religion, and unwillingness to die. Riches and prosperity cause
men to be hard-hearted, careless, and insensible of the wants of others, so as
not to weep with them that weep. Riches cause gluttony, intemperance, excess,
sin, diseases, sickness, pain, death. Riches are a snare into diverse
temptations, into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men into
destruction and perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. Riches greaten men's sin and
condemnation. Many shall curse the day that ever they had so many thousands and
hundreds a year; for had they not been so rich, they had never committed half so
much sin; we cannot hold God and riches, if ye hold to the one, ye despise the
other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon. This rich men will not beileve, Lu. 16.
13. They think they may easily well agree, and that they may seek and serve
both. If we were of Agurs mind, we would part with riches as freely and
willingly as ever we received them. Solomon did not so much as ask riches, God
did not like that he should, 2 Chronicles. 8. 11. Good Agur would not have riches,
therefore he prays against them, saying, give me not riches, Pro. 30. 9. It
is not a sin to be rich, but it is a sin to keep riches when others and the
Saints suffer and perish for want of them; there is a woe pronounced against
the rich, though they mind it not, regard or consider it not. Woe to you that
are rich, for ye have received your consolation, Lu. 6. 24. Dives thou have
received thy good things in this life, Luke 16. 25. Woe to him that ladeth
himself with thick clay, Hab. 2. 8. The Lord says, Labor not to be rich,
Pro. 23. 4. Riches is not, ver. 5. Love not the world, nor the things of the
world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John
2. 15. The love of money is the root of all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. Riches are
external, and appertain (nothing to the mind) to violence in getting, in
keeping: Strong men retain riches. If riches make themselves wings, and fly
away, men intend to fly after them.

The measure we meet to supply the wants of others, is not the same that we
measure to our selves, they are diverse, and diverse measures are abomination to
the Lord, Pro. 20. 10.

Comfort to all who in obedience to God, and for his sake give freely, and c to
supply the wants of others. 1. You are like Jesus Christ, and his people in so
doing.

2. You have the prayers of the Saints for you. The Lord give mercy to the
house of Onisiphorus, for he often refreshed me, 2 Timothy 1. 16. 2 Cor. 9. 13, 14.
Ephesians. 1. 14, 15. Ps. 69. 33. and 71. 12.

3. Your bountifulness causes thanksgiving to God, many thanksgivings to God,
2 Cor. 9. 12, 13.

4. All things are clean to you. Give alms of such things as ye have, and
behold all things are clean to you, Luke 11. 41.

5. You are happy: He that has mercy on the poor, happy is he, Pro, 14. 21.
and blessed, for he gives his bread to the poor, Pro. 22. 9.

6. Your righteousness remains for ever: He has dispersed abroad, he has
given to the poor, your righteousness remains for ever, Psalm. 112. 9. 2 Cor.
9. 9. Also the merciful man does good to his own soul, Pro. 11. 7.

7. You shall not want, Pro. 28. 27. Job 5. 20.

8. The blessed promises of this life, and that to come are for you: He that
has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he has given of his bread to the
poor, Pro. 29. 9. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will
deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord will preserve and keep him alive, he
shall be blessed upon the earth, and thou will not deliver him unto the will of
his enemies. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing; thou will make all his bed in his sickness, Ps. 41. 1, 2, 3. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat. 5. 7. Deal thy bread to the
hungry, cover the naked: Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and
thy health shall bring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before
thee. The glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward; then shall thou call, and
the Lord shall answer thee, thou shall cry, and he shall say here I am, Isa.
58. 7, 8, 9. Give him for this thing; the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy works, in all thou put thy hand unto, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.

9. You shall have a great reward. If thine enemy hunger give him bread to
eat, if he be thirsty, give him water to drink, and the Lord shall reward
thee, Pro. 25. 21, 22. Love your enemy, do good, lend, hoping for nothing
again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of the most
highest, Luke 6. 34, 35. This promise is not to any Usurer; for if he lends,
he looks for something again, and not only for the principal, but for more
then he lent, he hopes for use. Whosoever shall give a cup of water to drink
in the name of a Disciple, because he belongs to Christ, verily I say unto you
he shall in no wise loose his reward, Mar. 9. 41. see Mat. 19. 20. Mar. 10. 10.
Thine alms are come up for a memorial, they are had in remembrance in the
sight of God, Act. 10. 4. 31.

10. You shall have treasure in heaven, Mat. 19. 21. Lu. 18 22. Come ye blessed
of my father, receive the kingdom prepared for you; for I was an hungry, and
ye gave me meat, naked and ye clothed me, sick and in prison, and ye came
unto me, Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36.

There are Statutes as good as can be desired for the poor if executed, the
Statue 43. Eliz. 2. Provide to raise weekly, or otherwise of every inhabitant
such sums of money as they shall think fit for a stock to set the poor on
work (and to compel them to work) and toward the necessary relief of poor
not able to work to distress and sale of goods, or imprison without bail or
mainprize till he have paid the same. Yet for these many years the poor are
neglected, and suffered to beg contrary to the statutes: Yea, they suffer great
misery, and run to ruin, and yet both Magistrate, Minister, and people are
silent, and content to have it so, this is a sore evil.

Thear the Town of Maidstone and the City of Dorchester, and a few other
places, the poor are set to work* and provided for without begging. Oh that
London, etc. would do so also, That there be no complaining in our streets,
Psalm. 144. 14. But in stead of helping the poor, there be that rob the poor.
One Justice of Peace gave in his account of the poors money 500. pound short,
this can be proved. If men fearing God and hating covetousness, were appointed
to receive that which would be voluntary given to effect this good work; there
would be stock enough to set the poor on work, and to supply all wants The
people of this Nation have been so bountiful, that a Law was made to restrain
them, fearing that all the whole L^^d would be given to the poor, the Papist
may rise up against many of this generation. It is a sad thing that they should
be more forward upon a bad principle, then a Christian upon a good one. I hope
it will not be long till those in Authority will consider the cause of the poor
and help it. It is possible we may see some as willing to help others as to
help themselves, and to provoke others to do so: the poor daily increase and
multiply; in time, if you prevent it not, they will be able and willing to
order you and your estates as they think fit. Take care, and provide work and
things necessary for the poor. Surely there is no work in the world that men
will give more freely unto then this.

Worthy Oliver Cormwel deserves great honor and imitation, he gives more money
to the poor then any I have heard of in our days, thousands a year. I would the
Rich would follow his steps; it is expected the Lord will use him with some
others who have the same spirit, and merciful heart to do great things for the
good of this Nation, especially to ease ^he oppressed, and to help them that
cannot help themselves, and that all honest and wel-minded people shall bless
God for them, and for what they have done; the benefit and good thereof will
more and more appear to the glory of God, and the welfare of this Nation. He
has put down the mighty from their seat, and exalted them of low degree, Lu.
1. 52. Let every soul be subject to the higher Powers, there is no power but
of God, Romans 13. 1. Those against whom none are able to prevail, are the
greatest and higest power.

Those who have the greatest power, are the fittest, and most able to protect
and govern: honor and obedience is due to them that protect.

God has by this Army protected, saved our estates and lives. Such Rulers are
to be desired, who fear God, and have power and good principles. In reason we
may expect a continued safety from them who have been a means to procure the
liberty we enjoy, rather then from others, who under the title of Authority
would undo us. Did not the late Parliament order treble damages for not paying
of tithes, and erect a tribunal to punish all that did preach without
ordination of the said Hierarchy and their Priests, which themselves have
declared to be Antichristian. There does not appear more love to God, to his
people, and to this Nation, then in the Officers of the Army.

They deserve the greatest honor and trust among men that have suffered, been
wounded, and shed their blood for this Nation, have freely offered for Gods
sake, and for our sakes their lives and estates to save ours. I pray you give
us leave to own and speak well of them who have saved our estates and live^.

God does not put the power into the hands of any, so much for their sakes as
for others; the honor, safety, welfare, peace, comfort, happiness, and glory
of this poor Nation they ought to seek and prefer before their own. I trust
the Lord has put it into the hearts of those who have the power over us, to
say, we will do this, and see this done; we will not seek our own things, but
every one another welfare, as 1 Cor. 10. 24. and each one to say as Gideon, I
will not rule over you, the Lord shall rule over you, Judge 8. 23.

Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every one according
as his work shall be, Rev. 22. 21.

FINIS.

