Gemitus Plebis: OR A Mournful Complaint AND SUPPLICATION In behalf of the more
weak and ignorant of the people of this Nation.

Drawn up for them by a Friend, whose deep sense of his own ignorance and
weakness, has taught him to be compassionate toward all that labor under the
same infirmities.

By C. RAIE.

We roar all like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves, we look for judgment, but
there is none, for salvation, but it is far from us, Isa. 59. 11. Tolerabilius
est Deo quempiam cum ignorantia in humilitate jacere, quam cum elatione alta
sapere, Greg. in Mor. Si propter eos solos Christus mortuus est, qui certa
intelligentia possunt ista disc^rnere, pene frustra in ecclesia laboramus,
August. Epist. 102. LONDON, Printed by R. Ibbitsan, for Tho. Newberry, at the
Sign of the Three Lions in Cornhil, 1656.

To the Honorable the Knights and Burgesses, chosen for this present
Parliament in the County of Suffolk.
NOBLE PATRIOTS,
THis Supplication which now presents it self unto your Honors view, was drawn
up in much grief and anguish of spirit, lamenting to see the sad condition of
the people of this Nation, in order to their souls, and everlasting state;
whilst after a long expectation of some happy Reformation, they are found
partly sinking by degrees into the gulf of Profaneness and Atheism, partly
hurried on by the wind of strange doctrines upon the rocks of Heretical
opinions, destructive to the very foundations of our holy Religion: Not much
unlike the case of that ship wherein St. Paul was driven to Malta, whereof Act
27. 7
one part stuck fast in the earth, the other part was broken and driven away by
violent waves. The sad apprehensions hereof caused me with a weak and trembling
hand to draw up this Petition, imploring the aid of God and men, in this our
sinking condition. It was indeed intended to be sent abroad in the world as a
desolate orphan, without any discovery whence it came, or to whom in particular
to apply it self. But after that divine providence had ordered the convention
of this great Assembly, and assigned your Honors to bear a part in that trust,
I was easily persuaded to presume so far upon your Christian charity, as to
direct it first unto your doors, humbly casting both it, and my self down at
your Honors feet, beseeching you in behalf of the people of this Nation, as
the passionate Father mentioned in the Gospel, did our Savior in behalf of his
son; If you can Mark. 9^
do any thing, have compassion on us, and help us. A case of higher concernment
cannot be presented unto you, than this, wherein the honor of Christ, and
salvation of so many thousand souls is engaged. And my hope is, that nothing
will be more in your thoughts, than restoring beauty to Sion, and repairing the
walls of Jerusalem so ruined every where. They seem to me too unreasonably to
debase your honorable station, who would exempt the case of Christ, and the
eternal salvation of souls from your care, leaving only the petty businesses
of this world unto your cognizance; yea to deal most injuriously with you,
persuading you to neglect that, the care whereof is your greatest honor, and
security, and the neglect whereof, would certainly blast all your other
proceedings.

Now the Lord vouchsafe to your selves, and the rest of that Honorable
Assembly, a large portion of that Spirit which he put upon Christ, the head of
all powers, A Spirit of wisdom and understanding, of counsel and might, Isa.
11. 2.
of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord, and make you quick of sent, in what
concerns the honor of Christ, the free course of his Gospel, and everlasting
good of the people, and cause that all the mountains of difficulties that now
lie in your way, may be turned into plains before Zach. 4. 7.
you, that in the end, the languishing hopes of the faithful in the land may be
revived, the vowed Reformation of Religion accomplished, that we, and the
following Generations may call you blessed, as being under God the happy
instruments of repairing our breaches, and restoring our paths. Which is, and
shall be the daily prayer of

Your Honors, and of all that love the Lord Jesus, a worthless servant, C.
RAIE.
Wast. Sept. 16, 6.
To all those Faithful Ministers of Christ in the land, whose hearts are
mourning under the Present distractions, and breathing after an happy
reformation amongst us.
Reverend Fathers and Brethren;
THat so weak and worthless a creature has presumed to speak thus loud in
your ears, and by way of petition, to suggest to your wisdom; some things which
will scarcely agree with the principles or practice of diverse, whose more
eminent piety and learning, has made them, worthily precious and honorable in
the Churches of Christ, I can give no better account, than what David
mentions as forcing words unwillingly from him, My heart was Psalm. 39. 3
hot within me, thenspake I with my tongue.

The Principal thing which has stirred these passions, has been the
Consideration of the sad condition wherein the people of this Nation are left,
whilst not alone some of their eminent Pilots seem to sit down in despair, as
if nothing were to be done in these stormy times, but only to pray and wait
for a calm, but even diverse of those, whose more industrious spirits provoke
them to action, appear to attend nothing more, but to get with the best of
their goods unto the boat, leaving the ship to sink in the Sea, contenting
themselves with such a reformation, wherein not alone the viler sort, whose
open profaneness, and desperate contempt of God and Religion, proclaims them
unworthy the name or privilege of Christians, but even the main body and bulk
of the people are left, either in the state of absolute heathens, having none
to take any pastoral care of their souls, or any other privilege for
themselves or their children, then Jews or Turks might enjoy, if they lived
amongst us, or else entertained as semi-Christians; neither fully owned nor
cashiered, but wearing by halves the colors of Christ.

Of how exceeding dangerous concernment such a reformation may prove, seems to
me not hard to conjecture, especially being attempted in such a juncture of
time, wherein the Magistrate has in great part withdrawn his coercive power,
as to things of Religion, leaving men to themselves, and the Devil has so many
agents at work, to seduce men from the very profession of Christ, and to entice
them back into the Camp of the enemy.

Suppose this course were taken with some mutinous or dubious army, that

1 The more faithful part of the Soldiery were withdrawn from communion with
them. 2. Their voluntary tenders of renewing their engagement to their rightful
Prince were rejected. 3. The most desperate mutineirs, who are always
soliciting a total revolt, were permitted and continued amongst them. It were
easy to guess what were like soon to become of that Army.
The deep apprehension of the sad consequents of such a reformation in order to
this, and the following generations, considered, and compared with such
remarkable signs of divine displeasure, as daily sound in our ears, has caused
me to forget my former resolution of silence, and how weakly so ever, to utter
my poor thoughts in this case.

When holy David in the height of his zeal, was bringing home the Ark of God to
Jerusalem, and found by that dreadful 2 Samuel 6
stroke upon Vzza, that somewhat was amiss, and God was offended, he is found to
have laid aside, for the present, his former design, and to have fallen upon a
serious enquiry; into the cause of this displeasure of God, which having wisely
discovered; and timely amended, the work at the second attempt went on with
happy success.

Many of us have as David laid out our zeal in bringing the Ark of the Lord, I
mean the presence of Christ in the power and purity of his worship, and
Ordinances, home to our selves and our people, but have been enforced to behold
such Stumbling of the Oxen, and so many of those that have driven the Cart, or
laid their hands to the Ark, suddenly smitten either with death, or dreadful
fits of quaking and giddiness, that nothing appears more necessarily incumbent
on us at this time, than to enter a serious scrutiny what we have, done or
wherein offended, that God should stop our way and brand our work with such
evident signs of displeasure?

Now, as at that time upon search it was found that the grand miscarriage was,
that the Levites had been too favorable to themselves; spared their own
shoulders too much, having found out an easier way to carry the Ark than God
had appointed, making that the burden of Oxen, which should have 1 Chronicles. 1^
12, 13, etc.
been born by themselves. So I cannot but fear that something equivalent may
be found amongst us at this time. We have too much indulged our selves,
declined the labor imposed by Christ, and found out easier ways to carry the
Ark, than his commands will allow.

To cull out a few of the best of the people, or whose ways and principles do
most suit with our own, these to new dip in water, new name them a Church, or
to admit only them to a full communion with us in ordinances, leaving the rest
of the people to wander as sheep in the mountains, affording them neither
advantage of Sacraments to engage them to Christ, nor censures to awaken them
out of their lusts, is a far easier task, than by vehement endeavors, both
public and private to bring back and engage the body of the people to Christ,
and strenuously to draw forth the censures by him committed unto us, in revenge
of all the stubbornness and disobedience of those, 2 Cor. 10. 6 (...) Mat. 18.
15
who shall contemn such applications as he has appointed for their recovery.

Now the former of these, as being much more facile and easy, has (though
under several and different forms) been attempted by many of us; but the
latter, as much more painful and burdensome, We have either totally shunned, or
performed by halves.

Now if upon examination it should be found, that this forementioned way of
reformation under what form so ever attempted, is no way approved by Christ,
but a mere invention of man, to ease our selves of the burden which it belongs
to the Ministers of God to go under; We shall then see no cause to admire that
God has erected so many monuments of his displeasure, and caused a Perez Uzza
to be written in so many places.

How dangerous the least mistake in things of this nature is, both the case
under our hands, and likewise that of Nadab, Dev. 10
and Abihu, do sufficiently witness, but when the miscarriage is such as may
be rationally thought to endanger the loss of many thousand souls, bought by
the blood of the Lord, and engaged in Covenant with him, yea the very undoing
this and the following Generations; by dissolving the bonds betwixt Christ and
this Nation, it cannot seem strange if God for one at that time, does now erect
many Pillars of Salt, and as any party has traveled further in these ways,
so the notes of his wrath be sound more signal on them.

Now that the way before mentioned, notwithstanding some show of piety, in
making or preserving a purity in Churches, or Ordinances; Yet truly is no way
appointed by Christ, but like the new Cart made for the Ark at that time, a
mere invention of man to ease our selves of the burden, I cannot but vehemently
suspect upon these following grounds, which I humbly present to your grave and
mature consideration.

1 Because I find not in Scripture, either precept or president for any such
way of Reformation, though cases not unlike to ours, have often happened of
old. Many revolts and backslidings of Gods people stand upon record in
Scripture with the ways and means of their recovery, but this way of drawing
the more eminently pious into new societies, or the withholding the engaging
seals of the Covenant from the People, when willing to renew their engagement,
I never fixde recorded in Scripture. But on the contrary, those men whose names
are precious in the book of God, for the glorious Reformations made in their
days, as Asa, Hezekiah, Josia, 2 Chronicles. 20. ^ 35.
etc. are plainly found to have made it their great design, to bring back and
engage the body of the people to God, and for that purpose to have attended
nothing more earnestly, than to bind them in sacramental bonds to the Lord.
Neither does the Apostle Paul in order to the Churches of Corinth or Galatia,
sadly corrupted, persuade either the sounder part to separate themselves into
new Churches, or the Pastors to withhold the Sacraments from them till better
reformed, but on the 1 Cor. 1. 10 1 Cor. 10. 21.
contrary earnestly, presses Love and Union amongst them, and makes advantage
of their Sacramental engagements to Christ, to dis-ingage them from their
sinful corruptions.

2 Neither do I know how to reconcile these proceedings with the glorious
promises contained in Scripture, of the great enlargement of the Church, or
Kingdom of Christ in these Gospel times. Nothing seems more pregnant in the
Prophets, than Isa. 2. 2
that the times of the Messiah, should be times of great increase to the
Church, by flowing in of Nations to it. Now if we well consider how small a
part of the World is at this present, or for many ages by past, has been
Christians, and Breerw. p. 118
how small a part of the Christian world, is so Orthodox in opinion, or regular
in practice, as the body of the people amongst us, we must needs conclude,
that if such as these be secluded, and a gathering made according to the mind
of some of the stricter sort of our brethren, the Church of Christ would now
be brought into much narrower bounds, than before the manifestation of Christ
in the flesh; when I consider the Muster roll given in by Joab to David, I am
enforced to think the 1 Chronicles. 21. 5
Church at that time did not consist of less than five or six millions of
Souls, and those (doubtless) much augmented in Salomons days, but should none
be owned as Church members, but such as some of our Brethren aforesaid would
admit, I question, whether the whole Christian world at this day, would afford
a tenth of that number, neither have many ages since the manifestation of
Christ in the flesh, been much happier than ours in the number of Orthodox
Christians; so as whilst these separating ways seem to aim at the honor of
Christ, in leaving none but precious stones in his building, they are found
much to detract from his honor in another way, namely in abridging Prove. 14. 28
so much the number of his subjects.

3 Neither do I know how to make these stricter proceedings agree with the
infinite grace and indulgence of God so much proclaimed in Scripture, and so
often proved in his compassionate Exodus 34. 6
owning those that were once entered into Covenant with him, even then, when
their dreadful revolts and manifold whordomes, Jer. 3. 1
did seem to cry aloud for a Bill of divorce. Now the people whose case I am
pleading, are certainly entered into Covenant with God, being given up to him in
the Sacram ent of Baptism, and notwithstanding many miscarriages, are not
found to have renounced this Covenant, they truly believe the fundamental
Articles of our holy Religion, and even in their greatest extremities, when
they are least like to dissemble, make profession thereof; so as they must of
necessity be accounted Believers, not Infidels, men within, not without,
according to the language of Scripture: Now how the rejecting these men, by
hundreds and thousands, as if they were heathen, or debarring them from the
Ordinances of Christ, unless upon their contumacious rejecting such
applications as he has appointed, will stand with this infinite grace and
indulgence of God, I cannot conceive.

4 The singular love and goodness of Christ, does enforce to believe, that in
his kingdom, salus populi, is lex suprema. That the Ordinances were made for
man, not man for the Ordinances, and consequently that such ways as for
preserving the purity of Ordinances, should destroy the souls of the people,
can be no ways approved by Christ, now whether these ways of withdrawing the
more devout and zealous part, from their communion, leaving them to wander in
the wilderness as sheep without Shepherds, staving them off from renewing
their engagements to Christ in that heart-melting Sacrament, be not destructive
to the souls of the people, creating in them hard and uncharitable thoughts
concerning the more eminently pious, leaving them under the guilt of a dreadful
sin of omission, and hindering them from one special means of recovering
strength against their corruptions, seems not hard to determine. For mine own
part, I cannot but strongly conceive in this case, what Jonathan speaks in
another, that diverse of us have by our unadvised zeal hindered the people, and
that a far greater slaughter might have been made amongst the enemies 1 Samuel
14. 30
of God, had the people been permitted more freely to taste this heavenly food.

5 When I consider this way of proceeding, in order to people wherein they are
excluded, from communion in Sacraments, and in the mean time, admitted to their
wonted communion, in prayers, praises, humiliations, etc. I cannot find that
clearness of Scripture, evidence for this halving in point of communion, that
should warrant our faith to expect the presence or blessing of Christ upon such
kind of censures; I have according to my poor ability, considered what has
been published by some reverend Brethren in defense of suspensions, but am
enforced still to conceive, that the communion of christians one with another,
lies as truly (though peradventure with some gradual difference) in prayer, as
in breaking of Bread; and that the vast difference that now we have Act. 2. 42
made, admitting all to communion in one, and so few in the other, was never
learned from the rules or examples in scripture, nor yet from the practice of
the Primitive Church, whether Jewish or Christian, and consequently that if we
will bring up our censures to the rules and patterns aforesaid, we must remove
the rail from the communion table, and set it nearer the door of the Church.

6 Were these suspensions never so clearly proved by Scripture, yet it seems
justly questionable, whether Christian prudence guided by Scripture Light, will
admit them to be so generally passed. Ecclesiastical censures seem to be
enervate, and loose much of their vigor, when they fall upon the major part of
the People, yea more to resemble some Popish interdict, than the censures of
Christ, the tender Physician; when a finger, an hand, or an arm is dangerously
diseased, the wise Surgeon sometimes thinks of cutting it off, but he would
scarce be approved as a good Surgeon, who should deal thus with the major
part of the body, though affected in the same manner. The blessed Apostle saw
several persons in the Churches of Corinth, and Galatia, whose case he
bewailes, and peradventure might think them worthy of censure, yet at present
singles 2 Cor. 12. 21 1 Cor. 6. 1 Cor. 5 Gal. 5. 12
out only one not orious offender in the Church of Corinth, and wishes that
only the ringleaders of error in the Churches of Galatia, should be cut off.
Now had we taken this course to admit more generally the body of the People to
a full communion, and laid some stubborn notorious offenders, under more signal
remarkable censures, peradventure we might have seen some more happy effects of
our proceedings, than now we behold.

I have thus presumed according to the licentiousness of these times, to utter
my mournful thoughts in this case, craving from you a candid interpretation of
my meaning, though you find my words rude and unpolisht. And if it shall
happen that any of you shall me in opinion concerning these things, let this
poor Petition have the help of your Prayers, that it may find entertainment in
the hearts of those to whom it is directed: if otherwise, let the Author obtain
the benefit of them, that God will be pleased graciously to pardon all his
errors and sinful miscarriages, who, if he knows his own heart, would
willingly see and submit to the mind of the Lord, though never so crossing to
his former opinion or practice.

Wast. September. 1656
To all that love and serve the Lord Jesus Christ in the work of Magistracy, or
Ministry. As also to all the more eminent Professors of Religion within this
Commonwealth.
A mournful Complaint, and Supplication, in behalf of many Thousands of the
more weak and ignorant people of this Nation; Humbly lamenteth and declares,
THat notwithstanding your poor Petitioners have even by your confession,
reasonable and immortal Souls, capable of eternal bliss or misery,
notwithstanding the same common nature, and the many civil bonds wherein we
stand related unto you, notwithstanding you see us weakly owning the same God,
the same Christ, the same common principles of Religion with your selves,
notwithstanding you see us dreadfully assaulted by the power and policy of the
same enemies with whom you are in combat; notwithstanding you behold our
danger from those enemies in regard of our ignorance and weakness to be so
great and imminent, that were we not too insensible, we should even fill heaven
and earth with our shrikes and cries, yea notwithstanding you profess your
selves Disciples and followers of the Lord Jesus, who not alone descended from
heaven, and gave his precious blood a ransom for such poor creatures as we,
but whilst he was here upon earth, did with most earnest and unweariable pains,
seek up such feeble and wandering sheep, and most sweetly communicate himself
unto them.

Yet the depth of our present misery, proclaims aloud, that you are extremely
straightened in your bowels of compassion toward us, in that we remain under so
much ignorance and blindness, under so much deadness and carnality, and you no
more forcibly apply your selves unto our help; you see us groping and tasping
as blind men in danger to fall into the pit, and you cry not out unto us, you
see us shattered and overpowred by the cruel enemy, and you hasten not unto
rescue, you see us fallen amongst Thieves, and lie wounded in the ways, and
you pass by on the other side, nor pouring oil or wine into our wounds yea you
see many of us panting, and ready to breathe out the last gasp of our dying
Christianity, and you bring no cordials to revive us.

You have made high professions for promoting the work of Christ in this
Generation, you have taken deep engagements upon your selves to endeavor a
glorious reformation, and we hope some others have found some more comfortable
fruits from those professions, but also we for our parts are enforced sadly to
look back on former times and say, O that it were with us as in the days of
old! seeing that little knowledge we had of Christ is now diminished, our small
heat of love abated, our weak profession of that our dear Savior almost quite
obliterate, and our children like to be set in a more hopeless condition than
our selves.

We cannot deny, but as God has been infinitely gracious in calling us by the
preaching of his Gospel to the knowledge of his Son, so with, and under you, we
have enjoyed those blessed advantages, by many godly Sermons and exhortations,
that if we had not been wanting to our selves, we might have attained much more
understanding of the things of God, and greater victories against those
corruptions, that now so overpower us: But as the Patient, who has contracted
diseases by his own folly, or carelessness, yet expects that the
tenderhearted Physician, should faithfully apply himself unto the cure, so we
being miserably wounded and infeebled by our own sluggishness, yet have hope,
that you who behold our doleful condition, and whose place and office binds you
to be healers, will have your bowels yerning toward us; and upon this our
mournful complaint will lay out your selves with greater industry and diligence
in order to our recovery.

But because we would willingly move your most tender compassions, we shall
humbly cast our selves down at the feet of each of you in particular, and
spread our mournful case before you, wishing that our deep sighs and groans,
might fill your ears, but if that do not, that yet your eyes might affect your
hearts in beholding our most sad and lamentable state.

O you the Magistrates! who possess the name and place of Gods amongst us, in
whose power, and at whose dispose are all the external means of our present and
everlasting welfare, upon whose directions and commands, our eyes wait even in
those things which concern our souls, and eternal being.

You have the command of our persons and estates, to order and dispose them at
your pleasure, you have the command of our Schools and Universities to fill or
empty them, you have the command of our Pastors and Teachers, to place or
remove them, you have the command of our Churches and Chapels to shut or open
them, you have the command of our Tithes and other Oblations, to give or
dispose them to whom you please: And surely nothing should be dearer to you
than the glory of him from whom you have received this power, and the salvation
of the souls by Christ committed to your trust.

Now unto you our mournful condition lamentably complains, that diverse of
our Parishes are left wholly destitute of Ministers, there is none to lead us
in the ways of God, none to break the bread of life unto us, no not so much as
to read the holy Scriptures in our Congregations, the ways of Sion mourn
because none come to her solemn Assemblies; We, and our children faint for
thirst, and there is none to draw the living waters for us.

That diverse of our Churches are still possessed by weak, ignorant, or
scandalous Ministers, who either through unskilfulness, or unfaithfulness
betray our souls into the hands of our enemies, and that you neither have
removed them, nor enjoined them to read plainly to us the holy Scriptures, and
other godly Prayers, and Sermons composed by abler men, which advantage our
Fathers did enjoy in the penury of learned Ministers, and which our experience
assures us, would be far more profitable for us than such Prayers and Sermons
as are of their composing.

That you have placed in many of our Churches, and given the Tithes, and other
profits belonging to the cure of souls, to men that refuse to take any such
charge upon them, and who are so far from having the affections, or performing
the duties of faithful Pastors to us, that they do profesledly dis-own any such
relation, and consequently all the duties thereunto belonging, thence they
neither baptize nor catechize our children, nor do they administer the Lords
Supper in our Congregations, our sick and feeble persons they visit not, nor
own it as a duty incumbent on them to take care for our souls.

And though indeed they make Orations in our Pulpits, yet for as much as they
profess themselves, no Officers or Messengers of Christ unto us, we cannot hear
them as his Ministers, and consequently cannot expect his presence with them,
or blessing on their labors.

That you do not according to the noble example of Asa, Josiah, and other holy
Governors, enforce us by your Authority, to worship the only true God, and to
attend his sacred Ordinances, you take us indeed off from our wonted labor on
the Lords days, but do not likewise compel us to attend some public
Assemblies to hear the word of God read, or preached to us, we as idle
Scholars refuse to go to School, and you our Masters rebuke us not: This
indulgence of yours we find indeed pleasing to the flesh, which would rather
sleep or play, or drink at home, than go to Church to worship Christ, but we
fear that many of us will find cause for ever to curse our selves for taking,
and you for giving us this woeful liberty.

That you commend not to us by your Authority some public Confession of Faith
to be learned and owned by us, which might be as a touchstone to try the
Doctrines which we hear, and a preservative against the cursed endeavors of
those men, that seek to raze the foundations of our holy Religion; for as the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments, many of us have quite forgotten
them, seldom or never hearing any mention of them in our Churches.

That you do not enjoin a more reverend, and seemly deportment of the body in
our public Assemblies we find all helps and advantages, too little to raise
our drousie hearts to true devotion, but when we are enforced to behold the
rude and unreverent carriage of others in our Congregations, we find that it
mightily hinders and abates the intention and devotion of our spiritis in the
worship of God; nor can we think that you would well approve such rudeness and
disorder in men's addresses to your selves.

That you assign no more Ministers to our greater Congregations, many thousands
of us sometimes have but one (if one) to lead us in our spiritual welfare: In
your civil wars where the enemies are less dangerous, you have many Officers
for every hundred men, And can you think that one man is sufficient to
instruct, exercise and conduct many thousands against a more subtle, vigilant,
and formidable enemy?

That you have appointed no means to discover who are listed as our
fellow soldiers under Christ in the Sacrament of Baptism, which we suspect
will leave no small scruple upon our children, and others when we are gone, if
by the infinite mercies of God, Christian Religion should still be continued in
this Nation, you have removed the Diptyches, or books of Record out of the
hands of our Ministers, and put them into other hands, but not enjoined them to
record the baptism of any, which gives occasion to adversaries to think that
you set but little price upon that sacred Ordinance.

That you have let loose so many ravening Wolves upon us, who go up and down
seeking to devour, venting their poisonous soul-destroying errors, both
publicly and privately, whereby we the more ignorant are often shaken in the
very fundamentals of our holy Religion, and left in doubt what we should
believe, how much better were it for us if you suffered men to poison and
infect our bodies to the destruction of this our life natural, than thus to
poison our souls to the evident hazard of our everlasting ruin.

Consider we beseech you, our ignorance, and weakness, and have compassion on
our souls, and let it appear by the intention of your care and watchfulness in
order to our spiritual good, that our Governors are real Christians, and know
the worth of that which Christ has purchased at so dear a rate, that he may
own you as his faithful stewards and we may bless God for you as tender nursing
Fathers unto us.

O you the Ministers of Christ! whom he has set as watchmen to discover
dangers, and give warning as Captains, and Leaders in his Army, as Stewards in
his Famisy to give to every one his portion in due season; you are set to be
the Lights of the world, the Salt of the earth, yea Clouds to distill the
precious dews upon us; from you we expect not alone directions from your
heavenly Doctrine, but light from your graceful walking, strength from your
servent prayer, and sweet refreshings from your fatherly compassions, that you
in imitation of the great Shepherd, should carry the Lambs in the bosom of
your love, and gently lead the feeble of the flock.

And blessed be God amongst you, we have found some truly loving and
compassionate Samaritans, who have pitied us in our distress, have bound up
our wounds, and laid out your selves to the utmost of your strength for our
eternal comfort; for whose faithfulness in order to our souls, we hope many of
us shall celebrate the name of God with everlasting praises.

But against many of you, our doleful case mournfully declares, that
notwithstanding the holiness of your function, and the great trust by Christ
committed to you, yet you seem careless and regardlesse of our immortal
souls; more minding your own temporal advantage in the world, than the eternal
condition of the people committed to your charge, incumbring your selves so
much with worldly business, that you cannot give attendance to reading,
exhortation, and to doctrine, and whilst you have left your watchtower, and are
busy in those lower valleys, the enemy, always vigilant for mischief,
surprizeth us to the eternal hazard of souls.

That diverse of you perform the work belonging to your high Calling, with so
much coldness and remisness, that you occasion us to question whether you be
in good earnest, or do your selves believe what you deliver unto us, our houses
are on fire, and you knock softly at our doors, a dreadful deafness is upon
us, and you whisper in our cars, our necessities require that you should cry
aloud and lift up your voices like trumpets, to make known to us our sin and
danger, and you speak with so low a voice as it you were afraid to wake us.

That you attend no more to the sure laying the foundations of religion in our
hearts, by frequent catechizing, and plain Preaching the fundamentals, clearing
up to us the grounds upon which these great things of eternity are to be owned
by us, through ignorance of these your Sermons, though otherwise excellent, are
made in great part unprofitable to us, you are upon the finishing whilst we
stick at the foundation, you read in a manner all your lectures to Scholars,
of the higher form; whilst we the more ignorant are neglected as not being
able to understand the terms in which these great things of God are by you
delivered to us.

That some of you deny unto your children the sacred body of our Christian
profession, the Sacrament of Baptism, we would bring our Children in our Arms,
and present them unto Christ for his Blessing, but you thrust us back; we would
engage our Children unto Christ, to live and dye his servants, but you will not
permit us, but enforce us to leave them free, to serve the Devil if they
please, as if you had conspired with our enemies to thrust our posterity back
again to Heathenism.

That many of you permit us not to celebrate the memorial of our dying Savior
in the Sacrament of his last Supper, and so deprive our souls of that heavenly
food, that our dear Lord has with so much cost provided for us, we would
after many sad violations renew our Covenant with Christ, and engage our souls
more firmly to him, but you will not permit us; You complain of the loosnesse
of our spirits, whilst you withhold the bonds that should knit us faster unto
Christ; you complain of our weakness in resisting corruptions, whilst you
withhold the food whereby we should be strengthened; you complain of Schism,
strife, and division, whilst by you the sacred Pledge of union is detained from
us.

Some of you have for many years wholly laid aside this Sacred Ordinance,
choosing rather to deprive your selves and others, whom you better approve, of
this heavenly banquet, then to afford it unto us; you complain of some of us
for living in known sins; and frequently make your proof from some neglect of
duty, whilst you your selves have lived many years in the notorious omission of
this great duty, so solemnly enjoined by the Lord Jesus Christ.

Others of you, though you do administer this Sacrament, you have raised so
many stoppes, and made such lofty rails about the table, that few of us can
come unto it, as if you thought it a matter of great piety, to confine the
tenders of the body and blood of Christ into a narrow room, and cause those his
bitter passions suffered for mankind to be known and remembered only by a few,
as if it were an honor to Christ, or advantage to the world, that his name and
memorial should perish from the hearts and mouths of so great a part of the
people professing his name, and engaged in Covenant to him.

Hence many of you are so far from inviting us to this heavenly banquet, that
you do by your preaching and otherwise, continually hinder and discourage us;
as if we were of our selves too forward to worship Christ, and keep up his
memorial; aggravating to the height, if not beyond the truth, the danger if we
come unworthily, but not equally acquainting us, with the like or greater
danger in the total neglect of this great Command of Christ.

Others of you, have erected a Court of ruling Elders, and set up them to be
Judges over us, and that not in order to any crime or accusation brought
against us, but to examine us in order to the Sacrament, without whose
approbation, we may not be admitted to the portion of our Masters food, and
have not pitied us in our infirmities, when you saw us in our ignorance,
jealous of new erected powers, and that we would hardly be convinced, that the
business of Sacraments did belong to any other but preaching Elders, yea that
we could hardly own them for Elders, upon whom we saw no stamp of God by
Ordination to that Office, nor character of humane power by Commission from the
Magistrate, or by any legal choice or election from the people.

Others of you have combined your selves with some small parties of our
neighbors, and those sometimes whose private ways and principles we cannot
own, and have called these your Church, and set up those to be Judges over us,
according to whose sentence, and that without any legal trial, we may, or may
not be admitted to our Masters Table, not showing us which way this power over
us should be derived unto them, or giving us cause to believe that you, or they
would willingly* be so dealt withal by us, or any minor party amongst your
selves.

By these, and the like means you have discouraged and disheartened us from
coming to this heavenly Banquet, and kept us so long fasting, that our stomachs
are almost wholly gone, and our spirits much infeebled, and we fear a dreadful
guilt is contracted by our not coming to this sacred feast, remembering how
terrible Gods threatenings were against those that came not to his Passover of
old, Numb. 9. 13.
and wish it may not be laid to your charge that you have so many ways hindered
and discouraged us.

Consider we beseech you, your dealings in this case, and compare your practice
with the rules and presidents recorded in holy Scripture for our instruction,
and observe whether the servants and officers of Christ, there mentioned, did
deal with the people of their times as you have dealth with us.

We are indeed guilty of much ignorance and carnality, the Lord humble and
amend us; But do you indeed think, that there was none in the Camp of Israel
under Moses, as ignorant and carnal as we? And did Moses use such means to
stave off them from coming to the Passover, as you have done to hinder us?

Was there never a one in Israel or Judah in the days 2 Chronicles. 30.
of Hezekiah that had as little knowledge, or appearance of real godliness as
we, when that holy King sent out his general summons, Come to the house of God
at Jerusalem, and keep a Passover to the Lord God of Israel?

Was there none in the Church of Corinth, besides that one incestuous person,
against whom as just exceptions might have been made, as against us, when St.
Paul makes 1 Cor. 10. 16.
use of their joint communion at the Lords Table to press their non-communion
at the Idols Temple?

What do you think of the Disciples of our blessed Savior, were they free from
ignorance and carnality, or Luke 18. 34. and 22. 24.
was there not a dreadful cloud of ignorance and carnality upon their spirits
at that very time, when they were by Christ himself admitted to this sacred
Banquet?

Yea what Officer of Christ did you ever read of in holy Scripture, that
secluded any from Passover, or Supper, unless such desperate and notorious
sinners, as were likewise secluded from communion in all other Ordinances of
Christ?

If these things move you not, consider (we beseech you) your own practice, and
compare your dealing in this, with your other administrations, and see how you
will vindicate your selves from contradictions.

We hear you sometimes in your Sermons sweetly tendering Christ to all that be
willing to receive him, earnestly inviting us to come to Christ, telling us
that Christ expects no worthiness on our parts, but only a willingness to
accept him tendered to us, but when upon these invitations we come unto you, and
profess our willingness to accept the Lord Jesus Christ tendered in that holy
Sacrament, having no other way wherein we can so visibly yield obedience to
your invitations, you thrust us back, and tell us we must not come, because we
are not worthy.

We find you in your public prayer owning us brethren, Saints* and faithful,
as appears in that you do not alone in communion with us, but can in our name,
as our mouth* call God Father, Christ Mediator, and tender up most spiritual
confessions, petitions and thanksgivings unto God; but when we would with you
approach unto the same God and Mediator in the holy Sacrament, you quite
disclaim this brotherhood, in prayer acknowledged, and allege against our
coming to it, That you must not give holy things to dogs or swine.

Yea some of you, when we present our children to Baptism, require from us a
profession of our repen^ance for sin, and faith in the Lord Jesus, and upon
such profession by us made, do baptize our children, and justify your practice
against those that do oppose you, upon this account that our children are holy,
being the offspring of believers, and yet when we would come to present our
selves to the Lord in the other Sacrament, you refu^e and stave us off as
unholy and unbeleevers.

In all acts of civil converse where the greatest danger of contagion from
polluted persons is, and which the 1 Cor. 5. 1^
Scripture most expressly forbideth with scandalous Christians, you neither warn
others, nor do you your selves decline communion with us; you eat and drink
with us, at your own, ours, and other men's tables, and that without scruple, so
far as we perceive, and yet when we would upon the command of Christ, come and
present our selves with you at our Masters Table, you seem to fear contagion
from us, and allege against us that of the Apostle, With such a one, no not to
eat.

How your greater wisdom will accord these things, we know not, but to us the
more ignorant, they appear little less than contradictions, and leave us in a
strange amazement, considering what thoughts you have of us, or would have us
to have of our selves, whilst in some things you so sweetly own us as brethren,
and good Christians, in others, so strangely cast us off as Dogs or Swine.

We cannot think you have entertained the Popish doctrine of a real or corporal
presence of Christ in this Ordinance, more than in the rest, and yet we cannot
but wonder in what School you have learned to make this difference between
Christ's Ordinances, that all the residue should be laid in common, and only
the Communion table railed in.

We indeed hear this often alleged, that other Ordinances are converting,
this only confirming; other Ordinances are instrumental to beget souls to
Christ, this only to nourish those that are begotten: Now though it appears
to us very hard to affirm that that Ordinance wherein there is a tender of
Christ the principle of life unto the soul, may not be a means of conveighing
life, even the first motions of life supernatural to the soul, yet were this
distinction used only to difference the Sacrament from the preaching of the
word, we could more easily apprehend it; but when we find it likewise used to
distinguish it from Prayer, and other the like Ordinances, it quite surpasses
our shallow understanding to conceive the reason of it, considering we find
by the holy Scriptures, 1* Tim. 2. 8* Jam. 1. 6 Romans 10. 17*
that repentance and faith are necessarily required in order to Prayer, as well
as to the Sacrament, and experience assures us, that a child must be born
before it cries, as well as live before it eats.

But what ever difference your wisdom can find out between this and other
Ordinances, sure we are, that by this means it is come to pass that your
censures, if those your suspensions be accounted such, are made in great part
frustrate, and invalid in order to those ends for which our Lord Christ has
appointed censures in his Church, as having little or no power to shame, and
consequently reclaim the offender, or to preserve the sounder part from
contagion; for how is any man like to be made ashamed who injoyeth full
communion with the best, excepting in one Ordinance, and has so many and some
so honorable companions with him in the want of that? or how is the sounder
part like to be preserved, whilst they converse familiarly with contagious
persons, excepting in one Ordinance, and that one, wherein of all others, there
used to be the least evaporation of corruption?

If these things yet move you not, let us entreat you to behold the
countenances of your poor people, and if you find us more fair and fat in flesh
since this restraint of yours than when we did eat our portion of the Kings
meat, then you may still detain it from us, but if you see apparently, that we
are grown leaner and more feeble, yea have more grievous and noisome spots and
biles arising upon us, then have pity on us, and restore unto us the portion of
food detained from us, yea have pity on your selves, and think what answer you
will make unto the King, when he shall please to look upon us.

O consider (we beseech you) the sad case of your poor people! and instead of
these unprofitable, and as we conceive unscriptural suspensions, make more
forcible applications to us, teaching, exhorting, and admonishing with all
earnestness, not alone publicly, but from house to house, according to that
noble pattern of St. Paul: make Act. 20. 20*
known to us, the true nature of this Ordinance, and how strong an obligation,
it lays upon us of obedience to Christ, whose servants we there profess our
selves, and then with holy Hezekiah call us to engage our selves to the Lord in
this sacred Ordinance, and prove whether this will not be more effectual to
recover us from sin, and save our souls, than these your suspensions have been.

And if you find amongst our number, some whose ignorance is so gross, or
scandal so notorious, that you dare not but lay us under censures; yet let
those censures be inflicted in the way prescribed by the Lord Jesus Christ, and
let all your further proceedings with us be according to the Rules of holy
Scripture, that both you, and we may expect his blessing in all your dealings
with us.

Let those more private and public admonitions enjoined Matthew. 18. 15.
by our Savior, go before your censures, and prove whether he will not bless
these to our emendation, if after all such Christian applications made to us,
we go on boldly, and contumaciously in sin, we then plead nothing for our
selves, if you censure us more deeply than a bare suspension from the Sacrament
amounts unto: but till this be done, and we found obstinate, do not deprive
us of the food by our Lord, provided for us, nor us of that precious
opportunity of engaging our souls more firmly unto him.

Make some difference (we beseech you) between us, though many ways faulty,
and those that are desperate contemners of God, and all Religion, remembering
that there are wandering sheep, as well as dogs and swine, carnal Christians,
and brethren walking disorderly, as well as sons of Belial mentioned in
Scripture: that there were Numb. 15. 30.
many in the Church of Israel that did sin through weakness and ignorance,
besides those daring presumptuous sinners from whom the Lord would have no
sacrifice: Now if you acknowledge such a difference, consider whether it be not
more agreeable to the tender mercies of the Lord Jesus Christ, to receive such
weaklings in the faith as we, amongst the better sort, by whose godly counsels,
and example, we may be edified, than to leave us amongst the desperate
contemners of God, and all Religion, by their cursed counsels and examples to
be eternally ruined and destroyed.

O lay to heart the dreadful charge of God against his Pastors of old* the
diseased you have not strengthened, neither have you healed that which was
sick, you have Ez^k. 34. 44.
not bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought back that which
was driven away, or sought up that which was lost.

O remember that you are Officers under him, who has professed he will not
break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking Flax, and who despises not the
day of small things* O! let your compassions imitate the mercies of him, whose
name you bear, and say you concerning Isa. 65. 8.
our numerous cluster, though it be not pleasing to the eye destroy it not,
there is a blessing in it.

O you the more eminent professors of Religion! you have by the advantage of
more excellent natural endowments, better education, greater diligence, or more
abundant grace from above, far surpassed us in knowledge and understanding, in
spiritual things, you have made a more glorious profession of Religion, and
have clean escaped some of those pollutions in which we are yet miserably
entangled, you as Scholars of the highest form, are enabled to afford much
help to us, who are of the lowest in the School of Christ, and divine
providence has so dispersed you amongst us in your habitations, and caused
such mutual intercourse of worldly business that you have much advantage to
discover our infirmities, and afford a seasonable supply of help and support
unto us.

And blessed be God amongst your number, we have found some humble,
charitable, and truly self-denying Christians, who have cheerfully laid out
themselves, and their several abilities for our good and comfort: for whose
faithfulness in order to our souls, we are bound always to be thankful, and
although sometimes through the prevalency of our corruptions, we too much
slight their gracious counsel and advice, yet when our spirits are more
serious, we remember feelingly their godly admonitions, and esteem them the
most faithful of our friends.

But against many of you our mournful condition sadly complains, that you
have shut up the bowels of your compassions from us, that you look aloof upon
us, and proclaim us blind and miserable, but do not strongly apply your selves
unto our help, you see us in imminent danger to fall into the pit, but take
little care to keep us out, you see us worryed and much overpowered by our
lusts, but hasten not to our assistance, you see us chilled with cold, and you
rub us not, many of you think it enough to slip away; and shut up your selves
in some separate Congregations, leaving us in danger to perish in our
coldness, or be devoured by the cruel Enemy.

Yea though you proclaim us blind and ignorant, yet you cease not to cast many
fearful stumbling blocks before us, whilst we are enforced to see and hear
from some of you, scornful censuring and condemning others, greedy panting and
grasping at the riches, honors, and preferments of this world, fraudulent
circumventing and overreaching others, cruel revenges upon those you judge your
enemies, bitter quarrelling and contending one against another.

And notwithstanding those miscarriages, which might justly cause you with us
to lie in the dust, jointly bewailing our dreadful transgressions* yet we
find you lifted up, boasting of the glorious Times, proudly appropriating to
your selves the honorable names of Christians, Saints, the godly party, not
remembering the sentence of our Savior in the case of the Pharisce and
Publican, Luk* 18. 13
or what he sometimes said to men, whose profession was as high as yours, when
he saw them lofty: Man. 21. 31.
Publicans and Harlots shall go before you into the Kingdom of God.

That you seem to us to measure the Saintship of your selves or others, rather
by some private opinions, or some small punctilioes of worship, then by the
great things of Faith, righteousness, and mercy, because we find some men
whose profession of the Lord Jesus Christ, is attended with righteousness and
mercy, yet accounts us no better than civil by diverse of you, whilst others
are cried up for Saints and godly, who are much deficient in these.

That you animate and encourage, yea in some measure necessitate and enforce
our Ministers, to their more harsh and uncharitable dealing with us, it is
usually from you rather than themselves, that our children are not baptized,
nor our selves admitted to the other Sacrament, whilst they are loath to loose
or anger you and if any of them has more courage in the case of Christ; or
more bowels of compassion toward us, you presently brand and asperse them with
your tongues, yea often make schisms and separations from them.

That you carry all things toward us in a lofty magisteriall way, not as
Scholars of the higher form (which we could willinging admit) but as Lords
and Masters over us; though you live in vicinity to us, we seldom hear any
words of wholesome counsel or instruction from you, unless you get into our
Pulpits; neither can we enjoy any communion with you in our Churches, unless
all the power may be in your hands, to admit, exclude, rule and order all
things at your pleasure, having forgotten (as we think) that seasonable
counsel of St. James, My Brethren Jam. 3. ^
be not many Masters.

Those powers and privileges which you challenge as belonging to the Church of
Christ, you share in a manner wholly to your selves, not affording to us any
portion in them, you say it is in the peoples power to choose or reject their
Ministers, yet make no scruple to obtrude them upon us, you say a Christian
ought not to be rejected or dealt with as an heathen, till he be found
contumacious after several admonitions, yet observe no such rules in order unto
us, as if your very opinion of your selves were sufficient to make you the
only Christians and to entitle you to all the honors or liberties by Christ
conferred, and your ill opinion of us were sufficient to degrade us, and
seclude us from the meanest privilege belonging to the Church of Christ.

That you endeavor to bring upon us and our posterity the saddest judgment
that can befall a nation, namely to unchurch and unchristian us, and as you for
the present seem to account us as Heathens or little better, so your practice
tends (if infinite mercy prevent not) to make us such indeed, whilst you
endeavor, to take from us, and our posterity, all the marks and badges of our
Christian profession, and so what lies in you, wholly to casheire us from the
Camp of Christ, as if you grudged to see the promises made by the Father unto
Christ, of causing Nations to be gathered to him, performed in this little
Corner of the world.

Consider (we beseech you) the infinite mercyes and long-suffering of that God
whom you profess, how exceeding flow and loath he is to cast off those which
are once entered into Covenant with him; what heart breaking expressions he
has concerning Ephraim and Judah, in the height of their apostasy and
rebellion, and how exceeding Hos. 11. 8 Jer. 3. 15
backward he was to give a bill of divorce to either of them, and think how
acceptable your endeavors are to Christ, who make it so small a matter to
cashiere so many thousands, yea, whole Nations from his camp.

Compare, (we entreat you) this your way with the presidents and examples
recorded in holy Scripture, and see whether the precious servants of God there
mentioned, did ever tread this your way of Separation; did Moses, Joshua, or
Samuel? did Jeremiah, Ezra, or Nehemiah? did our blessed Savior or his
Apostles, ever steer your course in order to the corruptions of the Church in
their times? did not they lay out their endeavors for the emendation of the
whole body? and did not they live in communion with the Church in their times,
though many ways corrupted? Yea look upon the Christian Churches recorded in
the new Testament, did St. Paul, or any other Apostle, commend to the sounder
part of the Churches of Corinth or Galatia, any such separations as you
endeavor? yea, what servants of God did you ever read of in holy Scripture,
that did withdraw or separate themselves from the body of the people,
worshipping the same God with them, upon such pretenses as you? or what example
do you find in all the holy Scriptures, that looks so like your case, as that
of the Pharisees, so branded by our Savior.

Consider of the singular talents that God has bestowed upon you, and the
strickt account that you must give concerning your improvement of them, and
seriously bethink your selves, whether you might not give a better account
continuing in communion with us, and applying your selves strongly to our
emendation, helping us by your godly counsel and example, and cheerfully
assisting us in removing desperate contemners of God, and all Religion from
communion, than leaving the stations where divine providence had set you, to
cloister up your selves in separate Congregations, and so deprive us your poor
brethren, of those helps and assistances which we might justly have expected
from your more eminent abilities.

Ransack (we beseech you) your hearts thoroughly, to find out the true root and
bottom of this spirit of separation, and observe narrowly whether under other
specious pretenses, or with some pious intentions, there be not a bitter root
of pride and haughtiness, causing you to affect singularity, and desire to
appear alone to the view of men, thinking it below your worth to be found in
communion with those whom in opinion you have laid so much below your selves.

Yea think sadly whether those manifold revolts that have been made from your
separate Congregations, to monstrous opinions, and unclean conversations, have
not been the righteous judgment of God upon you, for your too high valuations
of your selves, and uncharitable separations from others; whereby you have
deprived such poor creatures as we, of those brotherly helps, and
encouragements, which by your eminent endowments. God had enabled you to yield,
and by his providence put opportunities into your hands to afford unto us.

What construction you make of these passages of providence, we know not, but
truly to us the more ignorant, they appear, strange, and formidable, that
whereas you fish with so great a mash, that scarce one of an hundred are by you
taken and admitted into your Congregations, that out of this hundredth part of
yours, more should be found revolting to desperate opinions, than of the ninety
nine parts by you deserted, appears to us strange and wonderful, and such as
we think may rationally put you upon a just suspicion, and serious
re-examination of that way, from which there is so easy a transition to many
dreadful delusions, and through which so many have already passed into the
camp of the enemy.

Having thus directed our complaints to each of you in particular, we now
return unto you all to whom this our mournful supplication is intended, and
again prostrate our selves before you, humbly beseeching you, by all the tender
compassions of that God, who styles himself, The God of mercy, by all the
precious blood of Christ shed for such poor sinners, by all the bowels of mercy
in that Spirit, who (as we hope) rules in your hearts, by all the bands both
natural and civil, wherein we stand related unto you, by the invaluable price
of an immortal soul, and high concernment of an everlasting state.

Have pity on us in our ignorance and weakness, and apply your selves more
earnestly to rescue us from the rage and malice of our soul-devouring enemies;
let your endeavors for our help be somewhat answerable to the greatness, of
our danger, to the weight of an eternal state, and to the invaluable price paid
by the Lord Jesus Christ for our redemption.

What if you find us peevish, froward, and sometimes sleighting your Christian
endeavors for our good, do not presently give over, but remember that the
great God of heaven has waited long both upon us and you, be assured that we
shall in the end be convinced of your faithfulness, and that what ever thanks
you have from us, the Lord Jesus will certainly remember this work and service
of your love.

O dissolve not that nail that yet we have in Christ's holy place! restore unto
us those colors, which you have begun to take from us, let us be entertained
as Scholars though of the lowest form, as Soldiers, though in the meanest
employment in the Camp of Christ, at least deny us not the favor vouchsased to
the Gibeonites, to be as hewers of wood, or drawers of water for the house of
our God.

You tell us you have rescued us from imminent danger of Popery and
superstition, but what comfort will this be unto us, if you now leave us, and
our posterity to perish in the deeper gulf of profaneness and heathenism?

Consider what singular advantages you now have upon us for our good, whilst we
maintain the principles of Christianity, and wear the colors of the Lord-Jesus
Christ, your principal work is now but to bring us to live up to the principles
we do believe, and to serve that Master, whose livery we wear.

But if you leave us till those principles be obliterate, and these colors
thrown aside, think seriously how much more hard, and hopeless our condition
then will be, especially considering that you are not furnished with the power
of miracles or extraordinary gifts, which have been Gods ordinary means for
converting heathens unto Christ.

O then delay not the time! but hasten with all possible diligence unto our
rescue, before the Devil circumvent you, and take advantage of your leaving us
unto our selves, as staving us off from the Ordinances of Christ, to harden our
hearts, and draw us by degrees to contempt of those things which now we weakly
prize, and both you, and we eternally bewail the loss of these present
opportunities.

We are yet willing to engage our children to the Lord in the Sacrament of
Baptism, we are yet willing to renew our own engagements unto Christ in that
other Sacrament, if you would not dishearten, and discourage us, but we find
sin is of an hardening nature, and that long neglect of duty will dissolve the
sense of obligation, and we cannot but fear, that if we be now neglected by
you, it may come to pass that our hearts may be so hardened, that if God should
afterward raise up some Hezekiah who should call, and invite us, or ours, to
engage our selves unto the Lord in these sacred Ordinances, either we or ours
should answer such gracious invitations after the same manner as the most of
Israel did the summons of that holy King, with scorn and contempt. 2 Chronicles. 30.
20


O let this our imminent danger be weighed in your most advised thoughts, you
see how many have already turned their backs on Christ, and all his Ordinances,
and are wholly gone after Satan, and how industrious they are to draw others
after them, and then think what dangerous temptations you put us the weaker
sort upon, to revolt unto the enemy, whilst you refuse to entertain us in the
Camp of Christ.

Mind seriously (we beseech you) that great account that you must give to
your, and our Master the Lord Jesus Christ, of your faithfulness in all your
administrations, in order to the souls of men, and consider what answer you
will make to him if you slight, or neglect so great a part of the purchase of
his blood, or what excuse you will find when he shall arise to plead with you.

Did not I come from heaven, and give my dearest life for the redemption of
these poor souls? Did not I with great endeavors, even with the expense of the
blood of many my holy Martyrs, bring them under solemn bonds and engagements to
my self?

And when I saw them neglected by their former guides, did not I by wondrous
providence rescue them, and deliver them over into your hands that you should
feed and teach them?

And is this your faithfulness to me and mine, to withhold the precious food
that I provided for them, to leave them to wander in the wilderness as sheep
without a Shepherd? yea, to let loose many ravenous Wolves upon them to devour
them, and for an excuse of this your sloathfulness and treachery, to deface my
marks and badges which you found upon them, that so you might plead they were
none of mine?

Seems it a small thing to you, O Rams and Hee-goats, Ezekiel. 34 21.
you fattest of the flock, that you have taken the best of the pasture for your
selves, but that you have thrust with the shoulder, and the side, and pusht
with the horns, the weak and diseased of my flock, till you have scattered them
abroad?

O consider what answer you will make to the Lord Jesus, when he shall arise
and plead with you on our behalf, and how sad your case will be, if the blood
of so many thousand souls, perishing through your neglect and carelessness,
shall plead against you in the day of wrath.

We have indeed deserved from the Lord Jesus Christ, by our unfruitfulness, and
many other sad miscarriages to be by him totally rejected, and that his
Gospel-sight should be wholly taken from us; But what have we done to you, that
you should deal so hardly with us, that you should be the instruments to bring
this dreadful night of darkness on us? Or that you should not rather endeavor
our emendation and salvation?

What evil have you observed in us, from which your joint endeavors might not
hope to rescue us? Are we blind and ignorant? Yet surely not so incapable of
instruction, but that your joint endeavors might even enforce the most
ignorant of us to learn the fundamentals of Religion, and so much as being
practiced would save our souls. Are we wrapped and entangled in sinful lusts?
Surely your earnest and joint endeavors, might by the blessing of the Lord
break these cords of sin, and bring us by an holy violence to the obedience of
the Lord Jesus Christ, we cannot but think that noble King Josiah had as
ignorant and stubborn a people to deal withal as you, and yet he not alone
engaged them to the Lord in that his solemn Passover, but made them serve the
Lord all 2 Chronicles 34. 33
his days.

We know the donation of life supernatural lies not in your power, but it
lies in your power, to acquaint us with the ways of life, to cause us to
attend upon the means of grace, to restrain us from the outward acts of sin,
yea to set and keep us in such ways of worship and obedience unto Christ, as
that you might comfortably hope by Gods blessing on your Christian endeavors,
to behold us as the Crown of your labor at the great day.

Now consider, we beseech you in your serious thoughts, whether a general
reformation of the body of the people of this Nation, a re-ingaging them in
Covenant, and keeping them at the least in an external obedience unto Christ,
will not be more for the honor of him to whom the Nations are promised for an
inheritance, more agrecable to your own former Vows and Covenants, and a more
likely way to make you a blessing to the people, and them to you, than to leave
the main bulk of the people to be overgrown with thorns and briars, to
degenerate into an howling wilderness, whilst all your care is laid out upon
the culture of some few small enclosures.

What comfort can it be to you, O Magistrates! to have the bonds between Christ
Jesus, and this Nation, continued through the revolutions of so many hundred
years dissolved in your days?

Or to you, O Ministers! to have the foundations of Religion, which you found
laid in the hearts of the generality of the people of this Nation, quite
demolished under your administrations?

Or to you that call your selves the godly party, to have the Christian
Religion, which formerly did overspread the whole surface of this Nation, now
abridged to your few separate Congregations?

Or what heart, that is not altogether stupid, can behold the great endeavors,
and high professions for Religion found in the beginning of these times, and in
a sad revolt of so great a part of the Nation back again to heathenism, or the
like abominations, and not bewail it with a flood of tears?

We have thus spread our mournful case before you, hoping that, the God of all
grace and mercy, in whose hand are the hearts and ways of all the sons of men,
will incline your hearts to pity our sad condition, and more compassionately to
apply your selves unto our help, for which purpose we now make our humble
addresses unto him, who gave his precious blood a ransom for us.

O Glorious Prince, and Savior Jesus Christ, the faithful, and merciful high
Priest of our Profession, who did for our sakes suffer, and were tempted,
that thou might be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, and know
experimentally to pity us in our temptations, have mercy upon us, have mercy
upon us, O blessed Savior, and grant that these our mournful complaints and
supplications, may pierce the ears and hearts of thy Vicegerents, and
Ambassadors, with all the more eminent of thy precious servants amongst us,
that our eternal welfare may be more cordially regarded by them, that they may
more faithfully and diligently lay out themselves and al their abilities for
the salvation of those souls whom thou have bought with thy precious blood, Let
our Magistrates inherit the zeal of Hezekiah, Josiah, and other famous nursing
Fathers of thy Church of old; Let our Ministers, as thy dear Apostle Paul, be
willing to spend and be spent for our salvation; Let the impressions of thy
tender mercies be upon all the more knowing of thy servants, that they may
compassionately employ all their abilities for our emendation and salvation. O
thou that wept over thy Jerusalem, when they would not own thee; Let us, who (
though unworthy) are called by thy Name, and have taken hold of thy Covenant,
taste of thy tender compassions. Look down from heaven the habitation of thine
holiness, Where is thy zeal, and thy strength, and the sounding of thy bowels
toward us; Doubtless thou art our Redeemer, though our Fathers be ignorant of
us, and our Elders will not own us, thou art our Redeemer, and thy name from
everlasting; O do not suffer us to err from thy ways, do not harden our
hearts from thy fear. We cannot expect the like compassions from sinful man,
as from thee, O blessed Immanuel, who felt the pains of our redemption, not
Paul, but thou, O Christ, were crucified for us, we cannot repose in any other
arms but thine, who carriest the feeble lambs in the bosom of thy love. Though
the Priest and Levite pass by on the other side, yet thou the good Samaritan
have compassion on us, and pour thine oil and wine into our wounds, and the
more we are neglected by men, the more forcible and alluring let the cords of
thy love be to us, though the hearts of men melt not over our misery, yet let
thy bowels of compassion yern upon us, and let us not lose our hold of thy
Covenant, but still be refreshed with thy protection, and rejoice under the
shadow of all thine Ordinances. Look down from heaven, and behold this
Vineyard, and the Vine which thy right hand has planted in this Nation, make
up the hedge of thy providence about it, and let not the Boar of the Forest
continue to waste it, or the wild beast of the field to devour it. Return, O
Lord, and let it repent thee concerning thy servants, and let not the evil that
is already come upon us appear little before thee.

Heal thou the dreadful breaches and distractions which the cruel enemy has
caused amongst us, repair the ruined walls of thy Jerusalem. Grant the spirit
of unity and charity to thy people of this Nation, that thy family here may be
truly a family of love, and on their doors engraven, Here is no strife, for we
are brethren. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, and heal our desolations, remember
not against us former iniquities, let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us,
we are brought very low. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy
name, deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy names sake; So we thy people,
and sheep of thy pasture, shall give thee thanks for ever, and teach our
children to celebrate thy praise to all Generations.

FINIS.

