May the second, 1642. THE WARLIKE, NOBLE, And prosperous proceedings of the
Protestant Army in, IRELAND.

Being the true Copy of a Letter, sent from Mr. Thomas Richard Merchant in
Dublin: to Mr. Thomas Andrews Grocer without Newgate, in the Parish of St.
Sepulchers.

Brought over by the last Post Apr. 30. 1642.

Wherein amongst diverse others is related, a very memorable victory obtained by
the English, wherein 1800 of the Rebels were hanged, and slain, 16. of their
Colors taken, and 800 Arms, with the names of three chief Commanders of the
Rebels, killed at the same time whose heads by Proclamation, were vallued at 400
l. a Piece.

Also how 3500 Scots and English, are lately landed in Ireland with 2000 Arms,
besides 700 Horse.

April, 19. Also an Order by the house of Commons, for the releife of those
Volunteers that do, or shall serve in the Irish war.

Hen, Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, in the Old-Baly. 1642.

Die Veneris 29. April. 1642.

IT is this day declared, and so Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament,
that all such Persons as shall serve the King and the Commonwealth, in the
War as Volunteers, and receive wages, after they have received it, they are
within the words and intention of the Law, that provide for the relief of
maimed Soldiers.

Hon. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Dublin the 19th of April. 1642.
LOving Cozen, this is to give you notice since my last on Thursday, the first
present; Sir Simon Harcourt was honorably interred, here in this Town, by the
Lord General, and all the Chevalry: the solemnity being ended with 3000 shot
in three vollies, besides Ordinance: on Saturday the third, my Lord of Ormond,
Sir Charles Coot, and other Commanders marched out of Dublin with about 3500
foot, 1000 horse, five pieces of Ordinance, field pieces all, but one, and 150
Wagons, with provision of Biscuit, etc. For 14 days, God be their good speed;
The same day there safely arrived, God be praised the Countess of Ormond and
Ossorii with all my Lords children, which by Gods providence and great mercy
got from amongst the Rebels, Her uncle the Lord Mongarrot giving consent at
first she should depart, but sending after her upon the way with a letter to
countermand her, and her children back, but she being got out of the Rebels
reach a little, made answer that by Gods help she would on. Otherwise she
would see who durst stay her; so she speedily got into a boat again, her
servants near a 100 Horse and foot, marching on each side of the river, till
she came to the Fort Duncannon, where she lay two days, and then took
shipping in the Kings Pinace, sent on purpose for her, while the Pinnaces long
boat went up the River for the Countess; The Pinnace had two French Ships in
chase, but wanting her boat, they being small run into Dungarvan, its doubted
lest some ammunition be brought to the Rebels in them. The Rebel commands
the City of Waterford as yet, and the Fort, but Captain Cole of Bristow, in a
Ship of 300 Tun 28 pieces of Ordinances, intended at the coming away of the
Countess to fire the passage, and to do further service, who had forborne
until then for her sake. Its reported that within half an hour that the
Countess left Carricke, the Rebels came down with 1000 men to have staid her.
They further report the Rebels begin there to jarr, one stealing from another,
Montgarrots son is Governor of Waterford.

On Monday we had news by some were sent home with some maimed Soldiers, that
on Sunday ours took a Cas^^ called Suttons Castle of Stippon, a strong place
within one mile of the Nasse, and blew it up; But within three or four miles
of this town, the Rebels set upon our convoy being but 12 horse killed all the
maimed men, the rest fled to Town, We think the Army is marched to Athie, and
to the Fort of Leaffe, and from thence to Killkenny, by the way relieving of
those Castles up and down, have kept out the Rebels, God be their good speed.

Yesterday being Tuesday my Lord Moore with some 50 Horse, came to Town from
Sir Henry Tichborne at Dundalke confirming the last weeks advise of the Rebels
overthrow there; brought with them three prisoners, one Coronell Barnwell,
Cooly, and Sir Thady Duffe his son of this Town, they have recovered of
pillage at Dundalke as the common report goes, 20000l, or 30000l starling,
with pillage as hides, Tallow, etc. Which they proffer to sale, to the Dutch in
this Town, the only men have money now, have bought up, and Gabers sent about
for it.

Last night and this night, the Rebels have presumed to come: yea they began in
the open day about two of the Clock to fire some Towns, within three or four
miles of this Town being English habitations toward the Mountain, which were
left unburnt of our men. And presuming upon the absence of our men, were so
bold last night about 12 of the Clock to come into Killma^lm, within half a
mile of this City, and there set two farthest of the houses on fire, then
retreated, and did no more harm; But my Lord Lambarts, Deputy governor of this
Town, sallied, after them with two troops of Horse, and 500 Foot, overtooke
some straglers of them, and hanged some 40, or 60 of them about six mile from
the Town; The Rebel sometimes showing himself with a body of horse, but not
daring to stand our mercy: our men having fired two of their Towns that day,
returned with good booty.

Here is arrived a ship of London, or of Bristow, called the employment, one
Wale Captain of her, some 400 Yun, she came from the West of Ireland, laden
with Biscuit for this port: At her being in the West, she did light upon a
Barque was unlading of Ammunition at Baltimore, within 8 mile of the Naas,
eight Commanders, 12. Priests and Jesuits, besides others who were all landed
before his coming, and 500 Muskets; But the Barque and five Barrells of
powder, her covered with some 9 or 10 of the Saylors being all French, and came
out of France; This Ship is speedily to go about for Gallway with powder and
Biscuit: for within these few days here came by Sea a bo^t, brought news from
the Fort that the Townes-men had seized upon a London-Ship lay there, and had
planted 8 or 9 pieces of her Ordnance upon their Walls, had got in her 25
Barrells of powder. That they had proclaimed that all those Protestants that
were in the Town, and did not go to Mass by Easter day should be hanged; But
Lieutenant Willowby writ here to his Father, Sir Francis Willowby: That he
hoped they would all before that time find means to come unto him, for whom he
would provide, and that he had provision hard by for two months; that he had
butten barrells of powder if he had store, he would either force the Town to
send him in such necessaries as he wanted, or would speedily beat the Town
about their ears.

Since the writing of the abovesaid on Sunday the 17. of this present April
(God be praised) part of our Army, the rest being left behind at the Nasse,
under command of Sir Charles Coot, came into that Town, the Trumpets sounding
victory before the Lord-Generall, Some 20. miles off this Town coming home;
they having given the rebels leave to follow them 10. miles and above, being
to draw them on to fight, at last finding a place something Commodious for the
purpose; ours Sounded a challenge, and both sides having Ordered their men, our
Ordnance began to play, but in respect of the advantage of the place, they did
little barme, but 4. Troops of our horse being appointed to charge, gave an
assault upon their maine Battle, beat quite through them, and they presently
fled, their own horse flanking their Battle, and not daring to relieve them,
our horse killing of them half a mile, until they got a Bog, which saved the
rest; we killed 600. or 700. in the place, amongst them diverse of the great
Commanders, three of the chiefest of them were killed, their heads were brought
to Town, the one Darmand Camenough a great man a Colonel, another head
brought of one Birnes, the other a Butler, uncle to the Lord Dunboyne; there
was taken 15. or 16. of their Colors, whereof their Generals Colors was one,
took at least 800. Arms, it is further there reported, that the Lord Mongarets
Son was killed in the field: there was no prisoners taken, but two English
men, that was forced along with them to tend their Carriages, their chief
Carridge drawn by eight Oxen, wherein was their powder, and other provision
was taken also, the prisoners that were taken being English, that they had
forced, for no quarter was given to the Rebels: two days before they joined
Battle, the Rebels held a Consultation, and agreed who should have such and
such Carriages etc. And a long debate amongst them, whether or no that any
quarter should be given, at last they agreed no quarter should be given. God
fought for us, blessed be his name, the rebels had all advantages almost could
be desired, a rising ground, the wind, natural entrenchment; and three or
four men to one, having the strength of 7. Counties, 10000 or 11000 fighting
men, many of the Nobillity, the Lord Mongarret, the Lord Akewin, Baron Lohmar,
and diverse others being there; of our side praised be God, but 4. troopers
killed, and none of the foot, for they could not come to fight nearer then at
great distance, being the rebel was strongly entrenched, and stood not long:
They have had diverse skirmishes in the woods, going to the Fort, Leasse, Athy,
the Bour, and two other places, the rebel never before showing himself, but
in Boggs, and Woods, places of great advantage. God be praised in this Journey,
in all is reckoned to be lost of our side, but 16 or 20. men at the most, we
have releived and brought home almost 1000. poor distressed hunger-starved
people, men, women, and Children, and its thought ours have killed and hanged
of the Rebels in the Journey 1800. of them, some report 2000.

Here is certain intelligence come to Town, that 3500. Scots landed in the
North, some English with 2000. Arms: if we had here but two or three thousand
foot more, besides these 700. horse landed here last week, that we might have
two flying Armies in these parts, we are in hope that we should do great good
upon them: one month now gained in the forwarding our cause, would do much
good, to beat the Rebels off the plowed lands, within the Pale before harvest,
for its a report they begin to pinch already for want of Corn; and if it be
suddenly followed, I am of opinion they will be suddenly starved: many 1000.
of them* on Friday next is appointed by the state, to be a day of thanksgiving,
for this delivery; our Army at that time they joined Battle, being but 2500.
fighting men, the rest left in Garrisons, and other occasions abroad; our
neighbors in High Street are daily found out to be coadjutors and assistants
to the Rebels, by letters found in the pockets of the slain; its reported
there is a 100 of their names known in this town, that have given aim to
their proceedings, this week there was one Ashes man a Mercer taken with a bag,
5. pound of powder carrying to the Rebels, which he has confessed was a trade
with him, formerly being paid 20. shillings a pound and yesterday Alderman Beg,
was committed to the Castle, his goods sealed up, for no less (supposed) then
treason.

This night again being the 18. God be praised, here arrived news from
Drahedah, by Captain Marroe, and part of his troop bringing news, that the
Rebels making head in two several places near Droheda, with 800. or 1000. in
each company, was presently charged by my Lord Moore, Sir Henry Tichbourne,
being up in the country at Dundalk, but the Rebels presently fled at each
place, and some of them werekild, but no great number; I pray God continue this
good news: Sir Charles Coot is at the Nasse, has fortified the place, and is
in hand already with a plantation there, being settling of a hundred poor
families, that were brought out of the Country of the stripped English, by his
command the country begins to and in Corn apace thither: we suppose so
soon as he has secured the place by two works which are in hand; our Army
shall march forth again, this town is of great consequence, 12. miles from
the City, the rebels having no market Town now within 20. miles of us. I have
been tedious, but only desirous to give you ample satisfaction concerning these
passages I am capable of here, according to your request, I take my leave and
rest,

Your ever Loving Cozen, THO. RICHARD.


