DIVINE CONSOLATIONS; OR The Teachings of GOD in three Parts.

Part 1. Contains Observations, Experiences and Counsels. I have learned by
experience, Ge. 30. 27. None teaches like him, Job 36. 22.

Part 2. Declares how a soul may know and live in the sweet enjoyment of the
love of God, etc.

Part 3. That Christ at and by his death freed the Elect from the whole
punishment of sin.

With an Answer to the Objections made against it.

And Doctor Crips Book justified against Steven Geree.

By Samuel Richardson.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1649.

To his Excellceney, Thomas Fairfax, Lord General; and Oliver Cromwell,
Esquire, Lieutenant General; and Henry Ireton, Esquire, Commissary General,
and Colonel Thomas Harison, Esquire. Peace, happiness, and joy.
Right Honorable, and worthy Sirs;
AS your conditions are above others, so are your temptations and trials; do
what good you can: you are men; Be pitiful; be merciful; do good to them
that hate you; see Luke 6. 27. 32. to 39. Ease and relieve the oppressed;
consider Eccle. 4. 1. Pro. 31. 9. Job 29.

God has made you special Instruments, in saving this nation from ruin and
destruction; he has honored you with his protection, presence, and blessing,
even to admiration: you are the Advocates of Christians, in that you have often
pleaded their cause, and done (as much) good to the truth and people of God as
any; and in that you are of the number of them, this is your greatest honor,
happiness, and glory.

Its the portion of the people of God to meet with reproaches and hard words,
Mat. 11. 12. and 19. 29. and 27. 39. 41. etc. Christ did no sin, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
Yet he endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, Heb. 12. 2, 3.
Hard speeches ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude v. 14, 15. Christ
was called a deceiver, Mat. 27. 63. You must not think much if you be called
so; the servant is not above his Lord; if they have called the Master of the
house Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? If it be sufficient to
prove one guilty, because accused; then Christ was not innocent. Many things of
which you are accused, I know are false; of what truth the rest are, I judge by
these. I have observed, although good men have faults enough, yet our accusers
miss them, and charge us of that whereof we are innocent. Its a certain truth,
some report ill of men, because they are no worse.

You are none of them, of whom all men speak well of; its well you are freed
from that woe, Luke 6. 26. To speak modestly, we have not observed any in
authority that have given greater testimony of their faithfulness, readiness,
and willingness, in improving opportunities for the safety and welfare of this
Nation, and that have showed more love to the truth and people of God, then
these have done: neither can I see how such do well, who would have those whom
God has made the Bulworks of this Nation, the butts for them to shoot their
sharp arrows, most bitter words. Discontented Spirits, ease thems^^ves in
abusing others; but I trust, you freely forgive them, and endeavor to get good
by them: This I thought fit to express, to correct their unreasonablenesse,
and to leave this testimony (to after ages) to answer theirs in print.

Expect not freedom from reproaches, but to get good by them: do well, and
expect ill; they hurt themselves, not you; Riches, prosperity and honor,
causes coldness and lukewarmnesse in Religion. Hezekiah was a good man, yet his
heart was lifted up at a small matter; in many things we sin all; humane
^railties, every good man is subject unto; great places have not so great an
influence into good men, as to free them from those infirmities which before
they were subject unto; they rather increase the^. Such need some sharp cross
to quicken and revive and weane them from this world, to cause them more to
mind and prize things spiritual and eternal: no worldly thing seems great to
him that minds eternity.

You have had great success in war, and a great blast of the applause and
praise of men, therefore you need something to balance it. Frail man is like a
little Vessel, lightly laden, not able to bear very great sails and winds;
crosses are sent to let out self, to try us, and to weane us from the world,
to examine our hearts and ways, and to be more watchful and circumspect for
the future, they cause us to deny our selves, and to live by faith, they show
us what hearts we have, and how like we are to Christ, when reviled, 1 Pet. 2.
23. They exercise the fruits of the Spirit in us, how could we forgive our
enemies, if we had none? or deny our selves in suffering wrong patiently, if
none were offered unto us? how could we rejoice in trials, temptations, or know
our strength, or weakness, or learn patience and experience by them, and reap
the sweet fruit of them without them? What you loose in one kind, I trust you
gain in a better: great crosses prove none of the least mercies, when we see
God in them, and that all comes from his free and infinite love; that not any
thing shall hurt, but all work together for our good (th^ugh we see not how)
Romans 8. we enjoy the sweetness of them, are humble, and thankful, and rejoice
in every condition, because we know that ere long our joy and rest shall be
eternal; then shall we be for ever with the Lord, out of the reach of all
reproaches, pain, grief, or trouble.

Most noble Worthies, Luke 1. 3. the great respect you have showed to the truth
and people of God, has imboldned me to present this to you in love, out of a
deep respect unto you; the Lord is with you, Judge. 6. 12. D^ut. 33. 27. 1 Samuel
16. 18 The Saints love you, they pray and praise God for you; England fares
the better for you; the children unborne shall praise you, and bless God for
you; and though there be that revile you, yet the memorial of your names shall
be for ever precious;

Your friend, Samuel Richardson.

The first Part.
Containing, Observations, Experiences, and Counsels, etc.
I have learned by experience, Genesis 36. 27.
Concerning the affections.
THe affections are the pulses of the soul, and they show the state of it. The
affections are the motions of the will, and the will is the seat of love.

The judgment distempers the affections, and the affections the judgment, and
captive each other.

When the judgment is taken captive by the affections, things are judged
according to their pleasure.

Our affections of joy and sorrow, will exceed their bounds, unless they be
restrained.

Many pay dear for being led by their affections.

It Is hard to set bounds to our affections, we need power to moderate them.

We have many occasions of doing good, but we often want hearts and
affections to improve them.

Our affections do often deceive our selves, and others, and go for spiritual
when they are natural.

If our affections, love, anger, grief, joy, do fit us to pray, they are
spiritual, else not.

When the object is spiritual, and the motive spiritual, then the affection
is spiritual.

In our greatest earnestness, we have most cause to examine our hearts and
affections.

Our affections come far short of that we think we have in our judgments.

If some men's affections were answerable to their apprehension of God, it would
endanger their lives.

The quickness of our affections, depends much upon the spirits of our bodies.

All the disquietnesse and distempers in us, and by us, is occasioned by the
want of well bounding, and ordering our affections.

Our affections declare what we love: the fools mind was all for his ease and
his belly.

Our affections are strong, and unruly, and hard to be subdued.

The will is much to be observed in it is tempers, inclinations, motions, which
are the affections of the soul.

It Is not easy to master our wills and affections, because they rage and dote
so vehemently after vanities.

We set our affections on things below.

When our affections are set strongly (...) things below, it is good for us they
be taken from us, that we may take more delight in God, and the unspeakeable
and everlasting delight prepared with himself.

Concerning actions.
The less we do, the more we suffer.

Actions profit most, but contemplation pleases best.

As the soul is more noble then the body, so the actions of the soul are more
noble then the actions of the body.

That which is the cause, ground, and end of an action, in it we live, whether
it be God or self.

Even the best actions of the best men, are subject to the mis-interpretation
of others.

The more spiritual any duty is, the more averse our hearts are to it.

Actions begun with selfe-confidence, do often find success accordingly.

Actions which concern our selves we often exceed in, but those that chiefly
concern God, we are hardly drawn to, but easily from.

If Satan cannot corrupt the action, he will endeavor to corrupt the judgment
and affection.

Without some measure of love and joy, we are not fit for any good action.

Self-love rules all a natural man's actions.

We often act more from affection then judgment, but such actions never
produce ^olid comfort, but often real sorrow.

Actions without a word to warrant them, cannot be done in faith and with
comfort.

A roving mind, devours time and action.

The more wise we are, the more we weigh all our actions in the balance of the
Word.

Of afflictions.
Crosses and afflictions are Gods call to examine our hearts and lives.

Afflictions are as necessary for our spirits, as food is for our bodies.

Afflictions cause many to see their sins, to own and confess them, and to
be humble.

Sin makes affliction bitter.

God sends afflictions to his, for to try and exercise their faith and
patience, to open their eyes more to prevent and remove sin, and to quicken us.

Afflictions breed patience, give understanding, humble, and mortify self,
they teach a Saint experience, reform him, and send him the oftener to God.

Such as are most afflicted, have oft-times most experience of God and
themselves.

Not any affliction could trouble a child o^ God, if he did but know wherefore
God di^ send it.

It Is beyond our knowledge, what good Go^ will do us by afflictions.

God is as sweet and may be as much enjoyed in poverty and affliction, as in
prosperity.

God is always present with his in affliction, though always we do not see
him, because we often look so much on the aff^ictio^ (if oppressed with it) yet
many of the Lord see God best in affliction.

It is not best to fasten our minds upon the affliction, but to mind the end
of every affliction, which of a certain will be sweet and comfortable to all
that are the Lords.

A child of God may always suck some sweetness out of the bitterest
affliction.

There is a blessing in every affliction to a child of God, whether they see
it or no, sooner or later, they shall find it.

Without affliction, neither others know us, nor we our selves.

Of assurance of the love of God.
Assurance of salvation is an effect of the testimony of the holy Spirit,
speaking peace to the soul.

A believers first assurance or comfort, does arise from the apprehension of
Gods free love to him in Christ.

As our assurance is of the love of God, so answerable is our peace and
comfort, and accordingly are we spiritual, and our conversation is alike
suitable.

Some things tend much to weaken, and other things tend much to strengthen the
assurance of the love of God.

Obedience is necessary to our comfort and assurance, though not to pardon.

A child of God may decay exceedingly in the sense and assurance of the love
of God.

One that has had the witness of the Spirit, to evidence the goodness of his
estate, may notwithstanding, in time of temptation and desertion, question his
estate, and be full of fears and trouble.

The assurance of a Christians good estate, may be maintained in him when the
frame of his spirit and life is much degenerated from what it was.

The more we enjoy the assurance of pardon of sin, the more contented we are
in any estate and straight.

He that has assurance of the love of God, can trust himself with God in any
estate and straight, and can part with any thing for God.

A heart sensible of sin, and touched with remorse for it, may stand with the
assurance of pardon.

Authority.
The authority the husband has over the wife is great, but to exercise all of
it ordinarily, none but fools will do: nor is it comely for the head to stand
out of it is place.

Of the attributes of God.
The attributes of God are infinite.

The attributes of God are rocks of strength, and fountains of comfort to his,
and those that eye them live comfortably upon them.

It Is best in all our straights to look to the attributes of God, and live
upon them by meditation, faith, and prayer.

Of Apostasy.
Going back tends to apostasy.

Infidelity is a cause of apostasy: love of lusts, love of the world,
ungroundednesse in the truth, an unsound heart, or not considering what attends
the profession of Religion, causes many to draw back.

Such as love not the truth, will leave it.

To draw back from the profession of the truth, is condemned by God and man.

Offenses, and darkness, and weakness cause many to stumble and turn aside.

Age.
Old age is a state of grief, and sorrow, and burden, to themselves and others.

Age will kill no sin.

Distrust and covetousness, do often increase as age increases.

Every state and age has some peculiar sin to attend it.

It Is rare to see one full of years, full of zeal for God.

Old and cold; yet so it should not be.

Of anger.
Anger is a short madness, it darkens our sight, dulls troubles, and corrupts
us.

An angry man is weak, he cannot deny himself.

Such as are often angry, have but little judgment and consideration, wisdom
and discretion.

A fool is soon angry, but not so soon pleased. Concerning Books.

Books do much good, or much hurt.

There are too many Books, and because there are so many there needs more.

It Is best for ordinary capacities to read but few books, and such as are
suitable to their conditions.

Many read much to little purpose, for want of wisdom in choosing books, and
wisdom to distinguish truth from error, and for want of a serious
consideration and meditation on that they read.

There is more true knowledge and comfort in the study of the Scriptures, then
in all other books.

And seeing what God says must stand, it is best and safest to mind what God
says in his Word, and to slight whatsoever any else say, if they speak not
according to them.

Of believing.
No joy and peace without believing.

Our believing in Christ is sooner discerned by us, then our personal
sanctification.

There is more reason to believe God then man, but it is easier to believe man
then God.

Oft-times we are willing to believe that to be, which we would have to be.

We believe more then we see and feel.

Concerning the body.
The beauty of the body is a vanity, it will soon decay.

The more we prize our bodies, the less we prize our souls.

To spare the body, and keep it tenderly spoils it, and makes it good for
nothing.

He is an enemy to his body, that gives it all it craves.

A moderate diet is good for soul and body.

The wise prize and preserve health of body.

The most of the pains and diseases of the body, are occasioned by excess in
eating and drinking.

Oft-times that we think best to preserve the body, will soonest destroy it.

To pamper the body with costly fare, will cause it the sooner to be diseased,
and to perish and rott.

Many do so feed and pamper their bodies, that they cannot rule them; it will
end in sorrow.

The way to be sick, is to fill the body with meat and drink.

Many think that the costliest diet and drink is best for the body, but it
does not always prove it. Sometimes water is better for the body then wine,
and fasting better then feasting.

That fasting, sweats, colds and toil that are immoderate, are ill for the
body.

The bodies of many want necessaries, because they overflow in superfluities.

Few men know what is good for their bodies, till it be too late.

Bondage.
Liberty to sin, is the greatest bondage that can be.

Outward bondage is not much to a free and enlarged spirit.

Nothing can do much hurt, when all is well within.

What can be grievous to him whose eye is fixed on Heaven, and knows it to be
his own?

Of outward blessings.
It Is a great mercy to enjoy outward blessings.

The more common and largely God bestows his blessings, the less they are
regarded.

In the want of blessings, we come to prize them.

Of causes.
Every cause depends upon the first cause.

The cause and the effect are inseparable.

Natural causes will have their operations.

So much as we judge of things by secondary causes, so much we judge amiss.

Of comfort.
The immediate and divine comforts, are the sweetest.

Those comforts are the greatest and sweetest, that flow from the love of God
to us.

He that lives by faith, wants not comfort.

Full and settled comfort a believer cannot have, until it be witnessed unto
him by the Spirit.

Comfort without the Word, is but false comfort, and the Word without the
Spirit yields but dark comfort.

Neither the Word, nor the Spirit, does teach us to take comfort so much in the
work of Christ in us, as from Christ himself.

He that grounds his comfort upon a right bottom rightly, his comfort will hold
and be the same, because God is the same.

To build our comfort upon the change of our lives, is a sandy foundation which
will fail.

There is no comfort that will last long, but that which is drawn from (or
confirmed by) the word of God.

We often seek comfort from the creature, which have no power to comfort.

God takes from his their comfort, to give them comfort upon better grounds,
and for ever.

God mixeth crosses with comforts, and comforts with crosses.

Soul-afflictions imbitter outward comforts.

Many consent with Satan to take away their comforts, and then say they want
comfort.

Loose walkers shall meet with sorrow, in stead of comfort.

If a child of God fall into a gross s^nne, it will so grieve the Spirit, as
he shall not enjoy so sweet comfort in his soul: sin will break the bones of
his comfort.

The Saints comfort is in Christ, who will provide for them while they live,
and receive them when they dye.

Consolation.
After consolation look to meet with temptations and trialls of one kind or
other.

Crosses.
Crosses are sent by God to let out self.

Great crosses are good physic for great stomachs.

Even good men without some cross, are prone to grow corrupt and careless.

Self makes the cross to pinch, if self be removed the cross is easy.

The more crosses a Saint has, the more they do him good, and make him more
like Christ.

All the Saints crosses are appointed by God to do them good.

Crosses that come only by providence, we have most comfort in.

Though crosses be not pleasing to the flesh, they are profitable to our
spirits.

There are but few that make others crosses their own.

God crosses men, that they may rest on his providence.

When we are crossed and tempted, we show what mettle we are made on.

Of cares.
Cares cause fears and distractions.

Worldly cares do greatly distract, and make men drunk.

The cause we are so full of cares and fears, is because we have so little
faith, and selfedeniall, and are not content with a little.

The poor are more freed from care then the rich.

The consideration of Gods care and providence, in providing for birds, etc.
and the wicked, (besides the promise of God) is a special means to prevent
immoderate care for food and raiment, for we are better then lillies, or
sparrows, and our life is more then meat.

Custom.
Custom so shutts men's eyes, that they cannot see the true visage of things.

Custom makes hard things easy, and bondage no burden, and adds delusion to
blindness.

Custom without truth, is but an old error.

Form and custom are deadly enemies to spirituallnesse*

The rich observe customs, and the poor pay dear for them, they are starued
by them, for if that which is spent at burials, were wisely bestowed upon the
poor, it would be much better; and so in other needless customs.

Custom by degrees eats out and destroys Conscience.

Delight and custom so wraps a man up in sin, that he cannot get free from
it.

Men rock themselves asleep in the cradle of custom.

Corruption.
Corruption cannot be teformed.

Corruption neither will nor can subdue corruption.

Concupiscence.
Concupiscence is strong and raging, and hardly tamed without much difficulty.

Complaints.
It Is best and safest to complain to God.

Serious complaints made in season to such as can help by advise, are
profitable and comfortable.

Contention.
Self willed, proud, and simple persons love to be contentious.

A contention is easier begun then ended.

There is nothing gotten by the husband or wives striving and contending one
against another, but mischief, vexation, and loss.

Some will contend earnestly for that which is not worth the mentioning.

Creatures.
The voice the creatures cry is, contentment and rest is not in me.

The creatures are full of emptiness, they satisfy but a small time, and
spend in the using.

Every earthly blessing has it is vexation.

The creatures cannot be enjoyed without sorrow.

All the creatures are fading, part we must with them, and with life ere long.

The reason we are so subject to be drawn away with the creatures, is, because
we see not the emptiness of them.

The creatures are like brooks, whose water fails when we have most need of
them.

The more we lean upon the creatures, the more we are pierced by them.

What so ever we depend upon, besides God and his Word, is but
creature-confidence.

It Is not the enjoying of creatures, that will make our lives comfortable, but
Gods presence, and blessing them unto us.

We often love the creatures more before we have them, then when we have them,
because we expected more from them then was in them.

Even the hearts of good men are apt to be taken with outward things.

The love of the creatures do much hinder us in good things, but a wise use of
them much furthers us.

He is not troubled at the coming and going of the creature, whose heart is
fixed on God.

He that lightly esteems of outward things, can easily part with them.

A child of God may in the use of the creatures be spiritual.

Creatures are not fountains but cisterns, and broken ones, yet full of
transitorinesse, mutability, and change.

God can give the comfort of outward things without them.

What God conveys by means, sometimes he instills immediately from himself.

By the creatures many are deceived and ensnared, and drawn into many excesses
before they be aware, to the dishonor of God, and grief of themselves, and
others.

Company.
Eamiliarity with the wicked, will vex and corrupt us.

Good people are company bad enough.

Contentment.
Contentment is not in this world.

No earthly thing can give content.

Earthly contents are present to our sense.

Many will try conclusions to have content, though it was our first undoing.

So much as we deny our selves, so much contentment we enjoy.

Joy in God breeds content.

Such as know and mind the providence of God, enjoy contentment.

Counselors.
Wise men will ask counsel.

There is much safety in many Counselors, who are wise and faithful.

Many by following their own counsel, prove great burdens to themselves and
others.

Flesh gives counsel like it self fleshly.

Contraries.
Every contrary, the more it is resisted the more it appears.

Charity.
Charity prevents many breaches and discontents.

Calamity.
No calamity comes unaccompanied.

Condemn.
Many condemn with vehemence that in others which they approve on in
themselves.

Covetousness.
Co^etousnesse is the birdlime of the soul. Most Men's care and skill is how to
get money.

Such as think themselves least covetous, are most covetous.

Covetousness has many pretenses, colors, and excuses.

Such as are not contented with that they have, are covetous. And so much as
we are discontented with our estates, so much covetousness there is in us.

Distrust of God causes covetousness, which is the root of all evil.

Covetousness does us more hurt, then we are aware of.

Covetousness fills our minds with distrust of Gods care of us, whereby we
vehemently desire the things of this world, to provide for our selves.

The more covetousness prevails, the more it makes a man run, ride, scrape,
deceive, flatter and frown, to get the things of the world.

A covetous man cannot be satisfied with money; yet money contenteth all men.

Many say things are naught, when they would have them easily, and for naught.

Many sigh after death to be free from crosses, but few to be free from
covetousness.

Covetousness has not a child of God, though he has too much of it.

Gods own people know not how to be revenged on themselves, for their coveting
the things of this world.

It is a great dishonor to a child of God to be covetous, and for the rich
not to be bountiful to their brethren, and to good uses.

Worldliness reigns and bears sway in all places, as though there were no
other world.

Cheerfulness.
Cheerfulness adds to the life of our spirits, it inlargeth our spirits, it
fits us to receive happiness, and to express it.

He that will support diligence, must support cheerfulness.

In cheerfulness there is no negligence.

An unchearfull spirit is soon weary*

Such as go to God unchearfully, do often return unthankfully.

A cheerful and willing spirit is most suitable and acceptable to God and man.

From a cheerful heart flows cheerful actions, but a heavy heart dries the
bones.

In all that are cheerful, there is not faith; but as our faith is, so is our
cheerfulness.

Conscience.
A good conscience is a great comfort.

It Is a great mercy to have a tender conscience.

Conscience is a very tender thing, a small thing will trouble it.

It Is better to offend all the world then conscience.

When conscience cannot be heard, it will soon grow speechless.

Sinning against conscience, exceedingly hardens the heart.

Such as practice contrary to their consciences, will soon loose all
conscience, and become men of no conscience.

A natural conscience will be satisfied with the outside of a duty, a verbal
prayer will stop the mouth of conscience.

Conscience can see best and speak most in silence.

Gross finnes, as lusts of uncleanness, etc. will burn up, waste, and
destroy conscience.

When time alone will end grief of mind and trouble of conscience, the cure
is worse then the disease.

It satisfies not a doubting conscience, that another judges it lawful.

The larger the conscience is, the better if lightly informed.

Nothing ought to bind the conscience but the word of God.

Christ.
A soul sensible of the want of Christ, cannot be satisfied without him.

It Is the nature of man to depend upon any thing rather then upon Christ.

Such as enjoy Jesus Christ, exalt him alone, as their life and glory,
happiness and peace, and all in all, and count no cost too much for him.

Many will serve Christ no longer then they may serve their own wills, backs,
and bellies.

Christ's servants are for the most part poor, and they appear to the world
very silly and contemptible.

Christ is sweet in meditation, more sweet in contemplation, but most sweet in
fruition.

Of circumspect walking.
I^ is a sweet thing to walk circumspectly in our actions to God and man.

Contemplation.
Contemplation is a great part of the happiness the Saints here enjoy.

Contemplation sums up the several beauties of meditations objects.

We meditate to know God, and contemplate to love him.

To contemplate on the things above is pleasant to those who have tasted of the
sweetness of it.

The contemplation of Gods free love, and the souls interest in it, does much
revive, raise, and enlarge the soul.

Divine contemplation makes us high in thoughts, and rich in expectation.

Conversation.
A disordered conversation does hinder spirituallnesse in holy duties, and
causes trouble, and sadness.

Commands.
The command of God is the most powerfullest thing in the world to a Saint*

There is not any of the commands of God needless.

If men did know the Majesty, and Authority, and infiniteness of God, no man
neither would nor could do what he forbids, or neglect his command.

Many when convinced of a duty, consult with flesh and blood whether they had
best to obey God or no.

Deadness.
Deadness of heart argues disaffection.

Deadness of heart is the grave of many good gifts.

Deadness of heart is an enemy to action.

One cause of our deadness and dullness in the things of God, is unbelief,
and consulting with flesh and blood.

Spiritual deadness is a great grief to a child of God.

When we are dead and dull, the meditation of the love of God will revive us.

Delays in good things.
Delays be dangerous: by delays many a good motion dies, and comes to
nothing.

Delays arise from sloth.

Delays cool us, and cause the affections to fall down.

The more we delay, the more we may.

When we are to do good, Satan cries hereafter, and that is never; to morrow
to morrow, cosens many a man.

By delaying we presume upon that we have not, and neglect that we have.

Declining.
It is easy to decline in good things.

A declining heart will catc^ at that which may plead for declining.

Even Gods own people are subject to decline from him.

Difficulties.
Difficulties are discouragements, and handsome excuses are welcome to a
sloathfull heart.

Love will carry on through all difficulties, and all manner of torments.

Distractions.
Multitude of business causes distraction, especially when there wants a wise
ordering and dispatch of them.

Distraction of mind in duties, is either from a minding other things, or
resting upon our own strength, or in not seriously setting our minds on the
things propounded by us, for on that the heart is thoroughly set upon, it is so
attentive to it, that on that instant it can be present at no other thing,
especially to hinder the thing in hand.

Of doubts and discouragem^nts.
It Is the nature of sin to raise doubts in the soul.

There is no good got but discouragements.

Ignorance is the cause of doubts and discouragements.

So much discouragements we admit of, so much sight and comfort we loose in our
life and happiness.

Discontents.
A small matter occasioneth discontent.

All our discontents arise from disappointment; frustration of expectation is
the ground of vexation.

There is no man that is without discontents.

It Is folly and madness to be discontent at trifles.

There is the most difference between them that are one and most alike.

Disposition.
It Is the disposition of a wretch to be cruel.

A mild and loving disposition is amiable and desirable.

Duties.
A dead man lives upon duties.

It Is no wonder the Papists do as they do, because they expect heaven for it.

The more a Saint does for God, the more he enjoyes God.

A Saints desire is to do all for God.

A means not to sin, is not to omit duties

A man may do duties from convincement of understanding, and not from a
principle of life and love.

Such duties as flow not from faith and love, are slavish.

Many will own and confess their duty in general, and wholly deny it in
particular, especially when it concerns them.

When a child of God has performed duties best, immediately he is tempted by
the Devil and his own heart.

To be straightened in a duty may do us more good, then if we had been much
enlarged in it.

Of self-denial.
So far as we are spiritual, or live by faith so much we deny our selves.

Self is content to be a little denied in one kind, to be pleased much in
another.

Unless a man can deny himself in his will* honor, credit, state, relations,
wife, life, he cannot follow the profession of Christ.

There are but few that deny themselves, but many deny Christ, and his truth.

Such as cannot deny themselves, cannot endure the troubles and indignities of
an angry world.

They live the sweetest lives, that most deny themselves.

If we could deny our selves, every thing that befalls us, would be easy and
sweet unto us, for all things are so far under us, as we are above our selves.

Of dreams.
God speaks in a dream, in a deep sleep, in slumber, and man perceives it
not.

By dreams we may know what sin we are in danger to fall into, which we are
not aware of.

An evil dream does show some evil that prevails in the heart.

Delight.
Such as delight not in God, delight in fin^

The more we delight in worldly things, the more they sting and vex us when
they part.

Fleshly delights are earnestly desired, an^ acted with great willingness.

Despair.
Despair can do no good.

Ignorance is a cause of despair.

Despair is not commanded nor commended, but condemned.

Distempers.
To be disquieted, or cast down, arguerh a distemper of heart.

Distempers hinder us in our trust and delight in God.

Distempers hinder us in our spiritual and temporal callings.

Death.
We choose life with sorrows, rather then death without them. I have heard
that a porter being spent with his burden, was forced to throw it down, oh
death, says he, come death, welcome death; death comes in a visible
apparition, what would thou have with me, says death, oh nothing, nothing
but help me up with my burden.

By life we have a being, but a better being is by death.

The day of death, is the first day of life.

He whose hopes are in heaven, is not much afraid of death.

Death is to him no misery, whose hopes are in eternity.

When death seems to dispossess a Saint of all, it possesses him of all.

The Saints have cause to welcome death.

Wise men desire death, yet are content to live.

As loath as we are to dye God by death delivers his from all sorrows at once,
and makes them happy for ever.

Death fully freeth the Saints from all crosses, burdens, and infirmities, why
should I fear that I would not escape? what hurt is it to enter into glory? I
cannot have my happiness, unless I go unto it.

Many good men at their death, have fears and pains.

Death has something to say to every man, and would be heard, but men are not
at leisure.

If it were not for the miseries that attend this life, many would less
welcome death.

Concerning our ends.
The end is the ground and rule of our actions.

A man fully seeks to attain his end: nothing contents a man till he find
that which he apprehends he needs.

As a man's end is in his eye, proportionably he uses the means to attain it.

When the chief end is apprehended and minded, nothing can divide between the
soul and it.

The more God is intended, the more he is desired.

When God is chiefly desired, no bounds nor limits is set to the desires and
endeavors to attain it.

Every thing rests in it is proper place: the attaining the end quiets the heart.

Unless we know and mind our end, we cannot have the comfort of our obedience.

The chief end bears the greatest power in us.

Such as a man's principle is, such is his end.

The end declares to us the goodness of our action.

The end rules the means, and is above them.

We may know what is our chief end, by the place and power of it.

A man is constant to that which is his end, and acts freely to attain it.

We are strongly inclined and moved to our end, willingly, diligently,
patiently, constantly, to attain it.

As we attain our end, so are we contented: so far as we intend God, we
desire him.

The end is first in the intention, and last in execution.

A believer is true to his end, however he may fail in the means.

The place of the end is in the intention and affection.

Not the endeavor, but the ground of it, discovers the end, whether it be God
or self.

Error.
Ignorance is the foundation of error.

It is the property of all men to err and be deceived.

When errors prove profitable, many will embrace them.

It Is common for error to be called truth, and truth to be called error.

One way to suppress errors is silence, for by this means they will dye
alone: whimsicall persons that affect novelty, will lay them down as fast as
they took them up, if you will let them alone.

Excuses.
It is easy to frame an excuse for any evil.

To cover an evil with an excuse, is to cover a lesser evil with a greater.

When we have sinned, Satan, and our corruptions will help to cover it with
excuses.

Such things as we cannot justify, we often excuse.

Extremities.
No extremity holds long.

It Is common to run from one extremity to another.

It Is hard to be angry without sinning, to grieve for sin without despairing,
to fear without doubting, to be merry without lightness, to be sad without
heavy and unprofitable dumpishnesse.

Most men love extremes: men eat too little or too much, and work too little
or too much.

Of education.
Good education does often cause an outward Reformation.

Evil education is a great provocation to evil.

Election.
The doctrine of election and appointment unto wrath; and how much the first
cause causes all actions, and the certainty of the event, the certainty of the
state of every person; and the like doctrines cause a corrupt heart to be more
loose and careless, therefore to teach these to the world, is to cast holy
things to dogs, witness experience.

Examples.
The worst examples are most observed.

The examples of men are forcible when they are universal.

An evil example of a good man is very dangerous.

The examples of the best men, ought not to be a Rule for us to walk by.

Excesses.
Most men are drowned in adversity, or drunk with prosperity.

The drinking healths is an excessive wast.

To drink others healths, is the way to loose our own.

Effects.
Effects are in order to second causes, not to God, who most certainly,
necessarily, and wisely has willed them: nothing falls out accidental to him
whose knowledge and purpose reaches every thing.

The eye.
David's roving eye caused him to fall greatly, and procured him much sin,
shame, vexation and grief; who would have thought an idle glance could
occasion so much mischief.

Fancy will take fire before we be aware.

It Is in vain to expect better fruit, if we suffer our hearts to run after our
eyes.

Experiences.
By observation we get experience.

Experience makes men wise, because it gives understanding.

Experience teaches what does help or hinder a gracious temper in us.

Experience strengthens faith.

Without experience we know not where our strength and weakness lies.

Things imaginary, historical, traditionall, will vanish in time of need.

Envy.
Envy torments the mind, and dries the bones.

No good man can escape the envy of others.

Expressions.
Such as leave the Scripture expressions, will soon loose the faith of Christ,
and receive error in stead of truth.

Extraordinary.
To do to all as we would be done unto is extraordinary.

For men not to seek themselves is extraordinary.

For a man to deny himself is extraordinary.

To practice the truth against great oppositions is extraordinary.

To embrace disgrace, poverty, prison, and pains, rather then to deny any
truth, is extraordinary.

To be more humble by knowledge, and to go against custom, is extraordinary.

To be more humble when exalted, is extraordinary.

For the rich to take reproose willingly and profitably from their inferiors,
is extraordinary.

For to refuse to join house to house when he can, is extraordinary.

To part with riches as freely as they were received, is extraordinary.

For man to seek not his own but others welfare, is extraordinary.

To tell great persons of their faults in love wisely, is extraordinary.

A mind that cannot be provoked, is extraordinary.

To be willing to leave the world, and to be zealous for God in prosperity, is
extraordinary.

Eternity.
Until we have some serious thoughts of eternity, we mind not our souls.

Serious thoughts of eternity, will weane us from the world.

The favor of men.
The favor of some is much desired.

The favor of men is a vanity.

The favor of men is uncertain, often soon got, and sooner lost.

The more some desire the favor of men, the more God denies them, to exercise
their faith, or to weane them from the world, or because we perform not our
duties to them.

Folly.
It Is folly to meddle with other men's business, and neglect our own..

Many never see their folly, until it be too late.

A fools mind is all for things below and present, but the wise prize most
the things above, they look beyond this life.

A fool multiplieth words.

Fears.
We fear what we should wish, and wi^h that we should fear.

Fears make the understanding weak, and the judgment dull.

Of all passions, anger and fear does most disquiet the heart.

The fear of an evil does more afflict, then the evil it self.

To be always in fear, is to be always in misery; it is painful to dwell
upon the expectation of evil.

Fear betrays care, and hinders reason of affording it is help.

Fears hinder faith.

Fears multiply evils, but faith diminishes them.

Fears make dangers greater, and helps less then they are.

Fears present too many ways of help.

So much as we fear men, so much we slight and forget God.

Faith.
Faith is the staying of the mind upon God.

Faith quiets, comforts, and strengthens the soul.

Faith excludes not all doubting, but fights against it.

Faith is under God the supporter of the Saints under many crosses and
pressures.

Faith persuades the soul of Gods love, that it is as much to h^^, in their
afflicted estate, as in a prosperous.

Faith says to the soul in the want of food and raiment, be content, God will
provide.

He that lives by faith, is content, sincere, and fruitful.

The Saints enjoy Christ by faith, and not by feeling.

When faith is greatest, there is the least feeling to satisfy sense and
reason.

The life of faith is a hidden life, but unbelief is too open.

To those God gives faith, he gives trialls to exercise it.

Humane wisdom hinders says.

A way to strengthen faith, is to live by it.

The more we live by faith, the more we may, and so on the contrary.

The more faith, the less fear.

Even good men live more by sense, then by faith.

As our faith is great or small, so accordingly we are encouraged to obey God.

Faith believes impossible things to sense and reason.

By faith we look through death, and see our felicity.

He that lives by faith, lives a sweet and comfortable life on Christ alone.

Faith in God, and the use of means, do well agree.

The less a man apprehends the grounds of his says to be solid, the lesser
shall his comfort be, and the more he applies the promise to himself, and
apprehends the unchangeablenesse of God in his oath and promise, the more
strong shall his consolation be.

Of falls.
Even good men stumble and fall.

If we have occasion and temptation, and Gods permission, then we fall.

If God withhold his strength, lust soon draws us aside, and down we fall.

Such as reproach others for their falls, either have, or are like to fall as
much or worse themselves.

Freedom:
Christ's freedom the Saints most prise, none so blessed, none so much to be
desired.

Christ in his time freeth his from all fears and terrors, death, hell, and
judgment, and from the commanding power of sin, and free to noble employments.

Friendship.
When friendship is between good and bad, they quickly part, or become alike,
for like will to like.

A friend must show himself friendly.

He that will accept of all that his friend offers, may weary him in time.

To affect familiarity with the wicked, is to lead our selves into Satan's
temptations.

Flattery.
Flattery gains friends, plain dealing makes men foes.

Many can bear flattery, but not reproo^e.

A fault.
It Is best sometimes not to seem to take notice of some faults.

Sometimes it is a fault to find fault, and sometimes it is a fault not to
find fault: knowledge and wisdom must determine it.

It Is easier to see a fault in another, then in our selves, and to reform one
in another, t^en in our selves.

Good.
We often do the least good to them we owe most.

A man may do good in the strength of a lust.

There be many good things will decay if let alone, but evil if let alone will
in^rease.

Parents think they do their children great good, when they make them rich
and great in the world: which is to make them great sinners, for then they have
little else to do but to wast the creatures, and live in excess and
idleness, lust, pride, and oppression.

God.
No voice, sign, or form, can sufficiently express God, either to sense or
reason, no finite understanding can comprehend that which is infinite; our
understandings are finite, therefore cannot conceive the form or pattern of
an infinite being.

God is the cause of all good, there can be no good at all in any thing which
God from all eternity, has not decreed to effect, or bring to pass.

What God is, no man can perfectly define, we rather know what God is not, then
what he is.

God does sometimes work by contraries.

Gods ways are sometimes secret and unsearchable.

God is near his when he seems furthest off*

When God seems to leave a man, then help is nearest.

God is the center of the Saints lives.

In God is satisfaction, and no changes.

They that live upon God alone, live most comfortable, they are satisfied, and
fear no changes.

We often enjoy most of God, when we enjoy least of the creature.

The more wise, powerful, glorious, and eternal God is, the more happy are we
in being in his love.

Eyes fail, flesh fails, heart fails, all fails, but God he never fails.

It Is a great comfort to a Saint, that God is present in every place.

Such as know God, will trust him with their souls and bodies.

Nothing can free a soul from sin and misery, but God alone.

The self sweetness we find in God, the less we love him, and the less
pains we take to obey him.

The sight of God to a Saint is glorious, and the knowledge and meditation of
him will raise and enlarge the soul.

So much as we desire God, so much we enjoy him, and so much as we enjoy God,
so much we seriously mind him.

All perfections are in God, therefore we may well be content with him.

Gifts.
Gifts blind the eyes of the wise.

Great gifts, and great corruptions too, often go together.

The greater gifts spiritual or temporal, the prouder the flesh is, and the
readier Satan is to assault.

Such as act from their gifts, without looking to Christ, are like to fall as
Peter did.

Glory.
What a man trusts in, he glories in, and what a man glories in, he trusts in,
and is confident off.

When we think we most seek the glory of God, we (too often) most seek our own.

Vainglorious, and simple men, love to show their authority in needless
commands.

Grief.
It Is a great grief to a child of God, to speak of any good thing he finds a
want of in himself.

We cannot heartily be grieved for the sin of another, if we make no conscience
of it in our selves.

If we grieve much for any earthly thing, it is a sign we seek not that
comfort from God we might and should.

If we did not immoderately love outward things, we would not keep such a do
to get them, nor so grieve at the loss of them as we do.

It Is poorness of spirit to joy or grieve at any thing worse then our selves,
yet this poorness is in all men.

Honor.
Honors change manners.

The honor of men is a vanity, a very shadow.

Honor, ease, and riches, are great things in the eyes of the world.

The more me^ desire honor, the less they deserve, and the less they often
have.

Such as stand most upon terms of honor, have the least true worth in them.

The more a man's worth is lessened in his own eyes, the more he is honored in
others.

A man's honor is his honesty, etc.

He is free, gentile, and noble, that is a Christian.

Happiness.
Happiness is not found in honor, riches, nor health.

There is no happiness, but only in God alone.

He is happy that God loves, although he know it not, but he that knows it,
knows he is happy.

A child of God cannot be content to be happy alone.

That cannot make a man happy that is mutable, and subject to change.

Heaven.
The Saints enjoy heaven out of heaven.

Heaven and glory are ready for the Saints, if they were ready for them.

No man can set his affections on things above, until he see a vanity and
emptiness in all things below.

Such as count heaven their home, reckon the world a strange Country.

Humility.
The more we see our selves, the more we loath our selves, and stink in our
own nostrils worse then carrion.

Nothing huumbleth us more then the knowledge of our selves.

According as our humility is, so is our knowledge of our selves.

One may be humbled, but not humble.

Such as are content to be sharply reproved of their faults, have humility.

Our ignorance, coldness, dullness, deadness, etc. might humble us.

Heart.
The heart, thoughts, words, deeds, are of one and the same nature.

What the heart likes best, the mind studieth most.

A man knows not what is in his own heart, ^ill trials and temptations come.

Great joy in worldly things, and little joy ^n things spiritual, show plainly
what kind of hearts we have for God.

We daily find our hearts are worse then we took them to be.

The heart of man is ready to be glued to every poor contentment.

Many men's brains deceive their hearts.

Unless the Lord fix the heart on himself, it will b^^xed and fastened on
things below, and wander after vanities to fill it self withal: O the vanity
of the mind.

Watch.
If we cease to watch our hearts, they quickly become vain.

A careless watching our own hearts, will cost dear.

Hatred.
Hatred is irreconsilable.

That sin that a child of God most loved before conversion, he hates most
when converted.

Healing.
God sometimes heals corruption by not healing it.

Hope.
The Saints hope is in heaven in God.

The natural man's hope is to get riches, honor, costly apparel, good
cheer, ease, and pleasure.

Habits.
In acquired habits, the act goes before the habit, and prepares for it, but
in infused habits, it is contrary, for as we have first the faculty of seeing
before we see, so we have first the infused habit, before we exercise the
operation of it.

Of infirmities.
No child of God is free from infirmities, errors, falls, and defects.

If we did live more by faith, our infirmities would be less.

An infirmity is some weakness, which hinders us, that we cannot do the good
we would, but do the evil we would not.

An infirmity is an impediment that one would feign remove but cannot.

A sin of infirmity is always attended with grief and sorrow, if it be an
infirmity, those in whom it is do desire to be informed of the evil of it,
and are willing to be reproved for it, and would know how to leave it they
plead not for it, but complain to God against it, they are ashamed of it, and
are grieved and abased for it, and use all the means they can against it.
Interest.

Interest blinds men's eyes.

Inclination.
Our inclinations declare what we love.

Idleness.
An idle person is fit for nothing but sin and temptatation.

An idle life is much loved and entertained of most men.

Ignorance.
Ignorance is the cause of all evil

Devotion with ignorance breeds superstition, idolatry, and persecution.

Hope with ignorance causes presumption.

Fear with ignorance causes desperation.

Ignorance causes men to lay a plaster on a sound place

Judgment.
True judgment stands not upon number nor multitude.

Impossible things.
It Is impossible to be conformable to Christ, and the world, to obey God, and
the world.

Joy.
Every heart seeks joy, such as it is.

There is no sound joy in outward things, they reach not the heart, but the
fancy.

Worldly joy and sorrow last but a night.

Outward joys make a great noise, but never truly heal and comfort the heart.

While we live here, we have joy and grief mixed; not this life, nor our
bodies will admit of perfect joy.

Spiritual joy opposes carnal, and carnal spiritual, the more we relish
heavenly, the less we relish earthly, and the more we relish earthly, the
less we relish heavenly.

In temporal things our joy is greater then the cause, in spiritual the cause
is greater then the joy.

Spiritual joy eats out carnal mirth, and carnal mirth hinders spiritual
mirth.

None can joy in God but such as enjoy him.

The strength of our joy depends upon the infallibility of our hope.

No^ joy is in the Saints, when they are in heaven they shall be in joy.

Knowledge.
Knowledge is better then gold, and wisdom is better then understanding.

Knowledge is not given to keep, but to impart.

Knowledge is good, but the means of getting it is not always good.

Knowledge only in the brain, will not subdue finne nor Satan.

He knows not himself, that knows not that he is (in himself) as base as the
Devil.

We know but in part.

It Is easier to inform the understanding, then to subdue the will and
affections.

Knowledge is to be reckoned by practice.

Such as know good things, cannot but love and affect them.

That knowledge that is from God, subjects the soul to God.

By neglect a child of God may exceedingly decay in his knowledge in the truth.

In the use of the Scriptures, knowledge is gotten.

Light.
Light causes them that see it to follow it*

Many go beyond their light.

The light of truth is known but to a few.

Life.
The most men seek life where it is not.

We live in that we mind and love.

Where our life is, our hearts are.

Such as our life is, such is the nourishment of it natural or spiritual.

Every life is sed with that which is suitable to it, the body cannot be
satisfied with that which is spiritual, nor the soul with that which is
natural.

It Is a poor life to live naturally, and be d^^d spiritually.

This life is a dying, being we are borne crying, and we live laughing, and dye
sighing.

The life of man is like a shadow, something next to nothing.

This life keeps us in slavery at the best, it is but a variety of vanities.

Man's life is vain, and subject to many discommodities and miseries without
number.

Man's life is folly, and his death rottenness.

Many have comforts few, crosses frequent, pleasures short, and pains lasting.

God mixeth the life of man with prosperity and adversity, to show they are
both empty.

This life is beset with death, tends to death, and ends in death.

Love.
Love begets and kindles love.

Love disputes least, and does most.

Nothing is more active and stronger then love.

Love will venture upon great difficulties.

Love is strong and powerful to carry on through all.

Love and labor go together. What will not one do for that he loves?

Love may be persuaded, but it cannot be compelled.

Love not begun upon good terms, will end in hatred.

Love is the greatest Commander in the world.

Love will have i'ts way at the last.

Love built on beauty and wealth, will not hold, because the foundation is
sandy.

Love is active, when it is not known, and cannot be requited.

Love that is not constant, is false love.

Fools love lightly, and leave as lightly.

Forced matches are empty of love.

In love there is no lack, in good will there is no want.

A man will bear much, when he knows it comes from love.

Union breeds love, and love simpathy and compassion; but where self-love
prevails, union and love are absent.

Arguments of love, are suitable to the nature of man.

We are made like the things we love.

Kindness puts an obligation upon the spirit of love.

Where love is, duties are frequent, and done with ease and delight.

Where love is wanting, all things are taken in the worst part.

Such love the way of God, who hate all that is contrary to it, and practice it
when it is most despised.

The more we love Christ, the more we remember him and his love.

As our love is to God, so is our love to his Word.

It Is natural to love ease, liberty, and carnal pleasure.

The power of sin, stands in the love of it.

Self-love blinds* us, and deceives us exceedingly, it is a dangerous enemy.

When our love to God runs high, our love to the world runs low, and so on the
contrary.

We may apprehend the love of God, but we cannot comprehend it.

The love of God makes a soul mourn for sin, more then any thing else.

Such as would be affected with Christ's love, must dwell upon the consideration
of the excellency of it.

Such things as we love we keep with care, possess with joy, and loose with
grief.

As our longing is to enjoy God, so is our love to him; such as greatly love
the Lord, greatly long to enjoy him; for as our love is to any thing,
accordingly is our endeavor to enjoy it.

According to the measure of the manifestation of the love of God to the soul,
so accordingly it is filled with peace and joy, and bears Christ's yoke, obeys
him, and is content to suffer for him, and does all freely.

Such as see Gods love to be the same to them in all conditions, are not
troubled when God alters their condition.

Losses.
There is no loss in loosing for God: what we loose for God, will be made up
unto us in God

One benefit that follows the loss of outward things, is that we shall never
be troubled with them any more.

Many get by their losses.

Labor.
All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it.

Lust.
Lust is violent, and is past sense and shame.

Bad discourse inflames lust.

Laught^r.
Laughter is a vanity: the wise laugh least.

Liberty.
When men think to use their liberty, they loose it.

We are more prone to desire outward liberty, then to know how to use it.

Such as plot and plead for liberty for the flesh, are very carnal.

It is not fit to give young people half the liberty they would take.

Young people do not know, not will believe how slippery their state is, till
they come to feel it by their falls.

Many study more how to keep outward liberty, then how to part with it; the
last is the best.

It is the greatest liberty to enjoy God, and a free heart to serve him, and to
have the lets removed.

Too many of the Saints abuse their Christian liberty.

To be free from sin, is liberty indeed.

Motions.
Forced motions cannot be perpetual.

Mind.
This world cannot satisfy, nor contain the mind of man.

Worldly things are not good enough to stay our minds upon.

Such as mind things above, favor them, and have interest in them.

By minding things above, we are freed from many idle fancies.

When our minds are not fixed, they rove any where, and are no where to purpose.

Our minds are where our hearts are, and that is where we love.

Our minds do too much partake of the temper of our bodies.

God has enabled some to make glad the sorrowful mind.

Mirth.
In vain mirth there is no true joy.

The mirth of the wicked is vanity and madness.

Natural mirth ends in sorrow and sadness.

In natural mirth, when we are most merry, we are nearest to danger.

When men are most cheerful and merry* they are most free and bountiful.

Meditation.
Meditating on the sweetness of outward contents, glues our hearts to them.

The more our thoughts are above, the more is our joy, and the more we avoyde
the snares below.

It is no burden to fix our minds and thoughts on things above, where our life,
joy and treasure is.

There is much sweetness and profit in the consideration and view of the
several passages of Gods providence to us and ours, inward and outward, of the
time past: if it were well minded, it might strengthen our faith, and draw out
our hearts to God, and enlarge our thankfulness: who so is wise to observe
these things, shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.

By meditation we retain truths, and are enriched by them; it makes them sweet
to us, it is the way to knowledge, the mother of wisdom; it refines the
judgment; it cuts off errors in judgment and practice; it makes the mercies
of God fresh and sweet to us; it increases love; it is the life of hearing,
reading, conference, etc. it reveals truths to us, and acquaints us with our
selves; it makes all to become our own; it settles truth upon our spirits; it
removes lets, and breeds affections, and quickens them; it makes hard things
easy; it fills the soul with experience, and inableth us to apply it to our
own benefit and others; it fires the soul with love, and sends it up to heaven.

By the neglect of meditation, we loose a great treasure.

Unless by meditation the judgment be refined and settled, and so work it upon
our affections, and lay it up in our minds, Gods means, and our hearing and
reading comes to nothing.

M^sery.
Extreme miseries last not long.

It Is no small misery, to have the body and soul, and conscience, all
distempered.

God knows the miseries of his, and will send help in the fittest season.

The better the man is, the less he needs to be bid to share with others in
their miseries.

Mercies.
We enjoy more mercies then we are aware off.

The mercies we enjoy are more and greater then our crosses.

Many possess many mercies, and yet want the comfort of them.

We come to know the worth of mercies by their want.

Of marriage.
There is no outward comfort under the Sun, so great and sweet, as a married
estate affords: what is equal to marriage for the being and well being of
life; its the prop of mutual content, the aid of nature, the perfection of
health, wealth, beauty, honor; no condition is sweet, where marriage supplies
it not; it is the pillar of the world, the preserver of chastity, the glory of
peace, and the life of the dead; no union so strong as this, no joy in any
outward union so contentfull as this.

There are comforts in marriage that a single life is not acquainted with, and
so there are many crosses.

The crosses in marriage goes to the very heart, yet the comforts in that
state exceed the crosses.

The best marriages are not free from crosses.

A married condition is a state of care and trouble.

Marriage breaches are not easily healed, they seem to be healed before they
are.

They provide ill for their own comforts, who in marriage lay a foundation of
discontent, as those do who marry persons of another judgment and practice in
Religion.

Every good man is not fit for every good woman.

Persons ill joined, carry their complaints to their graves.

Few in marriage deny themselves.

In marriage few choose the best things, wealth and beauty are too much desired
by the best.

In the choice of a husband or wife, next Religion, care is to be had of their
dispo^ition, because we are not made of brass, but of flesh.

Such as are married need observe all the passages of Gods providence, in
bringing them together, that they may see God in it, to increase love, and
cause content.

Mortification.
The quicker the temptation is a taking, the less mortification, when the
thoughts of former sins prove snares, lust is strong; the more sin disturbs
us in duty, the more it prevails in the heart.

Of mankind.
The nature of man is subject to extremities, either to be sad in want, or
wanton in fruition.

It Is the nature of man, the more he is kept from a thing, the more to desire
it.

No man is wholly free from humane frailties, often he is as a bird catched in a
snare before he is aware.

The wit of man is ready to defend that which pleases him.

It Is not comely for a man to beg, or to complain: it tends to the grief of
his friend, and the joy of his e^emy.

It Is best to handle weak persons tenderly, and wilful ones roughly.

It Is but in vain to trust in men, to day they err, to morrow they perish.

It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put confidence in Princes.

We need observe humorous persons, for they have sudden pangs and passions,
from affection, not judgment, that rise high on a sudden, and fall as fast
when the humor is over, one sex is more prone to this then the other.

A man may know whether he be good or bad, by observing his principle, and his
constant inclination: to will is present with me.

Man cannot make straight that which God has made crooked.

There is no man so honest and upright, that never swarved from the duty of a
good man.

Such measure as we mete to others, we often meet with.

Melancholy.
A small matter finkes one that is melancholy.

Of means.
It Is hard to trust God for that for which we see no means to attain.

When all means sail, God will send help: in the mount will the Lord be seen.

Of mourning.
It Is best to mourn alone, and to rejoice with company.

It Is profitable to go to the house of mourning; and to behold a dying man.

Of malice.
The malice of the Devil few know, fewer well weigh, fewer wisely and
carefully resist.

Nature.
Nature cannot well bear a sudden alteration.

That which is natura^l to a man, he is constant in, and acts unconstrained.

N^cessity.
He is wise that converteth necessity into a virtue.

That which cannot be cured, must be endured.

Memory.
Order is a help to memory and understanding.

Original.
The original is God, whom if we know, we know the original.

Ordination.
What God has ordained, it must be: man's ordination often comes to nothing.

Order.
For want of order, some read much and profit little.

Offenses.
None are more forward to take offense, then those who are most forward to give
offense.

Such as are fullest of failings, can least bear with others failing.

Christ, and his truth, and people, are a great offense in the eyes of many.

Obedience.
Obedience is a harsh word to proud persons.

Our obedience to God is most direct, when there is nothing else to sweeten the
action.

It is not safe to judge of our obedience by the successes of it, but by the
Word.

Of oaths.
An oath is of force to him that thinks it lawful, and bound to keep it, but
when that opinion is ceased, it does more hurt then good.

Because of oaths the Land mournes.

Of peace.
Man cannot give peace, unill the LORD speak peace, there is no peace.

Where no peace is, there may be quietness or silence.

Those that enjoy peace, do so prize it, that they are afraid to loose it.

The people of God are a peaceable people.

He can easily be at peace with men, that knows God is at peace with him.

When peace among the good is wanting, the Devil works strongly.

When quietness is in the heart, there is not much disquietnesse in the tongue.

He that can but a little deny himself, may enjoy much peace.

Profession.
The Saints are subject to let go their profession.

Prevent.
He wills his fall, whose fall he could prevent but would not.

Providence.
When means fail, God can help without.

Sometimes wise men want bread^ politic men riches, and skillful men favor
with others.

The providence of God reaches all things, yet few observe it.

A froward and discontented spirit, does not know, mind, nor acknowledge the
will and providence of God.

As we are discontented at the providence of God, so much carnal reason, and
so much want of faith.

The providence of God discovers his will^ as ^ell as his Word, though not in
the same way.

Every thing happens to every man: yet nothing happens but what and when
God appoints it.

Prise.
That which a man prizeth most, he loves best, and is* most provoked when
hindered in the enjoyment of it.

Pa^ience.
Patience suppresseth and restrains great ^is^hiese.

Patience is a salve for all sores.

Patience will keep a man from being mise^able, though it cannot keep him from
misery.

Impatience does perplex and distract a man.

He that would be a patient man, must not take liberty to be angry at trifles.

Of por^ions.
Great portions, and great stomachs, high spirits and costly fashions, and
great expenses, often go together.

A lesser portion with prudence in seven years may equal one much greater.

Pride.
As a natural man grows in gi^ts and parts, so he grows in pride.

Pride is one of the greatest enemies to the free love of God.

Pride is the nurse of hypocrisy.

The pride of man befooles him.

The proudest men are the weakest, and most troubled with discontent.

He that thinks not himself great, thinks there is no great hurt done, if he
be a little wronged.

If we did fully know our selves, we could not be proud.

We are ready to be most proud, of that which should most humble us.

Spiritual pride is usually cured with a fall.

Our delicate fare, costly apparel, and idleness, causes the wise to
despise us.

Passion.
Passion robs us of quietness and confidence, which is our strength.

Passion does no good in the things of God or man.

When we give way to passion, the Devil enter^.

Passion distracts counsel and judgment, and causes to err in the choice of
a right end, means, and time.

Untamed passion is the cause of unquietness.

The cause of anger and passion, is igno^ance and pride.

Contrary passions are cured with their cont^aries, as mourning is with joy.

As unhewen stones, so unhewen spirits are u^fit for the house of God.

Of poverty.
Some to escape poverty, run into greater poverty.

It Is better to be poor, and weaned from the world, then rich, and covetous.

Many are much afraid of poverty, yet it never did any hurt.

The poor are out of danger of being flattered.

The heirs of heaven are often pinched with poverty, and Saints who are Kings
lie in prison.

Men spend their time in idleness, and wast their estate in costly apparel,
and fare, and then say they are not able to supply the necessities of the poor
people of God.

A child of God in his greatest want of outward things, is not poor, because
God is his God.

A slack hand in giving to the poor, and a sl^ck hand in labor, each makes
poor.

Some have sweetly enjoyed God, when fed with bread and water, and have had
sweet smiles from God, when they could not see the face of one friend.

In the want of outward comforts, the Saints have enjoyed sweet comforts from
God, they have more experience of Gods faith^ulnesse, care, and love, see more
of their own hearts, are more spiritual, and humble, and live more upon God,
and are more wean^d from the world, then those that are rich.

Prospe^ity.
Prosperity swells ^he heart with pride.

The prosperity of fools destroys the^.

Prosperity causes men to forget (...) and themselves.

Many a child of God has found prosperity has done him more hurt then good.

Outward peace begets plenty, plenty begets security and idleness, and
idleness begets all evil.

It Is in vain for those in prosperity to think it will last long.

Of pleasure.
Pleasure is a flattering delight.

The pleasures of the body are the poison of the soul.

Those whose eyes are open, see outward pleasures to be but mean things.

The more carnal the heart is, the more it affects natural pleasures.

In idleness, delight and pleasures the Devill-easily intangleth men in his
snares.

The^ mistake the time and place of pleasures, that expect it in this world:
heaven is the Saints place of pleasure.

Sin is desired for the pleasure of it, but there is more grief and misery
then pleasure.

Sinful pleasure ends in sorrow.

Such as delight in pleasure, shall find their grea^est pleasure become their
greatest pains.

Such as think on the supposed pleasure and sweetness of sin, are deceived
and ensnared.

Promises.
The promises of God are a great stay and comfort to a child of God.

The promises of God, are the foundation of the Saints comfort.

The promises of God, are free, full, and firm.

The promises of God bears up the soul in all straights.

There was never any ashamed that did rest only upon God in his promise.

The promises of God do not make His neither wicked nor careless, but more
fruitful and serviceable.

The wicked desire promises for peace, and not to strengthen them against sin.

One promise from a man, pleases them more then ten from God.

Some men are free^ in promises, then in performances.

Of praises of men.
He that prizeth others praises, he injoyes not God, nor himself.

Prayer.
Necessity teaches to pray.

When the heart is filled with fears, prayer powers them out.

Prayer puts the heart into possession of peace.

Prayer sweetens all troubles.

That which a man obtaines by prayer* it inlargeth his spirit.

God by prayer supports his in the greatest troubles.

Verbal prayer causes great deadness.

There is no duty so counterfeited as prayer is.

Prayer is more of the mind and heart, then of the mouth.

When prayer is wanting, the action of fin is as ready as the tentation.

Some pray when they should sleep, and sleep in prayer, and pray when they
should work; but wisdom divides to each their proper time and season.

By prayer we attain a more sense and feeling of our wants, and more strength
to pray.

A good conscience nourishes faith, and faith prayer.

He that makes prayer the end of his praying, rests in his prayer, and prays
to no purpose.

What many build up by prayer, they p^ll down by their practice, by remisness,
^lightnesse, and frothinesse of spirit.

Princ^ples.
When a principle of error* is taken ^or a principle of truth, the more it is
relied on, the worse it is.

Preacher.
He that does not rightly distinguish between the Law and the Gospel, is not a
good Preacher, nor a good Christian.

Quietness.
Man disquiets himself in vain.

A quiet soul is the seat of wisdom.

In the worst times, a Saint may quiet himself in God.

In quietness and confidence is our strength.

Until men be satisfied, they cannot be settled; quietness is the fruit of
both.

Satan has most advantage against us, when we are troubled and disquieted.

He that is troubled because others words answer not his desires, cannot enjoy
quietness.

They enjoy most quietness of mind, that most submit themselves to the
providence of God.

Reason.
Natural Reason cannot be satisfied in things spiritual, because they are
above the fight and reach of nature.

Religion.
The Saints find sweetness in the bitterest things in Religion.

Where Religion is in truth, it is in power, and it enableth a man to practice
it.

There are no people one indeed, that dissent in Religion.

It Is not possible for all men to be of one Religion and judgment, because
their understandings and ends differ.

When a man differs in Religion, those from whom he dissents, load on him false
things, to make him odious: thus many condemn as odious, those whose arguments
they cannot answer, nor dare offer to answer.

Most men love that Religion best, which best suits with their lusts, as,
honor, pleasure, ease, and their bellies.

A form of Religion, with riches, is embraced, rather then the power of
Religion with poverty.

The Religion of many, is to be irreligious.

In these days iniquity abounds, and many depart from the faith to needless
disp^tes, and principles, that destroy the foundation of Religion.

Most men take their Religion upon trust, and hold it by the copy of men's
countenances, and certain reservations, and the permission of their lusts.

Men's lives and Religions, are commonly alike.

He that will not leave his sin for his Religion, will leave his Religion for
his sin.

A little Religion will go a great way in great persons.

His Religion is to little, purpose, whose knowledge is not distinct and
certain.

It makes much for the benefit and comsort of a Christian, to understand the
grounds and principles of Religion.

Rules.
When we come to the particular case, if it concern our selves, we forget the
Rule.

A weak men's Rules, may be better then the best men's actions.

The Rules of many men's actions, are only t^ei^ own wills.

Such as like not the Rules of God in his Word, like the Devils, and their own.

Of Ruling.
When a man comes to Rule, he shows himself what he is.

Reproach.
What men will not follow, that they will reproach.

Reproof for sin.
Such as are wise, count Reproof a privilege.

Poor persons have a privilege above the rich, in that they are reprooved.

Those that complain, because they are reprooved for sin, show their folly.

Those that are angry, because they are reproved for sin, hate not sin.

Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee.

Riches.
As thorns pierce the body, so Riches pierce the soul.

Riches are the thorns that choke the good seed, and hinder the growth of good
things.

The more Riches a man has, the more he desires.

The greediness is more sharpened by the having them, then in their want.

There are but few that are drawn the nearer to God by Riches.

Rich men commonly do the least good to others.

Rich men's purses, and poor men's hearts, would do well together.

God turns many out of their Riches, because they abused them.

Riches ensnare many, and are the destruction of many.

Riches are thorns, which if not heedfully handled, will wound us before we be
aware.

A rich man that is not liberal, is unworthy the name of a Christian.

Riches, and all outward things, sooner or later, will be as a lier, and waters
that fail; and be as nothing to us.

Riches has made many afraid to consesse Christ, and his truth.

God bestows abundance of outward things upon some, not for themselves, for
they need them not, but that they might supply the wants of others, and they
keep them for themselves.

Outward things make themselves wings, and fly away.

If Riches do not leave us, we must quickly leave them.

God is the Saints best Riches.

Religion often pays for men's getting Riches, and often suffers most by them.

He that has riches, and does not freely part with them to good uses, his
heart is stolen away by them.

Reports.
No good man can escape evil and false Reports of the wicked.

Often times the best suffer the worst Reports, because they will be no worse.

Such as are much joyed at good Reports* are much grieved at ill.

Such as cannot with patience bear ill Reports, cannot live a comfortable life.

Rest.
Most men think and endeavor to attain Rest.

Rest is de^ireable, but it is not here attainable.

Scriptures.
Reading the Scriptures, helps the judgment, memory, and affections,
conf^rmes faith, and fits us to answer the temptations of Satan.

Such as deny and slight the Scriptures, will quickly become abominable in
their understandings, hearts, words, and actions.

When men refuse to be bounded within the bounds of Gods Word, they have fallen
into great errors and heresies.

Security.
When we think we are safest from danger, the danger is greatest.

Satan watches most, when we watch least.

Strength.
God is the strength of his people.

When men are confident of their own strength, then they are weakest.

God deals out strength to his people walking in his way.

Snares.
Snares lie not above, but below.

Sin.
Every sin is not alike mortified in a Saint.

Sin is wounded by prayer, and a temptation by resistance.

A lesser sin will make way for a greater, if ye give way to a little, a great
deal ^ill follow.

Sin is deceitful, it has many ways and colors to beguile a man, by degrees
it steals the heart from God, and settles it in evil.

The want of a true sight of sin, is the cause men love fin, and sleep so
securely in it.

^gnorance, and unbelie^e want of confideration, and meditation, and not
shunning the occasions of sin, cause much ^in.

The way to subdue a lust, is not to satisfy it, and to believe it shall be
subdued; assurance of pardon is a good help against sin: if the hatred of sin
continue, and grief for it, use the means, and pray in faith against it: such
as do so, shall overcome it.

Sin is easier kept out, then thrust out.

When the motions of sin do rage, it is best quickly to take the sword of the
Spirit, the Word of God, and fight against them.

Custom in sin, takes away the sense and feeling of sin.

A man may sin by omission and commission at one and the same time, and yet
know of neither.

Some sins of omission may exceed some of commission.

We often sin more, and are in greater danger in lawful things, then in
unlawful, because we fear grosser evils more then secret insnarements in
lawful things.

To be delivered from sin, is a great good.

To desire sin, is a misery, and to enjoy the pleasure of sin, is a greater
misery.

Those sins are most dangerous which seem virtues, and tend to make virtue a
sin.

Few oppose sin, and fewer consider the ground and reason why they oppose it.

Every child of God has some sin that easily besets him, which to escape he
had need to fly.

A believer is as subject to commit as great sins now, as those before Christ
came.

It Is possible for a child of God to commit a sin, that he hates, and has
truly repented of.

The flesh loves great sins as well as small ones.

According as a man's fight and sense of sin is, so he hates it, and himself
for it.

If a professor of the truth commit a scandalous sin, woe to his peace and
comfort; for if he belong to God, it shall vex and grieve him more then all the
sins that ever he committed, he shall find that it is no small matter to
dishonor God, it will lie heavy on his heart, and make him weary of his life;
it will fight against hi^ soul; it will deprive the soul of peace, and fill
it with horror; it shall cut his heart to consider, that he has disgraced the
truth, and people of God, grieved the Saints, and hardened others in their sin.

Sin defiles, insnares, distracts, and streighteneth the soul, it is the
thief that steals from the Saints much of their strength and comfort.

Did we know what bitter pains our sweet sins will cost us, we would more
fear them then now we desire them, we would fly from them as from the Devil.

God sometimes cures sin by sin, and by the bitterness of sin God weanes his
from it.

Sin will tire him at last, that loves it best.

The knowledge and consideration of the end of sin, chaseth away sin.

The less sensiblenesse of sin after it is committed, the more hardness of
heart there is.

The more there is of the will in sin, the greater is the sin: to forecast
evil, is a great evil.

The more deliberation, and the weaker the temptation is, and yet sin, the
greater is the sin.

To sin against knowledge, is of dangerous consequence.

The less fear we have of sinning, the less care we have of well doing; the
less zeal in praying, the less fruitful under the means.

Because sentence against an evil work is not presently executed, therefore
the hearts of the children of men are fully set in them to do evil: he
thinks he scapes now, therefore ever.

Of solitariness.
It is not good for weak believers to affect solitariness.

Satan's temptations have come more frequent and stronger when alone, and many
sin more freely when alone.

Satan is most bold when we are alone, and his temptations take a deeper
impression

Suggestions.
If evil suggestions be admitted, they will grow and increase exceedingly,
into consent, and consent into delight, and delight into practice, and practice
into habit, from habit into custom, from custom into senslesnesse.

Of small things.
A small matter will trouble our spirits, yea, and interrupt us in our
communion with God.

Of su^etiship.
Those who have least cause require sureties* as Usurers.

Many have run themselves upon great straights, and others have undone
themselves by suretiship.

He is wise and safe that a^horres suretiship.

Concerning fleep.
The more the body is exercised with labor, the more sleep it requires.

Four hours sleep in a day and a night is enough for some, and five for
others, six is enough for any one.

Some say, they cannot sleep, if they did labor and work more, they should
sleep more.

Much sleep makes poor, dulleth the wit, and loses time.

Season.
The season of an action, adds to the goodness of it.

Every thing is beautiful in it is season.

Sadness.
Sadness of spirit breeds unsetlednesse, uncomfortablenesse, and
unthankfulness to God.

If we be sad, we enjoy not the comfort of any thing.

An unchearfull spirit is not fit for any duty.

What we go about unchearfully, we are soon weary in, or off.

Sadness of spirit helps us to yield to discouragements.

An unchearfull spirit does nourish hard thoughts of God.

One cause of the sadness of a child of God is, because he does not mind and
apply such promises as are suitable to his condition, and behold, and live on
the things above.

Satan.
Sin and Satan are never pleased.

It Is a great design of Satan to cozen the Saints of their peace and comfort,
and to draw the Saints from God, his truth, and people, and that we neglect the
means, or wholly rely on them.

Satan in his subtilty and malice, watches to discourage and terrify the
people of God.

It Is a deceit of Satan, to put a man upon the practice of a contrary duty, to
hinder the soul, and cause a disorder.

In good things, Satan separates the means from the end, and in evil he
labors to separate the end from the means.

An unadvised resisting of Satan, causes disappointment.

Senses.
The senses of our body do every day decay by little and little, though we
take no notice of it.

Our senses do often prove traitors to our souls and bodies.

Soul.
If our souls be down, it is best and easiest presently to raise them up by
meditation of Gods free love: the longer we stay, the more we may.

Selfe-seeking.
All men are full of self.

Selfe-seeking is dishonorable and dangerous.

Self always aims at her own ends, and ends there.

Self cannot oppose self in a particular opposition.

Spiritualnesse.
The more spiritual a man is, the more he abhorres and loathes himself.

A spiritual man is not always alike, his faith, love, zeal, joy, peace, is
sometimes great, and sometimes small, he is sometimes strong, and sometimes
weak.

Saints.
A Saint lives in the love of God.

The weakest Saint will pass with some grains of allowance, and the best or
strongest will not pass without.

Sinners.
Some will confess in the general, they are faulty, but in the particular
utterly deny it.

Suffering.
Hope of glory incourageth in suffering.

We cannot suffer cheerfully as we ought, unless we know and mind our
interest in God, and mind suitable promises, and the faithfulness of God in
performing them: the necessity of suffering the end of it, and the reward.

A good conscience, a good cause, and a good call, will cause a sweet suffering.

As our love is to Christ, and his truth, so is our willingness to suffer for
him.

It is best quietly to suffer that which we cannot prevent.

It is better to suffer, then to sin.

He that intends to suffer for Christ, must not hearken to fleshly reasonings.

To suffer for small matters in Religion is most honorable.

Single life.
There be helps conducing to a single life, natural, moral, and spiritual.

Surmises.
Secret surmises do often hurt our selves and others.

Seek.
The more we seek any thing, the more we love it, and the enjoyment of it is
more sweet unto us.

Speech.
Many make long discourses of that which a little is too much.

Many love to hear themselves speak, and think to please others, because
they please themselves.

He is wise who has skill when to speak, and when to be silent.

Straights.
God does provide for his people in their straights.

God puts his in straights, that they might live by faith.

Slothfulness.
Our beloved said, Come away, but our sloth, self-love, ease, carelessness,
inconstancy, unsetlednesse, hinders us exceedingly in going to our beloved.

Time.
Our time is short, as a span, a shadow, a dream; it is our duty and wisdom to
preserve and redeem it for good actions.

Loss of time is a great loss; we loose much time in idleness, and idle
visits, in trifling and sleeping: in which time much good might have been done.

Time is not valued to it is worth.

A great part of our time slideth away in doing evil, and impertinent, and
nothing.

He is wise that improveth time.

Time well spent is laid up for the future.

Time past cannot be called again.

Time ill spent, turns to great loss, and ends in deep sorrow.

Much time is spent about the body.

We loose much time which we take no notice off.

Time wastes all things.

Time hasteneth to an end, and runs to eternity.

Time shall be no more.

We spare not so much time for God as we might.

We do and will spare time for what we list and love.

That time is well and sweetly spent, in which the soul obeys God, and beholds
God and glory, and has communion with him.

Of truth.
Whatsoever is against or without the word of God, is not truth.

That which the most follow, is not truth.

That which carries the greatest show of humility, is not truth.

The authority of men is not always for the truth.

Man's reason cannot dive so deep as the truth.

The more natural w^se any is, the less capable he is of divine truth.

Neither the learned nor unlearned can know the mystery of the truth, till God
teach it them.

Many will have truth to be error.

Christ is truth, and his Word is truth.

A man may loose Christ in the truth, and close with truth, and not with Christ.

He that receives truth as from men, truth is but a tradition to him.

If truth may have liberty to go abroad, it will quickly suppress errors.

The greatest enemy truth has, is concealment.

The more manifest truth is, the more glorious it appears.

The glory of the understanding is truth.

Every truth of Christ tends to holiness.

God esteems truth above the lives of his Saints.

Teaching.
Those God teaches, he first unteacheth, in making them wise, he shows them
that they are fools, he convinces the soul of the folly of it is own wisdom,
and of a necessity to be taught, and causes the soul to see that it is not in
it is own power to attain true wisdom.

Those God teaches, he meekeneth their spirits, and humbles the soul to make
it teachable, and causes them to have right ends, in desiring knowledge, and
in using means to attain it, and makes them content to be at Gods disposing
for the manner and measure of his teaching.

Gods teaching humbles the soul, the more they know, the more vile they are
in their own eyes.

Gods teaching causes the soul to trust in God, also their knowledge is
suitable to their souls wants, and strengthens them against temptations, and
preserves them from many evils others fall into.

So much as we are taught of God, so much we practice; Gods teaching attaines
the end of it, which is practice, therefore if thou art taught of God, thy
conversation shall show it: the wisdom from above, is full of good fruits: so
it causes them to be afraid to sin, and to hate all false ways.

Gods teaching, causes and raises the affections; it is no cold business; the
more they know, the more they love God, and do act more for him; as our
knowledge is, so is our practice.

He that is taught of God, he never thinks he has knowledge enough, but still
thirsts after more, and is thankful for that he has.

Toleration.
Where persecution is, there is no toleration; where there is toleration (in
differing opinions in Religion) there is no persecution.

Those who make others causes their own, plead for toleration.

It is but hypocrisy to profess another Religion, then that which is in their
heart.

Talent.
He that uses not, or abuses his talent, loses it.

Tears.
The apprehension of Gods love, will cause tears freely.

Trouble.
There is nothing but trouble under the Sun.

It Is in vain to expect to live in this world without trouble.

The less trouble men expect, the more they often meet withal.

We should not be so troubled in trouble, if we did look more to God in his
promise, and less upon the trouble.

God removes great troubles from his, or gives them strength to bear them.

There is no trouble so great, as the trouble of an evil conscience.

Self cannot stay, or check it self, much less recover it self out of
sinful trouble.

A soul cast down by self, or Satan, rests (...) God, but in trouble.

To say in great troubles, be content and joyful, it is easy, but to be so is
hard.

So much as a Christian is stored with promises, he is able to bear troubles.

In trouble we are prone to forget that which makes for our comfort.

He that is little in his own eyes, will not be troubled if he seem so to
others.

A troubled soul is not fit to do or receive good.

Weak minds seek ease in changes.

There are but a few that in trouble express a free spirit, and an enlarged
heart to God.

Few in trouble express faith, wisdom, patience, humility, contentedness,
comfort, joy, and thankfulness.

Trialls.
Those who are least exercised with trials, have the least wisdom and
experience.

Thoughts.
Our evil thoughts are many.

All actions are nourished by thoughts.

Thoughts kindle and inflame affections.

A man's most and worst sins are his thoughts.

The most of our thoughts are vain, and come to nothing; oh the vanity of the
mind.

Evil thoughts defile our souls and spirits.

A child of God loathes himself for the evil and vanity of his thoughts.

If one sinful thought be admitted concerning the sweetness and pleasure of
sin, the will is ready to consent to the motion, and the understanding to
forecast the accomplishment, and the affections to add heat and strength; then
the heart travels with iniquity, and by time and opportunity sin is brought
forth.

Where our treasure is, there are our thoughts.

The more our thoughts are above, the more we enjoy God, and the more we avoid
the soars below.

He whose thoughts are exercised in the things above, injoyeth content,
sweetness and delight.

Temptations.
Temptations tries men's strength.

He is wise and strong that stands in strong temptations.

When temptation is absent, a fool is wise and strong, and the froward patient.

Every person has his special temptation, against which he ought to watch.

God lets Satan tempt his, to keep down their pride.

Strong and lasting temptations, are to show us our selves, and our pride.

God takes men off their pleasant lusts, by hideous temptations.

Rank affections are eaten out by strong temptations.

Satan tempts, that he may tempt, and he tempts not, that he may tempt.

Those temptations are most dangerous, that most suit with holy ends.

An over much fearing a temptation, and a weak purpose to resist it, weakeneth
us, and incourageth Satan to tempt.

Such as slight temptations, are most like to fall by them.

The more of the fruits of the Spirit any has, the more they need to pray
against Satan's temptations.

When we are tempted, it is not best to stand reasoning with the temptation, but
immediately shun the occasion, and fall to prayer.

We cannot withstand the least temptation without the help of God.

Tongue.
Rule the tongue, and rule all.

The tongue no man can tame.

Thankfulness.
Our natures are averse to it.

The sense of want of one mercy, steals from us the remembrance of many, and
all thankfulness for them.

Thirst.
Spiritual thirst is as strong as natural, if not stronger.

Unbelief.
Impatience, and discontentednesse with our estates, immoderate care, and
desire of the world, are the fruits of unbelief.

Unbelief is the cause we depend no more on God for soul and body.

Of Unwillingnesse.
What men do unwillingly, they do not effectually.

Of Unthankfullnesse.
The more spiritual any are, the more thankful they are to God and man.

Ignorance, forgetfulness, and pride, cause unthankfulness.

The not observing the several passages of Gods providence to us, is a cause
of unthankfullnesse.

The beholding and minding the things of heaven, provided for the Saints,
causes them to be content and thankful in any condition and straight.

Of Usury.
Usury is, and is like to be in request, because to lend without, is out of
fashion.

Who oppresses most? he that lends upon use, or he that can lend freely, but
does not.

To be tied to pay use, when the profit is uncertain, is a means to fill men
with care, trouble, distrust, if not with oppression.

Virtue.
Some pretend a virtue to cover a vice; this is base.

Vanity.
Every man at his best state, is altogether vanity.

The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are vain.

Of Want.
Some have little, and want little; many have much, and want much.

He that can bear outward want contentedly, is a strong man.

It Is a sin, and a great dishonor to a child of God, to say or think he
shall want, or to say, what shall I do.

If hands, state, and friends fail, God will supply some other way.

A child of God never is in want (though he may think he wants) because he is
possessed with all things; God is his God.

It Is best to want that which we cannot enjoy, unless we sin.

Weeping.
Excess in weeping, is against nature, reason, and Religion.

Many make a Christ of their tears.

World.
The whole world is a vanity of vanities and vexations.

Will.
To will is natural, but to will spiritual is above nature.

He cannot resist a sinful will, who has no other then a sinful will.

A man may persuade the will, but it cannot be compelled.

To make Gods will to depend on man's will, is to deprive God of his honor.

When we want a will to do a thing, we pretend want of power, and say, I
cannot.

Many prefer their wills before their lives; for when they are crossed, they
wish for death.

The creature cannot do more or less then God will.

Those virtues that adorn the will, as love, mercy, justice, are more glorious
then those that adorn the understanding, as wisdom, power, etc.

If the will gets into the understanding, it puts all the powers of the soul
upon action.

As the will is, so answerable is the endeavor.

Wit.
A dull wit is fittest and best for him that wants discretion.

Wind.
Most men feed upon wind, yet there is no satisfaction in it.

Words.
Many in stead of proof, will give big words, but bare saying is no proof.

Wonder.
For men not to prise their best works, is a wonder.

Natural men wonder at worldly and sensual things.

It Is no wonder if a natural man seek himself in all things.

Wisdom.
Wise men forecast how to do most with least noise.

It Is wisdom sometimes to let pass, and take no notice of a fault.

To fear to sin is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.

Wisdom goes as far beyond folly* as light beyond darkness.

It Is a special piece of wisdom to find out and improve such places of
Scripture, as are suitable to our present condition.

The way to be wise in things natural and spiritual, is to observe and
consider the reasons and causes of things.

It Is wisdom to do that which is safest.

Wisdom is better then strength.

Worldly wisdom few have, but what they paid too dear for.

The wisdom of man comes from conference of things past and to come.

The more wise a man thinks he is, the more fool he is.

World.
This world is insufficient, uncertain, and perishing.

Every worldly thing is inconstant, and a vain vanity.

Many are deceived by the false and vain shows of the world.

The nourishing in our selves the love and care of worldly riches, choakes the
love of heavenly, and kills many good things in us.

The things of this world are suitable to our spirits.

The world affords no stable comfort, it perishes in the using, and when we
have most need of it.

The less the Saints desire the world, the large, their hearts are for God.

The more we love this world, the less mind we have to leave it.

The more men are afflicted, the more willing they are to leave this world.

The consideration of the end of the things of this world, tends to weane from
the world.

Such as are full of the world, are empty enough of spiritual things.

He that is full of worldly business, needs no other trouble.

The world is a great snare and deadly enemy to spirituallnesse, they are the
strangers that devoute our strength.

According as the world is sweet unto us, so accordingly spiritual things are
bitter.

The more men possess of this world, the less many use and enjoy; the more we
love it, the more we are crossed with it, and the more we have of it, the more
we are in want.

Weakness.
Weakness with watchfulness, stands when greater strength with
selfe-confidence fails.

The wisest and strongest Saints* are most sensible of their own weaknesses.

Works.
To be saved by Christ, and to be saved by works, are contrary, the one
excludes the other, Christ will be all, or nothing.

It Is possible for a person that believes, through weakness, to go aside to
the covenant of works.

Watchfulness.
Spiritual watchfulness, is a special gift of God, a chief part of
godliness, and a special help to holiness, and a Saints great privilege.

Because the Saints watch no more, they fall so much.

There is no good order in their lives, who watch not.

Watching keeps the soul awake, and fits us to exercise seasonably the fruits
of the Spirits.

Of zeal.
The height of the affections is zeal.

Zeal is the height of love, and the heat of the intention and affection.

Zeal is an affection wound up to the highest peg.

Zeal is the fire of the affections, and it is very hot.

Zeal is good when it is for God, it is evil when it is against him.

The command of God, and Christ's love to us and ours to him, begets zeal for
him, it kindles it, and makes it burn and flame.

Riches, honor, pleasure, ease, consumes the Saints zeal, and cools them.

The world, and carnal friends, power much water to quench our zeal.

Zeal should eat us up, and we eat it up.

Every man is zealous for God or himself.

To be zealous for a trifle, is a great weakness.

Zeal cannot endure to see God dishonored in no kind.

A Saint loathes himself, because he has so little zeal for God, etc.

AS it were with wings,
Mount thy self my spirit,
Unto stable things,
Without alterings,
Which all comfort brings,
Them for to inherit.
Earthly things despise,
In them take no pleasure,
But thy self advise,
Higher for to rise,
Where true substance lies,
And the chiefest treasure.
Shadowing things are here,
Better things are higher,
In the Heavens clear,
Let it then appear,
That as things right dear,
Thou do them desire.
Earthly things we know,
Soon away are sliding,
Here on Earth below,
They do ebb and flow,
And to dust they go,
Without long abiding.
Yea, they are by kind,
So base and unstable,
That they should not bind,
To Earth a pure mind,
The which we may find,
To be honorable.
Counsels.
Concerning Actions.
1. SEe that what ye do be lawful: see that your actions have a good
foundation, a word of God to warrant them, else they are evil: to do things
not required of God, is the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3. 17. that when God
shall say, Who required this at your hands, Isa. 1. 12. ( Deuteronomy. 12. 32.) we may
say, thou, O Lord.

2. Look what ye do be expedient, the circumstance of time, place, and
person, must be wisely con^idered: to a good action is required that all the
circumstances be good.

3. Look to your end, why ye do what ye do; the end and scope of an action
conduces to the being of it: if two duties come together, do the chiefest
first, unless works of mercy, and necessity hinder.

4. Look ye do what is required, because it is required, and as it is
required, and when it is required: to do one duty and neglect another, is
uncomely, give each duty it is due respect.

5. Look with what affection ye do what ye do; serve the Lord with the
best, and serve him fully for measure and degree: he that does these things,
his conversation shall be beautiful and savoury.

Concerning affections, etc.
1. Ever suspect your judgment and affection, when the cause concerns your
selves.

2. Often call your affections to account.

3. When your affections exceed their bounds, ask your soul the reason of it.

4. Let not your judgment be taken captive by your affections: let your
judgment command your will, and your will your affections, and your affections
your actions.

5. Make not your affection known in company, unless the cause be
extraordinary.

Concerning afflictions.
1. Slight not any affliction, nor let it overpresse thee; consider it is
appointed, Romans 8. 29. There is a blessing in every cross, eye that more then
the sharpness of the affliction, know the longer it continues, the more thou
may get by it.

2. Consider that nothing can befall thee, but what is appointed by God, 1
These. 3. 3.

3. Search to know the cause why he sends his affliction, that so thou may be
reformed by it.

4. If thou art the Lords, stay thy self in the love of God, and attend upon
him for the time, manner, and measure of thy deliverance.

Concerning Books.
Study the Scripture, set a high price upon it, keep close to it: next the
Scripture, prize those books which keep closest to the language of the
Scripture, and do clearest prove from them what they affirm: Believe not any
man upon his bare word, if the substance of it be not expressed in the word of
God, reject it.

Make much of Christ's speaking unto you in his Word, Heb. 12. 25.

Conscience.
Hearken to the voice of conscience.

Prize and preserve a tender conscience.

Take heed ye wound not your conscience to please your affections.

Creatures.
Expect not much content and satisfaction from the creatures.

So use the creatures, so as to be fitted by them to serve God and man: God
gave not the creatures to hurt us.

Concerning Company.
Avoyde familiarity with such from whom you receive means of cooling.

In the choice of a companion, consider;

What soundness of judgment is in them.

What knowledge, and sensiblenesse of their own inward corruptions.

Whether they speak of the infirmities of the Saints with grief and
compassion.

Whether they do plainly reprove them for any sin they see in them.

What are his companions.

Countenance and encourage those who hazard themselves in Gods service, and
good causes; be companions of such, Heb. 10. 33.

Crosses.
Be not afraid nor offended at crosses, they may do thee much good, and let
out sinful self.

Desires of the world.
We had need to moderate our desires to things below.

We should rather endeavor to equal our desires to our estates, then to make
our estates equal to our desires.

Excuses.
Be afraid to cover over any evil with an excuse.

Errors.
If you would be kept from errors, pray to God, search the Scripture, labor to
be well grounded in the principles of truth, and shun false Teachers, and their
writings, Luke 21. 8.

Of others falls.
Let the consideration of the many great falls the Saints have had, cause thee
to fear thy self, to watch and pray to God to keep thee from falling.

A friend.
Esteem him thy friend, that would hinder thee in sin.

Faith.
Live by thy faith, let not other men's belief, be the rule of thine.

Grief.
Discover not thy griefs to many.

Discover them to such as are able and willing to help thee: the Lord is
loving and pitiful, able and willing to help, it is best to complain to him.

Of good.
Think not much of doing a little good, though it be with great trouble, for
to do good we live.

Esteem not that thy chiefest good, which may be taken from thee.

God.
Be serious and zealous for God.

Gain.
Be not greedy of gain.

Glory.
Esteem Christ, his truth, a good conscience, the sufferings and reproaches of
the Gospel, to be your greatest glory.

Honor.
Honor the Lord with thy substance.

Infirmities.
Bear with the Saints infirmities, and cover them with tenderness.

Endure.
Endure that which thou can not escape nor ^ure.

Judge.
Judge not thy estate by thy knowledge, affections, and actions, but by thy
principle.

Knowledge.
Prize knowledge above gold, and wisdom above understanding.

Of lust, of uncleanness.
1. Beware of fleshly lusts, the sin is great, and the consequence greater.

2. Be temperate in all things, diet, sleep, apparel, recreation, etc. fear
thy self; watch thy senses, avoid the occasions of evil, as persons, places,
etc.

3. Be frequent in fasting and prayer, and look up to God for strength against
it.

Losses.
What ye loose for Christ's cause, loose cheerfully, and count it your gain.

Esteem sufferings for Christ, the most glorious passages of your life, Heb.
11. 26.

Liberty.
Study how to part with thy outward liberty.

Esteem that bondage that causes thee to sin, and keeps thee from God.

Live.
In the use of creatures, live above them.

Men.
Be sure ye try men well, and have good experience of their faithfulness,
before ye trust them with much.

Beware of men.

Mind.
If thou have a sorrowful mind, a wearied and distressed conscience, and
would have rest, and know not what to do, have recourse to such as fear
God, and have a sound judgment, wise and good experience, and have meek and
loving spirits.

Opportunities.
Prize and improve opportunities of doing and receiving good.

Pilgrim.
Remember you are a pilgrim, and have a pilgrims mind, Heb. 11.

Promises.
Provide several promises, suitable to thy several necessities, uses, times,
and condition.

Promise.
Believe the promises of God, meditate on them, apply them, let them satisfy
thee.

Concerning the poor.
Part with your superfluities for their conveniences, yea, part with your
conveniences, to supply your poor brethrens necessities, yea, part with some
of your necessaries to supply their extremities.

Religion.
Take heed of such a way of Religion, and serving God, as natural men like and
love.

Reproof.
Receive reproof willingly and profitably: if it be causlesse, revile not, nor
be angry.

Race.
Run the race set before you, as becomes the Gospel, Heb. 12. 1.

Reproach^s.
Slight not reproaches, if thou be not so guilty, thou art guilty in part,
or art guilty in another kind, and so it is but a mistake, or thou may be
guilty, it may be it is sent to humble thee, and give thee warning of the same
sin.

Sin.
Observe how sin enters thy heart, and how it gathers strength, and how it
suits with thy corrupt nature, and how the Spirit of God helps thee to resist
it, and what means does help thee most against it.

Judge not of sin by the matter or act of it, but by the rule and authority of
the Commander that forbids it, and consider all the circumstances and
aggravations of it.

Take heed least the unmortified roots of sin in you break out into scandal.

Be afraid to sin, and use means to prevent (...). Consider God has forbidden
it, Romans 6. Consider sin in the nature of it, in the root and fruit of it. It Is
the price of blood: there is no true sweetness in sin, no contentment, no
satisfaction in it, why you should desire it; it fills the soul with wounds,
sorrow, bitterness, shame, let experience speak, Romans 6. 21. Pro. 23. 8.
Avoyde the occasions of sin, evil company, Psalm. 119. 63. Pro. 13. 20. and 6.
9. Places and provocations of sin, idleness, excess in eating and drinking;
order your steps by the Word, and get others to watch over you, receive
reproof willingly and profitably; know, the more you yield to Satan, the more
you may, he uses to double his temptations when resisted, but give no place to
the Devil, if ye yield, it will be harder to resist the next time: consider
thy relation, art thou a child of God, an heir of heaven, it is unsuitable for
thee to serve Satan, to do his druggery: Ephesians. 4. 20. Ye have not so learned
Christ: Ephesians. 4. 17. I say and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth walk
not as the Gentiles walk in the vanity of their minds: Christ gave himself
for ^is, that they might be holy, Titus 2. 14. Romans 6. 10. 1 John 3. 2. 2 Cor.
6. 18. If tempted, answer, I am chosen to be holy, I may not sin, Romans 8. 29.
Consider the eye of God is ever upon you, Heb. 4. 14. Pro. 15. 3. and 16. 6.
Can you consider that, and sin in so holy a presence: Remember Christ's love,
nourish the motions of the Spirit; Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 16. Nourish zeal and hatred against
sin, every sin: Keep your heart, as your life, Pro. 4. 23. Reform the inside,
and Satan shall not prevail, Job 14. 4. Consider the time ye are to live is
but short, and the pleasures of sin are but for a season, and a short one, Heb.
11. 25. Hearken to the voice of Conscience, least it be silent, and ye
hardened. When the pleasure of sin is presented to thee, present to thy self
the sting it will leave behind it, also present to thy self a greater and
better pleasure and sweetness to be enjoyed with God; mind home, and the
pleasures there, that are for evermore; Set your affections on things above,
where your Crown and glory is, 1 Cor. 9. 24. Watch and pray for strength
against ^in, at the first approach of sin, change the object, and fall to
prayer, be not discouraged, if foiled, still resist, believe against
experience, God will help thee against it, Ephesians. 6. 16. and 4. 12, 13. Apply
suitable promises against sin, consider Ephesians. 5. 5, 6, 7. Romans 6. 11. Psalm. 119.
6. do as Mat. 17. 21. Reprove sin in others, in case none else do.

Consider, by silence when sin is committed we have ^ellowship with it, and
break Gods command, defile our souls, loose comfort, encourage and harden
others in sin.

1. It Is Gods command, that who sin, Rebuke before all, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Pro. 28.
23. and 29. 25. and 24. 25. Thou shall reprove (...), Levit. 19. 17.

2. The Saints have done so with great zeal, Acts 13. 16. 10. Ezra 9. 2, 3, 4.
Psalm. 119. 139. Number. 15. 11, 12, 13. Can we hear false things spoken, and Gods
truth, his way, and people condemned, and be silent, where is our zeal?

3. God commends it for a virtue in his people, that they could not bear with
them that are evil, Rev. 2. 2. To see and hear sin committed with silence, is
to bear it; if Ely sinned in doing it coldly, 1 Samuel 2. and 3. 13. what shall
we say to them that do it not at all, that neither love to God, his truth, his
people, the good of others souls, their own peace, will move them to do it:
does a friend love as he ought, and hears his friend abused, and is silent,
offer not this to God?

4. Reproof of sin, is a means to prevent the contagiousnesse of sin, 1 Cor.
5. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 20. Spare none; if we must take care for the Ox or Ass of an
enemy, as appears, Exodus 23. 4, 5. then much more for the good of the soul of
an enemy.

5. It was Jobes comfort, that nothing could cause him to keep silent, Job 31.
34 If he might have been silent, and not sinned, his silence was but a poor
comfort.

6. God esteems presence and silence a doing of the action, 1 Cor. 11. 4, 5.
with ^4. 24 that is, by consent, for they did not all speak; God charged Ahab
with murder, when Jezabel did it, and he only by consent, 1 King. 18. 19. with
7, 8, 9, 10. Silence is confirmation, as appears, Numb. 30. 14. He confirmed
them, because he held his peace when he heard them: So it was not enough, that
they sh^d not innocent blood, but that they did not see it, Deuteronomy. 21. 7. God
deals with those that were present and silent at the committing of sin* as if
they had done it, see Lev. 5. 1. and 20. 4, 5.

7. Not to reprove sin, is to ^ave fellowship with it, Ephesians. 5. 11. Hag. 2. 13.
Rev. 2. 20. J^sh. 22. 18, 19, 20. Hence the Saints are called to come out of
Babylon, that they might not be part^kers of their sins, Rev. 18. 2. 4. 2
Cor. 6. I was almost in all evil in the midst of the Congregation, Pro. 5. 14.

Lastly, God says, He shall dwell on high that stops his ears from hearing
of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, Isa. 33. 15, 16. Which
shows they can by no means endure it.

Of speech.
1. When thou speak of thy self, speak modestly without vanity and boasting.

2. Hear much, but speak little.

3. Speak not hastily, consider before you speak: see that in all your words
there be truth, fitness in respect of time, place, persons, profitablenesse,
choicenesse, soberness, and moderation in them.

4. If you teach matters of Religion, see that ye prudently understand and
faithfully dispense the word of the Lord, be short and fruitful, and preach
against fleshly lusts, do not affirm or maintain things that are doubtful, if
the Scripture speak it not, be ye silent.

5. If you speak to such as are troubled in mind, consider what knowledge they
have, whether they be strong or weak, whether more or less wounded, and for
what, whether they be troubled because they are troubled, or for fear of
punishment, or for the evil of their sin: observe the persons, age, state, and
condition of life, whether they be naturally fearful and melancholy, whether
they be lost or no, and what hinders their believing, be not too hasty, nor
stay not too long, observe a fit season to comfort.

Of Suretiship.
Be not thou one of them that strike hands, and of them that are sureties for
debts, Pro. 22. 26.

Give not thy self to Suretiship.

Saints.
O dear and precious souls, fear not death, love one another, be obedient to
God, make much of his word, rest satisfied in the Scripture.

That which you judge not lawful to be, admit not to be thought to be, and
refuse to be called so, Heb. 11. 24.

Own that Church that owns the principles and doctrine of Christ, unless there
must be an agreement in the principles of faith, we cannot walk together,
Col. 2. 5. with Amos 3. 3. Follow not every one, Luke 21. 8. Jer. 15. 19.

Neglect not Christ's discipline: rest not in Ordinances: slight not mean gifts.

Of your brethren judge and speak the best, Mat. 7. 2. Rejoice at their
welfare: defend their credit; expound doubtful matters in the best part, 1
Cor. 13. 7. give no offense, Mat. 18. 7.

Self-denial.
Seek not your self out of your self, in the conceits of other men.

Admit of that which tends to self denial: deny selfe-opinion, self
reasoning, selfe-counsell, self excellency, parts, privileges, credit, and
all that is great in thy eyes, or that which may make thee seem so.

Self will, selfe-comfort, self ends, deny all for the sake of God, his
truth, and people.

Also you are like to see divisions and distractions, use means to prevent
them, Isa. 10. 26, 27. see 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2 and 2. 3. 1, 2. The Sun darkened,
Christ obscured, heaven will shake, and stars will fall from thence, Mat. 13.
25. with Heb. 12. 27, 28. When you see it, be not you shaken.

Truth.
Contend earnestly for the truth, and suffer for it.

Buy the truth, and sell it not; let not mercy and truth forsake thee; betray
not the cause of Christ.

Receive not any thing for truth, unless i^ appear in the Scriptures.

If it be doubtful what is truth, consider which most opposes the practice of
the world, which has the least outward engagements attending it, which tends
most to set forth the wisdom and love of God, which are most for Scripture,
and whether their way be in the Scripture, or allege Scripture to prove their
way, which requires most self-denial, which most abase^h man: by these Rules
ye may know which is the truth, and way of God.

Temptation.
Trust neither your self, nor Satan, with any temptation.

Trouble.
Joy in trouble and persecution, be content with any condition for a while, it
will not be long ere glory come.

Time.
Redeem the time present to do good in, depend not on the time to come, for
it is uncertain, and not at thy disposing.

Of Usury.
It Is better to give usury, then to take it, but to do neither is best; avoyde
both.

Word.
Regard nothing but the word of God in matters of Religion.

World.
Set aside the vanity of this world, trust not in men.

Wrong.
Be more willing to receive wrong, then to offer any to any.

Wisdom.
Be not wise in your own 'eyes.

Woman.
Many wise and strong men have fallen by women.

Fly young women, admit no talk with them alone, avoyde such persons, places,
and occasions, as may tend to ensnare thee.

You cannot be too wary, remember how David and Solomon were snared, and fell
greatly, to the great dishonor of God, and his truth, and people, and to their
own great grief and shame, to the joy of their enemies, and to the hardening
of them in their sin.

Yield.
In things concerning your self, be yielding to others as much as you can; but
in the truth yield not in a little: Remember Moses yielded not a hoof, though
it was but a small matter.

Zeal.
Take heed ye decay not in your love and zeal for God, and so fall from your
first love.

Counsel to the unmarried.
Think not of marrying, until ye have 1. Sought God by prayer, for strength
and contentedness to live a single life.

2. Use such means, as may best fit and enable thee to live a single life.
Observe a wary and temperate diet, and drink Jacobs drink, Joh. 4. 12. with 1
Cor. 9. 27. fit company, fasting and prayer, meditation on God, diligence in
thy calling, etc. It may please God to enable thee to live chastely a single
life.

3. Labor to know the conveniences and inconveniences which attend a married
life; Consider if ye be able and willing to drink of the bitter cup of
discontents, which the married often drink off: what cares and burdens attend
that state.

4. If upon the use of means for some space you find your heart inclined to
marry, fear nothing, cast thy care upon God, be as wise as thou can, and
venture upon a wife or husband in the way of the Gospel; then

1. Pray to God to give thee a wise (or husband) that may be a meet help to
thee; a virtuous wife is the crown of her husband: Crowns are rare and
honorable; every one has not such a crown, her prise is far above Rubies,
Pro. 31. 10. No jewel is to be compared unto her, she is a gift of God* worth
asking.

2. Do nothing rashly, snatch not the first that comes to hand, prove she well
or ill, she may please for a moment, and be a thorn in thy side for ever after.

3. If thou art one of the Lords, marry in the Lord, love such as God loves:
that which is desirable in a man, is his goodness, Pro. 19. 22. so it is in a
woman: men seek wealth and beauty without Religion, but these things cannot
supply the want of Religion; external things will quickly blast, and the most
resolved loves vanish, when the fuel of love fails.

4. Choose one suitable in Religion, how can there be amity and love, where
diverse Religions are: no opposition is so strong as that which is for Religion;
contrariety causes enmity; Consider Deuteronomy. 22. 11. Job 1. 8, 9. 2 Cor. 6. 15.
and apply them. Secondly* Marry not as some do, one as old again, others as
young again; such matches are unsuitable and dishonorable. Thirdly, Choose one
of a good disposition, least ye smart for it; a few odious qualities will in
time wear off much doting delight. Fourthly, Suitable in respect of condition
of life, and ability of body to labor, and fare as thy ability requires; such
as must fare and wear that which is costly, and so weak not able to labor,
are fit for such as can bear it in respect of their states and minds.

5. Take heed least ye wrong not any in not performing your promise; also have
a care of your carriage, that ye express not your self in such a way as
shall justly cause it to be interpreted love, in that kind a man may make such
a profession of love, and yet so express himself, as he shall not be engaged
by promise (when by his practice he is) and so at pleasure depart, to the great
wrong and hazard of the other party, without giving any sufficient reason of
it. It were well, if the wrongs of this kind were severely punished by the
Magistrate, to be an example to others.

6. Marry with your Parents consent, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 36. unless they
extend their authority to the hurt of soul and body; in some cases, the want
of it is not sufficient to hinder, as in case the party has been married
before, as Numb. 30. 4. or Exodus 22. 16.

Mutual Counsel to husbands and wives.
1. Have a high esteem of marriage: marriage is honorable.

2. Nourish love, and abhor all occasions to the contrary, strive who shall
love each other most, and express it best, with the most cordial affection,
live and love, and cease not to love, till ye cease to live: love is given to
both, to make the miseries of marriage tolerable: have a care ye loose not
your first love; so demean your selves, as may best draw forth each others
heart in all love and amity, and be ready to express love and simpathy.

3. Avoyde a peevish carriage, which provokes to weariness, impatience, and
discontent.

4. Bear with each others infirmities, do not fret nor cavil at them, but
cover them with tenderness; if ye have a bad bargain, make the best of it
you can, it is too late now to complain, an eying each others infirmities, deads
and kills the affection of love.

5. Impart not your discontents to strangers, nor ask any counsel of them,
but with a free consent of both, and that when an absolute necessity requires
it. Such as complain to others, show their clamorous and turbulent spirits, and
want of wisdom of love.

6. If thy husbands and wives virtues be but small, multiply them by
contemplation, and by putting upon them the great value of their worth.

7. Observe each others tempers, to prevent discontents, and to preserve and
increase love.

8. If there fall out a difference between you, be both freely willing the word
of God may decide it, and submit to it.

9. Fear breaches, know a small spark of difference may increase to a great
flame, if not timely prevented; expect trouble, and bear with one another,
least ye break that which holds all together, the thread of love: Christ's
carriage to his is loving, meek, and sweet, let yours be so.

10. Be both chaste, love each others company, be faithful each to other, let
one house, one bed, one purse, serve them that are but one.

11. Be industrious and provident, that neither of you may want.

12. Hinder not each other in serving God.

13. In matters of Religion especially, do as ye would be done unto, offend
not the conscience.

14. Find as little fault one with another as possibly you can, and express
it not in anger, but in love, and when ye be both alone, forgive each other.

15. Tender each others good name.

16. Be fearful of harboring jealousies of each other, without a clear and
sufficient ground, least ye wrong each other, and make your lives bitter and
burdensome each to other.

Counsel to the wife.
1. Love your own husband, and express your love in a reverend, amiable, and
modest manner; in thy husband thou may behold authority, government,
forecast, sovereignty, from him thou injoyest countenance, protection,
direction, honor, love, etc.

2. Honor your husband inwardly in your heart, and outwardly in your actions,
esteem him as he is, your superior and head, and in lawful things yield to
him, let your will be subject to his, have you no will but his, if he speak
the word, do not contest, but in humility yield; if he be angry, be ye
silent; know the carriage of the Church, as it ought to be to Christ, is to be
a pattern to you; and know where love is, duties are frequent, and acted with
ease and delight.

3. Obey thy husbands lawful commands, alas, how hard is the word Obedience to
many a woman, that has a proud and stout stomach, they will profess, they
neither can nor will yield their necks to be subject in every thing.

The Lord knew that both man and wife would have their wills, though they were
quite contrary to each other, therefore the Lord thought fit to order it as he
would have it, that the wife should yield to her husband, and be obedient to
him in every thing; for thus says the Lord; Wives submit your selves unto your
own husbands, as unto the Lord, for the husband is the head of the wife, even
as Christ is the head of his Church; therefore as the Church is subject to
Christ, so let the wives be unto their own husbands in every thing, Ephesians. 5.
22, 23, 24. Therefore, O woman, whosoever thou art, rich or poor, that God
has commanded you to be subject to your husband, and if you do it not, God
will call you to an account for it one day, though it may be your husband is
content to let it pass; therefore in the fear of God, consider it, and tremble
at the thought of living in the breach of such an express and plain command;
consider, Christ is the Author of salvation to all that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. it
may be; you count it folly and baseness to be so subject to your husband in
every thing, but you will think otherwise at the great day, when Christ shall
come in flaming fire, to render vengeance on them that have not obeyed him, 2
These. 1. 8. O that ye would go to God for humility and self denial, to
stoop to your husbands lawful commands, because God has commanded it, and
will have it so.

Though marriage be an equal state, yet the carriage of both is not to be the
same, therefore let thy love to thy husband be with a loyal, sweet subjection,
without slavoury, and thy obedience shall be a blessing to thee, and an
increase of thy inward peace, and joy; also thou shall avoyde many quarrels,
envy, and discontents, which others endure, and by thy obedience thou shall
honor God, and be a good pattern to others to do so also.

Counsel to the husband.
Let your carriage be as Christ is to his Church, which is loving, meek, and
sweet.

1. Consider the command of God is upon you, that you love your own wife, and
be not bitter unto her: Let love descend first from thee, she is a deserving
object of love; she has forsaken all for thee, and perhaps is shiftlesse
without thee; great are her burdens and pains in conception and bearing
children, etc. all calls for compassion, love, and tenderness: Let thy love be
to her, full and free; love her in some sense better then thy self: Husbands
love your wives, even as Christ also loved his Church, and gave himself for
it; so ought men to love their wives as their own bodies; he that loves his
wife, loves himself; for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, they two are
one flesh, Ephesians. 5. 25. 28, 29. 31.

2. Ease thy wise as much as thou can; though she be bound to obey thy
commands, thou art not bound to command her: also you need not command so many
things, nor so frequently, and so the burden of subjection will be made much
easier unto her. I conceive it would be much better, and very commendable for
the husband, to turn what he may command, into entreaties, or say, wife if you
please, do such a thing; so would it be no burden to her, it being wholly
removed, and more would be done by her, and that with ease and delight. Surely
for a husband to command all he may, he will be bitter to her, and if she
should obey, as she ought, may it not prove very burdensome; if she be
willing to obey, spare her; if unwilling, forbear her, that so she may sin
less: Say not, thou will make her, be not too confident of thy strength, one
as wise and strong as thou a^t, could not do it; Victory is not always to the
strong, Eccles. 9. 11. It is ill grapling with a wilful and head^strong woman;
one weak in body, may be strong in mischief; The tongue is an unruly member,
which no man can tame, James 3. 8, 9, 10. If she answer not thy desires,
inform her of her duty from the Scriptures, pray to God to set it home upon
her Conscience; if God be not regarded, it is no wonder if thou be sligh^^d.

3. Do not strike thy Crown, nor cast it in the dirt, Pro. 12. 4.

4. Honor thy wife; right her wrongs; suffer none to slight or abuse her in no
kind.

5. Dwell with her, deprive her not of the benefit of thy presence, by long
journeys, unless necessity enforce it.

6. Provide all things needful for her, that she may live comfortably with
thee; whether she be good or bad, you ought to do what you can that she may
live comfortably after your death.

7. Let her share with thee in that which God has given thee, spiritual and
temporal; if thou have plenty, let her have plenty also, it is but equal, she
shall be sure to share with thee in the ill, in poverty, sickness, disgrace,
and other miseries; therefore let her share in thy plenty also, let her have
for delight as well as thy self, make her case thy own, and do as thou
would be done unto, and give it her freely without asking. Some have much,
and spend much upon their pleasures, but allow their wives nothing, or as good
as nothing; such give their wives ground enough to question the truth of their
love to them, for love is bountiful in a little, much more where there is
plenty; that you have is hers as much as yours, for her necessity and comfort,
seeing ye are but one.

These things much concern the comfort of a married life, and may be of great
use to some, into whose hands this may come, if GOD please to set it home upon
their hearts.

Concerning Prayer.
Prayer is a precious privilege, and of great use; Ask, and it shall be given
you, Mat. 7. 7. see Is^. 50. 15. J^mes 1. 5. Luke 11. 13* It Is a remedy of all
evils, Joh. 3. 8. 10. Psalm. 107. Prayer fits us for those good things we
need, Exodus 14. 15, 16. Jona. 2. 1. 10. Acts 12. 5, 6, 7. Josu. 10. 12. Hos.
14. 3, 4. Song 2. 14. Therefore prize prayer, and frequent it.

Preparation to prayer is a duty, Levit. 10. 3. Prepare to meet thy God, Amos
4. 12. 1 Samuel 7. 3. 2 Timothy 2. 21. The Saints have practiced it; Jehosapbat
prepared his heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. see Ezra 7. 10. Thou will
prepare their hearts, O God. Psalm. 10. 17. in the use of means.

Promises annexed to preparation; see Job 11. 13. 15. to 20.

It Is an evil not to do it, 2 Chronicles. 12. 14.

It Is a holy consideration of God, and what may best compose our hearts,
craving his strength: when thou prayest, forgive, consider Psalm. 66. 18. Mark.
11. 25. Mat. 5. 24.

For time and place to pray, Pro. 18. 1. Mark. 1. 35. or a closet, Mat. 5. Be
private. Psalm. 119. 147.

Consider, what may raise thy heart to God, what be thy wants, lets,
temptations, corruptions, with suitable promises; let your ends be holy, and
right placed, James 4.

Consider the attributes of God, Exodus 34. Have high thoughts of God, and low
ones of thy self, Genesis 18. 27.

Go to God with a large and cheerful heart, in assurance of person and prayer
accepted, hate hard thoughts of God, Psalm. 65. 2. and 77. 4. 7.

Embrace that season that God and thy heart sends thee to pray, and quickly
embrace the motion of the Spirit.

Pray to God to teach thee and enable thee to pray: pray not in print.

Read and meditate before prayer, if time will permit, they fit to pray in
prayer.

Fix thy mind upon God in Christ, and thy interest in him, and union with him.

Pray in knowledge, Joh. 5. 14.

Pray in faith, Heb. 11. 6. James 16. Romans 8. 38. Mark 9. 22.

Pray as thy present state and frame of spirit requires: strive against
sloathfulnesse and vanity of mind: strive for the best affections in prayer,
serve the Lord with all thy might servently; pray briefly, and often, Mat. 26.
39. Mind the time, season, occasion, and persons, what they can bear. In long
prayers, take heed of custom, superstition, and ambition; in short, take heed
of coldness and carelessness: long or short, pray with affection, be sutably
sensible, with joy, desire, or grief: see if the heart be as thy mouth.

Consider God in his greatness, etc. be thankful for what you have received,
1 Chronicles. 15. 13. Observe order, ask spiritual things before earthly: let
mourning flow from faith, Zach. 12. 10.

Be as large in thankfulness, as in request.

Be loath to be sent empty away: the life of prayer consists in servent desires,
Romans 15. 30. and 8. 16. Psalm. 143. 6. Lord give me what I come for.

Pray, as 2 Cor. 12. 10. Acts 7. 60.

After prayer.

As soon as the duty is ended: if enlarged, and before others, eye one or
more of thy defects in prayer, to humble thee; see how the duty was inwardly
performed, what faith, desires, comforts, God gave thee: Be not over-sensible
of thy defects in prayer.

Consider, My strength is made perfect in weakness: most gladly therefore will
I glory, that the power of Christ may rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12. 9, 10.

Whether enlarged or straightened (be thankful) inward or outward: be the
same, because Christ is the same, Heb. 13. 8. If enlarged, and faith
strengthened, be thankful; press after what thou have prayed for; use the
means, as, Pro. 2. 3, 4, 5. We tempt God to ask, and not to use the means;
see Pro. 20. 4. It Is for hypocrites to pray, and then to sin freely, as if they
intended to have liberty to sin.

Expect and wait patiently for an answer of prayer, Psalm. 40. 1. Rev. 3. 10.
Hab. 2. 2, 3. We should be loath to loose our prayers, eye the promise, least
ye faint, Psalm. 147. 1^. Take not a delay, for a denial: God knows the
fittest season to do us good in: we wait to see what God will do; eye the
event of your prayers, and be thankful for any answer of prayer.

Directions for hearing the Word.
Prize the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 3. Look to God to bless it to thee.

Take ^eed how ye hear, Luke 8. 18. Ezekiel. 40. 4.

Hear to practice, Isa. 55. 3. Believe God will bless it to thee; eye the
promise, Job. 7. 17. Mica. 2. 3. to the end. Isa. 48. 17. Psalm. 119. 33, 34.
and 86. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 31. 4. and 3. 4. 22.

Be humble; The humble he will teach, Psalm. 25. 9.

Come empty of distractions of worldly thoughts and affections, Exodus 3. 5.
Pro. 27. 7. Luke 1. 51.

Pray, show me thy truth, and bless it to me, Psalm. 119. 18. Pray for him,
Col. 4. 4.

Omit not opportunity, Eccle. 11. 6. Take heed who ye hear, and what ye
hear.

In hearing the Word.
Attend diligently, Isa. 55. 23. Watch eyes, ears, hearts, sleep not, wander
not, gaze not, do as Acts 8. 6. Mind that which most concerns thee.

Hear with understanding and judgment, put a difference between truth and
error, Prove. 14. 15. Matthew. 13. 13. and 15. 10. Job 21. 11.

Hear it as the word of God, else it profits not, Heb. 4. 2. 1 Pet. 2 3. 1
These. 2. 13. Pro. 3. 4, 5. Let it sink down into your heart, Neh. 9. 25. Luke
9. 45. Psalm. 119. 11.

After hearing.
If God has blessed it to thee, Joh. 14. 22. Mat. 13. 17. Psalm. 147. 20. 1
Cor. 14. 25. hold it fast, let it not go, loose it not the air of the world.

Try what ye have heard, 1 These. 5. 21. Acts 17. 11. Acts 8. 34. Romans 3. 8.

Know, He that planteth and waters, is nothing, 1 Cor. 3. 7. Acts 8. 1. with
11. 19. 21. Acts 4. 13. It Is God that gives the increase, give him the glory.

Think on what thou have heard, Phil. 4. 8. Deuteronomy. 3. 39. she pondered, Luke
2. 19. meditation helps the memory, and affection, and works an inward feeling
of it, if God bless it, but if we meditate not on it, it will do us no good,
but come to nothing.

Apply what thou have heard to thy several occasions.

Practice it, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. Mat. 7. 26. Jam. 1. 25. God looks for fruit, Isa. 5.
2. Mat. 21. 34. Luke 13. 7. Where much is given, much is required, Luke 12. 48.
Joh. 8. 47. and 12. 40. Practice presently; I made have, and delayed not, Psalm.
119. 60. Genesis 7. 23. with 22. 3. Abraham went presently; they were not to stay,
but to step in presently, Joh. 5. 4. Pro. 24. 33, 34.

Concerning Reading, give attendance to it, 1 Timothy 4. 13.

To read with profit requires diligence, Pro. 2. 12. Mat. 13. 54.

Wisdom in the choice of matters suitable to our necessity and capacity; and
fit time to read in respect of others business; God has made every thing
beautiful in it is time, Eccle. 3. 11.

Pray for a sound judgment, and good affections; so Pro. 17. 16. An honest
heart, Luke 8. Wherefore is there a prise put into the hand of a fool, to get
wisdom, ^eeing he has no heart to it.

After reading meditate, Psalm. 1. 2. it makes that we read our own.

Confer on it, pray and praise; Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy
statutes, Psalm. 119.

He that profits by hearing and reading, he must pray continually, 1 These. 5.
and not be wise in his own eyes, Psalm. 34. and 119. and his ends good, 1 Co^.
10. 31. he must love the Word, and hearken unto it, Mark. 7. 14. and resolve to
obey, John 7. 17. and search the Scriptures, and compare them together, John 5.
39.

Isaiah 44. 20.
He feeds upon ashes: a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot
deliver his soul, nor say; Is there not a lie in my right hand?

THese words declare the dead and miserable estate of man by nature.

1. He is without knowledge and understanding, he cannot see, he cannot
understand; as verse. 18, 19.

2. His food is ashes.

3. He has an appetite unto them, he lives upon them, he feeds upon ashes.

4. The end of his feeding is, that he might deliver his soul.

5. His mistake and delusion, he is turned aside.

6. The cause of this delusion is from his own heart; a deceived heart has
turned him aside.

7. The strength of his delusion is such, that he cannot say; Is there not a
lie in my right hand?

8. His soul is taken prisoner by Satan, he is a captive to him, and is kept
by him, he cannot deliver his soul.

9. He sees and knows his soul is taken, and lost, and he would feign redeem
it again; he uses means to do it.

10. The fruit of his labors are all lost, all his labors and endeavors, his
best skill, and his best actions will not do him any good, they cannot help
him; he cannot deliver his soul; he would gladly deliver his soul; he would
do any thing he can to do it, but though he do his best, it will do him no
good; for he cannot deliver his soul.

By ashes, is meant that which is not bread; Christ is the true bread, his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; other things may be taken
for bread, and in appearance have the same color and form bread has, but
whatsoever it seems to be, it is not bread indeed but ashes; Christ is the
living bread that came down from heaven, if any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever, see Joh. 6. 32. 35. 48. 51. 55. So that groundless hopes,
false conclusions, Idolatry, duties, ordinances, comforts, joys, ravishments,
and what else soever ye can name, except Jesus Christ, is ashes. Christ takes
from his all their ashes, to give unto them beauty for ashes, Isa. 61. 3.

The words opened.
By heart, is meant the understanding and will.

Deceived heart, misinformed by Satan, darkened, so that he thinks he is
rightly informed concerning the salvation of his soul, but he is deceived.

Aside from Christ, in whom is deliverance, rest, satisfaction, and salvation.

Turned him, viz. the understanding and will, has a power to turn the soul.

Soul, is meant the whole man, a principle part is here put for the whole.

Deliver, escape the danger he is in.

A lie, viz. that which will deceive me, in not being unto me that I take it
for, and that I need, that which will never perform that it promises to me:

Hand, that which holds, viz. the understanding, etc.

Right hand, the most eminent for use, viz. in those things which are most
eminent, and of greatest concernment, the soul is deceived.

Obs. 1. Natural men are content to be at great cost to save their souls,
Thousands of Rams, ten thousands of Rivers of Oil, the fruit of their body
for the sin of the^r soul^s, Mica 6. 6, 7. This is but ashes.

Obs. 2. There is no life nor strength to be expected from ashes, they are no
food fit to eat; naturally ashes corrupts and destroys the body; so these fill
the soul with corruption, which kills and destroys it; as they that have no
bread, must dye for hunger, Luke 15. 17.

Obs. 3. The food natural men live upon is ashes, bread they have none, they
know no better, nor desire no bread, Isa. 52. 2. They like ashes best, because
they are suitable to their natures, judgments, desires, affections, they see no
danger in eating ashes, they think it a happiness to have them, and they
expect satisfaction from them.

Obs. 4. Eaters of ashes are in a sad condition, they eat ashes and think
they eat bread, they are deceived; Isa. 29. 2. they follow vanity, Hab. 2. 3.
the East wind, Hos. 12. 1. And lay out their money for that which is not
bread, Isa. 55. 2.

Therefore consider, what do thou live upon?

When thou art empty, what is it that you eye, whether do thou go, go
thou to Christ, can you say,

First, My hope is only in Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 19.

Secondly, I find no peace, comfort, contentment, satisfaction, in nothing but
in Christ, Phil. 3. 8.

Thirdly, Is Christ thy life and strength, and nothing but Christ, Joh. 15. 5.
Col. 3. 11.

Fourthly, Can no peace, comfort, praise of men, duties, ordinances, joys,
ravishments, satisfy me, nothing but Christ, Col. 3. 11. If Christ be so all
and all to thee, then thou do live upon bread, and not on ashes.

Obs. 5. There is nothing in man, or can be done by man, that can deliver his
soul; man in himself is irrecoverably lost; if he follow his own heart, he is
misled, his heart is deceived, it turns him aside, and leads him to death, if
he follow his light, his understanding, he follows darkness, for his light is
darkness, as Mat. 6. 33. He that walks in darkness, knows not whether he
goes, Joh. 12. 35. We were sometimes darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8.

Obs. 6. Man's heart is not to be hearkened unto, because it turns the soul
aside from Christ.

What do thou hearken unto, and live upon. Consider

1. Many in stead of living upon God, live upon a deceived heart, Pro. 3. 5, 6,
7.

2. Many live upon sense.

3. Many live upon corrupt reason.

4. Some build their hopes of salvation upon other men's judgments.

5. Many live upon the report of others; it appears by this, if men speak not
well of them, they are greatly troubled, and not able to bear it; by which it
appears, their life is in it: the reason Laban made such a stir for his
images, was because they were his gods.

6. Many live upon their reformation, they thank God, they are not so bad as
they have been, therefore they hope now all is well; it is well when men grow
better; yet abstinence from evil, is no evidence of grace, for men may
forbear the act of sin, for fear of hell, or men.

7. Many live upon duties, and as they increase, their hope and confidence
increases, but when their duties fail them, their hope and confidence is at
an end; by which it appears, they live upon what they do, and not upon God;
these count their duties, which is their righteousness, gain, but if they
belong to God, they must count again, as Paul did this their gain to be loss
for Christ, Phil. 3. 8.

8. Some live upon their peace, they are quiet, free from terrors and fear of
hell in them, therefore they conclude, they are in a good estate, this is a
subtle delusion.

9. Many live upon groundless hopes, because their sins are few, or small,
as they think, they have hope.

10. Many live upon their inward comfort and joy, that while that lasts, they
have much assurance of salvation, but as soon as their comfort and joy, which
they sensibly felt, leaves them, their confidence went with their comfort, and
leaves them in a sad condition.

11. Some live upon ravishments, and ecstasies of glory.

12. Many live upon the ordinances of men, are ready to be of any Religion the
authority will impose, and so rest satisfied.

13. Many live upon the ordinances of God without God, they rest satisfied,
that they frequent the ordinances.

14. Some live upon their confidence of salvation.

15. Many live upon creature comforts, and conclude, God loves them, because
they possess them.

16. Many live upon the Devil, and his word, which is when Satan's suggestions
are hearkened unto, liked, believed, embraced, and obeyed: if he say, their
sins shall never be pardoned and subdued, they believe him, and are ruled by
him; this is so to live upon the Devil, as to hearken unto God, as Isa. 53. 3.
to believe in him, 1 John 3. 23. and to submit to God, James 4. 7. is to live
upon God.

A false foundation, and a false life, go together, and all those who live on
any thing besides Jesus Christ, their foundation is unsound, and it will
certainly deceive them; whatsoever their sparks be, they shall lie down in
sorrow; as, Isa. 50. 10. These are lying vanities, and they that hearken unto
them, forsake their own mercy, Jona 2. 8.

Obs. 7. A man is prone to follow the advice of his own heart.

The reason is.

First, Because he thinks his heart knows, and

Secondly, That his heart will not deceive him: but who so trusts in his
heart is a fool^, Pro. 28. 26. Isa. 10. 7. Jer. 23. 26.

Thirdly, Because he is ignorant of the desperate wickedness of his heart,
Jer. 17. 9. Happy is he that so knows his heart, so as not to trust to it, nor
hearken unto it.

The heart is the cause of all the errors and miscarriages of men, Out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Luk 6. 45. Mat. 15. 19. What men
think, speak, or do, (...) from the heart.

Obs. 8. Men seek deliverance for themselves from themselves.

Men endeavor to deliver their souls. The Reason is;

First, He judges it reasonable that his soul be delivered.

Secondly, He knows no other way of deliverance, save that of his own, in
whole, or in part.

Thirdly, He thinks it concerns him most, and that it is his duty to do it.

Fourthly, He is persuaded he may deliver his soul, or at least, that without
him it cannot be delivered; this he will not be driven from, till God manifest
to the soul the perfection of Christ's righteousness, then shall he see the
insufficiency of his own, Romans 10. 3.

He cannot deliver his soul.

Obs. 9. It is impossible for man to save himself, in whole, or in part, it is
beyond his power, he cannot do it; see Lam. 5. 21. Jer. 31. 18. Job. 12. 38,
39.

Obs. 10. Until a soul be convinced, that he cannot deliver himself, he
rests in himself.

God has not left it to the will and power of man, to deliver himself, because

First, That no man might boast, Ephesians. 2. 9. and that the pride in man may be
dashed in pieces.

Secondly, That man might not live in and upon himself, nor joy in himself,
but in the Lord Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 13.

Thirdly, That the love and power of God might be manifested, that we might
know the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward, who believe his mighty
power, Ephesians. 1. 19.

Fourthly, That God might have all the glory, Ephesians. 1. 6. that no flesh might
glory, 1 Cor. 1. 29. Gal. 6. 14. In the Lord shall all the children of Israel
glory, Isa. 55. 25.

Obs. 11. All ways besides Jesus Christ, are by paths, aside out of the way,
I am the way, Joh. 14. 6.

Obs. 12. Gods way and man's way, are contrary each to other; Christ's way leads
the soul to Christ; man's way leads to himself, to deliver himself.

13. We should not be led aside from Christ by any thing in the world: hearken
then only to Christ.

Nor say; Is there not a lie? viz. he cannot ask the question.

14. The means of deliverance are so hid from him, that he cannot use them; a
lie.

15. All that man does rest upon while he is in the state of nature, is nothing
but a lie.

He is miserably deluded.

16. The strength and confidence of a deluded man, may be so great, that it may
seem to him unreasonable once to question it.

17. A deluded man's confidence of salvation, may be greater and stronger then
the faith of some that are the Lords: and yet be false, a mere delusion of
Satan, and a deceived heart.

18. The greatness or strength of any man's confidence, cannot assure him that
has it, that it is not a delusion, but it may be proved true or false by the
ground of it, the cause and foundation of it; for

If it be built or caused by any qualifications in us, either abstinence from
sin, or doing good, or from inward peace or joy, etc. it is all false; but if it
be founded upon Christ alone in his free grace in the word and promise of God,
Romans 15. 4. If we can truly say, In his word do I hope, Psalm. 130. 5. But I
hope in thy Word, Psalm. 119. 81. It is well, if thou were lost and fatherless,
Hos. 14. 3. and were persuaded he had mercy for thee, and did hope in him for
it, as Psalm. 33, 18. 21, 22. it is no delusion.

2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, etc.
THese words show the excellency and necessity of the Scriptures, and their
exceeding majesty and authority over us.

The Apostle in the 14. verse, exhorts Timothy, and so the Saints, to continue
in the knowledge and practice of the things he had learned of the Scriptures:
and backs his exhortation with two strong arguments: one is because all
Scripture is given by inspiration of God. As if he should say, if the Scripture
were but the inventions of men, in stead of learning and observing them, you
might slight them, but seeing they came from God, by inspiration of God, we
may not contradict nor slight the inspirations of God, but submit unto them.
The other is from the excellency, necessity, and usefulness of the Scriptures
unto us, in that they are able to make us wise unto salvation, to instruct us
in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
every good work, verse. 15, 16, 17.

Whence we learn.
1. That God is the Author of the Scripture, that it is originally from him,
God inspired it into them, they received it from him, it is the saying of the
holy Spirit, Heb. 3. 7.

2. That there is a necessity for men to know and believe, that the Scripture
is the inspiration of God: for

1. Else they can have no power and authority over the conscience, seeing
nothing can bind the conscience, but the authority of God, (truly, or so
apprehended.)

2. Else men will not observe the commands thereof, but slight and jeere at it;
as those do who deny the Scriptures to be from God.

3. Unless we know and believe they came from God, we have no ground of peace
and comfort, for, if they be not from God, how shall I be assured of the truth
of them, then what hope have I, but in this life, which tends to make us most
miserable.

4. If they be not Gods word and will, we cannot honor God to observe it.

5. To deny the Scriptures to be from God, is to open a gap to all evil and
profaneness; for how will you prove any action to be evil, or unlawful, but
by the Scriptures? if ye set aside the Scriptures, ye will soon judge it
lawful to do what ye please.

Use. Information, seeing the Scriptures are of divine inspiration, it must
needs be a very great evil, and a most horrible sin to contemn or slight the
Scriptures, for in so doing they slight the inspirations of God.

Use. Exhortation; To all that fear God, to look upon the Scriptures to be as
they are, the very inspirations of God, that so you may honor it, and obey it.

Alas, into what times are we fallen, that men need to be exhorted to believe
this truth, which is fully declared in the word of God.

These are the last times, wherein iniquity does so abound, as men are not
afraid, nor ashamed to profess they do not believe it; one says, they are
not from God, but men's experiences; another denies the truth of them, and
says, they concern him not, and so they are nothing to him: but I trust all
that fear the Lord, will prize his truth, keep close unto it, and contend
earnestly for it; for if we let this go, then farewell all Religion, yea God,
Christ, and Heaven, and all; for if the Scriptures be not true, there are no
such things.

It Is in vain to allege Scripture to these men, to prove the Scriptures to be
from God, because they question the truth of the Scriptures: It Is necessary to
give some Reasons, to satisfy the Reason of such as are not unreasonable, that
the Scriptures, called the Bible, are from God, inspired from him.

Demonstrations that the Scriptures are of God, and from God.
The Scriptures are either from God, or from men: they are not from men, for
these Reasons.

1. Because neither the folly nor wisdom of man, can effect such a work, to
compose the Scriptures, for men as men cannot understand the meaning of them:
if they had originally been from men, the same wisdom that invented them,
could understand them; but seeing men cannot understand the meaning of them,
nor agree upon any meaning of them, it appears they are a mystery above the
reach of nature.

2. They are not from men, because it condemns that which is most excellent in
nature, as it condemns the wisdom of man to be foolishness, in that it
cannot understand it, and seeing they cannot know it, they could not cause it;
also it is against reason for any thing to condemn it self, is it not quite
contrary to nature, to condemn that which is most excellent in nature, the
wisdom of man is most excellent in nature, therefore the wisdom of nature was
not the Author of the Scripture; also man's wisdom esteems the wisdom of it
to be foolishness: contraries cannot agree.

3. The Scriptures are not from men, because the whole scope and drift of the
Scriptures, tend wholly to destroy that which the nature of man loves most, as
the way and will of man, yea it requires him to deny himself; what is more
contrary to nature then this; therefore this never came from the nature of man;
besides, it is a strong argument, that the Scriptures came not originally from
man, but from God, because they are no whit agreeable to our natures* hence it
is worth observing, that we naturally choose and delight to read any Book
rather then the Scriptures; as we see by experience, that those that read much,
read little in the Scriptures.

4. Because the Scriptures require that which is beyond the power of man to
do, as that he should deny himself, which to do requires a divine power, as
the Scriptures and experience teach; self is for it self, how then can self
deny it self; nature does not require, nor desire any such thing, therefore
it is required by some other, which must needs be God; also it affirms that
which is impossible to the reason, nature, and wisdom of man, as that a Virgin
should conceive a Son, this is beyond the reach of nature, and therefore it is
from God.

5. The Scriptures are not from men, because the more any are ruled by it, and
obey it, the more they are hated and persecuted by men; which shows it was
never the will of man, and therefore it came not from nature, but from God.

6. The Scriptures came from God, because they tend to God, this is a rule in
nature, every thing tends to it is center; a stone to the earth, the waters to
the Sea from whence they came; So the Scriptures tend to God, they run to God,
they show God in his goodness, wisdom, power, love; in the Scriptures there
is a divine wisdom, they speak for God, they call men to God, and to be for
God, which is the center of the Scriptures.

7. The Scriptures are not from men, because the way of bringing them forth
into the world, is quite contrary to the wisdom and expectation of man, who in
great matters imply persons that are wise, great, and honorable; but they came
forth in a quite contrary way, in that mean and contemptible silly tradesmen,
fishermen, and Tent-makers, etc. were the publishers and penmen of the
Scriptures, although at the same time there were men naturally wise and learned
at Athens.

8. The Scriptures are from God, because God has wonderfully and strangely
preserved them, in making the Jews, who were enemies to Christ, and his words,
preservers of the Scriptures: also in preserving them, when the greatest men
have sought their destruction, by searching for them, and burning them, etc.
The like preservation cannot be declared of any other writings that have had so
great opposition.

9. The miracles which were wrought at the first publishing of the Scriptures,
prove them to be from God; and that there were such miracles, we have the
testimony of those who were enemies to Christ, and the Scriptures, those Jews
who did not own Christ, nor his doctrine, who lived in Christ's time; saying,
There was a man one Jesus (if I may call him a man) who did great miracles,
etc. as Josephus and others in their writings testify. Now what reason can be
given, that the enemies to Christ, and his doctrine, should confess such
things of Christ, if they were not true?

10. Lastly, We know the Scriptures to be from God, because we see in our days
some of those things the Scriptures have foretold, come to pass; which things
came not to pass in the course of nature, nor in the eye of reason, as Mat.
24. 5. 24. Luke 12. 52, 53. 1 Timothy 4. 1. etc. 2 Timothy 3. To believe the
Scriptures are of divine inspiration, is a work of faith, and unless the holy
Spirit persuade the soul of the truth of them, there will be doubting; the
Lord persuade his of the truth of them, and of their interest in them.

Seeing the Scriptures came from God by divine inspiration, they must needs be
truth, therefore we ought to believe what it says, and rest upon it, whether
there be reason to satisfy reason or no, our reason is blind and corrupt.

2. Seeing they are the inspirations of God, it should cause us to prize and
love the Word of the Lord; David did so, Psalm. 119. 97. he loved it vehemently,
exceedingly, unspeakeably: the Saints love the Word, and they are not ashamed
to declare their love to it; they love it for the excellency that is in it;
they see love, wisdom, truth, purity, etc. The Word is very pure, therefore
thy servants love it, Psalm. 119. 105, 151. It Is a light to our feet; the rule
of our life; it tends to perfection; it cures all distempers; it is the ground
of our confidence; it keeps us from perishing in affliction, 92. It quickens
us, 93. It rejoices the heart, 111. It Is lovely, and such as love the Lord,
love his word, Job 23. 12. Love to the Word, is a holy and strong inclination
of soul, or affection of heart, arising from the apprehension of the Author of
it, and the excellency and sutablenesse of it, which causes the soul to
desire and prise it above all things, Psalm. 119. 17. 25. If ye love the word,
then ye will highly esteem it above gold, above fi^e gold, above thousands of
gold and silver, Psalm. 119. 72. Secondly, then you desire it, love works by
desire, great love is attended with great desire, and longing to enjoy it.
Thirdly, then you will take pains to enjoy it, and obey it; love and labor
go together, Psalm. 27. 4. Fourthly, then you think often upon it, for so we
do what we love, Psalm. 1. Fifthly, then it shall rule you; I have refrained
from every evil way, that I might keep thy word, Psalm. 119. 101. To obey it
is a fruit of love; so contrary, Psalm. 81. 11. Sixthly, then it is a grief to
you that others contemn and reject the word; I was grieved, because men kept
not thy word, Psalm. 119. 158. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because men
keep not thy law, 135. see 139. v. Seventhly, then you hate every thing that
is contrary to the word, love works by detestation of that which is contrary to
that they love; I hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 104. Eighthly, then you
rejoice in the Word, as one that finds great spoil, Psalm. 119. 162. Ninthly,
then you will rest on what the Word says; I trust in thy Word, 42. Tenthly,
then you will part with your sweet sin for the Word, Psalm. 119. with 2 Cor. 5.
14. We have cause to be ashamed for our want of love to the Word; our seldom
meditation on it, might convince us of our want herein: To love the word, 1.
Pray that thou may see the beauty and excellency of the Word. 2. Read and
meditate on it. 3. Practice it, and you shall better know it, Joh. 7. 17. 4.
Abate in carnal affections, for they are enemies to holy love. 5. Consider the
Word deserves thy love. 6. Consider it is thine, and those good things contained
in it: the more we believe the interest in the word, the more we love it; Great
peace have they that love thy law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.
169.

3. Seeing they are the inspirations of God, it should cause us to cleave to
the Scriptures, hear nothing against it; prove all things by the Scriptures;
it will be a special means against errors and heresies; Christ made use of the
Scriptures, Luke 4. 17. to 22. and directed others to do so, Joh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, for they
testify of me.

Some deny that Jesus Christ is God.

The Scriptures prove that Christ is God.

1. Because as the Father has life in himself, so has the Son, Joh. 5. 26.

2. Because the Angels ought to worship him, Heb. 1. 6.

3. Because he laid the foundation of the earth, Psalm. 102. Heb. 1. 3. He
created all things, Col. 1. 6. He made the worlds, Heb. 1. 2.

4. He upholds all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1. 3.

5. He is the first, and the last, Rev. 1. 8.

6. He was before the world, Joh. 17. 5.

7. He is the everlasting Father, Isa. 6. 9.

8. The Scripture says expressly, He is God: Christ is God; The mighty God,
Isa. 6. 9. Very God, Joh. 5. 20. The Word was God, Joh. 1. 1. 14. Christ who is
God over all, Romans 9. 5. Unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for
ever and ever, Heb. 1. 8.

That the holy Spirit is God, the Scriptures declare: the Spirit is eternal,
Genesis 1. 2.

1. Because God is a Spirit, therefore the Spirit is God, Joh. 4. 24. 1 Cor.
12. 4. God is truth, the Spirit is truth, 1 John 5. 6. The Lord is that Spirit.

2. We are baptized in the Name of the Spirit, Mat. 28. 19. We are equally
baptized in the name of the three, therefore they are one equal in authority.

3. The Spirit creats, Jo^ 35. 10. Ps. 104. 30. God and the Spirit are one, and
inseparably God creats.

4. To be the Temple of God; and to be filled with the Spirit, are all one, 1
Cor. 13. 16. with 1 Cor. 9. 19. Luke 1. 67. 1 Cor. 6. 19.

5. To lie to God, and to lie to the Spirit, is all one, Acts 5. 1. To lie unto
the holy Spirit, 3. v. Thou have lied unto God, v. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. with
Acts 16.

6. The Spirit anointed Christ, and sent him to preach, Isa. 16. 1. Luke 4. 18.
see Isa. 48. 17.

7. If the holy Spirit were not God, whence is it, that a sin against him shall
not be forgiven? Mat. 12. 32. Shall a sin against God be forgiven, and not a
sin against a creature? therefore the Spirit of God is God, 1 Cor. 3. 6.

So for those that deny the Resurrection of the body, try it by the Scriptures;
of them there are two sorts, some deny the Resurrection, because they believe
it is past already, and there is no Resurrection but that which is in us. Ans.
Christ says, in the Resurrection there is neither marriage, nor giving in
marriage, but are as the Angels in Heaven, Mat. 22. 30. If you be in this
Resurrection, why do you marry, etc. or will you lay marriage waste, make it
needless to you, and know who you please, Genesis 4. 1. Heb. 13. 4. Are you like
the Angels in Heaven?

Sort 2. Are those that deny the Resurrection of the body, because they cannot
see reason for it.

Ans. The Scripture does fully and clearly prove the Resurrection of our bodies
after this life.

Marvel not at this, all they in the grav^ shall hear his voice, Joh. 5. 28,
29. At the (...) of God the dead shall rise, 1 These. 4. 16.

that sleep in the dust shall awake, Dan. 12. 12* And the Sea gave up the dead
that were in it; and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them*
Rev. 20. 13. Christ is risen from the dead, 1 Cor. 15. 20. I will raise him up
at the last day, Joh. 6. 44. Thy dead men shall live, Isa. 26. 19.

2. The dead shall rise, because he that has said it, is able to do it; There
is nothing impossible with God, Luke 1. 37.

3. The Saints have believed the Resurrection of the body: Job says; Though
worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God Job 19. 26. I know my
brother shall rise again, at the last day, Joh. 12. 24. Our vile body shall be
like his glorious body, Phil. 3. 21.

4. If the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ be not
raised, your faith is vain: then they also which are fallen asleep are
perished, 1 Cor. 15. 16, 17, 18. But Christ is risen, therefore the dead shall
rise, Acts 3. 15. 1 Cor. 6. 14.

5. If the dead rise not, and in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are
of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. It Is our comfort, death cannot
dissolve the union between Christ and a believer. Romans 8. 38, 39. If not any
thing shall separate us from the love of God, with then death shall not;
Whether we live or dye 1 Cor. 9. are the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

5. To Consider Acts 26. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 18. Mat. 22. is all one, 31, 32. Mar^.
12. 18. 26, 27. Though it be incredible to reason, yet we ought to believe it,
because God has said it.

But some will say, this is but the letter, the mystery of it is no such thing;
I answer,

1. The mystery was revealed to the Apostles, Ephesians. 1. 9. Ephesians. 3. 4, 5. Ephesians. 6.
19.

2. Christ is a mystery, Col. 4. 3. Col. 1. 27. Christ in us by his Spirit,
Col. 2. 27. Col. 2. 2. Gal. 1. 16.

3. They speak the mystery of Christ, Col. 4. 3. and made it known by the
Scriptures, Romans 16. 25, 26. Behold I tell you a mystery, and (...) written, 1
Cor. 15. 51. etc. Ephesians. 3. 7. Ephesians* (...) ^2. The mystery is made manifest to the
(...) Romans 1. 26, 27. And seeing the my^^ (...) ^clared in the Scriptures, we
are not (...) another mystery of the mystery, (...) ^erstand the Scriptures.
They wor^^ (...) ^^in the Spirit, Phil. 3. 3. They were (...) of the mystery,
yea, they knew (...) ^^ese last times many would depart from the faith, and
bring in a mystery of iniquity, and call it the mystery of God, and of Christ,
and the Spirit; and so should deceive many. We are forewarned and commanded to
hold the form of sound words; and seeing the Scriptures are able to make the
man of God perfect, and to furnish him for every good work, 2 Timothy 3. We
neither may, nor need presume above what is written, Rev. 22. 18.

And so for other things, bring them to the Scriptures to be tried, and believe
nothing but what God faith in his Word, and expect not to satisfy Reason in
matters of Religion: We believe God is without beginning, and present in every
place, who knows and orders all things: but what reason can be given that
God is so, is it not beyond the reach of reason, to understand that any thing
can be, that never had a beginning? God is so, else he could not be God;
Behold, God is great, and we know him not, neither can the number of his years
be searched out, Job 36. 26. Touching the Almighty we cannot find him out Job
37. 23.

So also concerning the Baptism of Infants, bring it to the Scriptures, and
try it by them, see if ye can find either a command or an example there for
it; we find none, if we admit of one invention in Religion, by the same
reason we must admit of many, yea any invention of men: God complains of the
doing of that which he commanded them not, Jer. 15. 9. and 7. 31. and 32. 32.
35. Levit. 10. 5. Deuteronomy. 17. 1. and 18. 20. Mark. 7. 8, 9. Did God ever commend
or accept of the doing of that which he never commanded? neither can any thing
be well done, that God has no^ commanded to be done. If we suffer our selves
to be beaten back from this principle, where shall we stay or rest our feet:
we plead for the perfection of the Scripture, see 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. Secondly,
God has appointed who are to be baptized, and the manner how, see Acts 8. 12,
13. 36, 37, 38. and 2. 38. 41. Mat. 3. 6. 17. 16. Jo^. 3. 23. Mark. 14. 5. Acts
10* 44. 47, 48. Mat. 28. 19. To sprinkle Infants, is not to answer this Rule.
Thirdly, the matter of the Church ought to be Saints, Infants appear not to be
so; see 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. Ephesians. 2. 19. to 23. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5. Acts 20. 28.
Fourthly, the being children of believers, makes them not to be the children of
God, nor to be accounted so, Romans 9. 8, 9. Gal. 3. 26. 29. Jo^. 3. 5. 6. 36.
But there are several Treatises of this subject, to which I refer thee.

In a word, try all things by the Scripture: and hold fast that which is good.

The several Branches of the Saints duty and service to Christ every day.
Walk circumspectly, be ye holy as I am holy' Ephesians. 5. 15. see Mat. 11. 38, 39.
1. EVery day to be thankful for rest, sleep, and preservation from sin, and
to commune with your heart upon your bed, and be still, Psalm. 4. 4. Seriously
to mind him, and meditate on him; When I awake, I am still with thee, Psalm.
139. 18. and to think on such places as these, Psalm. 19. 15. Psalm. 73. 28.
Heb. 13. 8. Psalm. 104. 34. Acts 11. 13. Psalm. 42. 1, 2. Psalm. 119. 81, 82. Jer.
14. 8. Psalm. 13. 1. Exodus 33. 13, 14, 15. 18. and to crave his strength to
walk with him all the day: Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, Psalm. 17. 5.
not else.

2. Every day to live by faith, in all estates and conditions, and in
glorification. The just shall live by faith, Hab. 2. 4. Concerning the life of
faith, see as follows.

3. Every day, and all the day, to watch my heart, to keep it still and
spiritual content, and thankful, and to observe the secret motions thereof,
least unawares I be catched and ensnared in sin, and that I do not receive any
thing without warrant from the Word, Pro. 23. 17. Jer. 17. 9. Heb. 13. 12. Luke
6. 45.

4. Every day to watch our thoughts, that they be holy, or lawful and
seasonable, and to think on such places as these, Psalm. 139. 17. Such thoughts
raise the heart, and make it spiritual, joyful, thankful, and serious in all
duties and holy services.

5. Every day to hearken to the voice of conscience, prize the peace of it,
endeavor to inform it, and not to do any thing that shall offend it, 1 Timothy
3. 9. in keeping thy commands, there is great reward; Psalm. 19.

6. Every day, and all the day, to watch our affections, that they be set upon
right objects, and that they move not contrary to judgment, and that according
as the object discernes, that they be not set immoderately upon ear^hly things,
though excellent, desirable, and amiable, and so enjoy them, as expecting
every hour to loose them: Set your affections on things above, Col. 3. 1. 5
Desire, delight, hope, joy, are the acts of love, they chiefly belong to God;
then our affections are set right, when with God we are sick of love, Song 2.
5.

7. Every day to watch our time to redeem it, because it is precious, and take
notice how we spend it, and improve it, to enjoy God, and obey him, and to
serve each other in love, Ephesians. 5. 16. Acts 20. 31.

8. Every day to watch the windows of the soul, our eyes, and ears, to keep
them from such things as they would suck evil from, to shut eyes, and ears,
if need be, as Isa. 33. 15, 16. Psalm. 119. 37. Job 31. 1. else much evil will
enter in through these floudgates of sin: but a fool will take no warning,
Pro. 17. 4. and 25. 23.

9. Every day to watch to observe the creatures, and the several passages of
Gods providence, so as to get good by them, and that we may mind heavenly
things, Mat. 16.

10. Every day to watch in lawful things with care how we use and enjoy them,
viz. meat, drink, sleep, apparel, marriage, visitations, recreations, our
natures are prone to excess herein, Luke 12. 29. and to receive the creatures
with thankesgiving, 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. Christ did eat bread, and gave thanks,
John 6. 23.

11. To watch that we use not indifferent things securely and carelessly, but
have regard to others weakness, Romans 14. 21, 22. Requires that we do not that
which is in it self lawful, in case another is offended at it, if we may omit
it without sin, if I do that which is lawful, I give no offense, and it is his
weakness to be offended, yet if I do it to his grief, my action cannot be
defended, neither by the word of God, nor with a good conscience.

12. Every day to watch against every sin, and plead not for any sin, not
lessen it under no pretense of corruption, temptation, the sweetness and
smallness of it, nor inwardly favor it, but resolve and watch against all
sin, with the occasions and appearances of it, and be jealous against it, and
fearful of falling by it, and ever to show some dislike of it, Levit. 19. 17.
Pro. 5. 8* We should be afraid to sin, because it is forbidden by God. 2. It Is
dishonorable to him, his truth, and servants. 3. It incourageth others to sin.
4. It will fill our souls with sorrow to sin against so loving a Father, and
to dishonor him, etc. Having sinned, if but in the least measure, we should be
so far from covering it with any pretense, or excuse, that we should abhor
it, and our selves for it, with the greatest detestation; see Ezra 9. 2, 3.
Rev. 2. 2. Let every one that names the name of the Lord, depart from
iniqui^i^, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

13. Every day to watch that our speech be not vain, idle, and frothy, but
savoury, Psalm. 17. 3. Ephesians. 5. 4. Psalm. 71. 24. and that I wrest not others
words or actions, nor disgrace, nor insult over any; but in stead thereof
remember my own weaknesses; the thought of which should cause us to find less
fault with others (except necessity enforce it) the consideration of our own
weaknesses, should lay us low and greatly humble us: our pride, unbelief,
hypocrisy, atheism, thoughts of blasphemy, self-love, self seeking,
selfe-confidence, unprofitablenesse, hardness of heart, ignorance, blindness
of mind, unruly passion, security, lukewarmnesse, coldness, abuse of lawful
things, unthankfulness for mercies, want of laying to heart the fins of
others, want of courage for the truth, deadness, dullness, heaviness,
weariness, indevotion, distractions, indisposednesse of heart to do our
duties, forgetfulness, inconstancy, walking uncomfortably, with our souls
cast down, etc. ^s it so, can we remember these, and not abhor our selves?
When we consider our hearts and lives, we may say with grief and sorrow, Lord,
what is man: I am nothing, but a very va^^^^, 2 Cor. 12. (...) with Eccle. 1. 2.

14. Every day to observe the passages of my spirit in my actions and duties,
with what knowledge, faith, zeal, love, wisdom, humility, etc. I do them,
how I am sensible of my wants in prayer, and thankful for mercies; how I wait
for an answer of prayer, and observe how he answers me?

15. Every day to desire and endeavor to do my duty, according to my station
and relation, Ephesians. 6. To give good example, religious instruction, loving
admonition, and seasonable reproof, endeavoring to do good to friends and
enemies; see Acts 10. 24. John 1. 40, 41. 1 Timothy 4. 12.

16. Every day to watch to do and receive good, to look to my ways, Psalm.
39. 1. Mat. 26. 41.

17. Watch against coldness and formality, and that I be not taken with the
praise of men, mirth, pomp, profit, pleasure, ease, outward contentments, that
I exceed not, nor sink not under any of them; and to see God in others favors
and frowns.

18. Every day to take notice and sympathize with the sorrows and sufferings of
those that are the Lords, and be a companion with them, as Heb. 10. 23. To be
willing to endure any sorrows and suffering with the people of God, as Heb. 11.
and for their good to part with estate, friends, liberty, life: see Psalm. 137.
6. Lam. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 Chapters.

19. Every day to meditate on God, and his goodness to me and others, and what
he has prepared for me in heaven, and how I may be preserved from sin, self,
etc. and order my conversation aright, consider Genesis 26. 63. Mat. 6. 6. and do
so, Psalm. 1. 2 and 32. 4, 5, 6. Heb. 10. 38. Jos. 1. 8. By meditation we wind
up our minds from things below, Col. 3. 4, 5. and so enjoy God and our selves,
and live in heaven, while on earth. Oh refresh thy self with the variety of
the invisible comforts in heaven, thy interest in them, the comfort, joy, and
rest thou shall have ere long for ever: meditate on the shortness of the time
we have here to live, the miseries that attend this life, how we may preven^
sin, deny our selves, bear the cross, live by faith, be content in want, grow
in grace, escape temptation, keep a good conscience; what duties we owe to God
and man, wherein we come short; what mercies we enjoy, and how we profit by
afflictions, how thankful we are to God for his sweet and large love, etc. Set
your affections on things above, Col. 3. 1. By faith and meditation keep thy
heart there, view thy everlasting glory, fill thy self with joy, enjoying the
joys of heaven, which are unutterable, unconceivable, and infinite,
boundless, bottomless, endless: Oh the greatness and sweetness of those
joys, pleasures, and (...), which shall never have an end.

20. To deny my self, selfe-wit, wisdom, carnal reason, applause, passion,
ease, liberty, and all things for God; consider Luke 14. 20. 33. Mat. 16. 24.
Mark. 8. 34. Luke 9. 23.

21. In all actions, be humble, sincere, servent in spirit, serving the Lord;
serious, cheerful, thankful, Mat. 11. 29. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. Ephesians. 6. 14. Joh. 1.
47. Romans 12. 11. James 5. 17.

22. Daily to use the means to nourish and increase holy desires and
resolutions for God, Psalm. 42. 1, 2. O the strong and restless desires after
God, and the unweariednesse there of that soul, who has tasted of the
sweetness of his love.

23. All the day long to joy and rejoice in God, in our interest in him, and
union with him, our privileges and happiness by him, his Word, Saints, the
fruits of the Spirit, temtations, etc. as our chiefest joy and great advantage.

24. That I scorn not, nor slight, nor check any with their infirmities and
deformities of body, or dullness, or weakness of wit, or memory, meannesse of
outward state, or birth, smallness of gifts or parts, but consider 1 Cor. 4.
7. Job 10. 10. Psalm. 39. 13, 14. 16. Isa. 28. 26. in spiritual things, Ezekiel.
16. Isa. 43. 25. Romans 5. 11. Ephesians. 2. 20. the love of God makes the difference,
if God should convert him, he may soon become better then we.

25. Every day to mind the vanity and emptiness of the things below, the
hurt we receive by them, and how we exceed in our affections to them, that they
are not our own, they may soon be taken from us, or we from them; and how we
are often distracted and unsettled by them, that we may with more ease and
content want them, and be weaned from them in the enjoyment of them, and to use
the liberties of this life so as to be bettered by them, Eccle. 1. 2. and 2. ^.
1 Cor. 5. 25. Pro. 23. 4. Luke 12. 15. There is no certainty of the things
below, but above is certain^y, constancy, and eternity of all excellencies,
perfections, and pleasures.

26. To watch our selves in our retiredness, and solitary seasons, to prevent
needless fears and thoughts of the pleasure of sin, past, present, or to
come; such thoughts cause sin upon supposition, and pollute their souls and
bodies with sin, Genesis 38. 9, 10.

27. Watch to speak for truth, and contend for it, Jude 3. and glory in
suffering for Christ, and his truth, 1 Pet. 4. 14.

28. To consider what times we live in, what they afford, how I may be useful
and fin^sh smy course with joy.

29. To take h^ed and beware of covetousn^sse, it deceives and spoils all, we
mind earth, as if it were better then heaven; against covetousness, consider
H^b. 2. 6. Mat. 25. 14. Luke 6. 2. 25. to end, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Timothy 4. 8, 9, 10.
James 5. 1, 2, 3. Pro. 25. 5. 1 Pet. 5. 9. Luke 2. 7.

30. Every day to expect troubles and crosses, and to bear them patiently:
troubles will come, our life is a life of trouble and suffering, more then
other men, Psalm. 73. 5. Fr^t not. Psalm. 39. 9. We should be so fixed on God,
that nothing below should move us, Phil. 4. 11. 13. Our spirits should rule the
things below, and not be ruled by them; we should rejoice in trials,
temptations, conflicts, disertions, and outward troubles (death it self is to
make us capable of a fuller enjoyment and communion with God) James 1. 2. etc.
If we should rejoice, how much more should we be content and patient, 1 These.
4. 18. One said, Lord, I will bear any thing, because my sins are forgiven; a
conscience set at liberty, can with ease undergo a great burden; Bees gather
honey from bitter flowers, as well as sweet; so should we from bitter
conditions: Crosses are Christ's servants, they come and go at his command,
they are sent to do us good, all is sent in love, and best for me; God will
supply all our wants with his all sufficiency; we should not look so much ^t
freedom from trouble, as to profit by it, to enjoy God by it, and strength to
bear it, looking upon all that befalls-us, as appointed and ordered by God in
his wisdom and love for our good, etc. 1 These. 3. 3.

31. To show mercy and pity to others in their misery, and supply their
necessities, according as we are able, freely and willingly, and be more
industrious, and sparing in expenses, to supply others necessities, especially
the Saints, above our ability; let thy heart, house, and hand, be open,
joyfully and compassionately supply their necessities; consider Luke 3. 10, 11.
and 12. 33. Mat. 5. 42. and 7. 12. Gal. 5. 10. Ease as many men's burdens as we
can, be helpful, have mercy, compassion, love goodness, and such like virtues.

32. Watch that we grieve not the holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 3. We quench and grieve
the Spirit, when we neglect the motions of it, and slight the comforts of it,
seek comfort from the flesh, feed upon lusts, and spend our thoughts and time
upon the outward man, and use spiritual things for carnal ends, and father
the work of the flesh upon the Spirit, slight that which is good and allow of
evil, or plot for sin, or cavil against the truth, or omit duties, or slight
them, or do them in our own strength, or slight the fruits of the Spirit, or
slight any Saint, etc.

33. Every day to take notice of Gods goodness and mercy to us and others, and
acknowledge it, in all things give thanks, 1 These. 5. 14.

34. Every day will I bless and praise thy Name, Psalm. 145. 2.

35. Every day to grow in grace and knowledge, 2 Pet. 3. 18.

36. Every day to believe the present state and condition best for me, Romans 8.
28. if any thing oppress thee, use the means to remove it, then be content.

37. Every day to cast my care upon God, Phil. 4. 6.

38. Every day to be willing to be dissolv^d, and to look for death; All the
days of my appointed time w^ll I wait, till my change come, Job 14. 14.

39. Every day to observe my profiting in Religion, 2 (...). 3. 18. Heb. 6. 1,
2.

40. Every day to view my actions, and take notice of my failings, omissions
and commissions, to be more watchful against them, and to live by faith in all
infirmities above infirmities, as if I had never sinned, living in the sweet
enjoyment of the love of God, and so lie down in the consideration of it.

Saints subject to fall from their first love.
Thou have left thy first love, etc. Rev. 2. 4, 5.
CHrist commends this Church in verse. 2, 3. and informs and reproves them in
these words, and verse. 5. contains the means to recover them from their evil.

In the first verse, he says, He knows their works; He would have them to
know, that he did know and observe all their actions; what their actions were,
and with what affections they did them, how they exercised the fruits of the
Spirit, and how they decayed in their love to him: which should teach us to
observe all our actions, and to walk circumspectly, as becomes so holy a
presence.

The Saints first love is the best

God will be served with the best, with the fullest measure, and highest pitch
of love.

The Saints Church of Christ, need to be informed of their decays of their
love to him.

To leave their first love, is to abate in the degree and measure of love which
they have to God.

Gods own people are subject to decline, or leave their first love; this the
Scripture and experience testify.

The causes of our pronenesse to decline in our love to God are many.

1. Our natures are prone to it, we have an apostatizing spirit, and we know it
not, or consider it not, Heb. 10.

2. Security in us, causes us to think we are well, and need not fear no
danger, and so we fall before we are aware.

3. Is from the insensiblenesse of this sin, it secretly steals upon us, we
fall so easily, and by small degrees, that we perceive it not till we are
down, nor hardly then; we need be told, we are fallen.

4. Because we do not meditate on the love of God, and rest satisfied in it,
causes us to seek satisfaction elsewhere, and resting satisfied in that we
are happy, and what affections and actions we formerly have had for God, think
we have done enough: this is a base frame of spirit, that causes us to turn
the grace of God into wantonness; such need forget what is behind, and press
forward, as knowing they can never do enough for him, who has done so much
for them.

5. Because of the sloathfulnesse of spirit, causes us to have no mind to
stir to go to God, or to do any thing for him; ^loathfulnesse casts into
a deep sleep: and then we neglect or abate in the use of means, in which we
have had communion with God: when we leave our first works, then we decline
and fall asleep, God absents himself; While the bridgegroome ^arried men
slumbered and slept, Mat. 25. 5.

6. Want of watching our hearts and lives: did we watch, we might observe our
coldness, and on what our love is set, and so our consciences might smite us
for our divided love.

7. W^nt of faithful friends to observe and inform us of our declinings from
God, and their not using means to help (...).

8. Comparing our selves with those who are fallen, and because we are like
them, we think our selves well enough, and so rest satisfied; and thus we
teach, and cause others to be as cold as our selves.

9. Because iniquity abounds, the love of many waxes cold.

This should teach those that stand, to take heed least they fall, to watch
narrowly against all occasions, which tend to draw us from our first love; for

God will have his to know that it is a great evil for to decay in their love
to him.

The greatness of this sin appears in these particulars.

1. Because our love is Gods, and he calls for it; My son, give me thy heart;
He calls for his own, and it is unreasonable to deny him his own.

2. Love is the best thing we have, therefore we should give it to God, who is
the chiefest and best good, therefore he has right to the highest pitch of our
love; and it is pity so sweet an affection as love is, should be spent upon
any thing but himself.

3. Love will be fixed upon somewhat, and it is unreasonable to deny it to God,
and give it to the creature; this were to forsake a living fountain for a
broken Cisterne, Jer. 2.

4. God is the same he was, when ye first loved him, then ye looked upon him
to deserve the highest measure of love, and could not be loved enough: God is
not changed, Heb. 13. 8. Therefore the change is in thy self.

5. So much as you have left your first love, so much you have left God: God
counts himself charged with ini^uitie, when he is forsaken; see Jer. 2.

6. In so doing ye greatly dishonor God, as if there were not a fullness of
perfection in him; if there be in him what ye expected, why do you love him
less? thy practice declares thou repentest thee in loving him so much, as if
he is not worthy of it; tell me, can thou mend thy self in bestowing thy
love elsewhere?

7. Lastly, God has done much for thee, he has saved thee from wrath, hell,
and destruction, and provided for thee a place of happiness with himself; yea
given thee himself; could he give thee more? is all this as nothing to thee?
can thou do too much for him, that has done so much for thee? why then
do thou not give him thy first love, and love him dearly and vehemently,
that has so loved thee?

Use. Leaving our first love is so great an evil, that it should greatly
humble us.

The means God prescribes for their recovery are three; first, to remember
from whence thou art fallen; secondly, repent; thirdly, to do their first
works.

Fallen persons may recover, for God uses means to recover such; this his
love should work upon us; one great cause we do not our duty is, because we
do not mind it, our declinings might easily be discerned by us, if we did but
mind it.

The consideration and remembrance of what we once were, and what we now are,
is a special means to convince one that is fallen.

Consider and see if you cannot remember the time.

1. When your souls thirsted more for God, and ^anted and brayed more
vehemently after him then now; short breathing is a sign of spiritual
decaying, therefore know you are fallen from your first love, Psalm. 42. 1, 2.

2. See if you cannot remember that time was when you took more sweet joy and
delight, in drawing near to him, and in communion with him, then now; then ye
are fallen, and your affections are divided.

3. If you can remember the time was when you had more faith and confidence in
God then now you have, then you are fallen; for a decay in faith, and a decay
in love, ever go together; the less faith, the less love, so much unbelief,
so much want of love.

4. If there was a time, in which you were more willing to do and suffer for
God, and to dye to go home to him, then you have left your first love.

5. Are you as frequent in duties, and as much in them now as ever? are not
spiritual duties something more wearisome and burdensome to thee, then once
they were? then thou art fallen from thy first love. Some may say, once I
prayed with more faith and fervency, but now they are as my self more cold.

6. Have you as much zeal for God and his truth now as ever? the communion of
Saints once more desired, loved, and delighted in, then now? if it be so, then
you are fallen from your first love.

7. If ever you did love the things of the world less then you do now? then
you are fallen; for love to the world causes a decay in our love to God: love
not the world: so much as we love the world, so much we come short in our love
to God.

8. Can you not say, time was when I was more affected with the love of God,
and did more mind him, and his love? then you are fallen; for so much as we
forget Gods love to us, so much we forget to love him; the apprehending his
love, begets love in us to him; We love him, because he first loved us. When
Gods love in saving us, did appear to us to be great and wonderful, it set
out hearts afire with love to him, to live and dye with him, and for him, and
because we mind his love less, therefore we love him less.

If we should compare our selves with these Ephesians, whom God finds fault
withal, because they left their first love; what thoughts can we have of our
selves, when we consider how far short we come of them? God says of them,
verse. 2, 3. That they could not bear with them that are evil: they could not,
mark, that their love was so to him, and zeal for him was so strong, that it
over-powred them, they could not bear with sinners. But alas, we can bear
with fin and sinners: They labored in the work of the Lord; which implies
carfulness and diligence in Gods work: but alas, we are sloathfull and
dead-hearted; they were patient, they endured all oppositions within and
without they met withal; for keeping the Commandments of God, and the faith
of Jesus, they suffered much patiently, as appears Rev. 1. 9. We are
impatient, even at words; Thou have borne; which implies, afflictions,
sufferings, pressures, we can hardly bear with any thing. And have not
fainted: here was their courage for God and his truth, they bore great trials
without fainting, we faint under small trials, yea, at the hearing of them.

For my Names sake: their ends were holy, they sought not themselves, backs nor
bellies, but did all for the name and sake of God; this holy frame of spirit is
a sweet thing; oh how far short do we come of them.

Obs. Many good actions may proceed from them that are fallen from their first
love: many good actions cannot excuse for one fault.

Use. Exhortation You who are convinced you are fallen from your first love, oh
lay it to heart, your declinings from God; a decay in our outward estate is
laid to heart, but our inward decayings should trouble us much more.

And repent: the Lord bids thee repent: what repentance is, see Jer. 31. 18, 19.

The least declining in our love to God, is cause enough of repentance: it is to
be laid to heart; Repentance is a duty suitable for a Saint that has assurance
of the love of God.

And do thy first works: Do, says God, the life of a Saint is a life of
action; to live to God, and for God, is no idle life, God requires many things
to be done.

Do thy first works: Repentance without reformation is not sufficient.

Such as leave their first love, leave their first works; as we decay in our
love to God, so we decay in our obedience to him.

As our love is to Christ, so according is our fruitfulness; cold love is
attended with barrenness.

To do our first works, is a special means to recover our first love.

Means to recover our first love.

1. Frequent those duties, meditation and prayer, etc. in which you enjoyed
communion with God, in which God conveyed himself to thee; God may by those
means fill thee with himself.

2. Believe God will raise thee up, it is his promise, Hos. 14. I will heal
their backslidings; want of depending upon God, is a cause of our declining;
therefore faith is a means to raise us when fallen.

3. Pray continually to God to raise thee, and to hold thee up; hold up my
going, that my footsteps slide not; we are to use the means, but without the
presence and blessing of God all is to no purpose.

4. Love not the world, nor the things of the world; we cannot mind things
above, and things below, he that minds the things below, cannot mind the
things above; he that is filled with these things below, is empty of things
above, he cannot live above with God, he that is buried in the creature, he
cannot set his affections on things above.

5. Meditate often upon Christ's love to thee; what he has given thee, and done
for thee; the consideration thereof is enough to ^aise thee.

Use. This reprooves those that do not their first works, and yet think to
recover their first love, yet sit still; God has appointed means for his
peoples prosperity and welfare, and they are to use them.

Or else I will come; God will not suffer his to continue long in their fallen
estate.

Gods coming to his is to reform them, and do them good.

Come quickly.

1. Such as are fallen from their first love, are willing and prone to continue
so.

2. The time of our repentance and reformation is not left to us, God will not
stay our pleasures.

3. As soon as we are convinced of a duty to be done, we are presently to
practice it; after admonition, God requires a present reformation; he expects
we should regard his word, and be ruled by it.

4. Those that leave their first love; God will allow but a little time and
space to repent in.

This should exhort all that are fallen, to rise now quickly, put it not off to
another season, there is no reason why we should put it off; because

1. Gods command is now, quickly; To day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hearts. To put it off will but more harden your hearts.

2. For that which is put off till hereafter, is oft-times never done: Felix
was almost persuaded by Paul, but he put him off to another season; but when
did his season come?

3. It Is easier rising now then hereafter; rise now whilst it is in your heart
to rise; now God calls, therefore rise now, now while your conscience is awake,
and tell ye, ye are fallen; the longer ye lay, the longer ye may; for your
heart will be more hardened through the deceit fullness of sin; then ye will
have less mind to rise, and be less able to do your first works.

4. You have declined enough, and lain long enough, therefore do not deserre
it no longer, seeing Christ calls, saying, Rise my love, my fair one, and come
away, Song 2. 10. Oh, therefore, rise, rise, and go quickly to him, thirst
after him, cry to him now inwardly and secretly to raise you, and draw out your
heart abundantly to him.

Use. Reproof to such as know they are ^^en, and have left their first love,
yet rise not; nor use not any means to get up, but put it off till hereafter:
Oh that you would now consider, that in so doing ye disobey the voice of the
Lord; and if you rise not quickly, he will remove the Candlestick out of it is
place. Observe, he says not, if they do not so he will damme them, but remove
the Candlestick. The Candlestick is his Church, which is called a
Candlestick, Rev. 1. 20. A Candlestick holds forth the light, so does the
Church of Christ, the light of truth, the light of Christ.

To remove the Candlestick, is to remove one socket from another, to take it a
pieces; as the Candlestickes in the Temple had many sockets, so the Church
consists of many members; so that to remove the Candlestick out of it is place,
is to divide and scatter the Church, the members one from another: so he has
done to the Churches of Asia, where there is not any appearance of any of the 7
Churches to be found.

We learn that a Church of Christ may cease to be so, and which is more, a
Church of Christ may cease to be, although not guilty of any scandalous sin,
nor error in doctrine; God charge them not with any such evils but only for
decaying or leaving their first love.

So that if a Church of Christ decay in their love to him, he will quickly
un-church them, except they repent, and do their first works.

God will have his to know it is no small affliction to be un-churched, and
such as prise the enjoyment of the Saints, with the ordinances of God, count it
an affliction to be stripped of them: and because God threateneth to un-church
then, unless they repent, etc. it appears, that although they were fallen
from their first love, yet they had so much love to Gods ordinances, and
communion of Saints, that before they would be stripped of them, they would
repent, and do their first works.

Except thou repent: Repentance is a means to escape affliction.

If we repent not, he will strip us of that which is near to us, that so we
may repent, and be reformed.

When love will not reform us, a rod must, and it is a mercy to be reformed by
any means, Lam. 3. 33.

The life of Faith.
The just shall live by Faith, Hab. 2. 4.
THat we might live by faith, God has given his many rich and precious
promises, for this life, and that to come, that we may be comforted and
satisfied in the enjoyment of God in them, our lives cannot be sweet without
them, by reason of the many miseries within and without that attends us; I have
here set down many principal promises, that you may with ease and speed find
them, and live upon them.

Faith supplieth all wants; faith honors God, and God honors them most that
live by it: see Heb. 11. Hos. 12. 3, 4. Job 13. 15.

By faith we live to God a life of joy in him our righteousness, as if we had
never finned; by faith we live above sin, infirmities, temptations, disertions,
sense, reason, fears, doubts: faith sweetens the sweetest mercy, and the
bitterest miseries; it makes great afflictions as none; it maintains the souls
strength and comfort; by faith we obey God; it makes Christ's yoke easy and
sweet; faith puts the soul into possession of heaven, while the body is on
earth; by it we view the glory of heaven; by faith we know our selves to be
happy, when to a carnal eye we seem most miserable; by faith we can part
with the sweetest outward comforts, and welcome death, because we know we leave
the worst place, and things, and go to better; they that live by faith, live
upon God, and are feasted in Christ's banqueting house, where there are all
desirable dainties and enough: Eat, O friends, and drink abundantly; because
it is the pleasure of our Lord that we do so, it is thy portion, duty, and
privilege, to digest, and refresh, and make thy soul merry with his dainties,
to enjoy himself in them, that so thy joy may be full.

The life of faith, is the communion the soul has with God in Christ, in his
promises spiritual and temporal.

Faith in effectual calling.
It Is the souls cleaving to God in Christ, for life, upon such places as
these, Mat. 11. 28. 2 Cor. 5. 20, 21. Mat. 5. 1 John 3. 23.

The life of faith in justification.
The Lord having spoken peace to the soul, that Christ has paid all, and his
sin shall be remembered no more, Isa. 53. Jer. 31. 34. Now the soul knows it is
happy, and injoys the comfort of it, is filled with joy and peace in believing;
his life is a life of comfort, beholding and enjoying Christ's righteousness as
his own, lives upon it, what ever befalls him, he is comforted in his interest
in the righteousness of Christ, as sufficient to satisfy him at all times,
living upon such places as these, Romans 8. 38, 39. Job 13. 15. Isa. 54. 7, 8.
Rev. 1. 5. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. Romans 5. 9, 10. Gal. 3. 13. Heb. 10. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 13.

Concerning justification see the third part.

The life of faith in sanctification.
1. It Is the souls cleaving to Christ our sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. 2ly,
it is the souls cleaving to God in his promise, to cleanse and renew my heart
and life, and be a quickening Spirit in me, upon Psalm. 103. 8. Hos. 14. 5. Isa.
57. 18, 19. Micah 7. 19. Joh. 17. 17. 19. Oh how little do we obey him, enjoy
him, and honor him.

The life of faith in infirmities.
It Is the souls believing that God will be to us according to his promise for
ever a God of love; notwithstanding, all our omissions, and commissions,
excesses, and defects, Psalm. 103. 3. Joh. 13. 1. Mal. 3. 6. Heb. 13* 8. Psalm.
89. 30. Nehe. 9. 16. etc. Isa. 43. 25. Psalm. 130. 7, 8, 9, 10, 13, 14. 17. Isa.
42. 2. Psalm. 86. 5.

He that lives by faith in infirmities, he will hear Christ, 1 Samuel 3. 10. He
is not offended at what Christ requires, Mat. 11. 6. Joh. 1. 5. 3. The
Scripture is his rule, he will trust God, and rely upon his Word, he eyeth the
promise, saying, as Psalm. 46. 6. Isa. 45. 24. He will contend for the truth,
Jude 3. and do others good, Acts 20. 31. His sin does not sink him into
despair: the soul despaireth not for any sin or trouble; the weakest
believer may say in the midst of all imperfections, I have as much of the love
of God, acceptance, and perfect righteousness in Christ, as the best Saint
ever had, Jer. 23. 6. my state is as happy as any of theirs, Job 35. 7. and I
shall have as much glory in heaven as the best.

Such as live by faith in infirmities, live upon Christ in his promise for
strength against all infirmities, upon such places as these.

In deadness of heart, Isa. 35. 36. Ps. 37. 30.

In forgetfulness, Joh. 14. 16.

In fear of want, Psalm. 34. 9. and 37. 3. Mat. 6. 25. to the end, Romans 8. 32.
Luke 12. 15.

In cares, Phil. 4. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 7. Heb. 13. 5.

In ignorance, Heb. 5. 2. James 1. 5.

If fallen by passion, not to sink under it, James 5. 17. Acts 14. 15.

In all infirmities, Psalm. 103. 8.

For a supply of all wants, Phil. 4. 6. 19.

To live by faith for the fruits of the Spirit, etc.

To believe, 1 John 3. 23. Zeph. 3. 12.

To increase in says, Romans 1. 17.

To continue in the faith, Luke 22. 32. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

In the exercise of faith, Isa. 26. 3. Psalm. 18. 30. and 32. 10.

To know God, Jer. 31. 33, 34. Pro. 1. 23.

To love God, Mat. 27. 17. Joh. 17. 26.

In loving God, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.

To seek God, seek ye the Lord, Acts 17. 27.

In seeking God, Psalm. 119. 2. and 9. 10. and 69. 32. and 22. 26.

To fear God, Jer. 32. 39, 40. Hos. 3. 5.

In fearing God, Psalm. 147. 11. and 25. 12. and 34. 9.

To hope in God, Psalm. 147. 11. and 146. 5. and 31. 24.

To wait on God, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Isa. 49. 23. and 30. 18.

To delight in God, Psalm. 41. 16. and 89. 16. and 33. 21.

To praise God, Isa. 38. 19. Ps. 72. 15. and 63 3.

To enjoy peace, Isa. 27. 5.

To love the Saints, 1 John 3. 14. 23. and 4. 7. 1 Pet. 2. 22. Joh. 13. 35.

To love enemies, Mat. 5. 43, 44. Luke 6. 35.

To judge our selves, 2 Cor. 11. 31. Eze. 36. 31.

To mourn for sinning against God, Zach. 12. 6. Joh. 16. 20. Mat. 5. 4.

In poverty of spirit, Mat. 5. 3. Isa. 66. 2.

In de^ires after Christ, Isa. 51. 1. Job. 7. 33. 37. Rev. 21. 6. Mat. 21. 6.
Isa. 42. 3. 2 Cor. 8. 10, 11, 12. Genesis 16. 17. Heb. 11. 27. Luke 21. 3. Psalm.
37. 4. Pro. 10. 24.

To be meek, Psalm. 25. 9 and 76. 9. and 149. 4.

To be sincere, Psalm. 51. 6. Mat. 5. 8.

To confess sin, 1 John 5. 9. Job. 23. 27, 28.

To forgive others, Luk 17. 4. Mark. 11. 25, 26. and 6. 37. Mat. 6. 14. Ephesians. 4.
23.

To be a peacemaker, Mat. 5. 9.

To devise good, Pro. 14. 22. Isa. 32. 8.

To self-denial, Mat. 16. 15.

To watch, Mat. 13. 17. 1 These. 5. 6. Rev. 16. 15. Luke 22. 37. Mat. 22. 47.

To be patient, Jam. 1. 5. 8. Luke 21. 9. Heb. 6. 15

To be content in our condition, Heb. 13. 5.

To resist sin, Romans 6. 14.

Not to fear the world, Joh. 6. 33. 1 John 4. 4.

To mortify the flesh, Romans 8. 13.

To give to the poor; He that has two coa^s, impart to him that has none;
and he that has meat^, let him do so likewise, Luke 3. 10, 11.

The life of faith in the use of means.
It Is the souls cleaving to God in Christ, for a blessing upon the means he
has appointed, Pro. 9. 29. Isa. 48. 19. Isa. 48. 17.

To pray, 1 These. 5. 17. Z^ch. 12. 10, Mat. 7. 7, 8, 9, 11. Luke 11. 13. Mat.
21. 22. Mark. 11. 24. Mat. 16. 23. Isa. 65. 24.

To read, 1 Timothy 4. 13. Rev. 1. 3. P^o. 1. 23.

To meditate, Jos. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 4. 15. Psalm. 1. 1, 2. Psalm. 104. 34. and 49, 3.

For conference, Prove. 15. 17. and 18. 21. Mal. 3. 16. Psalm. 37. 30. and 71.
24. Isa. 59 21.

To hear Christ's Ministers, Pro. 8. 34.

To be baptized, Acts 8. 12, 13. 36, 37, 38. and 2. 38. 41. Mat. 3. 6. 13. 16.
Joh. 3. 23. 26. Mark. 1. 4, 5. Acts 10. 44, 47, 48. Mat. 28. 19. with Gal. 3.
26. 29. Romans 9. 8, 9. Mark. 16. 16.

To do nothing in Religion without a command from God, see at what God
complains, Jer. 19. 5. and 7. 31. and 32. 32, 35. Levit. 10. 1. Deuteronomy. 17. 1.
and 18. 20. Mat. 28. 20. Mark. 7* 8, 9. 2 These. 1. 8.

For breaking of bread, Luke 22. 19. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 21.

To be prepared to duties, Psalm. 10. 17. Job 11. 13, 14, 15.

To obey, Ez^k. 36. 27. Psalm. 19. 11. Pro. 37. 23. Rev. 20. 6. and 22. 14.

To be fruitful in season, Jer. 17. 8. Psalm. 1. 2, 3. Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Isa.
61. 9. and 62. 12. Psalm. 84. 7.

For ability to obey God, Job 17. 9. Psalm. 84. 7. Isa. 45. 24. and 40. 29, 30,
31. Phil. 4. 13. Ps. 68. 35. My God shall be my strength, Isa. 49. 5.

That no temptation shall be above that we are able to bear, and to have a
good issue, 1 Cor. 10. 13. James 1. 12. Romans 6. 20.

To know the truth, Joh. 7. 17. and 16. 13. and 25. 9. 12.

For direction in all our ways, Isa. 43. 13. Psalm. 32. 8. and 48. 14.

To reprove others, Levit. 16. 17. Pro. 28. 23. and 29. 25. and 24, 25.

To correct children, Pro. 25. 15. and 29. 15. and 23. 13, 14.

For husbands to love their wives, Ephesians. 5. 25, 28, 33.

For wives to obey their husbands, Ephesians. 5. 24.

For children to obey their parents, Ephesians. 6. 1, 2.

Servants to obey their Masters, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7.

To leave false worship, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 17, 18.

To dwell in Sion, etc. Isa. 35. 10. Jer. 3. 14. Psalm. 69. 36.

Gods presence, Rev. 2. 1. with 1. 10. and 6. 2. and 8. 13.

For his blessing there, Psalm. 132. 15. and 37. 8. and 84. 4. Deuteronomy. 12, 5, 6,
7. Song 5. 1.

For Saints to agree in the truth, Jer. 32. 31.

To have joy and gladness there, Isa. 51. 3.

In reproaches for Christ, Luke 6. 22, 23. 1 Pet. 1. 24.

In persecution for Christ, 2 Timothy 3. 12. and 2. 12. Mat. 5. 10. Romans 8. 18.

In losses for Christ, Mar^. 10. 29, 30. Mat. 29. 28, 29.

In imprisonment for Christ, Rev. 2. 10.

In death for Christ, Mat. 10. 29 Rev. 21. 7. Rev. 2. 10.

Destruction of enemies, Rev. 17. 16 and 18, 8. 2^.

For the calling of the Jews, Isa. 60.

The life of faith, for protection, and supply of wants.

For protection, Psalm. 91. 11. and 121. 8. and 49. 8. Job 36. 7. Luke 21. 18.
Joh. 17. 15.

To be delivered from the wicked, 2 These. 3 2, 3. Psalm. 34. 40.

A Harlot, Eccle. 7. 26.

For deliverance from unreasonable creatures, Pro. 5. 23.

If in famine, and in war, Job 5. 20.

If in captivity, Psalm. 106. 46.

If in water, Isa. 43. 2.

If in fire, Psalm. 43. 2.

In sickness, Psalm. 41. 3. and 103. 3. Exo. 25. 25.

To be preserved from all evil, Job 5. 19. 2 These. 3. 2. Psalm. 121. 7.

For clothing, Mat. 6. 25. 28, 30, 32. Ps. 37. 16.

For food, Psalm. 37. 3. Isa. 33. 16. and 37. 19.

For dwelling, Isa. 33. 17. Psalm. 34.

To be hid in danger, Zeph. 3. 16, 17.

God will remember his, Isa. 44. 21.

For success in labor, Psalm. 1. 3. and 128. 2. Pro. 12 11. 14. Isa. 65. 22.

If falsely accused, Psalm. 37. 6.

For a good name, Pro. 10. 17. Zeph. 3. 20. Isa. 65 5. Psalm. 56. 5.

For children, Psalm. 121. 3. 6.

For sleep, Psalm. 127. 2. Pro. 3. 24. Job 11. 19. Zeph. 3. 13.

For a supply of all we need, Phil. 4. 9. 6.

If in prosperity, Jer. 29. 5, 6. till God see good we shall meet with no
change, it may change, but God will never change, Heb. 13. 5, 6.

If in adversity, to be content in a hard or low condition, Heb. 13. 5. John
18. 11. Phil. 4. 11, 12. it is appointed, 1 These. 3. 3. Joh. 16. 33. Joh: 7* 30.
We have need of them, see 1 Pet. 1. 6. the time cannot be long till they shall
be no more.

For the presence of God in trouble, Psalm. 91. 15. and 9. 9. and 37. 39.

That the trouble shall not be too great, Jer. 30. 11. 2 Cor. 10. 13.

To profit by them, Heb. 12. 11. Joh. 13. 23.

For deliverance, John 5. 19. Psalm. 19. 17. and 50. 15.

For speedy deliverance out of them, Isa. 46. 13.

The life of faith in glorification.
Which is by faith to behold the rest, joy, peace, happiness, provided for us
in heaven, believing that God will give us after this life all those things
with himself which he has promised his, Acts 20. 23. and 26. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 4.

For the resurrection of my body, 1 These. 4. 16.

To have a spiritual body, 1 Cor. 15. 43* 44.

To have a glorified body, Phil. 3. 21. The Sun in the firmament is not so
glorious as the bodies of the Saints shall be, because the Sun is but a
natural body.

To have fullness of knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19. 1 Cor. 13. 12.

To have fullness of joy and pleasure, Psalm. 16. 11. Joy inward, pure,
spiritual, full, eternal, then no misery, no hunger, cold, nakedness, nor
pain, grief, weariness, but rest, 2 These. 1. 7. Without labor, in rest
tranquillity, in tranquillity contentment, in contentment joy, in joy variety,
in variety security, in security eternity.

To have life, 2 Timothy 2. 11 Col. 3. 3, 4.

Everlasting life, Luke 18. 30. then shall I never dye, nor end, being for
duration eternal.

A fuller enjoyment of God, Saints and Angels, John 17. 24. Col. 3, 4.

To see the Lord as he is, 1 John 3. 1, 2. 1 Cor. 13. 12.

To behold his glory, John 17. 24.

With him in glory, Col. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 18.

To have fullness of communion with God, Ephesians. 3. 19. Sight is higher then
presence, union is higher then ^ight, communion is higher then union as it
flows from it, full communion with God is more: we shall have as much as we
can desire, be filled with it, and enjoy the quintessence of all sweetness,
fulness, goodness in God, raised, inflamed, and ravished with him, in
admiration of him, without intermission or weariness; this is our greatest
good and blessedness, and the end of our being.

To be for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. eternal communion is more, 1
Cor. 2. 9. it transcends the expectation of the most enlarged heart: faith
believes the promises of glory, so we live comfortably in the expectation of
fruition, when faith shall end in vision, which will quickly be: faith believes
it, hope expects it, patience waits for it; to make this life tolerable, be
patient, endure all, it will not be long ere glory come, and be for ever; for
this cause we faint not, 2 Cor. 4.

Lastly, to dye by Faith.
Which is to resign up our souls to God, believing death shall be a passage
to glory* the righteous has hope in his death, Pro. 14. 32. These all dyed in
^aith, Heb. 11. 13. Rev. 14. 13. Psalm. 17. 15.

Of Meditation.
FRequent meditation, 1 Timothy 4. 15.

Meditation is a pondering, a weighing with our selves.

It is a serious reviving of those truths we have heard, or the dispensations
of God toward us and others, of that which we know, to consider of it, that
our hearts may be effected with it, and so apply it to our selves, to further
us to duty.

In meditation, the memory is exercised to remember things, and the
understanding to find out the causes, fruits, and properties of them, going
from one thing to another, and examine how the case stands between God and us,
in those things whereby the heart is sti^red to some duty, and the affections
framed to love or ha^red, joy or sorrow, according to that we seriously
consider of.

Before meditation
1. Read the Word, be not barren of fit matter to meditate upon, fit for thy
necessity and capacity.

2. Choose a fit time, day and night, Psalm. 1. 3. for the morning, Psalm 119.
147. Mark. 1. 35. for the night; we are fittest in the morning; I prevented the
morning ligh^, Psalm. 119. 147, 148. see Jer. 7. 13. Joh. 8. 2. Mat. 21. 28.

3. Separate thy self to it, see Pro. 18. 2.

4. Choose a fit place, as for prayer, so for meditation.

5. Believe God will bless it to thee.

6. Pray to God to bless it to thee.

In medit^tion,
1. Mourn for thy estrangement from holy things, separate thy self from
frothy fancies, look up to God for strength to keep thy heart from wandering.

2. Meditate on the Word, meditate on these things, 1 Timothy 4. 15. Psalm. 1. 2.
Psalm. 119. 99. from generals proceed to particulars.

3. Meditate but of one thing at once; observe order; 1. travel with your
memory; 2. Judgment; 3. affections, after conscience let judgment consider
what weight it is of, how it concerns Gods glory, our selves, or others,
whether we have it, or in such a measure as we need, what lets to it, and how
removed, how to attain it, and stir up our affections to it accordingly; if
it be some promise, remove the objections against it* and let not the promise
go, till ye enjoy sweetness from it.

4. If thy mind love after other matters, sigh to God, and pray to be
established, to be delivered from a vain, light, and ^rothy spirit; and then
return to meditation again.

After meditation.
The more thou meetest with God in meditation, the more frequent it, make it a
great part of thy communion with God, and when he blesses it to thee, rejoice
and be humble and thankful.

Luke 3. 10, 11.
And the people asked him, saying; What shall we do? And he answered, and said
unto them; He that has two coats, let him impart to him that has none; and he
that ^ath meat, let him do likewise.
YE see it is the duty of the people in general, to part with what they can
spare, to supply the wants and necessities of others; if they have two coats,
they must give one, and keep one for themselves, because it is of absolute
necessity.

That it is a duty to give to the poor; the Lord says; Give to him that asks
thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn thou not away, Mat. 5. 42.
Luke 6. 34, 35.

To be merciful; Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy, Mat.
5. 7. He shall have judgment without mercy, that showed not mercy, James 2. 13.

To give freely and liberally to the poor; see Eccle. 11. 1. Pro. 28. 27. and
11. 25. Psalm. 41. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 48. 10, 11. Heb. 13. 16.

To give cheerfully, 2 Cor. 9. 6, 7. Mat. 10. 42. Mark. 9. 41. Reward in heaven.

Reasons why we should give.

1. It Is just and equal to supply the necessities of those in misery and want.

2. Nature it self teaches to do as we would be done unto: also they are of
the same kind we are.

3. Gods command is, If thy ^nemy hunger, feed him, etc. to do good to all.

4. Good Job, and the Saints recorded in the Scripture did so, the Rightous is
liberal and lends.

5. If ye have to supply their necessities, and do not, ye sin greatly, ye
withhold the goods from the owners thereof. What ye have above your
necessity, they have a share in, God has ordered them to have a part of it;
the money is not yours, Ezekiel. 16. 17. Ye are but Stewards; God has given ye
so much, not for your selves, but to divide to them, according as their
necessities require.

6. If ye supply not others wants, ye shall give an account for it.

7. A woe is pvonounced against such as have this worlds goods, and give not,
see 1 John 2. 15, 16. Luke 6. 24. James 5. 5. Mat. 25* 40, 41, 42, 43. Mar. 10.
24. see and consider 109. Psalm.

I have but a little for my self, etc.

If you have for your present necessity, and to supply his, you ought to do
it Take no thought for to morrow: If you have no money, you must sell something
to give t^^ the poor, Luke 12. 33. To give, is the way to have more, and a
blessing with it.

But I may want my self, charge and trouble may come.

Therefore give a portion to seven and also to eight; for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth, Eccle. 11. 2.

1. He that gives to the poor, shall not lack; Blessed is he that
considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble, etc.
Eccle. 11. 1. Pro. 28. 17. Psalm. 41. 1.

2. If you should want, you had better give it, and want, then keep it and
sin; it is but stole to keep it when God calls for it; if ye keep it, ye may
want the comfort of it: he says, In the days of famine you shall have enough,
Job 5. 20. consider Pro. 11. 24, 25, 26.

3. God has promised to pay you again with increase: have you no faith? can
you trust a man with an hundred pound, and not God with a hundred pence? if ye
cannot trust God for your body, you do not trust him with your soul.

Not any will do so, if but two coats to give away one, etc.

If none do so, you have more need to do it; men's examples must not be your
rule, but the word of God.

Exhort. Be exhorted not to live in the breach of so plain and manifest a
command of God, give and lend, and think it not enough to give a shilling, if
they need twenty, ye ought to give those things they need, James 2. 16:

And that ye may be the more able to give and lend, Labor and work with your
hands, that ye may give to him that needs, Ephesians. 4. 28. Feast less, as, Luke
14. 12. wear less costly apparel, fare harder, yea eat nothing but bread
rather then the members of Christ, and thy own body should want bread; cut off
needless expenses in things for delight; with what conscience can ye wear
gold and silver, costly apparel, and by fine laces, and the poor Saints want
bread and other necessaries? Consider what the Christians did in the Apostles
time, Acts 2. 44, 45. and 4. 33, 34, 35. Ye say, ye be followers of them, is
not the 2 Cor. 8. 14. a command, how then dare ye neglect this duty?

Full ill will they sell their lands, much less dye for their brethren, who
will not spare their laces and superfluities to feed and cloth the naked body,
and hungry belly of Jesus Christ; I was an hungered, and naked, and Lord when
saw we thee an hungered, and naked, etc. They knew no such thing, nor did they
inquire, nor came where they might have seen it. And he shall answer; Verily,
in as much as ye did it not to one of these, ye did it not to me, Mat. 25.
34. to 46.

Whether Christ dyed for the sins of all Adams posterity?
Some men say so, but the Scripture does not say so; He took on him the seed
of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. But all Adams posterity, are not Abraham's seed in no
sense.

Secondly, Christ says, He laid down his l^fe for his sheep, John 10. 11.
15. All men are not his sheep* as ye believe not, because ye are not my
sheep, verse. 26.

Whether all those for whose sins Christ dyed, shall be saved?
They shall all be saved; as appears Romans 5. 9, 10. John 6. 37. 39. John 17.
2. 19. 24. 29. Heb. 13. 20. Jer. 32. 40. and 31. Mat. 25. 33. The salvation of
Gods Elect is certain.

Some say, Christ dyed for their sins who shall not be saved: But to what end
shall Christ die for their sins who are not appointed to life? Does not
Christ loose the end of his death, to die for their sins who shall perish?
Some are not ordained to eternal life, as appears Acts 13. 48.

Does it stand with the wisdom of God, to send Christ to die for their finnes,
whom he before decreed to condemn: The Lord has made the wicked for the day of
evil, Pro. 16. 4. 2 T^es. 2. 11. Isa. 43. 6, 7.

Q. W^et^er Christ is offered to all or no?

The Gospel is to be declared to every creature, Mark. 16. 15. 16. But to
declare a thing, and to offer it, is not one thing.

The Scripture does not say, that Christ is offered to any; men say so, but not
truly nor safely. The saying, Christ is offered to all, occasioneth many
errors; as to say, if God offers Christ to men, and they have no power to
receive him, and God gives them none: they are mocked, and that God is unjust,
and unreasonable, and that he does not mean as he says, else, say they, all
men have power, and may be saved if they will, and they may will, etc.

The purpose of God, Christ's death, salvation, and the revealing it in the
Scripture, are one in the extent; the one is not larger then the other; neither
is the ministry thereof to be larger in the declaration, viz. in the
application of salvation, is not to be larger (but rather straiter) because he
is bounded to believing and baptizednesse; He that believes, and is baptized,
shall be saved, Mark. 16. 16. He may not apply it to any person that does not
believe, etc.

Whether sufficient grace is given to all for conversion?
That which is sufficient, is effectual; if I put sufficient strength to move
the whole earth, will not motion follow? if it be not effectual, it is not
sufficient; sufficient and effectual go together.

That the conversion of man does not depend upon the will of man.
See 1 Cor. 2. 14. Deuteronomy 29. 3, 4. Mat. 1^ 34. John 1. 5. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. 2 Cor.
3. 5.

The will of God determines who shall b^ saved, Acts 13. 48.

God works all things after the counsel of his own (not man's) will, Ephesians. 1.
11. See and consider the word of the Lord, Isa. 46. 10. Psalm. 2. 13. Psalm. 135.
6. and 115. 3. Pro. 29. 26. Psalm. 33. 15. Pro. 21. 1. Pro. 16. 33. Mat. 10. 29,
30, 31. Acts 2. 23. and 4. 26, 27, 28. Pro. 16. 9. Jam. 4. 13. 15. Romans 9. 19.
2 Samuel 17. 22. Romans 1. 24. 1 Kings 22. 22. Psalm. 105. 25. Isa. 63. 17. John 11.
20. 2 These. 2. 11.

It is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. He has mercy on whom he will, 18. To ascribe
conversion to the freedom of man's will, is to exempt the creature from being
under the power of God; for if he be able to convert himself, or to refuse, so
as not to be converted; then convesion is under his own power. If it depend
upon the will of the creature, then the will of man is the cause why God
wills this or that; this were to bring the will of God under the will of man;
as if God should say, I will convert that man if he will, I have willed
nothing, or my will is mutable, my will shall wait on your will, and change as
often as yours shall; if the will of God should not determine all things, the
will of God should not be the first cause; if there be two first causes, then
there are two beginnings or more, and so more Gods then one.

If God gives power, and leaves it to man's will, then God has not determined
what shall be done, or else his purpose is changeable.

If the cause why God chooses me (and not another) is because I will, then it
is not according to his will, Ephesians. 1. 11. If Gods will be not the cause, you
deny the freedom of Gods will, and make the will of man the cause of his being
saved. If God by his omnipotent power, inclines the wills of men, whether he
will (as is above proved) then he has them more in his power then man has; if
so, his decreeing is the cause, necessity follows: the will of the creature is
not the cause of the necessity of things, because man's will is bounded by Gods
decree; and as the first weight or wheel moves the second, so the first cause
moves the second.

He whose salvation God wills, he must of necessity be saved, because he
wants no power nor wisdom to accomplish his will; man cannot resist an
almighty power, Ephesians. 1. 20. and 3. 20. Col. 1. last, therefore God cannot be
hindered of his will, if he should will any thing he could not obtain, he were
imperfect, and so not God; if he can obtain it, but will not, how does he will
it? Isa. 46. 10. Ps. 44. 2.

To grant that man has power to hinder Gods will, is to grant that he has
power to hinder his working, and so to frustrate Gods counsel, and make him a
lier: yet nothing will satisfy some, unless this be granted: if there were
any good, of which God were not the cause, how is the praise and glory of it to
be ascribed to him? To the praise and glory of his grace, wherein ^e has made
us acceptable in the beloved, Ephesians 1. 5, 6. To whom be all the praise and
honor, now and for ever, Amen.

The end of the first Part.
DIVINE CONSOLATIONS; OR The Consolations of God.

The Second Part.

Declaring how a soul may know and live in the sweet enjoyment of the love of
God, etc.

Are the Consolations of God small to thee? Job 15. 11. How sweet are thy words
unto my taste? Psalm. 119. 103. His lips drop down sweet smelling myrrh, Song
5. 5. By Samuel Richardson.

I heard sweet Jesus Christ unto me say, Rise my love, my fair one, and come
away.

^ONDON; Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-streete. 1649.

To Mr. Daniel Tailor, Silkman; Mr. Nathanael Andrews, Merchant; Mr. John
Fountain, Merchant; Mr. Samuel Penoire, Merchant; Mr. Edward Wright, Goldsmith
in Norwich.
Fullness of joy, happiness and glory. Much honored and worthy Sirs;
GOD has in his wisdom and love mixed crosses with comforts, and comforts
with crosses; He has said; In the world ye shall have trouble, but in me ye
shall have peace; peace in trouble is a sweet mercy; behold a fountain of joy
and rest, sufficient to satisfy the soul at all times, which ever flows
full of sweetness and life, to refresh our souls withal at all times.

Loving friends, the love you have manifested to me, its so great, so free, and
full, and undeserved, and unexpected: the more I view it, the more I see God in
it, and the more sweet it is to me; I have cause to be affected with it, with
great thankfulness to you, and to God for you, in that he has ordered you to
be so sweet a mercy to me; I trust he will take the kindness you have showed
to me, as done to himself, Mat. 25. 40. I know not how to require your love, I
cannot do more nor less, then to present you with the best I have, as a
testimony of my sincere and hearty thankfulness to you for the favor and
kindness I have received by you, not doubting but these spiritual and divine
Consolations, will be savoury and acceptable to you. The Lord bless you, and
keep you from all evil: so he prays that remains

Your much obliged, Samuel Richardson.

The second Part. DIVINE CONSOLATIONS.
Of the first Chapter of the Song of SOLOMON.
1. A Song of Songs;] the most excellent Song; because it is of the most
excellent things; viz. the excellencies of Christ, and his love. Which is
Solomon's; which is Christ's.

The soul says of Christ:
2. Let him kiss me: Kisses are expressions of love, and signs of peace and
reconciliation, 1 These. 5. 26. 2 Samuel 14. 23. He is my love, and my love is to
him; I prize and desire him, and the manifestations of his love; he is full of
sweetness; he is perfumed with Myrrh and Frankincense, with all powders of
the Merchants, Song 3. 6. Let him kiss me: There are no kisses so excellent,
nor so full of sweetness, none so comfortable as his, therefore none so
desirable and acceptable as his; therefore let him kiss me; O that he would
kiss me.

With the kisses of his mouth] His mouth is sweet, Song 4. 16. The roof of his
mouth is like the ^est wine; very sweet, Song 7. 7. His words are sweet, Prove.
16. 24. I long to enjoy the discoveries of his sweet and everlasting love, Jer.
31. 3. The kisses of his mouth are sweet, whose heart is full of love: his lips
drop down sweet smelling myrrh, Song 5. 13. Honey and milk are under thy
tongue, Song 4. 11. The expressions of his love does quiet my troubled heart,
and heal my wounded soul: Comfort me with apples; for I am sick of love: the
smell of thy nose like apples, Song 7. 8. Apples are of diverse and several
tastes; yet all comfortable to the body: So are the fruits of his death of
diverse and several tastes; all which are comfortable to raise and refresh the
soul; I raised thee up under the apple tree, Song 8. 5. Let me hear thy
voice; make have my beloved: Be thou like to a Roe, or to a young Heart upon the
mountains of spices, Song 8. 13, 14.

For thy loves] Many loves Redemption, Justification, Salvation, etc. are the
fruits of his love: and as so many loves, he has drowned all our sins in the
Ocean of his loves.

Are better then wine] More good then wine, more profitable, more comfortable,
more strengthening, more satisfying, more sweet and pleasing, more joyful, and
lasting then wine. Wine makes the heart glad, Eccle. 10. 19. Psalm. 104. 15. It
causes to forget sorrow and affliction. So Christ's loves chaseth away the
souls fears and sorrows: as the comforts of the soul exceed, and are better
then the comforts of the body; so much better are his loves then wine. In the
sense of sin, our souls are comforted and satisfied with his loves in
Christ, and his loves are all my consolation, happiness, and glory. This wine
is sp^ced wine, Song 8. 2. it goes down sweetly, and causes the lips of him
that is asleep to speak, Song 7. 9. Drink of this juice of apples; for in
this there is sweet consolation, Acts 2. 18. His fruit is sweet unto my taste,
Song 2. 3. and 5. 1.

3. For the savour] Thy smell is as sweet Odours, smell is a very sweet and
comfortable savor; pleasant words are as an honeycombe, sweet to the soul,
and health to the bones, Pro. 16. 24.

Of thy good ointments] Good made of precious things, of sweet spices, odours,
and perfumes, Exodus 30. 23, 24, 25. The fruits of Christ's death, are the good
ointments heals all, his ointments are very good, very sweet and precious to
the soul: ointments and perfumes rejoice the heart, Pro. 27. 9.

Thy name an ointment] The Lord our Righteousness is this name; This is his
Name, that they shall call him the Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 23. 6. This
Name is this ointment; The smell of which is better then all spices, Song 4.
10. Christ's righteousness is the best and most precious thing in the world;
this makes us righteous in the sight of God; in this ointment there is
contained all precious things; pardon, peace, reconciliation, redemption,
justification, happiness and glory, and what not, Psalm. 34. 6, 7. This is very
good, very sweet: this ointment heals all our wounds, 1 Pet. 2. 24. They that
know thy Na^, will trust in thee, Psalm. 9. 10. Therefore we lean on thee, we
venture all on thee, leaning upon her beloved, Song 8. 5.

Powered forth] In the pouring forth it is discovered and evidently seen in its
sweetness; as a sweet ointment being opened and powered forth, the sent thereof
fills the place with sweetness; so Christ's Nam^ our Righteousness fills the
soul with love, so that his breath where this love is, smells strong of love,
he cannot but sent it forth.

Therefore the Virgins love thee] Virgins, chaste ones, who are content alone
with Christ, they follow Christ, Rev. 14. 4. ( love thee, the Name, the
Righteousness of Christ, causes the Virgins that know it, to love thee) they
greatly love thee, and desire thee, and none but thee, they have full content
in thee, and have no hope or comfort but in thee; they know thy Name, thy
Righteousness, therefore they love thee, Psalm. 9. 10. Romans 10. 3.

The souls Request to Christ.

4. Draw me] Unless thou draw me, I cannot come to thee, nor follow thee,
without thy strength and power, Joh. 6. 44. Job 24. 22. Hos. 11. 4. To be
drawn is a sign of everlasting love, Jer. 31. 3.

We will run after thee] Willingly obey thee, and follow thee, and run in the
way of thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 32. To will is present with me, Romans 7. I
want strength to follow thee, without thee we can do nothing.

The soul says:
The King has brought me into his Chambers] The King Christ carries the soul
into his chambers, many chambers, many rooms in his Palace; in the Kings
chambers there are treasures, and desirable beauties, with varieties of
contentments and joys; in these secret chambers are the greatest discoveries
of love, between the Bridegroom and the Bride, there they joy and rejoice
together, Joel 2. 16. He brought me into his banqu^^ti^, house, there we
banquet together, and his Banner over me was love, Song 2. 4. Solomon's Chariot,
he made the pill^rs thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the covering
of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love for the daughters of
Jerusalem; viz. the elect, Song 3. 10. The pillars thereof are silver, the
pillars uphold; so does the word of Christ; Upholding^all things by the word of
his power, Heb. 1. 3. The Word is like silver, Psalm. 119. 72. The bottom
thereof gold; the decree of God. First, Gold is the most unchangeable metal,
all mettalls change but gold; the decree of God is unchangeable. Secondly, The
mercy-seate is pure gold, Exodus 25. 17. The mercy seat is God, for he is the
seat of mercy; all love is seated in him. Thirdly, In the mercy-seate God is
seen, Exodus 30. 6. Fourthly, The voice of God came out of the mercy-seate,
Numb. 7. 8, 9. First, The covering is purple; the covering is the top, that
which is above, in the heavens, in the world to come. Secondly, Purple is the
most costly and richest color, Exodus 39. 3. 5. A rich raiment; our greatest
riches and glory is above. Thirdly, Purple is for Kings; Purple Raiment was on
the King, Judge. 8. 26. Est. 1. 6. We are Kings, etc. Rev. 5. 10. Her clothing
is silk and purple, Pro. 21. 22. Heaven is for Kings and heirs. Fourthly,
Purple is a color in grain, its the deepest color, that fades not, it
prefigureth heaven that fades not; An inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
that fades not, reserved in heaven for you, 1 Pet. 1. 4. It is as unchangeable
as his love; his Banner over me is love, Song 4. 2. The Priests upmost coat
was the richest, it was imbroidered with gold and purple, Exodus 28. 6, 7, 8.
Fifthly, So is our upmost clothing: Clothed upon, that mortality might be
sw^ll^wed up of life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. The most richest, costly, and glorious, and
our greatest glory; the glory above is exceeding glorious. We shall not only
be in glory, but our bodies shall be glorious, like his glorious body* Phil. 3.
21. The golden Altar was spread with purple after the ashes were taken away,
Numb. 4. 11, 12, 13. The ashes this body which is Christ's, must first be
dissolved before the purple come, before we we can enter into the highest
glory. That which came after the ashes is purple, after the devolution of this
body, this tabernacle follows glory, a tabernacle not made with hands. The
midst thereof: the midst is that which is between Christ came, between Gods
decree and our eternal glory: Being paved with love, with the Covenant of
love; He loved me, and gave himself for me. Blood covered the mercy-seate,
Levit. 16. 13. This blood is the blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10. 29. The two
Cherubims that covered the mercy-seate with their glory: Christ's two natures
ate both glorious; Christ is the brightness of his glory, the express image
of his being, Heb. 1. 3. Whose glory covered the mercy-seate, Heb. 9. 5. His
left hand is underneath my head, to uphold me, and his right hand does embrace,
Song 2. 6. Manifest his love to me. I knew not where I was, until he powered in
that wine, sweetly causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak, Song 7.
9, 10, 11. When I awoke out of my sleep, I saw his beauty was so great, I
said, turn away thin^ eyes from me, for they have overcome me, Song 6. 5. Thy
glory is too great for me to behold, because my nature is too weak to bear so
great a discovery; or thy beauty is like wine intising, Pro. 23. 11. I cannot
go about that I have to do, unless thou turn away thine eyes from me: they
have overcome me, I am overcome. Wine overcame, Isa. 28. 1. it makes sick,
H^s. 7. 5. inflame, Isa. 5. 11. Puff up, H^b. 2. 5. Thou art wine, Numb. 15.
10. Old wine is best, and fit for old vessels, Luke 5. 36, 37, 38, 39. Mat. 9.
17. Every head cannot bear wine, unless it be mingled: therefore Wisdom has
mingled her wine, Pro. 9. 2. come drink of the wine which I have mingled, 5.
Wine and milk, Isa. 55. 1. Such have need of milk, Heb. 5. 12.

We will be glad and rej^yce] Inwardly and o^twardly, see Psalm. 104. 33, 34,
35. Shouteth by reason of wine, Psalm. 78. 65. Christ is th^s w^ne, Numb. 15. 10.

In thee] in Christ only, in thee there is none to Christ to me, there is none
like thee, who gave thy self to death for me. When I am Jad, I can be glad and
rejoice in thee; now I Jee all that is thine is for me; I wanted thee, and I
was so sad, that I contented could not be; but now I see I share in thee, I am
glad, ^up will be glad and rejoice in thee, and in nothing but thee, because
thou art enough for me: My beloved is mine, and I am his, Song 2. 16. Thou art
as truly mine, and more surely mine, then any thing in the world is mine, or
can be, therefore I will be glad and rejoice in thee.

We will remember thy loves, Isa. 63. 7. Not forget thy loves, but declare and
record thy loves. We are so taken with thy loves, that we desire and resolve
not to forget thy loves, but to have them continually in our hearts and minds.
The consideration of thy loves, increases our loves to thee, it is a
happiness to dwell upon the consideration and meditation of thy loves; in
thee, and in thy loves is sweetness, lo here is our consolation, happiness,
and glory: Loves, many loves, the varieties of privileges that we have by
Christ, are to be to us as so many loves.

More then wine] Thy loves are more to be desired and remembered then wine.

The upright love thee] Earnestly and sincerely love thee; only the honest and
sincere hearts love thee; others speak of loving thee, but they have no love to
thee: we love thee, because thou have wrought our deliverance; We have not
wrought any deliverance in the earth, Isa. 26. 18. Hab. 2. 14.

5. I am ^lacke] My outside is black, the color of my skin is black with
tribu^ation and a^fliction.

But comely] To a spiritual eye I am comely, and desirable, I am black in my
self, but comely in Christ; and in their eyes I am so, who judge me not
according to my outward view, but as I am in Christ, one with him, not by my
poverty, or want of outward glory, nor by the scandals cast upon me, nor by the
weakness and deformities that pass from me, in their eyes I am comely.

As the tents of Kedar; which were black.

As the Curtains of Solomon] As the Curtains of this King were costly, rich,
and beautiful, so am I unto a spiritual eye.

6. Look not upon me because I am blacke] To wit, with contempt, because of my
weaknesses and afflictions, rejoice not at my trouble, nor at my halting*
increase not my sorrow.

Because the Sun has looked upon me] Think me not the worse, because I am
per^ecuted and poor, and want these things, with that outward glory you enjoy,
which the Sun, viz. the heat of persecution has withered and dried up, Job
30. 30.

The Sons of my Mother] Not of my Father, Psalm. 69. 9. Acts 20. 30.

Have been angry with me] Highly displeased with me, and used me according to
their pleasure, they struck me, and stripped me of all, because I would not do
as they did, but obey the command of my father, Rev. 18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 14. to 18.

They made me keepers of the Vineyards] They compelled me to stay there, I
would have left them sooner, but their threatenings and deceitful reasonings
forced me to stay with them so long.

My Vineyard which is mine] Which appertains to me; where I should have been.

I have not kept] I have neglected and not frequented the flock of Christ his
Church; this was my infirmity, which I with sorrow bewailingly confess and
lament, Lam. 1. 14. 18. 22. Now my Request to Christ is that he would

7. Tell me] Teach and instruct me, show and declare to me, earnest I am for to
know.

O thou] who art my Savior and Teacher.

Whom my soul loveth] unsainedly and servently love above all things.

Where thou seedest (or wilt seed) thy flocke] That there I may seed and be sed
by thee; see Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Acts 2. 49. Isa. 40. 11. Among thy flock: Saints are
sensible of the benefit to be sed by Christ; Christ has a place to seed his
in, and he feeds by his brutaine trees, Song 1. 17.

Where thou make to rest at noone] or make to lie down quietly, and so
gives rest to thy flock; where they do not persecute one another, Isa. 49.
10. It is (...) to me that I cannot lie down quietly and enjoy my love, and
return my (...) to Ch^^st in thy garden; there will I give thee my loves, Song
7. 12, 13.

For why should I be as one that turns aside] Why should I wander up and
down like a Harlot, from place to place, and fall into their hands who may
spoil me, wound me, and keep me from them to whom I belong; why should I be
turned aside? there is no reason to be given that I should leave my flock, and
to go elsewhere.

Unto the flocks of thy Companions] Why should I go to those who call
themselves so, and say they are Christ's Church, and his companions, and are not
so indeed, and so deceive many, Mat. 24. 5. 24. Joh. 10. 4, 5.

Christ's answer to the soul, is;
O thou fairest among women] Exceeding fair, more fair and beautiful then
other women; Christ esteems not of his according to their acts of sin, but
as they are one with him; fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, Song 6. 10.
How fair and how pleasant art thou O love for delights, Song 7. 6.

8. If thou knew not] Seeing thou know not.

Go thy way forth] Get thee out, Rev. 18. 4. Song 4. 8. 2 Cor. 6. Sit not
still, let us go to the Vineyards (the Churches) there will I give thee my
loves, Song 7. 12. Song 2. 16. Christ's teaching is to purpose, they obey.

(...) the footsteps of the flocke] Go in that way trodden before thee, by the
Saints recorded in Scripture, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Ephesians. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 1 These.
2. 14. Heb. 11. 12. do as they did, Romans 4. 12. Heb. 13. 1. and 13. 7. Tread
in their steps, their practice is laid down for thee to follow.

And feed thy Kids] Feed the little ones of Christ, strengthen them, supply the
wants of thy brethren; do what thou can to feed their souls and bodies;
what thou have, let them enjoy it with thee, Joh. 21. 15, 16. See where Christ
is, Song 6. 2, 3.

Besides the Shepherds tents,] Ezekiel. 34. 31. Leave other people, and go where
Christ feeds; He seedeth among the Lillies; the thorns are sharp, prick
sore, they will quickly fetch the blood of thee; but the Lillies do not so:
Lillies drop sweet smelling Myrrh, Song 5. 13. They drop the honeycombe, Song
4. 11. viz. they speak sweet words, not bitter ones, they cannot wound and
war one against another.

9. I have compared thee] says Christ, I have likened thee to be like.

O my love] My fellow, friend, and companion that I love.

To the company of horses in the Chariot of Pharaoh] Well fed, strong, and
comely.

The horses in Pharaohs Chariots were not fit to rule themselves, they were
yoked with bits, raines, or chains, and a strong hand, else they would have
quickly left the Chariots; full-fed Horses will not do well without raines or
chains; if we are like them, we must be yoked with bits, raines, or chains:
Christ has a yoke for us, and he has commanded them to take it and put it on,
Mat. 11. A horse is strong and swift, Isa. 30. 16. able to do service; so are
the Saints fit for the service of God and man; for they are well fed by Christ.

Horses in war get the victory, Zack. 10. 3. 5. 30. with Hab. 3. 15. Exodus
14. are terrible as an Army with Banners, Song 6. 10. The people of God they
are strong, and will be too hard for those that make war against them, they
are as two Armies, Song 6. 13.

10. Thy cheeks] Our cheeks are visible, and looked on, because visible, it
holds forth our outward conversation.

Are comely] Thy conversation is beautiful to behold, its so orderly, its
comely, its praiseworthy.

With rowe^] The fruits of the Spirit, Love, meekness, temperance, patience,
faith, etc. Are seen in thy conversation, which is the praise and glory of it;
without which it were not comely, Ezekiel. 16. 11, 12. The more of these Rows is
seen in our conversation, the more comely our conversation is.

T^y neck with Chaines] Christ's commands are these chains; Our necks are not
too good for Christ's chains; chains are for use, and for ornament; for use,
for service, and to keep in order, and restrain.

Chaines] Many chains; chains are for service, and for strength, to hold and
last long; a horse may snap a bridle asunder, but a chain will hold him, if
not, many chains will.

The Law of God is this bridle, or chain, to restrain, order, and guide us in
the right way, in which we are to walk; the many commands of God, are the
chains which are as a bit to be put in our mouths, and upon our cheeks, and
about our necks; if the commands of God were not strong and durable, we have
such stiff necks, we need chains to hold us, else we would break them, snap
them asunder, as Sampson did his cords: by nature we are like the Horse, and
wild Ass, and swift Dromedary, Jer. 2. 23. We are not easily catched, and
when we are, we need be chained.

Also chains are for ornament; so are Gods commands; My son, bear thy
fathers instructions, they shall be as a comely ornament unto thy head, and as
chains for thy neck, Pro. 1. 8, 9. Chains of gold, Song 1. 10.

The more of these chains we have in our mouths, and about our necks, the
better, and the more fair and beautiful our necks are; no Jewels of gold or
pearl can adorn any so as these chains adorn; they are ornaments to us: its
a shame to us not to have these chains about our necks; we live in evil
times, the commands of God, men reject, and perhaps count it Religion to do
so; but ye that love the Lord, abhor such a thought, Gods own people are to
be ruled by him, by his commands; allow our selves to be set free from the
commands of God, is unreasonable and abominable.

11. We will make for thee (we, says God, as, Genesis 1. 26.) Rows of gold, with
specks of silver: Diverse ornaments, several fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22,
23. They are from God created by him, Phil. 1. 29. Ephesians. 3. 16. Phil. 2. 13. to
beautify our conversation, etc. that it may be for his glory, else it is not
comely.

The soul says;
12. While the King] Jesus Christ.

Sits at his Round Table] With his Church at the Lords Table, Mal. 1. 12. 1
Cor. 10. 21. With his Church at his spiritual banquet the Lords Supper: a
Round Table has no upper end.

My spikenard is very costly spice, Joh. 12. 3. A sweet smelling spikenard,
full of virtue; see Song 4. 13, 14. The breaking of Christ's body in the Supper,
is this sweet and precious Spikenard that fills the place with sweetness; so
the fruits of Christ's death, is held forth in the (...) of ointment of
Spikenard, with which Christ was anointed, Joh. 12. 3.

Gives forth the smell thereof] The sent thereof fills souls with sweetness,
Joh. 12. 1, 2, 3. It sents forth Redemption, Salvation, happiness and glory,
and what not; Oh! the sweetness of these, none can express, nor conceive:
what joy, delight, or consolation is like this of Christ, dying for my sins,
etc. It causes the soul to extol Christ, and say;

13. A bundle of Myrrh is my beloved unto me] This holds forth the greatness
of the contentment, satisfaction, and joy the soul takes in Christ, in the
fruits of his death: the soul desires ever to take comfort in these benefits,
and bundle them up together, least they be scattered, and to seek; tie them up
together in a bundle (its the sweetest poesy) ever to smell on, to comfort and
refresh thy self withal.

A bundle of Myrrh is sweet, but nothing so sweet as Christ, and his benefits
is to me. I find by experience he is so to me; there is nothing to be compared
to him, there is nothing so sweet and pleasing, as is sweet Jesus unto me. What
is a mountain of myrrh, and a hill of frankincense, Song 4. 6. Dropping sweet
smelling myrrh, Song 5. 13. The bundle of my works is not so sweet to me;
Love is as strong as death, the coals thereof has a most vehement flame, Song
8. 6. The heat of these coals were so exceeding hot, and the flame so
vehement, it scorched and burnt up all my righteousness ere I was aware; that
bundle is gone now, I need it not, for my beloved is a better bundle unto me I
lean not on any thing, but on my beloved, Song 8. 5. I have nothing else to
lean upon, nor is any thing else worth the smelling on; he is my delight, and
all my pleasure; in the sense of sin, and wants, I comfort my self in the
Righteousness of Christ.

He shall lie all night] The night is the saddest time, by reason of darkness;
the night is a sad time, by reason ^f fears, Song 3. 8. Many walk in
darkness, Isa. 50. 11. When my soul is most sad and dark (he shall lie all
night) the soul is to own and embrace Jesus Christ, and rest satisfied in him.

Between my brests] When I am at the worst Christ I desire, and nothing but
Christ. I leave all to embrace my beloved, he shall lie as near my heart, as
may be, he is only sweet to me, I will have him alone, and nothing else to lie
between my breasts, that I may smell on him, and be satisfied with his
sweeetnesse; when I am at the worst, he is enough for me, he alone will I
embrace, and fill my soul with his loves and sweet solace. The breasts, is the
place of consolation and satisfaction, Isa. 61. 10, 11. A bundle of myrrh is
sweet for sent, but not so sweet as he; my soul solace thy self with him, and
take thou no content, but in him; I am my beloveds, and his desire (...)
toward me, Song 6. 10.

14. A cluster of Cipres is my welbeloved unto me] Cipres is sweet, it has
reference to Christ, in the fruits of his death, Redemption, Salvation,
Justification, etc. are all clusters together in one, and not to be parted;
Christ has joined them in one, part them not.

In the vineyard of E^gedy.] A fruitful soil, Jos. 15. 6. 2. Ezekiel. 47. 10. So
Christ's death is wonderfully fruitful, who can reckon up his benefits? all
which are the fruits of his death.

Christ says to the soul:
15. Behold, thou art fair my love; behold, thou art all faire] Its twice
repeated, because Christ would have his to know and mind their beauty, Isa.
62. 5. Song 7. 6.

Thine eyes are as doves eyes] Good eyes and clear: as the eyes of doves by
the Rivers of waters washed with milk, Song 5. 12. It holds forth the souls
quick-sightednesse in the mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 4. Secondly, Doves eyes
are chaste, Doves eyes within thy looks, Song 4. 1. It holds forth the souls
chastnesse to Christ, they are covered, except it be to Christ, their eyes are
fixed on him; they look not to their works for life, but freely part with all
their lovers, and rest content in Christ alone.

The souls answer to Christ:
16. Behold, thou art all fair, my beloved] My beauty is not mine, but thine,
it all belongs to thee, take thee the praise thereof; for thou art only
beautiful; I desire to see the King in his beauty; for thou art glorious in
thy beauty, Psalm. 45. 2, 3. Psalm. 115. 1. Psalm. 90. 17. Isa. 30. 18. Psalm. 27.
4. thou art my glory, Isa. 45. 24.

Yea pleasant] Christ is very pleasant, comfortable, amiable, and delightful,
in him is all pleasantness, Song 7. 6. and 4. 16. Pro. 16. 24. I sat down
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto my taste,
Song 2. 3. Christ is that tree, under which we have protection, and defense,
and dwell safely, and quietly, no heat can scorch us [ sit] we rest in Christ,
we go no further, the fruits of his death are sweet unto my taste, they not
only smeell sweet, Song 4. 11. but taste sweet; there are no fruits so sweet
as the fruits of his death, Song 5. 1.

Also our bed is greene] Viz. fruitful and flourishing, communion with Christ
in the bed of love, causes spirituallnesse, fruitfulness; they increase in
good works, inward and outward, to God and man; such cannot be barren, Psalm.
92. 13, 14. 2 King. 6. 2. 5. Song. 4. 2. (...) is none barre^ among them, Song
6. 6. See Song 8. 12.

1^ The beame^ of (...) house] The rafters of our house, which is the Church of
Christ, 1 Ti^. 3. 15. Heb. 3. 6.

(...)] A Cedar is a tall tree, full of sap, Psalm. 104. 16. Its a tree that
grows well, its a tree of worth, and of great use, and a rare, and excellent
tree, Excellent as Cedars, Song 5. 15. Its a sound tree; its no p^thy nor
rotten tree; it holds forth what the matter of the Church of God should be,
choice matter, excellent Saints: the Candlesticks were made of pure gold, 1
King* 1. 49. See Rev. 1. 20. Cedars, many Cedars make an house.

Our galeries] The galeries are ^igher then other parts of the house, so are
those that are the Teachers above the rest in honor, etc. the King is held in
his galery, Song 7. 5. Christ is most seen in his galeries, they are his
galeries where he walks; the galeries are on the outside of the house, and
seen by those abroad, they declare the truth to them that are without.

Are brutaine trees; or fit tree, Psalm. 104. 17. The brutaine trees are of a
sweet and pleasant smell; it holds forth that those that teach the truth,
should smell best, their conversations holy and sweet; not of those whose
practice make them stink; The smell of thy garments is like Lebanon, Song 4.
11. It holds forth their sweet gifts, and excellent knowledge in the truth of
Christ, who teach Christ they are to teach truth with speech comely, Song 4. 3.
and comfortably to the beloved of the Lord.

Psalm 16.
THis Psalm is a Prophecy of Christ, David speaks concerning him; see Acts.
25. to 35. and 13 35.

This Psalm is a golden Jewel, it declares the riches of love to the sons
and daughters of Christ, their exceeding safe and happy estate, in which is
great consolation.

Verse. 1. Preserve me, O God There is no preservation in any thing, but in God.

Preserve me] Christ in the days of his flesh, put up strong cries and
supplications to his Father, Jo^ 17.

For in thee do I put my trust] There is no trust to be put in any thing, but
in God.

2. I put my trust] Christ as he was man had faith and it was in God, Gal. 2.

Thou art my Lord Christ in acknowledging him, honors the Father, yea Christ
is equal with him.

My goodnesse] Christ's goodness was of and from himself, therefore his own.

Goodnesse] Jesus Christ is full of goodness, Col. 2. 3. therefore all that
Christ has done, must needs be exceeding good and excellent, in this is our
happiness and comfort.

Extends not to thee] Appertains not to God, God is perfect and infinite,
therefore he is not capable of any addition of goodness; this is his
perfection.

3. But to the Saints] Those that are made so by me, they had no goodness of
themselves, their rig^t^ousnesse is of me, Isa. 45. 17.

Extendet to the Saints] It reaches to the^, there is no son or daughter in
any place, to whom my goodness does not reach, they have interest in it, its
theirs, and they shall enjoy the fruit of it.

Goodnesse] The Saints goodness is in Christ. This goodness of Christ was not
for every person in the world, but to the Saints that a^e in the earth.

Saints] Christ's goodness made them Saints.

Use. Oh Saint, admire the riches of Christ, and his love to thee, rest
satisfied in Christ's goodness, which is thine, rejoice in it admire at it, be
thankful for it, walk suitable to it, and improve this goodness against all
thy doubts and fears, etc.

To the excellent] The Saints are excellent to Christ; yea all of them are
alike excellent, beautiful, glorious, unspeakeable, infinite, excellent, with
the excellency of Christ; they are more excellent then the whole creation of
heaven and earth: Christ calls them excellent, and esteems them so, Ephesians. 5.
27. Oh Saint, esteem thy self as Christ does, to be excellent in his
excellency; for thy beauty it is perfect through my comeliness I have put upon
thee, says the Lord, Ezekiel. 16. 14. I will greatly rejoice in the Lord, my
soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the garment of
salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, Isa. 61. 10.

Use Oh glorious Saint, the world knows not thy worth, therefore it esteems
thee not, yet slight not thy self, because Christ has made thee excellent.

In whom is all my delight] Jesus Christ is fully pleased and contented with
his.

All my delig^t] An infinite delight Christ takes in his.

All] One Saint is more esteemed by Christ, then the whole creation of heaven
and earth; for those things have not any of his delight; the Saints have it
all, the quintessence of all fullness.

Use. O precious Saint, delight thy self in God, rest satisfied in him, in his
love, and the delight he takes in thee.

Verse. 4. Their sorrows shall be multiplied, that hasten after another God:
those that have another God, they shall have sorrow and increases in grief;
those that are not mine, their drink offering of blood will I not offer, nor
take up their names into my lips: they are not in so happy a condition, they
shall find the contrary from Christ; he will not once name their names to God,
I will not be made an offering for them; their offerings of blood, their costly
services shall be rejected; they shall find no acceptance; they are in a
miserable condition.

Verse. 5. Mine inheritance, and lot,] Given me of my Father, allotted to me:
Christ's lot and inheritance is his people; The Lords portion is his people,
Deuteronomy. 22. 9.

Mine] Christ has an interest in his people, and he owns it, he is not ashamed
to own them to be his; the Eject are his part.

The Saints are not their own, but Christ's, 1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 3. 23.

Use. Seeing the Saints are Christ's, they are to be at his disposing, and not
their own, they are to serve him, and do all for him.

Inheritance of my Cup] Christ's people are his by purchase; Let this Cup pass
from me; they cost a great price, his precious blood, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

Use. He that paid so much for his, will not loose them, nor leave them, Heb.
13. 5, 6.

The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance] The Saints have God for their
portion. The Lord is my portion, says my soul Lam. 3. 24. Thou art my
portion, O Lord, Psalm. 119. 57.

The portion of a child of God is infinite, because God is infinite. God
esteems nothing too much for his, in that he declares himself to be theirs.
The Saints are infinitely happy in having such a portion, Jer. 10. 16. Happy is
that people that is in such a case; yea happy is that people whose God is the
Lord, Psalm. 144 15.

Use. The Saints portion can never be spent, nor lost; God is my port on for
ever, Psalm. 73. 26. None are so rich as a Saint, they shall never want; The
Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want, Psalm. 23. 1. There is no want to them
that fear him, they shall not want any good thing, Psalm. 34. 9, 10.

Use. O rich and happy Saint, admire free grace, that has so abounded to thee,
be content with thy portion, for richer thou can not be; rejoice in thy
portion, for it will be a full supply to thee; They shall rejoice in their
portion, Isa. 61. 7. Be thankful for thy portion, for it was freely given
thee, Hos. 14. 4. Esteem not any thing too much for him, who esteems nothing
too much for thee; be content in every condition, because thou art an heir of
glory; improve thy portion, and live richly upon it.

Thou maintainest my lot] God has undertaken to preserve the Saints, and he
does it: Christ's inheritance can never be lost, because it is maintained by God.

The Saints safety and preservation depends not upon themselves, nor any thing
below God, but upon God, who maintains and upholds them.

The Saints are sure to persevere, its impossible they should miss of glory,
because they are maintained by God.

Verse. 6. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places] Christ's lot and
inheritance is his Saints, who are delightful and precious unto him.

Yea, I have a goodly heritage] Christ is wonderfully taken with the Saints
comeliness; its a maine part of the excellency of Christ's inheritance, that it
cannot be kept from him, spent, nor lost.

Goodly heritage] Christ has a high esteem of his; fair unto me, it pleases
me well; Thou art all fair my love; there is no spot in thee, Song 4. 7. They
are without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. 5. 25. to 28. 1 Timothy 1. 7. Psalm. 51. 5. Rev.
19. 8. Song 2. 10.

Use. O happy Saint, have thee a high esteem of Christ, he is satisfied in
thee, be thou satisfied in him; rejoice in nothing else but him, Psalm. 31. 21.
and sing praises to him.

7. I will bless the Lord] Declare his name. Who has given me counsell]
Counseled me, made me wise, see 1 Pet. 1. 11. Luke 24. 25.

My raines also instruct me] Heart teaches, see Pro. 16. 23.

In the night seasons] in the dark seasons.

8. I have set the Lord always before me] I have proposed, I beheld before,
Acts 1. 25.

He is at my right hand] Supplied, Acts 2. 25. God powerfully assists and
comforts me.

I shall not be moved] that I be not moved, Acts 2. 25.

9. Therefore my heart is glad^] in it I rejoice.

And my glory] my tongue, Acts 2. 26.

Rejoyceth] utters joyful things.

My flesh] My body.

Also shall rest in hope] Safely, securely, in confidence to rise the third
day, Mat. 12. 40. 10. For thou will not leave] Me in the power of death, Acts
2. 24. 31. and 13. 34, 35.

My soule] My life, Job 2. 6.

In bell] In the grave; he speaks of the Resurrection, that he should rise,
Acts 2. 31, 32. or pit, Psalm. 55. 24. Eccle. 9. 10. the corrupting ditch, Psalm.
16. 10. Psalm. 57. 7.

Neither will thou suffer] Wilt not permit.

Thy holy One] Me that am holy; free from sin.

To see corruption] To perish, Acts 13. 36, 37, but that I shall rise, Acts 2.
31, 32.

11. Thou will show me] Make me to know, or have made me know.

The path of life] The way of life; for me to dye and rise, is the way to life,
Acts 2. 28. Mat. 18. 9. Mark. 9. 47. Our works are not the way, or path of
life; Christ is the way, Joh. 14. 56. Yet Saints are to walk, and do walk in
good works.

In thy presence] Before thy face or presence; The wicked put from thy
presence, 2 These. 1. 9.

Is fullness of joyes] Thou will fill me with joy before thy face, or with thy
countenance, Acts 2. 28. Gods face or presence is our joy, Exodus 33. 14, 15, 16.

At thy right hand] The place of honor, in the highest glory, Psalm. 17. 15.
Exalted, Acts 2. 33, 34.

Are pleasures] Pleasant joys.

For ever more] Eternally, Mat. 25. 33, 34. 36.

A divine Cordial for a fainting Soul.
Psalm. 89. 28.
My Covenant shall stand fast with him.
THis Psalm holds forth Jesus Christ, of whom David was a type and figure, as
Acts 2. 30.

This Psalm contains the foundation of man's happiness, and the certainty
thereof.

We are to consider; first, what a Covenant is; secondly, whose Covenant it is;
thirdly, the nature and substance of this Covenant; fourthly, with whom it is
made.

For the first; the word Covenant, imports a mutual agreement of two parties
to perform each of them the things agreed upon; for it cannot be a Covenant,
unless there be something to be done on both parties; and therefore a promise
differs from a Covenant, in that a promise may tie one party only, as all
free and absolute promises do; but a conditional promise differs nothing from
the nature of a Covenant.

For the second, it is Gods Covenant, as appears by these words; My Covenant.

For the third; the nature and substance of this Covenant, its spiritual, and
contains principal things, spiritual, salvation, eternal life, happiness,
and glory.

For the fourth; this Covenant is made with Jesus Christ; which appears by
these words; My covenant shall stand fast with him: I have made a covenant with
my chosen; I have sworn unto David my servant, thy seed will I establish for
ever, verse. 3. I have found David my servant, with my holy Oil I have anointed
him, verse. 20. With whom my hand shall be established my arm also shall
strengthen him, ver 21.

The condition on Christ's part is comprehended in these words; that he should
be made a sacrifice for sin: the condition on Gods part was, that then Christ
should see his seed, and prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord should
prosper in his hand, Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12.

Obs: The sum is, that the Covenant of grace, life, and salvation, stands
only betwixt God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who has undertaken to
perform all that was necessary for the salvation of his Elect.

That the Covenant of grace was made with Jesus Christ; appears by these
Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because the word him, in the singular number, notes only one
Person; My Covenant shall stand fast with [ him] The Elect are many, therefore
its not made with them in this sense I here speak for; there is a difference
between the word him, and the word them: he says, My faithfulness, and my
mercy shall be with him, etc. 24.

2. Because Christ is called the Covenant, because it has dependence on him; I
will give thee for a Covenant of the people, Isa 42. 6, 7. and 49. 9. The Elect
are not called a Covenant, I grant they share in the privileges of it, but its
in relation to Christ, and as they are considered in him: hence it is God
says, he will show them his Covenant, Psalm. 25. 14. to comfort them with it.

3. Christ only is engaged to perform the conditions of this Covenant,
because he has undertaken it, he has sealed, confirmed, and fulfilled the
Covenant with his blood, therefore his blood is called the blood of the
Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. Our blood is not the blood of the Covenant.

4. It was of necessity that this Covenant should be made with Christ, and him
only, because he alone was able to keep the conditions of it; it required a
great strength to keep this Covenant: therefore the Lord says, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty; thou b^st a mighty arm; strong is thy hand,
verse. 19. 13. We are weak, even weakness it self, utterly unable to effect
such a work; it had been in vain to have laid so great a work upon man, yea
fallen man, whose strength is weakness, and his R^ght^o^snesse no better then
a menstru^^us cloth, Isa. 46.

5. If man had been to perform any of the conditions of this Covenant, it had
not been a covenant of grace, but a covenant of works; for, if it be of works,
is not of grace, Romans 4. 4, 5. Nor were the covenant of grace free and
absolute, if it were conditional, for that covenant is not absolute, which
depends upon any condition to be by us performed, but to us the covenant is
free and absolute, and altogether unconditionall on man's part, therefore its a
covenant of grace, it cost Christ dear, his very life, that it might cost us
nothing.

6. If this covenant had been made with us, and so had depended upon our
obedience, then might our sin have broke the covenant, and so deprived us of
salvation; which cannot be; for sin cannot deprive any of the Elect of
salvation; for God says, My covenant shall stand fast with him; his seed also
will I make to endure for ever; if his ( Christ) children fors^ke my Law, and
walk not in my judgments; if they ^^eake my statutes, and keep not my
commandments ( what then) then will I visit their transgressions with a rod,
and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail; my Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips, Psalm. 89. 28. to
38. These words do exceeding fully and clearly declare, that the covenant of
grace depends not upon our good duties, nor can be broken by our sins.

7. If the covenant of grace had depended upon our actings toward God, then
had the counsel of God appeared to be mutable, which is contrary to Heb. 6. 17.

8. If this covenant had depended upon our keeping the conditions, we could not
be certain of our salvation because we might not perform the conditions; at
least greatly doubt whether we had performed them or no; for if Adam in his
greatest strength fell, how shall we in our weakness stand?

9. If we had been to perform the conditions, to partake of the covenant of
grace, then could not we have strong consolation, because we should be under
care and fear least we should come short. Now God to free us from care and
fear herein, he made sure the covenant with Jesus Christ for him to keep;
therefore to make it sure, and to free us from all doubt, he confirmed it by an
Oath: the reason why he did so, is rendered, that we might have strong
consolation wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the infallibility of (...) Counsel, confirmed it by ^n Oath, that by
two immutable things (oath and promise) we might have strong consolation, Heb.
6. 17, 18. Our consolation is far more stronger, that all is finished, and
confirmed by Christ, then to have so weighty a matter (upon which depends our
eternal happiness) to depend upon the good acts of a weak, uncertain, and
vain man, whose breath is in his nostrels.

10. Lastly, it tends most to the advantage, to the riches and glory of Gods
grace, and abasing man, to establish the covenant with Christ, so as to leave
none of this work for man to do, for if man were to do the least part of
that work, on which depended our eternal happiness, in stead of giving God
the glory, we would boast. Therefore to prevent this, he has established the
covenant with Christ, who has wrought our works for us; and has not left any
of this work for us to do; see Isa. 26. 18.

Obs. The covenant of grace is unutterable, its a fast and sure covenant, its
an everlasting covenant, it cannot be broke, therefore all the Elect shall
certainly have happiness and glory.

We have the word of the Lord to confirm this; for God says; My Covenant
shall stand, verse. 28. My Covenant will I not break, nor after the thing that
is gone out of my lips, v. 34. The Covenant of my peace shall not be removed,
Isa. 45. 10. I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever; yea, he has sworn
it; Once have I swornely my holiness, that I will not lie unto Christ, Psalm.
89. 35. God is not as man that be should repent; faithful is he that has
promised, which will also do it.

Use. Inform. This shows they mistake who conceive the covenant is made with
man, or that reach faith to be a condition of the covenant.

2. That the happiness of the children of Christ, depends upon the stability
of the covenant, seeing that is sure and unalterable, therefore their
happiness is sure and unalterable; Nothing shall separate us, etc. Sin cannot,
nor shall not, Romans 8. 38, 39.

3. That our eternal happiness does not depend upon our works, nor upon our
selves, but upon Jesus Christ, in what he has done for us.

4. That all that are Christ's, need not fear nor doubt of eternal life,
because they are included in the privileges of the covenant.

5. This informs us of the greatness and freeness of Gods love, in that God
requires nothing of us to have an interest in this covenant, and are ever to be
in this his everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20.

Use. Exhort. 1. All the Lords are to take notice, that they have an interest
in this blessed and sure Covenant.

2. To joy in it, with great thankfulness for it, praise the Lord, tell of his
goodness, extol free love.

3. Ever have recourse to God in this covenant for what we need; come to God in
the consideration of this covenant, for comfort and strength to do or suffer:
mind this covenant, and walk in the strength of it all the days of thy life:
would thou have comfort and joy, that is sweet, solid, full, and lasting,
fetch it from Christ in this Covenant; this covenant affords the sweetest
comfort and consolation: in the loss of outward things, yea inward comforts,
this covenant affords much comfort, this might satisfy us in all our losses,
that we cannot loose our best treasure; certainly, the cause of the
unsettlement in our souls, is because we have not recourse to this covenant,
to live on it; improve this covenant against all thy doubts and fears; this
covenant contains all good things, therefore rest satisfied in thy interest in
it: mind it, and forget it not.

4. Walk answerable as the redeemed of the Lord, as becomes the Gospel, in
all holy conversation.

5. Be sure ye take heed, that ye turn not this grace of God into
wantonness; abhor the thoughts of being the more secure and careless in
obeying God.

Use. Comf. To all that are the Lords, you are happy whatsoever your wants are,
whatsoever condition, you are included in Gods covenant, this exceeds all
wants, in this you are happy, and had you all other things, and wanted this,
you were miserable: if thou art outwardly poor, yet thou art rich, in that
thou have an interest in this covenant.

Isa. 41. 10.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee: be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will
strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness.
OBs. 1. Some things are terrible to a Saint, which he is subject to fear.

2. It is the will of God, that his people be not troubled, but live a sweet
and quiet life, in, and upon himself.

3. God is always present with his, to keep them from all evil, and do them
good, though they know it not, or consider it not.

4. Fears arise, in not beholding the presence of God.

5. The consideration of the presence of God, is a special Remedy against
fears.

6. I am thy God; when a child of God is at the worst, still God is his God.

7. The knowledge of an interest in God, is enough to raise a soul out of all
its fears.

8. I will strengthen thee; God is engaged by promise to help and strengthen
his.

9. The Saints should mind Gods promise, and live upon it.

10. The promise of God is enough to quiet, and free the soul from fears.

11. The weakest Saint with God shall prevail.

12. Strengthen thee: there is strength enough in God.

13. The Saints strength is God.

14. Its in vain for men to oppose the Saints, for God is with them to help
them.

15. I will help thee: the Saints in themselves are weak, and cannot help
themselves.

16. Creatures cannot help, they are vanity, there is no help but in God.

17. So much as the soul rests upon the promise of God for help, so much its
freed from fears in the greatest appearance of dangers.

18. Uphold thee: God upholds his, the trials of the Saints are above their
strength, they cannot uphold themselves.

19. Strengthen, help, uphold; God applies himself suitable, and in particular
to the wants of his people.

20. When God will preserve a man, it is not any thing that can hurt him.

From all which, we may observe:

1. That the ground of fears is ignorance, as Psalm. 62. 11. Forgetfulness,
Isa. 51. 12, 13. and living by sense, and not by faith.

2. That its unreasonable for a child of God, to fear men, or be dismayed at
any thing.

Reas. is. 1. Because its against Gods command, which says; Fear not.

2. Because they have the presence of God to help them; I am with thee.

3. They have an interest in God, which is a happiness beyond all miseries; I
am thy God.

4. Because nothing can befall them, but what God appoints, who loves them.

5. Because whatsoever befalls them, shall do them good, Romans 8.

6. The bitterness shall be but short, Romans 16.

7. Fears never do any good, but much hurt, they dishonor God, his truth,
and people, and often cause us to neglect our duty.

8. Fears are unsuitable for a Saint. Rev. 21. The fearful and unbelieving,
etc. shall have their part in the lake with sorcerers, idolaters, and liars.

9. Fears are unreasonable for a child of God, because God has given them
many great, and sweet promises, that they shall not want any good thing, Psalm.
34. He has said, I will never leave them, nor forsake them, Heb. 13. 5.
Therefore they are well enough, they need not care, nor fear but in God
always rejoice, and sing praises to him.

2 These. 3. 16.
Now the Lord of peace himself, give you peace by all means.
PEace is rare, choice, and precious; its comfortable, sweet, and lovely,
therefore desirable; such as enjoy it, prize it, are thankful for it, and
walk answerable unto it.

Obs. 1. In that the Apostle prays, that God would give the Saints, the
Church of God peace; it appears, that such as are the Lords may want peace:
and that this is a truth, see and consider, Psalm. 88. 15, 16. Job 19. 10, 11.
and 7. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 31. 22. Psalm. 55. 5. and 77. 8, 9. Lam. 3. 2.
to 19. Job 7. 18, 19, 20, 21. 13, 14 Psalm. 51. 12. So that it is one thing to
be a child of God, and another thing to have peace.

Now the God of peace himself give you peace.

Obs. 2. That the peace of the Saints is from God, he gives it: it is not in
the power of men to give peace, they may speak peace, but they cannot give
peace: God is called the Lord of peace; to teach us, that it is at his
disposing, none have any power to order and give peace but himself.

To give peace requires an almighty power; its a creation, he creats the fruit
of the lips peace, Psalm. 57. 10. He alone can empty the soul of its fears and
terrors, and place peace in the soul. When men speak peace, the soul
refuses, is set upon a will, they will not receive it: thus David, My soul
refused to be comforted, Psalm. 77. 2. Man is not able to persuade the will, and
overpower the soul, but Gods persuasions are to purpose, because they are
effectual.

If men could give peace, God should loose his glory, and man should be admired
and adored as God.

Use 1. If the Lord of peace, must give peace, this should teach us in the want
of peace, to go to God for it.

2. It should teach such as enjoy any peace, how small soever it appears in
their eyes, to be thankful to God for it, for its from his mercy and loving
kindness that we enjoy it.

Obs. 3. The Lord himself give you peace by all means.

God conveys peace to his people, in, and by means.

Means cannot give peace, but God gives peace by them.

If means could give peace, we would look and rest too much upon means, and
be satisfied with them without God, and resting upon means, and not upon the
God of means.

Use. This should teach us to use the means, and to look above them to God to
bless them, and in the use of means to live upon God, and not upon the means.

Obs. 4. By all means: all the means that tend to increase the peace of the
Saints, they ought to know, and mind, and use, and believe God will give them
peace by them.

Use. Use all, if by any means thy wants may be supplied, Phil. 3. 11. Honor
not one, so as to exclude or flight another; its the fault of some, to neglect
some, and use such as themselves like; be ye so wise as to embrace and use
all, for all are for his glory, and thy good; the neglect of one, may hinder
the fruit of another; there is no means how weak so ever it appears, but God
can bless it to thee.

There be many special means to quiet and settle a troubled foul in the
assurance of the love of God, which are of special use to increase thy peace:
to name some;

Means 1. Commune with thy heart, and make diligent search to find out what
it is that troubles thee; see Psalm. 77. 6. Ask a reason of thy soul, why it
is disquieted, why it is cast down? why art thou cast down, O my soul? why
art thou disquieted, Psalm 42. 5, 6. 11.

2. Examine from whence all thy discouragements come, and you shall find they
come not from God; for his voice is peace and comfort to his; I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not
of evil, Jer. 29. 11. Comfort ye my people, says the Lord, speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem; cry unto her that her warfare is accomplished, that
her iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 42. 1, 2. You see they come not from God, nor
do they come from Christ; it was promised of Christ, that he should speak
peace; Thy King comes, he shall speak peace unto the heathen, Zach. 9. 9, 10.
This is his work, and he does it, therefore he does not trouble nor discourage
any; He binds up the broken hearted; he proclaims peace and liberty; he
comforts all that mourn; he gives beauty for ashes; the oil of joy for
mourning; and garments of praise, for the spirit of heaviness, etc. Isa. 61.
1, 2, 3. Luke 4. 18. He is gracious and pitiful; He will not quench the
smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed, Isa. 42. 3. His voice is full of
love and tenderness; his words are sweet words; as, Let not your hearts be
troubled, Joh. 13. 1. Fear not, it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
Kingdom, Luke 12. 32. Cast your care upon me, I will care for you, Phil. 4. 6.
Christ's voice is, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, Song 5.
2. What sweet words are here, all tending to peace and comfort, not the least
word of discouragement or trouble; his name is King of Salem, that is, King of
peace, Heb. 7. 2. Its evident then our fears and discouragements come not from
Christ.

Nor come they from the holy Spirit of God, for he is the great and most sweet
Comforter, he causes no discouragement, but removes them all, by revealing and
applying to the soul the love of God, and carries the soul by faith from all
discouragements to God, who is love and peace, where the soul is to rest,
Psalm. 116. 7. and be filled with sweet peace. This is the work the Spirit
does, hence it is he is called the comforter, Joh. 15. 16. He never caused the
least fear or discouragement in the soul of any.

The consideration that our fears, doubts, and discouragements, come not from
God, nor from Christ, nor from the holy Spirit, is sweet, for then what need we
care to regard them, or be troubled for them, but slight them. But may a soul
say from whence then do they come?

1. They come from the Devil, who is a malicious enemy to the peace and
comfort of the Saints; he is an enemy to their believing, therefore he tempts.
and takes the word out of men's hearts, least they should believe, Luke 8. 12.
And his instruments tempt, see Psalm. 42. 10. 1 These. 3. 5.

2. They come from our own hearts; Take ^eed brethren, least there be in any of
you an evil heart in departing from the living God, Heb. 3. 12.

3. They come from the l^i^g va^ities we have chosen; They that hearken unto
lyin^ vanities, forsake their own mercy, (...) 8.

4. The causes why the children of God have ^o many discouragements, doubts,
and fears, do arise;

1. From ignorance of the fullness and ^reenesse of the promise, Isa. 55. 2.

2. Mindlesnesse and heedlesnesse of the promise, Heb. 2. 1.

3. Ignorance and forgetfulness of God, Heb. 12.

4. Unskillfulness of the word of Righteousness, Heb. 5. 13.

5. And from corruption in the heart, opposing grace, unbelief takes the Law,
and ^pplies it to it self, which occasioneth fears, and fears doubts and
discouragements.

6. Not watching against sin, the not keeping a clear conscience, and omission
of duties, and loose walking with God; all these will ^aise tumults in the
soul.

7. Building our comfort upon that which ^s mutable and uncertain, Mica 2. 10.
and seeking comfort in our personal sanctification, and not in Christ, in our
justification by him.

8. False reasonings, as to conceive they have no grace, because they see or
feel none* and because they are so bad: thus we delude our selves in choosing
trouble, and preferring it before comfort, Job 15. 11.

9. From the bodies distemper with melancholy, and want of employment, or too
much business, and the troubling themselves wit^ the event of things, and
peevishness, Jona. 3. 9. Jer. 31. 15. and pride, in not quietly sub^mitting to
that condition, inward or outward God has put us in, and want of patience, i^
not waiting upon God for deliverance in the use of means.

10. Want of confideration of the groun^ of the trouble, to see whether it
ought to b^ a ground of trouble or no.

11. Too much eying of sin, and the co^^science siding with the Law against
it self.

12. Gods not appearing to the soul, Man 27. 46. the Spirits not speaking in
the soul and causing the soul to believe, Romans 8. 16.

3. Means. Give no way to any discourage^ment at all, although it do seem
never (...) just and reasonable: this was David's sin (...) admit of a parley
with that which did ten^ to discourage him; saying, Will the Lord ca^ off for
ever? does his promise fail for ever more? I said this is my infirmity, Psalm.
77. 7* 8, 9, 10. As soon as he did see his infirmity he had other thoughts of
God; saying, Who so great a God as our God? thou art a God that do wonders,
and thy footsteps are not known, verse. 14. 19. If God in his greatness were
known, and the wonders he does known, and the way he goes known, we would
admire and rejoice at that for which we now mourn.

4 Means. Learn to know and distinguish between the voice of Christ, and all
other voices, that thou may know, and say, It is the voice of my beloved that
knocks, and hearken unto it, Song 5. 2. If you would know Christ's voice, its
peace, Luke 24. 26. Thy sins are forgiven, Luke 7. 48. I will remember them ^o
more, Heb. 10. 17. Therefore that voice that tends to hinder the Saints peace,
suits with Satan's voice, and is not the voice of Christ: you must not hear
what Satan says, ^ut hear what God says; I will hear what ^he Lord will
speak, for he will speak peace to his people, Psalm. 85. 8. Satan is ready
enough to speak to the soul against what God says, and say, its a delusion,
and it is not likely to be from God, and allege reason for it; and says, Art
thou a child of God, and act so and so: and because this last voice is suitable
to reason, the soul is ready to close with it, and conclude against God, and
his own soul, that the voice was not from God, but a delusion of Satan, and so
mis-takes Christ's voice to be the voice of Satan, and Satan's voice to be the
voice of Christ, which is a great mis-take; therefore know that voice which is
for Satan's side* and if followed, will give Satan the victory, that voice is
Satan's voice; and that voice which is for God against Satan, that is the voice
(...) that all discouraging voices are (...) from God, but from the Devil, and
therefore see that ^ee so look upon them; therefore learn to know the
several colors, sounds, and voices, which are for God, and which for Satan, 1
Cor. 14. 8, 9, 10, 11. or else you will mis^take, and come unprepared to the
battle, 2 Cor. 7. 5.

5. Learn to know and distinguish between the voice of the Gospel, and the
voice of the Law; the Law says, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things that are wristen in the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10, 11. When there is
any work to be done upon pain of punishment, or upon promise of eternal
life, its the voice of the Law, the Law requires a doing something for life.
Moses describing the Righteousness of the Law, says, That the man that does
these things, shall live by them, Romans 10. 5. But the voice of the Gospel is
otherwise; as, that Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. and that his mercy is above what we can ask
or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. So the promises of life are free without condition; the
Gospel declares what God works in us, and freely gives to us; I will love them
freely, Hos. 14. 4. If we did more listen to the promise, which is the voice of
the Gospel, and not to the voice of the Law, and the voice of corruption, we
should enjoy more peace, and less trouble.

6. Meddle not with the threatenings in the Word, to apply them to thy soul,
because they belong not unto it, they are no part of thy portion, they concern
not the state of a believer (however they may be of use to prevent sin) yet
are of no use to him after sin is committed; its a weakness in a believer
having sinned to apply the threatenings against sin to himself, because we
are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14. Christ being made a curse
for us, Gal. 3. 13. has made full satisfaction for the sins of the Elect.
Reckon your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6. 10, 11. Romans 6. 7. It is against reason, sight, sense,
and feeling, to reckon so, but we are to walk by faith, and not by fight, 2
Cor. 5. 7.

7. See that ye do not judge your estate by false principles; some judge
their state to be bad for the want of that which if they had it, it would not
prove their state good; as, knowledge, memory, parts, sensiblenesse of sin,
etc. nor judge thy state to be bad, for having of that which if thou were freed
from, would not prove thy state good; as, passion, temptation,
discontentednesse, etc. If this rule were observed by some more, they should
not be so troubled as they are.

8. Take heed ye be not overwhelmed with sin, do not eye so much thy
infirmities, beware of such a minding, and complaining of sin, as may
discourage, oppress, and trouble thy soul; this is sinful; our experience
might teach us this, as well as it did David; I complained, and my spirit was
overwhelmed, I am so troubled that I cannot speak, Psalm. 77. 3, 4. 8.
Therefore hearken not to thy failings, corruptions, doubts, and fears, so as
to be discouraged, etc. For as they are all against God, so they are all
against thy soul, there is no grace or mercy to be expected from them in this
sense: what thou see and feel, see not, consider not, forget; and what thy
sense sees not, see; Faith is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. 1.
Walk by faith, and not by sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

9. Eye Christ only, mind him, meditate upon him, and his rich and free
grace; fetch all thy comfort from him, who is made to thee, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. If thou will
attend only to God in his promise, thou shall find Rest, Psalm. 116. 7. O
soul, eye not so much thy self, or thy sins, as Christ's full and perfect
satisfaction, which was offered and accepted for all thy sins; therefore live
and rest thy soul upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone, and place all thy
confidence in him; do you not hear Christ say; Cast away all thy fears, and
come to me, I will settle thee, comfort, quicken, and uphold thee, and be
better to thee then thy self can be, yea all in all to thee.

10. Know and mind the happiness of a believer in Christ, he is clean from
all sin, 1 John 1. 7. They are removed from us, Ps. 103. 12. Meditate on this
truth, until thy heart be over-powred with it, and enjoy the sweetness of it;
ever mind what is thy freedom and liberty thou have in Christ, which is full
and sweet, Gal. 5. 13.

11. Learn to distinguish between thy Justification, and thy personal
Sanctification: the first is perfect and complete in Christ; the latter is in
our selves, and is weak and uncertain; until a soul be settled in the point
of Justification, the souls objections cannot be answered; he that understands
not the true nature and doctrine of Justification, cannot enjoy true settled
constant peace and consolation; for in the right understanding of
Justification, lies the life of the Saints comfort.

12. Let not thy comfort depend upon thy personal Sanctification, because from
it there can no sure settled constant comfort flow, the seeking of comfort from
our Sanctification, is a cause of much trouble in many weak believers;
Sanctification has nothing to do with Justification, nor Salvation, as any
cause of it. Also Sanctification admits of degrees, but Justification admits of
neither rules nor degrees, and is more glorious then Sanctification; our
Justification should comfort us; Justification depends not upon our
apprehending it, not in our receiving it, but upon what the Lord Jesus has
done for us. Justification is effected by Christ, and its apprehended by faith,
Heb. 11. 1. The Spirit and faith does evidence to us our Justification; all
that believe are Justified, Acts 13. 39. Its possible to have a full assurance
of faith, Heb. 10. 22. Faith is an unquestionable evidence, and when faith is
hidden and doubtful, Justification is not apprehended, and when faith is
hidden and doubtful, Sanctification is not evident but doubtful, and so
cannot evidence to us our Justification. The effects of Sanctification, cause
men to question their Justification, therefore no effect of Sanctification can
evidence to the soul its Justification: and the soul that apprehends his
Justification by Christ, not only knows it, but may live upon it, and enjoy
the sweet fruit of it, peace, joy, strength, without any sanctification in
himself. Seeing Christ is made Sanctification to a believer, 1 Cor. 1. 30. why
may not a soul live upon that, and say, I have Sanctification in Christ, which
is perfect; my actual Righteousness does often fail me, but his indures for
ever, Psalm. 111. 3. Therefore I will fetch all my comfort from Christ, and my
Justification by him. And as we are not to conclude our Justification from any
effect of Sanctification, so we are not to conclude that apprehension of
Justification to be from God, as shall take men off the means and rules of
Sanctification, because its a dishonor for men not to walk holily, according
to the word of God, Titus 2. 14.

13. Be sure ye allow your self in no sin, but in the strength of God hate
and abhor with the greatest indignation all sin, and the appearance of it, it
is better to die then to sin. There is that which accompanies sin, which
strikes at a believers peace and comfort, it will damp, straighten and oppress
the soul, it will hinder their comfort, joy, and peace in God, unless God
does wonderfully strengthen their faith in him; we find by experience, that
sin is a let to our faith and comfort, it having often unsettled and disquieted
us in our peace and comfort, though we ought not to be so.

14. Trouble not thy self with the fear of what may befall thee, in case thou
were certain, great troubles shall befall thee, be not troubled at any
trouble, much less at future troubles, nor think to encounter with and supply
a future trouble with a present strength; if many and great troubles come, God
is all-sufficient, he will remove them, or give strength to bear them when
they come, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

15. Mind seriously those promises that are suitable to thy condition, and
apply them, God has imparted himself in his promise, and it is our wisdom
and duty to rest upon it: Separate thy self to meditate on them, Pro. 18. 2.
There is strength and sweetness in the promise, thou may safely venture thy
soul upon God in his promise, and live upon it; thou know not but God may
reveal the promise more to thee in thy meditation of it, and settle it by his
almighty power upon thy soul, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. Let not the promise of God be
strange to thee; be not willing to leave a promise, until thou be refreshed
by it, yea raised and ravished with thankfulness for the exceeding riches of
his mercy, Ephesians. 2. 9. his plenteous redemption. Psalm. 130. 7. The promise in
Heb. 10 17. Their sins and iniquities I will remember no more, is enough to
quiet and settle a troubled soul, its so full of sweetness and life.

16. Remember the days of old: I have considered the days of old, and the
years of ancient time, Psalm. 77. 5. Thou have been my help, Psalm. 63. 7. I was
brought low, and he helped me, see 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Psalm. 89. 49. Therefore he
will help me: if thou did treasure up the experiences of Gods goodness to
thy soul, it would be a means to quiet thy soul, etc. But who among you will
give ear to this. who will hearken and hear for time to come, Isa. 42. 23.

17. Keep thy heart calm and quiet from all passion, fear, and grief; the
still soul can best know and hear Christ's voice; where fear, vexation, and
distemper dwells, they are not aware of Christ, and themselves, and commonly
they fear most who have least cause; as appears, Luke 2. 9, 10. When the
soul is troubled with passion, it is not at the command of faith, Luke 24. 41.
the violence of their joy hindered their faith; Let not your hearts be
troubled, Joh. 13. 1. If they be, you cannot enjoy God, nor your selves;
quietness is the stay of the soul to do or receive; many by supposed fears,
draw upon themselves real sorrows, and unnecessary discontents; many are
possessed with bitter sorrows from supposed sufferings.

18. Be content with thy present estate, and sill not thy head, heart, or hand,
with more buisinesse, then thou must needs; Consider, Heb. 13. 5. Take heed of
the cares of this life, Luke 21. 34. 15.

19. Order thy conversation aright; To him that orders his conversation
aright, will I show the Salvation of God, Psalm. 50. 23. Want of wisdom to
dispose, and want of diligence to dispatch, what necessity requires to be done
in its right place and time, has produced such inconveniences, as have
unavoidably caused trouble, and a disquiet, and an unsettled spirit.

20. Walk with God in his ways, ordinances, and means appointed by him for
thy comfort, strength, joy, and peace in him: there is no quiet to those that
worship the Beast, Rev. 14. 10, 11. Use the means, and live upon God in them,
Romans 18. 2. 4.

21. Do not sl^ght nor refuse Gods consolations; Are the consolations of God
small to thee, Job 15. 11. Let not them seem small to thee, will thou not own
the comfort God gives thee; if it do seem small to thee, own it, because it
is thy own, least ye live to complain, as David did; saying, My soul refused
to be comforted, Psalm. 77. 2. and to wish ye had neither despised it, nor
refused it.

22. Rest satisfied in Christ's righteousness, and add nothing to it; I will
make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only, see Psalm. 71. 15, 16.
19. 24. Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, Psalm. 119. 142.
see Psalm. 22. 31. and 35. 28. and 50. 6. and 51. 14. Jer. 33. 16. The
perfection of Christ's righteousness is held forth to us, and does always lie
before us, for us, that we might ever be comforted with it, and rejoice in it,
with thankfulness for it: its perfect, and full of divine consolation; its
enough to refresh and satisfy thee for ever; we have enough, we need no
other, nor no more righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

23. Meditate on the goodness of God; let his loving kindness be ever before
thy eyes; We have thought on thy loving kindness, O God, Psalm. 48. 9.

24. Above all, take the shield of faith, Ephesians. 6. 16. Believe in God: Ye
believe in God, believe also in me; and, Let not your hearts be troubled, Joh.
13. 1. Want of faith, or a want in faith, is acause of trouble in the soul:
faith in Christ, quiets and settles a troubled soul; thou can not be too
confident in God; see Psalm. 30. 5. ye are bidden to come boldly to the throne
of grace, Heb. 4. 16. All that know thy Name, will trust in thee, Psalm 9. 9.
But a fool will not do so. O fool, and flow of heart to believe, Luke 24.
25. Such as are made wise by God, will trust in the word of the Lord, Isa. 26.
3, 4. Fear not but believe, Luke 8. 50. Believe God in his promise* even then
when thou art in the greatest fears, and most sensible of thy unworthiness.
Trust in him at all times; God is a refuge for us, Selah. Psalm. 62. 8. Observe,
if at all times, then at the worst times also; when thou art at the worst, even
then believe, and hear nothing against thy believing God in his promise.
Abraham believed God against hope, Romans 4. 18. So should we do, we should
believe God intends our good, and consider, Psalm 139. 17, 18. and apply it:
Christ came to seek and save the lost, Luke 19. 10. Lost in the sight and
sense of thy sin and misery, and in thy own sufficiency.

25. Improve thy doubts, fears, temptations against believing, to encourage
thee in believing; for have thou not by experience found, that it is but in
vain to hearken to them; consider often and well weigh these Scriptures, Rom
16. 20. Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37. Rev. 3. 11. 1 Pet, 4. 19. and 5. 7.

26. Renounce all lying vanities, and hearken unto none of them: hearken not to
the voice of thy heart, its a lying vanity, and will deceive thee, Pro. 3. 5,
6, 7.

Hearken not to Satan.

Hearken not to sense; Thomas said, he would not believe, unless he might see,
and thrust his hand into his side, Joh. 20. 24, 25. But such sensual practices
are to be abhorred by us; for its no other, but to consult with flesh and
blood, which cannot discern spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. and is condemned,
Gal. 1. 16. Some persons will see a holy frame of spirit in themselves, and
feel sin subdued, before they will believe; this is sensual; for faith looks
not to such things as these, but to God in his Word; therefore we live not by
sight, but by faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7. Blessed are they which have not seen, yet
have believed, Joh. 20. 29.

Hearken not unto carnal reason, if it be hearkened unto, thou can not
believe, nor submit to God, nor be settled: Reason will say, a Virgin cannot
bring forth a child; and a woman of ninety years is past conceiving a child:
Reason says, it cannot be, and so contradicts God himself, Genesis 17. 16, 17
Mat. 1. Can Reason believe, that by faith the walls of Jericho fell down; and
that the Saints stopped the mouths of Lions, and quenched the violence of fire
by faith, yet faith did it, Heb. 10. 30. 33, 34. Is it likely or possible to
Reason for a man to walk upon the Sea, as Peter did, Mat. 14. 29. Did not
Christ's command seem vain to Peter's Reason, that he should then cast his net
into the Sea, seeing he had cast it in so often, and fished all night, and
caught nothing, Luke 8. 5. Can Reason conceive, how the dead, who are eaten
with beasts and fishes, or turned into dust, can be raised to life, or that the
Sea can be divided; the Sun go backward, or the Rocks yield water in
abundance; Surely there can be no Reason given to Reason for these things: and
seeing sense and reason are so contrary to God in his Word, we may not hearken
to them when they say, the soul has no grace, because sense sees none, and
that God will not pardon my sins, because there is no Reason to Reason why he
should, nor no way to Reason which way it can be, yet it may be, for with God
all things are possible, Mat. 19. 26. Therefore they that hearken unto lying
vanities, forsake their own mercies, Jona. 2. 8. Also live not upon duties, nor
upon good report, nor upon groundless hopes, nor upon peace, comfort, joy,
raptures, ravishments, whether they be true or false; live upon God alone, live
upon nothing else besides God in Christ; if thou do live upon any thing
else, as thy foundation, is unsound; so it will deceive thee; whatsoever your
sparks be, you shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 10.

27. Let not thy comfort depend upon Gods actings or dispensations to thee,
inward or outward; if thou do, thou can not be settled; for they act often
changeable and concontrary each to other; one day thou may have peace, joy,
and strength, another none of these; to day God may show himself to thee, and
in a moment he may hide himself; ^o day ri^h, and enjoy health, and many
friends, to morrow sick and poor, and friends all gone; Gods actings in us,
and upon us, are not alwa^es to us as he is unto us; God is unchangeable, and
ever the same, how ever he seems to be, see Heb. 13. 8. Isa. 45. 7, 8. 15.
with Song 5. 6. Isa. 8. 17. Therefore make a good construction of what ever
comes to thee: his acting in us, or upon us, is the accomplishing of his will,
for his glory, and the good of his: that which I think worst for me, may be
best for me; however it be yet God is good, and good to me, Psalm. 73. 1. This I
see, and say, and enjoy in both; for thou art the same, Heb. 1. 12.

28. Pray to God that ye may know the hope of your calling, etc. To give thee
the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, that ye may know
what is the hope of your calling, Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Say unto my soul, thou art
my salvation, Psalm. 35. 3. I beseech thee, show me thy glory, Exodus 35. 18.
Cause thy face to shine upon me, Psalm. 80. 3. Establish, O God, that which thou
have wrought in us, Psalm. 68. 22.

29. Frequent, and wisely improve those whom God has settled, who are able to
direct and inform thee in the knowledge of the grace that is revealed, in
which is fullness of joy, 1 John 1. 4. Many hear and confer with such as do
not understand the truth, and find success accordingly.

30. In the want of comfort, go not for comfort to sin, to duties, to
conscience* but to Christ, to his word, and promise; Trust to the word of the
Lord; its in vain to think that ever their discouragements will be removed,
until they cleave unto, and rest upon the word of the Lord. When David rested
upon the word of the Lord, then he was settled, Psalm. 73. 17. but not till then,
Psalm. 119. 92. God has appointed his word to settle us: we find by
experience, nothing will remove the souls doubts and discouragements, but the
word of God: the word discovers to the soul the love of God; it conveys to the
soul that which is suitable to settle it; carnal reason cannot settle the
soul, but the word can; when God discovers his power and authority in it,
then all doubts, etc. gives place. So we find that according as we cleave to
the word of the Lord, our doubts and discouragements vanish; and as we cleave
to lying vanities, our fears and discouragements increase, Jonah 2. 8. When
God pleases to settle a soul in his love, he causes it to trust in his word;
Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou have caused me to hope,
Psalm. 1 19. 49. You had better make the word of God your familiar and
companion, then to make carnal reason so; see Isa. 18. 16. Many in the want of
comfort, seek it where it is not, which is to seek the living among the dead;
and so meet with dead comforts.

31. Hearken to the voice of conscience; prize, and preserve the peace of it,
and do nothing against it.

32. Be thankful for what thou have received, and improve that, and wait for
more; We wait for thy loving kindness, O God, Psalm. 48. 9.

33. When thy conscience is satisfied by the Word, hold to that, stay there,
and maintain it, that so we may not always have this work to do.

34. Hold fast what thou have, and let nothing go that tends to thy peace; do
not hear any thing against thy soul; be so wise as to give no way to
doubting, he is a fool that does; so see Luke 24. 25 O fools, and slow of
heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken.

35. Remember your resting place. Jer. 50. 6. If you forget your resting place,
its no wonder if ye be troubled; we have no more present actual comfort, then
we have remembrance; they were troubled, the cause of it was, they forgot the
exhortation that speaks unto you as children, Heb 12 5. Christ is our resting
place; Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, Psalm. 116. 7.

36. Avoid sadness of spirit, it breeds uncomfortablenesse and unsetlednesse,
and sadness causes us to yield to discouragements; seeing we are commanded to
rejoice alwaye^, and evermore, 1 These. 5. 16. We should think our selves
bound in conscience to do so.

37. When our spirits are down and sad, we should wind up our affections, and
stir up our selves to take hold on God, Isa. 64. 7. If thou have sinned, thou
have done foolishly: it being done, it cannot be undone. What shall the soul
do, but remember that sweet place, Heb. 10. 17. Their sins and iniquities I
will remember no more, see verse. 19. to 26. Romans 8. 1. 33. Fetch thy comfort
from it.

38. Know and consider, there is not any sin a believer can commit, that should
cause him to cast away his confidence, or so much as question the love of God
to him, not for any thing he has done, or can befall him; he may not admit of
such a disquietnesse, as shall discourage him, or hinder him in obeying another
command of God, 1 These. 5. 16.

39. Lastly, Know that these means are to be used, they tend much to assure and
settle the soul in the sensible enjoyment of love, and that means alone are
not sufficient to quiet and settle a troubled soul; its the work of the
Spirit to answer all doubts, and remove all discouragements: God creates the
fruit of the lips, peace; peace to him that is afar off, and to him that is
near, says the Lord, and I will heal him, Isa. 59. 19. Its God that
stablisheth us, 1 Cor. 1. 21. In the use of means, we are to look to him and
wait upon him, who will in his time free all his from all their
discouragements, doubts and fears, and satisfy them with his love: These
things I write unto you, that your faith and hope may be in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21.

2 Cor. 5. 20, 21.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us,
we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.
For he has made him to ^e sin for us, which knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him.
THese words breath forth nothing but love, tidings of peace, and great joy, in
that Christ alone does free the soul from sin, and causes the soul for to
enjoy the Righteousness of God in him.

Behold, what sure, sweet, clear, full, durable, divine consolation is here,
sufficient to cheer, revive, raise, and ravish the sinking soul, by reason of
sin, in the want of a Righteousness of God in him.

These words contain many divine truths, for our instruction and consolation.

In that he says, We are Ambassadors for Christ.

Obs. That God has sent to us his servants, to declare his infinite love, and
the unsearchable riches of Christ, and the freeness thereof, as, Isa. 61. 1.
Zach. 9. 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

Ambassadors; Its the duty of an Ambassador to deliver his Message, without
alteration, addition, or detraction.

Obs. Ambassadors for Christ; Christ Ambassadors are for him, not against him.

As though God did beseech you by us.
Obs. Those into whom God has put this word of Reconciliation, when it is
declared unto us by them (or in his Word) we ought to believe and receive it,
as if God did immediately speak unto us; for they speak in his stead.

Obs. Then all the doubts and fears the soul or Satan can frame of Gods
unwillingnesse to save a lost sinner, as Luke 19. 10. are all groundless and
false; for God seeks to us to be reconciled; man seeks it not; I was found of
them that sought me not, Isa. 65. 1, 2, 3.

The Prodigal is said to go, but God who is the Father is said to run, Luke
15. 18. 20. As running does express more willingness then going, so God is
more willing to save a lost sinner, then he is or can be willing to be saved.

This should teach and encourage all that desire Christ to believe, though thy
sins a^^ many, you need not doubt of his love, for it is infinite, without time,
or measure, full, free, and eternal; I will love them freely, Hos. 14. 4

We pray you; a loving way.
Obs: Gods way of saving man, is in a way of love: Therefore God says, I drew
them with the cords of a man, with bands of love, Hos. 11. 4. Behold, I will
allure her, and speak comfortably to her, Hos. 2. 15.

We pray you:
Obs. Fallen man is contented to be as he is; he is so seduced and deceived by
sin, that he need to be prayed and entreated to be reconciled.

We pray you in Christ's stead.
Obs. If Christ were with us, he would pray us to be reconciled to him: in his
absence, he has sent some to pray us in his stead.

Obs. Ignorance of Christ's love, is a cause of our fears, when it is
discovered, our doubts are resolved, and our hearts revived and enlarged, Psalm.
63. 5, 6.

Be ye reconciled to God.
Obs. The best estate of nature, is a state of enmity against God; for if these
need any reconciliation, how much more enemies?

Sight of reconciliation to God is consolation.

We are to distinguish betwixt Gods love and Reconciliation to us and our love,
and reconciliation to him, they differ in nature and time, and is grounded upon
several causes; as to instance the cause of Gods Reconciliation to us, is Gods
love, and the death of Christ; our Reconciliation to God, is the holy Spirit of
God, revealing to us Gods love, and Christ's Righteousness to be for us.

Reconcile us.
Obs. Even such sinners as God does love, and sends after, and will save, they
look upon God as their enemy, and have hard thoughts of him.

For he has made him.
Obs. God the Father has set apart the Lord Jesus, to save man; There is no
other name whereby we may be saved, Acts 4. 12. Heb. 9. 14. 22.

Obs. The way and means God has chosen to free a sinner from sin, is only by
Jesus Christ. This should teach us to prize him, and rest satisfied in him, and
not suffer ou^ foolish hearts to seek after, nor desire any other means or way
of deliverance from fin, but only him.

Made him to be sin] Some understand a sacrifice for sin, and no more, so as
the guilt and punishment shall be translated unto Christ, and not the fault;
but is it not unequal, if not unjust and impossible, to impose our guilt upon
Christ, and not our sin: sin and guilt are inseparable; for where there is no
sin, there can be no guilt, therefore that our guilt might be laid on Christ,
necessarily our sins, must after a sort be made his, and annexed unto him; by
imputation all the sins of the Elect, their adulteries, murders, blasphemies,
etc. were laid upon him, Isa. 43. 5.

Obs. Sin must be charged upon Christ, or the sinner, and had not Christ
undergone the penalty of sin, no man could be saved; as appears, Joh. 1. 1. 7.
Joh. 1. 29. Rev. 8. 2. Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. He^. 9. 22 Col. 1. 20. Zach. 9. 11. Our
happiness lies in this, that our sins are not ^mouted unto us, Psalm. 32. 1,
2.

Obs. God has imputed our sins unto Christ, and so laid them upon him, that
they are not ours no more but Christ's, who has ^reed us and himself from
them, and so he shall ap^eare without sin, Heb. 9. 28. We should rest ^atisfied
in Christ's satisfaction, because it is a ^ull, perfect, and infinite
satisfaction.

Obs. It appears that the sense and guilt of ^in, does discourage a soul, and
cause it to desire to be at a further distance from God, as Luke 5. 8.

Obs. There needs strong reasons and earnest ^ntreaties, to reconcile a soul
to God, yea, ^he arm of the Lord must be revealed in them, ^o make them
effectual, Isa. 53. 1.

Obs. The way to reconcile a soul to God, ^s to let him understand the cause,
way, and ^eans of his salvation; therefore the Apostle ^aith, He has made him
to be sin to us; and that we are justified freely.

Obs. The words us, and we, in this verse, we are to understand them in the 19
verse, to whom God does not impute their trespasses, therefore they are
blessed, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. They shall not miss of glory, they have Redemption by
his bl^ud, the remission of sins, Col. 1. 14. Romans 5. 10. Therefore by us,
and we, cannot be understood every son and daughter of Adam.

Obs. For us] That which is spoken in general to believers, every believer is
to apply it to himself in particular: so Paul says, He loved ^e, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2. 20.

Obs. For us* for me] The word and promise of God, that it is for me, is that
which the soul should fix its eye upon, and for eve^ rely upon, to a full
satisfaction to my soul, knowing that the word and promise of God is the only
ground of faith, and is securiti^ sufficient for my salvation.

Obs. Jesus Christ being made sin for me] (...) as good for me, yea better for
me then i^^ had never sinned; as much better as a spiritual body is better
then a natural; and (...) the image of the heavenly, is better then the image
of the earthly; as much better (...) strength is better then weakness; and
he^ven better then earth, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44, (...) 55.

Obs. As soon as the soul is convince^ that Jesus Christ is made fin for me,
and he made the Righteousness of God in him, a^ the souls fears, doubts and
discouragement and objections vanish, and Christ is beleeve^ in, and lived
upon, with thankfulness a^ joy.

Obs. Which knew no sin] Christ was wholly free from sin personally Luk 1 35.
inherently, Heb. 14. 5. and actually, Joh. 8. 40.

Obs. Seeing Christ is so holy, and so qualified as he is, there is no reason
why we should doubt of the sufficiency, meritoriousnesse, and effectuallnesse
of that which Christ has done for us, Heb. 10. 10. 14.

Obs. That we m^g^t be made] Whatsoever Jesus Christ has done and suffered,
was for those whose fins were laid upon him, and are fully pardoned by him,
Rev. 1. 5. Romans 5. 19.

That we might be made the R^ghteousnesse of God] There is a twofold
Righteousness, according to the diversity of his nature; the one uncreated and
infinite, which is the Righteousness of the Deity; the other is created and
finite, which is the Righteousness of the humanity: the first is infinite, and
therefore incommunicable; the latter is the Righteousness of God also, because
it is in him, who is not only man, but God. So then

Obs. Christ's Righteousness is the Righteousness of God.

The Righteousness which freeth a sinner from the curse of the Law, is a
perfect Righteousness, Heb. 1. 8. Heb. 10. 3. see Job 33. 24.

Obs. Man's best Righteousness is imperfect, it cannot justify him before God:
All our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 4. 6.

Obs. After what manner Christ became a sinner, after the same manner we are
made just; but Christ became a sinner, not by any infusion of our corrupt
qualities, but by imputation only, therefore we are just before God, not by
any infusion of any habitual grace into our corrupt natures, but by imputation
of his Righteousness without works, Romans 4. 6.

If this were well minded, it might remove diverse errors, and answer many
temptations, which are occa^ioned in many by apprehending the contrary.

Obs. So that justification is a Reciprocal translation of our sins unto
Christ, and his Righteousness to us, both which are done by God for us.

Obs. God reveals to the soul Christ's Righteousness, and the souls interest
in it, John 16. 14. To comfort the soul, and cause us to love God, he does not
comfort us with our own Righteousness, but with Christ's Righteousness, that
so we might fetch all our peace and comfort from Christ's Righteousness, and so
rest satisfied in Christ alone.

Use. Exhort. Seeing Christ's Righteousness is a perfect Righteousness, yea
the Righteousness of God; this should teach us to prize highly Christ's
Righteousness, and count his enough for us, and rest satisfied in it; and to
slight and abhor all our Righteousness, in comparison of his; esteem Christ
to be as he is, our Righteousness; This is his Name, whereby he shall be
called the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.

2. This should teach all that believe to admire the greatness and sweetness
of Gods love and free grace, in making Christ's Righteousness our own; its a
mercy to hear of it, how much more to have interest in it, and to enjoy it,
and be possessed of it, Isa. 61.

3. Is Christ's Righteousness thine? then claim interest in it, take it, and
apply it against all sin, and discouragements, because it is thy own portion,
and treasure, provided for thee, therefore take it, Col. 2. 3. and ever live
upon it, and the eternal love of God in Christ to thee; this object is sweet,
full, durable, and sufficient to satisfy thee at all times.

4. Dedicate thy self, and all thou have freely to him, who gave himself
fully and freely for thee; he suffered, yea dyed for thee, to make his
Righteousness thine, etc. Oh how should such love engage our hearts to walk
with God, to be holy as he is holy, to do all, and suffer for him; for the
ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them, Hos. 14. 9.

5. Declare to others Gods goodness to thy soul, use means that others may
enjoy the same mercy with thee; be merciful as he is merciful; give and
forgive freely to the souls and bodies of others, for so thou have received.

6. Be content with thy estate, inward and outward, though many crosses and
miseries attend thee, seeing Christ's Righteousness, and God himself is thine;
thou have enough, and therefore may well be content; let not many, nor great
troubles, inward or outward, dismay thee; see 1 Cor. 10. 13. Though they seem
long, they cannot last long; The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly, Romans 16. 20. Christ says, Lo I come quickly, Rev. 22. 20.

7. As Christ is all thy happiness, so let him be all thy comfort, and the
support of all thy wants; expect from him all you need, and can desire, yea
that God can give that is for thy good; for thou shall have all thou need,
Psalm. 34. 10. Seeing he has freely given us his Son, how shall he not with
him give us all things else, Romans 8. 32.

8. Watch and pray, least ye fall into temptation, and so abuse this favor,
and turn this grace into wantonness.

9. Stand fast in Christ's Righteousness, and in that liberty in which he has
made you free, Gal. 5. 1.

10. Rejoice evermore, let thy joy be in God, who is thy portion; They shall
joy in their portion, Isa. 61. 7. It is no small joy to us, that Christ's
Righteousness is ours, it comfort (...) at the very heart.

Lastly, Be exceeding thankful to God for his exceeding great grace and mercy
to thee, in that he has given thee beauty for ashes; verlasting joy shall be
to th^e, Isa. 61. 3. 7. Because Christ and his Righteousness is thine; all
other comfor^s will soon vanish, and come to nothing, but this shall last for
ever.

Righteousness in him.
Obs. That righteousness which justifies us before God, as it is not ours, so
it is not in us; but as the righteousness is Christ's, so it is in him:
therefore Christ says, In me you shall have righteousness and strength:
Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, Isa. 45.
24.

In him.
Obs. The state of a believer in Christ, as considered in him, is a state of
perfection; We are complete in him, Col. 2. 9, 10. 13. As Christ is, so am I,
as I am, so is Christ; as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 1. 17. What is
Christ's is mine, and what is mine, is his; Christ's righteousness is mine,
therefore I am all righteous, I do not need no more, nor no other
righteousness; as I am in Christ, I am as righteous as Christ, and as
acceptable as Christ; God sees no sin in me, because there is none: as God
says, (so I believe) Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee,
Song 4. 7. Isa. 38. 17.

It is also as true, that in the most perfect Saint, if he be considered as he
is in himself, there is much sin in him, and God does see it. Yet God cannot
condemn them to wrath for it, because Christ has suffered for it.

Seeing that righteousness which causes a soul to be accepted, pardoned,
saved; and that on which our eternal happiness depends, is in Christ, in him,
we learn;

Obs. That our eternal happiness does not lie in our selves, in nothing that
is in us, or done by us; therefore when we seek for our happiness or
righteousness in our selves, we loose our labor; for Righteousness is in him.

Obs. Seeing this Righteousness is in Christ, then it must needs follow, that
the Saints cannot possibly make it away, or loose it, because it is not in us,
and so not in our keeping, but is in him. Adam had his righteousness in him,
and he lost it, but seeing it is in Christ, in him it cannot be lost.

Obs. If the Saints Righteousness be in Christ, then all the Saints are alike
righteous, the meanest and weakest as the best, he has as much righteousness
in Christ as any, and is as much accepted by it as the best: as Christ has
righteousness enough for them all, so it is alike for them all; as they are in
Christ, they are alike perfect, righteous, and glorious: they that do most for
Christ, do best, but they have no more righteousness then the rest; all the
Elect are alike clothed with the garment of salvation, and covered with the
robe of righteousness; therefore they may all rejoice alike in the Lord, Isa.
61. 10. Oh here is strong consolation for a fainting soul, to refresh it self
withal.

Use. This should teach all that desire righteousness, to go for it to Christ
where it is; O soul, look no longer to find it in thy self, for it is not
there, it is in Christ, in him; his righteousness is enough, and good enough
for thee, yea best for thee, therefore seek no further, but rest satisfied in
Christ, in his righteousness; drink here abundantly in this sweet fountain
that is bottomless, add therefore can never be drawn dry, Song 5. 1. Thy
pardon is now by Justice as well as mercy, therefore drink freely.

Use. Comfort. Behold, here is comfort and consolation to all that believe, in
that you have righteousness in Christ at all times, however it be with you,
within or without, be thy defects few or many, this is a comfort to thee, thou
have righteousness in Christ, which makes thee happy for ever. Now all is paid
by my sweet Jesus, I may go boldly to the throne of grace. I am happy now, and
so shall be for ever.

But says the discouraged soul; I cannot believe the Lord Jesus was made sin
for me.

Why not for thee?

Because my sins are greater then others; for my sins have all the aggravations
upon them that can be.

1. Mine are many.

So were those in the second and third Chapter of Jeremiah, yet notwithstanding
God pardoned them all, as appears, Jer. 3. 21. to 25.

2. But my sins are great and heinous.

So were theirs, and so were M^nasses, as appears, 2 Kings 21. 4. 11. 16. and
so was hers in Luke 7. 47. and so was Paul's, 1 Timothy 1. 15. yet God pardoned
them all, as he has done many others; if thou art a wonderful sinner, Christ
is a wonderful Savior, Isa. 9. 6.

3. But my sins are against the Gospel.

So was Paul's, he persecuted them that professed, he made havocke of the
Church, entering into every house, haling men and women, and committing them to
prison, Acts 8. 3. Christ dyed for them that slew him, Acts 2. 23. 38.

4. But mine are after many mercies.

So was Solomon's, he sinned against God after the Lord appeared unto him twice,
1 Kings 11. 9.

5. But I have sinned against Gods entreaties to return.

So did they, I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me,
but she returned not, Jer. 3. 7.

6. But I have sinned against Gods Reproves.

So did they; Thou have a whores forehead, that refusest to be ashamed, Jer. 3.
3. 8.

7. But I have sinned against Gods corrections, in not being reformed by them.

So did they; In vain have I smitten your children, they have received no
correction, Jer. 2. 30.

8. But I have committed one sin often.

So did they; Thou have played the harlot with many lovers, Jer. 3. 1* 6.

9. But I have continued ^^ning for a long continuance of time.

So did they; We have not obeyed the voice of the Lord, from our youth unto
this day, Jer. 3. 25. and 2. 22.

10. But my sins are against knowledge and conscience.

So was David's concerning Bathsheba, and putting to death Uriah; and so did
Peter sin, when he said, and swore, He know not the man, and that he was not
with him, Mat. 26. 69. to 75.

11. But I am fallen back from what I have been.

So did they; Return thou backsliding Israel, Jer. 3. 6. 12.

12. But I have willingly and resolvedly forsaken God.

So did they; saying, We are Lords, we will come no more at him, Jer. 3. 31,
32.

13. But I have willingly chosen sin.

So did they; saying, I have loved strangers, and after them will I go, Jer.
2. 25.

14. But I have seduced others, and caused them to sin.

So did they; Thou have also taught the wicked ones thy ways, Jer. 2. 23. And
Manasseh seduced them to do more evil, then did the Nat^ous whom the Lord
destroyed, and made Judah also to sin, 2 King. 21. 9. 11. 16. And Paul
compelled men to blaspheme, Acts 26. 11. 16. Manasseh a greater sinner obtained
mercy, ^ Chron. 33. 18, 19. and a lesser sinner perishes in his sin, that men
may know that the Lord will have mercy on whom he will, Romans 9. 15.

15. But I have sinned as much as I could.

So did they; Behold, thou have spoken and done as evil things as thou
could, Jer. 3. 5.

16. But my sins are after vows and covenants.

So were theirs; Thou said, I will not transgress, when upon every high
hill, and under every green tree, thou wanderest, playing the harlot, Jer. 2.
25.

17. But I have justified my self in all my sins.

So did they; Because thou said, I have not sinned, I will plead with thee,
Jer. 3. 35.

18. But I despair, and have no hope of mercy.

This is worst of all, yet so did they; Thou said, there is no hope, Jer. 2.
25. And when I cry, he shuts out my prayer; and I said, My strength and my
hope is perished with the Lord, says Jeremiah, Lam. 3. 8. 18. And Job said; My
hope has he removed like a tree, Job 19. 10. My days are spent without hope,
Job 7. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16. David in his have, said; I am cut off before thine
eyes, Psalm. 31. 22. Abraham believed against hope, Romans 4. 18. Ye were
sometimes without hope, Ephesians 2. 12. Consider these were once like thee, and
the Lord has had mercy on them, and it may be he has mercy for thee, although
thou do not know it; be not out of hope, I was brought ^^w, and he helped me,
Psalm. 116. 6. And so God may help thee also. Oh the riches of his grace is
unsearchable; All that know his Name will trust in him, Psalm. 9. 10. consider
Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7.

I am persuaded, I have sinned the sin against the holy Spirit, and that is
unpardonable, Heb. 6. 4.

1. Those who have committed that sin, tread under-foote the Son of God,
and c^unt the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing, and do hare God and
Christ, Joh. 15. 24.

2. In that thou art afraid thou have committed this sin, it is certain thou
have not committed it, because those that have so sinned, are past fear, and
feeling, being given up to a reprobate sense, Ephesians. 4. 19.

I am afraid he does not love me, and so nothing can do me good.

(...) give way to such a thought, (...) but the Lord may return, as (...)

2. Is this the way think thou to enjoy assurance to nourish jealousies
against his love; should thou not rather say as David, How precious are thy
thoughts to me, O God, great is the sum of them, if I should count them, they
are more then the sands, Psalm. 139. 17, 18. The number of the sands are many,
yet ye see Gods thoughts of love exceeds them, therefore be not afraid, only
believe, Mark. 5. 36. Christ received sinners, Luke 15. 1, 2.

3. If thou think so, because thy sins are great, this will not prove it,
consider what God says; I have spread out my hand all the day to a rebellious
people, that provoke me to anger continually to my face, Isa. 65. 2, 3.

I do not believe I am elected, and so nothing can do me good.

1. This is a secret, meddle not with it; Secret things belong to God, and
revealed things to us, Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

2. It is a common deceit of Satan to tell a soul, God has no mercy for him,
when the soul has obtained mercy, or when it is not far from him.

3. It is certain these thoughts come from Satan, because they are contrary to
God in his Word, as Genesis 3. 2, 3, 4.

4. Its the nature of unbelief to be inquisitive and curious, to find out any
pretense, that he may seem to do well in not hearkening to what God says in
his Word, Heb. 10. 14.

5. We must not yield to Satan, nor hearken unto him: trouble not thy thoughts
with Election, but mind Jesus Christ; do you wait upon him in the use of
means, till he give thee faith, and then thou shall know thou art elected, Acts
13. 48.

But I have used the means, and I am worse and worse, therefore God will not
do me good.

1. Do you know Gods means, and the number of them? have your ends been good,
and right placed? have you used them in a right manner, measure, time, in
sincerity? have you not rested on the means? have you used them in faith,
expecting his blessing? The word they heard, profited them not, for want of
faith, Heb. 4. 2.

2. Its no good reason to say, Because God has not as yet given me my request,
therefore he never will; consider Isa. 64. 4. Isa. 8. 17. They which had not
obtained mercy did, 1 Pet. 2. 10. They shall not be ashamed that wait for me,
Isa. 49. 23.

3. It is just with God to blast the means, yea its a mercy, that we might
look more to Christ in the use of means, to bless them, and be all unto us.

4. If thou have a will that Christ should save thee, and rule thee, he that
has begun this good work in thee will finish it, Heb. 12. 2. One day thou
shall know thy sins to be pardoned and subdued.

5. Consider God may have mercy for thee, though thou know it not; for men's
sins are first forgiven, before they can know it, or believe it, or be
assured of it; therefore thy sins may be pardoned, though thou do not know
it: faith believes sin is pardoned, but our believing neither pardons any
sin, nor procures the pardon of it.

I have waited a long time, and many others have receeved mercy, but I have not.

1. Some of the Lords have waited a long time, at least they thought the time
long: David said; I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried, my eyes fail
while I wait for my God, Psalm. 69. 3.

2. If God has given thee a heart to wait upon him, thou art blessed; Blessed
are all they that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. Waiting implies perseverance,
patience, long suffering in holding out, notwithstanding the tediousness of the
time deferred: courage in breaking through all difficulties that stand between
waiting, and to continue waiting, though all things seem contrary, till we
enjoy what we wait for; I wait for my God, Psalm. 69. 3.

But I am now old in years, and if God had intended mercy for me, surely he
would have revealed it before this time, and now death is ready to take me away.

1. Yet mercy may come at last; the thief was saved upon the Cross, Mat. 20.
Luke 23. Oh how near was* he unto his end, before mercy came to him.

2. You must not set a time to God, its mercy though it come at last: God uses
to call some the last hour as well as the third; see Mat. 20. 1. to 10. There
is nothing too hard for God.

If I were fitted with qualifications, as humbleness, brokennesse of heart,
and took delight to hear and pray, as others, I could have hope, but its not
so with me.

1. This is nothing but a delusion, for these things cannot fit thy soul for
mercy; while ye look and rest on such things as these, ye seek the living
among the deid, Luk 24. 5. If you had these things ye desire in the greatest
measure ever any had, they could nor procure thy happiness, nor stand thee in
any stead, to save thy soul, nothing but Jesus Christ can do that, nor any
thing but him truly comfort thee.

2. What qualifications had they in Ezekiel. 16. 3. to 9. except sinful ones; and
what qualifications had they who were enemies, yet Christ dyed for them, Rom 5.
9, 10. Isa. 65. 1, 2, 3. Its a certain truth, that all that are saved are
saved freely, without any cause or condition in man; see 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10.

3. What need ye Christ, if ye have what ye need without him.

4. As in nature none can work before they have life; so none can work a
spiritual work before he live spiritually: Christ must be in the soul before
it can believe, so the soul must believe, before it can find any
sanctification, or any good work at all in himself: consider there is nothing
to be done by man to be a preparation to sanctification; see Romans 4. 5. and 5.
8. 10.

5. You go a wrong way to work, you go about to establish a righteousness
of thy own, therefore thou do so much thirst after it, but it must be
renounced, its hard to be taken off our own works, and selfe-concurrence: strip
a man of his own, and ye take away his life; he must and will have something,
some humbleness, tears, good works, something they must have, they think it
cannot be that one should be accepted, pardoned, and saved, and to do nothing
at all for it: yet it is so.

Many when they see they have not done well, they go about to break their
hearts, to make God amends for all, and think if they can but attain to such
a deep measure of humiliation and sorrow for sin, then they think they have an
evidence for heaven; alas, this is an evidence of great ignorance, in that they
do not see death in their best duties: the Lord may say to them who work so
hard for life; Thou have found the life of thy hand, therefore thou wast not
grieved, Isa. 57. 10. And so Comfort themselves with their own sparks: sorrow
will follow such comfort, Ye shall lie down in sorrow, Isa. 50. 11. When we
say, our good works are not the way to life, men esteem it a grievous error,
yet Christ says, I am the way, Joh. 14. 6. Tell me, are thy works Christ's or
no, if no, then they are not the way, if Christ say true, as he does, also if
Jesus Christ is to be unto us all in all, Col. 3. 11. our best works are to be
unto us nothing at all: our works do not make us the better before God, nor
the more beloved of God, but they declare us to be what we are made by God. The
Papists do, as they say, many good works to be saved, but we abhor it,
because it is condemned of God: Not of works, least we should boast. If it
were of works, it were not of grace. Therefore all those that expect and hope
for mercy, because they leave their sins, and do many good works, as they
think, alas, they are greatly deluded, they are not taken off of selfe-works,
and selfe-concurrence with Christ, you are ignorant of the righteousness of
Christ, therefore ye go about to establish your own righteousness, and so
long as ye do so, ye cannot submit to the righteousness of God, see Romans
10. 3. But if thou did know what a righteousness Christ is, thou would
have preferred it before thy own; yea it would be esteemed by thee but dress
and dung to his, Phil. 3. 8, 9. Publicans and Harlots are nearer salvation then
thee, as righteous as thou art, who work for life, as the blind Pharisees did,
and perished, see Mat 21. 31, 32. Luke 7. 29, 30. We are not commanded to do
any thing to procure the pardon of our sins, but in reference to service and
duty: I do count my self never the nearer heaven, for my best works, then if
I had never done any thing but swore and blasphemed God; its to him that
works not, Romans 4. 2, 3, 4, 5. We are saved not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9 Does not God speak plain
enough to the question, in saying it is not according to our works: And when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5. 10. I
will do away thy offenses for my Names sake, Isa. 43. 25. When thou were
polluted in thy own blood, I said unto thee live; then was the time of love,
Ezekiel. 16. 6. 8. From hence it is that all that see this mystery of Gods free
grace, that salvation is not according to our works; they cry, grace, grace,
Christ, Christ, Christ is all in all, nothing but Christ, now all their
prayers, tears, duties, devotions, all of theirs is nothing to them, in
respect of their acceptance, justification, or salvation, they are dead to
working, they will not stir to do the least work in the world to attain
any of these, etc. Heb. 4. 10. All ours is vanished in the infinite ocean of
Gods free love; its so that God might have all the glory, Ephesians. 1. 6. Jer. 9.
24. and that man might not boast, Romans 3. 9. but obey God freely, Luke 1. 74.

I have no work of God wrought in me.
The Spirit shall convince the world of sin, and of righteousness, Joh. 16. 7,
8, 9, 10. God has begun his work in thee, if he has convinced thee of sin,
and of righteousness: to be convinced of sin, is for the soul to see it self
utterly lost and undone by reason of sin; they confess, they are vile, and
abhor themselves, Job 42. 6. They loath themselves for their deeds, Ezekiel. 20.
43.

2. The soul is convinced, so as to have no hope in any thing it can do to
help it self; this is to be undone in nature, so as he cannot do any thing
from whence he may expect salvation, or have any hope of it; for a man cannot
expect life and salvation from Christ alone, until the soul be taken off all
other things in respect of life. This vision of God causes the soul to see
themselves, and say, There remains no strength in me, my comeliness is
turned in me into corruption, Dan 10. 8. That is, now the case is altered from
what it was, now my best works, my righteousness is defiled, and is sin, now
sinfull-selfe, and righteous-selfe, are alike, if there be any difference, the
last is the worst: now the creature has nothing to procure Christ, nor no
strength to believe in him; the Spirit of God reveals to the soul that there
is nothing but darkness and death in our best duties: it is from grace to be
taken off of nature; and he that is taken off of nature has grace, is borne of
God: When the soul is taken off its own bottom, it must have another to rest
on, or else it sinkes, therefore when God takes away the souls false
foundation, which is her false hopes, he gives the soul a better in himself:
this is the teaching and drawing of the Father, Joh. 6. That in Christ there is
a ransom, in which is life; and that all that Christ has done is for him; and
that nothing will stand the soul in any stead but him; when the soul has
learned this, there is a secret power goes with this teaching, and carries
the soul to Christ, to believe in him; for the teaching of the Father and
faith, goes together; Every one that has heard and learned of the Father
comes unto me, Joh. 6. So that to convince the soul of righteousness, is to
convince it of Christ, to reveal that in him only is help, and in his
righteousness is deliverance; I have laid help upon one that is mighty, Psalm.
89. 19. So that the Lord does fix and settle the soul upon Christ's
righteousness only, at least he puts the soul under the hope of it, Ezekiel.
16. 5, 6. When the soul sees nothing but death, God says live, and when the
soul is a going down into the pit, God says, Stay, hearken, I have received
a Ransom for thee, see Job 34. 23, 24. Now the soul wonders at the love of
God in pardoning his sin, he is taken up, as Luke 1. 41. 43 Though for the
measure it is not in all the Lords alike.

The Spirit discovers to the soul, that it has chosen something else besides
Christ, upon which the soul rests, and satisfies her self withal, and
expects mercy and comfort from, her best works, and other lying vanities;
telling the soul, that there is nothing but death in them: God by this
teaching turns the soul from darkness, viz. self, Satan, and all other
lying vanities, to light, to Christ, where life is; telling the soul, there is
life in Christ, and that it need not seek life in nothing else, but to wait
upon Christ for it, and that the soul shall not loose its waiting, but shall
certainly have it at last, Isa. 57. 13. These things are wrought in some
measure: Some are strong, others are weak, and are called carnal, and not
spiritual, yet they are babes in Christ; therefore they were in a happy state,
1 Cor. 3. 1. 3. In the same measure this work is wrought in the soul, in the
same measure faith is wrought; and as it appears to the soul, so faith
appears to the soul.

I know not whether I may believe; for some shall not be saved.

The Scripture does declare, that he that believes shall be saved, Joh. 3. 16.
You are to rest satisfied in the Word of God.

But I have no love to Christ, I am an enemy to Christ, and not fit for Christ.

1. The reason you do not love Christ, is because thou do not know Gods
love to thee; We love him, because he loved us first, 1 John 4. 19. As soon
as we know Gods love to us, that love constraines us to love him, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

2. Art thou an enemy to God, so were all that ever did believe; see Ephesians* 2.
12, 13. While we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, Romans 5. 8. 10. Enemies cannot deserve Christ, yet God gives Christ to
such.

3. Its a foolish conceit to think of fitting thy self for Christ, it can
never be.

4. If thou desire Christ, go to him, and you shall speed; He that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6. 37. You see, you have his word for it;
also Christ is in you, if you desire him; for no man can hunger and thirst
after righteousness (that is, Christ) but such as are blessed, Mat. 5. 6. They
that are led out of themselves to Christ, for light, and life, and strength,
are the children of God, Romans 8. 9, 10, 11, 14. This desire is from the
in-being of the light and life of Christ in you.

Indeed there are many great and sweet promises in the Word, but they are all
for believers, but I am none.

I grant none may apply a promise of life, but such as believe, yet the
promises are for all the Elect, thou do not know but thou art one of them;
when God shall give thee faith, thou shall know thou have an interest in them,
Acts 13. 48. In the mean time, stay thy self with this, that the Lord Jesus
gave himself for enemies, and justifies the ungodly, Romans 5. 4. see Romans 5.
8. 10. Be not discouraged, God may save you: also the Lord says; I will have
mercy upon her that has not obtained mercy, and I will say to them that are
not my people, thou art my people; and they shall say, thou art my God, Hos. 2.
23. Oh sweet place! therefore by no means yield to thy fears, do not nourish
jealousies against his love; resolve thee in Christ's strength to cleave to his
Word; as, Psalm 119. 49. And hold there, saying, My beloved is mine, and I am
his, Song 2. 16.

FOr he Jehovah is, and changes never,
Strong, gracious he is, and merciful;
The same this day as yesterday, and ever
Kindness and truth, as from their fountain flow.
Though thou have nothing wrought, no kind of way,
That might deserve his mercy on thy part,
Do not thou faint therefore or doubt to speed,
He gracious is, and loves without desert.
If thou have waited long, and also prayed,
And yet no comfort from him thou can find;
Still hope in him, and be not thou dismaide,
He in the end will show himself full kind.
Declaring love, yet in his judgment just,
All that do know his Name, will in him trust;
He is a Father, O come taste and see,
How sweet he is, and how he loves thee.
I would gladly believe, but I dare not.
1. There is no reason in the world for thee to doubt, or be afraid, seeing
Christ cries, saying, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink* Joh. 7.
37. The Spirit and the bride say, Come, and whosoever will let him come, Rev.
22. 17. Does God say, come, come, come, and are you afraid, come, he will not
quench the smoking flax, Mat. 12. 20. Hope thee in his mercy, and know; The
Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and in them that hope in his mercy,
Psalm. 147. 11.

2. The fears in many are occasioned, or much increased, by such teachers, who
bid persons believe, and then unbid them again, saying, take heed what ye
do, you may be deceived, its no easy matter to be saved, you must first be
humbled, and so sensible of sin, before ye may believe; and they conceive,
they are not so humbled, nor so qualified, and therefore they dare not believe.
So sometimes they scare them exceedingly with the many things hypocrites may
do, and how far they may go, and so set them short of hypocrites, which must
needs discourage them, and terrify them; so they build up one day, and pull it
down again the next, if not the same day. The word of God requires no such
teaching, for men to learn before they do believe; for when the soul sees
it self lost, the first thing they are to do, is to believe in Jesus Christ,
as appears, Acts 16. 31. The word requires nothing of them before they may
believe, therefore we may not, for none may presume to teach what is not
written, Rev. 22. 18.

3. If thou desire to believe, thy will is in part regenerated, and thou do
in some measure believe, though weakly, as he that said, Lord, I believe, help
my unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. Gods servants are described by a desire to fear his
Name, Nehe. 1. 11. Psalm. 145. 89. Psalm. 147. 11. Those desires which work
toward God, came from God; The spirit returns to him that gave it; if thy
desires be spiritual, thou art spiritual; to will, to repent and believe,
evidenceth that such do repent and believe; to will to be regenerate, is the
effect and testimony of regeneration: It is God that works in you to will,
Phil. 2. 13. Holy desires cannot be in the soul that has no spiritual life,
Psalm. 145. 19. Desires after Christ, are an act of spiritual life, an act is
from a faculty, a faculty is from life and being; a dead man desires not;
spiritual desires flow from the Spirit, and are a part of the work of God in
us; the will of man in it self is not able to effect a supernatural action, 2
Cor. 3. 5. insufficient to think, Genesis 6. 5. He cannot perceive the things of
God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. He cannot repent, Romans 2. 4, 5. He cannot come to Christ,
unless he be drawn, Joh. 6. 44. God must give eyes to see, and a heart to
understand, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. There can be no desires without says, 1 Pet. 2. 2, 3.
A man cannot desire that which he does not love, nor that he believes not to
be, Heb. 11. 6. Many do give God their hearts, and do not know it, and so are
troubled; because they do not know what is meant by the heart, nor where it is
seated; I speak not of the heart of flesh, Romans 8. 5, 6, 7. There is a carnal
mind, and a spiritual mind; I speak of the heart mystically and
spiritually, which is principally seated in the will, so that what it wills or
desires, there is the heart, and to that which the will most wills or desires,
to that the bent of the heart is unto; now if any one were to have its choice
of any one thing in the world, that one thing that the soul should choose,
would any question, whether they loved it, and whether their hearts were to it:
so in spiritual things, for as no soul can be sensible of the want of Christ,
until the soul be possessed of him, Rom 8. 10, 11. so no soul can desire
Christ above all things in the world, unless Christ had their hearts, and they
dearly loved him, and believe in him; Christ is precious to them that believe,
1 Pet. 2. 7. Therefore such as esteem Christ precious, do believe.

So the seat of faith is in the heart, which is the understanding and will,
but more principally in the will, so that if our wills be renewed, our hearts
are renewed, Romans 8. 5, 6. Paul says, To will is present with me, good I would
do, so then with my mind I serve the law of God, Romans 7. 18, 19. with 21. 15.
By which it appears, the will is one with the mind, and the heart is one with
them; these three are one, and always go together, and are alike spiritual:
Christ says, Where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also, that is
the mind, Mat. 6. 21. And by affections in Colos. 3. 2. is meant the heart;
Set your affections on things above; So that the heart, and the affections are
one thing.

Many believe, and yet do not know whether they believe or no; so that they
do as the blind man did, call their faith unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. So many
mis-take faith, some have thought comfort, joy, and ravishments of soul with
God, to be faith, and have concluded, because they had not them, they had not
faith.

He that believes that Jesus Christ is the Son of God shall be saved; all is
included in this, He that believes this.

1. Know Christ to be the anointed, Luke 23. The Savior of his people from
their sins, Mat. 1. 21.

2. He rests upon him; Lean, or stay himself upon the Lord, Pro. 3. 5. To
believe in him, Romans 10. 9. 11. Psalm. 17. 6. To cleave to God, Deuteronomy. 30. 20.
Joh. 23. 6. Acts 11. 23. Psalm. 119. 30, 31. To hope in him, Psalm. 147. 11. is
all one.

3. He cannot but own and confess Christ; Simon said; Thou art the Christ, the
Son of the living God, Mat, 16. 16. Romans 10. 9.

A man may say, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, the Devils confess this;
I know thee who thou art, Jesus Christ the Son of God; therefore this cannot
be the faith of the Gospel.

Two things to be considered in the nature of ^aith.

1. Illumination; this is to consent to the (...) that its true; this is called
faith, and (...) Devil does, Jam. 2. Mark. 5. 8. Aands (...)

2. To believe that Jesus is the Christ, which implies a seeing and knowing all
to be in Christ for life, and to trust in him for pardon and life, to rest upon
him for it: he that thus believes in Christ, is brought over to Christ, and so
centered upon him, that it will not go from him: as Peter, Whither shall we
go, thou have the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 58. My soul wait thou on
God, for my expectation is from him, Psalm. 62. 5. This no Devil can do.

As for the application of Christ, as their own in particular, this all that
believe have not attained, this is not so much of the nature of faith, as
assurance to know all is in Christ, no way or means of life but him, and to
rest upon him for it; is more then illumination, or saying so.

The Scriptures clearly prove, that to believe Jesus Christ to be the Son of
God, is the faith of the Gospel; I prove by these Reasons.

1. Because this is the faith which the Apostles preached, and witnessed unto;
and the faith that is recorded to us in the Scriptures, see Acts 18. 28. 1 John
2. 22.

Our salvation depends upon the faith of what God says.

2. None can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3.

3. Because upon the profession of this, Christ builds his Church, Mat. 16. 16.
18.

4. Because upon the profession of this, the Baptism of Christ is to be
dispensed, Acts 8. 37.

5. They who have this faith, dwell in God, and God in them, 1 John 4. 15.

6. Because God reveals this to the soul, flesh and blood cannot do it, Mat.
16. 16, 17.

7. Such are borne of God; Whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is
borne of God, 1 John 5. 1.

8. This is the faith that overcomes the world, 1 John 5. 4, 5.

9. Because such as believe this, are pronounced blessed, and shall never dye,
John 11. 25, 26.

10. He that believes this shall be saved, as appears, Romans 10. 9. Joh. 11.
25, 26.

There is a lesser degree of faith, then a full and certain assurance of life
by Christ for him in particular, Isa. 45. 21, 22. Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5. They had not
this, yet were blessed, and shall be satisfied; there is a hope of mercy,
without a certainty; such are blessed; Turn ye to the strong holds, ye
prisoners of hope, Zach. 9. 12. They hope, and in his Name they do trust, Mat.
12. 21. A man may believe, and yet not know that he has eternal life. The
Apostle says, These things have I written unto you that believe on the Name of
the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, 1 John 5. 13.
They had it, but they did not know so much, they believed, yet had no assurance.

The people of God are ready to admit of discouragements, when there is no
cause, as the Scriptures, and experience testify: Mary was troubled, and
afraid, Luke 1. 29, 30. All the matter was, the Angel saluted her, and sa^d,
She had found favor with God: So the Shepherds were afraid when the Angel
brought them tidings of great joy, Luke 2. 9, 10. So Peter was afraid, when he
drew up much fish, Luke 5. 8, 9. But what cause had these to fear? God says,
Fear not, but believe: and we fear when we should believe, to the dishonor
of God, and the hindering our own peace; therefore I shall name some of the
discouragements, which hinder the Saints comfort, and endeavor to remove them.

1. Discourg. Some are discouraged and think they have no work of God in
them, because they have not had so great a measure of sorrow for sin as some
have.

1. All that believe, have not the same measure of sorrow for sin; Lydia
received the word with joy, Acts 16. 14. but the Jailer trembled, being in
fear, Acts 16. 29.

2. The greatest measure of sorrow for sin any have had, was not the cause they
were loved or saved; its a great mis-take to think, God delights in fears or
tears.

3. A deep sensiblenesse of sin, hinders the souls believing, and drives it
from Christ, as it did Peter, saying, Lord depart from me, for I am a sinful
man, Luke 5. 8.

4. Do not complain that God deals more gently with thee then others.

5. What is sensiblenesse of sin, that flows not from the apprehension of
pardon and love, we must not look to our sensiblenesse of fin, but to Christ.

6. Our greatest measure of sensiblenesse of sin, is not free from sin, it
deserves nothing but death.

7. If thou did see thy self lost and fatherless, so as not any thing could
satisfy thee but Christ, this is a great and sweet work of the Gospel, this
none have but such as shall be saved: by thy renouncing thy own sufficiency, it
does appear, there is a better sufficiency come in place.

2. Dis^ I fear my faith is not the faith of Gods Elect, because I have so
many doubtings.

1. I grant fears and doubtings are the fruits of unbelief: and as fears and
doubts increase, the stronger unbelief is, yet by the Scriptures it appears,
Gods people that have believed, yet had many doubts and fears, as appears
Joh. 13. 1. Mark 9. 24. Unbelief was so strong in Thomas, that he said he
would not believe, Joh. 20. 24, 25. It may be the case is so with thee,
therefore take heed least ye say, you have no faith, least ye deny the work
of God, and call little faith, no faith, and light, darkness, and one of the
fruits of the Spirit sin; for to do so is very evil; Woe unto them that
call evil good, and good evil, that put darkness for light, and light for
darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Isa. 5. 20. Those
that put faith for unbelief do so.

2. Use means to remove such things as strengthen unbelief, and hinder the
sight of thy faith: ignorance is one cause of doubting; also an
over-sensiblenesse of infirmities, slighting Gods means, neglect of duty, or
formal performance, or nourishing sin, p^onenesse to sin, hearkening to Satan,
to sense, carnal reasonings, nourishing fears and unbelief, etc. Know that
means are means, not causes of the increase of the fruits of the Spirit; look
to God

3. Endeavor to strengthen thy faith; know the happiness of a believer in
Christ; seed thy faith with suitable promises; live upon Christ above; pray in
faith; Ask his Spirit, and thou shall have it, see Luke 11. 23. Which will
revive and fill thy soul with joy and peace in believing; in the same measure
God reveals his love to a soul, in the same measure doubts and fears are
cast out; Perfect love casts out fear.

3. Dis. I fear my faith is presumption.

Presumption may be understood in a twofold consideration: first, for a
confidence without the Word; or, secondly, against the Word: for the first:

1. He that presumes he has no ground for his confidence, he can neither give
you any Scripture, or good reason for his confidence; the ground of his
confidence is his own conceit, and not from the Word and promise of God; but he
that believes in Christ, his confidence is in the Word; We through the
Scriptures have hope, Romans 15. 4. No hope without a word; In his word do I
hope, Psalm. 130. 5. But I hope in thy Word Psalm. 119. 81.

He that believes in Christ, receives no promise of life, but in, and through
Christ, in the riches of his grace: but

2. He that presumes, if he receive a promise, he receives it upon his own
qualifications, without respect to Christ: he gathers conclusions of life from
what he is, and what he can do: his own righteousness was never dross and
dung to him, as Phil. 3. 8. So they depend upon their faith, and not upon
Christ; the cause of their confidence is, because they are so good, and not so
bad; like the proud Pharisee, he never received the sentence of death in
himself, 2 Cor. 1. 9. And as they were ever confident, so it was ever easy
for them to believe.

He that believes, his hope and trust is only in God; they hope in his mercy;
The eyes of the Lord are upon them that hope in his mercy, Psalm. 33. 18. 21.
22. It is Gods work to persuade the heart to rest upon the free mercy of God
in Christ, Psalm. 13. 5. I trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever, Psalm.
52. 8. With the Lord there is mercy, Psalm. 130. 7. God is rich in mercy. Ephesians.
2. 4. Presumption cannot do so, Joh. 12. 37. 1 Pet. 19. 20. John 6. 28, 29.

Also his confidence is contrary to the word of God, the word of God protests
against them, and their confidence; as appears Jer. 9. 9. 15. So their
presumption hardens them and imboldens them to venture upon sinful practices,
as lying, stealing, drunkenness, swearing, uncleanness, etc.

He that truly believes, abhorres that which is evil, and cleaves to that
which is good, Romans 12. 9. Every man that has this hope in him purifieth
himself as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. see Titus 2. 11, 12. They count all things
but loss for Christ; for him they will suffer the loss of all things, Phil.
3. 8. Those who have tasted of Gods free love, admire it, are thankful for it,
and do loath with the greatest indignation what soever shall entrench upon the
free love of God, although it were but in the least degree.

4 Dis. If I had grace, I should grow in grace, but I do not my life is not
holy, nor am I like unto the Lords.

1. Art thou a child, a young man, or a father, there is a great difference
betwixt a child and a man in nature, so great is the difference between a babe
in Christ. 1 Cor. 3. 1. and a man in Christ, see 1 John 2. 12, 13. Also
consider, are you a babe in the womb, or borne, he is a babe that is
unskilful in the word of Righteousness, see Heb. 5. 13. As a child is
begotten and alive, its in the womb before it be borne, so a soul may be
alive, begotten from above, before it be borne; Christ must be formed in us,
before we can be newborn babes, Gal. 4. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 2. When thou art
delivered out of bondage, darkness, and fears, concerning thy soul, thou art
borne and brought forth: for as the womb is a place of bondage, so is a
doubting condition, and therefore such cannot do that which others do. Also in
case thou art newborn, there cannot be that expected from thee as from a man
in Christ; you know there is a difference to be put between a child and a man.

2. Learn to distinguish between the fruits of the Spirits, and the exercise
of them; its not the having of the fruits of the Spirit, but the exercise of
them that attaines to a holy conversation.

3. Know that the time of doubting is a barren time; men cannot fight and work
at one and the same time; when a soul is delivered from its enemies, Satan's
terrors then the soul begins to serve; Being delivered we serve, Luke 1. 47.
Ye see deliverance is before working, therefore the time of doubting, of
bondage, is not the season of growing in holy services.

4. Know, its one thing to be the Lords, and another thing for God to convey
his power into the soul, by which its made conformable to the will of Christ,
and lives by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. The first is where the latter
is not.

5. Believers are of several growths and states; first, babes, children;
secondly, young men; thirdly, Fathers: Can babes work, yet if babes dye in
that state, they shall not miss of glory, 1 John 2. 12. Its one thing to be
^^stified, and another to be sanctified: as its one thing to live, and another
to be borne and to work is distinct from both: There is a great deal of
difference between the Lords own people; some are spiritual, but others are
termed carnail 1 Cor. 3. 1 Thou may be begotten, and not borne.

6. If thou be ignorant, or in temptation, then thy heart is clouded, and
thy heart distempered with fear, as Job 23. 8, 9. and to thou art not fit to
judge or thy growth: is^ newborn babe able to judge of its growth? Also
consider, it may be, thou do not use the means or not rightly in Gods way.
Psalm. 1. 3. with Song 4. 12.

5. Dis. I have many thoughts in me, that I am not the Lords, which
discourageth me, and weak^^^^ my confidence.

1. These thoughts are from Satan, they are contrary to the word of the Lord,
which says, Cast not away your confidence, Heb. 10. 35.

2. If you would consider from whence such thoughts arise, it would appear to
be groundless, and not according to the word, they arise commonly because a
man is so indisposed to do good, in that he is no more spiritual; these
indeed declare there is much corruption and sin, but they do not prove one not
to be a son and daughter of God; one son is more wilful and stubborn then
another, yet he is a son for all that, though a bad one.

3. Satan tempts Christ's babes to cast away their confidence in God; its no
wonder he will tell them they have no faith, etc. Satan may be answered, that
he knows not; also if I should think so, I may be deceived; for as fire raked
up in ashes appears not, nor gives it any light or heat, so corruption may
hide and obscure faith, 1 Cor. 3. 1. The soul may say to Satan, if I have no
faith, why do ye not let me alone, as ye do others, and as ye did me when I
took my fill of sin, then ye told me I had faith when I had none, I have
found ye a lier, and therefore I will not believe you, and am the more
confident I have faith, because ye say, I have none; for you are a lier, and
the father of it, Joh. 8. 44. But suppose I have no faith, there is no reason
why I should despair, because all that are the Lords were sometimes as I am:
at that time ye were without Christ, etc. Ephesians. 2. 12, 13. Which in times past
were not a people, but are now the people of God, which had not obtained mercy,
but now have obtained mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Men are ordained to eternal life
before they believe; I know not but I may be one of them; despair will do me
no good, its better in the use of means to wait upon God, and trust him with
my soul; if mercy appear, I shall praise him, and it may come, there is
nothing too hard for God; Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, Mat.
8. 2. Jer. 32. 17.

6. Dis. I cannot pray, nor do any thing that is good, therefore God has not
done my soul good.

1. Unbelief deads thy heart, and hinders thy living upon Christ's strength.

2. Its so with thee that thou may see a need of Christ's strength, and go to
him by faith for it.

3. If God has given thee a desire to obey him, say not that it is nothing,
God says its something, 2 Cor. 8. to 11. He that gives this, accepts it, 12
and he will grant thy desire in his time; He will fulfill the desire of them
that fear him* he also will hear their cry and will save them, Psalm. 119. 19.
He will not quench the smoking flax. When we see no fire, we know there is
fire by the smoke. Many a time a will to obey, may be all that a believer can
find in himself; To will is present with me, but how to perform that which
is good I find not for the good I would I do not, but the evil I would not,
that do 1, Romans 7. 18, 19, 20, 21. The strongest Saint is but weak, the
highest perfection we are capable in this life, is a fight of our
imperfections, and a desire and endeavor to obey and to live upon Christ by
faith; see Phil* 2. 12, 13. Paul was one of the most eminent Saints, yet see
what he says of himself, Rom* 7. 14. to 25. Romans 8. 37, 38, 39. He had not
power to do what he should, yet he lived by faith in the Son of God, Gal. 2.
20.

4. We should do all we can to obey God, yet we must know our all [we can doe]
will not justify us before God; see Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.

7 Dis* I find no relish in go^d things, and I often ^mit them.

1. God may have begun his work in thee, although it be thus with thee, this
temper in thee may arise from diverse causes; first, from unbelief; secondly,
doubting of acceptance of thy person and duty, its no wonder such have little
list to obey; thirdly, eying infirmities, and not Christ with them; fourthly,
not exercising the fruits of the Spirit, especially faith; fifthly, little love
to Christ; fixt^y, loving temporal things, deads the heart, and makes it
(...); seventhly, weakness of grace; eighthly, from Gods not affording present
strength; ninthly, sloth and ease, that-slayeth the soul; tenthly, undiscreet
doing duties out of their season; eleventhly, ignorance of the nature of
duties, and what God requires in some cases; twefthly, ignorance of the
sweetness in spiritual duties; thirteenthly, the souls sickness, which
hinders the souls relish of spiritual things; the soul has its sickness
and distempers as well as the body; fourteenthly, weakness of body is a great
enemy to action; My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever, Psalm. 73. 26. he never fails.

2. Unwillingnesse to good duties, argues much corruption; from whence the
omission of them does often flow.

8. Dis. I have nothing; for I am not able to subdue my passions.

1. Thy not subduing them, may arise from weakness; we arc weak and
imperfect at the best, we fall often; see Gal. 6. 1.

2. Some partake more of natural choler then others, and as that is, so we
are more or less hasty and passionate; and as that increases, passion
increases: one that is wicked, may be naturally patient, and a child of God
may be sinfully passionate; El^^ was a man subject to the like pass^ons we are,
Jam. 5. 17.

3. You must not measure Gods love to thee, nor the truth of his work in thee,
by thy mortification of sin, consider Romans 7.

4. God may for ends best known to himself, suffer corruption to be too
strong for thee, it may be, to abase thee more in thy own eyes, to see thy
weakness, and to see a more need of Christ's strength. God may leave thy
personal Sanctification the more imperfect, that we might the more mind and
behold Jesus Christ, and our Righteousness in him, and live the more upon him,
and joy the more in our Justification by him, Romans 4. 6, 7.

5. Its one thing to have thy sins forgiven, or not imputed, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
and another thing to subdue sin in thee.

6. The reason fin so much prevails, is because ye live so much in
discouragements; live in the apprehension of the love of God and down goes sin
and discouragements, but if ye live in discouragements, sin prevails, as you
may see Psalm. 77. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10.

7. We ought not to fetch our comfort from our subduing of sin, but from
Christ, who is made unto us both Righteousness and Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.
30. When we are at the best, we may not live in our selves, nor by sigh^, bu^
by faith; and when we are at the worst, we ought to live upon Christ by
faith, and comfort our selves in him, and in him only. Its the folly of many
when they want strength and comfort, they seek it in their duties and
subduings of sin, and comfort themselves there, but Christ is not in all
their thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4.

9. Dis. What I once felt is now decayed.

1. The ground of our faith is God in his Word, and not our sight and feeling,
that is sensual; We live not by sight, but by faith, 2 Cor. 5. 7.

2. Whilst thou maintainest fears and jealousies of Gods love to thee, its no
wonder it is so with thee; call to mind the days of old, as, Psalm. 77. With
him there is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. Whom he loves
he loves for ever, Joh. 13. 1.

3. A child of God may decay in parts, sight, feelings, and exercise of faith,
as Phil. 4. 10. these are sometimes more, and sometimes less, as God sees
best, that so we might rest and rely upon Christ alone; I see and feel
nothing in my self, or all is as nothing to me to Jesus Christ, who is all to
me.

4. We ought to believe that we neither see nor feel; says is the evidence of
things not seen, Heb. 11. 1. To live by faith, is to walk after the Spirit;
and to live by sight and feeling, is to live after the flesh, Romans 8. 1, 2.

10. Dis. I am discouraged, because nothing, is made good to me, I do not
possess is.

1. If thou be included, and art under the promise of it, thou shall
possess it.

2. It may be made good to thee without thy possession of it, there is neither
faith, nor hope in what we possess; to have right in it, and to possess it,
are two things; They dyed in faith, they did not possess what they believed,
Heb. 11. 17, 18. Abraham believed he should have a Son; here was his faith,
Romans 4. 3. 17, 18. yet then he did not possess his Son to make enjoyment
essential to faith, is a very great mis-take.

11. Dis. I have no assurance of salvation, and therefore have no faith.

1 Faith and assurance are two distinct things; assurance cannot be without
faith, but faith may be without assurance; for assurance is not the proper act
of faith, but an effect of it, and a higher measure then that is; and the
greater our feelings of assurance are, the lesser is our faith.

2. Faith is an assenting or cleaving to the truth and faithfulness of God in
his promise, not from any thing the soul sees or feels in it self, but
from something it apprehends in God in his Word, Romans 4. 20, 21, 22. Sometimes
faith is attended with much strife and struggling; for Satan says to the soul,
its in vain to believe. Christ says, Come, I will ease thee; now for the
soul to rest upon the ability and fidelity of Christ in his promise, is no
small measure of faith.

Assurance is not from the nature of faith, nor from the direct act of faith,
but from the reflect act of faith, which is for a man to see and know that he
believes; which assurance is from the light and testimony of the Spirit of God
in the conscience of one that is already a believer, causing the soul to know
it believes; the Spirit it self bears witness to our spirits, that we are
the children of God, Romans 8. 16.

3. There be some that have faith by reason of their ignorance and
unskilfulnesse, as Heb. 5. 14, 15. and 10. 15. Babes are unskilful, and have
not experience of Gods dealing with his for order and manner; so that when
faith does not act, and when Christ does not clearly appear in the soul, he
doubts whether he be not deceived; but when the Lord appears again, the doubt
is dissolved, and the soul satisfied, and he is armed with experience against
such a time, if he be able to judge, and neglect not to mark well, but where
use and exercise is wanting, there is not so clear a discerning, Heb. 5. 11,
12.

12. Dis. I fear the opposition in me is not between Christ and Satan, or the
Spirit against the flesh, but from my corrupt will, and my enlightened
conscience.

I grant all the combats in men are not right, many are deceived herein, yet
the difference may be discerned; as,

1. The natural conscience, though enlightened, acts only in a natural way,
at the most it is but moral, as not to ^lie, steal, swear, and such gross
acts.

2. It stirs not, unless it be forced, and only to that its forced unto.

3. Conscience enlightened, strikes only at the branches of sin, but not at the
root.

4. It sets one faculty against another, as the will and affections against the
understanding.

1. But the Spirit of Christ causes an opposition in the same faculty, as in
the will, etc.

2. The Spirit of God makes a free, full, constant, impartial resistance
against all sin.

3. And discovers to the soul her secret corruptions in their colors; the
Spirit overpowereth the soul, causing it to hate sin, and leave it.

4. The Spirit causes the soul to be more glad, the more sin is discovered.

5. The Spirit of God teaches the soul to oppose all sin, even the appearance
of evil, equally, proportionably, and orderly.

6. The Spirit causes the soul not to turn the truth of God into
encouragements to sin, as some do.

13. Dis. I am so troubled with hideous temptations, as I believe no child of
God is.

1. Christ was tempted, Mat. 4. There is no temptation but a child of God may
be tempted with, see 1 Cor. 10. 13.

2. If they be hateful and burdensome to you, and you cry to God for help
against them, they shall not be laid to your charge; for as it was with the
Damsel, Deuteronomy. 22. 25, 26. even so is this matter.

14. Dis. I fear when persecution comes I shall not be able to suffer, and so
not hold out to the end, but dishonor God, betray his truth, shame and grieve
his people.

Take no care for the morrow, cast all these cares and fears upon the Lord; in
nothing be careful, Phil. 4. 10. He will care for you; I will never leave
thee, nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. 5. God will take care for his glory and truth,
etc. his wisdom, power, and faithfulness shall order all.

15. Dis. I am discouraged, because I am not filled with joy and comfort.

1. Faith may be strong, when joy is absent; David had faith when he had no
joy; Restore to me the joy of my salvation, Psalm. 51. 12. He refused comfort,
Psalm. 77. 2. But after he wanted it.

2. Such as judge their conditions good, because they are filled with joy,
build upon a wrong foundation, in that they are not founded upon Christ alone.
If some had joy, they would make it a Christ to them, live upon it, and so
abuse Christ, and themselves, and their joy; its a mercy to such to want joy,
till they can better use it.

16. Dis. But my soul is filled with terrors; I have a hell in me, I feel the
wrath of God in my soul, and so have been for a long time.

1. This is a sad condition, yet thus it may be with one that is the Lords;
thus it was with Heman, who said; Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why
hidest thou thy face from me? I am ready to dye whilst I suffer thy terrors; I
am distracted, thy fierce wrath goes over me, thy terrors have cut me off,
Psalm. 88. 15, 16. Job cried, saying; He has kindled his wrath against me, and
counts me unto him as one of his enemies; see Job 19. 10, 11. and 7. 6. 13, 14,
15, 16. And David in temptation, judging himself according to the law, and
sense, and feeling said; I am cast out of his sight, Psalm. 31. 22. Christ said;
My God, why have thou forsaken me, Mat. 26. 48. Horror has overwhelmed me,
Psalm. 55. 7. and 77. 8, 9. And Jeremiah said; He has led me into darkness,
and not into light; he has broken my bones, and compassed me with gall; he
has made my chains heavy; he has filled me with bitterness; thou have
removed my soul far off from peace; and I said, my strength and my hope is
perished from the Lord, Lam. 3. 2. to 19. Some conceive, if God loved them,
there should be no such tempest in their souls, but a sweet calm, and in
stead of wrath and terrors, sweet peace and joy; but the Lord has his way in
the whirlewinde, and in the storm, Nahum 1. 3. Some enjoy peace and joy, but
its not so with all; see Job 13. 26. Job said to God; Why do not thou pardon
my transgressions, etc. Thou have set me as a mark against thee, so that I am
a burden unto my self, Job 7. 18, 19, 20, 21. ^3, 14. Our comfort depends not
upon free^ome from terrors, but upon the Spirits re^ealing truth, and
application of it to the ^oule, Lam. 3. 21.

2. The Angel of the Lord said to Gidcon; The Lord is with thee; But Gideon
said; Oh my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this fallen us, etc.
Judge. 6. 12, 13. So says the soul; If the Lord be with us, why then is all
this befallen us, that we are so full of terrors, yet it may be so; and as
Gideon was mis-taken, so may thou.

3. The greatest peace any Saint injoys, is not to be neither ground nor
encouragement for them to believe, therefore not any terrors any possess,
ought not to be a ground of discouragement in believing, for our happiness is
not in any thing we feel or apprehend in our selves, but in the word and
promise of God, and in that we are known of God, who loves us and comprehends
us in himself, and his not imputing ou^ trespasses unto us, Psalm. 32. 1. Of
this see more in part the third.

4. A soul in such a sad condition, should consider what the Lord says, Isa.
8. 20. and cast all their fears of hell upon God in a promise, and trust in
the Lord, Isa. 26. 3, 4. When thou art in the flames of this fire, thou shall
not be burnt; with God nothing is impossible, O troubled foul; the tender
mercies of our God has visited us, and so it may visit thee also, and give
light to thee that sits in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide thy
feet in the way of peace, Luke 1. 78, 79.

5. If thou would be freed from these terrors, trust in God, that is the way
to be freed from them; Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 26. 3, 4.

6. Consider what brought thy terrors, but poring so much upon thy sins,
until thou were filled with despair, and thy omissions and commissions
against conscience increased thy horror, do the contrary, and see that ye
daube not your selves over with your duties, and know that which is a great
cause of mourning, is no cause of despair, therefore cast not away your
confidence, Heb. 10. 35. for yet a little while, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry, ver. 37, 38. Therefore say as the Prophet said; When
I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me; he will bring me forth
into the light, and I shall behold his Righteousness, Mica 7. 8, 9.

17. Dis. I am in great outward misery and want, by reason of poverty, surely
if God did love me, I should not be so neglected as I am.

Thou should not reason so; was not this the condition of those who wandered
about in sheepskins, goat skins, in des^ts, mountains, dens, and caves of the
earth. Surely they were more destitute of outward comforts then thee, and
suffered more hunger, cold, and nakedness then thee; have thou not a house nor
bed to lie on, the places where they wandered afforded not these things to them;
art thou destitute, afflicted, so were they whom God so loved, that he esteemed
the world not worthy of, Heb. 11. 37, 38. Poverty and want is no small burden,
many desire death rather then such a condition; yet know that

2. Poverty and want has attended and kept company with many of the children
of God: Job was poor; the Apostles were poor, 1 Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 10. the
Churches of Christ were poor; the Church of Corinth was poor, 2 Cor. 8. 14.
The Church of Smyrna was poor, Rev. 2. 9. The Church of Macedonia was in dead
poverty, 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2. And our Lord Jesus Christ was poor, 2 Cor. 8. 9. And
thou may be very poor, and yet God may love thee as he loves Christ, Joh.
17. 26. The poor receive the Gospel, and the profession of the Gospel of it,
have made, will make the rich poor, in that for Christ they have suffered the
loss of all things, Phil. 7. 8. It will not be always thus, if it continue as
long as I live, my life will not be long ere glory come, then shall I suffer no
more troubles, nor afflictions, no hunger, cold, nor nakedness, etc. In our
greatest want, we should be content; for the time will quickly come, in which
we shall feel no want, nor suffer no hunger, cold, or nakedness: be content
to be like Christ in poverty, as well as in glory: what God takes away in one
kind, he can give in another, which will be better, Psalm. 34. 9, 10. Therefore
when I think I want, I may not believe I want, but that I have what I want,
when I do not see it: Saints poor and under abasement, may be rich in faith,
Jam. 2. 5.

3. There is no state and condition under the Sun, that is free from Satan's
temptations, those who have more abundance of outward things, Satan says to
them, these things are all they are like to have, and in that they receive
their good things in this life, have a heaven of outward contents here, they
must not expect another hereafter: and to those that have more gifts and parts
then others, he says, they are not given in love to them, but only for the
benefit of others: on every s^de Satan is ready to get advantage, to
disdiscourage us; its well if we could say, we are not ignorant of his devices,
2 Cor. 2. 11. The Lord teach us to know the depths of Satan, Rev. 2. 24. So as
to know his stratagems, and resist him.

As there is no state under the Sun free from trouble, so its a comfort to
all that are the Lords, that God can and will support his in, and under it, and
make it sweet and comfortable to them; All things shall work for good to them
that love God, Romans 8. 28. 35. 38, 39.

18. Dis. I cannot see God, surely God has forsaken me.

1. Sometimes God hides himself from his; Verily thou art a God that hidest
thy self, Isa. 45. 15. I opened to my beloved, and he had withdrawn himself,
Song 5. 6. Behold, I go forward, and he is not there, and backward, but I
cannot perceive him, on the left hand where he does work, but I cannot behold
him; on the right hand, but I cannot see him, Job 23. 8, 9.

2. Our carnal reason, our corrupt heart, and Satan's suggestions are so near,
as before our eyes, that we cannot see God, and we hearken so much to what
they say, that we mind not the voice of the Spirit, Romans 8. 16.

3. Its one thing to know, and another to know that we know: Christ said, they
knew; they said, they knew not: Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know:
Thomas said unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, how then can we
know the way? Christ spoke true, and they knew not that they knew, Joh. 14. 3,
4, 5. So, she saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus; but when
their eyes were opened they knew him, Luke 24. 31. Paul prayed, that they might
know the hope of their calling, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19.

4. When God hides his face, we are to wait upon him, and look for him,
Isa. 8. 17. For he will return again, but Sion said, the Lord has forsaken
me, and my God has forgotten me: Can a woman forget her su^king child, etc.
yea she may, yet will not I forget thee, Isa. 49. 14. For a small moment have
I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee, Isa. 45. 7, 8. Though
God absents himself from his, yet his love and care of them is the same to
them as when he does most manifest himself to them.

19. Dis. Another is discouraged, and says; I had thought I had faith, but
since I fell into a great sin; I am persuaded, if I had been the Lords, I
should not have been so left of God to sin so as I did.

1. Say not so, consider God has left his own children to fall into the same
sin, or as great; David sinned in adultery and murder; and Solomon sinned
greatly after he had obtained mercy, 1 King. 11. 9. And Peter denied Christ
with an oath; Paul was led captive, Romans 7. 23. These examples are recorded, to
hold forth the glory of the riches of Gods free gra^e, Ephesians. 2. 4. that men may
know what God can do, that great sinners might not despair, or faint under
their sin, 1 John 2. 1.

2. To despair of the mercy of God, because our sins are great, were to
limit God in his mercy, which is to add sin to sin, and a greater sin
then the former, therefore the greatest sin a believer can commit, ought not to
make him mourn without hope; for no sin can put him in the state of
damnation, or under the curse, Romans 8. 1, 2, 3. While we live in this world,
God heals not our sinful natures wholly, nor takes it quite away; the flesh
lusts, Romans 7. God ever looks upon his as they are in Christ, and not simply
as they are in themselves, Ephesians. 1. 4. 1 Cor. 1. 30. I my self keep the law of
God, but with my flesh the law of sin; sin does the evil, Romans 7. 15. 17. 20.
1 John 3. 9. Consider N^he. 9. 16, 17, etc. He knowe^h our frame, and
remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. 103. 14. see p. 66. God has in wisdom
and love left sin in his, to humble them, and to exercise the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. and that we might long to be where we shall not sin:
also that we may love Christ, in that its pardoned, and depend upon Christ to
subdue it, and that we might not scorn, nor insult over any, and see the power
of Christ in subduing them, and admire free love: the use of all is not to
expect to be freed from the act of sin while we live here, as some dream.
Secondly, not to sin that grace may abound, God forbid, Romans 6. 1, 2, 3. 8.
Use we all means against it; Be not over-pressed, and sunk in despair under
it; see Romans 5. 20. and 6. 1, 2. 2 Cor. 12. 9. Rev. 3. 7, 8. All the Lords are
the more happy they were sinners, else how could they be capable of union with
God, and of mercy and heaven: if there were not evil, it would not be known
what is good; Justice and mercy had not been known, how could the wisdom of
God be known, in drawing good out of evil, or his love in sending Christ to
dye, could not have been known, and man had not come to that happiness in
Christ, which the Saints shall come unto, 1 Cor. 15. 44, 45. The misery is,
that the most men fall into the extremes, either to despair by reason of sin,
or look upon sin as a small matter, and so grow profane; of this we have
many sad and miserable instances, as also of Gods making them visible examples,
by his terrible judgments on some of them to be a warning unto others.

3. God is never an enemy to his, though they greatly sin against him, Psalm.
51. We are not beloved for our own sakes, nor for any thing in our selves, but
in Christ, who has made us acceptable in the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 5. Therefore
nothing we do can cause God to love us more or less, his love is as
himself, ever the same, Heb. 13. 8. Therefore a believers hope, joy, and
confidence, is to be ever the same in Christ; hence it is they are always to
rejoice; Rejoice always, Psalm. 5. 11. and 32. 11. Rejoice evermore; again I
say rejoice, 1 These. 5. 16. Phil. 4. 4. Let them exceedingly rejoice, Psalm. 40.
16. The joy of the Lord is our strength, Nehe. 8. 16. Oh there is enough in the
Lord to satisfy thee at all times; he is an unchangeable object of true joy;
in him is all our hope and happiness. Therefore let not thy fall cause thee to
question the love of God to thee, thy salvation depends not on thy repentance
and holiness, see Romans 9. 15, 16. Isa. 43. 24, 25. and 57. 17. Ezekiel. 16. 1. to
9. My little children, these things I write unto you, that ye sin not, 1 John 2. 1. But for those that turn the grace of God into wantonness, the
mercies of God encourage them in their sins; such are led by the Spirit of
the Devil, he is their father, and his works they do^, Joh. 8. 44. If ye
regard iniquity, Psalm. 66. 18. Here is no consolation for you, you are not to
be numbered with those who through temptation and weakness are overtaken and
fall into the sin they hate. If fallen, be not out of hope, Paul persecuted
the truth, and them that professed it, yet after he preached the faith, Acts 9.
1, 2. Gal. 1. 23. If not converted, God may convert thee; if the Lords have
fallen into sin, they are to rise by faith; Shall a man fall, and not rise,
Jer. 8. 4. When I fall, I shall arise, Mica. 7. 7. Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons the transgression of the remnant of his people, Mica. 7. 18, 19,
20. I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and
iniquities I will remember no more, Heb. 8. 12. God has nothing against those
who are in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Gal. 3. 13. therefore go boldly to God, in
full assurance of faith, Heb. 4. 16. and 10. 22.

20. Dis. But my heart is hardened.

1. There is much hardness of heart in a child of God, they feel it, and
mourn under it, and complain of it, this is the frame of a new heart.

2. To feel hardness is from softness, and the condition of an experienced
child of God; O Lord, why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and
hardened our hearts from thy fear; doubtless, thou art our Father; thou, O
Lord, art our Father. Their hearts were hardened, yet they were the children of
God, Isa. 63. 16, 17. Let not the Eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree, Isa. 56.
3. I consider my self as I am in Christ, and one with him; what is his is
mine; Christ's fruitfulness is ours. I have sin, my glory and rejoicing is,
that its forgiven, and shall be remembered no more; and so I rest satisfied in
what Christ has done; my best works cannot save me, nor my worst cannot
destroy me; thanks be to God, who has given us victory by Jesus Christ, Romans
7. and fetch we our comfort from him, and not from what we find and feel in
our selves. About twelve years ago in the viewing of my defects in prayer, in
considering with what faith, sensiblenesse, earnestness, etc. I had prayed, I
concluded, that if I had had the Spirit of God, I should not have so prayed as
I did, then I concluded, that I had been fourteen years or more mis-taken;
then I concluded that if God had intended me good, he would have manifested it
to ^e before this time, then was I as fully satisfied as ever I was satisfied
of any thing in the world, that I should never be saved; I thought my condition
was very miserable; but in this extremity I apprehended no remedy in this
condition, till an interpreter, one of a thousand, did by the truth convince
me, that I did believe, and should be saved; and I was forced to confess that
he that did desire to believe, did believe; yet I was not fully settled till I
did see that my salvation was effected by Christ on the Cross, etc. But that
which is to be considered herein, is, into what a condition of despair we are
like to be led in, if we judge of our eternal conditions, and of Gods love to
us by the hardness of our hearts and by what we see and feel in our selves.
Although many years before I had the assurance of the love of God, and was
filled with joy and peace in believing, yet see what it is to give way to
unbelief in us: Let this experience be a warning to you that ye do not as I
did, but always remember that we are to believe that which is contrary to that
which we see and feel; its sense and not faith to believe that which we see
and feel, if one may be in this condition one day, then two days, and then
two seven years; it is as God pleases, sooner or later; He heales the broken
in heart, and binds up their wounds, Psalm. 147. 3.

Mark. 5. 36.
Be not afraid, only believe.
WE are commanded to believe, and the Spirit inlighteneth our understandings;
without the Spirit of Christ we can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5. Ephesians. 1. 19. yet
men are to use the means; for in the preaching the Word we expect the holy
Spirit to put power in the words spoken, to make it effectual, and to enable
the creature to obey; he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and
the Spirit entered into me; When he had spoken unto me, and set me upon my
feet, Ezekiel. 2. 1, 2. And the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5. 25. else it were in vain to speak to
dead men to believe, 1 Pet. 4. 6. And all men by nature are spiritually dead,
Ephesians. 2. 1. and 5. 14. only they believe whose hearts God opens; as, Acts 16.
14. None can believe, but they to whom it is given.

There are many encouragements to believe.

1. Because the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, and none are
forbidden to believe; nor is there any precept or command for any to doubt; see
Acts 16. 30, 31. 1 John 3. 23. But men are commanded the contrary, to follow
after faith, and to lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. 11.

2. By believing we come to know our interest in Christ, and salvation by him;
He that believes in the Son has everlasting life, John 3. 36. and 6. 40.

3. By believing, we honor God; He that receives his testimony, has set to
his seal that God is true, Joh. 3. 33 and 5. 10. Therefore none can believe
too soon, too confidently, or too constantly.

4. There is no quietness and settlement of soul without believing; If ye
believe not, surely ye shall not be established, Isa. 7. 9. Its faith that
rids the soul of all its distempers, doubts, and fears, Romans 5. 1, 2.

5. Thou stand by faith, and thou fallest into sin by unbelief, Romans 11.
20. Heb. 9. 12. The Word is precious and powerful, yet it profited them not,
because it was not mixed with faith, Heb. 4. 2.

6. By faith thou shall be kept in perfect peace, which will sweetly and
transcendently refresh thy soul, Isa. 26. 2, 4. Romans 5. 1. By says we
apprehend Christ our justification; the fruit of which is joy and peace.

7. By unbelief we add sin to sin in the highest nature; if we believe
not what God says, our act of unbelief accuses God to speak falsely; He that
believes not has made him a lier, 1 John 5. 10.

8. It can be no dishonor to God, nor hurt unto thy self, to believe, and
hope in his mercy; therefore believe, and when thou art tempted to unbelief,
set before thee the evil of this sin.

9. Unbelief hinders our thankfulness to God, it straightens our hearts, and
stops our mouths from praising God; Thou shall be dumb, because thou
beleevest not, Luke 1. 20. Unless we believe we can never glorify God, nor
honor him; He was strong in faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4. 20.

10. As bad as thou can be, have been received to mercy; Jesus Christ came to
save sinners; This is a faithful saying, that is worthy of all acceptance, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. He justifies the ungodly, Romans 4. 5. Therefore have hope,
Fear not, but believe, Luke 8. 50. The Lord will command his loving kindness
in the day time, and in the night, Psalm. 42. 8. Be not afraid, only believe,
Mark. 5. 36. Hope thou in God, Psalm. 42. 5.

Moreover, consider, that
1. The multitude and greatness of sin, ^^ght not to discourage thee in
believing, nor the fewness, or smallness of sins, is not to be any ground
of thy confidence in God for pardon.

2. The word of God does no where say, that great sinners shall not be saved;
therefore to think so is folly, and a delusion of Satan.

3. The word of God says the contrary; That Christ came to save the chief of
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Come, let us reason together, says the Lord; though
your sins were as crimson, they shall be made white as snow, etc. Isa. 1. 18.

4. The word of God declares many great and sweet promises to great sinners; as
Jer. 3. Isa. 55. 7, 8, 9. and 43. 24, 25. And there be many examples of great
sinners received to mercy, as Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 18, 19. and many others,
yea the rebellious also, Psalm. 68. 18.

5. Because Christ is mighty to save, Isa. 62. 1. He will abundantly pardon,
Isa. 55. 7. His compassions fail not, Lam 3. 23. There is a fountain set open
for sin, and for uncleanness, Zach. 13. 1. All that are weary and heavy
laden are called to come to Christ, Mat. 11. 28. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink, Joh. 7. 37. Every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17.

6. The Saints have made the greatness of sin an encouragement to believe;
Lord pardon my sins, for they are great, Psalm. 25. 11. How great is his
goodness, much greater then thy sins, Zach. 9. 17. Isa. 43. The greater our
sins are, the greater our faith should be; lo here is great consolation.

7. God does not sel^ Christ, etc. he was given freely; Come buy without money,
etc. Isa. 55. 1. Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely.

8. Because such as Christ saves, are unworthy, without works, Romans 4. 5, 6.
The most perfect Saint that ever was, stood in need of mercy; Behold, he found
no steadfastness in his servants, and charge his Angels of folly, how much
more them that dwell in houses of clay, Job 4. 18, 19. Ezekiel. 16. 63. The love
of God is the more glorious in that it is given to the unworthy.

9. It makes most for the glory of God to give great things; it were a
disparagement for a King to do otherwise: the Lord is a great King, Isa. 9. 6.
He does great things past finding out, and wonders without number, Job 9. 10.
Fear not, the Lord will do great things, Joel 2. 21. Measure not the Lord by
thy self; My thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your ways,
says the Lord, Isa. 55. 8, 9. Such as are wise will not look so much to their
own baseness, is to his greatness, Zach. 9. 17.

10. Nothing we can do, can moove God to show mercy, Ezekiel. 16. 3. to 9. he
shows mercy because he will, Mica. 7. 18, 19. I will do away thy sins for my
Names sake, Isa. 43. 25.

11. The mercy of God is infinite, its without part or form, therefore not
capable of any addition or defect, therefore infinite; should thou need
thousands of Seas of mercy to pardon thy sin; he could give it, and not have
the less; if I had all the sin in the world upon me, or one sinful thought,
this consideration makes it all one: oh worlds of sin in this Ocean vanish
and come to nothing: O the depth (not of the believers faith, but) of the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Romans 11. 33. Ephesians. 3. 8.

12. The name of God is infinite; he is the father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1. 3. its
the nature of God: The Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercies, Jam. 5.
11. All the pity and mercy that is, or ever was, is from him, and all is but a
drop to that Ocean of pity, love, and mercy, that is in him: we are ready to
sin, but he is more ready to forgive; Mercy pleases him, its his delight; thou
art a God ready to forgive; he is plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86. 5.

13. Consider the price that was paid for the sins of his, its infinite also;
count all thy sins, still they are the acts of a finite creature; Christ is
God, Romans 9. therefore his satisfaction is above them, 1 John 5. 20. His
righteousness is greater then thy sins.

14. Consider the covenant of grace is not made with us, nor can it be broken
by us, Psalm. 89. 31. Its not founded upon such a fandy foundation, as thy self
and duties are; and seeing the Covenant stands sure for ever, it should
satisfy us for ever, and cause us to cast away all our doubts and fears, and
rest satisfied in his love.

That Circumcision in the nature of it was not the Seal of the Covenant of
grace.
1. Because Circumcision binds unto a Law that is unprofitable to him that
does not keep the Law, Gal. 5. 3. Therefore Circumcision has nothing to do
with the covenant of grace.

2. The Scripture does not declare that Circumcision was an old seal of the
covenant of grace, Col. 2. 11, 12. Does not prove it was.

3. Because if Circumcision had been a seal of the covenant of grace, those
who had that should not need a new seal.

4. If Circumcision had been a seal of the covenant of grace, then the urging
it could not have overthrown the Gospel, as the Apostle said it did, see Gal.
2. 17, 18. with Gal. 5. 10. and Chap. 3.

5. Because the promise of blessedness by remission of sins, Genesis 12. 3. is
far different from that covenant, Genesis 17* 7, 8. which was sealed by
Circumcision.

Lastly, Circumcision being an intolerable yoke, Acts 15. 10. it could not be a
seal of the righteousness of Christ; if it had, then it had been a benefit,
and not a burden.

Luke 5. 4, 5, 6. Observations.
MAster] Christ is to be owned, acknowledged, and obeyed.

We have toiled all night] Much pains.

And have taken nothing] Men's labors without Gods blessing are fruitless.

Neverthelesse] I let go reason, experience, and likelihoods to obey thee.

At thy word] Christ's word prevails, a word from Christ is enough to put us
upon action, his word is to be eyed.

I will] So soon as the soul hears Christ speak, it submits.

Let down the net] Faith and the use of means agree.

Nets filled] Obedience of faith never fruitless, etc.

Matthew. 10. 29, 30, 31.
Are not two sparrowes sold for a farthing, and one of them shall not fall to
the ground without your Father: the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
COnsider the lilies of the field how they grow, they toil not neither do
they spin, Mat. 6. 28. God provideth for the young Ravens their food, Job 38.
41.

All things are ordered by the providence of God: Whatsoever the Lord pleased,
that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep places, Psalm.
135. 6. Our God is in heaven, he ^hath done whatsoever he pleases, Psalm. 115.
3. Many seek the Rulers favor, but every man's judgment comes of the Lord,
Pro* 29. 26. He fashioneth their hearts, Psalm. 33. Whose hearts God has
touched, 1 Samuel 10. 9. 26. As the Rivers of waters he turns it whither soever
he will, Pro. 21. 1. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing
thereof is of the Lord, Pro. 16. 33. The preparations of the heart in man, and
the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Pro. 16. 1. A man's heart devises
his way; but the Lord directs his steps, verse. 9. Ye ought to say, if the
Lord will we will go unto such a City, and do this or that, Jam. 4. 13. 15.
They shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail, Jer. 1. 19.

The consideration of these Scriptures are very necessary, profitable, and
comfortable; these Scriptures declare, that what God wills, he effects; all
things are as he pleases to order them.

Job seeing of God in all his crosses, was patient, content, and thankful; The
Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord: He
knew men could do neither more nor less then God will: it was God that did it.

A cause of that great care and over-thoughtfulnesse of heart in fearing men,
and want, is, because we see not all things to be ordered by God; we are more
like heathen Gentiles, as Christ says, Matthew. 6. We have need to mind that
Chapter more, to be more content, and to live by faith, and to be thankful to
God, which we cannot be until we see its sent from God; its a gift of love,
whether it be bitter or sweet, it shall do me good, Psalm. 34. 1 Cor. 13. 10.

All our care, and dislike, etc. cannot alter what God will do; it might cause
men to be content: Job says, He is in one mind, and who can turn him? and
what his soul desires, even that he does; for he performs the thing that is
appointed for me; and many such things are with him, Job 23. 13, 14. As if he
should say, I cannot help it, God will have it so, I may use the means, but I
must wait upon him, both for the time, and manner of my deliverance; Man
disquiets himself in vain, because he does not see and mind the providence
of God in the ordering of all things; and so are not content with our
conditions, nor bear crosses patiently.

If thou art lost and fatherless, Luke 19. 10. Hos. 14. 3. Christ is precious
to thee, and thou art precious to him; Oh know, Christ came to seek and save
you, and that you shall enjoy life and glory by him. God is at peace with you,
he has loving kindness for you, that is better then life; lo all is yours,
for God is yours, and that for ever: what can be more suitable, pleasant,
profitable, and delightful, better or more desirable? Oh the fullness,
sweetness, gloriousness of this peace, it passes knowledge: if thou art
nothing in thy own eyes, thou have a right in it, and therefore may apply it,
and be ravished with it.

Consider what I have said, what God has given thee, sent unto thee, and put
into thy hand, even his rarest and choicest dainties from his
banqueting house, and flaggons of his most excellent and richest wine, full of
spirit and life, one taste is able to cheer and revive thy heart, yea raise
and ravish thy fainting soul with love into love; Oh here is enough, Christ's
dainties are durable, his fountain is bottomless and infinite, it cannot be
exhausted or drawn dry, therefore eat O friends, and drink abundantly. To be
comforted and strengthened with it, if God please to bless it to thee, it will
be sweet and profitable; instead of darkness light shall shine clearly,
sweetly, pleasantly, if the Lord cause thy soul to be this light, and love to
live in it, and be overpowered with it, thou will acknowledge his goodness
with thankfulesse and joy; as some have done; he creates the fruit of the lips,
peace; if he speak the word its done, Gen 3. 3. The Lord so speak to thee,
that thou may profit by it, and that thy joy may be full.

A Song of the love of God to such as are in Christ.
Make ye his praises glorious with a joyful voice, Psalm. 66. 1, 2.
1.
THe Ephesians. 2. 4.
love of God has been to me full great,
In leaving Romans 3. 9.
me in such a state to be;
And then to set Romans 3. 24.
me free from that estate,
He gave his only Joh. 3. 16.
Son to dye for me.
Which is a greater 1 Cor. 2. 9.
happiness to me,
Then if I had not been in 1 Cor. 15. 45.
misery.
2.
I was as Ezekiel. 16. 3.
vile as any man could be,
And my vile Ezekiel. 16. 6.
state did openly appear;
When God in Ezekiel. 16. 6.
love did please to look on me,
And caused Ezekiel. 16. 6.
me a joyful voice to hear.
For passing by me, he to me said Ezekiel. 16. 6.
live,
Which voice of his unto Genesis 1. 3.
me life did give.
3.
When I heard this sweet voice of Ezekiel. 16. 6.
God to me,
Upon my heart Ephesians. 5. 14.
effectually it wrought;
That I was then so set at Romans 8. 33.
liberty,
That often times I did 1 Cor. 2. 9.
ponder in my thought*
From Joh. 8. 36.
sin, Satan, curse, wrath, and hell so free,
That I fear not what they can do to Romans 8. 38.
me.
4.
Love caused God for Gal. 4. 4, 5.
me his Son to give;
Love caused Jesus Christ for Joh. 10. 18.
me to dye;
Love caused God to say to my soul Ezekiel. 16. 6.
live;
Love in my Psalm. 116. 7.
soul does now again reply;
In Songs how lovingly Heb. 10. 7.
Christ did come forth,
A mighty Mark. 10. 45.
and ransom of great worth.
5.
What glorious sight of 2 John 3. 1.
love is this I see?
That being had before the Ephesians. 1. 4.
world could be;
Without all time, bounds, Ephesians. 1. 4.
measure, or degree,
Is this his Ephesians. 2. 4.
love which he has set on me.
One glorious Ephesians. 3. 19.
sight of this so great love,
Will cause a soul for to be Song 5. 8.
sick of love.
6.
This love made known to 1 John 3. 1.
me, made me to muse,
That ever Rev. 1. 5.
God should be to me so good;
To give his Ephesians. 1. 4.
Son for me, and me to choose,
Which was his enemy; and in my Ezekiel. 16. 6.
blood.
When I fled from Jer. 3. 7.
him, after me came he;
I sought not him, but Isa. 65. 1.
he sought after me.
7.
The love of God to Ephesians. 2. 4
me, is passing great;
Which had a being Ephesians. 1. 4.
ere the world began;
It 1 John 3. 2.
boundless is, and every way complete,
And 1 Cor. 2. 9.
longer does endure then this world can.
Like love to Romans 5. 7.
this has never yet been heard,
And there is Romans 5. 7.
none can be to this compared.
8.
That many in their John 8. 21.
sins should be destroyed,
Whose first Ephesians. 2. 3.
condition was as good as mine;
And yet to Romans 5. 1.
me this mercy is injoyd;
Thus being freed I shall in Joh. 17. 24.
glory shine.
This Ho^. 14. 4.
shows his love to me is great and free,
And could not be Isa. 64. 6.
deserved at all by me.
9.
Oh! who could wish Psalm. 63. 3.
himself a thing so rare,
As to be Romans 8. 39.
hemmed in, and compast about
With boundless Ephesians. 3. 19.
love; oh! who can it declare?
Or who by Hos. 11. 4.
fathoming can find it out?
My Ephesians. 3. 19.
heart, my hand and tongue are all too weak,
Of matchless Ephesians. 2. 4.
love, to think, or write, or speak.
10.
It is through Romans 3. 20.
faith enjoyed, so excellent;
It 1 Pet. 1. 8.
comfort, and elevates on high
The saddest Romans 5. 1.
heart, and fills it with content,
Yea, it revives a Romans 8, 35. 39.
soul ready to dye.
The apprehending Romans 5. 1.
it brings joy and peace;
When it is Romans 7. 24.
clouded, then our joys decrease.
11.
Each soul that does this boundles 1 Pet. 1. 8.
joy possess,
May well be Ephesians. 3. 8.
swallowed in admiration;
And to the Romans 7. 25.
praise of God may it express,
And have Joh. 16. 22.
it in their meditation.
Well may it cause us to 2 Cor. 5. 14.
serve, fear, and love
This infinite Romans 8. 32.
Giver, ever God above.
Glory be to God on high.

The end of the second Part.
DIVINE CONSOLATIONS; OR A fountain of life and comfort. The Third Part.

Declaring that the Elect were justified from the punishment of sin by Christ,
when he was upon the Cross, and the objections against it are answered.

And that Christ alone is our life, happiness, peace, strength, comfort, joy,
and all perfection.

Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin, Romans 4. 8. Being
justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. Who can lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect, Romans 8. 33. For they are without fault before the Throne of God, Rev.
14. 5. By Samuel Richardson.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons in Aldersgate-stre^te. 1649.

To all that love Jesus Christ in sincerity; heirs of the purchased
possession; to as many of them as this shall come; understanding to know, and
love to embrace the truth.
Holy and beloved in the Lord;
BEhold I present to your view Christ crucified, which is the sum and substance
of the Gospel: The Priesthood of Christ, and the sufficiency of his Sacrifice
to save, is the main thing I contend for against the Papists, who say, Christ's
sacrifice is not sufficient without their sacrifice; Charity saves, says one;
without good works, no salvation, says another; a third says; that Christ's
sacrifice is not sufficient for our Salvation without believing; that believing
saves; and that without believing we cannot be saved: Ye see, they all urge a
necessity of something for salvation, besides Christ's Sacrifice, without which
something, they say, we cannot be saved; so that they de^y the sufficiency of
Christ's sacrifice to save, and so deny that Christ does save; for those that he
saves, he saves by his sacrifice: Also if Christ and something else saves us,
Christ saves us not; for he is no Savior, if he be but a part of a Savior;
therefore in adding something to Christ's sacrifice, they deny the sufficiency
of Christ's sacrifice; so that their opinions are dishonorable to Christ;
therefore as we tender the honor of Jesus Christ, we are to hate and abhor
them, being enemies to the Cross of Christ, and therefore abominable.

If we consider how generally these are received, and scarce contradicted by
any, that believing, and Christ and believing together saves us: sure it should
greatly stir us up, and provoke us to contend for the sufficiency of Christ's
sacrifice, though our contending should cost us our lives.

There is no truth more honorable to Christ, nor of greater conc^rament to his
glory, and our salvation, then this is; take away any thing of the sufficiency
of Christ's sacrifice, and our salvation is destroyed; what a dishonor were it
to God to send Christ to save us, and yet for him not to save, and not to be
sufficient to save: there is no opinion in the world, that my soul does more
abhor, nor against which I would more freely lay down my life for then this.

This Treatise tends to exalt Christ alone, self is not exalted, nor nothing
of man; this doctrine puts a man upon a whole denial of himself, because man
and his best works are not only wholly shut out in this work, but trampled
upon in respect of Justification and Salvation: This doctrine strips us naked
from all things else but Christ, it is not I and my works, nor Christ and my
works together that saves me, but Jesus Christ alone is he that saves us from
our sins, etc.

Many want this light: desire and hope of doing good, moved and encouraged me
to take pains herein, and send it into the world; I have no prejudice against
the persons of any, nor would I have any think ill of them; in many things we
sin all, in one kind or other; its in vain to expect better so long as we
are in this world: neither d^e I know that I take any pleasure in writing
against any, no further then I think my self bound in conscience to witness
to the truth, and then especially when others omit it: Mr Gerees Book against
D^ctor Crispe has been published above four years, and no answer given to it
by any; neither have I heard that any other has given any answer to the other
four Treatises, the most of them have been published several years: O ye
that love the truth, is it a small matter to you for Christ to be dishonored,
and his truth condemned? Do ye not regard what violence is offered to the
sufficiency of Christ's sacrifice? if yea, why are ye so silent, as if there
were none to answer: God complains; None pleads for truth, Isa. 59. 4. It
might grieve us to consider that others take more pains for error, then we
do for truth; Can we say, we love the Lord, and his truth, as we should, and
not lay it to heart? In these cold days, the love of many, too many waxes
cold to God and man; many profess love to Christ, yet few love him, as will
appear ere long; for the knowledge and practice of the truth shall be slighted
and hated; there shall be found but a very few that will own it. The more dark
or doubtful any thing appears, the more narrowly search the Scriptures, and
consider them, the benefits will answer the pains: set aside partiality,
prejudice, and the opinions of men; neither receive nor refuse without
sufficient trial; pray to God to reveal his truth to thee: I trust the Lord
that has directed this to thee, will bless it to thee; so as thou shall
praise and honor him all thy days; which is the desire of

Samuel Richardson.

To Collonell Robert Tichborne, Mr. Moris Thompson, Merchant; Mr. William
Packer, Captain; and Mr. Methusalah Turner, Linen Draper,
Fullness of joy, happiness and glory. Much honored and worthy Sirs;
CHrist and him crucified, is the best and most desirable object that can be
presented unto your view: what can be better or more desirable; this is our
happiness and glory, and our chiefest joy. Joy sweet, satisfying, unmixt,
pure, spiritual, glorious, full, and eternal; there is no sweetness like to
this, of Christ dying for my sins; his suffering for us the whole punishment
of sin, so that God will not impute sin to that soul for whom Christ dyed,
therefore we are for ever freed from the punishment of sin. The more we know
this truth, the more sweet is Christ to us, and the more fixed on Christ our
hearts will be, the more we love and obey him, and contend for the truth once
delivered to the Saints. This subject is love, the best love, which is most
sweet and full of divine consolation. In the view thereof I trust you shall
find some sweetness: and if you had not enjoyed this sweetness, you could
not have sented it forth so naturally, fully and sweetly to me, as you have
done. I have great cause to be thankful to you, and to God for you: your love
to me has caused me to dedicate this small Treatise to you, as a testimony of
my hearty thankfulness to you for your love: the Lord bless you and keep you
from all evil; So he prays that remains

Your much obliged, Samuel Richardson.

Of the Justification of a Sinner before GOD.
Rev. 1. 5.
Unto him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in bis own blood.
THese words declare the virtue, fruit, and efficacy of Christ's blood, and the
privileges and happiness of the Elect by it.

The word our, comprehends the Elect, as appears John 17. 29. and 6 37. etc.
Romans 11. 17. Acts 20. 26.

By the word sin here, we are not to understand the being of sin, for sin has
still a being in the Saints; Paul says, Sin dwells in me, Romans 7. 17. see 1 John 1. 8. In many things we sin all; nor are we to understand it of the
pollution and defilement of sin, for sin is as filthy or and as abominable as
ever, and as defiling ^he ever; therefore by sin we are to understand o^ the
charge, curse, wrath, the condemnation of sin, viz. the whole punishment of sin.

The word washed, is a borrowed word from washing the dirt and filth from
cloths, etc. so here washed us from our sins, separated and cleansed us from
sin, viz. the punishment of sin.

This him that has washed us is Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 5.

The word blood, comprehends his death, and something else, as appears, Heb. 9
22. 2^. He offered himself through the eternal Spirit, 1 John 1. 14. The life
and substance of all lay hid under this veil, that is to say his flesh, Heb.
10. 26. By virtue of this union, there was such a worth in Christ's blood as was
able to do it, 1 Pet. 1. 19. with Acts 20. 28.

Has washed us in his own blood; which declares that it is done, and therefore
its not a doing, nor to be done; for he did it in his own blood, that is, when
he shed his blood; his own blood, that is, the blood of his body; by his death
he did wash and cleanse us from our sins, that is, from the punishment of them.

The cause why he washed us from our sins, that was his love, which was in
himself; nothing in us, or done by us, did cause him to y dye for us.

Doct. That Jesus Christ by his death upon the Cross, he fully freed his from
sin ( that is to say) the punishment of sin for ever, as fully as if they had
never sinned.

For proo^e, consider these Arguments or Reasons drawn from Scripture, and I
shall be the (...) large in it, because there is much consolation in it: also
it is denied by many, who ascribe our Justification from sin to believing, etc.

For from the Scriptures I thus reason.

Argu (...) I^ Jesus Christ has suffered for our sins, then he has suffered
the whole punishment of sin; if so, then we are freed from the punishment of
sin; and if he freed us not from that, his suffering for us was ineffectuall,
and he freed us not from any thing at all; for there was nothing we were liable
unto, but the punish^ent of sin.

But Christ suffered for us, for our sins; the just suffered for the unjust,
1 Pet. 3. 18, 19. He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5. 21. He offered himself for
the errors of the people, Heb. 9. 7. The punishment of our sin was death; In
the day* thou earest thereof, thou shall dye, Genesis 2. 17, Christ tasted death,
and underwent the same. Heb. 2. 9. He gave himself for our sins, Ephesians 2. He
laid down his life for ours, Joh. 10. 15. Christ shed his blood for the
remission of sin, Mat. 26. 28. Therefore it was sufficient for the remission
of sin; if it be remitted, the punishment is taken away; if his life was not
sufficient for ours, his precious blood sufficient to satisfy for all our
sins, 1 Pet. 1. 19. to what purpose did he die for us? The law said, Cursed
is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of
the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. So that we were under the curse, nor liable to
it; the curse was the punishment of sin, Christ to free us from it he was made
a curse for us. Gal. 3. 13, 14. He that is hanged is accursed of God, Deuteronomy. 21.
23. He bare the punishment, that we should not bear it; He bare our griefs,
and carried our sorrows; he was stricken smitten, and afflicted; he was
wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement
of our peace was laid upon him, etc. Isa. 53. He bare our sins. viz. (the
punishment of them) in his own body on the tree, 1 Pet. 2. 24. So that Christ's
payment of our debt is our discharge; for by the law of God and man, if the
debt be paid the debtor is freed as fully as if he had never ought any thing
(for Justice can require no more then a full payment) if my debt be paid, it
matters not whether I paid it or another, so it be paid, does not he to whom it
is due, reckon he is paid when he has received it: if he be asked, is not such
a one in your debt? his answer is no; I am paid, he owes me nothing, and my
book is crossed.

But if you ask the debtor, are not you in such a ones debt? it may be he will
answer yes; to whom answer may be made, you are mistaken, you owe him nothing,
therefore you are not in his debt, your surety has paid it, and I asked your
creditor, and he told me all is paid, and you ought him nothing, and that his
book is cancelled, crossed, etc. Says the debtor, if it be so, I owe him
nothing, I did not know so much before, neither the creditor nor my surety did
not tell me that my debt was paid, therefore I thought it had not been paid
Will not the debtor be glad, rejoice, and triumph, and say, I am glad my debt
is paid, I was not able to pay, I was afraid to be cast into prison; but now I
know I owe him nothing, I am not afraid of any thing he can do to me now my
debt is paid; its so in this case; Remission of sin could not be given before
Christ's death but in reference to this price, Heb. 9. 15. In all their
sacrifices Christ was presented slain, to teach, that in his blood is
remission, and without his blood no remission.

For the sins of the Elect that were past before Christ's death, God was
content to trust Christ for payment; this is called Gods forbearance, Romans 3.
25. The debt being paid forbearance cease; He was made a Priest to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people, Heb. 2. 16, 17. We were by his
death reconciled; and since it is declared to us before we believe it.

Christ suffered for us without any act of our own, yea without our consent or
knowledge of it, and he then justified his, that he might have all the glory of
our salvation.

Argu. 2. If Christ has saved us and redeemed us, then he has saved and
redeemed us from the punishment of sin, else from what are we saved; but Christ
is he that has saved us, 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. He gave himself to redeem us from
all iniquity, Titus 2. 14. with Ephesians 5. 2. Gal. 1. 4 Heb. 7. 27. To be redeemed
from iniquity, is to be redeemed from the punishment of sin: the slaying of
Christ was our redemption, Rev* 5. 9. Redemption and forgiveness of sin is
one, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 7. 14. Remission and Redemption is the taking away the
blame and punishment of sin. When he was cut off he made an end of sin, Dan. 9.
24, 2^, 26, 27. with Isa. 53. 7, 8, 9. Joh. 10. 10. 15. To make an end of
sin, is to make an end of the punishment of sin, which was removed in one
day, Zach. 3 9. When Christ dyed, then the hour of that day was come, Joh. 17.
14 Joh. 1. 29. So that ever since that day and hour, the punishment of our
iniquities have been removed from us; He took away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, Heb. 9. 26. We we^e reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans
5. 9, 10. Therefore ever since his death we have been reconciled, before Christ
entered the heavens, he had obtained an eternal Redemption for u^, Heb. 9. 12.
24. Eternal life promised, 1 John 2. 15. 1 John 1. 2. 2 Cor. 5, 6. 8. Phil. 1.
23, 24.

Argu. 3. If nothing can take away sin but Christ, then no sin from the
beginning to the end of the world shall ever be taken away, but what he then
took away by his death; but nothing else but Christ's death could take away
sin; the blood of Bulls and Goats could never take away sin; the Priests by all
their offerings could never take away sin, Heb. 10. 11. Our prayers, tears,
nor any work of righteousness we could do, could not do it, Titus 3. 5.
Christ's believing could not do it (much less our believing) if it could, why
did he dye? He took away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 20. The
offering of the body of Jesus took it away once for all, Heb. 9. 15. 26. and
10. 17, 18. 1 John 1. 7. Our sins were too heavy a burden for us to bear,
Psalm. 38. 4. He was mighty to save, therefore able to bear them, Psalm. 89. 19.
Therefore the Lord was pleased to lay on him the iniquity of us all, yea the
punishment of them all was laid upon Christ, Isa. 53. 6. and so saved us from
the punishment of them; therefore Christ is called the Author of salvation,
Heb. 5. 9. because he is the author of our freedom from the punishment of sin,
and the means of salvation through or by Jesus Christ, because it was through
him and by him effected, Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. Mat. 1. 21. He came into the
world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Therefore when he was in the world he did
save his from their sins, else he lost the end of his coming. He is called
Salvation it self, Isa. 49. 6. Because he alone has saved us without us;
without our believing or works he has fully and wholly saved us; he is no
half Savior; he says, My own arm has brought salvation, Isa. 63. Therefore
its not now to bring, because he has saved us from the punishment of sin;
for he bore our sins, and carried them away, Isa 53. 4, 5. with Lev. 26. 21.
If he had not then freed us from the punishment of sin, Christ had not exceeded
the Priests under the law and their offerings, but had bin as very a shadow as
they were Lev. 16. 30 with Heb. 10 4, 5, 10, 11. Col. 2. 17.

Argu. 4. If the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, ^oh. 1. 29. 1 John
1. 7. then not any thing ^lse does not, nor cannot cleanse us from any sin. Some
weakly conceive, Christ has been taking away sin this sixteen hundred
years, and yet this work is still to do; this is contrary to Zach. 3. 9. Say
some, can sin be taken away, and in us too? I answer; yes; in a several
consideration they have sin, and they are free from sin; they have sin, 1 John 1
8. 10. they are charged with sin, Jam. 5. 17. Gal. 2. 11, 12, 13, 24. yet they
are free from all charge, Romans 8. 33. they are free from all sin, Song 4. 7. 1 John 4. 17. they cannot sin, 1 John 3. 5. 5. We speak the wisdom of God in a
mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. But few understand this mystery, it is so great.

Argu, 5. If Christ's righteousness is sufficient to free us from the
punishment of sin, and his righteousness is ours, then we are freed from
the punishment of sin: but Christ's righteousness is sufficient, as appears
2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ is ours, therefore his righteousness is ours; for they
are inseparable: This is his name that they shall call him the Lord [our]
Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. Therefore neither believing, nor our works, cannot
free us from the punishment of sin.

6 Argu. Those that are without fault, they are not liable to any punishment of
sin; but we are so; for they are without fault before the throne of God, Rev.
14. 5. Its an act of Injustice to charge one to be guilty of that which he is
free of, but more unjust to punish him; he that is free from sin, is an
innocent man without fault, ought not to be punished.

1. Christ is without sin, 1 John 5. 5. and as he is, so are we in this world,
1 John 4. 17. We are fa^re Song 2. 10. Thou art all fair my love, there is no
spot in thee, Song 4. 7. That is, unforgiven.

2. We are perfect; We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6.
Just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. Luke 6. ^0. Christ was made perfect through
suffering, Heb. 2. 10. Then were we made perfect by it, for what he was made
he was made for u^, 2 Cor ^ 21.

3. We are righteous; We are made the righteousness of God [in him,] 2 Cor. 5.
21 R^m. His works are all perfect, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. Therefore we are perfectly and
everlastingly righteous; By one offering he has for ever perfected us, Heb.
10. 14. We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus once for
all, Heb. 10. 10. 14.

4. We are one with Christ; He that sanctifies, and he that is sanctified, are
all of one, Heb. 2. 10. Both in one body, Ephesians. 2. 16. Ephesians. 1. 16. Phil. 3. 15.
1 Cor. 16. 15, 17. In the body of his flesh we were presented holy,
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, Col. 1. 22 Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. To
be presented holy in his fight, is to be cleared in his sight, Gal. 3. 10. with
Romans 3. 20. To be without fault, to be holy, just and righteous, to be perfect,
and to be free from sin, and to be free from the punishment of sin, is one
thing, therefore we are freed from the punishment of sin.

7 Argu. Those that are freed from sin, they are freed from the punishment of
sin; but we are freed from sin, Romans 6. 7 and 7. 6, 7, 8. We are freed from
the law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. Therefore we are freed from the
punishment of sin, else how are we freed, and from what: Christ says, Lo I
come to do thy will O God; that will was to take away sin, Heb. 10. 5. 4.
Christ made me free, Gal. 5. 1. His death paid for the freedom I now enjoy,
Rom 7. 24, 25. We are called Saints, holy, etc. But if we were not freed from
sin, how are we holy? what kind of Saints are we? That which freeth us from
sin, is not in me, but something in him, Romans 8. 2.

8 Argu. If Christ has purged away our sins, then they are gone, we are freed
from them, from the punishment of sin; but Christ has purged our sins away; He
by himself purged our sins, Heb. 1. 3. As for our iniquities, thou shall purge
them away, Psalm. 65. 3. When he died, by his death he fulfilled this prophecy,
to purge away sin, viz. the punishment of sin, therefore he has freed us from
the punishment of sie.

9 Argu. If our sins cannot be found, then they cannot be laid to our charge;
but they cannot be found; Thus says the Lord, the iniquity of Israel shall be
sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not
be found, Jer. 50. 20. Therefore we are freed from the punishment of sin.

10 Argu. If we are not in our sins, then we are just and righteous; but we are
not in our sins, because Christ is risen: To say we are in our sins, is to
deny Christ to be risen, 1 Cor 15. 17. which is to deny him to be the Christ the
Son of God, and to make him to be a false witness, Mat. 20. 19. and 16. 21.
Joh 18. 32 Acts 2. 25. and 24. 24. He took away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, therefore we are not liable to the punishment of sin.

11. Argu. If not any thing can be laid to the charge of Gods Elect, then they
are not liable to any punishment of sin; but not any thing can be laid to the
charge of Gods Elect, Romans 8. 33. To be free from sin, and to be free from
charge, and to be freed from the punishment of sin, is one thing; they that are
justified by his blood, they are justified from all sin, and therefore stand
not chargeable to him for any sin. So that ever since the Elect were reconciled
to God by Jesus Christ, their sins were never imputed to them, as appears 2
Cor. 5. 18, 19. They have sin, but its not imputed.

12 Argu. If Christ has delivered us from the curse, then we are not liable
to the punishment of sin, for the curse and punishment of sin is one thing,
Gal. 3. 10. But we are delivered from the curse, Gal. 3. 13, 14. No curse can
come nigh our dwelling place, Psalm. 91. 10. Christ's suffering for us, is as
sufficient for us as if we had suffered for us in our own persons, he by it had
made a full and perfect satisfaction: therefore we are freed from the
punishment of sin.

13 Argu. If there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ, then there is
no punishment due to them; for punishment and condemnation are one thing; but
there is no condemnation to us, Romans 8. 1. with Ephesians. 1. 4. Therefore we are
freed, etc. for our sins are not imputed to us, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Romans 4. 8.
Therefore we are not liable to any condemnation for them.

14 Argu. If Christ has delivered us from the wrath to come, then we are not
liable to any punishment of sin; for wrath and punishment are one, Isa. 27. 4.
But Christ is he who has delivered us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10.
If it be so, then we are not liable to any, then we have no cause to fear any
punishment to come, because to us there is none to come.

15 Argu. If that which was against us was nailed to his Cross, then the
punishment of our sins was nailed to his Cross, for that and nothing but that
was against us; but that which was against us was nailed to his Cross, Col. 2.
14. Therefore never since his death there has not been any thing against us.
When I look into the book of Justice, I see all is paid, crossed, cancelled;
before God we were acquitted and set free by Christ, and are ever so, Heb. 10.
14.

16 Argu. If our peace and reconciliation was made by the blood of his Cross,
then ever since his death our peace and reconciliation has been made; but our
peace and reconciliation was made by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20, 21,
22. If Christ has made our peace for us, we cannot make our peace with God;
Christ he is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. If he was before we were, our peace was
before we were. Therefore we are freed from the punishment of sin.

17 Argu. If our sins are blotted out, then they are not chargeable; but they
are blotted out, Isa. 44. 22, 23. Therefore we are freed from the punishment
of sin.

18 Argu. If the enmity that was against us be flaine and abolished, then we
are freed from it; but the enmity that was against us was slain and abolished
in his flesh, Ephesians. 2. 15, 16. Col. 1. 20. Therefore ever since his death it
has been abolished: the enmity that was against us is nothing else but the
curse, wrath, which is the punishment of sin, if it be slain it cannot hurt
us; if it be abolished, it is not; we cannot meet with nor suffer by that
which is not; for that which is not, has no being; therefore we are for ever
freed from the punishment of sin.

19. Argu. If God will not remember our sins, he will not punish us for them;
but he says. He will not remember our sins no more, Isa. 43. 25. Jer. 31.
34. Heb. 8. 12. God is not capable of any forgetfulness; what he ever knew, he
ever shall; all that ever was, is, or shall be, he ever knew, and ever shall.
He is only wise, Romans 16. 27. He cannot know more nor less then he does: its
only a borrowed expression; its a similitude the Lord express (...) it, so to
satisfy us as if God should say, as that which is not remembered cannot be
imputed, it cannot be charged, nor punished; so certainly I will not charge any
sin to you, nor punish you for them, no more then if I had forgot it, and never
remember any such thing; for that which is not remembered, cannot be punished:
so his removing our sins far from us, as the East is from the West, Psalm.
130. The casting them into the Sea, Mica 7. 19. The casting them behind his
back, Isa. 33. 18. The carrying them away into a Land not inhabited in the
Wilderness, Lev. 16. 22. His covering them, Psalm. 32. 2. Making an end of sin,
Dan. 9. Blotting them out, Isa. 44. 22, 23. These and the like expressions of
God, are to satisfy and assure us, that he will never charge us with them, or
impute them to us, or punish us for them, which is enough to satisfy us, that
we shall never suffer any punishment for them.

20 Argu. If we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, then we may ever
have boldness; for that is the most dreadful and terrible day of all; but we
may have boldness in the day of Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. Then all is paid, and
nothing can be laid to our charge. Tell me, what boldness could we have in the
day of Judgment, if any thing could be laid to our charge, if all were not
paid, if we were not freed and delivered from the punishment of sin?

21. If we are blessed, then are we freed from the punishment of sin; if we
were not freed from that, we were in a miserable condition; but we are blessed,
Psalm. 32. 1. and 1. 1.

22 Argu. Those that are blessed, shall never be cursed; but we are blessed;
Thou shall not curse the people, for they are blessed, Number. 22. 12. see 23. 8.
1 Chronicles. 17. 27. Psalm. 115. 15. Isa. 61. 9. There is nothing but a blessing to
come, even the sure mercies of David, Gal. 3. 14. Heb. 6. 16, 17. Therefore we
are for ever freed from the punishment of sin.

23 Argu. Those that are blessed, heaven is provided for, and they shall be
saved; but the Elect are blessed, and shall be saved; Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, Mat. 25. 34. If we are sure to
be saved, we are sure we shall escape the punishment of sin; our salvation is
certain, as appears Romans 8. 39. Therefore our freedom from the punishment of
sin is certain. The Papists say, to deny that our good works save us, is a
doctrine of liberty; so say some, to say all our sins, past, present, and to
come are pardoned, is a doctrine of liberty to the flesh. We answer; the flesh
will abuse all that is of God; God says, they are pardoned, Isa. 42. 1, 2.
Others say, they shall be pardoned; if they shall certainly be pardoned, will
not a corrupt heart be as bold upon that principle as this, seeing the (...) is
the same, 1 John 2. 1. Most we tea^h that the Elect may be damned men, and that
men may fall from the love of God, to keep men in awe.

24 Argu. If the Law was not to last but till Christ came, Gal 3. 19. Then
Christ put an end to the Law, To. 10. 4. The Law being then taken away, Ephesians. 2.
15, 16. then never since the Elect have not been under the Law, and therefore
not under the punishment of it; for when the Law is put to an end, condemnation
cease; No Law, no transgression, no punishment, Deuteronomy. 27. 4. We are
delivered from the Law, Romans 7. 6. God sent his Son to redeem them that are
under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Therefore we are not liable to any punishment of
it; I am not under the Law of the King of Spain, therefore I am not liable to
any punishment for not observing it.

25 Argu. If we be dead to the Law, then we are not tied to observe the Law;
But we are dead to the Law by the body of Christ, Romans 7. 1. to 7. We are dead
with Christ, Romans 6. 8. Then the curse of sin and death was taken away by his
death, and therefore never since his death the Elect have not been under wrath,
nor liable to it, 1 These. 1. 10.

26 Argu. If the Law has nothing to say to us, then we are not under the
command of it; but the Law has nothing to say to us; Now we know that
whatsoever the Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, Romans 3. 19.
We are not under the Law, but under grace, Romans 6. 14. Christ and not our
believing delivered us from under the Law: ^f we were in our sins, the Law
would have enough to say to us, Gal. 3. 10. Deuteronomy. 27. 4. Gal. 5. 23. and 4. 26.
31. Therefore we are freed from the punishment of sin.

The Law is holy, just, and good, Romans 3. 31. the righteousness of the Law
remains, and every one ought to frame his life according to the same; we
receive not the Law as given by Moses, but as given by Christ; he gives the
same Law for his to obey, though not upon the same terms; though we have
nothing to do to be saved, yet we have something to do for his glory, Joh.
15. 8. We are commanded to be careful to maintain good works, Titus 3. 8.
For any to say we are not to observe the ten Commandments, called the (Moral
Law) ten words, is abominable; for if I am not tied to observe it, I sin not if
I do contrary to it, its no marvel if such be abominable in their hearts and
lives: I grant we are freed from the curse and punishment of it, but not from
the things contained in it; the Law concerns our conversation, though not our
salvation. Be ye holy in all manner of conversation; this is the Saints prize;
ye that love the Lord hate evil, and abhor to company with such as slight
the commands of God; see the Saints daily duty, part the second.

Christ has a yoke, and we ought to put it on, Mat. 11. 29. Mat. 14. 23. 31.
Its easy and a sweet mercy to observe it.

The power of divine love will sweetly and violently draw the soul to obey
Christ; see Titus 2. 11. and 3. 8.

Christ says; If any man love me, he will keep my words, Joh. 14. 23. and 15.
16. Ephesians. 2. 10. Such as love Christ, they desire and endeavor with all their
souls to obey him.

For such as love sin, and take liberty to sin, such as turn the grace, the
love of God into wantonness, and say they are saved, etc. they are liers, they
mock themselves and others, they have need to consider 1 John 1. 6. Gal. 5.
13. to 23. and 6. 5. 7, 8. Romans 2. 17. etc. they are the basest among men; its
a certain truth, as a man believes, so he obeys; as his faith is, so are his
works good or bad. Observe and take heed of those that speak for liberty for
the flesh; say to such, thou art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee.

When Christ comes into the soul* all things are become new, old things are
done away, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Fire shall as soon cease to burn, as such shall
cease to obey God.

27 Argu. That which is for our profit, that is a mercy to us, and no
punishment for sin, but Gods chastisements and corrections sent to us are for
our profit, Heb. 12. 10. They are to correct our injustice, but not to satisfy
Justice; they are to amend us, not to pay God; they are to exercise the fruits
of the Spirit in us, not payments: without them we neither know God, nor
others, nor our selves: they imbitter sin unto us; we need them to turn us
from sin to God, seeing we are the better for them, how are they punishments
to us?

28 Argu. That which comes from the love of God, that is sweet, that is not a
punishment for sin which is from anger; But whom the Lord loves, he
chastises, Heb. 12. 6, 7. 8. Gods chastisements are love tokens; all Gods
dispensations, bitter or sweet, are a portion of love to his; crosses and
afflictions I receive as love: and my escape from them (if God so orders it)
I receive as love: hunger, cold, and nakedness, pain, grief, and weariness,
though in themselves they are punishments, yet they are not so to us; if they
be curses and wrath to the Elect, how are we delivered from the curse, Gal. 3.
13, 14. and wrath, 1 These. 1. 10. Therefore to affi^me that we are punished
for sin, is to deny we are delivered from the curse, which is contrary to Gal.
3 13, 14.

29 Argu. If they be blessed that God corrects, thou they are no punishments
of sin, but blessed is the man that thou chastisest, Psalm. 94. 12. Our God
turned the curse into a blessing, Nehe. 13. 2. Therefore they are no
punishments of sin.

30 Argu. If God by corrections teaches us, then its no punishment, for its a
mercy to be taught; but God by corrections teaches us, Heb. 12. 9. Therefore
they are no punishments to us.

31 Argu* If all things work together for our good, Romans 8. Then all falls,
pains, diseases, crosses, afflictions, etc. do us no hurt, but work for our
good; all things work for our good, Romans 8. 28. Death it self is a mercy to
us; we die not to satisfy Justice, but to pass through it into eternal glory
provided for us: for me to dye is gain; Christ has borne the whole punishment
of my sins; There shall no evil come unto thee, Psalm. 91. 10. So that
whether I live or die, I am freed from the punishment of sin; the sting of
death is sin, now that is gone; we are saved from death, though we die; death
is an entrance into life, 1 Cor. 15. 55.

32 Argu. Those whose iniquities are pardoned, they shall never be punished for
them; but our iniquity is pardoned, Isa. 42. 1, 2. Therefore we are freed from
the punishment of sin; for that which is pardoned, is not punishable; how is it
pardoned, if we are punished for it, or liable to be punished for it: to
forgive a man his sin, and not the punishment, is as if one should say, I
forgive thee the debt, but not the payment of the debt; our sins were debts.

33 Argu. Those whose sins God has forgiven, he will not punish, if he will,
how are they forgiven; but God has forgiven the sins of his people; thou
have forgiven the iniquity of thy people; thou have covered all their sin,
Psalm. 85. 2. To forgive sin, and to cover it, is one thing; if all be
covered, there are none to cover; my happiness is not in having a few sins, or
many, but in that they are all ^orgiven, and not imputed to me, Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
We are imperfect in our selves, and action yet all our imperfectnesse is
perfectly forgiven: we are perfected for ever, that is, perfectly freed from
the punishment of sin for eve^ by the offering of himself, Heb. 10. 10. 12.
14. The righteousness of Christ avails for ever for all our sins: if the
blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin, Joh. 1. 29. then from sin, past,
present, and to come, for that is all, less is not all; as Christ by his death
satisfied for all our sins, so by one act of our faith, we are to apprehend and
believe the pardon of them, Romans 5. 11. to 24. This must needs be so, for if we
shall ever commit any sin that is not satisfied for by his sufferings, Christ
must come and suffer again, or e^^e we must perish in the unpardonable sin;
for without his blood there is no remission, ^eb. 9. 22. 26.

None can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God (...) for him; the
redemption of the soul (...). 89. 7, 8. Romans 7. 14. The cause of our being
delivered from destruction, and our eternal happiness in heaven, is ascribed
to Christ's blood, to his ransom: God says; Deliver him from going down into
the pit, for I have received a ransom, Job 33. 24. see Zach. 9. 11. Our not
being condemned, is ascribed to Christ's death; Its Christ that dyed, who now
shall condemn, Romans 8. 33, 34. Therefore Christ's ransom, his death is the
thing which delivers us from the punishment o^ sin: heaven is called our
purchased possession, Ephesians. 1. 14. All except election, and the love of God, is
attributed to Christ: We preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23.

Thus I have fully proved that Christ upon the Cross did suffer the whole
punishment of sin for all his Elect for ever: if it were not so, Christ did die
in vain, or is not a full and a complete Savior: if he suffered but part of
the punishment of sin, he had saved us but in part, and not fully and
perfectly: but Christ's dying for us, was to free us from all the punishment due
to us for sin. Christ bare all, in being made a curse for us; for what he did
bare he bare for us, and that which he has borne for us, we shall never bear:
and therefore it is a most certain truth, that all the Elect are for ever
fully freed from the whole punishment of sin; and his death is our
justification and freedom from the curse and punishment of sin; and this is no
small part of our happiness and comfort.

Use of this Doctrine.
Use 1. To exhort all that are the Lords, to ascribe their salvation to the
free love of God, and to the death of our sweet Lord Jesus Christ, and Christ
alone, and to nothing but Christ. Who was made sin for us, but Christ? 2 Cor.
5. 21 Who bare our sins in his own body, but Christ? 1 Pet. 2. 24. Who was
ordained to take away sin, but Christ? Heb. 9. 20. Who has redeemed us from
all iniquities, but Christ? Psalm. 130. 8. Titus 2. 14. Who finished
transgressions, and made an end of sin, but Christ? Deuteronomy. 9. 24. Zach. 3. 9.
Heb. 10. 4, 5. 7. Who appeared to take away sin, but Christ? 1 John 3. 5. Who
came into the world to save sinners, but Christ? 1 Timothy 1. 15. Who washed us
from our sins, and purged them away, but Christ? Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 1. 3. Who gave
himself for our sins, but Christ? Ephesians. 5. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Who was made a curse
for us, and delivered us from the curse, but Christ? Gal. 3. 13, 14. Who laid
down his life for ours, but Christ? Joh. 10. 15. Who bare our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, but Christ? Who was stricken, and smitten, afflicted, and
wounded for our transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities, but Christ?
Isa. 53. By whose stripes are we healed, but Christ's? 1 Pet. 1. 24. Who is that
just one that suffered for the unjust, but Christ? 1 Pet. 3. 18. Who made peace
for us, but Christ by the blood of his Cross, Col. 1. 20, 21. Who reconciled
us, but Christ, Romans 5. 9, 10. By what means are our trespasses forgive^, but
only by him Col. 2. 13. Who has so blotted out our sins, that they cannot be
laid to our charge, Romans 8. 33. Who could deliver us from the wrath to come,
but Christ, 1 These. 1. 10. What blood could cleanse us from all sin, but
Christ's, Joh. 1. 29. 1 John 1. 7. Who has carried away our sins, but Christ?
What could justify us, but Christ by his blood, Romans 5. 9. What could make us
complete, Col. 2. 10. and all fair, Song 2. 10. Without ^ault, Kev. 14. 5.
Without spot, Song 4. 7. and perfect us for ever, but Christ, Heb. 10. 14. What
could make us one with Christ, Heb. 2. 11. his fellows, Heb. 1. 9. and make us
the righteousness of God, but Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Who is our righteousness,
but Christ, Jer. 23. 6. Job. 33. 23. by whose obedience we are made righteous,
Romans 5. What ransom could deliver us, but Christ's, Zach. 9. 11. Job 33. 24.
What could make us free from the law of sin, and death, but Christ, Romans 8. 2,
3. What could make us free but Christ, Gal. 5. 1. Who could present us holy to
God, but Christ, Col. 1. 20. Who brought salvation, but Christ? Who ^ought our
battle, got the victory, and delivered us from all our enemies, but Christ,
Luke 1. 68. What Redeemer and Savior have we but Christ, who is all in all.
And seeing all is attributed to his blood, 1 Cor. 1. 18. 18. 23. we may not
attribute it to believing; justification and salvation are proper only to
Christ, to his blood to effect it; to attribute it to believing, as some do,
is to rob Christ to give it to believing. And if the preaching of Christ in
wisdom of words, made the Cross of Christ of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17. this
opinion of theirs does much more, Gal. 5. 9.

2. Prise this doctrine, contend earnestly for it, Jude 3. Be content to suffer
for it.

3. Fetch all thy comfort from Christ in this truth, meditate on this truth,
and endeavor that others may enjoy it with thee.

4. Think nothing too much for him, that has done so much for you; walk
holily, as it becomes the Gospel; obey Christ's commands; tremble at the
thought of giving way to sin, least ye dishonor Christ, and his truth, and
open the mouths of the wicked against the people of God.

Of the excellency and benefit of this Doctrine.
1. There is no doctrine in Religion more honorable to the Lord Jesus Christ,
then this is, this is the doctrine that gives all to Christ, and exalts him
alone, that God may be all in all: this doctrine cries nothing but Christ; for
he has done all for us, and is all unto us, Col. 3. 11. The maine thing the
Apostle desired to know, was nothing but Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

2. This doctrine most magnifieth the free love of God in that he has loved
us, justified and saved us freely: many are not able to behold this light, it
is so great; as when the Sun shines in its strength, weak eyes are not able
to bear it, only the Eagle can behold it; so none but the Eagle-eyed
Christians are able to behold the Son of Righteousness shining in his glory;
therefore few receive it: the Prophet speaking of this doctrine, says; Who
has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed, Isa.
53. 1. So that unless the power of God causes the soul to see this truth,
there is no believing it, men are ignorant of the fullness of the perfection of
Christ's righteousness, therefore they condemn it, and go about to establish
their own righteousness, Romans 10. 3. They reproach this doctrine, (thus they
served Christ, and his Apostles, see Luke 23. 13, 14. Joh. 17. 12. and 10. 20.
23. Jer. 20. 8, 9.) and darken this truth, instead of clearing it:
over-confidence of men's knowing truth, forestalls and deceives many, and keeps
them from the truth.

3. This doctrine most abaseth man, in that he has not, nor could not do any
thing in the world to procure these things, I deserved it not, nor procured it
not, nor had any hand in the doing of it; God will have it so, that no flesh
should glory, 1 Cor. 1. 29. That God may be all, and man nothing: I be nothing,
1 Cor. 12. 11. As the light of the Sun puts out the^ light of the fire, as
not enduring any light but its self; So when Christ the Son of
Righteousness appears in the soul, Mal. 4. 2. Gal. 1. 16. Out-goeth all fire
and candlelight, not one spark is left to walk in, nor to comfort the heart
withal, Isa. 50. 10, 11. It is no matter, let it go, Christ is a better light
and heat, strength, and comfort, and shines mes^ gloriously when alone.

4. This is the doctrine that causes the Saints to sin less, Gal 5. 16. Sin
is desired so^ the sweetness and pleasure of it: in the wa^ of satisfaction
men go to sin, but being sati^fied are content without it; here is swee^nesse
and satisfaction; oh how it satisfies the soul. The more the soul is filled
with this doctrine, the less it desires sin; the less w^ desire sin, the
less we sin; lo now there is (...) better sweetness and satisfaction come in
place^ Song 1.

5. This is the doctrine that makes the Saints most spiritual, and thankful,
this (...) us with joy, and gladness, praise, and thankfulness to God, and to
glory in him, and (...) call Christ by his right name; This is his na^ that
they shall call him the Lord [our] righteousness Jer. 23. 6. Job 33. 23.

6. This doctrine causes the soul to b^ most serviceable to God, and to serve
him free^ly and cheerfully; Being delivered, we ser^ him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 73. Until men know they are
delivered, they cannot serve God freely; but the contrary doctrine fills men
with slavish fears, to do duties to escape hell, and get heaven.

7. This is the doctrine that will hold when all fails, because it is built
upon the truth: The Gospel is the word of truth, Col. 1. 5. Therefore this
doctrine we embrace.

8. This is the doctrine that holds up the soul, and keeps it from sinking and
fainting in the sight and sense of sin; this doctrine removes many
objections, which otherwise would trouble and discourage us; this doctrine
says, there is nothing to pay, all is paid, it cost Christ dear, that it
might cost us nothing; its not of works, nor according to our works, Romans 10.
6. and 4. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 1. 9. Our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3, 4.
The answer of a good conscience is; O God, thy Son has dyed for me;
satisfaction is made; what more can thou require of me? O the unsearchable
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8.

9. This is the doctrine that raises the soul when fallen, to rise and
return to God, Heb ^0. Not any thing can keep the soul from utter despair,
and ^aise it when fallen but Christ's satisfaction, and the unchangeablenesse of
the everlasting love of God, Jer. 31. 3. Tell me, what peace or comfort could
we have, if we were not freed from the punishment, of sin: I see not how one
can be wholly ignorant of this doctrine, and be a Christian.

10. This is the doctrine that is full of sweetness and life, behold a living
fountain that can never be drawn dry, it ever flows full of sweetness; lo
here is strong consolation, full of spirit and life for the soul to drink
freely in at all times, to refresh it self withal; here is peace, security,
consolation, joy, contentment, in that not any thing can be laid to our charge;
our sins shall be remembered no more; no more, no more; oh what a fountain of
consolation is here; what marrow and fatness is like to this, if my soul be
deserted, and faith fail, yet God is my God, I change often, but he never; when
I cannot apprehend him, I am comprehended of him; Christ is the same,
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. I am the Lord, I change not, Mal.
3. 6. He that understands not this doctrine, can enjoy no true, sweet, solid,
settled comfort: in the right understanding of this doctrine, Christ is rightly
understood, and our souls enjoy such marrow and fatness, which glads our
hearts, and keeps our souls from fainting in a world of misery and trouble.

Seeing the Lord has caused us to know and enjoy this truth, we have cause
always to rejoice and sing praises to him; I will give thanks, and sing
praises to his Name, Psalm. 18. 49. see Acts 16. 25.

A Song that JESUS CHRIST is all in all to his.
1.
CHrist is his 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20.
Fathers chiefest choice,
And I in Ephesians. 1. 4.
him the very same;
Why should I not in Phil. 4. 4.
him rejoice?
Who am secured from all Romans 8. 38, 39.
blame.
2.
In God through Phil. 3. 3.
Christ, the Saints rejoice,
When they know they in Phil. 3. 9.
Christ are found;
Through Psalm. 61. 1, 2.
Christ they with a joyful voice,
In singing do his Psalm. 18. 49.
praises sound.
3.
I now in Ezekiel. 16. 14.
Christ, have beauty bright,
I am complete in Col. 2. 10.
him alone;
And clothed in his Rev. 19. 8.
Robe that is white,
In Col. 2. 3. 10.
him I have perfection.
4.
In me God does, through Mat. 3. 17.
Christ delight,
In God through 1 Cor. 3. 21.
Christ, I a right have;
Through Heb. 10. 19.
Christ I may come in his sight,
And needful things, may Mat. 21. 22.
ask and have.
5.
My Gal. 4. 7. 1 John 1. 1, 2.
privileges are full large,
Through Christ my Mat. 1. 21. Psalm. 2. ^.
Savior and King;
We only under^^ the Romans 5. 8.
charge,
Me to Ephesians. 2. 13.
redeem, and me home bring.
6.
Christ is my Joh. 1. 4, 5. Col. 3. 4.
light, my life, and strength,
My Phil. 4. 13. Acts 3. 22, 23.
Prophet, Priest, and King is he;
My Heb. 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 22.
husband, head, and Savior,
O^ non^ but Luke 2. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 19.
Jesus Christ for me.
7.
Christ is 1 Cor. 1* 30.
Sanctification,
And Col. 1. 20.
Reconciliation,
And all my Romans 15. 5.
Consolation;
For he u my Mat. 1. 21.
Salvation.
8.
He is my Isa. 42. 6.
Covenant, and peace,
Mediator, and Ephesians. 2. 14.
Advocate;
And he is my Luke 5. 31.
Physician,
And the Ephesians. 1. 7.
forgiveness of my sin.
9.
And my Sanctuary always,
He is my Psalm. 23. 1.
She heard and my stay;
He is my Isa. 9. 6.
Counselor always;
In 1 Pet. 1. 8.
him I have Psalm. 16. 11.
fullness of joy.
10.
He is a Isa. 9. 6.
Father unto me,
And Phil. 4. 6. 19.
supply continually;
And my Ephesians. 2. 20.
foundation is he,
And he Luke 2. 32.
alone is my glory.
11.
I have no hope, 1 Timothy 1. 4.
comfort, or joy,
But in swe^t Psalm. 71. 23, 24. Psalm. 71. 15, 16.
Jes^s all the day;
He is my sweet 1 Pet. 1. 1. 8.
del^ght always,
For all things else will soon Eccle. 1. 1, 2.
decay.
12.
What is it Psalm. 4. 6.
worldly men desire?
But beauty, Luke 12. 19.
riches, and fine fare;
With pleasure, ease and Luke 12. 19.
rich attire,
Things which the Psalm. 49. 6.
world in them do share.
13.
And what these Psalm. 49. 6.
things to them can be,
The same is Phil. 3. 8.
Christ to me and more;
And what thy best Romans 10. 3.
works are to thee,
Better to me, is Phil. 3. 7, 8.
Christ my store.
14.
Should my Romans 7. 18.
performances grow slack,
And should I Joh. 15. 5.
dead and lumpish be;
Or should Mark. 15. 34.
God seem to turn his back,
My part in Heb. 2. 11.
Christ shall comfort me.
15.
If my Romans 7. 23, 24.
corruptions increase,
And sin should seem to Romans 7. 23.
master me;
Yet Ephesians. 2, 13, 14.
Christ shall be my health and peace,
My strength and Psalm. 71. 16.
righteousness is he.
16.
In Phil. 3. 7. Col. 3. 11.
life and death, so shall he be,
For all Phil. 3. 8.
things else, are vanity;
What ever my Romans 8. 38.
Condition be,
Nothing but Psalm. 71. 16.
Christ shall comfort me.
17.
For Col. 3. 11.
Christ to me, is all in all,
In Gal. 6. 14.
life and death, advantage he
Unto me is, and sure Phil. 3. 21.
he shall
More then a Romans 8. 33.
Conqueror make me.
18.
And now I am by Joh. 8. 36.
him set free,
Union with Heb. 2. 11.
him for to enjoy;
The thoughts of Joh. 17. 24.
it so cleaves to me,
Tha^ nothing can Romans 8. 35.
me much annoy.
19.
And in this does my 1 Pet. 1. 8.
joy abound,
That I in Phil. 3. 3.
Christ am ever found;
Where all Col. 2. 3.
perfections abound,
And so shall I with 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
him be crowned.
20.
Therefore I will set forth Psalm. 18. 49
his praise,
And h^n^ur 2 Cor. 5. 14.
him whilst I have breath;
And Col. 3. 23.
him love, fear and serve always,
From henceforth to 2 Timothy 2. 9. Rev. 2 10.
my day of death.
An Answer to several Passages in a Treatise, entitled, The Triumph of Faith;
By T G. the second Impression.
IN which T. G. endeavors to maintain, that our Justification it self was
not at Christ's death, but at, and by his Resurrection; Secondly, that the work
of our Salvation is not yet effected, but Christ is a doing of it by his
Intercession, etc. I thought it necessary for the clearing the truth, (namely,
that we are justified by his blood) to remove these objections by giving a
brief Answer to what he there says.

Co^^erning the Resurrection of Christ, he says.

T. G. Yea rather that is risen again, Romans 8. 34. Rather compared to his
death. The Resurrection of Christ served for a double use and end; as an
evidence to our faith, that God is fully satisfied by Christ's death; Secondly,
It had as great an influence into our Justification as his death had, in both
respects it deserves rather to be put upon it, Page 65. and 102, 103.

Ans. Its Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, etc. Romans 8. 34.
The scope of the Apostle here in his triumph in Christ's death gives us to
understand the visible ground and cause of triumph, and that was rather in the
Resurrection of Christ, then in his death; for that did more declare him to be
the Son of God, then his death did; for any one might be crucified, and dye;
but no false Christ could rise again: and had be not risen, he had not been
the true Christ; and if he had not risen, they could not be assured that he was
the Son of God, who only could take away sin; therefore Christ's Resurrection
declared these things: First, That he was the Son of God; Declared to be the
Son of God with power by the Resurrection from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 4. Secondly,
It declared he had taken away sin by the sacrifice of himself, and we are not
in our sins, see 1 Cor. 15. 1. 4. 5. 17. Thirdly, It declared that those who
witnessed Christ to be the Son of God, etc. that they declared the truth, and
so justified them to be true witnesses: therefore the Apostle says; If Christ
be not risen, we are found false witnesses, 1 Cor. 15. 14, 15. He rose again
for our justification, Romans 4. 24. Before men Christ's resurrection justified us
in declaring him to be the Son of God, in that we are true witnesses.
Fourthly, It declares to us that we shall also rise in due time; see 1 Cor. 15.
the 12. to ^ers. 24. Therefore Christ by his death did justify, that is, free
the Elect from the punishment of sin.

And that the Resurrection of Christ had no influence at all in that
Justification which is our freedom from sin; appears by these Reasons.

1. We are justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. His Resurrection is not his blood.

2. We are made righteous, that is, justified by his obedience, Romans 5. 18, 19.
His Resurrection is no part of his obedience. What Christ did as God was no
obedience; not the divinity but the humanity is capable of obeying; but Christ
raised himself as God by his infinite power, Ephesians 1. 19, 20, 21. see Joh. 10
18. I grant his Resurrection is necessary to our eternal happiness and glory,
1 Cor. 15. 23. etc. But its no part of his obedience, nor did it save us from
our sins.

3. His resurrection was no obedience to the Law; for the Law required no more
but death, Genesis 2. 17. And therefore his death was a full satisfaction of the
Law, Heb. 2. 9. Gal. 3. 13. The Law did not require nor desire that we ^^^^uld
rise again.

4. We were justified through his Redemption, Romans 3. 24. Therefore not through
his Resurrection: he redeemed them by his blood; Thou have redeemed us by thy
blood, etc. Revel 5. 9.

But he says; The resurrection of Christ makes up that sum of that price
paid for us, p. 66.

Ans. Then Christ's blood was not a sufficient price for sin; you contradict
your self; for, you say, the Resurrection of Christ did evidence that God was
fully satisfied by Christ's death, p. 65. And in p. 66. you say the resurrection
of Christ makes up the sum of that price, as if God were fully satisfied with
an imperfect and insufficient price; therefore you add another price, as you
call it, to make up the sum of that price paid for us: if his blood was a
perfect and sufficient price, it wanted nothing to make it up. In another place
you confess Christ's death was a sufficient price, p. 225. Yea a price more
then enough to satisfy Justice, even to overflowing, p. 230. (then I hope it
was such a full and perfect price, that it needed nothing to make it up) you
say and unsay, and contradict your self.

But he says; The acqu^ttance to free from the debt was at and by his
Resurrection, p. 70.

Ans. Then it made not up the sum of the price paid; for the acquittance is no
part of the payment of the debt, nor no act of the debtor, but of the creditor:
an acquittance ^but a visible testimony that the debt is paid, neither are
acquittances of absolute necessity among honest men. I have received and paid
many debts without any acquittance, and we are fully discharged in justice and
conscience. I require no acquittance of that faithful and just one, who ever
lives, and I know he is just, I know all is paid, therefore I am satisfied.

T. G. His lying in the grave was a part of his humiliation and so of his
satisfaction, as general Orthodox Divines hold, p. 107.

Ans He was buried and laid in the grave, to manifest that he was dead indeed,
Mat. 27. 59, 60. Acts 13. 29.

H^s humiliation went no further then his life, his death was the last act of
his obedience, He humbled himself and became obedient [unto the death] even
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2. 7, 8. In his humiliation his life was taken
from the earth, Acts 8. 33. Death put a stop to his humiliation, it went no
further then his life.

His lying in the grave was no part of his obedience, therefore no part of his
humiliation; and therefore no part of satisfaction: he had a command to dye,
but none to lie in the grave, Joh. 10. 18. and 12. 49. Also how could Christ
obey when he was dead, or did he suffer when he was dead; if he did not suffer
when he was dead, he did not satisfy then when he was dead; his humiliation
and satisfact^^n consists in his suffering; you should have alleged for proof
the Word of the Lord; the thoughts of men are vain.

The record and testimony of God is truth, and the highest authority, and only
will bear sway in the hearts and consciences of those that love the Lord.

For your general Orthodox Divines, we thought they were more divine then
other men; we fell down at your feet, we thought we could not worship you
enough, unless we shut our eyes, and suffered our understandings to be led
captive by you: if you said to us stand, we durst go no further; we were
content to see by your eyes, and to call things after your names; when we did
see any light, if you told us it was darkness, we believed you, till we found
you deceived us: Know you not that matters of Religion are to be tried by the
Scriptures only: If an Angel from heaven teach otherwise, we reject and detest
it.

Its a poor shift in the want of Scripture to allege the saying of men, in
Religion we are to hear none but God, Isa. 8. 20. The testimonies of men are
no proof; all men are liars; in them we do not believe, Psalm. 116. 11. Cease
from men, Isa. 2. 22. They do or may deceive. We cry nothing but the Word of
God in matters of Religion, the word we embrace without men; if the Word say
it, we believe it, and not else, therefore speak Scripture we pray you, do no
more scare us with such great words, we know many call you Orthodox, and
others that differ from you Heretics: you call your selves Divines; but why
is it, because you are exercised in matters divine, or because you are made
partakers of the divine nature: if so, then many tradesmen may be called
Divines as well as you, seeing the Reason is the same: Gods being is only
divine.

Concerning the Intercession of Christ, he says:

Intercession is an act, p. 204. In his intercession he entreats, p. 194. Its
his praying for us in heaven, p. 176. 179. 185. 189. Intercession is asking, p.
339. Christ by his own prayers seconds the cry of his blood p. 253. Jesus shall
intercede for the pardon of them, p. 246. The 17. of John is a pattern and
instance of his intercession for us in heaven, p. 24^.

Ans. The 17. of John declares Christ spoke words in his own person: and then
the sum of that you say, is this; That Christ in his person now he is
glorified; speaks words to God for us, etc.

2. If it be so, then there is no perfection in glory, for where perfection is,
there needs no words; God is perfect, so is Christ in glory, and must Christ
speak words to God, that God might know his mind, and so prevail; is this
suitable to a condition of glory, in which is perfection?

3. Your words imply that God the Father loves us less then Christ; that he
need to be prayed and entreated, etc. But Christ is so far from needing any to
pray and entreat him, that he prays and entreats God for us; which cannot
be, because they are one, 1 John 5. 7. Therefore equal in love: God the Father
is said to Elect us, give us to Christ, and send Christ to dye for us: God is
as well pleased with us as Christ is, and he loves us as well as he loves
Christ: Christ says, Thou have loved them as thou have loved me: thou lovedst
me before the foundation of the world, Joh. 17. 23, 24. The Father himself
loves you, Joh 16. 26. 27. He of himself without entreaty loves us; God
cannot love us more nor less then he does, his love is infinite, without
beginning or end; that which is infinite, is not capable of being greater or
lesser; and its the more glorious, because it is so, his knowledge cannot be
greater nor less then it is: the same may be said of his love, he never began
to know, to will, to love, they are one in God: God is love; its his being, 1 John 4. 16. I can say in a holy reverence and confidence, in the satisfaction
of Christ, in admiration and thankfulness; if God can condemn me let him, he
cannot deny himself: the eternity and certainty of the Saints happy estate,
lesseneth not his love: when we conceive of him in the highest eminency we can,
still we come short, we cannot reach it; Such knowledge is too wonderful for
me; it is so high I cannot attain unto it, Psalm. 139. 6. O the depth of his
wisdom and ways, they are past finding out, Romans 11. 33.

Christ's blood speaks, Rev. 6. 9. Heb. 11. 4. So the blood of sprinkling
speaks within us better things then that of Abel, Heb. 13. 24. It speaks
peace to the conscience.

But he says; Intercession is a praying for us in heaven, p. 180.

There be many heavens, Deuteronomy. 10. 14. The kingdom of heaven is within you,
Luke 17. 21. The Church is called Heaven, Rev. 12. 7. Mat. 11. 12. The air is
called heaven, 1 Kings 18. 45. The heaven of heavens cannot contain God; in
him we live, move, and have our being.

2. Christ ever lives to make intercession for us, [in us] The Spirit it self
makes intercession for us, Romans 8. 26, 27. Christ, the Father, and Spirit are
one; The Spirit of Christ which was [in them] 1 Pet. 1. 11. The Lord is that
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 17. The Spirit of your Father speaks [in you) Mat. 10. 20.
Romans 8. 34.

3. Christ is our advocate and intercessor, in respect of that which he did for
us in his own person when he was upon the earth before he suffered; when he
poured out his soul unto death, and made intercession for us, Isa. 53. 12.
Holy Father, I pray that thou keep them from evil; I pray not for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe in me. Father, I will that they which
thou have given me may be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory,
etc. Joh. 17. 9. 11. 15. 19. to 26.

4. Christ's intercession holds forth the continuation of the efficacy of the
virtue and fruit of Christ's sacrifice, that it does for ever remain in force a
full satisfaction for all the sins of the Elect. This is very sweet, and full
of divine consolation, to satisfy the discouraged soul, which is the maine
thing intended by such expressions: it is a figurative speech, as the Scripture
ascribes to God, eyes, hand, arm: the Anthropomorphites conclude that God the
Father has a body, with eyes like unto us: So the Papists picture him to be an
old man, etc. If one should say, God is capable of forgetfulness, because he
says, he will remember our sins no more. These conclusions are unreasonable,
and so is your position that Christ speaks words now in his person, etc.

But he says; Christ does as much work for us in heaven at this instant, as
ever he did on the earth, p. 214.

Ans. You confess that a Surety is more then an Intercessor; and is it not
more to dye for one, then to speak for him; if so, Intercession is not so
much: see you not how you contradict your self in your discourse.

Christ is said to be set down at the right hand of God, to declare to us that
his work is done; while the Priest was executing his offices, he was to stand,
Heb. 10. 11. Which declared that Christ the substance of those Priests, was not
to sit until he had finished in his person his offices of Priesthood.

He says; That none of his offices should lie idle, he appoints this full and
perpetual work in heaven, that as a Priest by praying and interceding God
would have Christ never to be out of offices, or out of work for ever, Heb. 7.

Ans. If the end of Christ's praying and interceding is, that he might not be
out of offices, or out of work, then its not because of our sins.

That he does execute any offices in his person in glory, or that he does any
work there, is still to prove; do the Angels pray for us, etc. or are they
idle o^ out of work.

He says; He lives but to intercede, p. 208.

Ans. Then it seems after this life when all the Saints are gloried, Christ
must continue praying and interceding for us, or else he must cease to live. I
hope you will not say, when we are in glory, that he shall need then to
intercede for us: if so, then it seems he shall be out of office, or out of
work: by your exposition you have run your self upon a rock, I shall be glad
to see you get off again, I have afforded you my help.

He says; His living to intercede, is said to keep God and us friends, that
we may never fall out more, though pardoned by his death: Intercession is
principally intended for sins after conversion, p. 208. God says to him, now
do you look to them, that they and I fall out no more: not but sins after
conversion are taken away by his death, and sins before it by intercession
also, p. 209.

Ans. God says no such thing, you vent your vain conceits, and father them
upon God, and say he says so; I wonder at your boldness; sure you either know
not what you say, or think you may say any thing. When you write again, tell
us in what place we may read that God says so: it is better to say less, and
prove more.

2. Can you tell that ever God fell out with his Elect, and was not their
friend, or that it is possible for God not to love us, or not to be a friend to
us: you insinuate both, but are able to prove neither.

3. Tell me, what is God liable to fall out with us for, if for sin, you
confess that is pardoned by his death, and those sins after conversion taken
away by his death: to what purpose is it for Christ to pray and entreat for
that which he knows is pardoned before; and what has God granted Christ, in
granting the pardon of that which was pardoned before? Suppose I pay to one all
that I owe him, all that he can desire and require, need I pray and entreat him
to forgive me the debt; but if I do, and he grant my desire, he forgives me
nothing, because I owe him nothing: is not this the case also? how are our
sins pardoned, if we be liable to suffer for them?

4. You present God to be a friend, but a very uncertain one, in that he need
to have one to be continually praying and entreating him, to keep him friends
with us, that we may not suffer for that which is pardoned; has God pardoned
us, and is he now ready to destroy us? he said, he would remember our sins ^o
more. Heb. 10. 17, 18. And does he now remember them? You present God to be
changeable, who is immutable and changes not.

5. You present God to be an angry God, yet God says; Anger is not in him,
Isa. 27. 4. How can I, or Christ say, thy will be done, if his will be to fall
out with us: it seems he has a great will to it, if he must be continually
prayed and entreated to forbear, and to be ^acified, and not to fall out with
us.

6. The Father needs no more entreating then Christ does, and that is none at
all, for these Reasons.

There is no place for Intercession; for

1. Because satisfaction is made for the sins of the Elect, for them it was
that Christ suffered death: it is an act of injustice for to suffer for that
which is satisfied for, or to require any thing of me, for that which before
full satisfaction has been made.

2. We are reconciled, therefore need none to reconcile us; also his death is
that which reconciled us, therefore not his praying and entreaty, Romans 5 10.
Before Christ suffered, he made intercession; also there is no place for
intercession for that which is pardoned by his death.

3. If Christ's blood cleanses from all sin, praying and intercession cleanses
us not from any sin.

4. If Christ blessing his Disciples, blessed all those that shall believe to
the end of the world, as you confess, p. 42. and that the offering of himself
once, made so full a satisfaction, as he needed to do it but once, p. 242. Why
may not this intercession when he was upon the earth, though if it were but
once, be as effectual to serve for ever, as the rest, especially when we
consider that in the 17. Of John, Christ prayed for all that were given him
that shall believe. Christ's prayer was granted, Father, I know thou hear me
always. What benefit have we to the end of the world by that prayer in John
17. if it was not sufficient and effectual for us; if it was sufficient and
granted, there is no need of his continued praying for it; if Christ had
intended in his person to pray and entreat for us now, what needed Christ to
have prayed for us when he was upon the earth, so many hundred years before we
were borne, if he prays so for us now, would not they be sufficient for us,
seeing they are continually, as you say; if all that Christ can ask, is less,
yea far less then the service he has done to God comes to; our lives, pardon,
salvation, if these be not enough, but too small a requital, as you affirm,
p. 244. there is no ground, or reason, justice or equity, that Christ should
for ever ask and pray, before he or we can have it, especially if we consider
God teaches us to give to others their due without a continual asking, yea
before they ask; to pay and pray comes not freely off.

5. Because the Father himself loves us, his heart is as much for our
happiness as Christ's is, therefore Christ need not pray to God to love us, the
reason is rendered by Christ, Joh. 16. 26, 27. Joh. 3. 16. Ephesians. 1. 3. 5. 9. 11.
The Spirit of the Lord does not, nor need not help us to make requests, to be
loved, to be justified, saved from the punishment of sin; these things are
already done, only to know it not, or more fully to know it, Christ's prayer
John 17. is, to keep us from evil; and we are to pray for many things, though
not to be loved etc.

6. If Christ by his death had fully satisfied for our sins, as you confess,
and that at Christ's Resurrection, God gave Christ an acq^^^^nce for all our
sins, a discharge, p. 103. to 107. And that Justification gives title to
eternal life, Romans 5. 18. p. 161. and that by Christ's Resurrection our
justification is made irrevocable for ever, p. 103. Then there is no need of
any intercession, it is safe and sure, there is no danger, there needs no care
or fear, because its done and past recalling; he dyed as a public person, he
rose as a public person, and there is a formal, legal, irrevocable act of
Justification of us passed and enrolled in the Court of heaven between Christ
and God, in his being justified we were justified in him; so that thereby our
justification is made past recalling, p. 286. If so, there is no need of
Christ's praying and entreating (in his person in glory) for us.

He says; Intercession is a praying for us in heaven, otherwise the salvation
by his death were not perfect, the performance of that part in heaven is the
perfection of it, p. 189. The virtue of his blood with prayers in the heavens,
makes atonement by both, p. 180. Blood has the loudest cry of all things else
in the ears of the Lord, as Judge. 12. 13. Genesis 4. 10. Christ's blood cries
louder then Abels, p. 218. 249. 251. Rev. 9. 6. Christ's blood cries for
pardon, p. 250. If his righteousness be put into the opposite balance with
all our sins, will carry it by mere righteousness and equity, p 246, 247.

Ans. Then that cry is enough, and another needless, then his righteousness
is enough, and there is no need of more: you answer and contradict your self,
you deny the sufficiency and perfection of Christ's righteousness, and add
something to it to make atonement, and so deny Christ's death to be sufficient
to perfect us, contrary to Heb. 10. 10. 14. and so piece it out to make it up,
but if it be by both, one is not sufficient to do it, nor is it by the
offering of himself: and in another place ye extol it beyond all bounds.

T. G. God has two attributes; Justice and free grace: the first is satisfied
by blood, the latter by entreaty, p. 192. Free grace must be sought too and
entreated by Christ, p. 193. Favor and entreaty to effect it, p. 175.

Ans. 1. If Justice be satisfied, there is no more required.

2. You lessen the glory and freedom of free love. That love it self need to
be satisfied, or was ever unsatisfied, that it ever needed any entreaty, I
remain unsatisfied; tell me in what place in the Bible may I read, that free
grace, the free love of God was ever to be satisfied, or to be entreated; or
that entreaty is any satisfaction at all.

T. G. The greater the person Christ, the sooner he will prevail, p. 15. All
matters of intercession are carried by way of favor, if he should deny him any
thing, he should deny himself, which God can never do, Ephesians. 1. 6. The beloved
of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. 24. p. 335.

Ans. If Christ and the Elect are one, tell me which is the greatest, the Elect
are a piece of himself; flesh of ^is flesh, and bone of his bone: We are not
only in favor, and so shall ever be, but we are in union with God, and one
with him; thy Maker is thy Husband, Isa. 54. 5. Christ says, I go to my
Father, and to your Father, and to my God and your God. Ye are of God little
Children; they are one with God, and God is one with them, John 4. 4. John 10.
30, 31. We have favor and interest with God, we may have boldness, Heb. 10.
19. We are well, we are healed, and delivered from the curse: Christ has
destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil, Heb. 2. 14, 15.
He brought Sons to Glory, Heb. 2. 10. Having loved his own, Joh. 17. The
Elect are his own, and God loves them.

T. G. His obedience can never be requited, p. 245.

Ans. What not by God, he obeyed as man, and it is sufficiently requited; the
divine being cannot be beholding to the humane.

T. G. Salvation is as free as if Justice had not been satisfied, p. 193.

Ans. Its so to us, but not to Christ, he paid a great price for it.

T. G. Obs. We are saved over and over, p. 175.

Ans. That which is more then enough, is needless.

Obj. Christ's favor with the Father, and intercession alone, might have
procured pardon for us, but it was Gods will to have Justice satisfied.

Ans. If it had not been his will to make a Law, and to have it satisfied, we
should never have needed neither favor nor Savior.

But you say, those words of Christ, viz. I say not that I will pray the Father
for you, Joh. 16. is such a speech as Christ used Joh. 5. 45. I will not accuse
you to the Father: he insinuates that he will: as we say, I do not love you,
p. 279, 280.

Ans. This your exposition teaches us not to believe what Christ says, and
that his words are not truth, and that he does not mean as he says, but the
quite contrary; and that Christ would not have us think that he means as he
says: Christ says; Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, Joh.
5. 45. Yet, you say, he insinuates that he will. By this rule I may say, when
God says, Thou shall not commit adultery, he would not have us think he
means so; these words insinuate that we may; Is not this the same? I wonder
at your rashness, vanity, and boldness.

An Answer to a Treatise, entitled Tbe Doctrine of the Antinomians, in Answer
to Doctor Crisps seven Sermons, by Steven Geree.
Geree says, that Doctor Crispe condemns doing any thing for our own
salvation, and is not ashamed to say there is no condition on man's part: I say,
nothing is more evident in the Gospel then Conditions on the Covenant on man's
part, to wit, Faith and Repentance; without which, he cannot be in the
Covenant, nor have any share in Jesus Christ. As Masters covenant with their
servants, so does God with his people, and they with him, and if it be not
performed the covenant is frustrate, Romans 3. 27. Acts 27. 24. 31. 2 Cor. 6. 14.
to 19. If we mean to have God for our God, we must repent, and come out, and
God will receive us, and upon no other terms in the world: therefore I
conclude, that Doctor Cripse is fully deceived, and strangely deluded, and so
are all others as did and do believe him, Epist. side 9. page 35. 37. 43. 67.
72. 75. 77, 78, 79. 80. 99. 102.

Ans. You prove not what you affirm, Rom 3. 27, declares salvation is not of
works, this is a full place against you, Acts 27. Except ye abide in the Ship
ye cannot be saved; this is a temporal salvation from drowning, unless he
brings this place to prove his soul shall not be saved, whose body is drowned:
its not to the question; for the 2 Cor. 6. he alleges to prove that God is
our God upon terms, not else, whereas these words were written to the Saints
who were converted, and the Church of God before this Epistle was written to
them; this Church of Corinth had some communion and fellowship with Idolaters;
therefore the Lord exhorts them to come out from amongst them, and he would
receive them; declare himself to be their God, and own them to be his people
in a Church Relation, as Rev 1. 20. and 2. 5. see page 170. To understand it
concerning our eternal condition, is to contradict the Scripture, which says;
He has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us after our
iniquities, Psalm. 103. 10. Psalm. 89.

Gods love to his depends not upon what we do; see Gods eternal good will to
his, Jer. 31. 3. and 34. 40. Joh 13. 1. Luke 22. 32. Joh. 17. 20, 21. Mat. 21.
22. Romans 8. 9. Joh. 14. 16. Joh. 10. 28. Phil. 2. 6. Romans 11. 29. 1 John 3 9.
Mat. 24. 24.

Tell me, is Election, Christ's death, conversion, etc. fruits of hatred or
love, if of love, then God loved the Elect before they believed, yea, before
they were borne, Ephesians. 1. 4.

If we are chosen to life according to the good pleasure of his will, then we
are not chosen to life according to our believing and repenting, etc. But the
first is true, Ephesians. 1. 5, 6. Therefore the latter is true also: nor are men
chosen to life, because God foresaw they would believe God is eternal; the
will of God is God, he was never without his will; what he now wills, he ever
did: therefore there could not be any cause to go before it, to cause it to
be, or so to be: man cannot Elect without an act and time, but its not so with
an infinite being, Election is his eternal and immutable decree from
eternity, Romans 9. 11. Ephesians. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1. 9. It is the more wonderful and
glorious, that it is without beginning; his love is everlasting, Jer. 31. 3.
Therefore without beginning: as God is infinite without beginning, so is his
love; for God is love, 1 John 4. 16. see Joh. 17. 23. Therefore God loves his
as much before they believe as after. The Scripture does not say, God began to
love when we began to believe, nor that he loves any the better because they
believe: it is a certain truth, that Gods love to us, is not as ours is to him.

In that ye would have men to do something for salvation, it appears you are
ignorant of the taking away of sin by the death of Christ: hence it is that
you urge our works to be necessary to salvation; and so did the Seducers, Acts
15. 5. and 20. 30. If it were as you say, we are under an absolute covenant of
works; Do this, and live: men must do so, and so says the Papist, or else no
salvation, so say you; Though God has promised, and Christ purchased all good
for believers, yet they shall not have it, unless they do so, etc. Do you
not see how you exalt your works above the skies, yea, above God, and his
promise, and the death of Christ, and make works all in all, because without
them, all is frustrate and comes to nothing. What, no share in Christ, without
our works, all is frustrate, if it be so, then our works are joint Saviors
with Christ, chief Saviors: is not this pure Popery, and the Popes Doctrine
to a hair; yet it has an Imprimatur, J. C. is there not a clear light of the
Gospel in such Licensers, see Jer. 5. 31. Gal. 5. 2. Christ undertook to
obtain for his, remission of sins by his death, but he did not perform it
perfectly, if it be in part by our works; if it depends upon our works, then
it depends not upon the death of Christ, or do you bring in Christ to merit,
that your works may merit salvation? Most truly and worthily did Doctor Crispe
contend for the sufficiency of Christ's blood to save us, and you contend
against him, and contend for the sufficiency of your doings in bringing in your
works to salvation, and so undervalue the blood of Christ, therefore I contend
against you, our works are imperfect, and that which is so, cannot please God:
if ye say, Christ makes it up with his perfection, in adding Christ to piece
it out, to make it up, its apparent ye make Christ but a piece of a Savior,
which is the greatest indignity ye can offer to him.

We do condemn the doing of any thing for our own salvation; and the Reasons
why we do so are

1. We do nothing to be saved, because Christ has saved us; He came into the
world to save us, and he saved us before he ascended, therefore we are not now
to be saved from our sins, Heb. 10 10. 12. 14. 1 Timothy 1. 9. Its too late for
us to be paying the debt of our sins by our work, the debt being paid before
by Christ for us; God did execute on him in his death all the punishment that
was due to us for our iniquities: God does rest satisfied in Christ's
satisfaction for the sins of his, past, present, and to come, Isa. 53. 5, 6.
11. Heb 10 10. 14. Blessed he the Lord God of Isael, for he has visited and
redeemed his people, and has raised up [an horn of salvation] for us in the
house of his servant David, that we should be saved from our enemies, etc Luk
1. 68, 69. 71. Christ is the horn of Salvation.

2. God requires no righteousness of us to save us, because Christ has
fulfilled all righteousness for us, Mat* 3. 15. His righteousness saves us
from our unrighteousness. In the beholding of sin, we consider God has set
against it Christ's righteousness, and that in his righteousness God is fully
satisfied, and therefore in it we rest fully satisfied: Christ's satiffaction by
his death, if laid in the balance with that perfect obedience of the law
required of us, is of sufficient weight to answer the Justice of God: the wise
and just God would not have ordained it for that end, if it had bin
insufficient to satisfy for our sins; to judge Christ's death insufficient,
is very dishonorable to Christ.

3. Salvation from sin is not man's act, but an act of Christ by his death, its
Christ's work to save us, Mat. 1. 21. Its not our work to save our selves, not
our works, but Christ is the price and play master for the sins of the Elect;
if we could have saved our selves, Christ needed not to come from heaven into
the world to do it, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ works not salvation in us, nor by us,
but brings salvation to us, Isa. 63. 5. Jesus Christ in one work once
performed by his death, did eternally redeem, Rev. 5. 9. Justify, Romans 5. 9.
Sanctify, and perfect us for ever, Heb. 10. 10. 12. 14. Heb. 2. 29. Then he
reconciled all the Elect in the body of his flesh through death, Col. 1. 21,
22. His death is that price that paid to the utmost for all our sins; our
best works cannot save us, neither in whole nor in part.

4. Heaven is an inheritance, eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. An inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you,
1 Pet. 1. 4. That which we possess by right of inheritance, we never wrought
for, nor paid for, left to one, Pro. 13. 26. falls to one, Ezekiel. 47. 14.
given. Jer. 3. 18. Acts 20. 32. Heb. 11. 6. Ezekiel. 33. 24. Psalm. 78. 55. So this
inheritance, Acts 26. 18. Col. 1. 12. and 3. 24. Christ bought it, and paid for
it his precious blood, a great price, 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ephesians. 1. 14. It cost him
so much, that it might cost us nothing: vain man would work for it, to earne
it, and merit it: men think they must do something for it; our doings could
not procure it; God would not have us to have it that way, but by way of gift;
its a free gift, as appears, Romans 6. 23. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. And that it could not
be* if it had been to be wrought for by us; To him that works is the reward
not reckoned [free] of grace, but of debt, Romans 4. 4. The children of God are
borne heirs to it, Romans 8. 17. and it was prepared for them before they were
borne; Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34.

5. We are not exhorted to forsake evil and do good, to the end we may be
saved, but because it is our duty, consider these places, Romans 4. 5. and 5. 19.
and 1. 17. Gal. 2. 17. and 3. 14. Joh. 3. 18. James 5. 24. Acts 10 43.

6. We do nothing in the world to be saved, because salvation is not given for
our works, nor according to our works: God says, he imputes righteousness
without works, Romans 4. 6. Not of works, Rom 9. 11. Who has saved us, and
called us, not according to our works, 2 Timothy 1. 9. Not of works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us.
Titus 3. 5. If by grace, it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace: if it be of works, then it is not of grace, Romans 11. 6. What can be
more plain: Hence it is that we are ceased from our own works, Heb. 4. 10.
We did walk in the way of works for salvation, till God did hedge up our way
with thorns: our works were those thorns which did pierce ^s and wounded us
at the heart, in stead of saving us they killed us; these thorns did so prick
us, that we were not able to go any further in that way, God opened our eyes
that we saw nothing but death in them, then we ceased to work for life and
salvation: We ought to do good works, because God commands us to do them,
and because they are for his glory; see Titus 3. 8. 14. and because we are
loved, and saved from our enemies, Luke 1. 71. To do good works, is good, but
not for salvation: fire is good, but not to put into the thatch, nor under the
bed, unless ye mean to fire the house. We persuade to good works and
strictness in holiness of life, because we are justified and saved without
works, yea before we did any good work for we did none before we were called;
Who has saved us, and called us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. We were saved when Christ
suffered upon the Cross, called when converted, both e^^ected in time, but
neither of them was according to our works, but according as he had purposed
before the world began: our works remove not our offenses, nor make us just
before God; that which can cause to be accepted must be so perfect that the Law
of God cannot except against, see Lev 18. 5. Luke 10 27, 28. Our best works
are not so, and therefore they will not stand us in any stead for salvation: If
we could be saved by any works, Christ dyed in vain; I determined not to
know any thing among you; save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2.

Remember that they that love Jesus Christ will keep his words, see and
consider, Joh. 14. 23. and 15. 16. and 2. 10. Is Christ come not to do his own
will, then we may not do ours, unless ours be his, Joh. 6. 28, 29. For those
that take pleasure in sin, let them consider, 1 John 1. 6. and 2. 4. Gal 5.
13. to 23. and 6. 5. 7. 8. Romans 2. 17. Mat. 7. 30. Luke 6. 44. and 13. 27.

Christ's love caused him to dye for us, let his love constrain us to serve
him, he is worthy of our love; if he has thy affections, he shall have thy
actions; if thou have tasted of the sweetness of Christ's love, thou will say,
there is none so sweet as his, who in his wounds has buried and destroyed all
thy sins, to redeem thee from them, and purchase thy salvation.

7. To do for salvation, were to bring in the law of works; he that seeks to
be justified by the Law, is fallen from grace, Gal. 5. 4. The Law concerns our
conversation, not our salvation: The righteousness of God is manifested
without the Law, Romans 3. 21. No man is justified by the Law in the sight of
God, Gal. 3. 11. In man's sight he may: Jam. 2. 24. By the deeds of the Law
shall no flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. We are not debtors to the
Law, Gal. 5. 23.

8. Those that are such great doers for salvation, do as little as others;
None of you keep the Law, Joh. 7. 19. If ye say ye can keep the Law without
fin, the Scripture does call you a lier, 1 John 1. 8. There are none just upon
earth. Such as are such great doers for salvation, are fit to be ranked with
those in Mat. 7. 22. Can you make your self righteous? can you keep the Law?
It forbids lust, yea vain thoughts, Rom 7. 7. Gal. 3. 10. Unless ye can
keep the Law, ye cannot be saved by works.

9. So much as we eye any of our works to be any thing in salvation it self,
so much we not only neglect and slight Christ, but are enemies to the Cross
of Christ, Phil. 3. 18. Whatsoever they say or do they are no better.

10. To do any thing to be saved, is but wicked obedience; all is unclean,
Their minds and consciences are defiled, Titus 1. 15, 16. The more they do,
the more hypocrites they are. What men do to escape hell, and get heaven, is
wicked serving of God, for that they do is not in faith, therefore it is
sin, Romans 14. and do not please God, Heb. 11. 6. If the plowing of he wicked
is sin, what is his praying; until Christ's love constraines the heart to
love and serve him, there is no love to God in what they do, all is but
self-love, their own ends are all they aim at; but when the love of God is
shed abroad into their hearts, they will serve God freely, Luke 1. 74.

11. We do nothing to be saved, because we saw that when we had done all we
could, we were unprofitable servants, Luk 17. 10. Which could not be if we
could have saved our selves, or effect the least part of our salvation by any
thing we could do: we see we sin in all our works, they are no better then
Paul's, and he calls his dung, Phil. 3. 8. Dung is fit for the dunghill; Such
are not worth the mentioning, much less magnifying; O Lord, I will make
mention of thy Righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm. 71. 16. 24. We have
no confidence in the flesh, none in our selves, but in Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 3. We
live to Christ's righteousness, we are dead to our own, Gal. 2. 19, 20. Our
works are our glory, God spoils us of our glory, that we might glory in
Christ, I be nothing, 2 Cor. 12. 11. All we can do cannot satisfy for one
vain thought; our works are a most miserable, rotten, and sandy foundation;
if our salvation should depend upon them, it did depend upon a broken reed: no
man is righteous in himself; we are not just in our selves, but in another, 2
Cor. 5. 21. Saving benefits are in Christ, and not in us, our blessedness is
in Christ, and him crucified.

12. Doers for salvation, as confident as they are, such were shut out of
heaven, those in Mat. 7. 22. were confident heaven should be opened to them;
their plea to enter into heaven was, because they had done many great and
wondrous works (it is worth the observing) they thought it an unanswerable
argument, yet they were shut out, heaven was not provided for them, Publicans
and Harlots were saved, but not they, Mat. 21. 31. Christ says, He knew them
not. What? Does not Christ know great workers for salvation, no, he neither
knows them, nor they him. Such as look for salvation to be on condition of
works, seek to attain it by works, they prize their own righteousness in
stead of Christ's; see Romans 10. 3. Such as know Christ's righteousness, prize
it, its glorious in their eyes; our works are as nothing to us, they vanish
before us like the morning dew, as Hos. 6, 4. They prize, set up, and esteem
nothing but Christ. Your conclusion, its your delusion; consider again and see
if you can see whose is the error, who is deceived and strangely deluded, I
desire you may see, look on it well and submit.

Geree: Who so blind as he that cannot see with half an eye, that believing is
the condition of the party justified, p. 82. We must believe before we can be
justified, p. 81. The Doctor does most ungodlily infer, that a man is
justified actually before he has faith, p. 83. He says, We are justified
before we believe; this is the thing in question, p. 87. He makes a wicked and
sinful separation between Christ and faith, in the point of Justification,
which methinkes should make all true Christians abhor their Doctrine as
hellish and apostaticall, p. 95. The Doctor holds, that Christ justifies us
before any qualification is wrought in us: he says, Faith comes after
Justification as well as works, and so excludes Faith in Justification, p. 18.
34. The Apostle says, We are justified by faith, Romans 3. 23. The Doctor
says, before we believe.

You cry out against us, our answer is to all your sharp arrows, most bitter
words, The Lord rebuke thee: You will have us to see what spirit you are of; I
hope the Lord will let you see and say, that you condemned the truth, and those
that taught it, and that the error and hellish doctrine and blasphemy is your
own.

You see the Word faith in Scripture, Romans 3. 23. But its evident ye see not
the meaning of it. What the Scripture says is true, and so is what the Doctor
says; its but your mis-take to think otherwise; we deny not, but affirm we
are justified by faith; but we deny we are justified by believing; for the word
Faith, is not always to be understood for believing: the Scripture does not
say, we are justified for, nor through, nor by believing, neither does it
follow, that we are justified by believing, because the Scripture says, We
are justified by faith; because the word Faith is diversely understood; as,

1. Sometimes by faith is meant the doctrine of Christ, Jude 3. Obedience to
the faith, Acts 6. 7. In the faith, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Hearing of faith; preaches
the faith, Gal. 1. 23.

2. So for the power by which we believe, Gal. 5. 22. Phil. 1. 29.

3. Faith is to believe; have faith in God, Mark. 11. 22.

4. Sometimes by faith is meant the profession of faith, Romans 1. 8.

5. By faith we are to understand knowledge, Romans 14. 22.

6. Sometimes Christ is called faith in Gal. 3. 16. with 19. 23. The seed in
the 19. verse is called faith in 23 verse, and Christ in the 16 verse: So that
to be justified through faith, and by faith, that is, through Christ, through
his blood, Ephesians. 1. 7. Through the Redemption that is in Jesus, Romans 3. 24. So
the word through him is used 1 John 4. 9. Through him and by him is all one,
Ephesians. 1. 5. 7. That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 14. Compare Romans 3. 14. 28. with Romans 5. 9. Isa. 45. 24,
25. Mat. 9. 22. Ephesians. 2. 8. Acts 15. 9. Gal. 3. 26. Ephesians. 1. 5. Those expressions
of Scripture* that ascribe most to Christ, are the clearest; the other are to
be interpreted by them; for the Scriptures are to be interpreted for Christ*
and not against him. Also we are to consider, if the word Faith were always to
be understood for believing; by Levit. 17. 11. it appears that was ascribed to
the sign which is proper to the thing signified.

The word Justify, it signifies to make just: men are made just three ways.

First, By infusion; so Adam, Eccles. 7. 29.

Secondly, By the justice of another, R^m. 5. 19. Ephesians. 1. 5. Romans 3. 24. In
this sense the Elect are justified by Christ, for we are justified by another,
and in another; Righteousness and Justification are one; when he was made our
Righteousness, then he was made our Justification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. We are made
righteous by his satisfaction, therefore we are justified by his satisfaction:
to deny this were to overthrow the foundation of Religion, and man's salvation.

Thirdly, Men are said to be justified by Sentence: in this sense a man may
justify himself; so Job 9. 20. or by witnesses, Isa. 43. 9. 26. In a large
sense, this is called Justification: and sometimes this Justification is worth
nothing, and worse then nothing; as when the wicked are justified, Pro. 17. 15.
and 24. 24. We are justified by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 11. But this is not that
Justification on which depends our eternal happiness; this is only declared
to us by the Spirit, that we are justified by Christ's death; this knowledge of
it is only necessary to satisfy and quiet the Conscience: Christ having
justified his upon the Cross by his blood, it is (not our believing but) the
Spirit that reveals the same to the soul: The Spirit dwells in us, 1 Cor.
3. 16. 1 Cor. 9. 19. Romans 8. 11. 16. 1 John 3. 24. The Spirit speaks in us,
Mat. 10. 20. and shows us what Christ has done for us, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. with
16. 13, 14, 15. Heb. 10. 15. 17. 1 John 5. 6. The blood of sprinkling is the
Spirits speaking to the conscience that all is paid; this satisfies and
cleanses the conscience, Heb. 12. 24. The work of faith is only to assent to
the testimony of the Spirit, that it is truth, and so receives its testimony:
to manifest and to receive the manifestation are not one thing, Ephesians. 3. 5. When
the declaration is believed, the answer of a good Conscience is, My sweet Jesus
dyed for me, he has delivered me from all my enemies, and from the wrath to
come; the debt of all my sin is paid, there is nothing now to be required of
me: What shall I render to the Lord for all his goodness unto me? O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. Psalm. 107. 8.

There is a Justification before men by good works, James 2. 24. which
declares to men we are justified visibly, but not infallibly; but this is not
that Justification which saves us; that Justification I treat, is of that
Justification which freeth us from condemnation; for Justification is opposed
to condemnation, Romans 8. 1, 2. For his death was our Justification from the
punishment of sin; this is the Justification that I intend, and contend for;
for in this is our salvation, therefore in this is our greatest happiness and
glory.

And that the Elect from the beginning to the end of the world, were justified
at and by Christ's death upon the Cross; Consider

Justification is that which is our freedom from the punishment of sin; this
I have proved was at and by Christ's death: and that I may more fully put this
question out of question; namely, that we are not justified by believing, but
before we believe by Christ; I prove by these Arguments or Reasons.

1 Argu. If Justification is free, then believing is not required; for that
which is free, is without any condition or consideration of any thing in us, or
done b^ us; but we are justified freely, Romans 3. 24. Ergo.

If it be Christ, and his works, it is not I and my works that can justify
me from the punishment of sin: if Christ saves us, then believing does not
save us: compare Joh. 12. 42, 43. with Mat. 10. 37. Luke 14. 26.

If it be Christ and my believing together, that saves me, then Christ does not
save me; if it be Christ and my works, then I share in saving my self: To say
we are justified by Christ and believing together (as some say) is to deny we
are justified by either; for that which is not alone, does not justify alone;
he that is justified by two, is justified by neither. Christ and faith
together, say you; Christ and works together, say the Papists; we are not
justified without believing, say you; not without charity, say the Papists;
that which they say is Popery, so is what you say, because what yon both say is
in the nature of it one, and though you differ in the letters that express it,
yet in substance it is one and the same thing.

2 Argu. If Christ justified enemies, sinners, ungodly, etc. then they were not
believers when they were justified; but Christ justified enemies, Kom. 4. 5.
and 5. 10. Believers are not so called, they are called friends, Luke 12. 4.
Joh. 15. 15. Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Holy and beloved, Col. 3. 12. Holy brethren,
Heb. 3. 1. Holy women. 1 Pet. 3. 5. If holy, then not ungodly; Babes in Christ,
1 Cor. 3. 1. Therefore we were justified before we believed; therefore
believing comes too late to justify us from the punishment of sin, if we
were not justified till we believe, he does not justify the ungodly it is
evident.

3 Argu* In the same manner we are made sinners, in the same manner we are made
just and righteous; but we were made sinners by the diso^edie^^ of one; so we
are made righteous by the obedience of one, even Christ, Romans 5. 12. to 20.
Ephesians. 1. 5. Therefore his obedience justified us from all sin, viz. from all
the punishment of sin; therefore ever since his death we have been justified;
also if justified by his obedience, then not justified by believing; as our
sinfulnes consists in that one disobedience of the first Adam, so our
righteousness consists in that one (only) obedience of our sweet Lord Jesus
Christ.

4 Argu. Those God declares to be just and righteous, they are just before;
therefore made so by Christ; if they be not just, they are wicked, and to
declare them to be just, is to justify the wicked, which he says is
abomination to him, Pro. 17. 15.

5 Argu. If Christ did dye for us truly, really, and actually, then he did
truly, really, and actually justify us; but Christ did dye for us truly,
really, and actually, Joh. 10. 15. it was not in a shadow, Col. 2. 17.
Therefore he truly and really took away sin, viz. actually justify us from all
the punishment of sin; and in that the Apostle says, Without blood there is
no remission, Heb. 9. 22. it does follow that with blood there is remission;
see 1 Pet. 1. 19, 20.

6 Argu. If all things were accomplished, the prophecies concerning Christ's
death were finished, then he justified us; but the first is true, Jesus knew
that all things were accomplished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
says, I thirst; when he had received the vinegar, he said, it is finished, and
he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost, Joh. 19. 28. 30. Christ came to save
sinners, and when he gave up the ghost upon the Cross, he tells us the work
was finished, Joh. 17. 4. and I believe him.

7 Argu. If I am to believe, I am justified, it is either true or false; if
true, then I was justified before I believed it; if not true, then for me to
believe I am justified when I am not, is for me to believe a lie, and deceive
my self; nor does God require me to believe a lie, and for me to believe I am
justified, that so I may be justified, is to believe a lie that it may be true,
which is unreasonable; for my believing cannot make any thing true or false,
(nor give being to that which had no being before; if I believe brass is gold,
is it gold) therefore I was justified from the punishment of sin before I did
believe it, Romans 5. 19.

8 Argu. If our believing cannot satisfy Justice, nor pardon the least sin,
then it cannot justify us from the punishment of sin; but the first is true, 1 John 3 5. it cannot give remission of sin, Acts 28. 18. Believing adds nothing
to Christ, nor to our salvation, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Luke 8. 13. and 13. 25, 26, 27.
Mat. 13. 20, 21. Mark. 4. 16. Heb. 6. 4, 5. with Isa. 48. 6, 7. and 58. 2. Jam.
2. 19. Charity and prophecy is greater and more to be desired then faith, 1
Cor. 13. 13. and 14. 1. But how could it be so, if believing did justify us;
for without justification there is no salvation, no freedom from the
punishment of sin: also there is not that said of believing, which is said of
charity; see Mat. 25. 42. The Papists say, we are saved by charity; others by
believing; the Papists ground is as good as theirs.

9 Argu. That which is imper^ect and defiled, and is stained with sin, cannot
justify us from sin; but our believing is so, its imperfect, something is
wanting in our faith, 1 These. 3. 10. Its defiled with sin; All our
righ^eousnesse is as filthy rags, Isa. 42. 6. with Titus ^. 5. Daniel
includes h^s most holy acts when ^e names his righteousness, Dan. 9. 18. Our
be^eeving is called unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. Therefore our believing cannot
justify us from the punishment of sin, its only a means of our knowing or
enjoying the knowledge and comfort of it. We say not that good works are
^innes, we put a difference between the action God commands, and the corruption
of it, ^s acted by us, by reason of the corruption in us its stained and
defiled with some spot of ^inne, all our actions, our righteousness is so.

10 Argu. If our righteousness be like unto a stinking filthy clout, Isa. 46.
10. then every good work we do is tainted with some sin; ^or they were
converted, and were not without the fruits of the. Spirit when they so said of
themselves; see Psalm. 130. 3. Dan. 9. 7. 18. Ezra 9. 15. Job 9. 3. 28. 1. Joh.
1. 8. and 1 John 2. 7. Titus 3. 5. Psalm. 143. 2. Which shows that we are not
justified for (nor by) any thing we do: also from these Scriptures it is
evident, that there is no perfection in the flesh, nor in any thing we do; and
therefore that which is not perfect is not our righteousness, and therefore
cannot possibly be our Justification; viz. our freedom from the punishment of
sin.

11 Argu. If Christ saves us, believing does not save us; if we be reconciled
by Jesus Christ* 2 Cor. 5. 18. believing does not reconcile us if Christ takes
away the sins of the world, believing takes away no sin; if we are justified
by his blood, then not by believing; if we are reconciled to God by the death
of his Son, Romans 5* 9, 10. then not by believing; if Christ hat^ delivered us
from the wrath to come, 1 These. ^ 10. then believing does not deliver us from
wrath; if he has delivered us from the curs^ Gal. 3. 14. then believing
delivers us no^ from the curse; if Christ has made me fre^ Gal. 5. 1.
believing makes not me free; our sins are forgiven for Christ's sake, Ephesians.
23. then not for my sake, nor for believing if men are Christ's sheep before
they believe Joh. 10. 26. then believing does not mak^ them his sheep; if men
are of God before the hear, Joh. 8. 17 then before they believe if Christ has
washed us from our sins, Rev. 5 believing does not do it; if we are set out
of the (pit of destruction) by the blood of the Covenant, Zach. 9. 11. then not
for, nor by our believing; if we were not justified by his death, how are we
justified by his blood? if the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, 1 John
1. 7. believing cleanses from no sin.

12 Argu. If the sins of the Elect shall not hinder their salvation, then
their salvation depends not upon their believing; bu^ the sins of the Elect
shall not hinder their salvation it is evident, Psalm 89. 28. to 39 Oh how sweet
is this place, and that in Rom 8. 1. 33. to the end. It depends upon his
promise, and not upon our believing; He is faithful that has prom^sed, Heb.
10. 23. What if some did not believe, shall their unbelief make the faith of
God of none effect? God forbid. Yea, let God be true, and every man a liar,
Romans 3. 3, 4. If we believe not, yet he abides faithful; he [cannot] deny
himself, 2 Timothy 2. 13. see Isa. 14. 24. If we believe not, observe Gods
faithfulness in saving us, depends not upon out believing; see Romans 11. 29,
30, 31. It depends upon Gods election, predestination in the immutability of
his Counsel, Heb. 6. 16, 17. Therefore our salvation is certain: to say we
shall not miss of salvation, unless we will not believe, is a vain conceit;
if nothing can be charged upon the Elect, Rom 8. 33. they are freed from all
curse or wrath before they believe; yea, consider this truth, and the
sweetness of it.

13 Argu. If God loves the Elect before they believe, then believing is not any
cause of his love, but God loves the Elect before they believe; he that is an
enemy to the Gospel, does not believe it: as concerning the Gospel they are
enemies, but touching the election they are beloved, Rom 11. 28, 29. He accepts
of our persons, before he accepts of any thing we do, Heb. 11. Therefore we
are loved and accepted before we believe, Ephesians. 1. 4. 6, 7.

14 Argu. If not any thing shall separate us from the love of God, then
unbelief shall not, but not any thing shall separate us from the love of God,
as appears, Romans 8. 33. to the end. The Elect shall be gathered together, Mat.
24. 31. Joh. 11. 52. The election obtained it, Romans 1^. 7. He says not that we
obtained it by believing: If believing were of absolute necessity to salvation,
such as dye in their infancy cannot be saved; for they do not believe, as
appears, Romans 10. 14. 17. Faith is an assent, a trust, a persuasion, Heb. 11.
13. A believing God, v. 6. a judging God faithful, v. 11. Infants want
understanding to believe; for knowledge and says* are not without the
knowledge of the Son of God, Gal. 1. 16. and 2. 20. That infants do believe,
there is no reason nor Scripture for it: If any say, God is able to make them
believe; I answer; God is able to fill this house full of gold, but this is no
proof, that he has done it, or that he ever will; so here.

15 Argu. If unbelief be not the unpardonable sin, then it cannot deprive
the Elect of salvation; but unbelief is not the unpardonable sin; for
unbelief is a not believing in Christ; this sin is immediately and directly
against Christ, therefore its as pardonable as any other sin against Christ is,
as appears, Mat. 12. 31, 32. Also the Elect have committed this sin, not
only before conversion, but after; and daily sin by unbelief, in that we
believe not all that we ought, nor so as we ought to believe, and dye in not
believing that which we ought to believe; is not this unbelief? If final
unbelief be the unpardonable sin, none can be seen to commit this sin
before death; for who can tell its final till they dye, but men may be seen
to commit the sin that is unto death before they dye; as appears 1 John 5.
16. Therefore final unbelief is not the unpardonable sin.

16 Argu. If the salvation of the Elect is sure and certain, then it depends
not upon that which may fail, but believing may fail, therefore if it depends
not upon believing, if it did, it might fail also; but the salvation of the
Elect is sure and certain, in that it depends upon a sure foundation, the
immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6. 16, 17. Faith shall cease, 1 Cor. 13. It
is a creature, Psalm. 5^. a work, and it grows, 2 These. 1. 31. and
increases, 2 Cor 10. 1^. it may be overthrown, 2 Timothy 2. 18, 19. What God
says, I must believe, he says they did for a time believe, Luke 8. 13. The
Devils believe, James 2. 19. How could they have that taste, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
Without believing; how could they receive the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10.
26. Without believing; how could they stay themselves upon the God of Israel?
Without believing ye see what they were, Isa. 48. 1. to 7. and 58. 2. The
nature of it is liable to fail, else what need was there of Christ's prayer
that it might not fail, Luke 22. 32. Its a fruit of the Spirit, one with joy,
peace, goodness, temperance, Gal. 5. 22, 23. And do not one or more of these
in a child of God sometimes fail: if it be denied, the experience of the
Saints do sufficiently testify to the truth of this: but I will prove it by
Scripture: First, for joy, David says; Restore to me the joy of thy salvation,
Psalm. 51. 12. Had not he lost his joy? it did fail him, he wanted it: and
Heman, a good man, complaining says; Lord, why castest thou off my soul? I am
distracted while I suffer thy terrors, Psalm. 88. 14, 15, 16. What joy and peace
had he, if Joy and peace fail? Why not faith, they being one in nature?
Jeremiah says; I said my strength and hope is perished from the Lord, Lam. 3.
18. If his strength and hope perished, then faith perished; if no hope, then no
believing: if we cannot cast away our confidence, why are we exhorted not to
cast it away, Heb. 10. 35. Believing and confidence are all one, 2 These. 3. 4.
Ephesians. 3. 12. If their confidence might be cast away, they might be without it;
see Heb. 3 6. with 1 John 5. 14. Romans 11. 20. Flesh and heart fail, but not
God, Psalm. 73. 26. My hope has he removed like a tree, Joh. 13. 10. Joh. 20.
25. Psalm. 77. 2 7 8, 9, 10. If continue in faith, 1 Timothy 2. 15. denies the
faith, 1 Timothy 4. 1. and 5. 12. denied the faith, 1 Timothy 5. 8. I speak as unto
wise men, judge what I say. Many idolize their believing, they live upon it,
fetch all their comfort from it, and not from God in Christ.

17 Argu. That which takes away sin, that justifies us; Christ took away
sin by his blood, therefore we are said to be justified by his blood, Romans 5.
9 To be justified, and to be free from sin is one; that which justifies us,
freeth us; as the payment of the debt, freeth the debtor from suits and
imprisonments, etc. So Christ paying our debt, is our justification from sin,
our freedom from the punishment of sin. To be saved by Christ, and to be
justified by Christ, is all one; to be saved from our sins, Mat. 1. 21. and
to be justified from our sins, Romans 5. 17. is one thing. Its not our
believing, but the Spirit that reveals to us we are justified; the Spirit
dwells in us, 1 Cor. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 9. 19. Romans 8. 11. 16. 1 John 3. 24. The
Spirit speaks in us, Mat. 10. 20. and shows us what Christ has done for
us, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. with 16. 13, 14, 15. Heb. 10. 15. 17. 1 John 5, 6. The
blood of sprinkling is the application of it to the conscience, it speaks
good things to the conscience, that all is paid, this cleanses the conscience,
Heb. 12. 24. The work of faith is only to assent to the truth of what the
Spirit in the Word says, and receive its testimony: now to assent unto a
thing, is not to manifest it; giving and receiving are two things, Ephesians. 3. 5.

18 Argu. If Christ's death be that thing, for and by which we are justified,
then when that death was, then we were justified; but Christ's death is the
thing for and by which we are justified: By his knowledge my righhteous servant
shall justify many; for he shall bear their iniquity, Isa. 53. 11. So that
his bearing our iniquity, was our justification from sin, and by his
knowledge he knew who^e sins he bore; that is, whom he justif^ed; The Lord
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. with Exodus 28. 21. etc. By his knowledge he
knew thee and me, and he loved thee and me, and gave himself for me and thee,
Gal. 2 20 To bear iniquity, and to bear the pun^shment of sin, is one
thing; if we are justified through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3. 24. Therefore it is evident, we are not justified through believing,
Rev. 5. 9. This is my body which was broken for you, 1 Cor. 11. 24. He had not
dyed but for you, and in his knowledge and love you were when he dyed for you;
here are sweet consolations.

19 Argu. If we are not justified by works, then if believing be a work, then
we are not justified by believing, but we are not justified by works, Romans 4.
That believing is a work, appears

1. Because we are commanded to believe, as to love one another, as he gave us
commandment, 1 John 3. 23. If we are commanded to do it, its a work.

2. To obey a command is a work, but to believe is to obey a command; faith is
an obeying of the will of God, therefore a work; faith is called a service,
the service of your faith, Phil. 2. 17. If it be a service, it is a work; the
work of faith, 2 These. 1. 11. The act and exercise of our faith is a work.

3. Its a work, because we are reproved for the smallness of our faith, Mat.
6. 30. and 8. 26. If it were no way acted by us, why are we reproved for not
believing; if we are not to do it, why are we reproved for not doing it?

4. Its a work, because the Saints are exhorted to do it, Heb. 10. 22. We are
not exhorted to any thing but that which is our duty to do, if it be a duty,
it is a work,

5. To believe, is a work of all the faculties of the soul, the
understanding, will, conscience, memory, affections.

6. To receive a thing, is an act of the whole man, but to believe a thing, is
to receive it, Joh. 1. 12.

7. Not to believe, is a work of darkness, therefore to believe is a work of
righteousness, Titus 3. 5.

8. Faith is required in all we do, therefore it partakes of the nature of a
work, and so is a work, and without it we cannot do any good work, Heb. 11.
6.

9. Its a work, because we are said to do it, If [thou] beleevest, [I do
beleeve] Acts 8. 38. With the heart [man] believes, Romans 10. 9, 10. It is an
action of the heart consisting in judgment, and he does it as truly as he
confesses with his mouth: it is improper to say, believe does believe, love
does love, repentance does repent, but we being moved by the Spirit of God, we
do believe, we love, and we repent; not God, but we by his power.

10. If to confess Christ is a work, then to believe is a work, and one of
the works of righteousness we have done, Titus 3. 5. If it be said, that
faith is put in opposition to works, and therefore faith is not a work: I
answer,

First, When faith is put in opposition to works, then by faith we are to
understand Christ, because he alone is our Righteousness, Romans 3. 28.

Secondly, When the Apostle excludes works in Justification, by works we are
to understand all outward and inward acts, faith it self, for seeing works are
excluded, believing being a work it is excluded with the rest.

Thirdly, It will be granted that the works of the Law were excluded in
Justification; then it will follow, faith is excluded, because no command of
the Law could be obeyed without faith, therefore faith was a part of the
fulfilling of the Law: that faith was required, appears, Mat. 22. 37, 38. 40.
The Law required purity, and that could not be without faith; for those that
believe not, are defiled, their minds and consciences are defiled, Titus 1. 15.
Therefore believing was required under the Law as well as under the Gospel: as
to love the Lord is a duty now as ever, and ever as now; that which is our
Righteousness, causes us to be accepted, causes us to be saved; but that is
Christ, and not our believing, Ezra 9. 15. Righteousness belongs to God, Dan.
9. 7. Its proper to Christ, Jer. 23. 6. Our believing is neither God nor
Christ. We are justified by the act of faith; answ. Then we are not justified
by Christ, by his blood; Christ has deserved to accept our faith for
Righteousness; answ. Gods judgment is according to truth, Romans 2. 2. He
accepts it in mercy, not in justice: answ. Does God judge or accept a thing to
be that which it is not.

20 Argu. If justification is an act of God, then it is not an act of
believing; but its an act of God; its God that justifies, Romans 8. 33. Christ
is God; My righteous servant shall justify many, Isa. 53. 11. Romans 5. 9. Ever
since his death our sins have been removed, Zach. 3. 9. Joh. 1. 29. Col. 1.
20.

21 Argu. If we are justified by his blood, then we are not justified by
believing; but we are justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. Through his
Redemption, Romans 4. 24. Therefore not through our believing; for blood,
Redemption, and believing are not one thing.

22 Argu. That which is our justification, that is our peace; but Christ is our
peace, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15. 17. Therefore Christ is our justification, and not
believing.

23 Argu. That which covers our iniquity, that justifies us; but Christ
covers our iniquity, Isa. 59. 2. Therefore he is our justification: as that
which is covered, is not seen to men, and that which is not seen, is not
imputed, and that which is not imputed, cannot be punished, no more will God
impute any sin to his, 2 Cor. 5. 18. But his righteousness. Imputation
signifying accounting, or recounting what was ours, not to be ours, not
imputing their trespasses to them, 2 Cor 5. 19. Not reckoning to us sin, and
so not the punishment of sin, and imputing or reckoning Christ's
righteousness to be ours for it is ours.

24 Argu. If our justification is in another, then we are not justified in our
selves; but we are justified in another; In the Lord shall the children of
Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa. 45. 25. Our justification is our
glory, and we glory in it: belief is in us; see Rev. 19. 8. and 7 9. 13, 14.
Isa. 61. 10. Therefore believing is not our Justification.

25 Argu. Where our Righteousness is, there is our Justification; but our
Righteousness is in Christ; In the Lord is our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6.
Sufficient to secure us from the punishment of sin: that which is our
Righteousness, is our Justification; Christ is that, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Therefore
believing is not our Righteousness, nor our Justification, Isa. 45. 24. Romans
4. 24. The Papists judge their works to be that which saves them, upon such
places as these; Mark. 16. 16. Pro. 28. 18. Mat. 9. 17. to 23. Mark. 13. 3.
James 2. 24. 1 Timothy 4. 16. 1 Cor. 7. 16.

26 Argu. Justification is a spiritual blessing, therefore where our
spiritual blessings are, there is our Justification; but all spiritual
blessings are in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 3. In him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Saving benefits and
blessings are not in us, but such things as accompany salvation: Saving and
accompanying salvation are not one.

27 Argu. Where we are accepted, there we are justified; but we are accepted in
the beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. Therefore we are justified in the beloved: so we are
complete in his compleatnesse, not in our selves but in him is our perfection,
Col. 2. 10.

28 Argu. Our Justification is a part of our compleatnesse, therefore where we
are complete, there we are justified; but we are complete in him, Col. 2 10.
Therefore we are justified in him; therefore we are not justified in our
selves, nor by believing.

29 Argu. If we be justified by grace, and believing is not grace, then we are
not justified by believing, but we are justified by grace, Romans 4. 24. Titus 3
7. Believing is not grace, the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. are called
graces by men, but not by God; the Scripture calls them not so; faith, love,
meekness, temperance, peace, joy, etc. are not graces, but effects of grace,
gifts of grace, or from grace, grace is but one, there are not many graces,
though there be many gifts of love, which are the effects of it, which all are
the gifts of grace, Romans 2. 6. 1 Cor. 12. 4. Grace is out of us in the good
will and pleasure of God; and Christ's death was an effect of grace, of Gods
grace is love, Titus 3. 7. We are exhorted to grow in grace, viz. in the
knowledge of the love of God, etc. He that believes has the witness in him;
but faith is not this witness, 1 Cor. 2. 10. 2 Cor. 4. 13. The seed that
remains in us, is not God, but the Word of God, Luke 8. 11, 12. Romans 10. 17.
Romans 8. 30. It declares the order of Gods dispencing these privileges to us;
the setting of one thing before another, does not always prove the being of it
before it; see 1 Cor. 1. 30. Rev. 5. 9. If men be called before justified, men
are not justified by believing; for if they be called they believe, or else how
are they called; if they be believers, and yet are not justified, it is because
believing could not justify them. We are also to consider when Scriptures were
written, if before Christ's death or after: Some of those before his death,
says; as some object; He shall redeem Israel, Psalm. 130. 8. He shall
justify, Isa. 53. 11. He shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 20,
21. These speak in the Future tense, he shall come; for as yet Christ was not
borne: but after Christ's death the Scripture speaks in the Present tense,
because he had then actually done it; see Heb. 10. 10. 12. 14. Rev. 1. 5. and
5. 9. Before Christ's death it was commonly expressed that he should do it; now
Christ has done it, we may not say it is to do. Justification by believing
is not to be understood of Justification it self, but the manifestation of it
in the conscience; for the Scripture attributes that to a thing, which is not a
cause, nor means, nor effect of it, but a mere shadow of it; as appears,
Levit. 16. 30. compared with Heb. 10. 11. Col. 2. 17. Till Christ dyed there
was no satisfaction for any one sin; the Father trusted Christ for the sins
of the Elect till Christ's death, and then Christ made payment for the sins of
his Elect to the end of the world.

30 Argu. If we are healed by Christ's stripes, then we were healed before we
believed, for his stripes were before his death when he dyed upon the Cross;
but Christ's stripes healed us; By whose stripes we are healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Therefore believing does not heal us; then ever since Christ's death we have
been sound and whole, even before we knew it; see Ephesians. 2. 16.

31 Argu. If men are given to Christ before they believe, then believing does
not make men belong to Christ; but the first is true, Joh. 6. 37. Joh. 17. 6.
Therefore the latter is true also.

32 Argu. If salvation is in Christ, then it is not in us, much less in
believing, but salvation is in Christ, 2 Timothy 2. 10. Mat. 1. 21.

33 Argu. If the cause why we shall live, is, because Christ lives, Joh. 14.
19. then believing is not the cause why we shall live: if we are alive to God
through Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 7. then not through believing; see Romans 6. 10,
11. for believing is not Jesus Christ.

34 Argu. If our salvation depends upon the promise of God, then it depends not
upon our believing, but it depends upon the promise of God, Heb. 13. 8. Heb. 6.
17, 18.

35 Argu. If the Reason why we shall not perish, is, because none are able to
pluck us out of his hand; then the Reason of our not perishing is, not because
we believe, but the Reason we are saved is, because none are able to pluck us
out of his hand, John 20. 28, 29, 30.

36 Argu. If our salvation depends upon the faithfulness of God, then it
depends not on our believing; but it depends upon the faithfulness of God, 1
These. 5. 23, 24. Mica 7. 18. 20.

37 Argu. If the Reason why we are not consumed, is, Because the Lord changes
not, Mal. 3. 6. Then it is not because we believe; we change often, but he never,
Heb. 13. 5. The ground of my confidence is not in any thing in me, or done by
me, but in God, in his promise. Psalm. 62. 7, 8. I rejoice in the Cross of
Christ, Gal. 6. 14. and that my name is written in the book of life, Luke 10.
20. O ye that love the Lord, Rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 3. 1. Always, Phil 4.
4. Evermore, 1 These. 5. 16.

I would know of you that hold we are justified by believing, whether faith in
the nature and power of it does justify or no; if yea, I would know how the
power to believe apart from the exercise of it can be known to us, and how it
may be called faith, when there is no believing; and whether the light and
power by which we believe, be not the same by which we obey the rest of the
commands of God, and how it can be distinguished apart or without believing; if
it justifies us without its act, can you tell how and when you were justified;
for if it may be in the soul one hour, and not act, why not two seven years;
and whether this opinion does not imply, that a man may have faith, and be
justified by it, and yet not know it, nor believe; if faith justifies in
respect of the righteousness and meritoriousnesse of it, whether it will not
follow that we are not justified by the righteousness of Christ, but by that
of faith which is in our selves, and so need not look at a righteousness in
another, in Christ, if the act of faith justify, whether we are justified by
one act or many, if by one, how we may know it or distinguish it, that we may
not so act faith again needlessly; for what need is there of more then one, if
one be enough; if many acts of faith be required to justify us, it is
necessary to know how many, that so we may know when we are justified; if we
are to act faith continually to be justified, because we sin continually, it
will follow we are not justified for ever, and that we may despair of ever
inj^ying one quarter of an hours sweet enjoyment of Justification, because in
less time we sin, and so are unjust, and to be justified again: and if it
be so, no man can say three minutes together, he is a justified man, because in
less time he sins, and then he is by faith to be justified again; but this
it is for a man to justify himself (as the blind Pharisees justified
themselves) Luke 16. 14, 15. Call you this Justification, which will last no
longer, and is to so little purpose; its but a shadow, there is no truth nor
substance in it, they are like the Priests under the Law, and their work to
less purpose, Heb. 10. 11.

Geree: For satisfaction that they may see we derogate not a jot from Christ;
see Wards Sermon, p. 68.

Ans. It seems Wards Sermon says, they do not, therefore they do not: this
is proof enough for those that will think it so.

Geree: How can this be a derogating unto Christ, or an abrogating unto faith,
to say by believing we live and are justified from sin, etc. Joh. 3. 33. p.
92.

Ans. How can it be otherwise, seeing ye dishonor Christ, and put him to open
shame: it is a very great evil ye do; your evil is great and grievous:

For 1. Christ should be lifted up, but ye pull him down, in that ye deny
him his perfection and glory; ye derogate from his sacrifice, in that ye deny
it to be sufficient to save us.

2. Ye bring in works, believing and repentance, etc. as joint causes of
salvation, and deliverance from wrath.

3. In desiring something beyond his perfection, ye make Christ an imperfect
Priest, and his sacrifice imperfect.

4. Ye disgrace Christ, in adding your righteousness to his; ye deny the
efficacy of his death, and deny him to be able to save to the uttermost.

5. In that ye would have something done for salvation, ye deny it depends
alone upon Christ; for it depends not alone upon him, if it also depends upon
any other condition or additions.

6. Ye deny salvation to be a free gift, freely given us, if we must do for
it, and so earne it, else (as you say) we shall not have it, and so you make
salvation uncertain and doubtful.

7. Ye make Christ a mere shadow in comparison of your works, in saying the
promise of God, and the death of Christ is frustrate to us, unless we perform
such conditions.

8. In saying we are justified by believing, ye deny we are justified by
Christ, which is dangerous, though it has a show of truth, because Christ and
believing are two things; so that its to divide our Justification between God
and man, Christ and us, his works and ours.

9. Ye deny Justification and Salvation to be accomplished by Christ's
obedience, in making it to depend upon our obedience, and so ye impute it in
part (if but in part) to our selves, and so overthrow the death of Christ.

10. Ye make not Christ, but faith and repentance, etc. the means of our
salvation.

11. Ye give that to believing, etc. which is proper to Christ, in that ye
attribute Justification, (which is the chief and maine thing Christ has done
for us) to believing, Isa. 45. 24. and 53. 11.

12. You make believing a cause of Justification, in saying without it we
cannot be justified.

13. In saying believing is imputed for righteousness, ye make it our
righteousness, or charge God to impute that for righteousness which is not
righteousness.

14. Your opinion ingendreth unto bondage, it leaves the conscience in fear,
it robs it of peace, joy, and consolation; its an enemy to a cheerful and free
serving of God.

15. To say that we are justified by Christ and faith together, is
dishonorable to Christ; for if we be justified by both, then not by one, and
so Christ is made no Savior, in their judgments he is but a half Savior. I
desire to know how it can be made out that we are justified by Christ, if we be
justified by believing; if we are justified by his blood, Romans 5. 9. Unless
believing be his blood, we are not justified by believing: the Scripture does
not say that any one is justified from sin by believing, but we have been
taught so, and it is no easy matter to unlearne and leave a corrupt principle.

16. Christ has not all the glory of our salvation, if we join believing or
works to Christ as a copa^ner with him: faith must have a part of it, and we
our selves; for we believe as you confess, p. 6.

17. In saying we are not loved nor accepted until we believe, ye deny we are
accepted for Christ sake.

18. Ye attribute righteousness in part to our selves, in attributing it in
part to believing: many please themselves with a conceit that they do not
dishonor Christ in attributing salvation to believing, because faith is from
Christ.

19. If we may ascribe Justification to believing, then by the same Reason we
may ascribe Justification to love, patience, temperance, etc. yea to all our
performances, our good works, prayers, tears, etc. Because the power by which
we do these is Christ's; Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5.

20 You make Christ no Savior at all, though you confess Christ dyed for us,
yet you affirm, believing and works save us; He is all, yet you make him
nothing at all, unless man please ^o make him (and what he has done)
something by believing, etc. Christ will be all (...) thing in that if ye make
him not all, ye (...) upon him.

O ye sons and daughters of the most High, lift up your voice, and cry no
inherent holiness, no works of the Law to Justification; Its not of works,
of righteousness we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, Titus
3. 5. to 9. In the Lord have I righteousness, he is our righteousness, Jer.
23. 6. My tongue shall talk of thy righteousness, even of thine only, Psalm.
71. 16. 24.

Geree: Methinkes Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27, 28. should make him blush, if he were
alive, they shall be my people, and I will be their God, p. 79.

Ans. You have cause to blush for writing your self a Preacher of the Gospel,
and are so ignorant a Preacher (of the Law, yea) of Popery, to be a Minister of
the Law, is to be a Minister of the Letter, as appears, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9.
Such a Minister you are.

2. Such as belong to the Election of grace, ever were and shall be the people
of God, yea all the world, and all in it is Gods; he says My Gold its his,
Ezekiel. And the beasts of ten thousand mountains; the world, and all in it is
his; but when God says; I will be their God, and they shall be my people; the
meaning is, he will declare himself to be theirs, and own them for his
visibly; My people, Isa. 5. 13. called so, Romans 9. 25. And so shall they own
him; in this sense they were not his people, nor God to their God before.

Geree: We must make our Election sure, 2 Pet. ^. 5, 6, 7. 10, 11.

Ans. This place is to be understood of the knowledge of our interest in it,
that is, we are to use all the means to attain to the knowledge of it; as for
Election it self is sure enough, it was before the world, therefore nothing we
can do, can cause it to be, nor cause us to have an interest in it, Ephesians. 1. 4.
Our help comes too late to do that which was done before we were borne; we
grant that until men believe, we cannot tell who is elected, or shall be
saved, till it appears to us, Acts 13. 48.

Geree: All justified persons please God, but without faith none can please
God, Heb. 11. 6. I herefore without faith no man is justified.

Ans. God was ever pleased with the persons of the Elect; Jacob was loved
before he had done good or evil, Romans 9. 11. 13. This love is from
everlasting, Jer. 31. 3. God loves the Elect, as he loves Christ, and Christ
was loved before the foundation of the world, Joh. 17 23, 24. Therefore the
persons of the Elect pleased God before the world, therefore before they
believed; nor does God love any the more or the better because they believe; as
appears, Romans 5. 8, 9, 10. 2 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Romans 11. 28. 1 John 4. 16.
Therefore Heb. 11. 6. is to be understood of actions not done in faith, are not
according to the Word, therefore are not acceptable; therefore your Sylogisme
is not true nor safe; if ye learn the truth, ye must learn a new Logic;
your Doctrine inferres, that a believer does not sin, or if he do, he
pleases God; if ye grant, its possible for one that is justified to displease
God, then ye contradict your self, then its possible for a man to displease
God, and yet be justified.

Geree: Faith and repentance on man's part, are conditions of the Covenant of
grace, is evident, Joh. 3. 16. p. 73.

Ans. I would see Scripture for this, I hear it from men, but not from Christ:
the Scripture does not say, that believing and repentance are conditions of the
covenant of grace, nor that there is any conditions on man's part of the
Covenant of grace. When you write again, allege the Scripture that says so,
or say nothing: if there be conditions in the covenant of grace, then the
covenant is frustrate, if the condition be broken, if it were so, we could not
be certain of salvation. Joh. 3. 16. Mark. 16. 15, 16. and the like places,
are not conditions of the covenant of grace, but directions how the Gospel is
to be preached, and applied: if any ask who shall be saved, the Scripture
answers, He that believes.

The Scripture says; He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark
16. 16. Ye see Baptism is required as well as faith: the thief on the Cross
was not baptized, yet saved; if he was saved and yet wanted the one, by the
same reason another may be saved in the want of the other (if he belong to the
election of grace) seeing believing, repentance, baptism, are works in nature
one. Whereas it is said; He that believes not shall be damned, and is
condemned already; Such Scriptures hold forth what men are in appearance, and
not what they are in respect of the eternal decree and appointment of God: for
those who believe were once unbeleevers, Romans 11. 32. And if it were his will
that they should be damned, God has or must change his will, or they cannot be
saved; For the Lord of hosts has sworn saying, as I have thought, so shall it
come to pass, as I have purposed it shall stand, Isa. 14. 24. and 46. 10. Acts
2. 23. Heb. 6. 17. To be condemned already, is to be understood they are
condemned in the Scriptures, and in their own consciences, yet if elected, they
shall be saved.

The Word of God is his will, viz. his signifying will, it reveals some part
of his pleasure, it is not his decree or pleasure, it is not so properly his
will, as the will of his good pleasure is: By the event (the not slaying
Isaac) it appeared that it was not the will and decree of God that Abraham
should kill his Son; nor Niniveh be destroyed. The word of God is his
signifying will, and it concerns us to look upon it, to bind us to the
observation of it, until he signify the contrary; thus it was in Abraham's
case concerning the killing of his Son. Also the providence of God declares
his will as well as his word, though it be not in the same way; instance the
sparing of Niniveh, etc.

Geree: Righteousness is imputed to us by faith, p. 102.

Ans. The Scripture says, God imputes Righteousness; you say, faith imputes
it: faith and belief you make one, p 85. Do you make God and belief one, or
do you deny that God imputes Righteousness?

1. Nor does God impute our believing for Righteousness; if it be said,
Abraham believed, and it was imputed to him for righteousness: So Phineas
executing Judgment was imputed to him for Righteousness unto all generations:
Psalm. 106. 30, 31. That is, it was an action commendable.

2. [ It] what it, was imputed, his believing or that which he believed, it was
Christ his Righteousness that was imputed, not his believing; the word
believing implies so much, that Righteousness is elsewhere, and not in
believing, nor in our selves; for by it we apprehend something out of our
selves in another, in Christ.

3. If God imputed his believing to him for righteousness, then it was his
righteousness, or God imputes it for that which it was not; for Christ is our
righteousness; This is his Name that they shall call him the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. We are to ask in his Name, viz. his Name is his
Righteousness; He is made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. In his Name,
that is, in the confidence of his Righteousness we are accepted, and shall
have what we need; in this confidence go to God without wavering.

1. Righteousness is in Christ; In the Lord have I righteousness, Isa. 45.
24. Romans 2. 24.

2. Belief is in us; Christ's righteousness is without us; it covers us,
Rev. 19. 8. and 7. 9. 13, 14. Isa. 61. 10.

3. Daniel believed, yet righteousness was not then brought in, Dan. 9. 24.
Isa. 61. 1.

4. The Saints did not count belief to be their righteousness, Psalm. 71. 16.
Mica 7. 9. I shall behold his righteousness. Righteousness and glory consists
not in faith, but rather subsists in us by it; I mean the comfort of this
Righteousness.

5. To say that any thing is our righteousness besides Christ, is to deny him
the pre-eminence in all things, Col. 1. 18.

6. Therefore the Saints cry; O Lord, thou art our Righteousness, Ezra 9. 15.

7. All that fallen man needed, was only a perfect righteousness to justify
and save him, if believing could have been that to them, Christ might have been
spared.

8. That which is our righteousness causes us to be accepted, and that is
Christ, Ephesians. 1. The Saints expect not any acceptance for any thing in them, or
acted by them, Dan. 9. 18. Isa. 71. 10. 16. Its most evident that Christ he is
made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Therefore believing is not made our
Righteousness. Therefore our Righteousness is not in any thing but Christ, in
and by whom we are more righteous then Adam in his purity and greatest glory.

Geree: Belief makes us the children of God.

Ans. Men are sons; first, by creation; secondly, by generation; or thirdly,
by adoption. A fourth way we know not.

The Elect are Sons before they believe, which appears by these Reasons.

1. We are children and sons by adoption, Ephesians 1. 5. We were sons when
elected; for Election is nothing else but our adoption (by adoption Christ and
the Elect became sons to God) adoption and choice is one; the Elect were
chosen before the world, Ephesians 1. 4. Adoption is acceptance of us in Christ;
therefore we were children before we believe: before God declares mercy to
Ephraim, he calls him his Son; Ephraim my Son, I will surely have mercy
upon him, Jer. 31. 20.

2. The action of the Father is before the action of the Son; adoption is
attributed to the Father, therefore it must in order be before Redemption,
which is the work of the S^nne; so that the Elect were chosen before Christ
did redeem them by his death, Rev 5. 9 Therefore adoption is before our
redemption, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4, 5. And our Redemption was before we believed, Rev. ^.
10. And therefore we were sons before we believe.

3. If we were not sons before Christ suffered, he could not have brought
sons to glory through suffering, Heb. 2. 10. If not sons before he
suffered, how could we be his brethren? It beh^ved him to be like unto his
brethren, verse. 17. But if they had not been children, they could not be his
brethren; also Christ by his death justified children.

4. We were given to Christ before he suffered for us, then we were heirs,
sons; If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs, etc. That is,
children of God, Gal 3. 29. So that our being Christ's, makes us the seed, and
not our believing.

5. If a child differs nothing from a servant, Gal. 4. 1. That is, one that is
not a child, then he is a child before he believes; for if he believes, he
differs apparently.

6. We are sons before we believe, because we cannot believe without the
Spirit; for faith is a fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Therefore we have the
Spirit before we believe; and we are sons before we have the Spirit; for the
Spirit had not been sent into their hearts, if they had not been sons;
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our
hearts, Gal. 4. 5. If the Reason he sent the Spirit into their hearts, was,
because they were sons; then it was not because of the smallness of the
measure they had received; therefore Gal. 4. 5. is to be understood of the
first sending it into their hearts.

7. If believing makes us the children of God, it will follow, we have no union
nor interest in God without our act; for we believe; this suits well with
Popery.

8. Its against truth and reason to believe, that by believing I make my self
a son, and God my father; if I believe my self to be a Kings son, will
believing it make me so: if I believe brass is gold, will it be so; he that is
a Prince knows not that he is so, until some time after he is so; yet he is a
Son and a Prince whether he knows it or believes it or no: therefore
believing makes us not sons, but by it we see our selves to be sons, and
enjoy the comfort of it by believing.

9. Some teach and say, by baptism I was made a member of Christ, a child of
God, and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven: and you say, by believing: yet
its by neither.

10. Some have believed themselves to be sons, yet see what God says, Isa.
58. 2, 3, 4. Besides, God says, Some believed for a time, and after fell away,
Luke 8. and that the Devils believe, as James 2. Were these the sons of God;
if no; then believing cannot make any a son; sons by says in Gal. 4. By faith
is understood Christ; or by faith we know our selves to be sons; and by faith
we appear to be sons; faith and works being inseparable, in any other sense
it cannot be extended, as I have proved.

Geree: None can be in Christ without faith, Romans 11. 20. Ephesians. 3. 17. p. 97.

Ans. The Scriptures says not any are in Christ by faith; Christ says, Every
branch in me, Joh. 15. 2. 4. etc. That is, in the (visible) Church; for that is
called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. In this sense men may be in Christ, and perish, a
contrary exposition inforceth a final falling away, etc. There is a being in
Christ by election, Ephesians. 1. 4. But this not by believing, therefore your
conclusion is without a foundation.

Geree: We are dead till we believe.

Ans. We are so in our selves; but alive unto God by Jesus Christ: our life is
hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3, 4.

Geree: That which is sinful may justify from sin, p. 91.

Ans. So you say, but the Scripture does not say so; read me this out of the
word of God, if ye cannot, it must be placed among the unwritten verities or
fables. God does not approve of that which is sinful, much less does he
justify us for it, or by it; all that is sinful is detestable and accursed,
the wrath of God is against it, Rom 1. 18. Gal. 3. 10. Hab. 1. 13. That which
makes us innocent, makes us just, and that is not sin, but Christ, who is our
righteousness.

Geree: It justifies not in regard of it self or work, but in regard of that
which it holds, being most worthy, p 91. They over-honour faith indeed, that
say, the very act of faith justifies, which we utterly disclaim in the
Arminians, p. 90.

Ans. If faith justifies as it holds, then it justifies as it is an act; for
to hold a thing is an act; and yet ye say the act of says does not justify; I
see you can contradict your self, and disclaim what ye affirm.

2. If faith justify, because by says we receive justification, then the act
justifies; for its an act to receive: also it will follow by this Reason, that
he that receives a pardon from a Prince, may say his hand pardoned him, because
the hand received it; and may ^e not as well say he pardoned himself, because
he received it. The reason is the same.

Geree: Faith is before Christ, p. 116.

Ans. Christ says; Without me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15. 5.

Geree: Repentance and Faith are antecedents of grace, p. 76, 77.

Ans. It seems they are no grace, but go before it, they are and are not, you
know not what they are; they are effects of grace, and signs to us that we are
chosen to life, Acts 13. 48. Repentance is a change of the mind Luke 16. 13.
and a change in conversation, Hos. 14. 10.

Geree: Treading the wine press alone, Isa. 63. 3. is not meant Christ
suffering for sin, but causing his enemies to suffer; as the coherence with
Rev. 19. 13. Christ is an agent, he treads, p. 13.

Ans. Christ's passivenesse was an actual destroying sin his greatest enemy;
what you have said to it, has not proved that it is not so meant; is not this
your mis-take, be not so confident.

Geree: Ephesians. 5. The word might present holy without spot, etc. is meant for the
future in heaven, p. 5.

Ans. It seems you are ignorant and a stranger to these, and the like places,
Song 4. 7. and 2. 10. and 6. 9. 1 John 4. 17. Rev. 14. 5. Heb. 10. 14. Rev. 1.
5. We believe these, because they be the word of God.

These places speak in the Present tense; has Christ been 1600 years a
removing iniquity, and still is it to do; this is contrary to Zach. 3. 9. Heb^
9. 26.

Many Scriptures written before Christ's death, says; He shall redeem, etc. as
Psalm. 130. 8. Isa. 53. 11. Mat. 1. 21. After his death, it says, Its done,
Heb. 10. 10. 12. 14. Romans 4. 9. Rev 1. 5.

Geree says; The Doctor does unlearnedly infer, p. 83.

Ans. It seems if any infer any thing contrary to you, it is no learned
inference; will you monopolize all to your selves, that wisdom may dye with
you; God is the teacher of his, 1 Cor. 2. 10. They shall all be taught of God;
he is the best teacher, and they are the most learned that are taught by him,
Who teaches like him? says Job.

Geree: He has not any solid Author on his side for what he has delivered, p.
99.

Ans. He alleges none but solid ones; Is Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles,
no solid Authors with you? If we had said so, you might well have cried
Blasphemy.

Geree: The Antinomians hold that faith cannot be showed by our works, p. 89.

Ans. Then I am no Antinomian, nor never knew any, yet you rate and revile us
at your pleasure.

Geree, says Doctor Cripse, denies, Mat. 10. 34, 35, 36. Luke 11. 33. 26.
Therefore he teaches another Christ, and a wrong way to heaven, p. 22.

Ans. He mentions not these places, much less does he deny them: your words
want warrant and weight; for they are a manifest slander; the objection you
answer unto is sufficient to convince you: you charge falsely, and then draw a
false conclusion; what boldness and large conscience have ye? how unjust and
unreasonable is your charge and inference? do you it to make us vile?

Geree says Doctor Cripse says; Righteousness puts a man from Christ, a
prodigious profaneness, hell it self has not a more devilish expression,
Mat. 5. 6. p. 104.

Ans. The righteousness he condemns, is our own righteousness, and that
which keeps men from Christ; see Romans 10. 3. He condemns not the
righteousness of Christ, nor any thing that is righteous, or from Christ; I
never knew any so unreasonably wrest any man's words as you do his.

When the Doctor says, sit down, question it not, believe it is as good
security as God can make thee; God has promised, venture thy soul upon it
without further security; Geree wonders at this security, and says. Its no
security; as good as God can make; Blush, O heavens, at this blasphemy; if they
have no better assurance, their faith is built upon a sandy and slippery
foundation, p. 124, 125.

Ans. The security is that which the soul is to rest upon: therefore he says,
God has promised, venture thy soul upon it without seeking any further
security, p. 124.

2. Is the promise of God no security at all with you; blush O heavens at this
blasphemy; to call it none at all, sandy and slippery.

The promise has an Oath annexed to it, Heb. 6. 17, 18. This is as good
security as God has made, or is needful to make.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, and has raised up for us a horn of salvation in the house of his
servant David, etc. Luke 1. 68, 69.

An Answer to a Treatise, entitled, An Antidote against Antinominanisme, by
Doctor Homes.
AN Antidote promises some rare extract to expel poison, a specious pretense;
But how can poison expel poison? his Antidote is poison, and he that has
received it, needs an Antidote to expel its poison: he crowns the truth we
contend for with names of disgrace (which is powerful to deceive the simple)
calling it unjustifiable Antinomianisme, etc. But its easier to say it, than to
prove it; and though his saying so, is sufficient to many, the wise will try
it, 1 John 4. 1. He confesses actual Justification is by union, and so has
overthrown what he contends for: Seeing we were united to Christ before we
believed, as appears, Heb. 2. 11. Joh. 1. 14. Then we were justified before we
believed. Also how could the Elect be crucified with Christ, if they were not
considered in him, one with him, united to him, Gal. 2. 20.

But he says; The instant of union is when Christ is in us by faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. Joh. 3. 36. Joh. 1. 12.

Ans. A thing may be said to be in us* and yet not one in union; how could Paul
say; Its not I, but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7. If sin and he were one
in union; is the house and he that dwells in it one in union? Ephesians. 3. 17. Speaks
of Christ's dwelling in us by faith, Joh. 3. 36. it declares who has
everlasting life, he that believes has it: we do not say men have it before
they believe; we say, this life is in his Son; and the Elect shall have it, 1 John 5. 11. Joh. 1. 12. declares that those that receive him, have this
privilege or prerogative to be called Sons; this none have but such as
believe; for we may not call him a son, who appears not to be so; to men
there is no difference between men before they believe, but to God there is, he
knows who are his.

Without faith it is impossible to please God; please, signifies a delight, so
Basil and Bud.

Ans. Seeing the Scripture declares that Gods well pleasednesse with us depends
not upon our pleasing of him, we are satisfied, we regard no man's testimony, we
own no Doctors but Christ.

Can God approve of the greater, our persons without faith, and not of the
lesser, namely, our actions without faith; this is strange.

Ans. Its Christ that causes us to be accepted, Ephesians. 1. 6. Actions without
faith are not accepted, neither for Christ, nor for faith.

Our happiness consists, not in Gods accepting our actions, but in our union
with him, and in that our sins are not imputed unto us, Psalm. 32. 1.

Our actions are accepted, because our persons are accepted, Genesis 4.

Ans. Its strange you will offer to say so; oh the horrible and tragical
effects that naturally flow from this doctrine, that he that believes cannot
sin, or his sinful actions are accepted; if so, then David's adultery and
murder was accepted, yea all the sins of believers are accepted; we abhor
to open such a gap for sin to enter.

The word Reconcile, declares that God is at enmity with us, and we with him.
Re signifies again, con signifies together, ciliation, to call or move to,
how is there a removing, where there was never a removing? how together of
those who were never asunder? how again, unless the oneness had been broken
apieces?

Ans. Though the word signify so, it will not follow, that God was ever at
enmity with the Elect. We are full of movings, and removings, because
changeable, but its not so with God, although the Elect sin, and depart from
God, yet the Scripture says not that God was at enmity with them, or that they
fell from the love of God, or that God hated the Elect; consider 1 John 5. 16.
Isa. 27. 4. Romans 5. 9, 10. Heb. 13. 8.

In saying God was never an enemy to the Elect, you make the fall of Adam, in
whom the Elect were included, a fiction, and the story of Christ's sufferings a
fable, and Christ's passion a vanity, and overthrow the nature of God, whose
purity cannot endure sin; ye deny many Scriptures, which testify that God
was at enmity with the Elect, Ephesians. 2. Isa. 63. 10, 11. Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42.
Ezekiel. 16. 62, 63.

Ans. These are hard words, and high charges indeed, Jud. 13. 15. like the
raging waves of the Seas* that look big, and rise high, and fall as suddenly;
so will your words fall into mere fables, or slanders; for no such thing will
follow; we say the ^all of Adam, and Christ's death, are no fictions, nor
fables, but real things, by nature in Adam the Elect did sin, and fell in
Adam, etc. And had not Jesus Christ been made a curse for us, we had perished,
therefore the death of Christ did more then reveal love; men can reveal love
each to other without dying, much more could God; in the love of God, and
Christ's death, lies our eternal happiness: Consider whose doctrine is
against the purity of God, yours or ours.

You say, we deny many Scriptures, tell us of one, we deny not any, we deny
your false glosses, and mis-interpretations, I pray tell us in what place of
Scripture we may read that God was ever at enmity with the Elect; or that he
did not love them, until they did believe.

You say; Till conversion comes, God is an enemy with the Elect.

Ans. The Scripture you allege to prove it, says not as you do; the word,
wrath, Ephesians. 2. is the curse, that nor any other place does not say, that by the
word wrath is meant Gods enmity against the Elect; if it do, we will say so
too. In Isa. 63. 10, 11. is the word enmity, viz. In some of his dispensations
he was so; for he fought against him. So Levit. 26. God walked contrary to
them, yet it will not follow, that God did so from any enmity and hatred to
them; for he did then love them, and own them for his; as appears, verse. 45. I
have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hands of their enemies, Jer.
12. 7. As for Ezekiel 16. 62, 63. When I am pacified toward thee; it appears
by the four last verses, that its to be understood of the knowledge of his
love; for he says; Thou shall know that I am the Lord thy God. Joh. 14. 20.
God may seem angry, yea seem an enemy, and hide himself, and handle them
roughly, and yet love them not the worse for that; as Jer. 31. 20. He change^h
not, Mal. 3. 6. He says, He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb.
13. 8. Anger is not in me, Isa. 27. 4. Therefore your brother was very much
mistaken to conceive that there was anger in God till he was pacified.

If Gods enmity had not concurred with Eves enmity against him, she had not in
all likelihood eaten the forbidden fruit.

Ans. You are hard put to it, and have no Scripture to prove that you affirm;
it appears you have no more but a likelihood for it; therefore we must take
that, or nothing.

The fall was not from any enmity in God against her, but God by that means
was pleased to bring about his glory; see Ephesians. 1. 6. to 12. Romans 3. 19.

God is a God of wrath to us, till faith in Christ comes, Ephesians. 2. Romans 5. 1, 2
Its as evident as evident may be, that by faith in Christ, God is reconciled to
us and we to him.

Ans. Its as evident as may be in your book, though the Scripture say not so.

Faith is a cause of Justification.
Ans. You ascribe as much to faith, as to Christ a cause; this your opinion is
very dishonorable to Christ, in setting faith above Christ; in making it a
cause, whereas Christ's death is but a means, a cause is above a means; the
cause is the love of God.

I say actually God cannot be said to be reconciled to man, while man is not
reconciled to God.

Ans. I see you say it, and say more then you can prove; we say and prove that
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 9. 10. What Christ
did was actual, unless you will make it a fable: if Christ dyed before we
believed, we were reconciled before we did believe.

Faith brings us into Christ, Ephesians. 2. 8, 9. Joh. 6. 37. Joh. 3.

Ans* You say, into Christ, and that faith is a part of Christ, and a part of
the divine nature; but the Scripture does not say so; the divine nature is God,
and incommunicable; if it could be divided in parts, it were not infinite: we
partake of it by union, not by in^usion: its no wonder ye ascribe all to faith,
as you do, if ye think faith is God. So you ask, ^f God saves us without our
being in Christ, and whether God does not love to see us in Christ, rather then
out of him: is this to speak like a Doctor? Tell me, how could we be chosen in
Christ before the world, if God did not consider us in him, Ephesians. 1. 4. Can you
^ell when God considered us out of Christ, or or in what Scripture it is said,
that ever any of the Elect were out of Christ, or that they by ^inne fell out
of Christ, or out of the love of God.

When in Ephesians. 2. 5. does not import a difference of time.

Ans. But it does, for when we were dead, then was the time that we were not
alive.

Evermore the godly learned Schoolmen (we call not the Papists in) put a
difference between Gods decree and the execution of it.

Ans. So do we, but not because they say so: if the Scripture be clear, why
call ye in any at all, we will not believe men, therefore spare that labor
when you write again: we do not say, we were actually justified from
eternity, but by Christ on the Cross.

Why is God said to be wrath with the Ephesians whilst out of Christ?

Ans. You abuse the Scriptures, for they do not say, that they were ever out
of Christ, or that God was wroth with them.

Tremble to say, God loved Paul with as great love, when he persecuted the
Church, as when he preached the Gospel.

Ans. Let them tremble that say, that the sins of believers are accepted,
that make God changeable, and love in him finite, and to be by fits and starts
sometimes more and sometimes less, and sometimes without any love at all; and
that a purpose of love, and an act of love are contrary; I thought a purpose of
love could not be without love; a purpose of love is love in act; see Jer. 31.
3. Joh. 3. 16. 1 Timothy 1. 14, 15, 16.

Concerning your distinction of Gods love of benevolence to a sinner, and his
love of complacency after conversion, there is no light in it: in what
Scripture may I read this distinction of the love of God; if not in any, I
believe it came out of the impure fountain, viz. the blind Schoolmen. How this
distinction of love may suit with man, I pass not, but to refer this to God,
is to make him imperfect; Christ loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.
20. I did not believe when God sent his Son, and when he dyed for me, therefore
he loved me before I believed; see Romans 9. 11. 13.

I wonder why you so contend for this expression, that God loved the Elect from
Eternity, seeing the Scripture for once calling it love, calls it, purpose,
choice, counsel, election, predestination.

Ans. Wonder not we contend for it, seeing many deny it, a little leaven
leaveneth all, Gal. 5. 9. We believe also that all those expressions hold forth
love, and are one with it.

Where is life and peace till faith comes?
Ans. Its in Christ, where it should be, Col. 3. 3, 4. who is our peace, Ephesians 2.
14. and when we believe, we enjoy the comfort of it.

I wonder ye so contend against our Justification and salvation alone by
Christ, unless ye intend to establish your own works for righteousness, Romans
10. 3. Luke 18. 9.

What need we take care, if we believe he will not love us the better; if we
believe not, he will not love us the worse; and then a man may dye without
faith, and yet be saved.

Ans. If this be all, the Papists say as much against you for denying they are
saved by charity: say the Papists, if our good works cannot make us to be
never the more loved, what need we take care to do them? if we do them, God
will not love us the better, if we do them not, God will not love us the
worse: if we dye without them we may be saved: Consider what answer ye would
give to them, and take it to your self.

So you tell us a story of a maid, who, as you say, was led away with this
doctrine; said boldly to you, she knew not how she could offend Jesus Christ
by any thing she did; answer Heb. 13. 8. He changes not; if her speech could
not be justified, what is that to us? The doctrine of Christ is not the cause
of the sins of men; is there none of your mind do amiss; its easier to tell
a story, then to prove what you have said.

To use your own words; Many errors, blasphemies, and tragical effects flow
from your doctrine: You say, Faith takes a man out of the state of damnation,
etc. with other strange doctrines, which the Bible never knew, which tend to
dishonor Christ, and to obscure the Gospel, and fill the conscience with
trouble and sorrow, in stead of joy and peace.

Christ's perfection is our happiness, and in it we rest satisfied, desiring to
obey him: O that we did not think any thing too much for him, who has done so
much for us, to love us, and wash away our sins in his own blood.

Many shall receive the notion of this truth (as I hear you have done) but
shall afterward lay it down again for error (as you have done) grow dead, or
be profane, because they received not the truth in the love of it, God gave
them up to strong delusions, to believe lies, taking error for truth; they not
being taught it of Christ, they wanted the power of it, and never truly knew
nor understood this truth; but ye have not so learned Christ, if so be ye have
heard him and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 20,
21, 22. Ye see the teachings of men, and the teachings of Christ, are diverse,
and have several effects: the one ends in profaneness; but Christ's teaching,
ends in holiness, as becomes the Gospel.

An Answer to a Treatise, entitled, Sin suffered for, but not remitted.
IN which he says; Sin was not before the sinning person had a being

Ans. If sin cannot be considered to be before we were borne, then when Christ
suffered he bare none of our sins; how then can we be saved; for that which
is not, cannot be borne; and how is it just to punish Christ for nothing; for
so is that which is not, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.

We put a difference in the Covenant, and the performance of it.

Ans. So do we; and when Christ dyed he performed the condition of the
Covenant.

Heaven was then purchased, and we may a^ well say, we have that now, as pardon
of sin hefor^ it be committed.

Ans. The Scripture says, we are justified in his blood, and that he has
washed us from our sins in his own blood: but the SS^rip^ture does not say,
we have heaven in his blood and are glorified in his blood; therefore the
Reason is not the same.

The Scripture speaks only of sins past.
Ans. If Christ satisfied only for the sin past before his death, or only
those we have committed, who shall satisfy for the rest w^ shall hereafter
commit: the Scripture saith^ he has forgiven us all our trespasses, pas^
present, and to come, is all, less is not a^ How past; what before Christ
suffered, wh^ or what satisfied for sins since committed^ if past, before we
believe, what satisfies (...) purges us after conversion; will our work^ do
it?

We put a difference between the salve in t^ Surgeons box, and the healing of
the wound.

Ans. So do we; yet say, His stripes healed (...)

Some whose sins Christ (...) are (...) unwashed, Zach. 13. 1.

Ans. Zach. 13. 1. was a prophecy of Christ* who by his death washed us clean
in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5.

Christ gives remission of sins after we believe.
Ans. The question is not when Christ gives it, nor when we receive it, but
when sin was destroyed, and washed away, and we made just: if there were not
remission of sins in Christ for us before we believe, how could it be given
us afterward?

We are to ask pardon, Mat. 6. 12.
Ans. The word pardon is not in the Text; the word debts is to be understood
betwixt man and man: first, for we pray to be forgiven as we forgive, we
forgive not perfectly; will an imperfect forgiveness of our sins from God be
sufficient for us? Secondly, Because Gods forgiving us our sins against him
is not on that condition, if we forgive others, as this is; see Mark. 11. 25,
26. Luke 17. 3. 2 Cor 2. 7. And as for the forgiveness of sin in 1 John 1* 9.
is to be understood for the manifestation of forgiveness, the assurance and
enjoyment of it in the conscience: its usual in Scripture to put the cause for
the effect, and the effect for the cause, Pro. 8. 36. Its so to be understood,
because there is nothing of pardon obtaineable, but the manifestation of it,
therefore not to be prayed for since Christ's death, all that is to be done is
only to declare its done, and for whom its done; for Christ will dye no more,
its in vain to pray for the pardon of that sin which was not washed away in
his blood, Heb. 10. 18. 2 Cor 5. 19. It is no mocking of God, to pray to God to
manifest to us what he has done for us; as, David, Psalm. 51. 9. 12.

I grant Christ has borne our sins, there is a difference betwixt Christ's
bearing them, and giving us pardon for them.

Ans. If Christ has borne them, and satisfied for them, seeing God is
satisfied, now we know it, we are satisfied, in that God has not any thing to
lay to our charge, Romans 8* 33.

2 Timothy 1. 9. speaks of his purpose.
Ans. Christ by his death did save us, according to his purpose, before the
world: mark the words, His purpose to save us was before the world: He says
not that we were saved before the world; He saved us by his death, so that its
said, He has saved us, 2 Timothy 1. 9. see Titus 3. 5. Joh. 3. 36. and 5. 24.
Col. 2. 10. Ephesians. 1. 3. and 2. 5. 8. Heb. 10. 14. 1 John 5. 11, 12, Phil. 3. 12.
Romans 8. 24. We have all in Christ, Romans 8. 23. We wait for the adoption; yet we
are now the Sons of God, 1 John 3. 2. and our Redemption, Ephesians. 1. 4. Yet by
Christ we are redeemed, Luk 1. 68. We have redemption in him, Col. 1. 14. for
Ephesians. 1. 3. In our selves imperfect, there is no perfection in us, nor in this
life.

Heb. 10. 10. Proves that by one act, Christ's death, God was satisfied.

Ans. Its enough, seeing God is satisfied, we are satisfied, though others
cavell, and be unsatisfied.

Forgiveness of sin, conveyed to us by the Spirit, is called pardon.

Ans. It appears from Isa. 40. 1, 2. That their sins were pardoned before it
was declared unto them; God calls it pardon, yet they knew it not, nor had it in
their consciences; Comfort ye my people; tell her that her iniquity is pardoned.

2. Pardon of sin, or justification in the conscience, is not justification
is self, but only the knowledge of it; Justification depends not upon our
assurance of it, or knowledge of it, but upon Christ, Isa. 45. 25. It consists
in taking away sin, that which is in the conscience is the knowledge of it,
and comfort of it.

1. That pardon of sin or justification consists not in the declaring of it,
nor receiving of it; for if to declare one to be just, makes him so, then he
was not so before, God and wisdom are said to be justified by men, Mat. 11.
19. Luke 7. 35. Romans 3. 3, 4. did it make him so?

2. God by his Spirit declares a soul to be just and righteous, but if he
were not made so by Christ before, it will follow, he justified the wicked,
which is abomination, Pro. 17. 15. They are just, or wicked, guilty persons or
not guilty, he says, he will by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34. 7. Deuteronomy.
25. 1. Therefore they that are righteous before, God will declare them to be
so: God will not have men to declare any to be just and righteous, unless they
appear to be so: The Elect are made just by Christ, therefore they appear so
to God, and in his time he declares it.

3. If to declare one to be just, could make him so, it were good to do it;
for its good to make evil good: if the wicked and their actions were to be
declared to be just, yet would they remain wicked and sinful still.

1. Neither is Justification a taking sin out of the conscience, if it were,
faith justifies not, nor does it take sin out of the conscience, nor assure
the conscience that he is a child of God, for that is the work of the holy
Spirit of God.

2. A man may fear the Lord, and obey Christ, and yet walk in darkness, and
see no light, and yet God is his God, Isa 50. 10, 11. If he be not a believer,
how does it appear that God is his God: If sin be taken out of his conscience,
and he assured that God is his God, how does he walk in darkness, and see no
light? to see all Christ has done to be for us, and sin taken out of the
conscience, which is the fruit of the former, is a great light.

3. If the knowledge that a man is a believer takes away sin, then faith takes
it not away; for it is one thing to believe, and another to know I believe; as
it is one thing to see, and another to know I see: the latter is by a
reflection: by this reason it will follow, that nothing justifies, but the
taking sin out of the conscience, which is assurance; and

4. If assurance be justification, then a believer may be an unjustified man,
because he may want assurances, and be so clouded and deserted, that he may not
enjoy the assurance of pardon, but very much doubt whether his sins be
pardoned or no^: thus it was with Heman, Psalm. 88. and many other believers.

5. If justification consists in taking sin out of the conscience, it will
follow, that if conscience accuse, he is an unjustified man, and so be a
justified and unjustified man in ten minutes; for idle thoughts and words are
sins, and conscience will accuse for them, and they may lie heavy upon the
conscience.

6. Also by this reason it will follow, that none are converted, nor have faith
until they have assurance they appear to be in their sins; no faith but
assurance, yet assurance is no faith at all, for they are two things, Joh. 6.
68, 69.

7. In placing pardon and Justification only in the conscience, many of the
children of God, who enjoy not assurance, but walk in darkness, in that
respect are concluded to be in sin and unjustified, which is not only
uncomfortable, but contrary to the Scriptures, and the Saints experience, its
an error, therefore to affirm that men must believe, and be assured of the
remission of sin, to the end they may be remitted.

Heb. 10. 14. By Perfect, is not meant pardon of sin, they were sins, and after
washed, 1 Cor. 8.

Ans. What then does it mean, is not he that is perfect without fault? did not
Christ by himself purge our sins, Heb. 1. 3. Was it not enough, and to
purpose?

They allege 1 John 3. 9. and 5. 18. Whosoever is horn of God sins not,
etc.

Ans. Its not I but sin that dwells in me, Romans 7. 20. If sin and a
believer be one, how can he say, its not I, therefore I and sin are two things:
we say, Whosoever is borne of God sins not, and we do sin, and have sin,
if this be a contradiction, you know where we had it.

O but, say they, Gods people cannot sin in Gods account.

Ans. We neither say so, nor think so, but think and say the contrary;
believers sin, and they see it, therefore God much more, and counts it as it
is, sin: also we say, there is no condemnation to be inflicted on the Elect for
their sin, Romans 8. 1. 33.

Your doctrine causes men not to feel the sense of sin, and to cry to God
for pardon, nor to know the sweetness of pardon.

Ans. If by sense of sin you mean the horror and terror of it, we desire
not such a sense of sin, nor wish it you, nor do we fetch our comfort from
our sense of sin, or tears, or crying, nor our best works, but only and
alone from the love of God in the death of Christ; we have made a Christ of our
works, tears and crying long enough.

An Answer to a Treatise, entitled, Ancient and durable Gospel: written in
answer to my Book, entitled, Justification by Christ alone.
HE says; Its well you yield to the truth at last, if you had done so all this
while, I had spared my labor in opposing you; you confess what I stand for,
p. 93. 97, 98.

Ans. You should have read my Book before you answered it: if I confess that
which you stand for, you might well have spared your labor: you answer and
contradict your self, and so contradict your self, that your Book needs no
answer to throw it down, it will fall alone; for he affirms things
unreasonable: He says; Sonship and purity goes together, p. 12. We are
Sons when we believe, p. 76. We are not purified till Christ's second coming:
Salvation and Sonship came together, p. 77. Yet no man is saved till Christ's
second coming: We are Sons by faith, when God is our God we shall, etc. p.
11. 19. Adoption and Redemption came both together, p. 77. Yet our Redemption
is not yet, p. 44. We are justified by faith before God, p 87. Faith by which
we are justified: yet Faith does not, nor cannot justify, p. 32. 89. We are
not justified while we act sin, p. 107. No man is justified in this life; we
shall be justified when Christ again appears, not before, p. 105. When they
believe, they by faith become Sons, p. 76. We are Sons by faith, p. 77.
That faith makes us Sons, I utterly disowne, p. 76. Are not these
contradictions? So he contradicts the express Scripture; such deserve no
answer; instance, he says; Our sins remain; our sins are not laid upon
Christ, and taken away as yet, p. 55. He says; We are not healed till Christ's
second coming, p. 57. Contrary to 1 Pet. 2. 24. Christ says; Woman thy sins
are forgiven thee, Mat. 9. 2. I write unto you little children, because your
sins are forgiven you* 1 John 2. 12. Yet he says; Forgiveness of sin is
not in this life, p. 63. He says; Health of body, and outward cures, are
forgiveness of sins, p. 16. Our sins are not remitted, but imputed to us,
till Christ's second coming, p. 94. And that believers are under the curse, and
do bear it, p. 67. He denies God to be their God who believe, and that we
have no interest in God; He says We shall have interest and propriety in God
at his next appearing in the world to come, when God is our God we shall not
need Word nor Ordinances, p. 11, 12. 15 16. 19. 20. Contrary to the express
word of God, Psalm. 48. 14. and Joh. 20. 17. God says; He will not remember our
sins: He says; He will remember them till we sin no more, p. 57. And that
these Scriptures, Col. 1. 21. Ephesians. 5. 26. Isa. 53. Song 4. 7. 2. Cor. 2. 21.
Ephesians. 3. 17. Romans 8. 33. are not relations of things done, but prophesies of
this to come, p. 48, 49. 57. 63. 65. He might as well have said, those words,
we have all sinned, in Rom 3. is a prophecy as well as Romans 8. 33. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? He might as truly have said, Christ's
Testament is a prophecy, and is to be understood in the Future tense, and then
Christ as yet is not crucified, dead, and risen, etc. Since he said to those
words in Isa. 53. 6. He has laid on him the iniquity of us all, he could not
tell whether they were or no: So he has added, and detracted, altered and
falsified some of my words, and left out the Scripture and strength of what I
wrote, which is but a flight answering, and therefore a slight answer is more
then enough.

The maine difference lies in the time of Justification; I say it was when he
shed his blood; others say it is when men believe: he says, it is not till the
next world: I have given my Reasons from the Scripture, and answered all the
objections that I know are made against this doctrine, with as much love and
tenderness, as their expressions against the truth would admit; and now I have
declared the truth, and pleaded for it in faithfulness, love, plainness, and
singleness of heart, as in the sight of God. Christ was called a deceiver,
Mat. 27. 63. Therefore I wonder not if I be so called, yea and I expect it, and
that which Christ and his followers in teaching the truth, to meet with, which
was, Some believed the things that were spoken, and some believed not, Acts 28.
24.

I pass not if any condemn me, so they do not condemn Christ and his truth,
seeing all shall work for good, therefore I am satisfied in committing all to
God.

And concerning the doubt which does arise in many concerning Communion,
whether we may have Communion in the Ordinance of the Supper with such as hold
contrary to this truth so much contented for, I answer to the question, whether
we may walk in communion with those that deny this doctrine* Can two walk
together unless they be agreed, Amos 3. 3.

The Saints cannot walk together warrantably, and so not comfortably, without
these two things.

1. An oneness of faith in the principles or doctrine of Christ, known,
owned, and declared.

2. Love to the truth, and to each other, so as to desire to walk together.

For my part, I would not join to that Church, who denied any
foundation-truth, and this is one; but being joined, if the Church do not den^
it, I am not to deny communion with those that deny it, until sufficient
means has been used to inform them: it appears to me, there is a necessity
to part in any of these causes following; as,

1. If the staff of beauty is broke, Zach. 11. 10. Faith and Order, Col. 3. 5.

2. Or the staff of bands is broke, Zach. 11. 14. Love so broke, so as each
desires to part.

3. Or the brotherhood so broke, that the Church, the Candlestick is removed
one part from another, that we cannot perform our duty one to another, Rev. 2.
5. with 1. 10.

4. Or many depart from the faith.

5. Or the worst over power the best, that offenders cannot be cast out.

6. Or cannot agree about the doctrine and discipline in the Scriptures for the
Church, when our staying cannot reclaim the rest, then can we not with honor
to the truth, nor with comfort and peace of conscience, walk together. Such as
love the Lord, who are of one mind and heart, in the principles of truth, are
to cleave to the truth, and each to other, as Jer 50. 5. Only let each soul
consider well that his grounds be full and clear; let not any thing be done in
strife, nor passion, but in love to the truth and them: The Lord help and
direct us all to know his will, and to do it.

Concerning the Ordinances of Christ, many shall slight them, and depart from
the faith, and the practice of them, and pretend want of Apostles, and of men
to work miracles: that all that did baptize, did work miracles, cannot be
proved, but the contrary appears. John did baptize, yet he did no miracle,
(nor Apollo, Acts 19.) Joh. 10. 41. He that is least in the kingdom of God is
greater then he; therefore a preaching Disciple may baptize as well as he. The
Scripture does not declare, that he that baptizeth must work miracles, etc.
therefore it may not be restrained to such; consider 1 Cor. 12. 7. to 14. The
gifts of the Spirit are in nature one, though diverse in operation; therefore
of equal authority, and so to be esteemed by us, 1 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. 24.

He that is baptized by any of the gifts of the Spirit, is baptized by the same
Spirit; we are baptized by one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 3. He says not by the gifts
of miracles; see verse. 28, 29, 30.

If God works in all the operations of the Spirit, the baptism by one gift of
it is to be acknowledged the baptism of the same God: the first is true, 1
Cor. 12. 6. therefore the latter is true also.

To tie Baptism to some of the gifts of the Spirit, and not to the rest, is to
dishonor the Spirit, as 1 Cor. 12. 23, 24. This in effect was the Corinths
sin, 1 Cor. 12. 26. The ceasing of the gifts of tongues and miracles might be,
because they might not be idolized above the other.

If the Apostles did baptize, because Apostles, then might they baptize, though
they had not the gifts of miracles, etc. for it is one thing to be an Apostle,
and another to work miracles, 1 Cor. 12. 28, 29, 30. Gifts are given to men
severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. The Disciples were not Apostles when they
baptized, Joh. 3. 22, 23, 24. and 4. 2. At that time Christ had no Apostles,
Mark. 1. 14. After John was cast into prison* verse. 16. Simon and Andrew his
brother were converted, and that Simon and Andrew were the first Apostles,
appears, Mat. 10. 2. Luke 13, 14, 15. Whence it will follow, that one that is
not an Apostle, nor a worker of miracles may baptize.

Obj. Apollo conferred the gifts of the Spirit, by laying on of hands, because
its a principle in Religion, and he baptized not till he had learned the
principles of Religion, Heb. 6. 2. Ans. It does not follow, because it is one
thing to understand the principles of Religion, and another to confer the
gifts of the Spirit, by laying on of hands: as its one thing to understand, to
believe the Resurrection of the dead, etc. and another thing to raise the dead.
Which holds forth most of Gods wisdom and love: to say the Ordinances of
Christ are not necessary, or cannot be had; or to say they are useful, and God
has appointed a way and means for such as believe to come by them, and enjoy
them. Therefore as in Moses time the children of Israel had miracels, yet
obedience was required of the after ages, who saw no miracles: So in the
Apostles days there were miracles, yet obedience is required of those who now
believe, although we see not such miracles. Its foretold that Antichrist shall
come with signs and wonders, as Mat. 24. 23, 24. and 2 These. 2. 9, 10. Christ
is not to come in this way, yet many, except they see signs and wonders, they
will not believe, Joh. 4. 48.

Preaching and Baptism are to continue to the end of the world; as appears,
Mat. 28. 19, 20. And breaking of bread until he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. And gifts
to teach until he come, Luk 19. 13. 1 Cor. 14. 3. So all things delivered unto
the Saints are to be held fast till he come, Rev. 2. 25, 16.

The end of the third Part.
FINIS.

