The great Preserver of Mankind, which is ALEXICACUS, SPIRIT of SALT of the
WORLD, Now Philosophically prepared and purged from all hurtful or corroding
qualities; far beyond any thing yet known to the World; being both safe and
pleasant for the use of all Men, Women and Children.

By CONSTANTINE RHODOCANACES Grecian of the Isle of Chios, and one of His
Majesty's Chemists.

In London, next door to the Three Kings Inn, in Southampton Buildings near
the Kings Gate in Holborn. By His Majesty's special Directions and Allowance.

TO THE READER.
WHereas very many have desired a brief Compendium of the Virtues of the Spirit
of Salt of the World, together with some short and clear Directions for using
it; I have here now fulfilled their desires: And because the former Book
concerning it, is now augmented with new and rare Testimonies and Experiments,
together with larger Advertisements, and Medicaments Ex Sacro Saturno prepared
almost against all very dangerous and difficult Diseases, which at the request
of my Friends I have made public: Wherefore if any shall desire to have the
said Book for their further satisfaction, they may have it at the Places where
the said Spirit of Salt is sold, paying 4d. for the same. Besides in the end of
this Compendium, there is mention made of Hippocrates his Antidote against the
Plague with directions for the use of it. and some other rare Medicines proper
for each disease.

The Virtues of the Spirit of Salt are both inwardly and outwardly to be used.
As to the inward uses of it, they are very many.
ALthough it communicates not much to the nourishment of the Body it self: For
the stomach.
Yet this Spirit marvellously procures a good appetite, strengthening and
cleansing the stomach from putrefaction: and (...) away and dispelleth all raw
and Phlegmatic (...) Bowels: (...) Digestion quenches (...) transports
nourishment to (...) dissolves all kind of Obstructions.

(...) Blood and keeps it volatile, (...)
that thereby it more regularly (...) Circulation.

It warmes, Vital Spirit.
but not overmuch, because it has a most temperate Faculty in comforting our
vital Spirit, and is the cause of dispelling whatsoever distempers arise
against nature, and hereby men become more agill, merry and jocund. It procures
moderate Sweatings, and gentle Sleep.

It causes Urine and keeps the Ureters from all filth or slime, Sweating and
sleep. Urine. Stone and Gravel.
and dispells the water that lurks betwixt the skin and flesh, by Stool and
Urine.

It cures all persons troubled with the Stone or Gravel, both in the Reins and
Bladder, and forbids Coallition of the Gravel, and in time dissolves the
Stone, if not already too much congealed and hardened.

It is very good against all Catarrhs that fall from the Head, and preserves
from all diseases that come by Coughing or any flux of Rheum.

It is an excellent remedy against Fevers of long continuance, Rheumes and
Cough. Ague and Fever.
and quenches Thirst in such as languish under hot distempers, or from all
distempers that arise from drought, in hot weather cooling the Blood and
inflamed Liver.

It helps the Liver and Spleen, and Hypocondriacall Melancholy: It easily
disperses and reproves all pains in the Sides and Bowels, and whatsoever has
it is beginning from Wind or Cold.

Against the Scurvy it is the most approved Antidote and Remedy, Spleen and
Wind. Scurvy.
because the Spirit of Salt hinders the putrefaction of the Blood.

It is an excellent remedy against all Hydropicall diseases, because all
Drosipes, Tifficks and Diseases that proceed from the Liver are wont to happen
to by reason of certain watery and bubling Tumors in the natural parts, Dropsy.
Thighs and Legs.

It is a most excellent remedy against the Falling Sickness; especially if it
be taken in the best Extraction of Saffron, (which is to be had of me) which is
not made of the Dreggs of Wine, Falling sickness and Palsy. Black and yellow
Jaundice. Worms. Poison. Green sickness and fits of the Mother.
but of Wine it self; as also against Numness, the Palsy, and Sciatica.

It stifles the Jaundice in the birth, or kills it in it is strength.

It is an healer of the Ulceration of the Lungs, and a preserver against the
Consumption of it.

It prevents the breeding of Worms, especially in Children, and kills them if
bred.

Also any that are poisoned by Opium, Spiders or otherwise, or stung or bitten
by Serpents.

It causes the Menstrues in women, removes obstructions, and helps them to the
benefit of Nature: Also for the cure of the Green sickness, and Fits of the
Mother, it is an approved Medecin. And those that have the Matrix clogged with
superfluous humors may use it with success. Note that if any disease be so
difficill or hard that this spirit of Salt cannot remove it, we have readily
other Medicines: God willing to assist and repel the most stubborn and
pertinax distemper.

For the Virtue of it outwardly used.
IT keeps a good and lively Color. And putrefi'd wounds or proud flesh, being
gently washed with it, are cured, and the place preserved by it, clean and
sound.

It brings life into benumbed Members, and is very good against the Cramp.

It may be outwardly applied for the French Disease: as also in cold Gouts,
mixed with Oil of Turpentine, Wax, Amber, Hartshorn, or the like.

It is good for the Kitchen, in rendering Meats grateful and pleasant; for
instead of Vinegar, Lemons, or orther sharp Sauces, it is more healthfully
taken: mixed with Sugar it is excellent Sauce for Roasted meats.

By it Raisins recover their former bigness and beauty: mixed with some Fountain
water, are pleasing to the pallat, and very cordial to refresh a weak Stomach.

Pigeons, Chickins, and all flesh seasoned with it, are of a pleasing relish:
Beef, steeped in, or sprinkled with it, is made tender.

It cleanses the Teeth, and makes them as white as Snow.

To say no more, it is that which cuts the Sinews of all Diseases, and supports,
and restores weak Bodies. One thing more cannot be omitted; when at Sea water
is scant, a little of this prepared into a Salt, laid on the tip of the tongue
in a small proportion, takes away all inclination to drink.

Who use it shall find these Effects: If any one doubt, let them try in some
one, and by that judge the rest.

Directions for the use of the SPIRIT of SALT.
FIrst in GENERAL. It may be put and taken in all sorts of Liquors; as Water,
Beer, Ale, Syder, Wine, Broths, Sauce, etc. More healthfully used than Oranges,
Lemons, Vinegar, or Verges; and with Oil is most pleasant: Indeed it is proper
in all sorts of Cookery, to be used by the healthy, to provent the Maladies
mentioned in the Treatise of it is Nature, as well as for their Remedy; and that
so much as gives the Pallat a smart relish, at the discretion of the User: No
error can be committed, by taking any quantity from 10. Drops to 40. That
proportion at any time, mingled with Sugar may be doubled, and taken in a
Mornings-draught, is very Efficacious; For it preserves not only the Body, but
what ever it receives, from all manner of Corruption, by Restoring Nature to
it is Primitive State. To preserve health, any small quantity will serve, but to
repel a Disease, a greater quantity is requisite, and may be used with Sugar
if they please.

In PARTICULAR. 40. Drops of this Spirit in half a pint of any sort of Liquor,
is a good Standard: And after the proportion of 80. Drops in a Quart, it
revives all sorts of Beer, Ale, Syder, and Wine; long preserving them both
Strong and Generous: And the like quantity being put into Barrells of Water,
for Mariners to drink at Sea, it will be better preserved, have a gratefuller
taste, and avoid that putrefaction which arises from Raw Water; especially
preventing the Worms and Scurvy. And so a so for preserving Meat in long
Voyages, 40. Drops hereof with a pint of Water, and so proportionably covering
the Meat, will increase the Weight, and make it wholesome.

In dressing all sorts of Fish, Flesh, and Fowll, being old and Tough, they are
made Tender and nourishing, by so much hereof mingled with any Spices, Water,
or Butter, and sprinkled on them, as may give a quick taste in their Sawces;
and cold Meat also sprinkled therewith, is preserved from detriment.

In Pickling any Sallets, as Cucumbers, Capers, Fennel, Purslain, Broom buds,
etc. being mingled with Water and Salt, so as to make it sharp and quick, is
very healthfully pleasant.

To prevent the Tooth ach, to cleanse and preserve the Teeth white, put six
Drops in a spoonful of running Water, (or for the Curious into Rose Water) and
with a small Linen Rag, rub the Teeth, and it is impossible they should
corrupt, or putrefie: It cleanses them from their Corrosive Gravel.

(...) WOMEN, in most cases it is fit to give private directions: But for such
as give suck, let them with 60 Drops turn a pint of Milk into a Posset, and
take the Whey, mingled with Sugar (if they please) and drink a reasonable
draught thereof in a Morning, fasting an hour after it, and their Children will
be kept thereby from the Scurvy, small Pox, Fevers, Convulsions, Worms, and
the like Diseases, giving and preserving a fresh and healthy Color.

In CHILDREN. They that desire to prevent the Stone and Gravel, which (by
experience destroys them, as well as others (who are not capable to take other
Medicines by reason of the Nauseousness and great quantities) may give them of
this sort of Posset Drink, and they will find it both preserving and cleasing
those parts of the Body subject to these Afflictions, and promise good natural
rest to them.

If any delight in Alsmaticum, or Aromaticum, or Coffe it is a very good Vehicle
to drink of this Spirit 10. or 20. Drops in a Dish of it.

In Agues before the Fit, and in continued Fevers, in the morning half a
spoonful of this Spirit in a draught of Wine or Beer, keeping in Bed a while
to sweat, is very healthful: If any desire to make it more effectual, they may
take a greater proportion, adding Sugar to make it pleasant.

Almost infinite other advantages; as preserving dead bodies entire, etc. are
hidden in this Spirit; which in success of time, by Gods grace shall be
manifested: and if any desire more exact instructions in their particular
Cases, they may repair where it is made, and be more fully directed.

INSTRUCTIONS.
BEcause the Spirit of Salt is a Condiment and preservative for all things and
matters, and there is nothing more natural to humane nature then it: whosoever
will consult and provide for his own good, may take it in every season of the
year, for if you consider winter, you shall find in that season, that all kind
of Flegmes do more increase in Man, than any other time, and men do spit more
then, than in Summer, but also other Tumors, and moist and soft swellings do
arise in men: spitting therefore arises from hence, because Winter by it is
nature is most cold for the plenty of Rain, and length of the Night, as
Hippocrates testifies in his book de Natura Hominis. It is therefore most
manifested among all men, that this Spirit of Salt is most excellent against
Phlegm and Rheum, and superfluity of Spitting.

In the Spring time the Blood is increased, but in Summer time much more;
Winter.
and therefore men in that season are troubled with inward diseases and
distempers, and Blood does proceed from the Nostrills, and they are more hot
and red in that season, and more subject to Fevers: This does Hippocrates
write in the same book, and other places: But this Spirit does oppose all those
inconveniences, because of it is own nature it is contrary to all hot Distempers
or Diseases, In the Spring and Summer.
as those that have made use of it, have found by experience.

Besides this Spirit has the property to correct depraved and malignant
humors and moisture, (which does wont to hinder and defraud the nourishment)
which if they be not prevented, the Belly does swell, Scabs and Boyls are
exasperated, from whence come indigestion, which does extenuate the vigor of
the body, and causes Dropsies and other evil habits and Maladies, by which
sick persons so vexed, that their taste is taken away, and they fall into
Consumptions, and therefore lastly, in Autumn, this Spirit ought more
principally to be taken, for in that time more grievous and distructive
diseases do swarm, as the same Hippocrates in his book de Epidem. does write,
and at that time many are oppressed with sickness, but especially those that
are subject to Consumptions. Autumn.


And therefore also Women always, but more especially in that season ought to
have a more precious Spirit, that they may keep themselves from the suppression
of their Menstrues, from whence does arise dangerous Tabefactions and weakness,
as the same Author relates in his first book, (...) for those women having
collected Phlegm and filth in their stomach, tremble, and are astonished
through all the parts of their body, because Phlegm by it is pricking quality,
For W^me
does detract and twitch the inward membranes which cover the Bowels, which
from the weight and plenty of matter, which intercepts the spritall and
respirating ways, so that they cannot breath but with great difficulty. In the
same season also extraordinary and spurious Fevers do happen, which are most
difficult and full of danger, because then they have a diverse permixture and
inequality of humors, as much matters of cold and Choler. All which
incommodities are prevented by this Spirit of Salt.

Children also ought not to be deprived of their healthful Spirit, who besides
the small Pox, Measles, Gravel, etc. in their Fevers are most prone to
Convulsions, because of the Crudity of their aliment, and from the sharpness or
acrimony which they draw from the Milk, and also from the weakness of the
nerves and sinews, and therefore they are wont to be terrified, and to mourn
and kick with their feet, because of the vitiousness of their humors, Chila
and curruption that proceeds from the Milk, which do trouble the stomach, or
fill the brain with acrimony of vapors. These and other Maladies this Spirit
does disperse and drive away. Therefore (although I have promised a Compendium)
yet I have largely and accuratelay described all out of Hippocrates, for the
learning and instruction of my neighbor, that this Noble, safe, and natural
Spirit, amongst all and always, to the glory of God, and their own health, may
be used.

Hippocrates his Antidote against the Plague. And other excellent Medicines.
THe same Author has prepared at a small price that admirable Preservative
against the Plague, wherewith Hippocrates the Prince of Physicians preserved
the whole land of Greece. And although some may Pretend to have some
Preservatives against the Plauge; Yet Hippocrates did not use the Spirit of
wine such as these pretenders do use against this disease (which he called
(...), because the Plague with its popular contagion does generally infect all;
but a Thing most universally balsamous and peircing, not (...) but (...), or
with a most vigourous and lively quicknes ingeniously prepared: for it must be
an universal Good that must repel an universal Mischief. They that use this
Preservative must drink two or 3 spoonfulls in the morning fasting with out any
mixture, walking in the house or chamber for some small space after, and
abstaining from meat or drink for two hours, and continuing so doing during
the time of any suspicion of the Plague. This Antidote so prepared does not
cause sweatings, or purging, but thoroughly penetrating disperseth it self into
the veins, and with its balsamous virtue preserves the Body as a safe
Conservative against corruption and infection.

He has also a Powder, of which two drams sprinkled upon burning charcoal,
will perfume and air shifts, drawers and other linen before they are to be
put on, which will, by the Grace of God defend the body both inwardly and
outwardly against this Contagion. But every one that wears gold or silver lace
or other things of such metal must forbear to use this powder for it will
tarnish them. He has also an excellent Curative for the Plague.

As also an excellent medicament for the Cancer in the Breast to be taken
inwardly, and cure it without cutting. Another against Consumptions, Coughes
and all diseases of the Lungs, which disease is so general in this Kingdom
that a great number every year perish thereby. Another against Leprosy. He
cures That epidemicall disease The Scurvy, though far gone, with pleasant
medicines.

The falling sickness, although inveterate and continued for twenty years, by
the blessing of God he does cure even to admiration

As also the Dropsy, Gout and all kind of Fevers, Agues, etc.

These and other proper Medicines for each disease he has by the blessing of
God attained unto among which a most rare Cordial is eminent, by whose most
excellent virtue many even at deaths door have been restored to their former
health, because it does revive the native heat of the vital spirits, and
begets strength to the members.

And because his Alexicacus Spirit of Salt of the world, prepared not after a
common but philosophical way, has wrought most excellent cures against
several diseases both in men, women and children unto admiration, therefore he
thought good here to mention it. For besides the Antidote it does very much
conduce against the Plague, forasmuch as it does purify and exalt the blood and
especially being taken daily in a cup of the best wine or strong ale. And to
obstaine from too much eating of all kind of raw fruit, and forbear falling
into all forts of Passions, and to endeavor to use honest mirth and moderate
recreation, so that all violence be avoided, and setting aside all fear of the
Plague, he rest only on the good will of God.

The Antidote against the Plague and the abovesaid powder, and the Spirit of
Salt is to be had at the Authors house next door to the three Kings Inn in
Southampton buildings near the Kings gate in Holborne. As also at Mr. Milward,
Bookseller, at Westminster Hall-Gate. Mr. George Stepney at the black boy near
Whitehall. Mr. Charles Morgan, Grocer, in Henrietta street in Covent garden.
Mr. Tuckers, Stationer, at the Black-spread-Egale in Fleet Street, over against
St. Dunstans Church. Mr. Heyrick, Stationer, at Grayes-Inn. Gate in Holbourn.
Mrs. Morton, Cheesemonger, at the Spotted Leopard in Aldersgate street, near
the Half Moon Tavern. Mr. Daniel Pelcome, a Millener, at the Golden Goat in
Gold smiths Row in Cheapsipe. Mr. Thomas Whittlesey, Stationer, at the Sign of
the Globe in Gracious-street, over against the Cross Keys Inn.

The Spirit of Salt is sold after the rare of 8. s. the pint. The Antidote at
4. s. the pint. The powder in papers at 6. d. the ounce. All sealed ut with the
rose and eagle and 3. Greek Letters K. P. X. and about the Seal, Verus Spiritus
Salis. The other Medi^ are only sold by the Author himself.

FINIS.

