A Moderate ANSWER TO Mr. Prins full Reply To certain Observations on his
first Twelve Questions: Wherein all his Reasons and Objections are heartily
examined and refuted.

A short description of the Congregationall way discovered.

Some Arguments for indulgence to tender Consciences modestly propounded.

By the same Author.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Allen, and are to be sold at his shop in Popes
head Alley at the sign of the Crown. 1645.

A Moderate Answer to Master Prinnes Book, called, A FULL REPLY.
I Will not stand upon the many loose passages and hard speeches that this
Reply is full of, desiring rather the opening of truth, then the discovery of
any man's corruptions; wise men (that must see us both) will judge us, not by
our words, but by our reason. If truth be on his side, surely he has very much
spoiled her beautiful face with his black and uncharitable language. Truth is
most glorious in her own garments, whatever men cloth her with but her own
apparel does but deforme her: If this be her attire that Master Prinne
presents here arrayed in, certainly she has changed her form, she never came
out so of the bosom of Christ, she was never wont to appear among the Saints
in such a garb; passion and railing were never wont to be her companions;
peace, gentleness, and meekness ever attended her as handmaids: How little of
this waits on his Reply, let any that was ever acquainted with such a spirit,
judge. In the very title-leafe he cries out (an anonymous Author ashamed of his
name;) were you ashamed of your name (Sir) when you put forth The unbishoping
of Timothy and Titus? The quench Coal? The Abreviate? all which you own in
this Reply; You that writ The Anatomy of Independency; The mystery of Iniquity;
The Subjects liberty, all without your name; call in your Books write no more,
You are ashamed of your names: You are not ignorant of the many worthy things
that have been put forth without a name, there be many reasons may be given
for it; it is not the name but the thing; not who writ, but what is written,
that will satisfy. The truth is, we are fallen into times wherein (as
Tertullian of old complained) men receive fidem ex hominibus, non homines ex
fide. I desired naked truth might appear, though I was not seen in the
setting of it forth; in his Preface he cries out, He is hated, envied, ^pugned,
for telling of the truth. If to answer be to envy, hate, etc. no truth of
Christ can lawfully be stood for; surely the Spirit of Christ never taught you
to jduge so harshly of those who only labor to vindicate the truth of Christ,
and friendly to examine your ungrounded queries about it. To pass over many
other things, which to speak to will rather fill up the paper then be
satisfactory: observe but one or two of these reasons he gives for his writing,
by way of question.

First, In his Preface to independency examined, etc.
that he says the Independents had never dogmatically (to his knowledge)
resolved or discovered in print what that Church Government is they so eagerly
contend for; and yet take notice, he confutes them, urges these Queries as his
Reasons; What a contradiction this is, let all judge: how a man can confute
that in an opinion which he knows not to be held in it; and out-argue that he
never knew dogmatically resolved on, is beyond my intellectuals to conceive.
Neither I (says he) nor any one writer ever discovered it, and yet Master
Prinne has confuted it unanswerably, For that (says he) he seriously
professes thefore God, Angels, or men, that he could never yet discover in
least footsteps of it in Scripture, Antiquity, etc. I shall only pray that God
would anoint your eyes with the eye salve of the Word, that you may see these
truths of Jesus Christ which are yet hid from your eyes, which many precious
Saints humbly conceive they see, and so see that (if God should call them) are
willing to seal their sight with their blood. But to the matter.

To the first question he says, I give no answer, but only misreciteth the
question without his limitations, and then refute what my self propounded, not
be; he should have shown wherein, and then might justly have challenged me for
it; I shall entreat the judicious Reader but to compare both. It seems Master
Prinne is ashamed now to think that there is no positive rule in the Word for
Church Government, but that it may be suited to States. He says, I should have
exactly proved by direct Scriptures that Christ has prescribed one set
immutable form of Government to all Christians, Nations, etc. from which none
must vary in a tittle; and then have proved from Gospel Texts, that which he
calls independencie to be this Government, but in this Point the Respondent is
wholly silent, and I shall expect (says he) his Answer Ad Graecas Calendas.
Observe (Reader) that yet he says in the following words, I endeavor to prove
it: to say nothing, to be wholly silent, and to endeavor to prove a thing, to
me can have no better title, then a gross contradiction: but to the thing.

First, Whereas he requires of me, as in the former words, so here, a full
discovery of Church Government in the world; and this is that he in all his
papers demands, that we will fully discover this Government in the word.

I answer: First, If by a full discovery, he means that we say all that can be
said of it in the word, or is laid up there: it is Iniquum postulatum, most
unjustly demanded; for even In credendis, in matters of faith, neither Master
Prin, nor any else is able to say all that can be said of it, or fully to
discover the many things that the word holds forth to be believed for
salvation; God reveals more and more of the Gospel every day in a fuller and
clearer manner; much less can any man, as yet, discover what is required for
matter of Government: As for our parts, we are far from such a thought, that we
know all things in the word about Church Government; but that more of it may be
still revealed, and we daily search, and wait for more knowledge in it.

But secondly, if he means we should discover what we hold concerning it, let
him know, that for what we hold in it, we can evidence from Scripture every
particular, and as much as is needful in this Controversy.

For the matter of a Church, that it should be Saints, we conceive it to be
evident from these Scriptures, Romans 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 1. 1. Ephesians. 1.
1. Phil. 1. 1. and in verse. 7. (...), its a righteous thing for me to judge so
of you all; now the Apostle wrote to them as they were Churches of Christ; and
to explain what they were, he calls them Saints, such, as it were an
unrighteous thing to judge otherwise of them; and its reason that members of
Churches should be thus judged Saints, because all the Ordinances that Christ
has left, its for to build up the Church, they are to be administered in the
Church; now none have right to the Ordinances but Saints, and therefore none
may be admitted but such as can be judged so by the Saints.

Again, for the former, which we say is consent or agreement (whether by
covenant or any other way, we stand not on it) we conceive first, it arises
from the nature of the thing, the Church being a politic body, wherein is rule
and authority, nothing but free consent or agreement to walk in such ways can
constitute it, as in all other policies: What makes England as a Commonwealth,
or as a Church to be such a policy, but the consent of the people, who have
given up themselves to be governed by such Laws and Constitutions.

Secondly, if this be not granted, there can be no distinction of Churches in
the world, but all must be under one power: for what makes England as a Church
distinct from Scotland, or Scotland from all Churches, that they have no
authoritative power over each other, but only this, that the members of
England, or Scotland, have not consented to walk under any other power but
their own? Surely the bounds of Seas or Rivers can no more distinguish
Churches, then a wall or a door can, if there be no other distinction; and no
other thing but consent can form a Policy.

Besides, Scripture is no way silent for the proof of this: Not to urge many,
that place is famous, and may serve for all, in Act. 9. 26. Paul after he was
converted, it is said, Assayed to join himself to the Disciples at Jerusalem;
and the word is (...), which signifies, to be glewed to them: Now observe,
Paul was converted, and a Saint, yet not joined to the Church, he was in that
place where they were, he was joined to them as they were Saints, yet he was
not joined to them as a Church; and this joining was not Physical, but Moral:
Now this must be done by free consent, and willing subjection to the
Ordinances, or no way.

For the ordinary Officers of the Church, they are Pastors, Teachers, 1 Cor.
12. 28. Ephesians. 4. 11. Teaching-Elders, and Ruling-Elders, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
Deacons, Acts 6. 1 Timothy 3. Widows, 1 Timothy 5. 9. Romans 16. 1. That the Church
has power of choosing its own Officers, is clear from Acts 1. 21. Acts 6. 3.
and Chap. 14. 23.

That a Church is but one Congregation, having power within it self to
exercise all the Ordinances, is apparent in the new Testament, neither do we
read of any other there: First, the word ((...)) used for the Church,
signifies no other; neither has it any other signification in the new
Testament, when referred to any visible Company; neither is it used by any
profane Author for to note out a larger Society then could meet together in one
place: For the Church at Jerusalem, it was but one Church, Acts 2. 46. and 5.
12. and 6. 1. and 15. 25. and 21. 22. and 25. 22. so the Church of Antiochia
was but one Church, Acts 14. 27. they are said to gather the Church together;
now that could not be the Elders, for, for Elders only the word Church is
never used; and the same persons that are called the Church, verse. 27. are in
verse. 28. called the Disciples: and Chap. 15. 1. the Brethren: so Acts 11. 26.
the same persons are called the Church, Disciples, and Christians. Besides, the
Church of Corinth was but one Church, was but one particular Congregation, 1
Cor. 5. 4. 1 Cor. 14. 25. 1 Cor. 11. 17. verse. 23. In uno and codem loco:
neither can the word ((...)) ever be showed to signify any thing else besides
one particular Assembly, as learned Baines well observes. I shall conclude this
with quoting of what that judicious Divine D. Ames says in this particular,
Med. p. 190. Hine variae Congregationes fixae ejusdem Regionis ac Provinciae
plurali numero semper appellantur Ecclesiae, non una Ecclesia, etiam in Judaea
quae tota fuit antea una Ecclesia Nationalis, Act. 2. 46. and 15. 12. and 14.
27. 1 Cor. 5. 4 and 11. 17. 23.
1 These. 2. 14. Acts 14. 23. and 15. 41. Romans 16. 4. 5. 16. 1 Cor. 16. 1. 1.
19. 2 Cor. 8. 1. 18. 19. Gal. 1. 2. 22. 1. Rev. Ecclesiae enim illae
particulares quae in N. T. commemorantur, convenice solent, (...), neque in
toto N. T. legitue de institutione Ecclesiae amplioris a quo minores
Congregationes penderent, etc. Thus you see a short description and discovery
of what we hold about Church Government, with some Scriptures in stead of
others that move us to this way: The Reasons and Grounds I doubt not but we
shall see at large when that shall be made public which our Brethren have
urged in the Assembly, and presented to the Parliament. But to proceed:

For that part wherein he says, I should have proved that Christ has set one
immutable form of government, and have made it out by direct Scriptures,
besides what is laid down in the Observations (which I doubt not to make good
against his cavills:) I thought Master Prin had read learned Master Parker, de
Eccles. Pol. Cartwright, and the most of the Nonconformists, who though
Presbyteriall in their judgment, yet have largely proved that; to whom I shall
refer him for larger satisfaction. I know none that ever writ against the
immutablenesse of a form of Church Government in the new Testament, but
Episcopal, and Pontificiall men, as Hooker, Bilson.

The judgment of the Church of Scotland is quite contrary: For they assert
their Presbytery to be Jure Divino, and holds its Title only from heaven; it
seems the Presbyterians differ as well as the Independants, and they are also
various in their judgments, some think there is no form of government, others
that there is. But to the Arguments:

First, Exodus 25. 40.
I said, if this were granted, the Gospel would be straiter then the Law, Heb.
8. 5.
Christ more unfaithful then Moses: and the Argument lies thus according to
his own drawing: if God set a pattern to Moses of every thing to be done in the
Church, from which he was not to vary upon any terms, these being but carnal
Ordinances comparatively: Heb. 9. 10.
then he has prescribed a form of government in the new Testament to all
Churches, Nations, etc. from which they may not vary: but the former, Ergo, the
Medium, or ground of arguing between these two is from the care that God has
of the Church at all times, being one and the same, rather more in the new
Testament God had showed less care over his Churches now than then, if he had
not prescribed a set Government for them also; besides, their Ordinances had
been more spiritual far then ours; for that which God directly appoints, is
more spiritual then what man appoints in Gods worship; though for the kind
more noble, and the use in reason far more excellent: To this he says in
general thus; That if I, or any other, can show him such a pattern, so
clearly delineated in the new Testament, as that in the old, he will believe my
sequel, else he shall judge it a mere independent Argument to this before;
Master Prin knows its a good way of reasoning, if the same ground hold the same
consequence: we are sure, for your Presbyteriall-government you cannot have the
least direct Texts, and you are feign to go to miserable extorted consequences,
etc. there is nothing that we hold, but we will show in clear Scriptures, as
before: where did you, or any one ever read of either name, or thing of a
classical Presbytery, of a Provincial, or National Synod, either alone, or
by way of subordination?

He goes on in way of Answer, and says, if this consequence will follow, then
this must needs also.

God prescribed to Moses the express pattern and fashion of Aarons and his
sons garments, etc. under the Law, Exodus Ergo, He has likewise showed the
express pattern, fashion, and color of all Bishops, Presbyters, and
Ministers garments under the Gospel.

How weak this absurdity is that he labors to fasten on this Argument, let
wise men judge.

First, I say not, That what ever was commanded in the old Testament must be
commanded now for the matter of it, if my meaning had been so, this consequence
had been good; but when I argue from the exact description of every thing in
the old Testament, to the like in the new, I argue from the equity, and common
reason that is in the thing; there was something in the Ceremonies, and in
their form of worship that was Juris Moralis, and Naturalis; the equity of
which remains for ever, and the Apostle argues from it in several places: as
that God should be worshipped after his own way, and according to his own
prescript, not through men's inventions, etc. As for the matter of the things
commanded in the old Testament, these things that were Ceremonies then, and had
a spiritual signification, are but circumstances now, and not to be regarded,
as Place, Garments, etc. You shall find the Apostle arguing thus from this
very head and instance in that Heb. 8. 5. See that thou do all things according
to the pattern in the mount; he speaks this of Christ's Priestly Office, and
proves that Christ was a true and real Priest, and he proves it by this,
because all the Priests of the Law served but to the example of heavenly
things, and they had their Commission only from heaven, God gave it Moses in
the mount: surely then Christ (says the Apostle) must needs be a real high
Priest, in whom all these things are fulfilled eminently: and he instanceth in
this of the Tabernacle, which could not prove it but by reason of the equity of
the thing; and its one of Calvin's Observations from the place; Hic docemur
perversos esse omnes cultus and adulterinos, quos sibi proprio ingenio, and
citra mandatum Dei, comminisci homines permittunt; nam cum praescribat Deus ut
fiant omnia secundum suam regulam, nihil penitus alienum facere licet; He
applies this to all worship in general, and that from the equity of the thing
it self.

To quell this Argument, says he further: 1. The pattern in the mount was
meant only of the materials, form, utensils of the Tabernacle, not of the
Government and Discipline; therefore very impertinent to prove a seeled form of
Church Government.

Answ. I never said that the Tabernacle was a pattern of Church Government,
and therefore that will not answer; for grant it to be a prescribing of the
materials, etc. yet there is as great a reason that God should prescribe the
form of government as that; and God did prescribe a form of government to
them, from which they could not vary; I only instance in this, because the
Apostle makes use of it, to prove as different the thing, as this: there was
nothing to be done either in Church or Commonwealth, but was discovered to
Moses as a rule for him to walk by, See Exo 2^, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.
Chapter.
which he could not vary from in a tittle; and there is a great reason it
should be so now, because the Ordinance and Government of the Church is more
spiritual. The Materials of the Tabernacle he grants were exactly prescribed;
and why not then the particulars of Government, seeing it is as great an
Ordinance as that?

Secondly, he says, It was showed to Moses the Temporal Magistrate, not to
Aaron or any independent Priest; and therefore if there be any consequence from
this, Kings, Parliaments, etc. ought to prescribe, and set up such a
Church Government as is according to the word, etc.

I answer, its no matter at all, neither does it a jot prejudice my consequence
to whom it was discovered, whether Moses or Aaron, they were not to vary from
it; and there is as good reason for Church Government as that: but let me ask a
question or two of you, seeing you have urged that.

First, Was this discovered to him, Quae a Magistrate, under that consideration
only, or no?

Secondly, If to him as a Magistrate, then where will you find a correlate to
Moses now?

Thirdly, Whether as a Magistrate he durst prescribe any thing more in a
tittle, or any thing besides the pattern in the mount, let Magistrates show us
what they have received immediately as the mind of God, and we will as
willingly take it from them as any; durst Moses, though chief Magistrate in a
prudentiall way for the good of the people, prescribe any thing besides the
patterns? much less may any now, who never had the mind of God revealed to
them as Moses had.

In fine, says he, If there be any express unalterable form, pray, inform me
why it was not as punctually described in the new Testament, as the form of
the Tabernacle. To which is answered again, that it is as punctually
described, as has been formerly shown. Nay, says he, why was the Tabernacle
altered into a Temple different from it, and why did the second Temple vary
from the first in the same Church and Nation?

I answer: I never said that God tied himself so as he could not alter the
frame of Government, but that no man could; if God will change the Tabernacle
into a Temple, its his pleasure, and that is our rule, but none else could do
it; had David or Solomon done it without a word from heaven, what thanks would
they have had? It was a sin in Jeroboam to set up places of worship in Dan
and Bethel, when God said they should go only to Jerusalem; though afterward
God changed it, and made every place fit to lift up pure hands to God in.
Besides, God changed things among the Jews according to the fitness and
conveniencie of their condition; the Tabernacle was made, as suiting with their
condition in the wilderness, being fit to carry up and down with them: but
when they were become a settled nation, rich and vvealthy, and in peace, then
God commands to build a Temple. Under the Gospel its otherwise; Christ being
come himself, as King of his Church, has made a covenant with no nation under
heaven, but in every nation he that fears him is accepted with him; his Laws
being only spiritual, and that concerning the conscience: it suits with the
condition of all Saints, and may be practiced in every Kingdom, neither can it
be altered, the Laws written in the new Testament being the last that ever
shall be given to the Churches for ever; so that Master Prins Reasons against
this Argument will not hold when they are truly tried.

To that part of the Argument wherein it is said, that Christ should be more
unfaithful then Moses if he should not prescribe a set unalterable Discipline
in the word, he answers nothing: whereas the Apostle urges it in Heb. 3. 2. 5.
6. Moses was faithful in his own house as a servant, but Christ as a son:
wherein lay the faithfulness of Moses, but in declaring faithfully what God
had prescribed to him in the governing of the Church, and ordering all things,
which concerned the worship of God, according to the pattern given in the
mount? Now how much more unfaithful then Moses should Christ be if he should
not as eminently do the like to his own house? For it was not only matters of
Doctrine, and the foundations of Religion, that Moses was faithful in
prescribing to the people, but all the Ceremonies and parts of instituted
worship, to which Discipline is to be referred; he did not only give them the
Decalogue, but every thing that was to be practiced by them, even to a pin of
the Tabernacle, and therein lay his faithfulness. And is not Christ as
faithful as Moses?

To the second Argument: That Christ should neither be faithful as a husband,
head, nor King of his Church, if he should give others power to order it as
they pleased to their own civil government, not setting down his own Laws for
them to walk by: he says, its both a fallacy and absurdity, yet he shows
neither. That he says to make it good, is this: That one may be as faithful a
Husband, Head, King, though he lay not down particular. Laws to regulare his
Wife, Subjects, etc. To which I answer: That its against the law of nature to
require obedience of a Subject, Wife, etc. in things immediately appertaining to
a Husband, King, and not to prescribe rules of obedience; and its greatest
unfaithfulness that can be, to leave these that are committed to ones care and
trust to others to rule and order, who cannot do for them as the party
entrusted can: Should the Parliament be faithful to the Kingdom, if they
should not make particular Laws for the governing of it, but leave it either to
others, or else set down general, dark, confused things, like so many blanks,
and Et cetera's, that every one may add what they will? Either the Government
of the Church is a part of Christ's Kingly Office or not, if it be, he cannot be
faithful if he prescribes not particular Laws for them to walk by: Besides,
either the Discipline of the Church is spiritual, and to edification, or not;
and if it be spiritual, then none can prescribe it but Christ; for that is
only spiritual in instituted worship, which has Christ's Precept for it:
Neither will the giving of general rules take away this blemish, as that Romans
14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and in order, (which you call a
general rule for Church Government:) for every particular Office, and
Ordinance in the Church, is for to effect some supernatural end, to build up
the soul in grace; now no Office, or Ordinance, can do that, but only what is
instituted by Christ to that end: For that place in the Corinthians I spoke
somewhat of it in the Observations, and I wonder he past it over without
mentioning; for these words, Let all things be done decently, and in order, is
only meant of ordering things in a Church already constituted, not of giving
rules for the constitution of it; and the words import nothing less: for what
is order but a fit disposing of things already made and constituted in their
proper place, it being a word taken from martial Discipline, where every man
is set in his Rank and File according as occasion is. Now you shall find the
Apostle applying of it so in the place quoted, for he speaks it to regulate the
exercise of Prophecy in that Church; and whereas they were wont to use that
Ordinance confusedly, one speaking when another spoke, he tells them they might
all speak one by one, if they would but stay before each other had done; and
then lays down this as a rule to direct in the exercise of this, and all other
Ordinances; Let all things be done decently, and in order: I wonder how men
that are not lost in prejudice, that have any intellectualls about them, can so
mistake this place, as to say its a general rule of prescribing a form of
Church Government left arbitrary to any people: seeing neither the
signification of the words, nor the coherence of the place, has the least
shadow of such an interpretation: where the fallacy of this Argument lies, I
cannot as yet discern, much less where the absurdity is which Master Prin
has charged it with.

His third Argument (says he) is that Revel. 11. 1, 2. we read of a measuring
of the Temple, and Revel. 21. 1, 2. of the new Jerusalem coming out of heaven,
etc. Ergo, There is a settled divine Church Government universally prescribed to
all Christians in the new Testament: To this he says nothing in answer, either
to the interpretation of the place, or the application of it to this
particular: only he seems to retort: First, That this is no better proof of
this Assertion, then the Angel of the Church of Ephesus is of our Prelates
Lordly Hierarchy Jure Divino: but how, or wherein the parallel holds he shows
not; yet this he thinks is a full Answer.

Secondly, (he says) I might as well, yea more properly conclude thence That
the Altar was measured as well as the Temple, Rev. 11. 1. ( referring to the
Jewish, not Christian Church, which has no Temple nor Altar:) Ergo, We ought
to have an Altar, yea one set form of Altars in all Christian Churches under
the Gospel: Thus far he: What the sense of these words is, I cannot as yet
understand, much less where the Argument lies; I never thought to have found
such a piece of absurdity fall from Master Prins mouth. His Argument will run
thus, if put into form: If the Temple was measured, then (as an absurdity) the
Altar was measured, and if the Altar was measured, which was Jewish and not
Christian, then we ought to have an Altar, yea one set form of Altars under
the Gospel: Who doubts but the Altar was also measured? for the Text says it
expressly. Now by Altar was meant the worship, as by Temple the Church, and so
its commonly used in all the new Testament; the Altar is put by Synechdoche,
Piscator in locum.
for all the worship in the Gospel, as the Temple for the Church; and here
Master Prin gives a good encouragement to the Papists for the maintenance of
their Altars, if he will interpret these Scriptures literally. The Apostle
says, Heb. 13. 10. We have an Altar, etc. And what can the Papists infer
otherwise, if they will argue from the word, but that there may be Altars now?
for that he says, it refers to the Jewish, not Christian Church, if he mean by
referring, that there are used the terms given to the worship and Church of
the Jews, its granted; but if (as his words carry it) he means that it is
meant of the Jewish Church, and the measuring of their Discipline and worship,
nothing can be more absurd; because that Church State they were in was
disanulled, and new Ordinances of the Gospel were brought in and the Book of
the Revelation is not an History, but a Prophecy; Nay, the holy Ghost using
the same words, and terms of the worship and Ordinances of the old Testament,
in expressing the worship of the new, gives a clear ground to infer, that as
their pattern was punctually described, ( viz. of the Temple and the Altar,
etc.) so also now is the worship and discipline of the new Testament signified
by these expressions, as punctually prescribed. What is that measuring of the
Temple spoken of in Ezech. 40. and 41. Chap. but the exact describing of the
frame and fashion of it, with the utensils in it? and what must this measuring
of the Temple and Altar here be, but the doing the same spiritually? That which
is observed from this place of the Revelation, is, First, That under the Gospel
there is a Temple and Altar; that is, a Church, and worship in it.

Secondly, That this was to be measured; that is, the exact proportion of it
taken: now nothing can be measured without a rule, and the following words
clear it, for the holy Ghost speaks of witnesses, who give Testimony to it,
and are slain for it: now who would be so used for that which was never written
as a rule, but left arbitrary to every nation and kingdom? and that it was
worship they witnessed to, is plain both from the words, Temple and Altar,
being never used for doctrine in the new Testament, but for discipline and
worship; as likewise from the types and parallel of them, as compare verse. 4.
with Zach. 4. now what did Joshua and Zerubbabel witness to but the worship?
Its Master Brightmans note upon the place, Page 347. The true Christian Church
is shaddowed out by the types of the old Temple, each part whereof was most
exactly decyphered, and measured out in the old, by the commandment of God
himself, and that unto this end, that men might know that this house is framed
by God, and is not made by man's might and cunning; and that therefore they
should not take upon them any power to change matters at their pleasure, as if
the Divine Wisdom had not provided sufficiently to ordain every thing in the
fittest manner that could be: thus far he: So that yet, Reader, you may see
that this Argument is not yet quelled, nor the absurdity of it in any measure
shown, how ere the full Replyer boasts, and gives it out to the world.

But yet to make this more evident, let this be an Argument: That which tends
to the salvation, and edification of the soul, must be appointed by God, and so
have the word for its rule; but such does discipline in a Church: Ergo, The
Major is denied by none that I know: yet for instance, the Sacraments, Bread
and Wine, and Water, have nothing in themselves, or their own nature, to
produce such spiritual effects as they do, but only because Christ has
instituted them to that purpose, and it is that which gives them such an
efficacy, this was the great, and indeed unanswerable Argument the
Nonconformist always: used against the Ceremonies, that the imposers of them
put a peculiar significancie in them, and gave them as helps fit and apt to
stir up the dull minds of men the better to serve God; as is expressed in the
Preface of the Book of Common Prayer: now, say they, none can give that as a
help to build up a man's soul, or to stir him up to any spiritual thing, which
in its own nature has nothing to produce such an effect, unless they can
give these things power for the working of it; and nothing but what comes from
God will carry to God.

For the Minor, or assumption, that the discipline of the Church is for
salvation, the Apostle is clear in 1 Cor. 5. 5. speaking of Excommunication,
one of the chief parts of discipline, says, It is for the salvation of the
soul; now what is said of that may be said of every part of Discipline, every
part being homogeneall, and of the same nature: I Will end this with the saying of
Master Brightman, on Rev. 2. p. 50. The Government of the Church is common to
all times and places, and is not permitted to be at the arbitrament of men to
follow what they list; but always in Reforming Churches we must have recourse
to the first beginnings, unto the which as our only rule we must call back
what ever strayeth from it, and that they are not to be turned and tuned
according to the crookedness, and jarring sounds of succeeding Churches.

In the next place, (says he) He pretends my third Querie contradicts the
first, because I suppose a Church: government may be consonant to Gods word in
the general, which is not particularly prescribed in it: a pretty fancy
(quoth he) as if nothing could be consonant to Gods word, which is not
particularized or verbally enjoined in it.

To which I answer, passing by many bitter expressions that follow it, that
things to be done in or about the worship of God, are either matters of
circumstance, as garments, place, time, etc. such as these come under general
rules of the word, such as that 1 Cor. 14. To let all things be done decently,
and that they be consonant to the word, is sufficient: Or else; secondly,
Things are such as partake of the nature of worship, and are to edify, and to
attain a spiritual end; so nothing is consonant to the word, but what either
is punctually expressed, or can be deduced by necessary and immediate
consequence, and in this sense its not sufficient that its no where denied,
unless it be some where commanded; and the reason is this, because matters of
instituted worship (as Divines call it) depend only on the will of God, and
there is no necessity in the nature of the things for their appointment: As for
example, why God would be worshipped by Sacraments, why excommunication, or
other acts of discipline should be appointed as a means to save the soul;
there is no reason to be given from the thing, but only Gods will; now that is
only expressed in the word, or naturally to be drawn from it: as for things
civil, such as he instanceth, as temporal Magistrates, Parliaments, etc. Its
left by God to every Commonwealth to sit themselves, and dispose of things, as
may be most for their peace and profit; and consonancie to the Moral and
Politic rules of justice and equity, is enough to warrant these undertakings.

From this he passes to my Anti-quaeries: First, If no prescript form (of
Church Government) in the word, why not Episcopacie, especially regulated and
moderated, as well as Presbytery?

To which he Answers: If you mean it of Lordly Episcopacie, there are abundant
Texts against it, if of moderated and regulated Episcopacie, the same with
Presbytery; if the Parliament by the Synods advice unanimously establish, etc.
I shall readily submit to it, and why not you and all others?

In which, first, let all the world observe: That Master Pryn grants that
Presbytery is but a regulated Episcopacie: Oh noble hearted Saints, and well
bred Christians of England, who have felt so much the power of Episcopacie,
which was the Lion let go about without its chain, think what Presbytery will
be, which is but the same Lion in a fetter; if ever it break loose, with what
redoubled might will it tear and devour? Episcopacie to be cut off root and
branch was one part of that first noble Petition of this famous City, signed
with 15000. hands; and does not that reach Master Pryns Presbytery? This was
the great suggestion both in Parliament and elsewhere, among the judicious and
godly, that if they should cut the Bishops Locks, a little regulate them, their
hair would soon grow again, and pull down the house of the Commonwealth about
us all: in a Presbytery there is no more, according to Mr. Pryns own judgment;
the Bishops nails will be cut a little to grow out the faster, to claw the
sorer; or rather, the Bishops power in a Presbytery is dilated from 26. unto
600. what one could not reach to do, you may be sure many will; and as the
Bishops would call men Puritans and Non-Conformists, and so persecute them; so
will the Presbytery call men Schismatics, Heretics, Antinomians, Separatists,
and do the like. And whereas it may be said, The Presbytery will be godly men:
I Answer, so were the first Bishops of Rome in the beginning: and these which
are now good may leave the government next to as bad men as may be, and then
the misery will be greater, by how much the multitude that have power are
greater.

I do not think the Pope is called Antichrist so much because of his Temporal
power, as because of his taking such power of jurisdiction over the Consciences
of men, prescribing for them Laws to walk by, and punishing men for disobeying:
Neither was the Episcopacie unlawful so much because of their Lordships, as
for their supreme power they arrogated over the Church, and Consciences of men,
and because there were no footsteps for it in the word. Whereas he says, if
the Parliament and Synod shall establish a Presbytery, he shall readily submit,
and asks why not we? Let him know, if he can sell away his Judgment and
Conscience, we cannot; yet though we cannot go against our Conscience to obey
actively, we have learned to submit to Authority passively, if they can in
Conscience take any such course with us.

2. Antiquerie was, if Church Government be to be suited to States, whether
Politicians are not more fit to consult about it, and why is an Assembly of
Divines called?

To which he answers: That his Position is, that Church Government ought to be
suitable to the Word, as also to the Civil State; and therefore Politicians
and Statesmen, and divines are to be consulted with, etc. In this Answer Master
Pryn give, the greatest ground to hold up the Bishop powers in States, and so
of Ministers also to be Statesmen, as can be, if the civil power and
Ecclesiastical have such a dependence on each other that the one must be
suited to the other.
If by suiting to States he means that the government of Christ's Church must
be suited to every form of civil government; then there must be as many sorts
of Church Government as there are of civil, which is the greatest confusion
that can be; and then you need not put in that clause, that it be suitable to
the word, for that is suitable to the word which suits the State; for either
there is but one government in the word set down to all, and then it is no
matter where it suit the State, for that must be followed what ever States say,
or else that government which suits the State is suitable to the word, and then
what need such calling and urging the pattern of the best reformed Churches?
what have we to do with a Scottish government, or French, or any, seeing our
civil government dissers from both? this conceit is the greatest doctrine of
Liberty in the world. If by suiting of States he means that the government of
Christ should be no disturbance to the proceedings or peace of a State, its
granted; and so the congregationall way is as suitable to States, as
Presbytery, or any other government in the world.

To the third question he answers, That it is more fit that the State should be
subject to Christ's rule then Christ to it, but this question, says he, is
besides the question, until you prove a set unalterable Government, which I
have done sufficiently; yet to say somewhat to what he says in the following
words, whether Christian Princes, Parliaments, Synods, under the Gospel have
not power to bind all the Churches under their dominions as the major part of
an Independent Church to bind their own members. To which I answer.

First, if majoritie be considered absolutely in it self; that where there is
the greater number or greater part of the Catholic Church, they may make Laws
for other Churches; then, another kingdom if it be greater then this, and the
numbers of the Church more, may make Ecclesiastical Laws for this kingdom,
yea then that must call in all the Churches in the world in every matter. For
where there is more, there is authority; yea only the Catholic Church must
rule, and make laws for it self.

Secondly, the reason why the major part of a congregation binds (yet only in
particular actions which concern themselves, not in prescribing a rule of
Church government unto others) is, because of the promise which God has made
with them. Matthew. 18. where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I
will be in the midst, says Christ, when he speaks of the Churches censuring an
offender; and this is strength enough to every action, and we need not fear
what the matter is that is to be handled, when Christ will be present, we have
no such promise to any society else.

As for the latter part of the quaere ( says he) that the Saints think Christ
is King alone over his Churches, and has not left them to substitutes, and the
politic considerations of men to be governed by: if ( says he) he means it
only of matters of faith it may pass as tolerable; but if he means of
external Ecclesiastical government, discipline, or order in the Church, he
must renounce his oath of Allegiance, his late Protestation, National vow, and
Covenant, etc.

In which observe two things. First, that to hold Christ is King in matters of
faith and internal government over men's souls may pass but as a tolerable
thing; how to pass by this expression with a less character then sleighting
Christ's kingly office I know not; bone Deus! and good Christians, to what pass
is Religion come? if this must pass but as a tolerable doctrine, that Christ
is sole King of souls, and is it not undeniably without controversies, as true
as God himself? and is it not horrid blasphemy to have the least thought to
the contrary? the truth is, I wondered when I saw such a mistake fall from Mr.
Prynnes pen; its no marvel if other things be intolerable to pass, if this be
but tolerable.

Secondly, to hold Christ King in external government, is against the Oath of
Allegiance, etc. who told you that the meaning of any Covenant or Protestation
intends any such thing? We cannot think the Parliament would be so injurious to
Christ as to take away any of his Kingly office from him, as Mr. Prynne would
needs affirm; we doubt not but they have learnt to give up the Scepter and
supreme power of governing the Church to Christ, as Christ has given the
supreme power of the Commonwealth to them. In what clause of the
Protestation, or Covenant does this lie, I never found it yet. I know none that
ever protested that Christ was not sole King of the Church, and the prescriber
of laws to his Church: show me the clause, and I will unsubscribe to that
particular, as being most derogatory to the honor of our heavenly Prince and
Lord Jesus Christ.

In his answer to my second quaere, ( says he) he first Charity would have
said weakly.
wilfully misrecites it, and then infers a blind obedience from it to all
superior commands, be they never so unjust or contrary to the Word, whereas my
question only speaks of lawful decrees, and consonant to the Word, etc. to
which every Christian is bound in conscience to submit, Romans 13. 1. to 6. 1
Pet. 2. 14, 15. Tit. 3. 1. If any man deny this, he must renounce, not only
his Christianity, but his Allegiance and humanity too.

For answer to this, I will not enter into that common place how far the
power of Magistrates may reach in matters of Religion, to the binding the
conscience, though I wish it were rightly stated, that Christ might not lose
his due, as they might not theirs. Yet I desire humbly to propound one argument
to Mr. Prynne, which has a little puzzled my thoughts: and I desire him not to
mis-interpret it, as if I went to undermine the privilege of Parliament, if
the Magistrate must be obeyed, as having power to command in matters of
Worship, it is either, qua a Magistrate, or as a Christian Magistrate: if as a
Magistrate, it holds in all, as well Heathen as Christian power, being equal,
alike in both, as they are Magistrates: for Civil power is not, as the Papists
say, founded in Grace or Religion, but in the compact and agreement of the
Commonwealth. whatever belongs to a man, as a man, belongs to every man, be he
rich or poor; whatever belongs to a Magistrate, as a Magistrate, belongs to
every Magistrate, be he Christian or Heathen; and then the Heathen Magistrates
Subjects are as much bound in Conscience to obey what Worship they set up, as
Christian Subjects are to obey theirs whom they are under.

If as a Christian Magistrate, then show your rule, these Scriptures Rom, 13.
etc. are spoken in general of power limited to none, nay they prove directly
against you; for the Magistrates, the Apostles and Primitive Saints lived
under, were Heathens, not Christians: Again, if as Christian, then he must be
obeyed, because he commands, or for what he commands, either because of his
own power, or the authority of the things themselves; if for the former, then
its qua a Magistrate, and so it belongs to all, his Authority not arising from
his Christianity, but his Magistracy: if for the latter, then its not the
Magistrate, but the Word of God that must be obeyed; now that must be seen
before it can be followed; there is no greater eating Worm in the Power of
Magistracy then to found it in Religion, for thence the Jesuits infer
undenyably, if Government belong to Magistrates, as Christian, as religious,
then he that is not a Christian Magistrate, is an usurper, and may be deposed
at pleasure; nay indeed he is no more then a private man, when once
excommunicated, and all their ensuing commands are not to be obeyed: yea it
will come to this, that the Church has power over States and Kingdoms, for
the Church is to deal in all matters of Religion most powerfully, now that is
to get States to be their servants, and exercise what power the Church pleases
upon offenders; besides, if they have power to command, I have no power
actually to obey, unless my conscience be convinced of the lawfulness of it,
for whatever is not of faith is sin; to the reason I urged for this, he answers
nothing yet further to confirm him.

1. Its neither a humane nor religious act that is not done with understanding.
God would not have us to believe him, without we see the ground of it in the
Word. All Protestant Writers give to every man judician privatae discretionis,
they give the testimony of man's conscience, as one way whereby we know the Word
of God to be the Word.
For any to require a man to practice that in the Worship of God, upon pain of
Schism, arrogancy, etc. before a man sees it to be commanded of God, is to
require more then God requires, who would have every man practice according to
his light; in natural Worship indeed God requires obedience of all alike,
because they all once knew how to serve God: God gave Adam for all his, and men
have lost them by their own default, and though they should never hear the
Word, yet they shall be condemned for not serving God in that way, for it was
engraven in every man's heart naturally, but its not so in instituted Worship,
which depends merely on Gods will, for in this God requires we should search to
know, but will never punish any man for the not obeying that he searches
after, prays God to reveal, and yet cannot find it to be the mind of God;
much less should men force men, (who not only have no light in the thing, but
their light is against it,) to obey what they conceive is the mind of God.

2. That Doctrine that puts upon any man an inevitableness of sinning, may not
be admitted, but such does this, that men must obey what superiors command in
the Worship of God, though their judgments be against it: and the minor is
proved thus by instance, to go against my light and conscience is sin, and to
disobey the Magistrates commands is sin, and one I must do; yea its the
greatest hypocrisy that can be, to follow that authority commands, which yet
man's conscience thinks is not to be done: besides, what do I know, but the
light I have is from the Spirit of God? and if I go against it, I am guilty of
resisting and grieving the Spirit, which is the greatest sin that can be.

3. It is the greatest tyranny over men's souls that can be: what can be greater
then to make other men's judgments the rule of my conscience, to swear
obedience to that my understanding is against: surely its the greatest
soul-inquisition that can be; however Master Pryn says, I infer a blind
obedience from his Position, I know not how to infer otherwise, for that must
needs be blind obedience, when a man must obey (take it in what you will of
this kind) that which he sees not, either expressed, or any way warranted by the
Word; its to put men above God, at least in this place: for if I must obey,
because higher Powers judge it so, their power must be the rule of my
conscience, which alone is subject to the Word; and its the greatest baseness
of spirit, it dis-ennobles men's spirits, hinders, and utterly crusheth the
growth of any ones gifts; for if other men's judgments must be my rule, and I
sin in not submitting to it, what need any man study to find out truth, or with
the noble Bereans, to search the Scripture, to see whether these things be so?
give men eyes, and they will soon follow you, else never call for such
unlimited obedience.

Again, what if the Parliament and Synod should err in setting up a
Government, must every one be bound to join with them?

To which he answers; First, such an oversight is not to be presumed until it
be actually committed; and its neither Christian, charitable, nor any way of
Christ, thus to prejudge their resolutions. And yet you to presume to determine
what the Congregationall way is, and censure what effects will follow, though
you profess you know not what they hold, and never saw the way exercised; we
know as much of Presbyteriall and its effects, as ever any can speak of the
Congregationall, therefore leave off your scandalous Titles of this way, which
yet you never saw did commit any thing worthy of them.

As for your sufferings you speak of, I never mentioned them as your shame,
though you have made the honor of them less then the World thought it was, in
that you say, you suffered not for opposing any Ceremony legally established,
or the Bishops calling, but their Lordly power; however you suffered, (and now
we are glad we know for what you suffered) yet holy Master Burton, for his
part, confesses the contrary, that he suffered for preaching against the
Bishops Government, and the Ceremonies. I doubt not, but if ever God shall call
us to suffer for this truth, we shall have as much comfort and strength in
standing for the Prerogative of King Jesus, as ever you had for maintaining any
Statute Law whatsoever.

In the fifth (says he) he grants, that Independency will overthrow all
National Churches and Synods. 1. Is it not even a turbulent, dangerous,
Schismatic unquiet, (that I say not insufferable) Government, which will
admit no equal nor corrivall? and thus he goes on with his uncivil calumnies,
for many lines. But bona verba quaeso, if you understand the words thus, that
in the judgments of these that are of this way, there can be no National
Churches according to the Word, so it overthrowes it; but yet only in
intellectu, as I may say, they cannot think it to be a Gospel Institution of a
Church; as the holding one opinion overthrowes another, so is this, that all
National Churches will be overthrown by your Congregationall way, and this
sense (which I mean) deserves not such unworthy Language; but if you take it
(as it seems you do) that the Congregationall way cannot live by the other
Government, or in a Nation which is a Church, but it will endeavor by force
and arms to extirpate, overthrow, unchurch them that disturb their peace,
slay their members, etc. It has not as yet conceived such a thought, and its
contrary to its nature to bring it forth; there is nothing so detestable to our
judgments, and, I doubt not, that should be more contrary to our practice,
then the disturbing the peace of a Nation, what ever scandal men fasten on us.

To the sixth, he says, I return no answer, but plainly yield that there was
never any Independent Church in any age or nation whatever totally converted to
the Christian faith, etc.

If Mr. Pryn understand the words thus, That the congregationall way has not
been set up as the government of any one Nation, its granted; but that there
was never a congregationall Church in any one nation is denied, and it will put
him to it to make it out: Nay, for the first four or 500. years I durst
challenge him to produce any other then particular Churches that had the power
of censures within themselves; Justin and Irenaeus knew no kind of Church in
the world which did not assemble on the Sabbath; and as learned Mr. Baines
proves out of Eusebius. l. 3. 44. lib. See Bains diocesan trial.
4. cap. 21. and lib. 2. cap. 6. that Churches at first were but Parishes, and
Parishes within Cities, and he quotes Saint John lib. 3. cap. 23. saying to the
Bishop, Read juvenem quem tibi ego and Christus, test Ecclesia tua,
tradidimus. Tertullian. Apol. c. 39. knew no Churches which had not power of
censures within themselves, and we hold no more. Says Cyprian lib. 4. ep. 1.
Schisms were said to be from hence, Quod Episcopo universa fraternitas non
obtemperat. And the same Author, Epist. 55. tota fraternitas, i. e. unius
congregationis tota multitudo, ex qua componitur Ecclesia particularis. Sabino
de universae fraternitatis suffragio Episcopatus fuit delatus. And again, lib.
1. epist. 47. 58. 68. Ecclesiae igitur circuitus non fuit major, quam ut
Episcopatus totam plebem fuam in negotiis hujusmodi convocare potuerit. He
which is skilled in Antiquity, I doubt not but may bring forth multitudes of
such testimonies as these; all that we say is, that a Church is a particular
congregation of Saints, having power of censures within themselves, and
exercising all the Ordinances of Christ. Now this Antiquity proves to be in the
primitive times, even many years after the Apostle; but suppose the contrary,
that there could not any such footsteps of this way be found in Antiquity, yet
have we no ground to think its not true; great was the Apostacy of the
Churches from the Apostles doctrine; that truth has been lost for a long time
among the most. It is a great mercy that since that defection from the pure
ways of Christ to Antichrist, there have been any glimmerings of light
preserved, any in secret that might worship him after his own mind, that any
thing has been refined and restored to its primitive institution; yet all
times are not alike, now God has in an abundant clear manner so scattered the
mists of Popery and darkness, has revealed many truths which formerly lay
hid. Unhappy we, if we yet see not more then the godly formerly did, who but
then came out of Antichristian darkness! God is now opening the mysteries of
the Gospel, discovering the truths that concern Christ's Kingly Office, and
why may not this be one, though never discovered before; or if discovered, yet
crushed and made light of. The opinion of the thousand years which was anciently
generally condemned for a Heresy, is now embraced as a precious truth, and
maintained by many learned lights, as Alstede, Mede, Doctor Twisse, Doctor
Stoughton, with diverse others. That is ancient which is primitive, and to be
found in the Scriptures; neither are the names of these that either have been
of this judgment, or have or do practice it of mean and contemptible
reputation, but they have given sufficient testimony to the world of their
learning and godliness, as learned Baines, Ames, Cotton, with the many in
these times, both in New England, here, and other places, men not a jot behind
any of their Predecessors in the knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel; yea,
anointed with the gifts of the Spirit above most of their fellows.
Notwithstanding that you say, that for any reverend godly person, who now
contends about this new Model, though I reverence their persons, and
judgments too in other things, yet I cannot subscribe to them in this new
dangerous by way. Yet those men cannot think you reverence dither their persons
or judgments, for then you would not be so rash as to condemn what they hold,
before you knew what it was, or whether it was so or no; for either you think
them judicious and conscientious, or not: if the former, then you would judge
what they hold they have ground for: if the latter, that then they durst not
practice that is generally opposed without a clear warrant (at least in their
own judgments) from the Scriptures. Neither do they desire you should
subscribe to their judgments in this or any thing else: yet this is your duty,
to give them the right hand of fellowship a while, and not rail on, and condemn
with all bitterness the way they practice, until you had heard what they
could say for themselves.

In the seventh (says he the grants, That the Law of nature that teaches men
to unite themselves into one national State, or civil Government, does
likewise teach them to join and subject themselves to one national Church, and
to national Synods, and Parliaments in point of Church Government.

Let any one judge that reads what I answered, whether there be so much as a
shadow for such a mis-recitation; the sun of my Answer was this: That the Law
of nature teaches every man to join himself to such a particular Society,
where every man may have his personal vote in every thing that concerns him,
as well as any one, or a Company to set up either one, or more over them, to
whose judgment they will submit, and who shall be the Vltinum of all their
Appeals and Counsels. And that there is as great a sutablenesse to the Law of
Nature in a Democraticall, and Aristocraticall Government (of which the
Congregation consists) as in a Monarchical, or (...) Arisocraticall. The
Liberties of Saints and Subjects differ; though Subjects may put theirs into
the hands of others, the Saints cannot theirs without ingratitude for Christ's
purchase of them, and disloyalty to his Sovereignty, who alone is King of his
Churches: for if I give up my power unto others, I must stand to what they
determine, what ever my Conscience be to the contrary; and what if they cry?
He grants that the Magistrate has not still power over men's Consciences, is
over men's bodies: yet he says, that God has enjoined us to be subject to
every lawful Ordinance of man, and not repugnant to the Word, etc. To which I
answer: What if the commands be repugnant to direct Consequence of Scripture,
though not against any express Texts? And what if a man thinks it repugnant to
the Word, must a man obey it? that which to me is repugnant to the Word, is my
sin if I do it: Besides, what if it should be repugnant? Either you must say
the Magistrate can command nothing repugnant to the Word, and therefore must be
obeyed; or else a man must see it in his own judgment not to be repugnant
before he can obey it. God forbid a tittle of the power God has given
Magistrates should be taken from them, yet I would things were so stated, that
Christ might not lose his Prerogative: Master Prin in his other twelve Queries,
and the latter end of this, labors to persuade the Parliament, that these whom
he calls Independents, are against the power of Parliaments, on purpose to make
them odious in their eyes. But let that honorable Assembly know, that what
ever power the Principles of Presbytery will give them, the Congregationall way
will give much more: neither have the Parliament truer friends then they, who
will be more willing to venture their lives, and sacrifice all they have for
them; only this is desired by them, (which they know is the desire of that
Honorable Assembly) that the Rights and Liberties Christ has purchased by his
own precious blood, and left the Saints as his last Legacy, may not be taken
away by the secular power; as that the secular power might not be encroached on
by Christian Liberty. After this, he goes on to justify his bitter and
unchristian passage, in comparing our Church-meetings to the Conventicles of of
the Arrians, Donatists, etc. Could you find no smoother or lovinger comparison
to scandalize us by? Can no other title be bad enough, but a Conventicle? A
name given by the Bishops, and all their crew, to all the godly meetings of the
Saints. Take heed, that you that are so skilled in the Bishops language, come
not to take up their weapons too; what do you but in one word call us heretics,
Schismatics, and the worst of men? For this you say in the Marthat 35. Eli. c.
1. none are Conventicles but the meetings of Heretics, and Schismatics, who
separate themselves, etc. Though your passion would not, yet your charity might
have given us better language. You and your Party are very full of these
terms, though you nor they ever define what Schism or Heresy is. We desire,
and challenge you to tell us what Heresies we have broached in these
Conventicles? In what Fundamentalls do we differ from you which is Heresy?
What Acts against the power of godliness can you manifest against us? What
Treasons have we plotted against the Parliament in our meetings? Should I call
you Heretic, and Schismatic, etc. because your judgment is Presbyteriall,
would you take it well? The Lord learn you meekness, and a more sober Spirit,
not to tax so highly, and slander so insufferably, unless you make it out that
we are such.

To the eighth, he says, I answer negatively, and well I may.

My first Answer was, that the national Church of the Jews cannot be a pattern
for us now, because the Covenant of the Gospel is not made with any one
particular nation, but to all in every nation that believe; you have no promise
nor Prophecy of any nation to be holy to God, but the Jews when they shall be
called again.

To which he Replies, 1. That the Independents have not the least Precept, or
Example for a solemn Covenant, but in the old Testament, and Church of the
Israelites; and that no private Congregationall, but public national
Covenant, prescribed by the supreme temporal Magistrate, and Assembly, yea,
the principal Precepts and Presidents for sanctifying the Sabbath, public or
private Fasts, you likewise derive from the old Testament, and that Church; Why
should not therefore their national Church be a pattern for us? etc.

To which I Answer: First, For the Covenant, we hold not that such a formal
Covenant constitutes a Church; this is enough, that there be an union, whether
by Covenant explicit or implicit, or consent; that is certain the Union is
Moral, as all other must be that constitute a Policy: yet for that he says,
there is no Precept or pattern but in the old Testament for a Covenant: its
answered; Secondly, That its ground enough for such a practice, the Covenant
not being Ceremonial, but Moral, and that which of necessity goes to such a
Constitution; it did not constitute the Church as national, but as a Church:
Indeed the Covenant was national, because the Church was so, but that was
accidental. Its no part of the essence of a Covenant, that it should be
national, that does accedere to it as it constitutes such a Policy; and the
same, or which is equivalent, must constitute a particular Church, the same
formal Constitution that was in that Church, as a Church, must be in every
Church also: and though the dispensation in Churches be different, yet the same
constitutive Principles remain in all.

For that he says, the principal Precepts, for a Sabbath, and Fasts, we take
out of the old, Testament, and therefore why should not their (...) Church be a
pattern for us to imitate, as well as their national Covenant, Sabbaths? etc.

I Answer: We keep the Sabbath only as it is a Moral Precept in the
Decalogue, not as peculiar to the Jews; for where there was any ceremonialnesse
(in it, as the seventh day) its changed among us; and for Fasts, there is as
great equity, that when we have displeased God, we should solemnly humble our
selves before him. But that the Church was National, was merely accidental;
and he might as well argue, and it will as rightly follow, that there must be
but one visible Church in all the world, and that one nation, as the Jews were;
for if he argue from one part, which is accidental, he must argue from,
another that is so likewise. Besides, if this be a property of a Church, that
it be national, then there is no Church but what is national if that did
convenire to the Church of the Jews, as a Church, that it was national, then
it does so unto every Church; and the same may be said, that there was but that
one Church in the world then, therefore there is but one now. Many such
absurdities will necessarily follow such an Argument.

To that that I say, that the Covenant of the Gospel is made with no particular
nation, but with every one in every nation that believes, and that there is no
Prophecy or Promise of any one nation to be converted, but the Jews.

He Answers: That this Reason is both absurd and false, the Covenant extending
not only to particular persons, but to all nations, etc. And for this he quotes
many Scriptures in the Margent, the sum of which is contained in Psalm. 2. 8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. And that in Esaias 2. 2, 3. The
mountain of the Lord shall be exalted on the top of the mountains, and all
nations shall flow to it. Therefore God has made a Covenant with particular
nations to be Churches.

To which, I answer, 1. That if these Texts be to be understood so, Jesus
Christ never had a Church since the dissolution of the Jewish State; for there
has been no nation in the world yet wholly given to Christ, none that may be
called a holy nation; as yet that Prophecy is not fulfilled: what may be
hereafter I know not.

Secondly, You may as well say that the Covenant of the Gospel is made with all
nations, and that all nations are, or shall be, Churches to Christ, for so the
words run in the general: I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the utmost parts of the earth, etc. and all nations shall flow in unto the
Church; and become such.

Thirdly, That in Psalm. 2. is not meant of God covenanting with any people,
but it shows that all the world is in subjection to Christ, and that the Father
has given him all rule and power from one end of the earth to the other; and
the following words imply so much; for he says, He shall rule them with a rod
of iron; now its not meant so much of the Church, as of the Kings, and
Potentates, and great men of the world, that band themselves against Christ.
Christ rules not his Church with a rod of iron, but with a golden Scepter; and
if all nations were given to Christ, that is, really converted, and in
Covenant, there would not be so many Potentates, Kings, and great ones, to band
themselves against Christ and his Church; and for that place Esaias 2. That all
nations shall flow into the Church when once its exalted, its no more then what
was fulfilled in Acts 2. where men of every nation under heaven believed, and
so is the word commonly used for some of all nations; and the utmost that can
be said of them, and all the other places brought, is but this, that when Jews
and Gentiles shall all be called together, the most part of the nations shall
believe, and come to Christ, in 1 Pet. 2. 9. which he quotes: The Apostle calls
the scattered Saints a holy nation, yet they were no nation, but scattered
through many nations; and these Scriptures are meant of the multiplicity of
believers that shall be brought under Jesus Christ's Dominion: and these Texts
do no more prove a national Church, or any one nation wholly converted, then
that Text, Go preach the Gospel unto every nation, Matthew. 28. proves that every
nation shall therefore be converted to Christ; and they rather prove, that all
nations shall be real Saints, then that any one nation or more shall be so.
Besides, if the Church be national, every one of the nation is a member, and
there can be no censures of Excommunication rightly administered; for there can
be no Excommunication, but either by cutting the person off from this life, or
else banishing, which are for destruction, not edification; for whiles he lives
in the Kingdom, he is a member, and the bounds and limits of the nation are the
bounds and limits of the Church.

Again, of what Nation in the world can it be said which is said of the
Church, you are a peculiar and holy people? nay are not all the Nations
corrupted, few or none, in the most, embracing the Gospel? England has been
accounted as Protestant, and as refined a Nation, as any has been for
Doctrine; yet how many vipers has it bred in its own bowels? who ever have
been more wicked then they? where have the Saints been more persecuted then
here?

Again, if Nations may be Churches, there will be no distinction between the
World and the Church: all will be Saints, and as far members of the visible
Church, as the best Saints.

To that I say, that he cannot show any Nation, every Member whereof is
qualified sufficiently to make up a Church, unless we will take in Drunkards,
Whoremongers, etc. and this cannot be avoided in a National Church, he
answers: that he daces not be wiser then his Lord and Master, who informs him
that there will and must be always in the visible Church on earth goats among
the sheep, ch^ffe amongst the wheat, etc.

I answer: 1. That there will be goats, is most certain: but that there must
be, is neither necessitate praecepti nor med^j. Christ never commanded it,
neither is it of absolute necessity, for the Saints can live and be built up
without any mixture of such society is it a delight and pleasure to Christ to
see goats among his sheep, in his own fold? what need then [this must] be so
confidently put in?

Secondly, goats, chafe, bad fish, are taken for hypocrites as well as profane
men, and in these places they are only to be taken so; as for example, that
place Mat. 13. 24. of the good seed and the tares which he quotes, by tares are
not meant profane persons, but hypocrites: 1. the Scutietus in obse. vat. in
Mat. Pasor. Lexicon. in ^b.
Word expresses no more, tares (as Historians observe) are a weed like the
wheat: now profane men are no way like the Saints: 2. if it be meant of profane
men, and Master Pryn take it of their being in the Church, then all the
censures of the Church are out off ipso facto, for the Text says expressly,
they must be let alone till the harvest, (that is, the day of judgment) so that
no wicked man may be excommunicated, or any censure pass upon him: yea 3. it
is plain, they are hypocrites, they were discovered by none but the Angels:
yea 4. if you will needs take it of profane men, the Text says expressly,
that these were not in the Church, but in the world; the field is the world,
verse. 38. whereas he says, he finds that in the Churches of Galathia,
Collosse, Pergamus, etc. there were drunkards, Epicures, whoremongers, etc. I
answer in general, that I know no Churches openly taxt for any such gross acts
of sin in all the New Testament; only the Church of Corinth abou the incestuous
Corinthian, which is spoken as a defilement, and a blot upon them, whereby they
were corrupted; and he therefore exhorts them to cast him out, that they might
be a new lump, 1 Cor. 5. As for 1 Cor. 11. where the Apostle says, one is
thirsty and another is drunk, I think it not meant of that gross act, which
we call drunkenness, but the same with that which is said of Joseph and his
brethren, Genesis 43. 5. they drank and were merry; they drank more freely then
they ought at that time, though it might be lawful at another time; but
however, though there were these in such Churches: Yet

First, I speak of the first constitution of a Church, and what Churches should
be, not what they are degenerated into.

Secondly, they were most spiritual sins that were laid to the charge of the
seven Churches, and other Churches, as that they lost their first love,
countenanced false teachers, etc. not such gross acts of profaneness, as
whoring, etc. Yet

Thirdly, what heavy and sad threatenings are there denounced by God against
these, if the continued in that estate, and what judgment did follow? for God
is very tender of his worship, and what is become of all these Churches now?
how greatly has God been displeased with them? the Jews might not enter into
marriage with the daughters of a strange Land, much less might they admit them
to ordinances among them, unless really converted, and made proselytes: now
such are all not visible Saints, in the judgment of the Saints, unto those that
are really called, and join together in the ordinances, and they ought to be
as shye of those, as they were of them: whatever a Church rightly constituted
may fall into by defection, I speak not of; but what they ought to be, such as
the word calls Saints, which can hardly be given by any knowing Saint, to the
most part of men in England: For that he asks, whether we have not drunkards,
cozeners, usurers, etc. members of our Churches? I answer, we know none, and we
should thank Master Pryn if he could discover any such, and account him our
real friend in it: For that he says, where was there ever a Church of all
elected ones? that is a state for heaven, not for this world: I answer, there is
none says a Church must be all of elect, but of such as can be judged by the
Saints to be elect. If men be not saved, its not because the Church is
deceived, but themselves: the Church goes only on these probable rules of
judging by which the word prescribes; the visible Church, in Scripture, is
called Heaven often times, as Mat. 25. 1. Heb. 12. 26. Mat 13. and in Esa. 4.
5. its called glory, to intimate that none should properly be of the Church,
but should go to Heaven; and its called the body of Christ, none should be
admitted as members of that body, but those who can really be judged to be so:
if profane persons must be in the Church, as you say, then I know no reason
but all may be in the Church, and no man in the world may be said to be out of
the Church; for the most are ungodly: if ungodly ones do steal in among the
Saints to a Church, they prosper not, and Christ will discover them to their
everlasting shame; and more dreadful judgments follow none as these: Christ
dwells in his house, which is the Church, and its no pleasure to Christ to see
a mixture among his own: he that made a whip of cords to drive out the buyers
and sellers out of the material Temple; will take rods of iron to whip out
such ungodly wretches. I am sure Christ's bread belongs to no such dogs, only
the children are welcome, and he has given power to his Church to keep out
these that have not a judged right.

Again, if profane persons, and such as walk not like Saints, are to be cast
out of the church, then such as are judged so must not be admitted into the
church; but the former is true, Ergo. That they are to be cast out of the
Church, is clear from the Scriptures, Mat. 18. 1 Cor. 5. that therefore they
ought not to be admitted, is as clear: for the same ground is in both; they
are admitted in, because they walk as Saints, and so are judged to be Saints;
they are cast out because they walk not as such: the truth is, this principle
will soon lessen a National Church, and therefore no wonder the Presbyterians
are shye of holding it; for they must cast out the most of their members,
as soon as they receive them in. Its the strangest thing to me, and I startle at
it many times, what strict rules the Presbyterians have laid down in their
Sermons in print, Master D^s preparation to the Sacrament.
and their Sermons before the Sacrament every month, in which they lay on men
such qualifications, both habitual and actual, that there is not one in a
hundred of the best Saints can follow them, and yet blame their brethren for
keeping of there, which they cannot judge to have the least degree of these
qualifications: they tell them it belongs not to them, they will eat and
drink their own damnation, on, and yet cry out in these that would not have
these poor souls contract such guilt, and draw on such ruin on their own
souls, and therefore keep them back; do you take in these who are drunkards,
whoremongers, etc. into communion in the ordinances blame us not if we keep our
selves from such defilements.

For his answer ( says he) to that of Act. 15, all ages, Churches till this
present, have held it as an express warrant for provincial and national
Synods, and their making Cannons in Church affairs: I shall not say much to
this, not doubting but we shall see these things shortly in print, which our
brethren have urged in the Assembly.

How that can be a formal Synod I could never see yet made forth: For

First, This was not a gathering of the Elders of many Churches, who make a
Synod, but only some messengers (whether Elders or no the Text speaks not)
occasionally sent up to Jerusalem, to that Church there.

Secondly, here was the whole multitude, viz. the Brethren present, besides the
Apostles and Elders, and the Letter that is sent is as much written in their
name, as of any of the Elders: now the Brethren or multitude are not usual to
be Members of Synods.

Thirdly, the Message is sent as the mind of the Holy Ghost, and not their bare
judgments, but that which they had principally received by inspiration from the
Spirit, and is not now ordinary to any Synod, for what Synod, I can say, it
seems good to the Holy Ghost, and us to lay such things on you.

Fourthly, if this were a Synod made up of Elders of several Congregations,
and that Paul and Barnabas went not up to prove the false Apostles liars, but
to have the truth manifested, which they could not do; then a Synod of Elders
have more power then bare Apostles to order things in the Church; Paul and
Barnabas were men very unfit to be Apostles, if they could not have determined
such a question whether it was necessary for the Gentiles to be circumcised,
who were to plant and order things in all the Churches; and who had power over
all Churches, and were to write the man I of God to them: surely, one Apostle
had more knowledge of the things of God, and of matters of controversy in the
Church, then all the Synods in the world besides; nay all are to follow what
they loft to the Churches; it were greatly to diminists the Apostles power, and
the highness of that office, to think than they could not determine such a
question, but must go to a Synod to have it cleared up to them. Besides, it was
an Apostle, when they came up to Jerusalem, (viz. Peter) who decided the
controversy, and Paul and Barnabas were men of as great judgment, and had as
much power as he. However we think not that to be a Synod, yet the convening of
Assemblies and Synods for advice and counsel we deny not, but that any Synod
or Council has an authoritative jurisdiction to impose Laws and Canons for
all Churches to walk by, we conceive cannot be proved, neither from this of
Acts 15. or any other Text: Yea, even this Assembly now among us the Parliament
have called only for advice, not intending to give them a power of
jurisdiction over them and all the Kingdom: Master Pryn says, and takes much
pains to prove (in his late triumphing book) that Synods, and Counsels, and
Magistrates have ever used to make Laws for the Church, and to exercise a
coercive power in matters of Religion, De Facto, (and he might have saved
himself labor to have proved it:) but whether, De Jure, there is such a power
invested in them, and from what Scripture I have not yet seen, and should be
glad to be informed by him.

To my ninth Querie (says he) and Argument in it, he returns nothing worthy
Reply, but upon this Petitio principii, that the Scriptures and the Apostles
have prescribed a set form of Government, etc. (which I have proved before:)
and that the Churches in the Apostles days were Independent, though doubtless
(says he) all Churches were then subject to the Apostles Laws and Edicts, etc.
therefore not Independent.

What there is in this worthy of Reply, I am ignorant of; yet this is to be
noted, hwo the Presbyterians make a market of this scandalous name of
Independents they have fastened on us: viz. To make the world believe that we
are subject to no Laws, that neither Gods Word nor man's is a rule to us, for
this is the natural sense of his words: he says, The Primitive Churches were
subject to the Apostles Laws: Ergo, Not Independent. As if we held that we were
Independent from the Apostles Laws. And if he put it as an Argument, it runs
thus: if the Primitive Churches were subject to the Apostles Laws and Rules,
then are all Churches now subject to a Presbytery and Synods; the consequence
we desire you to prove: To whom should the Church be subject but to these, who
gave them the mind of God immediately? And here let the Reader observe, that in
this Head Master Pryn brought in many Arguments by way of absurdity, upon the
holding of the Primitive Churches to be a pattern of all other, which, it
seems, he is ashamed to mention, and sees now, because of what was retorted on
him, that even they themselves are absurd. For that he says of my retorted,
That the Scriptures were written in the infancy of the Church, therefore
better might be written now; that is a blasphemous conclusion: Its confessed.
Yet had it as good a consequence as yours, that the Churches now had a more
perfect constitution then the Churches in the Apostles times, because they were
the first, and, as you call them, Infant churches.

Whereas you say that the Scripture was writ by the Ancient of days, who has
neither infancy nor imperfection, as the Church has. I Answer: That the
Scripture was writ to be a Rule to perfect the Churches, and the reason of the
imperfection of the Churches, is, because it comes not up to that Rule; and
these Churches (how ever you deemed them Infant) had more knowledge of that
Rule then ever any yet have had, they receiving it more immediately from Gods
mouth then any since; and their Churches must needs be more exactly constituted
then any since, who lived under the Apostles direction, and had all they had
from them, as from God.

To that I say, that he would make a National Church more perfect then a
Congregationall, he says, he doubts not to aver it, since warranted by
direct Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 13. 9. Heb 6. 1. 1 Pet. 9. 10. Phil. 3. 12.
2. Heb. 13. 21. James 1. 4.
Scriptures; to the which I shall refer the Reader but to look over, and then
let him learn hereafter to be taken with Master Pryns Marginall Quotations;
what shadow there is of proof in these Scriptures, but a cast of an eye will
discern: But yet I answer; Imperfection in any thing arises more or less,
either from the defect of something essential, or which is to the beauty and
ornament and glory of a thing, or both; then is a thing more or less perfect,
when either its essentialls are more perfect, or that which accidentally goes
to the adorning of it. What there is more of these two in a National Church,
then in a Congregationall, I know not; unless the mixed multitude of believers,
and profane persons growing up together into a bitter bulk of sin, should add
either to the essence or ornament of a Church: if God had seen so much beauty
in Nationall-churches above others, he would not have destroyed the Jewish
State, or at least would have stablished the like in the Gospel, and would have
converted the heathen Empires, and have took them in to be a Church to him. It
was the mixed multitude which came out of Egypt with the Israelites that brought
them to so much woe; indeed, were a whole nation such as could be judged real
Saints, it would be a lovely sight to behold so many Churches walking together
in the unity of the faith, but that never has been yet; we know not what may
be, we have little hopes of it until the Jews be called, (if then.) And which
is a more perfect State, a company of visible Saints joined together in love,
and walking in all the Ordinances of God according to their light, or a whole
nation, wherein there is here and there a Saint walking with Whoremasters,
Drunkards, and all sorts of ungodly ones without distinction, and enjoying all
these Ordinances that the most have no right unto? The comparison between a
grown experienced Christian, and a babe in grace, is no way proportionable to
this thing. Wherein lies the growth and perfection, and experience in a
Nationall-church, that is not in a Congregationall? Either it lies in the
Presbytery, and Nationall-assembly, or in the distinct Parishes, and the
Members of them: If in the Assembly that they are so experienced, the people
have little benefit by it, unless to subject their necks to what they say; and
there is the same in many Congregationall-churches, when met for advice; if in
the Parishes and the several Congregations, the same is, in this way we speak
of, much more; little is the edification the members have from the perfection
of a Nationall-church, seeing they cannot meet together, or be present at the
hearing of these experiences that others have; the only benefit the members
have is from the enjoyment of the gifts of their own Pastor; and it may be he
one that they never chose as Pastor to them, but was imposed on them: and the
truth is, this is but to circumscribe the Church in the Ministers, for else
there may be more understanding men, and experienced Christians in a
Congregationall-church, then generally thorowout a nation; the common people
being most ignorant every where.

One thing he urges more in this; That a Congregationall-church is forced to
pray in the aid of other Churches for advice, assistance, etc. which a
Nationall-church need not.

Now here let all the world observe, whether he or any of the Presbyterians
have cause to call us Independent: What more independent then a
Nationall-church? Its a Pope, infallible, needs no aid, assistance of any
Church in the world, it has a spirit of infallibility tied to its girdle. We
acknowledge we need help and assistance from other Churches, they need none;
and here all you Presbyterians, either renounce Master Pryns opinion, and get
some other Champion for you, or else for ever cease to open your mouth to call
any of the Congregationall way Independent.

In fine (says he) He himself confesses that the Apostles made new rules for
Government and Discipline, as occasion served and as God fitted occasions, so
he made known new rules successively, by degrees, not at once, etc. Therefore
the Infant-Church in the Apostles days was not so complete and perfect in all
its parts, as the multiplied and grown Churches afterward.

A. How much he has failed in the recital of this, let the Reader compare,
and judge; (I will not say wilfully, as he says of me) for he has left out
that part which was the strength of all, which if he had took in, his Position
had been overthrown; which was, that though the Apostles added by degrees,
according as occasion served, new Rules, and Offices (for to what end should
they add until there was occasion?) yet so, as at length they discovered all
the mind of God concerning his Churches Government, and left it as a pattern
to all the Churches: As the Scriptures were not written all at once, but some
Epistles were written to some Churches, before others, according as occasion
was, and the Revelation discovered last, as concerning the last Ages of the
Church,; yet so; as still at length, that the whole Scripture should be
written, and left as the mind of God to all ages. And unless Master Pryn
says, that the Churches constituted by the Apostles had not at length a full
discovery of Church Government, he has no ground to think they were not so
complete as the following Churches.

My tenth Querie (says he) he wilfully mis-recites, as he does the rest: and
then returns an Answer by way of Dilemma, Charity would have prompted you
otherwise.
to which he Answers thus: That if the Parliament and Synod shall by public
consent establish a Presbyterian Government, as consonant to the Word, the Laws
and Regiment of this Kingdom, Independents and all others are bound in
conscience to submit, under pain of obstinacy, singularity, in case they
cannot prove it Diametrally opposite to the Scripture, etc.

Something has been said in Answer to this before: Yet further, if Master Pryn
means by submitting, that actually we must yield to the Presbyteriall
judgment, and on the first setting of it up, presently lay down every thought
of Reason and Argument we have raised up against it, and say it is the way of
Christ, and the only way which we must serve Christ in; if he thinks any of us
to have the least principles of reason, he cannot imagine we should do so. But
if he means thus, That we ought not to stand against that Authority that sets
it up, but submit to the penalty (if the least can in conscience be imposed)
which shall be laid on us; we grant it: I hope we shall not be found despisers
of Authority in that; but shall expect as great assistance from Jesus Christ,
as ever you did, in a matter far lower, even the writing against a Bishops
Court, or a Cardinals Cap, as crossing the Statutes of the land; and as you
confess, but a matter of mere opinion: I speak not this to upbraid you, or
detract from your sufferings (which are indeed badges of honor, not of shame;)
but as far as your self detract from them, in telling us the true ground of
them, that we might not too much glory in you. These places you so often quote,
Romans 13. 1. 1. Tim. 2. 1. etc. They make as much for Heathen Magistrates as
Christian, and in every thing as well as any thing, if it be meant of actual
obedience.

To his cross Interrogatories (says he) I Answer: First, That if the Popes
Council command lawful things to them that are under their power, they ought
to be obeyed as well as the commands of Heathen Emperors, Magistrates,
Parents, by Christian Subjects, Wives, Servants living under them.

Notwithstanding this, the Argument is still in force: That Heathen Emperors
are to be obeyed as well as any Christian Magistrates, if that as Magistrates
they must be obeyed; for that you say, and seem to make a distinction of it, if
they command lawful thing. But the question is still, who shall be Judge of
that? Is it not as great a reason, that I shall be Judge of the lawfulness of
the things I am to obey, as the Magistrate should judge of that he commands to
be lawful? If this be not granted, blind obedience must necessarily follow.
If I obey, because he judges it lawful, I obey not out of a principle of
judgment concerning the thing, but merely because of the command: what blinder
obedience there can be, I know not. Again, as before, either the power
commanding is to be obeyed, or else the things themselves command obedience: If
the former, that is alike to all Magistrates, and in every thing there must be
obedience, where that power is: If for the latter, then the things themselves
bind, and then I must needs see it to be lawful; and that necessity of
sinning put upon a man by this, is not taken away by any thing I see in Master
Pryns Reasons; for if I obey not the power commanding of lawful things, I sin,
if I do obey before I am convinced of the lawfulness of it, or have a scruple
or doubt of its unlawfulness, (much more when I positively think so) I sin
against God, and he will condemn me as an hypocrite, a time-server, as one
sinning against my light; and contradicting these motions, that, for ought I
know, are from his good spirit, God cares not for, nay will condemn whatever
is done without knowledge, though the things themselves be what he has
commanded: so that either we shall entreat Master Pryn to give us new eyes, or
else not to censure us, if we actually follow not that we have no knowledge in.

Secondly, says he, there is a great difference between matters of opininion
only, and of practice, as whether Episcopacy be jure divino etc. though the
resolutions of a Synod and Parliament should be affirmative, they could not
bind my judgment ( says he) absolutely, so far as to subscribe to their
opinion, as an undoubted truth, unless they could satisfy my arguments, yet
they should and ought to bind me to practice: So if the Parliament and Synod
should establish any Church Government, though it binds not Independents to be
simply of their opinion, or unless your reasons and arguments be sufficient to
convince their judgments; yet it binds them in point of practice and obedience
outwardly to submit thereunto.

This Argument contradicts the fundamentals of Religion, and gives way to the
greatest hypocrisy in the world; this is that God requires in all services,
that the heart, and the head, and the hand go together; to oppose the practice
and the judgment in spiritual obedience, is to separate the soul from the
body, and bid the body act; God has put the understanding in a man, to be a
light to his path; a man's understanding is a man's practice, as the eye to the
body, without which it cannot walk safely; and men may be what they will if
this be true, that a man's judgment may be one way, and a man's practice another;
a man may deny God, break the Sabbath, swear in his practice, so his judgment
be contrary: But it may be Master Pryn means it of indifferent things, merely
circumstantiall, but I hope he accounts not matters of worship and
Church Government so; whatever is not of faith is sin; no man's practice can be
of faith, who knows not what he does lawful, much less whose judgment is
contrary. Its true, matter of opinion is one thing, if it be a mere opinion
that is not reducible to practice, and I may only hold an opinion, and being
contradicted by higher powers, though I may not be convinced, yet I may be
silent, but when things come to be pressed on me to practice, and that in the
worship of God, and my judgment is not satisfied, then I must be convinced, or
else its a sin for me to practice; how Master Pryn thinks in his conscience we
can submit actually to the power of a Presbyteriall government, who in our
judgments think it not the power Christ would have his Churches be governed
by, I know not, unless he would have us be the veryest hypocrites,
time-servers, these which will do any thing to save our selves, surely, how
ever he can practice one thing, and judge otherwise of it, we dare not; for as
we account it below rational creatures, to put out their own eyes to see by
other means, so we think it hypocrisy in the highest, to practice that our
judgments are against: that is not a humane action, much less christian, that
is not done praeeunte judicio intellectus; and how much less when it is
against the thing.

To his eleventh Quaere he says, I give only a negative answer, and then
declaime against Presbytery, without any ground or reason; which he says he
will prove no further, except in two particulars: First, that independency is
in reality mere separation and Brownisme, lately christened with a new title to
take off its Odium. To which I shall say no more in a way of answer but this,
that it will be well if Presbytery prove not in reality a tyrannical
Episcopacy, only newly baptized with the fair word [regulated] a regulated
Episcopacy, says Master Pryn himself; and I wish it may not break its bridle
shortly.

Secondly, he says, that we find what bloody divisions, wars, Schisms, the
toleration but of one Religion in our Realm, contrary to that established, (
viz. Popery and Papists) has produced in all our Dominions, etc.

To which I answer: First, that there is no comparison between Popery, and this
way we speak for; they differing in all fundamentalls, their principles being
absolutely against the secular power which is not of their Religion; neither is
ours; different Religion, but the same; only in some points; wherein the beauty
of Religion lies, we differ; we have the same faith, baptism, we all profess
the same Christ, yea, we differ but in a point, and that merely out of
conscience.

Secondly, how will you help the growing of Sects? do what you can they will
grow, not all the counsels yet, and strictest governments in the world, have
ever kept their dominions free; nay, the more severitie is used, the more they
will grow: for that which is opposed and cried out against, men will the more
prye into; Bishops made more Puritans against their will, then ever was before;
and it will be so in other things too: men will be doubting whether that power
be lawful, which is so cruel: errors are like camorile, the more you tread
them down, the more they will grow, let them alone they will fall off
themselves.

Thirdly, Uniformity is no mark of a true Church, that is the Papists glory,
the Apostle says, there must be heresies, that the truth may be manifested;
this is the glory of the Saints, that though their light differ, yet their
hearts are one; and they love one another, though in some things they have not
received equal knowledge.

Yet farther to come to this way, for that is it you intend, that there may not
be any sufferance of it.

If it must not be tolerated; its either for something in its self, or for its
inconsistency with states, or for fear that they should grow too numerous for
the power of the Magistrate to curb.

For the first, let all the world judge that knows it, what it holds, I know
nothing, that either in its foundation or structure has any poison or sting in
it; any thing that may not in charity be borne with, that seeks not preeminence
or jurisdiction over others; it meddles not with other men's matters, to
disturb them in their peace; all that it differs from you, is in matters of
Discipline, and what is not immediately belonging to salvation, yet they are the
liberties of Christ, as is conceived.

As Secondly, neither is it inconsistent with States, for it was set up under
the Heathen Emperors, that were the most cruel, and there is nothing in its
principles, that has so much as a shadow of inconsistency, for it meddles not
with their power; besides, we see in other Kingdoms (as flourishing States as
any are) many others besides this way are tolerated, yet no disturbance to the
State; yea, though the public government of the Church be Presbyteriall: he
knows little in History, who knows not, that men of different Religion have
been suffered and tolerated to enjoy their conscience, yea, even among
Heathens; how much more when the difference is only in smaller things; States
lose nothing by preserving the Liberties of men's consciences. In France the
Protestants are accounted the best Subjects, they are tolerated contrary to the
public Government of the State, yet are not inconsistent with the well being
and flourishing condition of it. And surely, even Papists will rise up in
judgment against us, who suffer those who are contrary to their principles,
and Religion, to enjoy their consciences, if we shall not suffer these who
differ not in Religion absolutely, but in points of lesser consequence, to
enjoy their Liberties amongst us. If upon trial it proves inconsistent with
State, then may the Magistrate curb them.

But this is the fear, you will say, lest they grow to a Party, and be too
strong for the Magistrate.

First, Its against their Principles, to have any hand in opposing the
Magistrate, to keep up their own Privileges.

Yet secondly, If there were any such thought, (which their soul abhors) yet
there are many eyes over them, who will watch them close enough to take the
least advantage against them, whereby to bring them into bondage: Besides, they
are the smallest, and most contemptible Party in the Kingdom.

This may as much, nay more probably, be feared of the Presbytery, who are more
numerous, and of greater sway; and we say the same; Who shall restrain them?
And what if they take distaste against the proceedings of Parliament, or the
like, having got so much power in the Kingdom, what will become of things then?
The State gives not Presbytery any power but that it supposes it is able to
restrain and overtop them if they offend, and grow insolent; and it may on the
same consideration give a toleration unto others, knowing that when ever it
breaks out, it can soon check, and bound them: Besides, as Master Pryn says
himself, Such a thing as not to be presumed of before it be actually committed.

But yet further, That there ought to be an indulgence unto such as differ in
lesser matters, for to that I only speak now.

First, That natural right we have to the Kingdom (though I will not urge it
as an Argument) as well as the Presbyterians that cries loud for it; we are men
as free born as they, have as great interest here as they; nay, many of us
having been formerly deprived of their Liberties, while others did eat the
sweet, and drink the fat at home: Yea, further, we have engaged our selves in
getting a settled Peace, in maintaining of the Privileges of Parliament, the
Liberty of the Subject and Religion, and we think this, in justice, but an
ordinary reward, (though we expect no more, and bless God for that:) For the
lives of so many that we are sure were of our judgment, and had this in their
eye, and which when they were gasping out their last, they rejoiced in the
thoughts of, that they should procure Liberties for the Churches: and surely it
would be somewhat sad, that our lives should go to set Presbyterians on the
Throne, (though much good may it do them) while we our selves, that serve the
same God, are of the same faith, shall not have wherewithal to lay our head,
and that merely for our conscience.

Secondly, If a man ought not to lay a stumbling block before any tender
conscience, nor offend him in the use of lawful things, in which his
conscience is scrupled, as the Apostle says Romans 14. 15. then much less ought
any one to punish any one so scrupled; especially when they are known to be
godly, and what they hold they have much reason for: This is to grieve indeed,
and to destroy indeed, any tender conscience: Him that is weak receive not to
doubtful Disputations, Romans 14. Beza interprets the word thus: Though we
think you may not eat, etc. he says not, Cast him out of the Kingdom.

Thirdly, do but hold this, that for difference in smaller matters men are not
to be suffered, and you lay a ground of a continual, and most bitter
persecution as can be; for if one Kingdom may not suffer them, and this be
because of the Law of God; another may not suffer them likewise, for the same
Law binds all; and then there is no way but death for them; men are not to
live in the world, who are not of the same size with others. Now the Religion
which is from above, is more merciful and just then this; if a man swear, be
drunk, commit uncleanness, there is but a common mulct of the Statute on him,
he is suffered to live in the land; and why should a greater punishment be
inflicted on those that differ in judgment in smaller; things; it is not
because of it self, for the sin is not so heinous, if it be a sin; neither is
it in respect of the authority, that is despised, for that is alike in the
other: What a sad thing is this, that a man for following his judgment (which
God will damn him for if he go against it, while it is judgment;) should not
be suffered a place in the world; for if one State will not suffer him, why
should another.

Fourthly, these which are subject to errors and mistakes themselves, may not
punish those who hold an opinion different from them; for what if that they
punish for should be a truth (as there is none can infallably determine the
contrary;) their punishment would be persecution; what if it should not, but
they think so, to punish would be oppression; for even they themselves are
subject to the same errors; yea, and that they themselves hold may be an error.

Fifthly, consider the power God has given to conscience, and I argue thus, no
man is to be punished for his duty; this is a man's duty that God requires, that
conscience should give warrants and direction for every act; and the rule is
clear, Romans 14. v. last, whatever is not of faith is sin, man can do nothing
religiously without the persuasion of his conscience; let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind; now what justice can there be in punishing a man for
not sinning against God?

Sixthly, that way which is not adaequate to, or is ineffectuall for the
recovery of any in error, or their salvation is not to be taken; but such is an
external punishment for a mere spiritual offense (which yet is questionable
whether it be an offense) to banish men, or imprison them, merely for their
judgment, is a very unfit means to recover them; neither has God ever
sanctified it to such an end: nay, there is nothing more hardens men in their
error then such a course, and makes them more refractory and incorrigible: men
will be led and not drawn; few or none ever were recovered, with whom such
course have been taken.

Seventhly, that course which will never bring about, even the end of the
punishers themselves may not be taken, the great end in men's not suffering
those which are of different judgment to enjoy their liberty, is to bring in a
uniformity which never has been yet, nor never is to be expected while we are
here; for as long as men have reason in them, and a free understanding, there
will be different apprehensions of things; and that old saying, quot homines,
tot sententia, will ever be. Herein is the manifold wisdom, and fullness of
God seen, in giving different gifts to men; and until you can compound all men
into one head and reason, you can never bring this about; yea, even the same
man, at the same time, has different apprehensions of things, and now his
understanding is clear for that which now through stronger reasons he is
against: its true, all the Saints agree in fundamentals, but for other things
it is as light is revealed from heaven to them: and if the matter were sifted,
this crying out for uniformity, is but to make all men subscribe to the
Clergy, who must see for all the rest of the people; and let a man's judgment
be never so rational, yet if not suitable to the common clamor of the times,
both the man and his man, and his judgment; must not have a being in the
Kingdom, yea, though before accounted most godly: either you must infuse into
all men, one and the same individual conscience, and give men the same
understanding with you, or else you must suffer them; unless you will make
every man a gross hypocrite.

Eighthly, That which puts a state or people upon the greatest hazard, not
probably only, but most times necessarily, of persecuting the most godly, and
grieving the hearts of those whom Christ would not have grieved, that is not a
way of Christ; but does this opinion, that none that differ from a State in any
thing may be tolerated; its a thousand to one but some Saints, who love the
Lord Jesus dearly, are of those opinion, (I am sure, of this opinion I now
contend for, hundreds are) now their sides must be wounded, and their
habitations made desolate, though they are such as Christ loves; who follow
their judgments merely out of love to truth, and thorough the convictions of
their conscience; especially the godly are oftentimes, if they are overtaken
with errors of smaller and lesser consequence, such as are on the right hand;
and what a persecution is this, unparalleld in any age, not to suffer them in
the same Kingdom with them. Even the Papists in Queen Mary's time punished not
for matters of Discipline, but for fundamental differences of their Religion:
there can be no State free from the blood of Martyrs, if this Principle be
ingrafted to them, and practiced by them.

Ninthly, this will be the greatest hindrance of knowledge and growth in
Religion that can be; for it puts out men's own eyes and judgment, and ties them
to see by others; every man (which has not his conscience and judgment quite
sold to the common opinions, and lost in the common road) will be afraid to
read the Scriptures, or search them thoroughly, for if God should dart in any
light from them, or his own ingenuity thorough the strength of his reason
should be forced to dissent from the multitude, either he must stiffle in the
birth his divine conception, (for so it may be) (for if he be known to be of
such a judgment (though in it self never so small) he must loose all he has,
and ipso facto, be liable to the greatest censure;) or else he must dissemble
his judgment, and wound his conscience, what a strait is this? this will be
only growth in religion, to grow up more conformable to the opinion of the
times; and he will be accounted the most knowing man, who has the language of
the times most by heart, no man durst set to himself a higher pitch in walking
with God then the State has set to him, upon pain of the greatest hazard; and
whereas God reveals diverse truths in diverse ages and times (especially in
matters of government and worship) more and more, as men come out of
Antichristian darkness, yet none must be suffered and tolerated, but that one,
it may it self be Antichristian; at the least miserable cold and formal.

Tenthly, if you will needs be punishing for smaller difference in judgment, I
desire you to show your Commission and Warrant from the Lord Jesus, and I am
sure he never gave either pattern or precept for such a course, he knows his
gifts he gives to men are different, and that light he communicates, is more
and less, and he bears with his Saints who are of different growth and
stature, and I think we ought to bear much more; who are as infirm as any
others; he bore with his Disciple, weakness, when they believed not the
resurrection, and came with peace in his mouth to them; how much more would he
have borne, if they had doubted only of matters of Discipline? Romans 15. 1. you
which are strong ought to hear with the infirmities of the weak, and not to
please your selves, as Christ pleased not himself.

I hope you will walk as Christ walked, Christ told his Disciples, Luke 9. 54.
that they knew not of what spirit they were of; when they would have fire to
come down from heaven to consume those that would not receive him, there are
many such spirits now a day, but they know not what spirit they are of.

Object. But it will be said, and its the maine objection they have, if we
tolerate you, we must likewise tolerate Papists, etc.

Answ. That does not follow, for their very principles opposes the secular
power, they differ in fundamentalls, and are properly another Religion, and yet
the State faith, when they execute Jesuits and Friars, etc. it is not for
their conscience or religion only: That we differ is but in a point, not of
absolute necessity to salvation, though nearer the beauty and ornament of
Religion, and being a truth of Christ, (as is conceived, it must be prized, and
we dare not discharge our conscience of it. I shall say no more of this; but
let men take heed how they persecute the Saints, and oppress their Brethren,
lest Jesus Christ draw forth his Iron Scepter against them, to vindicate the
innocence of his people.

To my twelfth quaere (says he) he only answers, That I fall a jeering of my
Brethren, and that I put a nick name on them, to make them odious, not
answering one syllable to the substance of the Question.

To what I should answer, more then I did, I am not yet informed; for this was
his Question, whether it be not a proud insolent name we arrogate to be
independent? I answered, that we disclaim it, and that in print: and
therefore his Quaere could be nothing but a jeare. To which he answers, first,
That this title was at first assumed, approved of by your selves, and is still
owned by many; you should have named the persons that assumed it, as for our
parts, as many as I know abhor the name as its fathered on us. Indeed we are
independent in this regard, that we will not subject our judgments and cause
to the juridicall power either of Master Pryn, or any others, though we will
lie down at the foot of Christ in whatever he shall command us out of his Word;
and the truth is, the Presbytery is the only independent in the world, and may
most properly be called so, for you neither depend on the Scriptures for it,
for you affirm not jure divino, neither has it dependence on others, for you
say in your third Reply, page 13. that it needs not the aid and assistance of
other Churches: for as the ever honored Lord Brooks said in his book against
Bishops, I know no reason why one Congregation should be accounted more
independent in respect of a whole Nation, then Geneva in respect of France, and
France in respect of all Europs cominent. Therefore you are best to take up
that title on your selves, as most suiting with your principles. As for our
part we are accomptable for our actions to every neighbor Church that shall in
the name of Christ require it; and we stand not independent from, but hold
communion with all other Churches, both in Ordinances and asking counsel
mutually; though we think no Church has a power of jurisdiction to command or
impose any thing on us.

To which you answer: That if we are accountable for our actions to every
particular neighbor Church, then why not much more to a Parliament or Synod:
To which I answer: We shall be as ready to give an account to the Parliament
and Synod of any action we do, with the reason of it, as well -- nay, rather
then to any other; as for the way of doing of it, we are accountable by way of
information, and satisfaction; and in some cases unto the Magistrate by way of
just appeal: as in case an obstinate offender shall be excommunicated, and he
be unruly, he or we may appeal to the Magistrate for redress; we, that if the
Magistrate judge him justly excommunicated, he may be restrained from
disturbing of us: he, that if the Magistrate judge the sentence unjust, may be
publicly cleared and vindicated. But for any authorative power of jurisdiction
that Synods or any have to make Canons and impose on us which we are bound to
follow, we humbly conceive it not be the mind of Christ; and we shall desire
Master Pryn to show us his Rule in Scripture.

To the second he answers: That if you stand not independent from other
Churches, but hold communion with them: Then first, why do you separate from
them as no true Christians?

Answ. I answer in general: We separate from none we know to be true Churches;
but if you mean by your true Church the whole bulk of the nation, whom you call
a Church, we must needs separate from it, for we acknowledge no such Church.
Yet,

Secondly, Though we acknowledge not England as a nation to be a true Church,
yet we acknowledge many true Churches in England, with whom yet we cannot
communicate in Church Ordinances, because of many personal defilements among
them, or yet purged out: and if they would give us leave in our communion with
them to profess against these corruptions which we think defile them, we
should not scruple communion with them. You know that one may be a real man,
ye so corrupted with diseases and sores, that it may be dangerous to come nigh
him, or eat or drink with him. Glad should we be to join with them, if they
were so reformed, and that mixture taken away, that, as nigh as could be, none
but such as had a right to Christ might partake of the Ordinances; until then
you must excuse us, if though we think many to be true Churches, we cannot
actually communicate with them.

You tell us (says he) that neither I, nor any Synods, nor this Synod is
infallible, etc. Therefore men are not bound to obey their decrees on penalty
of sin. To which he answers only by way of Querie; May not you and your
Independent Ministers err as well others? O yes surely, therefore they
arrogate not such a power to make Laws for others; as for that of the Major
Votes, its answered before. How ever slight Master Pryn makes of this reason,
yet until he has answered, he must give us leave to believe it. For if Synods
have power to bind the conscience, it is either because they can enjoin
nothing but truth (for truth only binds the conscience) and so are infallible,
or else because of their own power and authority; I know no other ground for
it. Is this good Logic, or Divinity? (says he) Good Ministers may, and do
err in some points of Divinity, therefore we will believe them in none. In
that you say true, there is neither Logic nor Divinity; but the Consequence,
as I draw it, is this: Ministers may err, therefore none are absolutely bound
to believe every thing they say as Scripture, and so to sin if they obey not:
for its a certain truth, not probable, that binds the conscience. Certain, I
say, either as I apprehend it, or in regard of it self; if I am bound to
believe what ever they say that are in authority, who may err, then my
conscience is subject to error, as well as truth; for that which is commanded
may be error, yea, if I think it error, yet I must obey it: and this holds in
every thing, as well as any thing: for in all things that is commanded, they
who command are to go by their own ^dgements of the truth of the thing that
they enjoin, and their judgments may err, yet I am bound to obey, and sin if
I do not: Nay, suppose what they command to be a truth, yet I think it an
error, and so it is to me, (my conscience so judging) yet I am bound to obey,
else I sin. The Lord learn you, and those in authority, more tenderness to
Saints consciences, that you may not put such a yoke upon our necks, that
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear.

FINIS.

