A Faithful Testimony against Extravagant and Unnecessary Wiggs.
WHereas, the Great and Wise God, the Creator of all things, having made Man
according to his own good pleasure, has bestowed on many a plentiful Quantity
of Hair to keep them Warm, some of one Color and some of another, but to Each
one of them, has his Providence afforded such a Color as will satisfy an
Humble Mind.

And if any one has not a sufficient quantity of Hair to keep him Warm, or
through Sickness, or by any other Infirmity, or Casualty looses his Hair; a
suitable and modest supply may then be very reasonable, and no offense to God
or Good Men, and such supply of Hair being used, till Natural Hair grows again,
may afterward be well laid aside.

But if for Pride, or without any just occasion, any that have sufficient Hair
to keep them Warm, do cut it off; esteeming it not Fashionable or Modish, or
that it don't curle enough, or is not of such Color as they would have it be;
this is not right in the sight of God, and is an evident Token, his Divine
Wisdom, Care and Providence is slighted and undervalued, by those who are not
contented with such Sort, and Color of Hair, as he has seen fit to bestow; as
if they would alter the Work of Providence, and mend what God has made.

I felt a Concern upon my Spirit from the Lord, to give a short Testimony
against Excess in these things; seeing to my Sorrow many, both Old and Young,
run into unnecessary Wiggs; and have found that it has given occasion of
offense in diverse places.

Therefore in the Love of God, which now flows in my Heart to all my Friends
and Brethren, I entreat all to be Careful to shun such occasions, and rather to
deny themselves than to give offense to any.

This Counsel I have taken my self, and by the helping hand of God Almighty, I
intend so to continue to the end of my days, and not only in that, but in
avoiding all Superfluity of Naughtiness whatsoever: for so is the Will of God
concerning us, whom he has chosen above all the Families of the Earth, to
place his Eternal Name in, and to be the first Fruits to his Glory in these
latter Ages of the World.

Oh! let us walk circumspectly, not as Fools whose Eyes are abroad, gazing upon
the foolish Fashions of the World, which will pass away and Perish with the
Using; but follow him in our Day, whom God has given for a Covenant of Light
to us Gentiles; who still leads in the way of Self-denial, and in the clean
Path of Righteousness, which alone brings to his Kingdom, all who walk in it to
the End of their Days.

So the God of Consolation be with all his chosen Vessels, whom he has
sanctified to do his Will in the Earth, and Preserve us all to the End of our
Days in Faith, Patience and Well-doing; that the Worthy and Honorable Name of
the Lord, by which we are called, may be renowned by us for evermore,

Amen.
Reigate, the 3d. of the 10th. Month, School. I am a Brother, and Fellow Laborer
in the Gospel of Christ. Ambrose Rigge.

LONDON, Printed by T. Soul, in White-Hart-Court in Grace Church Street, School.


