THE BANNER OF GODS LOVE, AND ENSIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS Spread over his people in
these later days.

Wherein the true light shines, and the mystery that has been hid from Ages
and Generations, is revealed to the Saints, which is, Christ in us the hope of
glory, as our forefathers witnessed, Read Col. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29.

ALSO, A Testimony against them who formerly has tasted of the good Word of
God, and of the Power of the world to come, who has cast the Law of God behind
their backs, and has trodden under foot the blood of the Covenant, and now
does labor with one shoulder to destroy the Manchild which is now brought
forth to rule the Nations with an Iron Rod; and these are most especially,
those that are called Anabaptists and Independents.

Also, A few Words in warning to the Priests, Professors, and People of the
Town and County of Southampton.

With a few Quaeries to the Rulers and Magistrates of England, to try their
fruits whether they be according to the Christian Magistrates recorded in the
Scripture of truth, or according to the heathenish Kings and Rulers in former
Ages.

Set forth most especially for the sake of the honest-hearted, who are not
wholly given up to believe lies, that they may come to know the way of life and
peace. Written by me who am called Ambrose Rigge.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his shop at the Black
spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1657.

To the sober Reader.
GReat and admirable is the Love and Mercy of the Lord God unto the sons of
men, that he has not withheld his only Son, but has sent him a Light into
the world, that all men through him might believe, and be saved: But there is a
generation of men in these our days that cannot endure sound Doctrine, and
such will not receive him who is the good shepherd, but heaps unto themselves
Teachers having itching ears, which has never profited them, nor never shall;
and the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stands now
where it ought not; therefore I desire thee who reads these ensuing lines, to
understand and weigh them in an equal Balance, and with a single eye look upon
them, and thou will clearly see that here is nothing written but what is just
and true to every man's condition, without flattering, or daubing with
untempered Mortar, as the false Prophets have done these many years, which has
made the abomination so great in our Nation of ENGLAND. And take heed of
judging or censuring any thing hastily, but try all things, (as he has done
who writ this unto thee) and hold fast that which is good; For to this end was
this sent forth to public view, That every one may be known by their fruits:
From him who is a Friend to all that love the Truth as it is in JESUS called of
men

Ambrose Rigge.

THE BANNER OF GODS LOVE, AND ENSIGN OF RIGHTEOUSNESS, etc.
FOrasmuch as many dear and precious Isa. 8. 18. Joh. 17. 23.
Servants and Children of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whom he has loved
with an everlasting love, and has opened their eyes and ears to behold him
whom they had pierced, and has armed them with Zach. 12. 10.
power from on High, to make war in righteousness against all the powers Rev.
20. 8, 9.
of darkness that stands up against the appearance of the Lamb of God, who has
now clothed them with his Armor of Light and Life, and given them for an
Helmet, the Hope Romans i3. 12. Ephesians. 6. 13, 17.
of Salvation, and has put the Sword of the Spirit (which is the Word of God)
into their mouths, that with boldness they may declare abroad the Name of him
who is now come a Light into the World, and has lighted every man that Joh.
12. 46. Joh. 17. 9.
comes into the World, that all men through him might believe, and come to the
knowledge of the truth.

And for this end is he now made manifest, To destroy the 1 John 3. 8. Eccles.
12. 3: Ezekiel. 32. 25, 26: Ezekiel. 2i. 28.
Works that the devil has wrought in man, even to make the strong man bow
before him, and the Keepers of the House to tremble, that the uncircumcised may
fall by the stroke of his Sword which is now drawn in his hand, and made ready
for a mighty slaughter, even to cut off the wicked from the Land of the living,
that their remembrance may Luke i9: 27:
be blotted out from the earth, which wlil not that he shall rule whose right
it is: and he has made his children and servants living Witnesses of his
eternal Truth, to declare his eternal Name among the Gentiles, and has given
them a 1 John 5: 20: Luke 22: 35:
good understanding to know him that is true, and has sent them forth into the
World without Bag, or Scrip, or two Coats, and has given them his Word of
Life and Light to declare to the Spirit in Prison; and these have (as they have
been moved of the Lord) run to and fro in the earth, in true and tender love to
peoples souls, warning all men every Acts 17: 30, 31. Acts 20: 33:
where to repent, and seek the Lord while he may be found, without coveting
any man's Silver, Gold, or Apparel; and for this have they been stocked, stoned,
vvhipped, imprisoned, and shamefully entreated, and not counted worthy to live
upon the earth, not only by them that professed little or nothing of God,
Christ, or the Scriptures, but rather by the Scribes, and Pharisees, and chief
Priests, and zealous professors Mark 8: 31:
as the Jews was, as may be witnessed at this day by hundreds in our Nation
of England, whose fruits shame their Profession, and whose Works show to
their faces they are of their Father the Devil. And those whom the Lord Joh.
8: 44: 1 Cor. 4: 2:
has called and chosen to commit his secrets unto, and to place his eternal
Name in, as they have freely received of the Lord, freely have they ministered
unto all, whereby many has been turned from darkness unto light, and from the
Matthew. i0. 8. Acts 26. 18.
power of Satan unto God; and God has greatly blessed their labors within
these few years, so that many that was scattered as Sheep without a Shepherd,
in the cloudy and dark day, by the Idol dumb Sepherds which had made a prey
Ezekiel. 34: 12.
upon them, their feet are now directed into the Way of life and peace, wherein
they are now walking up to Zion, with Songs of Deliverance, and are sitting
down with Abraham, Isa. 35: 10:
Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God; and the children of the Kingdom shall
be cast out into utter darkness, where Matthew. 8: 11:
is weeping and gnashing of teeth for ever.

And now quick and powerful has the Word of the Lord Heb. 4: 12:
been in the mouth of his Messengers and Ministers in this Nation of England,
and elsewhere, whereby the strong man in hundreds has been made to bow, and
the Keepers of the House to tremble; and by it has the Wisdom of the Wise Isa.
29: 14: 1 Cor. 1: 19: 1 Pet. 1: 23, 25: Isa. 40: 8: Acts 19: 20:
been confounded, and the understanding of the prudent brought to naught; but
the Word of the Lord has stood, and shall stand and accomplish the Work for
which it was sent, and has grown and increased abundantly, so that many by it
is quickened, and raised from death to life; and they have not labored in vain,
as the false Prophets have done this many years, but many Vessels are full, and
an innumerable multitude is drawn out of the Sea of confusion, where Luke 5: 5,
6:
they were overwhelmed, and could never have come to the Son of God, unless
they had been drawn by the Cords of the Fathers Love, wherein now they walk to
the praise and glory of God for evermore.

And those whom the Lord God of Heaven and Earth has 2 Cor. 1: 22:
endued with his Spirit of Life and Light in Christ Jesus his only Son, and as
they have been moved of the Lord, have taken Luke 1: 1, 2:
in hand to set forth from the very first a Declaration in order of those
things which are most surely believed among us, who have been eyewitnesses of
him from the beginning, and of all the things that Jesus began to do and to
teach, of Psalm. 112: 4:
the works and mighty wonders which he has wrought for the sons of men, who
sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, how he has caused his
everlasting day to dawn upon them, and has commanded light to shine out of
darkness, Luke 1: 79: 2 Cor: 4: 6:
whereby his children comes to have the knowledge or his glory. And this
Declaration has been set forth for the sake of the simple, that they may turn
in at the call of Wisdom, who is now uttering her Voice in the Streets, and
opening Prove. 1: 20, 22, 23, 24.
her Gate wide, so that many hearkens to her Voice, and enters in at her Gate;
and by such is Wisdom justified daily, Matthew. 11: 19: Isa. 11: 9: Zech: 4: 9:
and Knowledge increased abundantly, so that the Lord God is known to be one,
and his Name one. And he has confirmed his Work, not by Word only but by his
mighty Power, and by his Armor of Righteousness on the right hand, and on the
left, whereby his Enemies is subdned under his feet, 2 Cor: 6, 7:
and the Power given unto him to rule whose right it is: And this has his own
Arm accomplished for his own Seed sake which lay in captivity, and was
oppressed and burdened, so Ezekiel: 21: ^7:
that it could not arise to bring forth fruit unto him, but his Vinyard wholly
laid desolate to the Beasts of the field to make a prey upon, and his Heritage
was become as a speckled Bird that was wandered into the desolate places of the
earth, Je^: 2: 9:
and not one stone was found to build up the desolation of Zion with, till it
was hewed and suited by the Word of God, which is as a Hammer, which was put
into the mouths of his chosen ones in the fullness of time. Jer: 23: 29:


And now I, with the rest of my dear Brethren and Sisters, who have obtained
grace and mercy from the Lord; and having had perfect knowledge from the very
first, of the things that Jesus has done for me, and the rest, who have
believed in his Name, and how it pleased the Father to reveal him in us, that
we might preach him among the Gentiles, for the Gal. ^: 16:
salvation of his people Israel, and for the redemption of all the children of
Adam, who were made sinners by his disobedience.

Now am I moved of the Lord to bear my testimony (with the rest of my Brethen
and Sisters, who are in scorn called Quakers) unto Christ Jesus the Light of
the World, whom we witness in us, the hope of Glory and how He did there Col.
1. 27.
begin his work, and wrought in us both the will and the deed, as our
Forefathers witnessed in their declaration in Phil. 2. 13.
order; the mystery that was hid from ages and generations was Christ in them
the hope of glory, and them that sought Col. 1. 26.
a proof of Christ in them, they exhorted to try themselves, and prove
themselves, and told them that Christ was in them 2 Cor. 13. 3. 4. 5.
except they were reprobates; and this is the mystery that is now hid from all
sorts of profession and professors at this day who are found without the life
of Christ, manifested in the mortal flesh, and so are seeking proofs of his
speaking 2 Cor. 4. 11. Deuteronomy. 18. 15. 18. Acts 3. 22.
in his people; and such has ears but does not hear him of whom Moses wrote,
which the Lord has now raised to be a Teacher and a Leader to his people,
which they now bear in all things according to the word of the Lord by the
mouth of his servant Moses: And this does set all the world in an uproar so
that Gog and Magog does strike hands together, Rev. 20. 8. Rev. 17. 14. Rev.
12. 5. Rev. 19. 15. Matthew. 3: 12: Luke 3. 17
to join in Battle against the Lamb who is now arisen to rule the nations with
a Rod of Iron, and Fan, and purify his Sons and Daughters, that he may gather
his Wheat into his Garner according to his promise, and burn up the Ghaff with
unquenchable fire.

And now shall they clearly be known that serves the Lord in truth and
tighteousnesse, from them who pretend Mal. 3. 18. Titus 1. 16: 2 Timothy: 43.
in words they know him, but in works deny him, for the time is already come
wherein men cannot endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, heaps up
unto themselves Isa. 56: 10: 11: 12: Ier: 23: Ezetk 34: Matthew: 23.
Teachers which does not profit them at all, but are such as the Prophets and
Apostles of the Lord did always bear testimony against as all that are not
wilfully blind may clearly see.

But now has the Lord furnished us with power from on high, to preach his
everlasting Gosple unto every creature, Mark: 16: 1^:
so that our labor and travel is to see Christ formed in them, who is the
express image of his fathers person, that henceforth Gal: 4: 19: Heb. 1: 3:
they might not be tosed to and fro, with every wind of Doctrine, through the
sleight of men but that all may Ephesians: 4 14:
come to the knowledge of him in them, subduing all things under his feet, and
leading Captivity Captive, and destroying 1 Cor: 15:* ^8: Ephe: 4: 8. Ephe: 5:
27.
and defacing the image of the Devil in all his children, that they may be
presented without spot unto his Father, and for this end did he sow the good
seed of the kingdom among us, which the good ground has received in us, and
Matthew. 13. 8.
has brought forth first the Blade, then the Ear, then the full corn in the
Ear, to the everlasting praise and glory of him that sowed it; so that the
earth has brought forth her increase by handfulls, and abundance is gathered
into the house of the Lord, and God has opened the Windows of Heaven and has
sent a blessing upon it, that there is scarce Mall. 3. 10.
room to hold it, and he has rebuked the devourer in hundreds according to
his promise, so that his children does eat and drink with a discerning of his
body, and are become one bread and one body fitly joined together unto Christ
the head, who is made unto them, wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1 30:
sanctification, and redemption, to the everlasting praise of his everlasting
name for ever and ever.

And now is the Lord ariseing and arisen out of his holy Habitation, and has
covered himself with Zeal as with Isa: 59 7:
a Cloak, and for Zions sake has he uttered his voice as a man of War,
whereby the tall Oaks has been brought down, and the Cedars of Lebanon has
been made to bend; Ezekiel. 37: 10: 11:
And he has breathed upon the slain that they have stood up upon their feet,
and are become the whole house of Israel; Isa: 28: 17:
and for Zions sake has he laid Judgment to the line and righteousness to
the plummet, and is sweeping a way the refuge of lies, so that there shall be
no hideing place found in Heaven or in earth but his own righteousness, which
whosoever is found out of, in the day of Gods fierce wrath, shall be swept a
way with the Beesom of destruction into the Lake that burns with fire and
brimstone for ever, where there is no redemption. And therefore awake awake
all you carnal minded ones of what Sect or Faction soever you be of: The
everlasting day is come, and dawned upon us, which you hate, which has
discovered you to be out of Gods righteousness, in the deeds of darkness,
following the Imaginations of your evil hearts, whereby the seed of God is
oppressed, as a Cart is pressed with Amos 2: 13:
Sheaves, and over you death has great dominion, and darkness has great
power, the way of peace you know not, nor never can in that state; therefore
open your eyes, Rev: 22. 16
and behold the bright and morning Star, that arises out of the East, which is
over-shadowing the whole earth, that every man's work is now made manifest of
what sort it is; and no longer shall your deeds be hid, for all things are
naked and bare before him with whom we have to do; Heb: 4: 13: 1 Cor. 4: 5:
and he will suddenly bring to light the hidden things of darkness, so that
every one shall appear as he is in truth and righteousness, or in deceit and
unrighteousness, and all vailes will he rent, and all covers will he rip off,
that his own flock only who are covered with his spirit of Isa: 30. 1:
life and power, may be hid in the day of his fierce wrath, which will come
upon all mankind.

Awake awake all you who has long lain upon your beds of ease and carnal
security, and has eaten with the Gluttons, Amos 6: 3: 4: 5: Matt: 24. 49.
and drunken with the Drunkards, and is now beating with the Fist of
wickedness, and with a slanderous tongue backbiteing the innocent, behold your
Master is come and has found you asleep, He stands now at the door and knocks,
and is desiring of you to awake, and arise Ephe: 5. 14.
out of the filthy pollutions of the world that you are overwhelmed in, that he
may give you the light of life to follow him into the Land of the living, where
many now does praise and magnify his great Name for evermore, who has done
mavelous things for them who are his Matt. 21. 42.
flock, who follows him whethersoever he goes, unto whom He is a Priest, a
Prophet, a King.

Awake awake all you filthy Dreamers, who are in the defilements of the flesh,
and who has made people brutish Ier. 27 9. Jude 8:
by your false Dreams, which you have called the word of God, which has been
but a Divination of your own brain, and has not profited the people at all,
but their hungry souls is yet languishing after the bread of life, you have fed
your selves with the fatt, till your flesh is become Ezekiel. 34. 3. Ezekiel. 23. 20.
as the flesh of Horses, your eyes stand out with fatness, your words is as
smooth as butter, but in your heart does the ravening Wolf lie hid from the
eyes of many, as your fruits does daily manifest, the Lord will now feed Ezekiel.
34. 16.
you with Judgment, and make you drink the dreggs of the Cup of his sury,
powered out without mixture, for you have caused many to err by your lies and
lightness, and none have you brought into the knowledge of the truth, because
you have departed from it your selves, you have long ruled in this long night
of Apostasy, wherein the blind have walked which you have led, who have Inter
s^cos regnat strabus.
called you ministers of Christ and prophets of God: And of such have you made
a grievous prey, and has taken their money for that which was not bread; but
the Lord has shaked his hand at your dishonest gain, and has caused Ezekiel. 22.
13.
his everlasting day to spring upon his children, which he has appointed to
gather from your mouths, that they Ezekiel. 34. 22. 28.
shall no longer be made a prey upon by you; therefore be awakened and consider
your state and condition in which you now stand, if you be not wholly given up
to make Merchandise of peoples souls through covetousness which is Idolatry;
for God will now no longer be mocked, 2 Peter. 2. 3.
such as you sow, such shall you reap; your Vineyards are very unclean, Briars,
Thorns, Weeds, and Heb. 6. 8.
Thistles grows up abundantly instead of tender Vines, you are sleepy and
sloathful Vine-dressers, you may blush to look into your Vineyards if you were
not wholly given up to hardness of heart: The day of the Lord will come upon
you as a thief in the night, wherein the Lord will 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
require his sheep at your hands, and then shall the book be opened wherein is
written all your covetous practices, Rev. 20. 12.
and ungodly deeds, and out of it shall you be judged accordingly, and then
shall you howl for pain of heart, and weep for grief of spirit when you
consider how miserably you have deceived and deluded many poor souls, and how
you have scattered the Lords flock upon the barren Mountains, which the Lord
will surely require at your Ezekiel. 34. 10.
hands; behold now the time is near accomplished that if you will not hear and
lay it to heart, to give glory unto the Lord, that he will spread dung over
your faces, and Mal. 2. 2.
will curse your blessings, yea many of them he has cursed already, so that
henceforth never fruit shall grow on you more, but you shall suddenly wither
away like the Fig Tree that bare leaves, but no fruit, because you have Matt.
21. 19.
despised the Law of God, and has followed after covetous 2 Pet. 2. 14.
practices and are become cursed children who have forsaken the right way, and
has run gredily after the errors of Balaam the son of Bosor, whom Gods hand
was heavily stretched out against, and the same hand of the Lord is against you
now, who are found treading in the same steps.

Awake awake all you high notionists of what kind or sort soever who has
gotten the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles to talk of in your ayrie
minds, and thinks to have eternal life in them, but hates the son of God in all
John 5. 39.
his appearances, and will not come unto him that you might have life; the day
is dawned, and the sun is risen with his burning heat and has scorched all
your beauty, so Ier. 17 6.
that you are become as a parched Heath in the Drought of Summer, all your
glory is the Lord bringing into Isa. 23. 9.
contempt, and your Wisdom has he turned into foolishness, because neither
you nor it did stand in the fear of his name; your preaching and long praying
are but as the cutting off of a Dogs neck, or offering Svvines blood; Isa. 66.
3.
the Lord has no regard to it because your hands is polluted and daily works
iniquity: And as a Cage is full of birds, so is your houses and hearts full of
deceit, your abominable Idols have you not yet cast to the moles, and Isa. 2.
20.
to the Batts, for the fear of the Lord and for the glory of his majesty, who
is now arisen to shake terribly the earth, the Lord will not be mocked with
your Hypocritical profession, Gall. 6. 7.
for the day is come wherein every one of your works are made manifest, but
this you cannot endure to hear of, who loves darkness rather then light
because John 3. 19.
your deeds are evil, therefore be awakened, be awakened now when the
everlasting day is come and consider your state, and measure your ways, by the
unalterable rule of righteousness, which is the light wherewith you are
enlightened, 2 Cor. 10. 13. 15.
and it will let you see that you never yet knew the mystery of the Cross of
Christ, which to the world does crucify all that comes to bear it; but in the
world and the vanities thereof are you yet wandering as sheep Gal. 6. 14.
without a shepherd, and never yet witnessed a true separation to God with the
light of his Son: And now are you stumbling at the stumbling stone that is laid
in Zion, Isa. 8. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 8.
which is become a rock of offense to you who stumble at the word of faith
which is nigh in the heart; your high buildings shall be now laid besolate and
not one stone left upon another, that shall not be thrown down, the mouth of
the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

Awake awake all you covetous cruel oppressors, who grind the faces of the
poor, and by Cuzening, Cheating Isa. 3. 14. 15.
and defrauding, has set your nests on high, and are become great in the
earth, so that you join house to house and field to field, till there be no
place for the poor in the earth, the day is come upon you that you Isa. 5. 7.
8.
shall be called to an account before the dreadful God of Heaven and earth, who
has taken notice of all your ways and actings, and has heard the cry of the
poor and needy which you have greedily made a prey upon, according as you
could receive power from the beast whose Image you bear: And therefore go to
now ye rich men, weep and howl for the misery that is coming upon you, for
the rust of your silver and gold shall be a witness against James 5. 1. 2. 3.
you; the Lord is now bringing down the oppressors, and setting the oppressed
free, which has long cried unto him; your riches shall not deliver you in the
day of Gods fierce wrath: Therefore now, incline your ears Pro. i1: 4: Ezekiel:
1^: 6. and 18 30.
unto the call of Wisdom, and repent repent with speed and return unto the
Lord with all your hearts, and seek him while he may be found, and hearken unto
him while he calls upon you, Why will ye dye in your iniquities? Now have you
all a day and a time, see that you all prize it, least Psalm. 52, 5.
you be cut off from the Land of the living, and go down to the pit with the
uncircumcised.

And now blessed be the everlasting Day for ever, who has visited us who sat
in darkness, and in the shadow of Luke 1. 78, 79.
death, and has broken forth in an acceptable time unto the sons of men after
this long night of Apostasy, wherein darkness has been called light, and the
Way of the Lord has not been known, nor the true Prophet which Moses Act. 3.
22, 23.
wrote of, has not been heard; but people has been ever learning, but were
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, which many has desired to
know and receive, 2 Timothy 3:
but could not in that state, and by reason of darkness and blindness of mind,
have followed such Teachers as have been wholly Enemies to Jesus Christ, and in
every thing out of his Doctrine, but yet covered themselves over with the
sheeps clothing, and through good words, and fair speeches, deceived the hearts
of the simple, and Rom i6. 18.
made them believe that they were the only men that were gifted of God to
minister a Word in season to the weary, and to direct them that were gone
astray, into the Way of Ezekiel. 38. 16.
God: And so great was the Cloud of darkness over the whole earth, and the
covering was drawn so close over the ravening Wolf in them, that he did not at
all appear unto the children of men, but they gave large sums of money unto
them, and thought by that to know the true way to eternal life; and this kept
the ravening Wolf from appearing or breaking forth, so that (as they did
imagine) all was well, and at peace, and they cried peace, peace, unto Ezekiel.
13. 10.
them that put into their mouths, and daubed with untempered Mortar; so the
Lord overturned them by his mighty power, and then did he appear in a measure
of the dispensation of his love unto a people that was called Puritans, and he
opened their eyes in a little measure, that they saw the deceit and
unrighteousness that both priest and people lived in; they had a zeal for God
and his glory, and a tenderness of affection arose in their hearts one to
another, to exhort one another to love, and to good Works, and the Seed of the
Kingdom of God was sown in them; but it falling by the way-side, the Fowls of
the air picked it a-away, so that it came not to take root downward, nor Mar. 4
4.
bring forth fruit upward to him that sowed it. So these fell back again, and
lost their zeal and tenderness which they had, and got the words of truth in
the airy mind, but in the life was one with the World after a little time; and
then was the Lord grieved that his Heritage was wholly Jer. 12. 8.
left desolate for the Fowls of the Air to tread under their feet, and make a
prey upon; and it pittyed him to see his own seed so oppressed, and his Vinyard
so wholly laid waste to the Beasts of the field. Isa. 3. 14.


And then did he arise for his own Name sake, and opened the eyes of many, and
appeared in a large measure into a People that was called Anabaptists, and
showed them in a large measure the Witchcraft of the great Whore, who Rev. 17.
1, 2.
had made all Nations drunk with the Wine of her Fornication; and then did he
lead them from the mouths of the Idol dumb shepherds which had made a prey upon
them, and had taken their money for that which they saw was not bread, nor had
not in the least satisfied their hungry Isa. 55. 2.
souls; even then did God raise his living Witness in them, and shed his
eternal love abroad in their hearts, and gathered them together in several
quarters of the world, and his Name was witnessed among them, and his Power did
appear in them, and a great zeal and tenderness for a while was among them, so
that they met with part of the rage of the Devil, and endured it for a time
with joy; and while they was near unto the Lord, he was known to be near unto
them, and gave them the necks of their Enemies to tread upon, and a great sight
of the good Land they had, and the Seed of the Kingdom of God was abundantly
sown amongst them, but it falling upon the stony ground in them Mar. 4. 5.
when the Sun arose with his burning heat, it was scorched, and became
unfruitful, so that after a time the power of God ceased, and was not seen
amongst them, but coldness and barrenness got up, and pride, and exaltation,
and self-conceitedness crept in by little and little, and then they begun to
build again those things which they had in a measure destroyed; and he that
got the most in his brain-knovvledge, was set up to be a Teacher and a Ruler,
and so gloryed in the gift more then in the Giver; and this Ministry became one
in nature with the Priests, and did not profit the people at all, which may
be witnessed at this day. And now are they set down at ease in a dead form
of that which the Saints witnessed the life of; nay, they have so far
departed from the power of God which the Saints did, and does vvitness to
lead and guide them, that they have lost the very form, and are become one in
nature with the World, and differ nothing but in words, and in outward shows
and pretenses. The true Proverb is fulfilled. upon them, The Dog is turned to
his own Vomit again; and the 2 Pet. 2. 22. Prove. 26. 11.
Sow that was washed to her wallowing in he Mire; so that the Lord is weary
with their sacrifices, and their solemn Assemblies he cannot away with, because
they have cast his righteous Law Isa. 11. to 16. Heb. 10. to 29.
behind their backs, and has trodden under foot the blood of the Covenant, and
now has sitten down in a rest which is polluted, and are become enemies to the
Cross of Christ, therefore is the same hand of the Lord that was turned
against his Enemies before, the same is lifted up against them now, whereby
they are torn and rent as an old Garment, and as a tottering Wall that is
daubed with untempered Mortar. And thus have they rendered unto the Lord evil
for all his kindness, and has turned his grace into lasciviousness, which
would have led them to salvation if they had been taught with it, whereby
the works of the Devil Tit. 2. 11. 12.
would have been destroyed in them, which they are so strongly pleading for,
and concluding all to be deceived and seduced that shall vvithstand or oppose
it; and if any will not bovv down to their Image which they have set up from
the Scripture Letter, presently he is judged and censured not worthy to have
communion with, though he have the power of God for his defense, and be led
and guided by the Spirit of the living God, and have fellowship with him, and
be brought into his Covenant of light and life.

And this is that now which they call their Fundamentals, Baptism of Water, and
taking of material Bread and Wine, which there is no command for throughout the
Scripture; but Judgment, Mercy, and Faith is omitted, Luke 11. 49.
which is the weighty matters of the Law, and so the Woe that was unto their
forefathers is to the same generation still. And thus has the Lord been mocked
with a voluntary humility, and a Will Worship after the traditions of men,
after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ the Light of the World,
who has lighted every man that comes into the World: And so now are they Joh.
1. 9.
crying up the Ordinances of God, the Ordinances of God, as the Jews did the
Temple, but are as ignorant of Christ Jesus the Substance, as the Jews was that
stoned him: Though there was a time that he was known in such things, and in
the flesh, yet he that came through it, desired to know him so no more; but
these deny all that comes to know him any otherwise, as the Jews did them that
testified against the outward Temple, (which was a time commanded of God) when
their Bodies was made the Temples of God, and they came to witness the
Substance 1 Cor. 6. 19.
of the Figure. Now this is the reason of so much confusion now among several
sorts of men and forms, That the Life and Substance of all Types, Shadows, and
Figures, is denied, and only the Husk fed upon; and this has been the ruin
and downfall of these people that are called Anabaptists.

Then in another dispensation of the Lords love did he appear to a People
called Independents, and brought many of them to se the emptiness of all sorms
of profession, and they thought only to depend upon the Lord was the safest
way; and there was a love begot in them to God and his Way and truth, and
tenderness of spirit one toward another, and they were a little brought low in
their own eyes, and they separated themselves in the outward from other men in
Worship; but it was self that separated them, which was never yet denied nor
separated from by them, as does fully appear at this day in their whole course
of life; the Seed of the Kingdom was sown among them, but they receiving Mark
4. 7.
it into the thornie ground it was choked ere it grew up, with the cares of
the World, and deceitfulness of riches, and abominable pride, envy, and wrath,
as Nathaniel Robbinson, one of their great Sect-Masters of the Town and County
of Southampton, may bear me witness, if his heart be not totally hardneed, and
he be given up to work all manner of wickedness with greediness, and his
conscience be seared with a hot Iron.

Woefully has these sort of people betrayed their trust, their latter end will
be worse by double then was their beginning; highly are they now exalted upon
the Mountains of pride, and deeply are they obliged in the bond of iniquity;
their Sacrifices are now an abomination to the Lord, who is of purer eyes then
to behold iniquity; they have departed from the counsel of the Lord, and have
greatly erred into the Way of Cain, as will hereafter plainly Jude 11.
appear in Nathaniel Robbinson, and many of his Hearers 2 Timothy 3. 4. 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7.
in the Town of Hampton, who are now become brutish, and without natural
affection, incontinent, fierce despisers of those that are good, and not only
so, but has a great thirst after their blood, without any just cause, as has
manifestly appeared both in words and actions not long since; all this they
cover under a cover of profession, and a feigned humility, which is seen with
the children of light to be double hypocrisy. And a covering of a most curious
color Matthew. 7. 15, 16.
have they put on to hide this ravening Wolf, but now it is too narrow, the
ravenous Beast breaks forth in great rage and fury, and musters up all his
Forces against the Lambs appearance, who is now come to torment him before his
time. And now does he cast out floods of railings, revilings, lies, slanders,
false accusations after the Woman in whom the man-child is moving, and this is
because his sacrifice is not accepted: But oh Cain! why art thou wrath? and why
is thy countenance fallen? Why does thou so rage and swell, foame and torment
thy self, and envy thy Brother? If thou do well thou shall be accepted; if
not, sin lies at thy door. Thou have forgotten that Gen 4. 5, 6.
thou should first be reconciled to thy Brother before thou offer thy gift, and
this is the main reason why it is not accepted at thy hand, which makes thee so
envious and wrathful, that even nothing will quench thy thirsty stomach but thy
Brothers blood, which daily appears to all that are not wilfully blind, by thy
eager pursuance after it, and threatening them that will not to the utmost
answer thy cursed desires in persecuting the innocent. Oh how art thou postng
on in the Way of Cain the Murderer, Jude 11.
and treading in the steps of thy Father Balaam! Oh thou Nathaniel Robbinson!
Oh how is the right Ways of the Lord evil spoken of and reviled daily by
thee, and by thy seduced followers, who makes lies your refuge and mischief
your dwelling place, which is hatched in your deceitful Breasts! Will your high
talking of God and Christ cover all this? Or are you so given up to believe a
lie as to believe it will? There is an eye opened that sees you, which you see
not; and a Judge that weighs your actions, which you know not; but when the
Book of every one of your consciences shall be opened, then out of that shall
you all be judged, without respect of persons, and receive according to your
deeds done in the body. In that day shall not your crying Lord, Lord, and
preaching in the Name of Christ in your Synagogues rescue you from that
dreadful sentence, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not; for I
was an hungry, Matt. 7. 23. Matthew. 25. 41, 42, 43, 44. By Name William Pinhorn.
and ye fed me not; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; a stranger, and ye
took me not in, but went with abominable lies and false reports to the
Magistrates to persecute me as a Wanderer and a Deluder; and when they would
not imprison me, you caused them to do it; and when there was no Witness
against me, you came in false Eliz. Horsent said it was a matter of conscience
not to visit her Sister in Prison.
Witnesses your selves, whereby to seek my ruin and destruction; and when I
was in prison, some of you said it was a matter of conscience not to visit me,
and said it was just upon me: All this and more have you acted and spoken
against me, because you neither knew the Father, nor me; for in as much as you
have done this to one of the least Matthew. 25. 45, 46. Matthew. 18. 6.
that believe in me, you have done it to me: And therefore now woe unto you,
good had it been for you that a Millstone had been hanged about your necks, and
you cast into the midst of the Sea, then to have offended one of them that
believe in me. Oh Matthew. 23. 37, 38.
how often would I have gathered you as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings, and ye would not, but hated, persecuted and shamefully entreated my
servants and messengers that I sent in tend or love unto you, to warn you,
while you had a day and time, to turn unto me from all your abominations: But
oh! how have you hated reproof, Prove. 1. 21. Isa. 55. 9.
and turned your ear from the cry of Wisdom, and has chosen your own ways,
which is corrupt, before me, and as far from mine as the Heaven is from the
earth!

Oh how will you answer this, ye stiff-necked and rebellious people, that have
eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not; and hearts, and does not understand!
Will the Lord be mocked with your vain oblations which you bring before Isa. 1.
13.
him day by day, when your hands is full of blood, and your hearts is after
your Idols? You have set your Nests on Isa. 30. 1.
high, and has covered your selves with a covering, but not with the Spirit of
the Lord, as is daily apparent to all whose eyes the Lord has opened; highly
are you seated upon the Mountains of pride and exaltation; the Scribes and
Pharisees did far exceed you in zeal, who made clean the outside, which you are
far from; but you say pride is in the heart, which is true enough by your
garments; you are bad patterns before them you call Heathens, which can see
nothing but the outside; yea, many of them outstrips you in life and
conversation, and would be ashamed of your practice: You have built you a
Tower, whose top you think may reach to Heaven, whereby to get you a Name, and
exalt your selves in the sight of men; and a name you have gotten of Lambs and
Sheep, but the nature of Dogs and Swine is found ruling in you, as is too too
evidently your Rev. 3. 1.
actions and fruits: I know you will call this railing, but it is the Words of
sound Doctrine unto you, which you can scarce endure, you have been so long
daubed with untempered Mortar, and flattered in your iniquity; but now will 2 Timothy 4. 3.
the Lord rip off all your false covers, and your folly shall be made manifest
unto all men, as theirs was who withstood 2 Timothy 3. 8, 9,
the truth in former ages.

I did think to cover your iniquity from the eyes of the World, but now I see
the Lord will not have it so, but your shame and confusion must now be laid
open unto all, that others may hear, and fear* and take warning, and that you
may be left without excuse, and your blood be upon your own heads in the day of
the Lords fierce indignation, which shall come upon you as a thief in the
night, except you with speed repent, and turn to the Lord with all your hearts,
and with all your souls, and put on Sackcloth, and sit down in the dust; for
the jealousy of the Lord is kindled against you, and all your prayers are an
abomination to him; for you regard iniquity, and envy in your hearts, and works
it with your hands: Is now the Weapon of your Warfare become a Magistrates
Sword? Will not your Ministry stand without imprisoning and persecuting the
innocent? Had ever the Churches of Christ such a VVeapon, as you can read of?
What will be the end of these things? Consider betime, if you be not wholly
given up to a reprobate mind. In true and tender love to your poor souls I
speak, and warn you again, as I have often done, who have most unjustly
suffered by you, both in false words, and unjust actions, as I shall make appear
to public view: You have cast many false and abominable aspersions upon us who
are by you in scorn called Quakers, and most especially upon me, who am only
known to you by the Name of Ambrose Rigge; yea many things have you laid to my
charge, which I never knew nor acted, for which the Lord will you judge, which
thing you never made good, to this day, nor never can. And this have you
possessed ignorant people with, That we are Witches and Deluders, and does deny
Christ and the Scriptures; and many other filthy things, which is not fit to be
named, but to be thrown into the bottomless pit from whence they came: And this
have you possessed the minds of many with, for which the Lord will reward you
into your own bosoms; but of all your false Accusations are we clear in the
presence of the Lord, for Christ and the Scriptures we own and witness, else we
should not see your deceit and hypocrisy, which is covered in you with the
Name of Religion; and if we did not own him in us the hope of glory, we needed
not suffer by Col. 1. 26, 27.
you and all the World so much reviling and slandering, and be hated with a
deadly hatred, as we are daily by you; but at this we marvel not, for we know
it was our Masters portion before of the same generation, as we have a cloud of
Witnesses recorded in the Scripture of truth, was written for our admonition
and learning, as our forefathers were moved of the Holy Ghost, took in hand to
set forth in order a declaration of the sufferer, and of the persecutor, that
we might have a Witness for one, and against the other, which we prize greatly
at this day, seeing that both parts is now to be fulfilled, as your eyes have
seen, and our ears have heard.

And thus has the third ground appeared worse then both the former, wherein
you are found who are called Independents; for you are weighed in the Balance
of the 1 Samuel 2. 3.
Sanctuary, and are found wanting; therefore woe unto you if ye do not repent,
for the Spirit of the Lord will not always Genesis 6. 3.
strive with you, nor his Messengers will not always be sent to warn you to
turn unto him; but the time shall suddenly come upon you, that you shall seek
the Word of the Lord from Sea, to Sea and shall not find it, if you still Amos
8* 11, 12.
go on in hard heartedness and rebellion, and despise the day of your
visitation.

And now Nathaniel Robbinson, I shall lay open some of thy fruits to public
view, that all who fear God, and keep his commandments, may be ashamed of
thee. And this I shall declare for the simple sake, that they may know thee by
thy fruits, according to the words of Christ, Matt. Matt. 7. 15, 16.
7. 20. and that all who loves their souls may no longer be deceived by thee,
nor hold thee up, lest they partake with thee of thy plagues.

Upon the first day of the Week I who am called of the World by the Name of
Ambrose Rigge, was moved of the Lord to come into the Idols-Temple where thou
was speaking a divination of thy own brain, where I stood peaceably till thou
had made an end, as many may witness; and then I spoke to thee the words of
truth in soberness, but thou fled out at a backdoor, as the false hirelings
ever did; Joh. 10. 13.
and then those that was present in hearing thee, fell upon me like so many
Wolves and Lions, that it was the great love and mercy of the Lord that I saved
my blood; and they haled me out of thy Synagogue into the Street, where I was
speaking the Words of truth with boldness, till one of thy Hearers, by name
William Pinhorne, and Nathaniel Knight, one of thy members came, and laid
violent hands on me, and haled me violently along the Streets to the Majors
House, where they kept me prisoner till the Major came home, and then accused
me falsely to the Major, so they sent me to prison, where I did remain till the
second day, and then was brought before the said Major and Justices of the
Town and County of Southampton, where did appear none to lay any thing to my
charge worthy of bonds: Then came in Nathaniel Robbinson, as a Judge in his
own cause, and told the Magistrates he would prove me a Hireling; and when I
put him to prove it, he quoted that place of Scripture in Luke 10. 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. where Christ said unto his Disciples when he sent them forth without bag, or
scrip, or two Coats, and commanded them to eat and drink such things as was set
before them, for the Labourer is worthy of his hire; but when I put him to
prove by the Scripture where ever Christ commanded his Ministers to go into
such a City, and there have a set-place, and a Steeple-house to go into, and
have fifty pounds by the Year from the State, which is his practice, as many
may witness, such a command was not to be found thorowout the Scriptures: Now
let any that are guided by the Spirit of the living God, judge whether of these
are according to the command of Christ, or agreeable to the Scriptures of truth
and the practice of the holy men of God.

Then when the Magistrates could find no just occasion of evil against me,
whereby to suffer anyfurther imprisonment, Nathaniel Robbinson came and told
them in my hearing, they had best to bind me to my Good-behavior, when no
evil-behavior could justly be laid to my charge: And then they would have
proceeded against me for mis-behavior; but I pleaded my freedom according to
their own Law, That without the mouth of two or three Witnesses nothing is
established or proved, nor cannot legallie be prosecuted. So upon that they
concluded to send me to prison again, which was done accordingly. Then on the
next day came Nathaniel Robbinson and another Priest to the Prison-door, and
asked me if they might have a little discourse with me, to which I answered.
Yea: So they went away, and said they would come again by and by, which they
never did, and so proved themselves to be of their Father the Devil, who was a
liar from the beginning, and abode not in the truth: Then I was sent for before
the Magistrates again, where was five false Witnesses prepared against me, of
which Nathaniel Knight was one; but their testimony did not agree together, as
it was with their forefathers recorded in the Scripture of truth, Mar. 14. 56,
to 59. Then the Magistrates being more sober then to prosecute from such false
Witnesses, they commanded their absence; then they tendered me the Oath of
Abjuration, which I did then, and shall for ever bear testimony against, both
over my self in particular, and over the whole Church of God in general: So
finding no just occasion against me of farther Bonds, they set me free,
according to Law, though it was much against the Wills of mine adversaries.

Then on the third day of the seventh Month, 1657. Ellin Embree went to the
Steeple-house in Southampton, called Roods, and there stayed peaceably until
the Priest had ended both his Sermon and Prayer, as he called it; and when he
had quite ended, as she did believe, she spoke some few words to the people
whereupon two of the Justices of the said Town, presently commanded some
Officers to lay hands upon her, which they did, and haled her in a rude manner
through the Streets to prison, without any Examination or Mittimus to the
Officer or Keeper of the Prison, to show the cause of her imprisonment, nor had
the Keeper any Warrant for her detainment in prison, where she remained until
the Sessions, which began the 17th. of that Month; and in the Evening of that
day the Recorder Lisle sent one of the Town-Officers to bring her before the
Court; and calling for the Indictment laid against her, it was answered, There
was none; whereupon the Recorder taxed the Justices for having imprisoned her
wrongfully, and so word was sent presently back, not to bring her to the Court;
but the next day there was a false Indictment framed contrary to the late Act,
by which she suffered for the words maliciously, wilfully, or of purpose,
(according to the Act) was quite left out of the Indictment, and only the Word
disturbance put in, upon which Indictment the Jury proceeded, and brought her
in guilty of disturbance; whereupon the Recorder Lisle gave sentence to lay a
Fine of five pounds upon her to be paid at a Months time, or to be sent to the
House of Correction for six months, to be set to hard labor, and be corrected
according as they should think fit; but the Prisoner replying she would never
pay any, they had her body there present, they might do with her what they
thought good; so she asking whether she was free, they bid her go home if she
would, which she did.

Now the Month being up, the Mayor of the Town made out his Warrant to the
Constables and Beedles to come to her house to demand the money, or to take her
Body; her Name being mistaken in the VVarrant, there was nothing done, only the
payment of the Fine refused: Then two days after; being the 21. of the eighth
month, the Constable and five or six Officers with Swords, came with a second
VVarrant from the Mayor to fetch her to Bridewell; but she being in an inner
Room in her house, did forbear putting her self in their hands, and so remains,
expecting what further course they will take against her.

Anne Horsent upon the 6th. day of the 7th. Month, was moved of the Lord to go
to a Steeplehouse in Hampton, called All Saints, where Nathaniel Robbinsen
spoke that day, where she stood peaceably, and spoke not a word until Robbinson
was come down his Pulpit, and out of the Meeting Place, and when he was fled,
she spoke some few words to the people, and so went home again. But the next
day this Robbinson sent to the Church-VVardens, (as they are called) telling
them he had been affronted, and if they did not execute their Office, he would
complain against them: [Take notice of that, thou that reads, with a single
eye] And he also went to the Mayor of the Town with a false Information against
her the said Anne, whereupon the Mayor sent his Officers to apprehend her where
she was to visit the said Ellin Embree in prison, and there they also detained
her in prison until the Sessiont, full 12. days, and was likewise imprisoned
without Examination, or any Accusers heard, and was proceeded against in the
same manner, and upon the said days and VVarrant as the said Ellin Embree,
although it did not appear by any proofs in the Court, that she the said Anne
had disturbed the said Robbinson in the time of his officiating, nor yet in
going to it, or returning from it, as many can witness; nor can Robbinson say
that he heard any one word that she said in the Meeting Place, but was got
home, or very near, before she spoke; yet judgment was given against her at
the Sessions, either to pay five pounds, or to be sent to the House of
Correction, to be set at hard labor, and be corrected as they should think
fit, though it could not truly be brought in that she had broke any Law.

Note, That the Justices of the Town (when they were in prison) did give order
to the Keeper of the Prison, that none should visit them but their near
Relations.

Therefore I desire all sober people in this Nation that fears the Lord, to
weigh and consider these things, whether ever such a Ministry as this was ever
ordained of God yea or nay, that will not stand without imprisoning and
persecuting the innocent for saying not a word, but for standing peaceably
among the rest, looking upon him; What do you think is in this man's heart if he
could but get the Rulers and Scribes to join with him in cruelty? Would not the
Jesuit Priests in Queen Mary's days been ashamed to have acted such things
against any that came to speak to them? Oh Nathaniel Robbinson! cannot thou
even blush to hear of this? Is thy heart so hardened that thou glories in that
which one day will be thy shame? What will be the end of these things? Consider
betime, left he that thou so much strives against, break thee to pieces, and
thou be cast out into utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, and gnashing
of teeth for ever.

THere dyed of late one John Behaute, in the Town and County of Southampton,
who was another of the Independent Teachers, as this Nathaniel Robbinson
aforementioned, who did upon his deathbed declare, that this Robbinson was the
cause of his death, to Robbinsons face, but did forgive him, and bid him do so
no more: Now if they be so envious one to another, as be the cause of one
another death, what may any judge they would do with us if they had power
given them from above? If this be not Cain's way that Robbinson is in, let all
who fears the Lord, judge, Genesis 4. 8. Jude 11.

And now a few words in warning to the Priests Professors, and people of the
Town, and County of Southampton.
VVOE Woe unto you the Inhabitants of Southampton Priests Professors and
People, who hate the light wherewith Christ Jesus the light of the world has
John 3. 19, 20, 21. Psalm. 73, 18. John 2. 8, 9. 1 John 1. 5.
lighted you withal; your deeds are evil, and your ways are crooked, and
perverse, even the slippery ways of darkness, your building must be thrown
down, and not one stone left upon another, and your Image must be dashed to
pieces which you have set up, (unto which you would Dan. 3. 23. 1 Pet. 2. 6, 7,
8.
have the true seed to bow) with the little stone cut out of the Mountains
without hand; at which you stumble, which is become a rock of offense unto you,
who at the word of life stumbles, and yet professes the letter as your
forefathers did, but as far if not further from owning Romans 9. 33.
the life as they were, even stoping your ears, at the voice of the true
Prophet; and cannot endure sound Doctrine; 2 Timothy 1. 3. 4. Isa. 48. 22.
but says unto the Prophets Prophesy smooth things unto us, and speak unto us
peace, though the witness of God (the true Prophet in your consciences) says
there is no peace to you, for you live in the lust of the eye, and in Ezekiel. 10.
49.
the lust of the flesh, and in the pride of life, eating and drinking and
riseing up to play, even like your Sister Sodom, whom God overthrew: And does
not thy Prophets in the midst of thee hearken to this, and cry peace peace
where the Lord has not spoken peace, and daube with untempred mortar, so that
none is able to turn from the Ier. 6. 13, 14, 15.
evil of their doings, but all your daubing is accounted as Potters clay, for
within are you full of rottenness and deceit, Ezekiel. 13, 10, i1, 12, 13, 14, 15.
pride, and ambition, envy and hatred, prisoning and persecuting the Innocent,
which are all fruits of that Matt. 23, 27, 28. Matt, 7. 19, 20. Heb. 6. 8.
tree which has no promise but to be hewn down and cast into the fire; long
has the Lord looked for fruits of you, but nothing is brought forth but
Briars, and Thorns, for your profession and Ministry will not stand, without
renting and tearing, pulling and hailing out of your Synagogues, persecuting
and drawing the Innocent before your Judgment seats; false accuseing and
backbiteing, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9
lyeing and slandering, these are the fruits that is brought forth a among you
of which I am an eye and ear witness, and this was not declared against by
thee Nathaniell Robinson, who professes thy self to be a teacher of others,
but thou thy self is not yet taught to deny nor to declare against such
things, but does cry out and complain it is not severe enough; Now are you like
Priest like people, all are Ier. 23. i1. Hosea 4. 9.
prophaine; yea your wickedness is now found out, and your ways traced with
the eternal light of the Son of God which you hate and scof at, now does your
inside appear, the sheeps covering will no longer hide the ravening Wolf; but
he breaks forth in great rage and fury even Matt. 7. 15, 16, 17.
ready to devour the Lambs of Christ, which walks Innocently before you, who
are inwardly ravening Wolves as your fruits makes you manifest, by which you
are known, Ezekiel. 34. i0.
as Christ Jesus the light of the world has foretold, which is now seen and
fulfilled, glory be unto his eternal name for ever that your good words and
fair speeches will no longer hide you, but the children of light sees you to be
in the same steps of them, the Prophets Christ and the Apostles was sent to cry
against, which use your tongues Matt. 23. Ier, 23. 30, 3i,
and say thus says the Lord, when in the mean while you are persecuting his
Servants and slaying his Son, though Matt. 7, 21.
you make a large profession of him, and call him Lord and Master, but does not
the things which he commands but the things which his soul loathes.

And thou Nathaniell Robinson look upon thy congregation, yea them which thou
calls church members, which thou have sown unto, and see if there be any thing
to be reaped amongst them but corruption, pride, lust, lightness, wantonness,
envying, strife and debate, the most vain fashions and customs, of the world,
which is to fade as the flower: And is not thy Vineyard full of this, can thou
look upon them and not confess thou art a shameless Vinedresser, that can
walk in this Vineyard without blushing? thy plants does send forth an evil
smell into the nostrils of the Lord: Is not thy preaching vain, and their
faith vain, and thy people yet in their sins, and pleading for them for term
of life? but if thou had stood Ier. 23. 22.
in the council of the Lord, and caused his people to have heard his word,
then they should have been turned from these abominations, which both thou and
they are in, and pleading for, and persecuting such who testifies against them,
and dare thou say that thou have brought them to witness the first Principle
of religion, or think thou Acts 26. 18. 1 Cor. 4 20.
the kingdom of Heaven stands in words, or the way to it is the way of
uncleanness, Pride, Envy etc. And whether thou and the rest be not in such
ways of darkness Isa. 35. 8, 9, 10,
aforementioned yea or nay; if this be the way it is very broad, and many may
go in thereat, and yet may profess as much of the Saints words as you can or
does, while Matt 7 13. John 8. 44.
they themselves are of their father the Devil as the Jews was, whose works
they did in persecuting his Servants and stoneing him, and are not you doing
the same? let the faithful Prophets of the Lord once speak, and lend your Deuteronomy.
18. 15.
ears a little unto him who will not flatter nor lie nor daube with
untempred mortar, for now has the Lord raised him according to his promise
who speaks with authority, John 1. 45. John 7. 37. 38.
and ministers to the spirit in prison, and all that will not harken unto him
shall be cut off, the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, and it shall be
accomplished, and Acts 3. 22.
unto him shall Kings bovv, and cast down their Crowns, Who will rule the
Nations with a rod of Iron, and dash them to pieces as a Potters Vessel, and
now vvoe Isa. 28 1.
unto the Crown of pride, that must be brought down and laid in the dust:
And you that bear it the Lord will scatter in your Imaginations in what form
or profession Prove. 1. 5.
so ever you be, though you be gathered together and hand join in hand, yet
the wicked shall not go unpunished; Matt. 3 8, 10.
now this is sad nevves to you, that are found without the Camp of the Lord,
for it is now fruits that he is now looking for, and righteousness that his
soul delights in, and the heart that he requires; therefore hear this ye Prove.
23. 16.
professors of what sort soever, who are out of the life and power of God, unto
which every soul is to be subject, Romans 13. 1.
unto this power you are not brought, nor a subjection to it you do not know,
but are under the power Ephe. 2. 2.
of the Prince of the air which rules in you whereby some of you are led into
pride, others into enmity, others into abominable lyeing and false accuseing
the Innocent without a cause, now I know he who has led you into these things
will not let you confess it, nor own that Ezekiel. 23. 45. Dan 7. ^2. 1. Cor. 6.
2. i: Cor: 2. 16.
which condemns you secretly for it, but will bring Scripture for his own ends
(as he did to Christ) and say I should not judge; but I say the righteous
loves judgment, but the wicked cannot stand in it; and the Saints shall judge
the world, and the Spiritual man judges all things, and he himself is udged
of no man, and your actions is to be condemned with the light, and trodden upon
as dirt in the streets, with them who are in the power of God? Oh how the seed
of God is oppressed amongst you, that even the cry thereof has entered into
the ear of the Lord of Sabbaths, who is now risen to avenge his own cause,
and to plead with you who are in the flesh, and are not only enemies to the
seed of God in your selves, but your rage abundantly apperrs toward any in whom
it does arise, to rule and guide them in the way that is called holy; your
abominations are increased, and your transgressions cannot be numbered, the Lord
is weary with your sacrifices, they are an abomination unto him; for no sooner
have you done that you call your sacrifice, Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. Prove. 15. 8.
if there be any in whom the seed of God is brought forth, that are sent of him
to declare against your abominations, before they can be suffered to speak the
words of truth in soberness, you like dogs, and swine, Wolves, and Lions,
Mat. 23. 34, 35
do fall upon the Lambs of Christ, (who wrongeth no man neither can you lay any
thing justly to their charge,) and pulls, and hails them out of your Assemblies
even ready to Luke 19. 3.
take their blood as Cain did, and casts into prison such without any cause at
all; are these a Company of sheep, or of dogs, and Swine, yea, or nay? And is
not this Cains way Genesis 4. 5.
that you are found in, and is your sacrifice more accepted of the Lord then
his was? why are you so wroth and envious? they that learn of Christ are meek,
when they are smitten smites not again, or do you ever read that any of them
ha^led out of their Assemblies, or persecuted, or imprisonned any? What
administration do you live under? Answer in plainness, if you say you are
Christians, show where such actions were acted among Christians; if not,
confess it openly, and do not play the Hypocrite; Read and see if your eyes be
not wholly blinded by the God of the World whom Ye worship and serve, who was
an accuser of the brethren from the beginning, and an envious man; Is not all
out of order amongst you, your children wild and rude in the evil communication
which corrupts the good manners, 1 Cor. 15. 33.
brought up out of the fear of God, like wild Colts, mocking, scoffing,
stoneing, deriding, and scorning Ephesians. 6. 4.
the Servants of the Lord in your Streets, so that those that neither does, nor
speaks any thing to you that is evil, are daily by you abused both by words
and actions as they pass peaceably along the Streets; are not you that are
Parents Titus 2. 2, 3.
or Masters to such ashamed of such things (or do you not delight in such
things,) your selves, and encourage your children and servants in it, What do
you think will be the end of these things, do you not think the Lord scorns
the scornful, or what is it your malice is so much against?

And again, is not your young men and maids uncivil, blaspheming the name of
the Lord, daily following youthful Titus 2. 4. 5, 6. Psalm. 119. 9.
pleasures, living wantonly upon the earth, scoffing, and scorning them that
cannot partake with them in their filthy pleasures, which will be bitter in the
end, and are they not inventing how to make themselves glorious in the sight of
the World, not remembering their Creator in the Eccl. 12. 1.
days of their youth, but following after pride and vanity which corrupts
youth, and leads out of the Moderation, which they who fear the Lord are in,
and are adorned with a meek and quiet spirit, which is of great price in the
sight of God. And does not your Women array themselves in costly apparel, in
gold and pearl, contrary to the Apostles 1 Timothy 2. 9. 10. 1 Pet: 3. 2, 3, 4.
command, and do not they go in hoods, and vailes, scarfes, and rings, and
changable Suits of Apparel, and walking with stretched out necks, and wanton
eyes, making Isa: 3. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
a mincing as they go, and a tinkling with their feet; and their broadered
hair; that they can scarce tell how to go they are so proud, and puffed up in
the lust of the Flesh, even such (if not worse) as the Lord sent his plagues,
and judgments upon. Read Isa. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

Therefore hear this all you that are found in this path, the Lord will take
away your bravery, and instead thereof he will cover you with contempt, and he
will bring down the haughtiness of man and woman, and will lay your honor Isa:
2. 11, 12, 13, 17. Isa: 10. 33.
in the dust; and scatter you as chaff is scattered with the Wind, because you
have cast his righteous Law behind your backs, and has walked despightfully
against the Spirit of Grace; Who has been warned like unto you? has not the
Lord sent his Servants early and late to forewarn You of the Judgment that he
has intended against You because of Your many transgressions; whereby You
daily provoke him to anger; even to sweep You all away with the besome of
destruction?

And have not You executed Your cruelty upon his messengers in mocking,
scoffing, spitting upon, hailing to prison Math: 23. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.
them that have been sent in tender love unto your Souls, to call You to
Repentance, and to seek the Lord while he may be found: but You may say, You
do not this to the servants of Christ, but to Vagabonds and Wanderers,
Deluders, and Deceivers, and the Ringleaders of the Sect of the Quakers, (as
You in scorn calls them) which is every where spoken against, and hailed out of
the Synagogues, and persecuted, and cast into prison, but all this while cannot
see Your selves as blind as Your Forefathers the Persecutors was, and as
ignorant of God, and his works as Cain the Vagabond was, who was in Envy as
you are, though he builded the first City to make bimself an habitation, Genesis
^. 12.
God called him a Vagabond, Genesis 4. 12. but he did not call his Son a Vagabond,
who had not vvhereon to lay his head, nor his Son did not call them which
went about in Sheep skins, and goat skins, and had no certain Heb. 11. 35, 36,
37, 38, 39 40.
dwelling place, he did not call such Vagabonds, who had a habitation where
neither Cain nor any of his stock has, but you are the Vagabonds rightly named
who are in envy and wrath, who has great habitations in the earth as he
had, but are driven out from the presence of the Lord into pride and
highmindedness, and into the Earth, and its pleasure, and treasure, laying up
treasure there, but are ignorant of the true treasure which they have in
earthen 2 Cor. 4. 7.
vessels which wander up and down, and are made a prey upon by you, who are
in Cains way, and in God has not an habitation, but are wandering stars,
wandering Isa: 59. 15.
up and down in the Element of your imaginations, out of one fashion and
vanity of the World into another; and here are you scattered upon the
mountains of Pride and high mindedness, in the clouds of darkness, and stops
your ears at the true Shepherds voice, who would gather you off from the
barren mountains into the lovv valleys, to feed among his Lambs, and to drink
of the fresh fountain of living Water, but this You loath, and will not hear
of, but loves to vvallovv with the Swine in the filth, and mire, therefore
will Your condemnation be just, and the Lord will be clear of Your blood.

Again, is not the harmless and innocent children of the Lord whom he has
placed his Name in, and has set as Phill. 2. i5.
Witnesses against you, as he did Lot in Sodom; whom you have nothing justly to
lay to their charge, are not such by 1 Joh^ 3. ^^.
you abused as Lot was, scoffed and scorned at, stoned in the Streets and
spitted upon, who cannot go with you into the same excess of riot, do you
think the Lord does 1 Pet: 4. 4.
not take notice of this? Yea, surely one day ye shall know that it had been
better for you that a millstone had been hanged about your necks, and you cast
into the midst of John 15. 19.
the sea, then to offend one of the least of his, who is the good Shepherd, but
because Judgment is not executed upon Math: 18. 6. Eccl: 8. 11.
you speedily, therefore are your hearts bent in you to do wickedly; but this
know, that there is a Witness in every one of your consciences, that takes
notice of all your ways and actings; therefore once more I warn you from the
Lord to repent and turn unto the Lord, and put off your bravery of your
tinkling ornaments, and put on sackcloth, and sit down in the dust, if so be
you may be hid in the day of the fierce indignation of the Lord, and cease to
do evil, and learn to do well, lest the overflowing scourge of the Lord sweep
you all away, for his sword is Isa. i. 16, 17.
drawn, and his bow bent, and his arrows are made very sharp, and will fall
grievously upon the head of the wicked Amos 5. 14, 15, 16.
and how can you escape when he appears, who will plead with you by his Sword,
and by Fire, and will render to every man according to his works, without Math.
16. 27.
respect of persons, and then shall you all know that you had warning in your
life time, by them which you hated and persecuted; scoffed and scorned; so
while you have time prize it, and slight not the day of your Visitation, nor
the mercy of the Lord to your Souls, least you be shut out among the
Unbelievers into utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, Math. 8. 12.
and gnashing of teeth for ever.

I charge you as you will answer it to the Lord, search these Scriptures out,
which are quoted, and read them in the fear of God; and try your teachers, and
your fruits, whether they be according to them which spoke forth Scriptures,
Yea, or Nay, for every tree is known by his fruits, and so are the false
prophets from the true, Matthew. 7, 20.

Written by me whom you greatly hate, because I am sent to bear testimony
against your abominations, and by you am I called a Quaker, but through the
tender mercy of the Lord, am I made partaker of the Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
and only known to the world by the name of

Ambrose Rigge.

ANd now Oh ye Rulers of the earth, the word of the Lord is to you; who has
gotten the Seat of Moses the Servant of the Lord; you who are called Judges,
Justices, or Head Officers of what kind or sort soever; And does pretend that
you are Gods Ministers to lay the sword upon the transgressors, and to be a
praise unto them that does well, according as the Lord has appointed his
Ministers to be, now if you profess the Scriptures to be your rule and the
Christian Magistrates to be your example, which is recorded in the Scriptures;
Let us now reason together in meekness, and try your fruits whether they be
according to the Magistrates in the time of Moses, the Prophets, and Apostles,
Yea or Nay? I speak of them who were Gods Ministers indeed, and did not bear
their Sword in vain, but was a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that
did well, according as God had ordained them.

First Consider, are you such as Moses chused in his days to be Rulers over
the people, even men fearing God and men of truth, hating Covetousness, as you
may read, Exodus, 18. the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.

Again, are you such as God commanded his Ministers to be in the days of Mose,
who commanded them to do no unrighteousness in Judgment, nor to respect the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, as you may read, Levi.
19. 15.

Again, are you such as Moses charged his to be, who was to judge righteously
between every man and his brother, and the Stranger that was with him; and were
nor to respect persons in Judgment, but to hear the small as well as the
great, as you may see, Deuteronomy. 1. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19.

Again, are you such as Jehoshaphat the King set over the people, who does not
judge for man but for the Lord, and is the fear of God upon you, with whom
there is no respect of persons or taking of gifts, as you may read 2 Chro. 19.
4. 5, 6, 7. Prove. 24. 23. 2 Samuel 14. 14. Now let but the witness of God in you
all speak, and it will plainly tell you whether you, and your Judgment be
according to them and theirs, yea, or nay.

And whatsoever cause came before them between blood and blood, and between Law
and Commandment, thus were they to do in the fear of God faithfully, and with
a perfect heart, they were even to warn them not to trespass against the Lord,
least wrath came upon them, 2 Chronicles. 19. 9, 10. Is this so among you oh ye
Rulers of England of what degree soever, would not you even cause them to
trespass against the Lord that dare not, in persecuting and imprisoning them
that dare not break his commands?

Again, are you such as does execute the Judgment of the fatherless, and
widows, and loves the Stranger in giving him food and raiment, as you may
read, Deuteronomy. 10. 17, 18, 19. or are you not such as daily seeks to ensnare and
persecute Strangers under the name of wanderers, and instead of giving of them
food and raiment (according to the command of God,) does cast them into prison,
and whip, stock, and stone them, yea, or nay? as you have done many of the
servants of the living God within this few years, who by faith has (according
to the command of God,) left their country, and fathers house, and are become
Strangers and pilgrims in the earth, having in it no certain dwelling place, as
it was with the holy men of God in former ages: as you may see, Heb. 11. 36,
37, 38. 1 Peter 2. 21.

Again, are you such as David was, whom the God of Israel set to rule over the
people, being a just man, and ruling in the fear of God 2 Samuel 23. 3.

Again; are you such as God commanded the Princes of Israel to be, who said let
it suffice you, O ye Princes of Israel, remove violence, and spoil and execute
Judgment, and Justice, and take away your exactions from my people, as you may
read, Exek. 45. 9. or are not you such as use violence to them that cannot bend
to your pride and lust, and send out your Warrants to spoil the goods of the
innocent who cannot for conscience sake uphold that which they know and see the
hand of the Lord is turned against? here you are found not to be such as removs
violence and spoil, but are the defenders and warrants of such who by violence
and spoil, does daily oppress the poor, fatherless, and widows: And as for
taking away your exactions from the people of God, that you are far enough
from, for you casts them into prison, and then adds affliction to their bonds,
in spoiling their goods; and binds heavy burdens upon them which are grievous
to be born, which you your selves will not touch with one of your fingers; now
whether this be not as far contrary to them in former ages as light is from
darkness let any that fears the Lord judge.

Furthermore, are you such as was in the days of the Apostles whom he
commanded the children of God to be subject unto; who stood in the power of
God, and was a terror to evil doers, and a praise to them that did well, and
did not bear their swords in vain, but was ministers of God to execute wrath
upon them that did evil; unto such they was to be subject not only for wrath,
but also for Conscience sake, as you may read, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Again, search and try whether you and your ordinances be such as the Apostle
Pete commanded the Saints to submit unto for the Lords sake, whether it was to
the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that was sent by him, for
the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well, as you
may read, 1 Peter 2. 13, 14. (mark) they was to submit to every ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, which was for the punishment of evil doers, But he did
not command them to submit to such ordinances of men as was for the punishment
of such as obeyed the command of God; now let the witness of God in you all,
search you, and see whether you be such Judges, Justices and Rulers as is
aforementioned, yea or nay? who was men fearing God, and did not respect the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, and was not to take
gifts; Now if you be such, he that is not subject to you resists the
ordinance of God. But if you be found in the steps of them who were oppressors
of Gods people, that when your pride is not bowed unto, does in your rage and
fury persecute, and cast into prison the innocent children of the Lord,
contrary both to the law of God, and man; I say they that resists this power,
does not resist the ordinance of God, for such a power was never ordained of
God, but set up in the corrupt Wills of men; therefore they that comes to be
turned from darkness to the light, and from the power of Satan unto the power
of God, (which is the higher power which every soul is to be subject unto) does
rather choose to suffer by that power then to be subject unto ill, as you may
read Dan. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. Dan. 6. 14, 15, 16, Acts 16.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26.

And now we shall come to search into the actions, and fruits of the
Heathenish Kings and Rulers recorded in the Scripture of truth, who were
persecuters of the people of God, and weigh their actions with yours, who are
called Christian Magistrates in this Nation of England, and see whether does
overbalance.

So these are left as Queries to be answered by any of you.
1. Whether Pharaoh King of Egypt, who oppressed the children of God, might
not have pleaded, as well as you, That they were to be subject to his command,
and bow down to his power, yea or nay? who said, Come let us deal wisely with
them, lest they multiply, and grow stronger then we, that when there fall out
any war, they become our enemies, and fight against us; and he used cruel rigor
unto them, and laid great burdens upon them, as you may read Exodus the first
chap. Now whether or no is not this your Wisdom now, To use all your power and
strength to oppress the people of God now by cruel bondage and rigor, and when
your power is not strong enough, does join together, and take counsel to make
cruel Laws against them, whereby to bring them into bondage, and make them
serve you as Bondslaves, which you cannot read that Pharaoh did? So whether
your cruelty does not exceed his, yea or nay, let that in all your consciences
judge.

2. Whether this power that Pharaoh ruled in, was the power of God, yea or nay?
If yea, Why did the Lord with an high hand and an outstretched arm, deliver his
children from him and his power, and overthrow him, and his Chariots and
Horsemen, in the midst of the Sea? as you may read Exodus 14. 23, 24, 25, 26,
27, 28. If nay, Whether your power be not the same now, in oppressing the
innocent children of God now, whom he has appointed to offer a sacrifice to
him in righteousness? And whether ever any that stood in the power of God, and
was guided by the Spirit of God, was ever persecutors, yea or nay?

3. Where did ever Pharaoh King of Egypt fine or imprison any of the people of
the Lord for such a small thing as not for putting off their Hats, as many of
you have done? Or whether he did oppress the people of God so many ways as you
have done within these late Years, yea or nay?

4. Where did ever Moses* who was a true and faithful Judge over all Israel,
fine or imprison any that came before him for not putting off their Hats? Show
one example either among the Christian Magistrates throughout the Scriptures,
or among the Heathenish Rulers in former ages and if you cannot find one
example among either of them, then confess your selves to be grown higher in
pride and ambition then the persecutors in former ages.

5 Whether there be any transgression where there is no Law? If you say Yea;
show how, or wherein; If Nay, then whether do not you persecute and imprison
them that are no transgressors for not putting off their Hats, when there is
neither Law of God, nor man that commands it.

6. Where did Balaak King of the Moabites, whose enmity was against the
people of God, whom God had delivered from under the hand of Pharaoh, as you
may read Numb. 22. 4, 5, 6. yet show where he persecuted or imprisoned so many
of them as you have done of the children of the Lord, who are in derision
called Quakers, in the Nation of England, without any justcause? and whether
the power was not in him to do it, as well as you, yea or nay.

7. Whether Haman (who was full of wrath when Mordecai could not bow unto him
as others did) was in the power of God, or in the pride of his heart, who made
a Gallows to hang Mordecai on, because he crossed his lust? as you may read
Esth. 5. Now whether you who are full of rage and fury when the people of God
cannot bow down to your pride and lust, be not in the same steps, yea or nay?

Therefore consider what was the end of Haman, read Esth. 7. 9, 10.

8. Whether Nebuchadnezzar (who was a heathenish King) stood in the power of
God, when he commanded to bind he three children of God, and cast them into the
fiery Furnace because they could not bow to his will, as you may read Dan. 3.
the whole chapter? Now you that say all power is of God, and therefore ought to
be obeyed, whether did Shadrak, Meshek, and Abednego well in resisting this
power, and choosing rather to suffer under it, then obey it, yea or nay? as you
may see Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. So you who commands the people of God to bow unto
that which in conscience to the Lord they cannot, are not you full of rage and
fury, and commands them to be cast into prison without Bail or Mainprise, and
makes their affliction sevenfold worse then it used to be to others who were
offenders? So what this Power and command differs from Nebuchadnezzars, let
that in all your consciences judge,

9. Whether Darius the King stood in the power of God when he commanded Daniel
to be cast into the Den of Lions for praying to the true God? as you may read
Dan. 6. 16. If you say Yea; Whether did Daniel well, yea or nay, in not
regarding the King, nor the Decree that he had signed? Dan. 6. 13. If Nay;
Whether you stand not in the same power now, who casts into Dens and Holes the
children of the Lord, whose prayers he hears, because they cannot bow down to
any but to the command of God, yea or nay?

10. Whether Herod who imprisoned Peter the servant of God, was in the power
of God, yea or nay? as you may read Act. 12. 3. 4. If you say Yea, then why did
God send his Angel, and deliver Peter from him, and smite Herod that he was
eaten with Worms? as you may read A^^. 12. 7, 8, and 23. If you say Nay, Then
all power is not of God by your own confession, but the Devil keeps many under
his power, to act his will upon the children and servants of God.

11. Whether King Agrippa, or Festus, or Foelix, who had as much power to
execute their wills upon the servants of God as you have now, yet show wherein
they acted half so much rigor upon the servants of Christ, as many of you have
acted? Therefore now consider your state, and weigh your actions and fruits;
and in this your day I warn you all, high and low, to mind the things that
belongs to your peace before they be hid from your eyes, and you be shut up in
utter darkness; for the Spirit of the Lord will not always strive with you as
it has done. Therefore be wise now ye Kings, and be instructed ye Judges and
Rulers of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with
trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and you perish from the way; for if
his Wrath be kindled a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in
him: And cease persecuting the inocent, who neither vvrongeth you, nor any
man; and consider the end of the persecutors in former ages, Pharaoh the
oppressor of Gods people was drowned in the depth of the Sea, as you may see
Exodus 14. 27, 28. Haman was hanged on the Gallovvs that he prepared for
Mordecai, read Esth. 7 9, 10. Nebuchadnezzar his Kingdom was rent from him,
and his dwelling was with the Beasts of the field, and did eat grass as the
Oxen: Read Dan. 4. 32, 33.

Darius was made to repent, and confess to the truth, That it was the true God
that Daniel served, whom he persecuted, as you may read Dan. 6. 26, 27.

Herod was eaten with Worms who prisoned and persecuted the servants of God
as you may read, Acts 12. 23. These things I write unto you that you may see
the just judgments of the Lord upon the persecutors of his in former ages; not
that I desire in the least such things to come upon you, but that while you
have time, to prise it, and return to the Lord, if so be you may be hid in the
day of his fierce wrath. So thus far am I clear of all your blood, who am
known in England by the Name of

Ambrose Rigge.

FINIS.

