A TREATISE OF THE VANITY OF CHILDISH-BAPTISME: WHEREIN The deficiency of the
BAPTISM of the CHURCH of ENGLAND is considered in five particulars thereof.

AND wherein also is proved, that Baptizing is Dipping, and Dipping Baptizing.

A. R.

Proverbs 4. 25. 26, 27. Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eye lids
look straight before thee.

Ponder the path of thy feet; and let all thy ways be established.

Turn not to the right hand nor to the left, remove thy foot from evil.

LONDON, Printed in the year, MDCXLII.

TO THE READER.
HAving with most serious thoughts minded diverse texts of Scripture, which do
evidently set out Baptism to be an undoubted pledge from God, to all the right
Subjects to whom it is applied, of the free Pardon and Remission of all their
Sins, Mar. 1. 4. and 16. 16. Acts 2. 3 8. and 22. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 21. And
finding also That Baptism is designed only to Believers, upon their making
Profession of Faith, and their willing submission thereunto, Mat. 28. 19. Ioh.
3. 22. compared with 4. 1, 2. Act. 2. 41. and 8. 12. 37, 38. and 18. 8. And
seeing likewise that the right Subjects are not to be merely passive, but are
required, and did perform therein such duties as are incompatible to all
Infants and persons destitute of understanding, Mat. 3. 2. 6. Mar. 1. 5. Act.
22. 16. Gal. 3. 27. Col. 2. 12. compared with 3. 1. I could not without
unfaithfullnesse to God and my own Conscience) but much suspect the truth of
the Baptism which I had in my Infancy, in the Church of England; whereupon I
diligently tried by all good ways and means for satisfaction in this point,
yet found none: But the more I tried, the more I still saw the
unwarrantablenesse for the Baptizing of Infants, even by the invalidity and
insufficiency of the very strongest Arguments, which are and could be given by
the best and ablest mainteyners thereof. Insomuch, that at last I found it to be
but only a mere devise and tradition of men, and brought into the world for
politic and by ends, and accordingly yet continued, and still defended
merely by the subtilty of humane Arts and acuteness of man's brain.

Wherefore, in discharge of my duty to Almighty God, and to express my
unfeined love to my Country men and lovers of Truth (for whose best welfare I
count not my life dear) I am now imboldned (courteous Reader) to present these
few lines to thy serious view, introating thee (as thou will answer it at the
great day) herein to lay aside all prejudice and partiality, duly to weigh all
things, and to embrace the naked Truth of God in the love thereof, and not to
respect it as it has esteem in the world with variable men, Luke 21. 27. Isa.
40. 5. 10. and 24. 23. and 25. 8. and 28. 5. and 30. 26. and 31. 4. and 66. 15.
16. 18.
but only as it has been, is, and ever will be unchangeable in Jesus Christ,
who shortly will come and inlighten the Farth with his Glory, to the discovery
of things hid in darkness, to the making manifest the Counsels of men's
hearts, and 1 Cor. 4. 5. Psalm. 72. 67. Isa. 2. 20. 21. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Col. 3. 4.
to the praise and glory of all them that love his appearing; to whose Grace
and direction I commend thee.

Farewell. Thine A. R.
March 25. 1642.
THE VANITY OF Childish-Baptisme, And of Sprinckling, or washing, any part of
the Body, for Baptism; Briefly examined.
THAT Baptism is a great Ordinance of the New Testament, And that it is the
duty of every true Believer, o^ Disciple of Jesus Christ, to submit thereunto,
cannot be denied: for Christ commands his Disciples, Math. 28. 19. to go and
make Disciples all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. And Peter exhorts generally
Acts 2. 38. Repent every one of you and be Baptized.

But now the great Question which most concerns us is this: Whether that
which is administered in the Church of England for Baptism, be the Baptism of
the New Testament or not? And herein we will briefly consider these five
particulars:

Baptism is there Administered.
1. The End for which 2. The Manner in which 3. The Power by which 4. The
Ground from which 5. The Subject on which
And First, of the first, and so in order.

1. First, The End for which Baptism is there administered, is to Regenerate
the Infants there Baptized; as may appear by the form of Baptism set forth
in their Lyturgie, when the Infants are presented at the Font.

The Minister bespeaks the Congregation thus, Forasmuch as All men be
conceived and borne in sin, and that our Savior Christ says, none can enter
into the Kingdom of God except he be regenerated, and borne a new of water and
the Holy Ghost: I beseech you to call upon God the Father, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, that of his bountiful mercy he will grant to these Children,
that thing which by nature they cannot have, that they may be Baptized with
Water and the Holy Ghost.

Then the Minister and People pray thus: We beseech thee of thy infinite
mercies, that thou will mercifully look upon these Children, sanctify and
wash them with the holy Ghost, that they being delivered from thy wrath, may be
received into the Arc of Christ's Church, and being steadfast in faith, joyful
through hope, and rooted in Charity, etc.

Again, they pray thus, We call upon thee for these Infants, that they coming
to thy Holy Baptism, may receive the remission of their sins by Spiritual
Regeneration, etc.

Again, in the third Prayer thus: Give thy Holy Spirit to these Infants that
they may be borne again, and be made Heirs of everlasting salvation.

After this the Minister having sprinkled or cast a little water on the
Childrens faces, he openly forthwith (without blushing) says, Now seeing that
these Children be regenerate and grafted into the body of Christ's Congregation;
etc.

And then exhorts the people to give thanks to GOD, for that it has pleased
him to regenerate the Infants with his Holy Spirit, and received them for his
own Children by Adoption, etc.

And with all this agrees the Catechism, wherein the Children are appointed to
be instructed, after they are grown to years of discretion; for to the
Question, Who gave you that name? they are to answer, My Godfathers and
Godmothers in my Baptism wherein I was made a member of Christ, a Child of
God, and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

If any man question the truth of this Doctrine, let him take notice of these
few Authors, i^stead of many more that I could allege, which serve to justify
the same.

HIEROM says, The spirit of God moved upon the waters, Adver. Lucifer.
whence it is evident, that Baptism cannot be without the SPIRIT.

AUGUSTINE says, That in Infants Baptized* the Holy Ep. 57. ad Dardanum.
Ghost does dwell, although they be not aware of it.

ZANCHIUS says, not unfitly do the Fathers teach, that De Tri^. Eloh. Lib. 7.
c. 1.
effect of the Holy Ghost upon the waters, which Moses describes Genesis 1. to be
a resemblance of that which the Holy Ghost performs in the water of Baptism;
for as there he rested upon those waters, that he might cherish and prepare
them for the producing of living creatures, and for the Generation of all
things: So the Holy Ghost sits upon the waters of Baptism, and sits as it were
abrood upon them, and blesses them, and thence does cherish, regenerate and
animate the Elect, etc.

PETER MARTYR, In Infants, who by reason of their Loc. com. ^^as. 4 Cap. 8.
Sect. 2.
tender years cannot believe, the Holy Ghost supplieth the room of Faith.

AUGUSTINE cited by Bishop JEVVELL, Def. chapter 11. says, Infants have Faith of
their own, because they have Baptism, the Sacrament of Faith. For (says he)
as the Sacrament of Christ's Body, after a certain manner of Speech, is Christ's
body, so Baptism is Faith, because it is the Sacrament of Faith.

Dr. WHITAKER: Infants are purged by the Spirit, Treatise of the Sacraments.
seeing they are in the Church, and of the Church, Christ sanctifies his
Church.

The end for which Infants are Baptized in the Church of England, is to
regenerate them, and that they may be borne a new, and accordingly it is
concluded in the Catechism, and confirmed by all these Authors, and diverse
others well known to our Ministers, the maintainers of this doctrine, That in
Baptism they receive the Holy Spirit, that they are regenerate and borne a
new, that they are made the members of Christ, the child^en of God, and heirs
of the Kingdom of Heaven.

In answer to all which, I shall say nothing, but only reason this with some
other of their own principles, and practice, and thereby I doubt not, but it
will appear to all, how unfaithfully they have, and do delude the Nations in
this particular.

They are regenerate and borne again in Baptism, they are then made the
members of Christ, the Children of God, and inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Why then they are all saved; No not so, for the Ministers twenty years
after, (if the Children live so long) preach R^generation, Repentance, and
conversion to them, and tell them, that they must then be regenerate and borne
again, or else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, for without
holiness no man can see the Lord. Why, but what needs this? were they
regenerate and borne again in their Infancy, when they were Baptized? and must
they yet be regenerate and born again the second time, or have they lost their
first generation and new birth? and of the children of God and members of
Christ, become the l^mbs of Satan, and children of the Devil? No not so
neither, for the Ministers of the Church of England, both have and will defend
and maintain, the Doctrine of perseverance in the Regenerate, and members of
Christ, both against Pelagians, Arminians, and Papists, or whosoever else shall
oppose or question the same; What then, were they in their Baptism, regenerate
and borne again, made the members of Christ, and children of God, etc. and
have they not, nor can they not fall away from that estate, and yet shall they
not be saved? will God lose his children, or Christ his members, does not
Christ say, except a man be regenerate and borne again, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, Ioh. 3. 5. thereby assuring us, that if a man be
regenerate and borne again, he shall en^er into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Here now these these learned Divines are at as great a straight to defend
their proposition, and to avoid the Arminians, and others consequents, that
will necessarily follow thereupon, as their predecessors, the Priests and
Elders, were to justify themselves, in their rejecting of the counsel of God,
Luke 7. 30. When Christ demanded of them, whether the Baptism of John was from
heaven, or of men, Mat. 21, 25. And therefore in all likelihood, they thus
reason and debate the matter amongst themselves. If we should say, that Infants
are not regenerate and borne again in Baptism, then our adversaries the
Anabaptists (as we use to term them) will say, that then our form of
Baptizing of Infants before laid down, together with the Testimonies of our
learned Fathers, (to whom both in this point, and diverse other, we are more
beholding, then either to Christ himself, or to any of his Apostles) are
nothing but mere conceits of man's foolish brain, first invented to make all
the world wonder after the Beast, which otherwise never had, nor possibly could
have bin brought to pass, besides this, we our selves shall be found false
witnesses of God, and false Prophets to the people, in pronouncing before God
and them, and bearing them in hand all the time of our reign over them, even
unto this day, that God has regenerate and begotten again their Infants in
Baptism, when there is no such matter; yea and how impudent and audacious
shall we be judged to be, in that we have solemly given thanks to God for
regenerating their Infants in Baptism, requiring the people also to join with
us therein, exhorting them not to doubt, but confidently believe the truth
thereof. If now we should acknowledge, that they are not regenerate and borne
again therein: Moreover if we should grant, that Infants are not regenerate
and born again in Baptism, then it will follow, that our Church has a false
constitution, not being constituted of Christians, believers, Disciples, Sons
and Daughters of God, but contrariwise of persons borne in sin, dead in
trespasses and sins, the children of wrath, even of such persons, as we
declare Infants to be before we Baptize them; and then our own definition of a
true visible Church, in the 19 Article, (where it is said, that every true
visible Church, consists of believing men and women) will rise up against us,
and declare us not to be the true Church of Christ. Again on the other side,
if we shall stand to it and maintain, that they are Regenerate and borne
again in Baptism; then first it will follow, that the greatest part of our
preaching might very well be spared; for the whole Nation are regenerate and
borne again before we preach at all unto them (namely in their Baptism) And
also secondly it will follow, that we convert none by our Ministry; and then
the Seal and mark of ^ur Ministry, whereby we use to prove the same true
against the Brownists, will utterly fail us. And thirdly, we shall justly be
impeached, as abbettors of that Popish Tenet, that Sacraments convey Grace,
Exopere operato, by the work done. And last of all, it will undeniably follow,
as the Arminians use strongly to infer againstus, from this ground: That
either the whole Nation is saved, or that the Children of God and members of
Christ, persons regenerate and borne again, may finally fall away and be
damned. Now Sirs, by this craft ye know we have our wealth, Acts 19, 25. we
must therefore of necessity here Sophisticate the matter by some distinction,
though never so absurd, to bleere the eyes of the Nation, and stop the Clamors
of those that thus pursue us, to whom if we say nothing, but let them alone, in
short time, as it is said of the Samaritans Act. 8. 10. when Philip preached
the Lord Jesus Christ unto them, that all the people from the least unto the
greatest, will give ear unto them, and then our Kingdom is at an end, for
which purpose some of them have improved their skill, and thinking to silence
the controversy, as it is here stated; thus to distinguish, neither absolutely
affirming, that they are regenerate in Baptism, nor granting that they are
not, but that they are in the charity of the Church only so esteemed; neither
are any required to believe them to be regenerate, as an Article of their
Faith, but in the judgment of charity.

In answer to which, I desire them to inform me in the ground of this their
charity: for if it has no ground in the word of God, which is the rule of
charity; It cannot be termed charity, but folly and presumption, so to believe;
like unto that of the wicked, who believe they shall have peace, when as there
is no peace to them, Isa. 48. 22. for has God any where in his word spoken, or
Christ promised, or the Apostles taught, that he will give his Spirit to
Infants, to regenerate them in Baptism? surely not a word: no more then he
has said, that he will destroy them in hell: Therefore as it would be rash and
censorious for any to judge they shall be damned, in regard the Lord has no
where so declared; so on the otherside, it must needs be great folly, madness
and presumption, for any to believe their Regeneration in Baptism; forasmuch
as the Lord has no where so promised: Therefore for shame leave off this kind
of juggling, and give glory to God, in acknowledgeing the truth, and then with
me you will say, It is no more the charity of your Church to believe thus, but
the presumption, yea the craft and subtlety of the Prelates and Priest hood of
your Church, for their bellies sake, thus to delude and seduce the people.

But it after all this, they shall object and say, That Infants Object.
are elected and therefore may be Baptized.

To that I answer, that all Infants are not elected, and therefore Answ.
all Infants ought not to be Baptized.

But they will reply, That in regard some Infants are elected, Object.
and none can say that this or that particular Infant is not elected, therefore
Baptism must, be administered to all, because we may not deny the elect their
privileges, for fear of giving to others, that which belongs not to them.

To this I answer, That if it be a warrantable ground, for Answ.
us to administer Baptism to all Insants, because that some particular Infants
are elected, then by the same reason it will follow, That Baptism may lawfully
be administered to every man and woman in the world, because amongst them also,
we may judge that some ^^e elected: But this contradicts the order and rule
of Christ, laid down in the commission, Matthew. 28. 19. where he says, G^e
teach all Nations, and Baptize them: and Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is
Baptized shall be saved: first teach them, (that is, make them Disciples, or
believers.) and then Baptize them, and not before. Therefore this reason
brought for the Baptizing of all infants, because that some infants are
elected, must be ranked amongst other of their Sophismes, before detected.

2. This being granted (which is not true) that Baptism is to be administered
upon the elect before they manifest faith, then except we could know the elect
from those that are not elected we ought to administer it to none at all, for
we may in noe case do evil, that good may come thereon, Rom 3. 8.

Therefore whenever the Lord commands us a duty, or for bids us any
evil, he always prescribes unto us some rules, that in the observation
thereof, we may answer ^im in what he requires of us, and never for want of
instructions, leaves us in such straites, that we cannot obey him in one, but
of necessity we must offend him in the other; And therefore we see when he
commands us, in Mat. 7. 15. to shun and beware of false Prophets, he
presently directs us how to know them from his true Ministers, whom he
requires us very highly to love and esteem. 1 Thessa. 5. 12, 13. And so
likewise does he in point of Baptism, not only command the duty, but also
appoints the persons whom he would have Baptized, Mat. 28. 19. else he would
come far short of Moses, (...) faithful in all Gods house, Numb. 12. 7. but
Christ was as faithful as Moses, Heb. 3. 2. Therefore this objection which
grants, that the Lord intends his Baptism only for the elect, and yet
lays an absolute necessity to administer it to all others to whom he
intends it not, is most vain and frivolous, and therefore to be rejected of
all.

And were it possible for us to know and distinguish the elect from the other,
as it is not, yet I would feign see these profound Clarks make it appear by
the authority of the Scripture, that they might lawfully upon that ground only
administer Baptism unto them: I deny it utterly, and affirm that its true
faith only manifested and made known by confession with the mouth that gives
the elect admission to Baptism, Act. 8. 37. Romans 14. 23. And thus this
objection is vanished away: and so I shall proceed to the second particular.

The manner in which Baptism is there administered, 2.
which is by sprinckling or casting a little water upon the head or face of the
child Baptized; wherein they show themselves, as contrary to Christ, as in the
former particular, forasmuch as the institution of Christ requires that the
whole man be dipped all ever in water.

For the manner of the use of water in Baptism, must be either by infusion, or
by dipping.

But John the Baptist or dipper, according to the Dutch Version, did use the
water, by putting the party in the water, and not by infusing or sprinkling
water upon the party, as is proved, Mat. 3, 11. Ego men baptiz^ humas en
hudati, (...)
I indeed Baptize you in water, Mark. 1. 8. ego men ebaptisa humas en hudat^ I
indeed have Baptized you in water, also John. 1. 26. Acts 11. 16. All these
poin^ ou^ a Baptism in water, but not a Baptism with water.

Obj. But the word ( En) does sometimes signify (with) as in Rev. 19, 21. Kai
Hoi Loipo^ apecteathesan en teromiraia.

A. Never after this word Baptize which signifies to dip, for if it should,
then it would be no sense, to say, dip with water, Therefore either the word
Baptizo must signify to sprinkle, or else the word En must not signify (with)
but the word Baptizo does signify to dip, Ergo the word En must signify (in)
and not (with) as is proved very clearly, and denied by none, who are not
ignorant of the language; for the Greek Authors account bapto and baptizo to
signify that for which the Latins use mergere, immergere, (tingere
immergendo) (that is to say) to d^p, to plunge, to douse over head or under
water; As is proved by Christ's own baptism, Mar 1. 9. kai ebaaptist he hupo
Ioannon eis ton Jordane^: And (...)
he was baptized of John into the Jordan: but it is not the water of Jordan was
put upon him, as in sprinkling, the water is put upon the party. And by Plut.
Lib. de Superst: verbis utitur, Baptison seauton bis Thalassan, baptize thy
self (...)
into the Sea, which if bapto or baptizo signify to sprinkle, is to be
Englished, sprinkle thy self into the Sea, and Lu. 1. 9. he was sprinkled of
John into the Jordan, but that is very false and without all sense, and
therefore without all dispute: therefore the word En (as used after this word
baptizo) must signify, in, and not with.

Furthermore your Translators themselves, (as is to be seen openly) give it
to Dip, Mat. 26, 23. O embapsas, (...)
he that dippeth, Mark 14. 20. O embaptomenos that dippeth Luke 16. 24.
hinabapse that he may dip, Ioh. 13. 26. ho ego bapsas. to whom when I have
dipped, Rev. 19. 13. Himation bebamenon, dipped; unless they will make a
different signification of baptizo from bapto, which they can never do, either
cut of the Greek Authors, or the Scriptures written by the Apostles in that
language, but Mar. 7. 4. Baptismous Poteri^n, lotiones peculorum Ben: Ar.
Montan: the strictest Translator makes Lotiones Poculorum, that is, the washing
of cups not the sprinkling of cups, for the washing of cups is a putting of the
cups into the water, and not a putting or infusing water upon the cups:
Therefore it is very plain, that the use of the water in baptism, was not
sprinkling the Subject with water, or as I may say, an imposing of water upon
the Subject to be baptized, but a putting or demersion of the Subject into the
water.

The truth of this will further appear from the consideration of these
Scriptures, Ioh. 3. 23. It is said of John, that he baptized in Aenon beside
Salim, because there were many waters there, that is much deep or great water,
as Rev. 1. 15. which reason of the Spirit of God, (because there were many
waters there) should be rendered in vain, if a little water had bin sufficient
for John to have baptized the people withal; for we know that any little Font
as you use, would have yielded him water enough to have taken thereof by
handfulls to have sprinkled the whole world withal, but there were many
waters, not waters only.

Again, Acts 8. 38 39. It is said of Philip and the Eunuch, that they went
down both of them into the water, which they would not have done, if washing
or sprinkling of the face had bin the appointment of the Lord, and would have
served the turn: it was also said of Christ, That he was baptized or dipped
by John, Matthew. 3. 16. Mar. 1. 10. and that he came out of the water, which
implies his going in the water, which had bin likewise needless, if sprinkling
would have served. And in Colo. 2. 12. buried with him in Baptism, wherein you
are also risen with him etc.

Again, Rom 6. 4. 5. it is said, we are buried with him by Baptism into his
death. And if we have bin planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall also in the likeness of his Resurrection. And in 1 Cor. 15. 29. Saint
Paul amongst other arguments to prove the Resurrection has these words, what
shall they do which are Baptized for dead, if the dead rise not at all? why
them are they Baptized for dead?

Now let any man that is not quite fallen out with his reason, judge, whether
washing or sprinkling the face with water, or dipping the whole man into water,
and rising again out of the water, does answer all these Texts of Scripture:
he must needs conclude, that dipping the whole man into water, does answer
them all, and sprinkling or washing without dipping not at all, for what
similitude has sprinkling with death, burying, rising again? none at all, but
dipping is a full resemblance of all, and holds out unto us our profession,
self-denial, and our forsaking of all for Christ's sake, without which we
cannot be his Disciples, Luke 14. 26, 33.

Now then if we well consider these Texts, we shall find that they used the
water by putting the party into the water, that is, dipping him, and not by
putting, infusing, or sprinkling (which are all one) the water upon the party.

Therefore dipping, and not sprinkling or washing without dipping, must needs
be the truth of that institution, and the proper sense of the Holy Ghost in the
Scripture dialect.

For as a learned and approved Author has noted, the Greek wants not words to
express any other act, as well as ^^pping: If the institution could bear it,
Casaub. upon Mat. 3. 11. for the Greek to sprinkle, is rantizo: much (...)
human^ authority, both ancient and modern, might be produced herein, all
which would be needless, seeing the Scripture it self is so clear in the
point, as is before already declared.

Nor can it be proved, That Baptism was administered any other way, then by
dipping, for at least a thousand years after Christ.

To conclude then this point: if to Baptize be to dip, (as is proved) then
whosoever is not dipped, is not Baptized, and he that is only sprinkled, or
has water only imposed upon him, is not dipped, whence this consequence
clearly results.

That all those that have the administration of Baptism, either by sprinkling
or by any washing without dipping, have not the Baptism of the New Testament,
and by consequence are un-baptized persons. Repent ye therefore and be
Baptized every one of you, into the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission
of sins, Acts 2. 38. And now why tarriest thou? arise and be Baptized, and
wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord, Acts 22. 16.

For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness as iniquity
and Idolatry, 1 Samuel 15. 23.

Thirdly, The power, authority, and office of the ministry, 3.
by which it is there administered, is received from the Bishops, who received
their power from the Antichristian State of Rome: That the Bishops received
their power from Rome is manifest, and also confessed by themselves, in their
book of Ordination, dedicated to Archbishop Abbot, by Francis Mason, and
printed by authority Anno Dom. 1613. Lib. 1. cap. 2. fol. 11. That this is so,
and that the office of the ministry there exercised, is received from the
Bishop, is a thing most evidently known, whereupon it must needs follow, that
seeing the power and authority, whereby Baptism is there administered, is not
from Christ, but from an Antichristian Hierarchy; that the Baptism it self
is not from Christ but from Antichrist likewise.

The Nonconformists themselves teach us thus to reason, for although they
approve the Baptism of Infants, when it is administered by themselves, of their
brethren, yet the baptism administered by the midwife, as it was appointed in
the book of Common Prayer, that they repute to be nothing but a mere profaning
of the name of the Lord, Why so? did not the midwife baptize a right Subject?
(to wit) an Infant with a right Element? namely, with water in a right manner?
viz by sprinkling water on the face of the Child to a right end (that is to
say) to regenerate the Infant, and all this in the name (at least as they
conceive) and to the service of the blessed Trinity. Now seeing that in all
this, the midwife was as right as any of them* why should not the baptism
administered by the midwife, be as warrantable and good, as if it were
administered by any of them? Moreover, was not the midwife a Disciple and a
member of the Church, as well as they? yea, and had she not as lawful and as
true a calling to that Office as any of them? for did not the Bishop ordain
her thereunto in one case, as well as authorize them in any other case? yet all
this avails nothing with these men, to prove this to be the Baptism of
Christ; and the reason must needs be this, (for there can be no other rendered
by them) because the Lord Jesus Christ has no where in his word ordained and
appointed any women to administer his Baptism; Nor no more has he any where
in his word, authorized any men by any false power, to administer his baptism.
And therefore as the former were none of Christ's Ordinance, but a humane
invention, and for that cause by King JAMES justly rejected: no more is the
latter any of Christ's Baptism, but one of Antichrists strong delusions, 2
Thessal. 2. 1^. and which with him shall one day go to perdition. The truth of
this is seen in all Civil States, wherein when the Ordinances of the same are
administered by such persons as the King or State has assigned thereunto, then
are they to be reputed and esteemed as the Ordinances of the State: but if a
stranger or any other person then such whom the King or State has so
authorized, shall attempt to do any such action, let him do it never so much
like to that which is done by authority, (as some have bin found too skillful
therein) yet notwithstanding he is but a counterfeit, and no better then a
Traitor, against the King and S^ate. Apply we this to the present case: the
Lord Jesus Christ the King of Saints, has instituted and given to his Kingdom
(which is his Church) diverse ordinances for the well being thereof, and amongst
the rest, this Ordinance of baptism, and for the administration thereof, he
has given rules and precepts to his Church for the authorizing such and such
persons to administer the same. Now when any such person, so authorized, shall
dip a believer in water in the Name of the Father Son and holy Spirit, This
is to be esteemed and reputed the baptism of Christ; but when a stranger to
the commonwealth of Israel, by a false power shall perform any such action,
let him do it never so much like, and in resemblance to that which is done by
the power and authority of the Lord Jesus Christ, given unto his Church, yet
this is but a forgery or a counterfeit baptism, and none of the baptism of
Christ.

That such counterfeits should appear in the world for the opposing of the
truth, and deceiving of the people, the Lord long since by the Apostle
foretold, 2 Timothy 3. 9. As Iannes and Iambres (says he) to wit, the Magicians
and Sorcerers of Egypt) withstood Moses, so shall these withstand the truth:
Now Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses no otherwise then by their arts,
counterfaiting and resembling the signs and miracles which Moses and ^^ron by
the power of God wrought before Pharaoh, for as Moses cast down his ^od and it
became a Serpent, Exodus 7. 10. so likewise the Magicians and Sorcerers cast
down every man his rod, and they became Serpents: also ver. 11. 12. And
Pharaohs heart was hardened: just thus deals Antichrists Ministers, who by the
Spirit and power of Antichrist resemble and counterfeit, and thereby resist and
oppose the Baptism of Christ in the hands and ministry of his Servants,
whereby the hearts and minds of the people are hardened and prejudiced against
the same, but as the Magicians Serpent was not the Ordinance of God, though
like unto the same; No more is Antichrists Baptism the Baptism of Christ,
though never so much like thereunto. And although notwithst^nding by this their
juggling and counterfaiting, they may for a season d^lude the people, and harden
their hearts ag^i^st the Lord and his truth, as the Magicians and Sorcerers did
Pharaoh, yet says the Apostle, they shall prevail no further (Moses his
Serpent devoured the Magicians) for their folly shall be made manifest to all
men, as theirs also was, 2 Timothy 3. 9.

Object. If any object, That though they received the Office of Ministry from
the Bishops, yet they received it from them as Elders, and not as they were
Lord Bishops.

Answ. If the Bishops be lawful Elders, they must be Elders chosen by a true
Church, which is a Congregation constituted of Believers and Saints by calling,
Act. 2. 41. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Phil. 1. 7. Romans 1. 7. 8. As the nineteenth Article of
the doctrine of the Church of England does also witness, whichsaith, The visible
Church of Christ, is a Congregation of faithful men etc. now let them show
where or when such a Church, made either the Bishops or any of our Priests, to
be Ministers or Elders by Election, as the Scriptures does testify to be done,
in every Church, Act. 14. 23. And as the entrance of all ordinary Offices (of
which we speak) of necessitic presupposes a Church, by whose election they
are to enter, so their continuance requires a Church, wherein as in a Subject
they are to subsist, and to which they must minister: but the unlawfulness of
the calling of the Ministry of the Church of England in all these respects, is
acknowledged by many of themselves, who have therefore forsaken and cast off
their ministry, there received of the Bishops, and departed the land, and
became as Laymen, until they were authorized a new by the Election and
appointment of such a Congregation, as they conceived to be a true Church: And
these were no whit inferior (but for mostpart did far exceed) any of their
fellows, which they left behind them, either in learning, wisdom, or
godliness, or in any other parts or gifts: Nor did these men judge that
inward qualifications make a Minister, (as some vainly imagine) but only makes
him fit to be chosen into Office by the Church; for if gifts or qualifications
were a call to the Ministry, then should Judges, Counselors, Lawyers, and
others in the Land, be reputed to be Ministers, because many of these have
abilities, to be Ministers, yet not called of God to be Ministers, no more then
an able Citizen, is called to be the Major of the City, by his abilities
without his being lawfully chosen, and placed into that Office by the Citizens,
and therefore qualification is no such inward call of God, as is dreamt of; for
the call and choice of the Church of Christ, by the authority given unto it by
Christ, is now the only ordinary true call of God to this Office and Ministry,
and yet not debarring the exercise of any other man's gifts, either within or
without the Church.

Object. But some may object, That surely these Ministers issued not from the
Bishops: for if they did, then would they plead for their authority and not
against it, as most of our good Ministers now do.

Answ. Surely these issued from the Bishops; for if they did not, then would
they have pleaded against their authority, and not for it, as most of our good
Ministers did but two years agone: and therefore seeing that their authority
was unlawful then as now, and these Ministers the very same men, and as
learned, wise and Godly then as now, and the Gospel the same eternal and
unchangeable Truth, then as now, whence then comes this great change in these
great Clerks, but only from the change of the times, as the reasonable motion
does inform us; wherefore it is most reasonable for all men to be no longer
deluded, by relying and tying their Faith upon the judgments of these or any
other men in the world, nor upon ought else, save only upon the naked truth of
Gods word, seen and apprehended by their own eyes, and judgments, and not by
others, nor to follow any man, not Paul himself, any further then they or he
follow Christ, but to account all the holiest men upon earth, and holiest
Angels in heaven to be accursed, if they teach any thing to be believed or
practiced in the worship of God, but that which may clearly be proved by the
word of God; or if they go about to detain the in any false way of worship, or
debar them from trying all things, conducing to their finding out of the truth,
or enjoying the just liberty, purchased them by Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 7. 23. 1
Pet. 1. 18. Gala. 5. 1.

If it be objected, that they being no Mass Priests are not Object.
Antichristian:

I answer, they have the same Office as Mass Priests, Answ.
though reformed in many things; and this both the doctrine and practice of the
Church of England, pleading for succession from Rome, (as the Book of
Ordination and place, formerly quoted, does evidently confirme^). All the
Massepriests in Queen Mary's days, for that purpose, were upon their
submitting to the Service book, continued Ministers in their several
Congregations in Queen Elizabeth's days, by virtue of their former Ordination,
and so are such Mass Priests at this day, although Ordained at Rome, received
and continued in the Church of England upon the aforesaid conditions, without
any new Ordination. And seeing it is their own constant affirmation, that
Ordination (as they term it) makes a Minister, it must follow, that no new
O^dination, no new Minister; but they remain still the old Mass Priests, only
reformed from that kind of Massing, and therefore Antichristian.

But all are not so made Ministers, because some are chosen by Object.
the parish Assemblies.

1. There be very few so chosen. Answ.


2. The Parish Assemblies are not such Churches to whom the power of Christ is
committed, Acts 2. 41. 44, 47. 1 Cor. 1. 2, Romans 1. 7, 8. Philip. 1. 7.

3. These are Ministers before the choice, and after their leaving the Parish,
nor can the Parish choose any, but such as are Ministers ordained by the
Bishops, and are not therefore made Ministers by their choice.

Object. But these seek that all Episcopal power and Antichristian Lording it
over the Faith and consciences of any might be utterly taken away and that none
other of like nature might be set up to compel men to any form of worship
prescribed by the variable Laws and precepts of men, but that the just liberty
of conscience herein, might be enjoyed, and that the sole authority and
insallible rule of lesus Christ, already set up, and established by his own
blood might take place.

Answ. That this is their intentions, is too good to be true, and too true I
fear to be thought good by them: But is not this rather their aims, they
having bin long kept in servitude and bondage under their Fathers, and now
desiring a freedom, would only (like undutifull Sons) be rid of their
Fathers, that they might divide the Inheritance and dominion amongst
themselves, and to set out the same power in nature, only in another edition
and character.

Object. But ought not we, being Laymen and unlearned, believe our learned and
Godly Divines, and rely upon their judgments in divine matters and worship,
before our own private opinions?

Ans. We are herein neither to rely upon our own private opinions, nor upon
the judgments of all the most Godly man in the world, no not though they
should all concur in one, but only upon Gods word alone: and this I will
prove first by Scripture, secondly, by the Doctrine of the Church of England,
Thirdly, by reason.

First by Scripture, we are not to rely upon men for our bodily, much less
for our spiritual safety; he is pronounced blessed that trusts only in God,
Ier. 17. 5. and cursed, that puts trust in man, ver. 7. It is the Saints
practice and duty, to trust only in God, Psalm. 62. 7, 8. we are commanded to
believe God, and blamed if we do not, Joh. 4. 21. and 8. 45, 46. And in respect
of divine matters, no man upon Earth is to be called Father Master or Doctor,
but Christ only, and our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 23, 8, 9, 10. Herein
are we not to be servants to any into, or men 1 Cor. 7. 23. but to serve God
only, Mat. 4. 10. And herein are we not to fear any man, no not the wrath of
Princes, Mat. 10. 28. Heb. 11. 26, 27. Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18.

Secondly, by the Doctrine of the Church of England, who 2.
will not assume any such authority over the faith of any man, as to tie him to
believe or practice any thing in Religion, upon her credit, or upon the credit
of any man or men in the world, in as much as she has declared expressly in
the 21 Article of her Doctrine. That general Counsels (even these) in things
ordained by them, as necessary to salvation, have neither strength nor
authority, unless it may be declared that they be taken out of the Scripture.
Now then if no general Counsel (which is accounted to represent the whole
Church upon earth) has any such power, then no National Synod, of what sort
soever, has any such power: and if neither of these, then much less a
Covocation of Priests has any, seeing our late experience yet prompts us of a
monstrous issue, produced by that Generation, soil savoured and unsevoury, that
the corruption thereof might soon have poisoned our whole Land, if by the mercy
of our good God, the wisdom of our State had not soon strangled that birth.

Object. Rut a National Synod might be chosen of learned godly Divines that
may do better, and preseribe such a form of worship so agreeable to Gods word,
that no man's conscience may be offended.

Answ. They can no more do this, then make one laast serve every man's foot;
besides, God only can and already has prescribed rules in his word for his own
worship, so absolute and perfect, that none may add or diminish, or vary from
it in the least, without incurring eternal Piagues, and bringing down
judgments upon themselves, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. 12. 32. Josh. 1. 7. 8. Pro. 30. 5, 6.
Rev. 22. 18, 19. Gal. 3. 15.

First, Because all men, knowing but in part, have erred, 3 by Rease
may err; and the reason is further rendered in the 21 Article of the Church of
England, which says even of general Counsels thus, That for as much as they
be an Assembly of men whereof all are not governed by the Spirit and ward of
God, they may err, and have erred even in things appertayning to God.

Because we can be saved only by our own Faith, and that Reason 2.
grounded upon the word and truth of God alone, apprehended and seen by our
own judgments, and not by any others, nor built upon the Testimony of any man
or men, for all such can produce (no divine) but a humane Faith, and which like
the house built upon the Sands, Matthew. 7. 26, 27. will at last utterly fail us.

All this, these men know to be true, and therefore it cannot be Object.
thought, that they seek to have any such unlawful power, or having it would
use it so unlawfully, as to compel any in matters of Faith or worship, knowing
what the Spirit of God says, That the servant of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, patient in meekness, instructing
those that oppose themselves, if God at any time will give them repentance.
That they might acknowledge the truth. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26.

That these men will prove persecutors, as I will not accuse ^nsw.
them all, so yet conceiving that no unlawful power can support it self, but
by unlawful means, I cannot but suspect the best of them in this case,
especially discerning the malignant Spirits of some already this way breaking
out like little sparks from a great flame, against such as concur not in
judgment with them, as is evident by their revilings both in Pulpits and
private, for the attaining of which railing Rhetoric, they needed not to have
spent much time in the Universities, seeing herein they might become sufficient
Graduates, by conversing but a while at Billings-gate amongst the eloquent
Oyster-women there, to whom for answer to all such their Arguments, I wholly
refer them. And also discerning their murmurings and complaints against some,
for their exercising among themselves, edifying one another out of Gods word,
according both to their liberties and duties, they being but Laymen (as they
call them) and without orders, as if they feared least truth should too soon
break forth and shake their buildings in the very Foundation thereof; and as
if they thought the Spirit of God was only at a Bishops dispose, to blow when,
where, and upon whom he pleased to breath his Holy Ghost: and hence hope they,
that some fiery Law will speedily come down from the heavens and Hemispheere of
our te^rene Gods at once to devour all these their adversaties, not considering
of what spirit they are, so different from that in Moses, which wished, that
all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon
them, Numb. 11. 49. And so quite contrary to that sweet and blessed Spirit of
Christ which breathes in the Scriptures, and which there also tells us of an
Antichristian Spirit, that should both reign and rage in the world, make war
with the Saints, and prevail against them, yea to the overcoming and killing
of them: And wherefore is all this? only for not conforming themselves to a
worship, merely set up by the wills and traditions of men, Rev. 13. 4. to the
16. Dan. 7. 21, 25.

And now least I should be thought to shoot at Rovers, I will instance in one
particular and late carriage of a learned Divine (as they would be styled) in
the West, who frequenting the company of strangers part of three days
together, under pretense of unfeigned love and friendship, and then and there
reasoning with them upon certain points of Religion, wherein they and he
differed in judgment, did afterward take leave of them, and pretended to be
sorry he could stay no longer with them, and immediately hasted and raised most
soul and false accusations against them, as being Blasphemers, Heretics, and
what not? and did in fine procure them to be apprehended by Constables, Behold
here a true Son of a Butcher. a Bonner. a Bishop. Ioh. 8. 40. 44.
and brought publicly like Thiefe's before the civil Magistrate, and this
Priest being there ready on the bench, as if he would be both accuser and
judge, lay's these his false accusations against them; all which not taking
such effect as he desired, he then instigated the Magistrate (after their
taking the oath of Allegiance) to put them also to the Oath of Supremacy, which
the Magistrate (contrary to Law, merely to satisfy the will and pleasure of
this Priest) did, which oath they scrupling to take, desired some time to
consider of that (as duty binds them) they might give to Caesar the things
which are Cesars, and to God the things which are Gods: whereupon being
committed, and to be carried to to the J^yle, they were constrained with
sureties to be b^u^d over, and are yet to be prosecuted accordingly.

Now feign would I know, whether this be any meet Spiritual weapon for this
Spiritual man's use, to convert men by, and whether this Sword was ever
intended to lie ready in the Magistrates hands, to be drawn forth and be
disposed of by such a Scholasticke Ignora^^us, in defect of better Arguments to
confute his opposites by, and therewith to kill and Skin them, and all for
not subjecting their judgments to his, in some doctrines vainly received and
taught by him, from the vain traditions of men, and in particular, for their
not granting with him, that the God head of Christ was begotten; which for any
to affirm, (as I conceive) is no less then gr^sse Blasphemy, inasmuch as
thereby he denies the Lord Jesus Christ to be very true God. And is not here
extreme ignorance and malice manifestly striving to exceed each other in this
Priest. And as if all this were not enough, he, with the rest of his fellow
Ministers there, to quit their standings, (the lawfulness whereof being justly
questioned) do neither spare, pitifully to abuse Scripture, nor yet cease
unchristianlike, upon all occasions, to callumniate, and publicly to vent,
most false aspersions against them, and that also with such violence and rage,
which would much better beseem Bears robbed of their whelps, then reasonable
creatures; and all this to uphold the great honor and authority which they
have unduly got amongst many; by all which it evidently appears, what must be
looked for at their hands, if once their Presbyterian Tribunal were errected:
But leaving these to be accounted with by God and their own conscience, I will
now proceed.

Fourthly, The ground from which Baptism is there administered, is the
Repentance and Faith of the sureties, as is evident also by the Catechism,
where these Questions and Answers be made.

Quest. What is required of persons to be Baptized?

Answ. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they
steadfastly believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.

Quest. Why then are Infants Baptized, when by reason of their tender agethey
cannot perform them.

Answ. Yes they do perform them by their sureties, etc. And like hereunto in
the administration of Baptism, these Questions are demanded of the Sureties.

1. Do thou forsake the Devil and all his works? etc. 2. Do thou believe
in God? etc. 3. Will thou be Baptized in this Faith?
To which three questions, each of the Sureties in particular make answer in
the singular number, personating the Child to be Baptized, and then they
Baptize the Child.

Now first to affirm, that Faith and Repentance is required of persons to be
Baptized, and then conratriwise to affirm, that Children destitute of Faith
and Repentance, may be Baptized upon the Faith and Repentance of others, is a
flat contradiction, and the latter affirmation is all one, as if they should
say, that a person destitute of Faith, may be saved by the Faith of another,
for that which gives any man a right admission to the Baptism of Christ, gives
him admission into life eternal, and glory, and therefore if Children may be
Baptized upon the repentance and Faith of others, they may also be saved the
Faith and Repentance of others. If thou beleevest with all thy heart, thou
may be Baptized, Act. 8. 37. He that believes and is Baptized, shall be
saved, Mar. 16. 16. Therefore this Doctrine being directly repugnant to the
Scriptures, must be rejected, as impious. Ezck. 18. 20. The same soul that
sins shall die. Hab. 2. 4. The just by his faith (and not by the faith of
others) shall live. Gal. 6. 4. 5. Let every man prove his own work, and then
shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, for every man
shall bear his own burden.

Fifthly, The Subjects on which Baptism is there administered, 5.
are Infants, whereas the Scripture holds forth, that Disciples (or Believers)
only are to be Baptized.

For the Commission of Christ was to Baptize only Disciples, as appeates Mat.
28. 19. The words being these, Porenthentes oun matheteusate panta ta ethne
Baptizames (...), etc.
autous, etc. The English of which is, Goeing therefore Disciple ye all
Nations, Baptizing them: Now the question is, what this word ( Autous) them,
has relation to, whether to ( Ethne) Nations or no, but it is clear out of
the words, that it has not relation to Nations, but to Disciples, for the word
which is put for them in that place, is Autous (...) not (...).
and not Auta, which it should be, if it had relation to Nations.

Therefore out of this place we find, that Christ gave command to the
Disciples, to Disciple the Nations, or to teach the Nations, that they might
become Disciples, and then to Baptize them, but not to Baptize the Nations, or
any persons therein, before they were made Disciples. And to this agrees the
very practice of Christ himself and his Disciples, for Ioh. 3. 22. we read,
that Jesus and his Disciples came into the Land of Judea, and tarried there,
and Baptized. And who they were that they there Baptized, we may see in the
very next Chapter 1. 2. ver. where it is said, that Jesus made and Baptized more
Disciples then John, though Jesus himself Baptized them not, but his Disciples
Baptized them, (to wit) the Disciples or they whom they had by teaching made
Disciples, and what it is to be a Disciple may be plainly seen in Ioh. 8. 31.
Luke 14. 16. 27, 33.

And this truth is further evidenced from many other Texts, as Mar. 16. 15, 16.
where Christ says to his Disciples, Go into all the world, preath the Gospel
to every creature; he that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved: and
accordingly, in Act. 2. 38. Peter says, (even to the Jews and children of
Abraham, Repent and be Baptized every one of you: (that is) Repent every one of
you: and then be Baptized every one of you. And afterward verse 41. it is
said, that as many of them as gladly received the word, (that is) believed,
were Baptized, and the same day there were added of them to the Church, about
3000 souls, And in ver. it is said, that all that believed were together: And
in Act. 8. 37. The Eunuch coming to a certain water, and demanding of Philip,
what did hinder him that he might not be Baptized? was answered, if thou
beleevest with all thy heart thou may: which implies, that unless he
believed, he might not be Baptized.

And with all this agrees that in the Service-booke, before recited, That
Faith and repentance is required of all persons to be Baptized.

Now then forasmuch as Infants cannot have either Faith or Repentance, which is
required by the Lord, of all persons to be Baptized, as is manifestly proved by
the Scriptures, and also granted by the pleaders for the Baptism of Infants,
in the Catechism before recited: It must needs be concluded that Infants are no
meet Subjects of Baptism, and so by consequence it must needs follow, that the
Baptism of Infants is none of the Lords Baptism.

Object. But yet after all this, if any shall be so ignorant as to object, that
the Profession of Faith and Repentance made by the Sureties, may give the
Infants right to Baptism.

Answ. I shall answer them, That if the profession of Faith and Repentance of
the Sureties, can give them a right admission unto Baptism, then also may it
give them admission to eternal life, as they ignorantly in the Catechism
pretend it does; for to the question, Who gave you this name? The Children are
taught to say, My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made
a member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven,
but Scripture cited in the former point declares the contrary.

Object. But they will say, That the Sureties promise, that the Infants shall
believe and repent, and forsake the Devil and all his works, so soons as they
come to years of discretion, Ergo, etc.

Answ. To this I answer, that this is monstrous and to be abhorred, for it is
no less then to cause men to assume and arrogate to themselves, the
Prerogative of the most high, who is the author and finisher of Faith, the
giver of every spiritrall gift and ability, by whom we overcome Satan and all
his power, and this he gives to whom he lists, Ioh. 3. 8. Seeing then that
Faith and Repentance is only from him, and given to, or wrought in whom he
lists, how dare any to be so presumptuous, as to cause any to promise that
another shall believe or repent or forsake the Devil and all his works, dare
they presume to cause any to undertake that which appertains only to the
Lord? this argues therefore great impiousnesse, for they by this, either would
bear the world in hand, that men can work Faith and Repentance when and in
whom they please; or else that they have the Lord at their beck to perform
their wills, or last of all, which I rather think, that they cause that to be
promised which they regard not, whether ever it be performed or not, for this
cause let them read Eccles. 5. 4. 5.

Thus having brought the point to this issue, I shall now proceed no further
therein, having said sufficient to discover the grossness of this their only
and last shift: and if any shall yet assirme, that the Faith and Repentance of
others, may give Infants, (which have none of their own) right to Baptism,
they must be such, who by their arts and sophistries, can clude any truth, and
colourably justify any Error, though never so gross and absurd, such as this
of regenerating Infants by Baptism, grounded upon the Faith and Repentance of
Sureties, is, which though they teach others thus to believe, I cannot judge
them to be so ignorant as to believe it themselves, for if they did, then must
I needs admire their great uncharitableness, and the uncharitableness of all
Christendom (as they call it) this 1600 years in that they have not in all
this time sent two believing men and two believing women with a Minister or
Priest into all the Heathen and Pagan Countries in the world, to Baptize and
Regenerate their Children.

Object. If it be objected, That the Parents being Pagans will was suffer them
to Baptize their children?

Answ. I answer, though some would not, yet in all likelihood many would.

Secondly, By their converse there, in a small time they (no doubt) might have
opportunity to Baptize their Children without the privity of the Parents.

Object. Although this might be done, yet afterward, if Christians have not
the bringing up of such Children, this laber would be lost.

Ans. Not so, seeing they are thereby Regenerate, made the members of Christ,
the children of God, and the Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven: And shall
any be so wicked as to think, that Christ would want means to save his own
members, or that God would not find out means to save his own Children, God
forbid!

Now then to conclude all, seeing the Baptism whereof we treat, is
administered to a false end, in a false manner, by a false power, from a false
ground, and upon a false subject, as has bin proved; then the Baptism it
self must likewise be false and unlawful.

Again, for the lawful administered of every Ordinance of God, there must
besome institution of God to warrant the same, but there is no institution of
God to warrant the administration of Baptism upon Infants, therefore the
administration of Baptism upon Infants is unlawful.

And again, that administration of Baptism, which has no express command in
Scripture and which overthrowes or prevents that administration of Baptism
which is expressly commanded in Scripture, is a mere devise of man's brain,
and no Baptism of Christ's: but the administration of Baptism upon infants
has no express command in Scripture, and yet it overthrowes of prevents the
administration of Baptisms upon Disciples (or believers) which is expresselv
commanded in Scripture, Matthew. 28, 19. Mar. 16. 16. Job. 4. 1. 2. Act. 2. 38.
and 8. 37. Therefore the Administration (...) Baptism upon Infants, is a mere
device of man's brain, and no ^apt^^^e o^ Christ.

Object. If they here object, that, they hold and maintain has the Baptism
of Believers and the Baptism of infants also, as in the 27 Articl of the
Doctrine of the Church of England is expressed, and therefore deny that their
Baptizing of Infants does prevent the Baptism of believers, for of any Pagan
Tuike or Heathen be converted to the faith, they allow them Baptisms.

Answ, I answer, first that it is affirmed by the Spirit of Go, that there is
but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. Now if there be but one
Baptism, then either the baptism, of believers, or the baptism of Infants,
destitute or faith, must needs be that one true baptism, and not both: son to
affirm, that both is that one true baptism, is a ^^^t contradiction.

Secondly, the baptism of Infants, as it is by authority ordained in this
Kingdom, does thus far prevent the baptiz^ng of believers, that hereby no
native can be baptized upon ^a^th, seeing all are to be baptized in their
Infancy, when they are destitute of faith: wherefore if all other Kingdoms and
Nations did the same, then the commandment of Christ, for the baptism of
Disciples (or believers) would be quite prevented and destroyed out of the
whole world, as well as it is out of this Kingdom.

And therefore notwithstanding this objection, it is apparent, that herein they
have (at least so far as in them lies) like the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15
6. made the commandment of Christ of none effect by their own traditione.

And inflany shall here object and say, the discovering of the evil of this
form of baptizing is needless, seeing diverse persons see it already to be so
frivolous and naught, that they much dislike it, and will not have their
children baptized with Godfathers, but upon other grounds, namely, from the
Covenant made with believers and their children, upon which ground also, they
of the Separation use to baptize their children, wherefore their arguments
should have bin likewise answered.

To which I answer.

1 Although some few see this form of baptism to be sinful and naught, yet
what is this to the rest of the whole Nation, who yet make conscience of that
Idol to this day?

2. Although they of the Separation and some others, do mend the matter (as
they think) in the baptizing of their Children otherwise, and upon other
grounds, yet what is all this to their own baptism, being naught by their own
consession; and anullitie also, even from their own grounds: for they grant,
that no children save only believers Children, are in the Covenant, or have
right to baptism; then most of themselves had no right to baptism, then most
of themselves had no right to baptism, their Parents (by their own
acknowledgement) being ungodly: whence it will follow, that they themselves
being baptized in their Infancy, had not the baptism of Christ, and so by
consequence are yet unbaptized persons: thus is their own baptism clearly
made void, even from their own grounds, and how then can their children be now
baptized in the right of such Parents, who are yet unbaptised themselves?

But the grounds which SEPARATISTS and others do urge for the baptising of
INFANTS, shall be further examined and answered (if God will) in another
Treatise.

And if any shall think it strange and unlikely, that all the god^iest Divines
and best Churches, should be thus deceived in this point of baptism, for so
many years together:

Let them consider that all Christendom (except here and there one, or some
few, or no considerable number) was swallowed up in gross Popery for many
hundred years before Luthers time, which was not until about 100 years agone.

Let them also consider how long the whole nations of England and Scotland have
bin deceived in the point of the Hierarchy until of late, and yet they now for
the most part do see it to be Antichristian and abominable, and why may they
not like wise be deceived in this point of the Baptism of Infants, especially
seeing that the Hierarchy has as much warrant from Scripture as this, and the
Baptism of Infants as little as that?

Yea and much less in the judgment of Bishop Hall, who Episc. Jure divino.
par. 2. p. 127.
in this point expresses himself in these words, (viz.) Jam for my part so
confident of the Divine Institution of the Majority of Bishops above
Presbyters, that I dare boldly say, that there are weighty points of faith
which have not so strong evidence in holy Scripture, (and then he instanceth in
two particulars) The power by sacred orders given to the Ministers alone for
the Consecration and distribution of the holy Eucharist, and the receiving of
Infants to holy Baptism, which (says he) is a matter of so high consequence,
that we justly brand the Catabaptists with Heresy for denying it, yet let me
with good assurance say, that the evidences of this truth come far short of
that which the Scriptures have afforded us for the superiority of some Church
Governors over those who otherwise indeed, in a sole respect of their
Ministerial Function, are equal; and then he shuts up the point in these very
words, ( viz^.) He therefore that would upon pretense of want of Scriptures
quarrel at the Divine institution of Bishops, might with much better color
cavell at these blessed Ordinances of God.

And after in an other book he challenges his opposites to try their skill by
entering into a serious contestation with Answ. to Smectymnuus, pa. 98.
him, to see if they could produce more clearer evidence from Scripture for the
Baptizing of Infants, then he could for the Hierarchy; which challenge of his
may easily be maintained, for indeed and in truth the Scripture ownes neither
of them.

And as one of note not long since in defense of the Hierarthy, etc. alleging
altogether hymane authority, and being urged by me either to make good his
position by Scripture or else to say nothing, ^e replied to me thus, If you
will believe nothing in Religion but what may be proved by Scripture, then must
you renounce your Christendom, and turn Turk, for you cannot prove your own
Baptism, not the baptism of Infants by Scripture, wherein the man spoke
nothing but reason, for if I will believe one point in Divinity upon the
authority of m^n, or tradition of the Church, why not another, and another, and
so to multiply them beyond number upon one and the same reason and authority.

3. And let them likewise consider, that there is no marvel at all in this,
seeing there is nothing, nor more herein then was foretold by the Spirit of
God, should come to pass in the world ( vizt.) That men should depart from the
Faith, and give heed to the Spirit of error. 2 Thessa. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1. That
all the world should wonder, follow after, and worship the Beast, Rev. 13. 3.
4. 15, 16. And that the Inhabitants of the earth should be made drunk with the
wine of the fornication of the whore, Rev. 17. 2. And in no place it is told us
of any one Nation that should cleave to the truth, before the calling of the
Jews, but that until then, this only was, and is to be looked for, that all
that will live Godly in Jesus Christ, must suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
be brought before Kings and Rulers, yea to the loss of their liberties and
lives for his cause and truth, Mat. 10. 17, 18. and 24, 9. And that all the
rise of all our glory and happiness in the world to come, is from our being
made conformable to him in his death and sufferings in this world, Mat. 5. 11,
1^. Lu* 6. 22, 23. Phil. 3, 10. 2 Timothy 2. 12.

And if any shall think, that any of the Expressions concerning the Ministry
in this Treatise, be too harsh, seeing many in that Office are Godly and worthy
men:

1. Let them know, that I esteem not less of diverse of them, their worth and
honesty, being well known to me; yet never the less, the Office and ministry
which these men have, is no whit the truer for their worth or honesty, for the
honesty of a man in a false Office cannot make the Office any truer or
lawfuller then it is in it self.

2. Let them also consider, that I speak not against any goodness in any man,
but against the evil, and against the unlawfulness of the Office wherein he
is; for this being derived from one and the same power, in one and the same
manner, to one and the same end unto them all, must needs be one and the same
Office, and no better or lawfuller then the power from whence it is derived,
for no man can convey unto another, any better or truer right or power then he
has in himself: besides, if I should speak evil of the virtues of any man
in that Office, for that Office sake, I should then be as foolishly ignorant,
and as liable to the curse of God, as he is that speaks good of that Office
being evil, for the goodness or sake of the man in that office, for both
these are abominable and alike accursed in the sight of God, Isa. 5. 12.

3. Let them likewise consider, that if the Godliest and best Minister upon
Earth were made Arch- Bishop of Canterbury or York, yet that Office would
still be the same, and as bad as before, and in some respects far worse, then
if a worse man had it, for an evil Office gets credit by the goodness of the
man in it, and thereby deceives and keeps the people in blindness and error
the more, and puts them the further off from seeing their sinfulness in
submitting to it. And hence is the proverb verified, ( viz.) The better the
man, the worse the Bishop: the very same is the case of the Ministry and
Priesthood here treated of.

Jer. 23 11. Both Prophet and Prlest do wickedly: yea, in my House have I found
their wickedness, says the Lord. Jer. 5. 31. The Prophets prophecy lies, and
the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so. 2 Thessalonians 2. 11. 12. Wherefore God shall send them strong delusions that they
should believe lies, that they all might be damned who believe not the truth.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 8. line 23, for apecteathesan read apectanthesan, and for romiraja, read
romphaja. and line 35. for ebaaptisthe, read ebaptisthe.


