THE SECOND PART OF THE VANITY and CHILDISHNES OF INFANTS BAPTISM: WHEREIN The
grounds from several Scriptures usually brought for to justify the same, are
urged and Answered.

AS ALSO The nature of the diverse Covenants made with Abraham and his Seed,
briefly opened and applied.

A. R. May 3. 1642.

Gala. 3. 1, 3, 4, 6, 7. O foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye
should not obey the truth? dre ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the
Spirit, ye would now be made perfect in the flesh.

Have ye suffered so great things in vain?

Was not Abraham's believing God accounted to him for righteousness.

Know you therefore, that they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of
Abraham.

LONDON: Printed, Anno Domini, 1642.

THE SECOND PART OF THE VANITY and CHILDISHNES OF INFANTS BAPTISM.
HAving formerly Treated of the Baptism of the National Church, I have now
thought it meet likewise to consider the grounds upon which the Separated, and
some other Churches, do Baptize their Infants, which are from several places
of Scripture, especially these five, which I will examine in order.

The first is that in the Acts. 2. 39. where it is said, The promise is to you
and your Children: which Text, although it be to no purpose in the point, and
so confessed by the ingenuous, yet because many inconsideratly do still allege
it, I shall for their sakes show their great weakness in their thus reasoning
thence: If the promises be made to us and our Children, then the Seals of the
promises.

To which I answer, it is not there said of Infants, but to your Children; not
promises, but promise: it is therefore worthy inquir^ to find out, what is
there meant, by you and your Children; in both these we shall be satisfied if
we look back into the former part of the Chap. where when the gifts of the
holy Ghost were given forth upon the 120. and they speaking in diverse tongues,
and the Jews thereupon some marvailing, some mocking, and saying, that they
were full of New wine, ver. 13. Peter hereupon stands up and speaks to these
Jews thus, These men are not drunk as ye suppose, but this is that which is
spoken by the Prophet Joel, that in the last day (says God) I will power out
my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy, etc.
ver. 15. 16, 17. And immediately when he had thus spoken, he preached unto them
Jesus Christ, whom they had murdered, and whom though dead and buried, yet God
had raised up, and who being by the right hand of God exalted and having
received of his Father the promise of the Holy Ghost had shed forth, this which
they then did see and hear: ver. 33. As if Peter should have said to the Jews
thus, we are not filled with wine as ye suppose but are filled with the Spirit.
promised to our Fathers long since, that should be poured forth in these our
days; And that their Sons and their Daughters* should Prophecy; which is now
fulfilled upon us their Sons and Daughters, and may be also poured out upon
you and your Children, to make you all Prophecy and speak with tongues as we
do for you and your Children are all the Sons and Daughters of the Jews our
Forefathers, to whom this Prophecy was spoken, as well as any of us: If you
repent and be Baptized every one of you, in the name of thi^ Lord Jesus (whom
you have crucified) for the remission of your s^nne, notwithstanding your
dealing so wickedly with him and moreover ye shall also receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost, for the promise is to you and to your Children, as well as unto
us, ver. 38. 39. So then by this time we may see what is meant by the promise
(to wit) The gift of the holy ghost, mentioned in the 17. ver. to be prophesied
of by Joel, and in the 33 verse, to be received of the Father, and to be shed
forth by Jesus Christ, and also recited in the 38 ver. (thus) And ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Ghost, for the promise is to you and your Children.

And likewise we may see who are meant by you and your Children, to wit, the
very same which are mentioned in the 17 ver. under the terms of Sons and
Daugheers that should Prophecy, therefore no Infants are meant in this place,
nor is there so much as any color for the Baptizing of Infants from hence, for
the text is not, be Baptized, for the promise is to you and to your Children,
(as many in Print do falsely allege) But repent and be Baptized, etc. and ye
shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, for the promise is to you and to your
Children.

Object. If they say, then surely these Children were in the Covenant, seeing
the promise is said so plainly to be to them.

Answ. To this I answer, that this objection has no color of footing in the
Text (as appears by that which is already said thereto) yet nevertheless I
will further demonstrate the same by these reasons. First, The Promise is made
equally to them and to their Children; and to them that are a far off. But
these which are a far off, are not within the Covenant by the promise until
they believe the same.

Secondly, If they were in the Covenant by having this promise made to them,
then were they of the New Covenant and Church of the Gospel, for there were no
other people to be accounted in Covenant with God, save those which be of this
Church, but those were not of this Church, but they were afterward added
thereunto (as appears ver. 41. and therefore were not of it before, and
consequently, notwithstanding the Promise, being so to them and their Children,
yet neither they nor their Children were of the Covenant nor Church until they
did believe, al^hough they were Jews, and so the children of faithful Abraham.

Their second Argument is from those places which speak of Baptizing whole
Households, for (say they) there may be Infants in the Household; thence they
conclude, that Infants may be Baptized.

To which I answer, that there might be no Infants there; and my negative is
as good as their affirmative, without any proof, and more probable, for it is
said, Act. 18. 8. That Crispus the chief ruler of the Synagogue, believed on
the Lord, with all his Household, and that many of the Corinthians hearing it,
believed and were Baptized. And it is said of the Jailer, who was Baptized and
all his, Act. 16. 32. That Paul and Sylas first preached the word of the Lord
to them, and to all that were in his House. And in the 33 ver. it is said, that
he and all his were Baptized, and in the 34 ver. it is said, that he with all
his Household believed in God: So then it is plain, that they first believed,
and then were Baptized; and although it be barely spoken of Paul's Baptizing the
Household of Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1. 16. And of the Baptizing of Lydia and her
Household, Act. 16. 15. Yet it cannot reasonably be imagined, but that he did
Baptize these according to the Commission, and as he did Baptize the Jaylour
and his house, which was first preaching to them, and bringing him and all his
house to the faith, as is evident by the Text, and those other places which are
more silent, must be expounded and understood by this which is more plain, and
not this by those.

A third Argument of theirs is from 1 Cor. 7. 14. where it is said, 3.
else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy. whence they thus
reason, If the Children of believing Parents be holy, (that is to say, in the
Covenant) then may they have the Seals of the covenant and be Baptized.

To which I answer, that there is now but one Covenant on foot which is a
Covenant of Grace and salvation, Heb. 7. 22. Heb. 8. 13. and 10. 9.

Secondly, there is but one manner of entering and being in that Covenant, Ioh.
3. 3. 5, 6. Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Thirdly, there is but one holiness now acceptable with God, which is inward,
spiritual and in truth, without which no outward obedience or conformity to
any Ordinance or worship of the Gospel is warrantable or acceptable, John 4.
23 24. Heb. 11. 6.

Hence then it will follow, that if Believers children be in the covenant, and
have this true holiness, then all the children of believing Parents must be
saved, as well old children as young, for age does not make them cease from
being children to their Parents, but all the children of believers are not
saved, no not of faithful Abraham himself, for thousands of them perished,
according to that known sentence of the Prophet, Isa. 10. 21. repeated by
Saint Paul Romans 9. 27. Though the number of the Children of Israel be as the
Sand of the Sea, yet but a remnant of them shall be saved: therefore the
children of believers are not in the covenant now on foot, nor ought to be
Baptized.

Object. They further object and say, Notwithstanding all this, yet why may
they not be in the Covenant outwardly, having federall holiness, and in that
sense holy, so to be admitted now to the outward Ordinance of Baptism, as
Infants were then to Circumcision in time of the Law, and State of the Jews.

Answ. To which I answer, that the State or church of the Jews were under the
old covenant and Law, and stood not by Faith and circumcision of heart, (as
this church of the Gospel does) but stood merely upon nature and circumcision
of the flesh, and accordingly had their outward or federall holiness, and
outward cleansings, all which are abolished with that State, and no such
holiness or distinction is now between any persons in the world, as shall be
further declared by and by.

There being now the New covenant only on foot, which is a covenant of Grace
and Salvation, and which brings certain salvation to all those that rightly
enter into it, and which is only by Faith. Hence it is said, Act. 2. 47. That
the Lord added to the church daily, such as should be saved. And that the
holiness of children here, is not meant of any holiness in relation to any
Church Covenant, will further appear by these reasons.

First, that which is an effect of Regeneration, is not brought to pass by
Generation (though the Parents be holy) But to be of the Covenant or Kingdom
is the proper effect of Regeneration, Joh. 3. 3. without which none can see it
(much less be of it) or enter into it; Therefore it cannot be brought to pass
by Generation, though the Parents are holy.

Secondly, contradictions cannot be the effect of one and the self same
Covenant, in one and the self same respect; but for one Parent to be a
believer, that is of the Church, when the other Parent is not, to produce a
holy seed (that is) in the Covenant, 1 Cor. 7. 14. And for the other Parents to
be one a Jew, and the other a Babylonian; the one a member of the Church, the
other not; to produce an unholy seed (that is) out of the Covenant, and to be
put away, both wife and all borne by her, as Ezra. 10 3. is a contradiction in
one and the self same respect; therefore it cannot be the effect of one and
the self same Covenant.

Thirdly, It appears from the Jews Church State, from whence this successive
holiness and being in the Covenant is concluded to come: the Proselyte that
was to be brought in, was to Circumcise all his Males, Exo. 12. 48. where we
may conclude, that his Females were included in that time in the Males, there
being no other Ordinance of admission for them: whence it will follow, that if
the Jews Church State (from whence I say this succession of being in the
Covenant is derived) does not admit in any consideration of any lawful being
of Parents, the one a member of the Church, the other not to produce a seed
within the old Covenant, that then such a thing under the New Covenant, cannot
be concluded to proceed from that rule, but the former is true from the ground
before laid, therefore the latter is also true; and if not from that rule then
from none: But not from that by consequence of the former Argument, therefore
from none.

Quest. They yet say, they are here termed holy, and are so to be esteemed.

Answ. To which I answer, that so were the unbeleeving Jews, when they were
broken off, Romans 11. 16. and so is the unbeleeving wise in this place, yet
neither of these are to be Baptized for their being termed holy, and therefore
not children, for their being here termed holy.

Q. They further say, Then what holiness is here meant to the Children?

Answ. To which I answer, not that holiness that accompanies Faith: and such
holiness only is availeable to the admittance into the State of the Gospel,
and to have right to Baptism.

True it is, that in time of the Law, and State of the Jews and old Covenant,
there were some federally and outwardly holy, and outwardly unclean, and then
all men, yea all things in the world were distinguished by this kind of
holiness: So the uncircumcised were then unholy, and they of the circumcision
holy, and might not accompany with the other, Act. 11. 3. and accordingly had
they their outward washings and purifications, for these their outward
pollutions: all which were but Typical things, and all these, and such like
distinctions are now abolished with that State, and quite taken away out of the
world by the coming of Christ: and this is evident by Peter's Vision, Act. 10.
11. etc. expounded by himself in the 28. ver. where he says, That God had
showed him, that he should not call any man polluted or unclean, whence it is
clear, that now all men in the world are as clean as the circumcised, and
those as polluted in the Gospel sense as any other; for now all are as one and
alike in Christ Jesus, as may appear by these Texts, Romans 10. 11. Collo. 3.
11. Gala. 3. 28 and 5, 6. And as none then without this legal and outward
holiness ought to partake of those legal performances and worship, nor be
admitted thereunto without being first circumcised in the flesh, and so made
legally holy, Exo. 12. 48. So now none are acceptable or ought to partake of
the Gospel, worship and Ordinances, without the Circumcision of Christ, which
is of the heart and Spirit: Col. 2. 11. Romans 2. 28. 29. And this inward
Spiritual truth was Typified by that outward fleshly shadow: Hence therefore
I will conclude, that the Apostle meant no such kind of holiness in this
place, for the believers children to have. Nor is there any such kind of
holiness now in the world amongst men, nor is this or any other kind of
holiness (save only that true holiness that accompanies the new creature)
avaylable to Baptism.

Object. If it be objected, that in respect of Justification it avails
nothing, but to Baptism it may?

Answ. To this I answer, that which availes to justification and Salvation,
does according to the rule, only avail to Baptism, for if thou beleevest with
all thy heart thou art justified: Act. 13. 39. and shall be saved. Act. 16. 31.
and may be Baptized upon the same and no other grounds, Act. 8. 37.

Object. Here they object and say, that all that were Baptized by the Apostles
themselves, were not saved, therefore this is not so.

Answ. To which I answer, and grant^ that all Baptized by the Apostles, were
not saved, and yet deny the consequence, by distinguishing between the rule by
which they are to be Baptized, (which is infallible) and the judgments of men
who are fallible, and may be deceived in applying this rule, yet it follows,
not but the rule being of God, is still as infallible as God himself is, for
all that believe shall be saved (which is true as God himself is true) yet all
who are judged by Believers to believe, do not believe, and therefore are not
saved: This failing then here, is not in the rule but in their judgments, who
are but men; and can judge only in the outward appearance, (by their fruits
ye, shall know them, Mat. 7. 16. and cannot judge as God, who only knows the
heart 1 Samuel 16, 17. Jer. 17. 10. But in the Baptizing of Infants the case is
far otherwise, yea quite contrary, who will or can fail in judgeing an
Infant to be an Infant; the failing therefore here, is in the rule it self,
and so the fault and sin in the appointer of such a deceivable rule: This
therefore cannot be of God, who is truth it self, but must be of man; For let
God be true and every man alyar. And when does he show himself more vainly to
be so, then when he goes about to set his posts by Gods posts; and when he
teaches for Doctrines, his own vain and lying traditions, such as this is.

And here I cannot but take notice of an expression of a learned Mr. Dan.
Rogers in his Treatise of the two Sacraments, Chap. 5.
and able Author of our times; his words are these, viz. I take the Baptism of
Infants to be one of the most reverend, general and uncontroled Traditions
which the Church has: and which I would no less doubt of then the Creed to be
Apostollicall, although I confess my self yet unconvinced by demonstration of
Scripture for it.

Where we may see he acknowledges, the Baptism of Infants to be a Tradition
of the Church, yet reverend, general, and uncontrouled. And was not the Beast
reverend, when worshipped? And general, when all the world worshipped him? And
also uncontrouled, when it is said, who is able to make war with him? But he
says, he would no less doubt of the Baptism of Infants, then the Creed to be
Apostolical. No more would I doubt thereof, if I could be convinced by any
demonstration of Scripture for it; but seeing demonstration of Scripture,
neither to us is, nor by him, can be produced for it, I do and must remain
still unconvinced with him, and must needs take it to be but a mere humane
device.

Nor is this Author alone, in deeming the Baptism of Infants a Tradition, for
many of the Ancients with him have so declared it.

Origin calls it, a Ceremony or Tradition of the Church: In Levit. Hom. 8. In
Epist. ad Romans Lib. 5.

Augustine calls it, a common custom of the Church: De Baptismo contra Dona.
Lib. 4. Chap. 23. Et de Genesi ad Literam: Lib. 10. Chap. 23.

Erasmus, Lib. 4. de Rat^^ne Concio says, that they are not to be condemned
that doubt whether childrens Baptism were ordained by the Apostles, etc.

Eckius calls it a commandment and Ordinance of man, In Enchiridion.

The Papists themselves, from whom we derived the Baptizing of Infants openly,
profess, That the Baptism of Children and Infants is grounded upon Tradition,
and not upon Scripture.

Bellarmine, Lib. 4. de verbo dei Chap. 9. cited by Willet Synopsis Papismi the
12. Genesis Contro. of Bapt. Quest. 8.

And herein Bellarmine agrees with Pope Gregory the fourth, who calls it, a
Tradition of the Fathers, In decretis distinct. de Consecrat.

The practice of this appears to be forced upon all people by the authority of
counsels, for Ex consilio Milevitano cui interfuit Augustinus et Anselmus
Romae Ecclesiae Legatus. It is also our will, that all those that will not,
that children which are newborn from their Mothers womb, should be Baptized
to the washing away of original sin, be excommunicated.

Concerning the time when Infants Baptism was first invented, Luther in his
Book of Anabaptisme acknowledges, that it cannot be proved, by Sacred
Scripture, that childrens Baptism was instituted by Christ, or begun by the
first Christians after the Apostles, for one thousand years since it came to
be in use in the church, and was established by Pope Innocentius.

But Cassander in his Book de Infantium Baptismo, says, That it came to be
used by the Fathers which lived three hundred years after Christ and his
Apostles. The end for which the Baptism of Infants was thrust upon the world,
is seen In Tuicensis de divinis Officijs Lib. 4. Chap. 18. In times past the
children in the Churcb were throughout the whole year instructed in the word,
and at the Feast of Easter to repeat their Faith which they were to make
confession of at their Baptism: But that Christendom might increase and be
filled with the word of God (this was the color and pretense under which it
was foisted in, like as all other Antichristian devises have their cloaks and
holy pretenses,) The Church has thought good for mortalities sake, that the
Children of Christians should be timely baptized.

With this Author, Johannes Bohemius, Lib. 2. de Gentium Moribus, does some
what agree, when he says, That in times past it was the custom to Administer
Baptism alone, to those that were instructed in the Faith, and seven times in
the week before Easter and Pentecost Catechized, or asked Questions, and then
upon confession of their faith were Baptized: But afterward when it was
thought and adjudged needful to everlasting life to be Baptized, (mark how
one error ushered in another) it was ordained that newborn Children should be
Baptized and that Godfathers or Sureties were appointed who should make
confession of their Faith, and renounce the Devil in their behalf.

And with this accords the Rubric before Baptism in the Book of Common
Prayer, which says, that the Sacrament of Baptism in old time was not
commonly administered, but at two times in the year, at Easter and Whitsontide,
at which time it was openly administered in the presence of all the
Congregation, etc.

But now to the Question, What is meant by the holiness which Children are
said to have, 1 Cor. 7. 14. In Answer wherero I shall show only what I
conceive it to be, and then leave it to the Judgments of the wise.

I say then it is only such a holiness as is opposite to some kind of
uncleanesse, which I take to be this, as if when they are said to be holy it is
no more then to say, they are not unclean, (to wit) no Bastards, And I will
show my ground by my thus opening the text.

The believing Corinthians both men and women, married and single, do join in
a Letter to the Apostle for resolution of many of their doubts touching their
Several conditions, this appears in the first verse, and thence to the 12 and
their doubts in this particular, and which he answers in the five verses
following, seems to be this in effect as if they should thus write; we being
borne a new, and made the Sons and Daughters of God by Faith in Jesus Christ:
and being made holy by his spirit, and taken into Communion and fellowship with
Jesus Christ, and his Saints in light from an estate of darkness and death,
from being Idolaters, and Children of the Devil, have very uncomfortable
cohabitation and fellowship with our wives and husbands, remaining still in
their natural and blind condition, so far different from the estate into
which we are now brought: Surely our holy God that bids us touch no unclean
thing does not allow us thus to do: And we fear least we have done very ill
in continuing thus so long, for our Marriage we cannot think but it was
dissolved when we first believed: And we ought then to have put away our
wives as the Jews did their strange wives; And unto this the Apostle begins
his answer in the 12. verse thus, And unto the rest (to wit of your doubts)
speak I, not the Lord, If any Brother have a wife that believes not, if she
be content to dwell with him, let him not put her away, And the woman that has
a husband that believes not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not
leave him: for the unbeleeving husband is sanctified to the wife, and the
unbeleeving wife is sanctified to the believing husband, else were your
Children unclean, but now they are holy.

As if the Apostle should have said to them thus, you Corinthians do doub^ of
your cohabitation with your unbeleeving married yoke-mates, of which there is
no cause, for to the pure all things are pure (that is, all lawful things)
(namely whatsoever is lawful in nature or civil use) is sanctified to the
believer, and yet even those things are impure to the impure, or unbeleeving,
for even their minds and consciences are defiled, Tit. 1. 15. But to the
Believer all things are pure, (that is as I have already said) all lawful
things, for things that are unlawful in themselves cannot be sanctified by the
faith of a true Believer, no not to his use; but must be left and abhorred as
sinful and wicked, which if your cohabitation were such as you in weakness
judge, then was not your marriage lawful as the first, then it is not lawful
nor sanctified to you now, as you judge it is not and then are your Children
unclean: But if your marriage were at first lawful, then your Cohabitations
now with your yoke-mates is likewise lawful, and then also sanctified to you
now by your believing, else were your Children unclean (that is) unlawfully
begotten and Bastards, but now are they holy (that is) Legitimate and no
Bastards.

And that this is the genuine sense of this place may further and clearly
appear by the general scope of the Apostle in the 20, 21. 22, 23. verses
following in the same Chapter, where he after he had resolved the married
Believers not to depart from their lawful yoke-mates he then in these verses
exhorts Servants and all others, to abide likewise in the lawful callings
wherein they were before their Conversion, and seems to tell them in effect
thus much. That their being converted to the faith did in no wise release them
from any Lawful Covenants and civil duties in their several relations
wherein they stood before, but bound them to a more due performance of all such
obligements toward all men, but in point of Religion and worship of God,
therein they were not to be in subjection to any, save only to Jesus Christ,
who had therefore bought them with a price.

And this may likewise appear in Mal. 2. 14, 15. where the spirit of God by
the Prophet shows the reasons why their offerings were no more accepted,
because (says he) God has been witness between thee and the wife of thy
youth (that is his first wife then living) against whom thou have dealt
Treacherously, yet she is thy companion, and the wife of thy Covenant, and did
not he make one, yet had he abundance of the spirit, and wherefore one in that
he sought a Godly or holy seed, therefore keep your selves in spirit, and let
none trespass against the wife of his youth: In which words it plainly
appears that the scope of the place is, that those Children which are
generated by one man and one woman lawfully married, are a godly or holy seed,
and those that are generated otherwise, are not so but Bastards, And the reason
of this holiness arises not here from any relation they had to the Jewish
State, nor from any Church Covenant, but merely from Gods first Institution of
Marriage in the Creation, and his then providing one woman for one man, and
which therefore is of Universal concernement to all mankind, by the Law of
Creation.

In the same sense is the Apostle to be taken Heb. 13. 4. where he says,
Marriage is Honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled, but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge.

If Marriage be Honorable in all, and the Bed undefiled, then the issue of
that Bed must needs be undefiled (that is) clean and holy as on the other
side, the issue of all unlawful conjunctions are unclean, illegitimate and
Bastards. Now this holiness and unholinesse of Children, proceeds not from
the holiness or unholinesse of the Parents: But from the Lawful or unlawful
conjunction of the Parents in the begetting of their Children, for the Apostle
in this place speaks of all men Universally.

Obj. It seems then by this, that the holiness here of the Children arises
not from the faith or holiness of the Parents, but merely from the lawful
marriage and conjunction of the Parents in begetting their Children.

Ans. It is even so, for the question or doubt was only whither they might put
away, or depart from their unbeleeving yoke-mates, the which the Apostle
answers, that they ought not to put them away, and he implies this reason:
Because they were lawfully married unto them according unto Gods ordinance, and
this he backs with a double reason.

First because their unbeleeving yoke-mates were sanctified to their use.

Secondly, because their Children begotten in that state are legitimate and
holy: on the other side, if they were not so lawfully married to them, then
these three conclusions would follow.

First, They would not be sanctified to them.

Secondly, Their Children would be unclean, and Bastards.

Thirdly, They might and ought to put them away.

Obj. But what holiness has the unbeleeving wife seeing in some translations
it is rendered that she is sanctified by the believing husband, which seems to
be more then to be sanctified to the believing husband.

Ans. That which is sanctified to a Believer being unsanctified to an
Unbeleever, must needs be sanctified unto him by his believing, and so the
meaning is all one and may be expressed thus: The unbeleeving wife is
sanctified unto the believing husband by or through his Believing.

Obj. Why may not then the wife be admitted to Baptism and Church Fellowship
with her husband, seeing she is made holy by his Believing.

Ans. Not so, for she is no otherwise sanctified then Servants, and all other
lawful things are sanctified to a believers use: In which sense likewise his
Cattle and Beasts are holy and sanctified, for to the pure (or Believer) all
lawful things are pure and holy, by which reason all these may as well be
admitted, for all these are holy in one and the same sense.

Obj. But here they object and say, Have the Children of Believers no more
Privilege then the Children of Heathen, Turks and Infidels.

Ans. To which I answer in respect of the Covenant of Grace, and Salvtation,
none at all; For this comes not by any natural Birth, but only by a new birth
of the Spirit, and the Spirit blows where it lusts, Jo. 3. 7. 8. And God is
no respecter of Persons: But in every Nation he that fears God and works
righteousness, is accepted of him, Act. 10. 34 35. yet notwithstanding in
respect of the means of Salvation, their privilege in having believing
Parents, is far more then those that have not, for believing Parents may be a
means to bring their Children to the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ, and
so be Instruments of their Salvation, as Saint Paul says here: The believing
Husband may save his unbeleeving Wife,

4. The fourth Scripture is, That which speaks of Christ's commanding little
Chrildren to be brought unto him and said, that of such is the Kingdom of God,
hence therefore some reason, the Kingdom of God belongs to little Children,
why not the Seals?

1. To this I answer, First that if Infants have right to one of the Seals,
(if we may so call them) then to both; to the Supper as well as to Baptism:
But here they say, not to the Supper until they be able to examine themselves,
which is required of all that receive the Supper.

To this I answer, so Faith and Repentance are required of all that are
baptized.

But here they say, that these are required only of men of years, not of
Infants who are not able to perform them: And the very same is my Answer in
respect of the Supper.

That examination is required only of men of years, and not of Infants who
are not able to perform it.

Besides, if neither my Author nor memory fail me, Children Parker on the
Cross.
were admitted as well to the Supper as to Baptism for many years in times
past; And why not as well to the one as to the other, seeing the same reasons
are alike in both, and will center into one if fully prosecuted?

For as no Infant is required by God in Scripture to believe or repent, So
likewise no Infant is required to be baptized, nor is any man any where
required by God to baptize an Infant: and the same may be said in respect of
examination, and receiving the Supper.

Secondly, I answer that this reason is grounded upon a great mistake of the
sense of the text, for the words are not, unto them belongs the Kingdom, but
of such is the Kingdom, (that is) of none else, but of such, as the next words
which follow in these texts do manifestly declare, for in Luke 18. 17. Mark
10. 15. In both places where Christ had said, Suffer little Children to come
unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of God. He presently confirms it in the
next words thus, verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little Child, shall not enter therein: As also in Matthew.
18. 34. Christ speaking to his Disciples says, Except ye be converted and
become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little Child, the same is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven: Whereby it is evident that when Christ
says, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; his meaning is not of them nor of
such as them in age nor understanding, 1 Cor. 14. 20. But of such as them in
humility and such like qualifications.

Then they say that Christ took them up in his Arms laid his hands on them
and blessed them.

1. To which I first answer, that all this is not baptizing them, for Christ
baptized not, Io. 4. 2. And therefore this place seems not at all to prove the
baptizing of Infants.

2. Secondly, I say let them that please do as here Christ did, yet much
rather let us all learn the lesson which Christ here taught without which we
cannot be saved, But we quite perverting Christ's meaning, do in another sense
become little Children: for some at first had no sooner hence sounded out this
tune in our ears, that the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to little Children, and
therefore Baptism: But we all presently like little Children dance after this
Pipe as though our heads were lighter then our heels: And in the mean time
loose the true sense, the marrow and fatness of these Texts which so much do
concern us.

And thus it is not only in these Texts, but in many more, insomuch that we
through this our Childish (if not Brutish) following the heard of Interpreters
from humane Authority, rather take many gross errors for undeniable
Principles, then once open our eyes to see and receive the truth upon Gods own
bare word, that we might believe and so be saved out of this quick Sand of
delusions: And indeed how can we believe, giving and receiving honor thus one
of another, and seek not that honor that comes of God alone: As Christ tells
us, Io. 12. 44. There be some other scattering Objections, which I have met
withal such as these.

Object. 1 Cor 11. 2. The Apostle says, I praise you Brethren that you
remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances as I delivered them unto
you, whence some infer that seeing the Apostle calls them Ordinances when
he delivered them unto the Church, that therefore Ordinances depend not upon
the Church: nor upon Office, nor yet upon the Subject: And therefore must be
esteemed the Ordinances of Christ by whomsoever or on whomsoever they are
Administered.

Answ. I answer, that by the Ordinances of Christ here spoken of. we are only
to understand the Commandments of Christ, 1 Cor. 14. 37. or the mind of
Christ (as it is revealed in his word) which is all one, 1 Cor. 2. 16. And then
the weakness of his objection will presently discover it self, as we shall
see if but a little we open this Scripture brought for the countenancing of
the same.

The Apostle in the 23. ver. of this Chap. tells the Church of Corinth: that
he delivers unto them that which he also received of the Lord; and from the
23. unto the 27. ver. he relates what that was which he had received from the
Lord, and delivered unto them to observe (that is to say) that the Lord Jesus
Christ the same night in which he was betrayed took bread and hen he whad
given thanks he brake it; And said, take eat, this is my body which is broken
for you: This do ye in remembrance of me; And after the same manner also he
took the Cup when he had supped, etc. And this is one of the Ordinances or
Commandments of Christ which in this second verse the Apostle commends and
praises the Church for the keeping or doing according as he had delivered unto
them, But now contrary hereunto, this Objection imports that had but the
Idolatrous Corinthians taken Bread and Wine and broken it, and divided it
amongst themselves, nay or which is more gross, had they broken and divided
the same amongst their dogs and swine, yet this should have bin the Ordinance
of Christ, if it must remain his by whomsoever or on whomsoever it is
administered: But I demand whether the Apostle received any such Ordinance, or
Commandment as this is from Christ: or whether he delivered any such thing to
the Church, or whether it be any such thing as this which he prayseth them for
keeping and observing, or whether this be the Commandment or mind of Christ,
any where revealed in his word? There is no man surely dare say so, and
therefore I do not say that this or any such action of any man should nullify
the ordinance or Commandment of Christ before expressed, for his word stands
fast for ever, And Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but his word shall not
fail: But I deny this to be the mind, the Commandment, or Ordinance of
Christ at all, or that ever such a thing came into his heart: And therefore for
any to call such actions his Ordinances, can be no less then Blasphemy against
the Son of God.

Object. But they will reply that Bread and Wine received by any, in such a
manner, and Water sprinkled in the name of the Father etc. Are his Ordinance,
and therefore whosoever has these has his Ordinance.

Answ. I answer, that Sheep and Oxen offered in sacrifice under the Law, were
as much the Lords Ordinance, and therefore Ieroboams Sacrifice of Sheep and
Oxen, by this argument must needs be the Lords Ordinance, whereas the Lord
calls them the Sacrifice of Devils 2 Cor. 11. 15. But these men it appears
have learned of King Saul that if in one particular amongst many they do but
hit of that which the Lord requires, they like him presently affirm, that
they have performed the Commandment of the Lord, when there is no such matter
in the Lords account, 1 Samuel 15. 3. 13. compared with 11. 19. 23.

See this set forth by one familiar Example and so I will pass this objection;
Suppose a King for some special service wherein the honor of Himself and
safety of His Kingdom is much concerned, should by Commission ordain or
command a Sheriff upon pain of death, to raise for his service ten thousand
of the most able men in his County, and this Sheriff finding the said number
of Children about six months old (or rather so many Bartholomew Babies) should
present them to the King at the very instant time of Battle, as though he had
thereby performed the Kings commandment, would this be taken therefore for the
Kings Ordinance or appointment delivered to the Sheriff, It would be little
less then death for any man so to affirm, yet this is the case in hand (but
nothing so bad) as any man that has eyes may easily discern.

I instance in this example the rather because the Apostle does in diverse
places resemble a Christian to a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. and 4. 7. Phil. 2.
25. And also the Ministers in the Church of England, require their Infants in
Baptism manfully to fight under Christ's Banner and to continue his faithful
Soldiers etc.

Object. It is said, 1 Cor. 10. 1. of the Children of Jsrael, that they were
all baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea, there being young Children, as well
as men of years.

Answ. The text is, That they were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in
the Sea: But our question is not of baptizing unto Moses, but of baptizing unto
Christ; by being dipped or buried in water, into the similitude of his death:
according to the Institution of Christ, thus were not these Israelites
baptized, for they were in the Cloud and in the Sea dry, nor was Baptism then
Instituted: thus then is the sense of the place. That no enjoying of any
outward Privilege, as Baptism or the Lords Supper; without true faith
accompanied with obedience, will now save us any more then the many outward
Privileges and visible signs of Gods presence, and the great outward
deliverances which the Lord by the hand of Moses afforded and wrought for the
Israelites, in bringing them through the Sea; in defending and guiding them in
the wilderness, by the Cloud did exempt and save them from Gods Judgments,
for notwithstanding their enjoying all these outward favors, many of them
perished in the wilderness for their sins and disobedience, which Saint Paul
sets out as examples unto us, and therefore here by way of allusion compares
their outward Privileges, to the outward Privileges and Ordinances of the New
Testament, even as Saint Peter in like manner figuratively speaks of the
Arc, 1 Pet. 3. 20, 21. when once the long suffering of God waited in the days
of Noah, while the Arc was preparing, wherein few that is, eight souls were
saved by water, the like figure whereunto Baptism does now also save us: by
the resurection of Jesus Christ: These then being only figures and allusions,
cannot serve at all to prove the point in hand.

Object. There be diverse other Baptismes, as that of the Holy Ghost, being
inward and spiritual, and the effect of the other, which if a man has, that
in water being an outward thing is not needful.

Answ. To which I answer, that this in water being commanded us of God, it must
needs be our duty to submit thereunto, unless we will reject the counsel of
God against our selves, as the Pharisees and Lawyers did: Luke 7. 30. And deem
our selves wiser then God who commanded it, and by slighting and neglecting the
same become guilty of disobedience, which is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel
15. 23.

Object. But now as Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision but a new
Creature, so Baptism is nothing, for Christ is now all in all.

Answ. It Is true that now Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision, whereby
to difference or prefer one man before another, now in time of the Gospel
but a new creature, yet hence to conclude that therefore Baptism is nothing,
is very absurd, it being commanded us, unless to obey and disobey Christ were
all one, and yet in some sense Baptism is nothing, but its in the same sense
as Prayer, hearing, and Preaching, is nothing, yea and as Faith it self is
comparatively nothing to Christ, who is all in all: For in all our duties of
obedience we ought so to make and esteem him; but by our slighting of his
commands (instead of making him all in all) we do make him nothing in all, and
all in nothing, and our selves nothing at all: But these and the like Aeriall
Notions, I think scarce worth answering* holding firmly this conclusion, that
as Christ has redeemed us both bodies and Spirits, 1 Cor. 6. 20 so he
requires us, (and it is our duties) to worship him in both, not only to
believe him in the heart, but to confess him also with the mouth, and with the
whole man to yield him obedience to all his Ordinances and Commands, without
which we cannot approve our selves, to love him nor be his Disciples indeed and
truly, Io. 15. 10. 15. 22. And it much pitties me to see such curious conceits
and sublime Notions should be the ruin of so many precious Spirits as it is to
be feared they will be.

5. But their fifth and maine argument is yet behind from the Covenant which
God made with Abraham, and with his seed, Genesis 17. And hence thus they reason
as the Covenant and promises were made to Abraham, (being a faithful man) and
his seed, and thereupon all his seed were circumcized in time of the Law, so
the same C^venant and promises are made to them, being Believers and their
seed: And therefore their seed may now upon the same ground be Bap^ized.

To which I answer, that neither Abraham nor his seed were circumcized, because
the Covenant was made with him: for the Covenant was made with him above twenty
years before Circumcision was Instituted, as may appear by comparing Genesis 12.
2, 3. with Genesis 16. 3. and 17. 25. And yet all this time Abraham was not
circumcized, neither had he or any of his seed ever bin circumcized for his
being in the Covenant, had not the Lord afterward expressly commanded the same:
Nor was that Covenant made with Abraham and his seed merely for his being a
faithful man (for then should it have bin made with Noah being a faithful
man) but for his being such a faithful man whom the Lord pleased to choose and
set out as a Pattern to all Believers, Romans 4. 23, 24. And to be a Father of
many Nations, Romans 4. 17, 18. And in whose seed all the Nations in the world
should be blessed, Act. 5. 25. and 13. 23. (to wit) in Christ who was to come
of his flesh: And therefore although the Covenant and Promises were made to
Abraham, and his seed, yet the consequence will not follow, that the Covenant
is likewise made with all Believers and their seed, for Believers only are the
seed, and the seed only, and none of them a Father in the Gospel sense, nor
any other, save only Abraham to whom and his seed the Covenant and Promises are
made, wherefore to affirm that every Believer has now the same Covenant and
Promises made to him and his seed, as Abraham had to him and his seed, is very
absurd: and is all one as to say, that now every Believer by his believing does
immediately become a father of the faithful as well as Abraham: And if so, I
demand then where are any seed, if all be Fathers; For their seed and their
seeds seed are all members of the Church, and to be accounted faithful, and so
to be all Fathers of the faithful as well as Abraham, from Generation to
Generation to the worlds end.

Or more plainly thus (promising only this truth that there is now no
difference between any Circumcision or Uncircumcision, Jew or Gentile, bond or
free, Male or Female: But all are one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28.) I thus
express my self, if every believer by his believing does become a father of
the faithful as well as Abraham, then it must be at the very instant of his
believing that he does become a father of the faithful as well as Abraham, and
if so, where then will be any Children to all these Fathers, for none can be
Children before they be faithful, and also at the same instant cease to be
Children and become Fathers, which implies a flat contradiction, and then how
can Abraham himself be father of all Believers: Romans 4 11, 12.

Or how then can the Promise be sure to all the seed, if Believers Children be
the seed, for they will not affirm that all their Children are saved: But this
is affirmed of all the seed to whom the Promise is made, Romans 4. 16. Heb. 6.
16, 17. compared with Gal. 3. 29. Now then if the Promise be sure unto all the
seed unto whom it is made, and all Believers, and only all Believers, the
Promise is sure to: Then all Believers and only all Believers are the seed
unto whom the Promise is made, and then none of Abraham's own natural seed,
nor the natural seed of any other in the world, are to be accounted the seed
unto whom the Promise and Covenant is made until they believe, Romans 9. 7, 8.
Romans 4. 13, 14. Gal. 3. 7. 9. This then being a most evident truth, it may in
no wise be granted that the Covenant is made with all Believers as with
Abraham, or that the Promise is made unto all these as unto Abraham, or that
all these are fathers as Abraham, for all these are the seed and the only seed
and Children of Abraham: And those to whom the Covenant and Promises do only
belong under the term seed, for if it were otherwise then must they be
comprehended, Genesis 17. 7, 8. under the term thee, And then the rest of the
Phrase, (to wit) and to thy seed: would be in vain and superfluous, which to
think were very irrational.

But put case it be granted them to be fathers as they desire to be like to
Abraham then must they be fathers of only such as believe, and not until they
believe, for according to the Tennor of this New Covenant and in the Gospel
sense, Abraham himself is father of none other, nor otherwise: And then are
they Fathers of their own Children no otherwise then they are fathers of Jews
and Turks Children, which is when they believe and not before, and then let
them baptize all such their Children warrantably.

Hence therefore I affirm that Puplicans and Harl^ts may be the seed, and have
as much right to Baptism as any Believers seed, or as any of Abraham's own
natural seed, for all and every of these must first repent and then be
baptized, Act. 2. 38. And upon the same terms may any, yea the most wicked in
the world, and their seed be baptized, for the partition wall being now broken
down, the Gosp^ll knows no difference between any, but is to be Preached to
every Creature in all the World, and whosoever believes and is Baptized shall
be saved, Mar. 16. 15, 16. And go make Disciples all Nations baptizing them,
Mat. 28. 19. For to Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avayleth any t^ing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new Creature. Gal. 6. 15. And if any be Christ's, then
they are Abraham's seed, and Heirs according to Promise, Gal. 8. 29. And no
otherwise, ought any to challenge to be the seed or to have inte^rest to the
Promise or grace of the Gospel: All which considered I then demand of them in
cold blood how they themselves do become Abraham's seed? They will say, only
by Faith: Then dare I say, their Children must become the same seed by the same
way, and no other, for Abraham has not two sorts of seeds in the sense and
acceptance of he Gospel.

They further reason from the equity of Circumcision thus: As Infants then by
Gods allowance, received that Seal of the Covenant so by proportion why not
this now of Baptism.

To which I answer, God commanded Abraham to circumcise all the Males in his
House, and every Male Child at eight days old, as well he that was borne in
his House, as he that was bought with money of any stranger that is not of his
seed: Now it was both right and equal that Abraham should do herein as God had
commanded him, and it had bin sinful for him to have done otherwise, more or
less: And so likewise it is right for us to do as God has commanded us to do,
and no otherwise; The question then is, where the Institution for the baptizing
of Infants is? If they say that to Abraham: I answer, that was to circumcise,
not to baptize, that all his Males, not his Females, that all borne in his
house, or bought with Money, at eight days old. If they ground it from this
Institution, then must they observe it in every thing, for so did Abraham, who
had sinned in doing otherwise in any thing.

But here say they, we have another Institution to Baptize all Nations, Mat.
28. 19.

To which I answer, then ought they to observe that Institution, which is first
to make Disciples, and then to Baptize them so made: For so is the Institution,
and no otherwise.

But here they say, it is not any where forbidden to Baptize Infants.

To which I answer, that it is as much forbiden as it was forbiden Abraham to
circumcise his Females, for it is not said to him, thou shall not circumcise
thy Females nor thou shall not circumcise any other, save such and such, nor
only these and these: And whosoever therefore was not included in the
Institution, was excluded, for else might Abraham lawfully have circumcised
also all the Males of his Beasts, as his Camells and Asses, for this is not
otherwise forbidden him.

They further say, That Infants now being as capable of Baptism with all its
significations, as Infants then were of Circumcision: they see no reason but
they may as well be Baptized as the other were circumcised.

To which I answer, if they mean by capable Faith and Repentance which is
required of every meet Subject (as before was showed) in this sense they are
not capable, but if they mean although they be Infants, yet they may be
baptized in water, and are as capable to endure it as Infants then were to be
circumcised.

To this I answer, and say, that so are all Infants in the world capable of
Baptism* and so all Infants from Adam to Abraham were capable of Circumcision:
I demand of them why these were not circumcized, they will say, because
Circumcision was not then commanded, but as soon as it was commanded it was
done; Then must we baptize Infants when we are commanded to do it, and not
before: Notwithstanding their being thus capable thereof, with all its
significationss

Object. God gave to Infants Circumcision, which was a sign and seal of the
Righteousness of Faith and Regeneration, Genesis 17 11. Romans 4. 11. And we know
God gives no lying sign, nor seals a Covenant to any Persons that are not
therein, Therefore Infants are in the Covenant, have Faith and Regeneration,
and so ought to be baptized now, as well as circumcised then.

Answ. It is true that God gives no lying sign, nor seals to any persons
that they are in the Covenant, when they are not therein: And therefore seeing
that Ismael was Circumcised after that God had declared and made it known that
he was not in the Covenant, Gen 17. 18. 19, 20, 21. It must thence follow that
Circumcision was not by God ordained, nor by Abraham understood to be to the
persons circumcised, a seal of their being in the Covenant: and much less of
their being in the Faith or Regenerated; wherefore, Genesis 17. 11. Romans 4. 11.
which this Objection is grounded upon, of necessity must be understood as the
Apostle there applies it (to wit) that the Circumcision which Abraham received
both upon himself and seed, was to him and them a sign, and Seal, that
Righteousness should be, (not by the Law or Circumcision in the flesh) but by
the Faith which Abraham had when he was yet uncircumcised: That He should be
the Father of all those of many Nations, which should afterward b^leeve: And
that as faith was imputed unto him for Righteousness, even so likewise it
should be imputed to all Believers whatsoever; whether they were Circumcised or
not. And that all these are, and were to be the only heirs and true feed to
whom the everlasting Covenant and Promises of life are assuredly made, and do
properly and undoubtedly appertain, ver. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14. 16, 17. 18. 22,
23, 24. And therefore Circumcision never was, nor is any rule for baptizing.

They yet further say, that Infants were then members of the Church, and do
demand when they were cast out.

To which I answer, that they were cast out when the Jews Church State and old
Covenant was abrogated by the coming of Christ, and preaching of the Gospel,
and planting other Churches, far different from that of the Jews in many
respects: That constituted upon nature, and the natural seed of Abraham, this
upon grace and the spiritual seed of Abraham. That therefore termed Israel
according to the flesh and of the Circumcision of the flesh this Israel
according to the Spirit and of the Circumcision of the heart, Romans 2. 28, 29.
Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. Col. 2. 11. That a state of servants and Bondmen, so as in
that state an heir (or Believer) differed nothing from a servant* though be
were Lord of all, but was under Tutors and Governors until the time appointed
of the Father: which is the coming of Christ in the flesh and his setting up
the state of Churches under the Gospel, which is a state constituted (not of
Servants) but of Sons and Freemen, this is plain, Gal. 4. 7. first verses,
and is also evident by Christ his discourse with the natural Jews, Io. 8. 31.
for Christ there tells them, That if they continue in his word, they then were
his Disciples indeed, and should know the truth, and the truth should make them
f^ee, They answered, that they were Abraham's seed, and so were free already,
and were never in bondage to any man, Christ then tells them, That whosoever
commits sin, is the Servant of sin, and the Servant abides not in the
house for ever, but the Son abides for ever, If therefore the Son make you
free, you shall be free indeed: I know ye are Abraham's seed, but ye seek to
kill me, because my word has no place in you. If you were Abraham's Children,
ye would do the works of Abraham, but ye now go about to kill me, a man
that has told you the truth which I have heard of God, this did not Abraham:
ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do:
As if Christ should have reasoned with the Jews thus; it is true, ye are
indeed the natural seed of Abraham, and by that your natural birth and
circumcision of your flesh, ye were admitted free, and did abide as Members of
Gods Church or House in that State under the old Covenant, or law, whereof
Moses being a servant, was the Mediator, which state was but a state of
bondage, for Abraham's nature could produce no other but servants of sin, such
as your selves are, and such must not abide in the house for ever, nor stay
therein any longer, but must be cast out; for I am now come to abolish that old
and first Covenant, and to establish a better new and second Covenant, Hebr. 7.
18. 19. and 8. 13. and 10. 9. whereof I my self being the Son, am the
Mediator. If therefore ye will be free indeed, and be made subjects of this
Covenant and State which I am now to set up, your natural birth serves not to
admit you, but you must be borne a new of the spirit and so by faith become the
true seed and heirs of the promise, Gal. 3. 7. 29. without which ye cannot be
admitted into this State; for the promises were made to Abraham and his seed,
not to seeds as of many, but to seed as of one, which is my self, Gal. 3. 16.
If therefore I make you free, ye shall be free indeed, and then you shall
abide in the house for ever, being made sons of God by faith in me, Gal. 3.
26. For the promise that Abraham should be heir of the world was not to him,
or to his seed by nature, or through the law, but through the righteousness of
faith; for if they (you Israel according to the flesh) that are of the Law be
heirs, then faith is void, and the promse is made of none effect, Romans 4. 13.
14. And my coming in the flesh would be made utterly frustrate for if the Law
could have given that life promised, then Righteousness should have been by
the Law, but the Scripture has concluded all under Sin: that the Promise and
righteousness by faith in me should be given to them, and to them only that
believe, Gal. 3. 3 21. 22. And that this is so, is evident by the Covenant of
circumcision made with Abraham and you, his natural seed, which was also a
sign received by him as a seal, that Righteousness should be by the faith
which he had when he was yet uncircumcised, that so he might become the
father of all Believers, that Righteousness might be imputed unto them all,
whether they be circumcised or uncircumcised, for now all is one in me, Romans
4. 11. 12. You see then, how that Covenant of circumcision made with Abraham
and you his natural seed, was to be an everlasting Covenant in your flesh (to
wit) in me who was to come of your flesh, Genesis 17. 13. And to this end also to
this Covenant of circumcision was the Covenant of the Law added, not to bring
righteousness to you, but to show you your unrighteousness, and was to be
unto you a Schoolmasters with all it is Ceremonies and Shadows to point out
me, until I should come; but now, that faith and I that promised seed, and
true son and heir being come, you are no longer to be under a
Schoolmasters, but are all to be sons and heirs with me only by faith,
Gal. 3. 18, 19. 23, 24, 25, 26. And which was also prophesied Hab. 2. 4. That
the just by his faith should live; by which you may plainly see how that
circumcision was to you natural Jews, both a Covenant and yet also but a
sign, Genesis 17. 11. of another Covenant (to wit) of that everlasting Covenant
made with Abraham, and all his spiritual seed, and of that everlasting
inheritance promised them, Genesis 17. 7. 8. which is only to be enjoyed through
faith, therefore ye cannot be admitted into this State to be partakers in this
new and everlasting Covenant and Gospel privileges which I am now about to
establish, but are to be cast out as servants, and not to abide in the house
any longer; and this your casting out was long since prefigured to you by
Abraham's casting out Ismael the son of the bondwoman, and borne after the
flesh, together with his mother, who were figures of the Law, and old Covenant,
and all it is sons (which are Israel, according to the flesh) to be cast out,
and not to be heirs with Isaac the son of the freewoman, and borne by
promise, who were likewise figures of this new Testament, and also the
spiritual seed which I am now to establish and bring in as the only and true
heirs, and children of the promise, Gal. 4. 22. etc. of which sort you are
not, for if you were, Abraham's seed in this sense. ye would then do the
works of Abraham, but ye seek to kill me who tell you the truth, this did
not Abraham; I must therefore tell you whose children you are ye are of your
father the ^^v^ll, and his works ye do, repent ye therefore, and bring
forth fruits worthy amendment of life; and think not to say with your selves;
you have Abraham to your father: for now the Axe is laid unto the root of the
tree, and every tree that brings not forth good fruit is to be hewne down
and cast into the fire, Matthew. 3. 10. 11. (which is) you must not now think to
profit your selves by pleading your natural descent or birth from faithful
Abraham. But you must be borne again* and have faith in your own person, as
he had, and do the works which he did else you are to be cut down and cast
out as unprofitable trees; for now every natural branch of all that natural
tree (or stock of you Jews, whereof Abraham is your root) if it be not
transplanted by my spirit into me the true Vine, and so to be enabled to bring
forth fruit in me, is to be taken away by my Father, the husbandman, but such
as in me bring forth fruit, he will purge that they way bring forth more fruit,
Jo. 15. 1. 2.

Now then, to shut up all, put case it be granted (which is not true) that all
the children of Believers are those, to whom the promise belongs, are within
the Covenant, are elected, yea, and had faith also, yet notwithstanding can
they not warrantably be baptized until they do manifest and declare the same
by profession; this is apparent by the doctrine and practice: first of John,
Matthew. 3. 6. 8 9. Mark. 1. 4. Secondly, of Christ and his Apostles, Ioh. 3. 22.
compared with 4. 1. 2. Act. 2. 38. 41. and 8. 12. 36. 37. and thirdly, by the
tenor of the Commission, Matthew. 28. 29. Mar. 16. 15. 16.

1. By this we may partly see the gross mistake of all such great Clerks of
our times which confound these two Covenants of Law and Gospel, and make them
both as one in substance and different only in circumstance, as in
administration, or in degrees, the one more dark, the other more light, etc.
whereas indeed, they are no less different then old and new, works and faith,
nature and grace, then the Administration of condemnation, and the
administration of righteousness, or than the letter killing, and the spirit
giving life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. 7, 8, 9. or than a state of bondage, and a state of
sons, Gal. 4. 21. etc. And from hence this error comes, that in their
teachings and writings they make such a kind of hodge podge of the doctrine of
the Gospel, and so intermix Grace and Works. Truth and Error, and distill
thereby such a spirit of giddiness into the hearts of their hearers that for
the most part they walk in a circular maze, or as in a twilight, left between
legal terrors and Gospel hopes, between consolations and consternations of
spirit all the days of their lives, and never come to find that spiritual life
brought to light by the glorious Gospel nor that rtyumphant state of sonship
and freedom purchased them by Jesus Christ, through faith in his blood. The
Apostle tells the Church of the Romans, Chap. 6. 14. That sin should not have
dominion over them, the reason he adds, because they were not under the Law,
but under grace, whence it is evident, to be under the Law is to be under the
dominion of sin, and consequently of death. Now therefore by how much any by
their teachings do confound Law and Gospel, by so much they seek to bring us
or rather deteine us in Bondage to sin.

And hence also follows that gross error of admitting of Infants, and a
natural seed, as right Subjects of Paptisme and of the Gospel Privileges.
These two errors like Hypocrites Twynnes smile and weep, stand and fall
together: For if the doctrine of free grace by Jesus Christ in its native
luster were once distinctly set out; and the Spirituality thereof in its
fulness of Beauty and glory clearly laid open, It would then evidently
appear to all men, that none ought to partake of such a spiritual estate and
worship without being made suitable thereunto by Regeneration manifested by
their Faith and Obedience to the Gospel.

But how suitable such Spiritual worship and Churches would be to a Priestly
Levitical gay Clergy let the wise judge: I cannot but much suspect that they do
find far more sweetness and relish in their revenewes of hundreds per annum
gleabes, tithes etc. Though it be from the world in a Church, then they have
hopes to find in any thing from any such Church in the world.

I conceive therefore that there is no more hope to see that Tribe stoop so
low or forget themselves so much as to own and bear witness to this truth,
then there is to see them to allow the Doctrine and Practice of blessed Saint
Paul: Act. 20. 17. 34, 35. to be now of use and immitation in our times, or
then to allow the speeches of Jesus Christ, Mar. 12. 38, 39, 40. Luke 11. 44.
52. Mat. 15. 14. To appertain as well to the Clergy of this Age as to them of
any former age; yea, and as well as to the learned Scribes, etc. of whom they
were immediately spoken.

Wherefore to prevail with these men in this point, there is yet one Argument
only wanting (to wit) certain revenews of 3. 4. or 500. per annum, for each
of them, with which Argument (I doubt not) But one might convince the
Judgments of a hundred in one day, easier then a hundred can one in a whole
year without it: So prevalent is the world with our corrupt natures, as by
daily experience is seen; But these Arguments are of the earth, earthly, and
suitable to earthly affections, which men ought to mortify: and to have their
conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3. 19. 20. Col. 3. 2, 3. And seriously to
consider Christ's Arguments, who reasons quite contrary telling us of denying
our selves, and taking up our Crosses daily, Luke 9. 23. Of being sent as Sheep
amongst Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. Of being hated of all men, Mat. 10. 22. Of
suffering hunger and nakedness, 1 Cor. 4. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 27. Persecution,
tribulation, affliction, reproach, imprisonment, distress, yea death it self
for his sake, Mat. 24. 9. Io. 15 20. Luke 21. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 12. 2. Cor. 6. 4,
5. and 12. 10 And that except we first count our Costs and forsake all for
Christ's sake, and the Gospells we cannot be his Disciples here in this world,
nor reign with him in the Kingdom and world to come, Luke 14. 26, 27, 28. 33.
Io. 12. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 12.

2. And from confounding of these two Covenants and States of Law and Gospel
arises another great error, and that of no small consequence.

For from hence (as I conceive) the Papists have brought in many disorders into
the Gospel worship, As national Churches, Oblations, Sacrafices, first
fruits, Tithes, Offerings, Holy Ceremonies, Holy Days, Holy feasts, Holy
Temples, Holy Altars, Holy Places, Holiest places, Holy Persons, Holy Garments,
Music, etc. And many other pretty trinkets of that kind, And into Government
Office and Ministry likewise variety of sorts, as Sextons, Clerks, Curates,
Vic^ars, Parsons, Singing-men, Orgenists, Canons, Petty-Canons, Prebends,
Deans, Archdeacons, Abbotts, Lord Abbotts, Lord Bishops, Lord Archbishops,
Chancellors, Officialls, Commissaries, Doctors, Proctors, Apparitors, etc. with
a rabble of them even to the Pope, himself alluding to Moses and Aaron, and to
the Kings and State of Israel.

Hence also collaterally have they brought the power of the Civil Magistrate
into the Church as their Executioners and as subordinate and particular heads
under the Pope the universal head who challenges hence most wickedly to
dispose of their Crowns and Kingdoms at his pleasure, being willingly
ignorant that the State and Church of the Jews is to be considered in a
twofold respect* one as it was a civil State and Commonwealth and Kingdom*
in respect whereof it was common to other Civil States and Kingdoms in the
world, the other as it was the Church of God, and in relation thereto had
Worship. Commandments, a Kingly office and government which no other state or
Kingdom had or ought to have, for herein it was altogether typical, and this
Kingly office and government in relation to the Church concentred only in
Christ, who now is only the head King and Lawgiver to Israel, his Church, and
admitts of no other head to his Church subordinate, or otherwise in any
respect, Ephesians. 1. 22. and 4. 15, and 5. 23. Col. 1. 18 and 2. 10. 19. 1 Pet.
2. 7. For this State being sprituall admits of none but him their spiritual
King, Head and Lawgiver, Iam. 4. 12. Hence the Gospel is called the Gospel
and word of this Kingdom, Mat. 4. 12, and 13. 19 Acts 2. 25. And the true
Ministry of the Gospel, a Ministry of the spirit 2 Cor. 3. 6. whereby men
being converted, to God are said to be translated into the Kingdom of his
dear son, Col. 1. 13.

Hence God proclaims from heaven commanding us only to hear and obey his
Son, Matthew. 17. 5. he being the Christ of God, Luke 9. 20. Hence Christ
himself declares to us, that all power in heaven and earth is given to him and
commands his Disciples therefore in his name and by virtue of his power and
authority alone, to go into all Nations, and make Disciples, baptizing them,
etc. Matthew. 28. 18. 19. And this honor of being Head of his Church, gives he
to none at all by deputation, or otherwise, in any kind, it being the greatest
prerogative and dignity for the greatest Monarch upon earth, to become a true
member and subject of Jesus Christ in his Church under the Gospel; for by his
being so, he is made a child of God, a fellow heir with the Saints in light,
Col. 1. 12. yea, a coheire with Jesus Christ, of the everlasting Inheritance,
Kingdom and Glory, Romans 8. 16. 17. And the same honor have all the Saints,
for there is no respect of persons with God, Col. 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 17. Jude 16.
Ephesians. 6. 9. Iam. 2. 1. 2. 3. 9. and this will one day be made manifest to all
men, when Christ shall say, Bring hither those mine enemies that would not that
I should reign over them, and slay them before me, Luke 19. 27. At which time
he will be terrible to all, yea, to the greatest Monarchs upon earth, which
rebel against him, Psalm. 76. 12. and 82. all the Psalm.

Be wise now therefore, ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, serve
the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling, kiss the son, lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way when his wrath is kindled but a little, then
will it be manifest, that they, and only they are blessed that put their trust
in him, Psalm. 2. 10. 11. 12.

3. This may likewise teach us, to see and bewail the great apostafie, both in
faith and worship, that is brought into the world by this childish baptism.
And what a glorious uniforme Babilonish Tower the man of sin has reared upon
this rotten foundation bringing there by whole Nations at once into subjection
to his carnal worship, and indeed what is more suitable to his carnal Gospel
and Worship then such carnal worshipers, and nothing more conduces to his
Exaltation, nor better serves to the maintenance of him and his suitable
Clergy in all their riches Pomp and Pride then this; nay how possibly could
he otherwise have corrupted the whole Earth, and brought whole Nations to
admire and follow and worship the Beast as he has done: And why then think we
of reformation of Religion continuing this foundation? Can we wash the
Black-more white? Or give spiritual life to a whole nation in a lump? Has
God any such need of worshipers as to accept such lip-service, merely
compelled by the laws and commandments of men, Isa. 29. 13. Mat. 15. 8, 9. Is
not every man first to be persuaded of the truth in his own mind, before he
worship, else is he not damned in himself, Romans 14. 5. 23. And who art thou
that judge and usurpest Authority over another man's servant, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Seeing likewise the Church of England in the 13. article of her doctrine does
maintain and a verre, that works done before the grace of Christ, and the
inspiration of his spirit are not pleasant to God, for as much as they spring
not of faith in Jesus Christ neither do they make men meet to receive Grace
or deserve grace of congruity, yea rather for that they are not done as God
has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the
nature of sin: And this then being so, what spiritual house think we can be
built unto God upon such a carnal foundation, May we expect grapes of thorns
or figs of thistles: must not the Tree first be made good and then the fruit?
had not God respect first to Abell and then to his Offering, has not God long
since abrogated the state of the Jews under the law, and cast off Israel
according to the flesh (the natural seed of Abraham, to whom and his seed the
promises were made) Gal. 4. 29, 30. Ioh. 8. 34, 35. 36. And do we think to
bring in the natural seed of us Gentiles as acceptable on Gods Altar, none in
the time of the Gospel when the true seed is produced, Gal. 3. 19. and when
only spiritual worship and worshipers are accepted, Io. 4. 23. must the
parents whether Jew or Gentile needs be borne again of the spirit, and only
by faith become the seed of Abraham, and heirs according to promise,
Gallathians 3. 7. 29. Romans 4. 11, 12. And shall their children become the
same seed by nature? can our natures produce a spiritual seed to Abraham,
which Abraham's own nature never did, nor could do, Romans 9. 7. 8. Ioh. 3. 6.
Neither can any show any one such promise to any Believer, in all the whole
world, and his seed, as was and is to Abraham his seed, who is therefore the
father of us all (to wit) of all Believers, and only of Believers, sew and
Gentile, father and child, etc. Romans 4. 16. and therefore it is of faith, that
it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, but
the promise is sure only to Believers; therefore Believers only are the seed of
Abraham to whom the promise and ordinance of the new Testament do properly
appertain.

Again, That administration of Baptism which overthrowes the very nature of
the Covenant of Grace and whole Gospel of Christ's is Antichristian and
abominable. But the administration of baptism upon Infants does so, because it
stands upon the ground and interest which they have in the Covenant, (by
natural generation only, or by the mere profession of faith in the Parents
or Sureties) without faith in their own persons, whereby faith is made void,
and the promise (which is the Gospel and Object of Faith) is also made of none
effect, and so the preaching thereof, becomes useless and vain also, Rom 4.
14. therefore the administration of Baptism upon Infants is Antichristian and
abominable.

These things being so, it is most certain, that the baptism of Infants is
the greatest delusion, and a thing of as dangerous consequence, as ever the Man
of Sin brought into the world; and therefore the greatest maintainers thereof,
are justly to be esteemed the greatest deluders, wherefore it is high time for
us to look about us to awake out of this drunken slumber, and to see how
hitherto we and our fathers have been blindly lead by our blind Guides into
this depth of Ignorance and mist of iniquity, and let us seek out by what
means, and by whom we are so miserably intosticated, as to stumble and grope
for our way thus even at noone day.

Rev. 17. 1. Come hither I will show unto thee the judgment of the great
Whore. Rev. 18. 3. 8. 11. For all Nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath
of her fornications, and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with
her, and the Merchants of the earth have waxed rich through the abundances of
her delicacies: Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and mourning
and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord
who judges her. And the Merchants of the earth shall weep and mourn over
her, for no man buyeth their merchandise any more.

FINIS.

