SAFE CONDUCT, OR The SAINTS Guidance to GLORY.

Opened in a SERMON Preached at Dunstans in the East London. November the
second, MDCLIV.

At the Funeral of the Virtuous and Religious Gentlewoman, Mris. THOMASIN
BARNARDISTON, late WIFE of Mr. Samuel Barnardiston, Merchant.

By Ralph Robinson, Pastor of Mary Wolnoth, Lumbardstreet, London.

This God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto Death,
Psalm. 48. 14.

The Lord will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward,
Isa. 52. 12.

London, Printed by R. I. for Stephen Bowtell at the sign of the Bible in
Pope's Head Alley. 1654.

TO The Worshipful, my much Honored Friend, Mr. Samuel Barnardiston MERCHANT.
Worthy Sir:
THis ensuing Sermon was by your desire preached at the Funeral of your dear
Yoke Fellow, and it is now by your command come to public view. I thought my
self very unfit to be employed at such a Solemn Meeting, and cannot but judge
what was then delivered unworthy to come forth to open light. But my
engagements to your Self, and the memory of your deceased Wife, are such, as
that I cannot but gratify this desire. I had rather adventure the Censures of
others, than have my own heart censure me for unthankfulness.

Sir, God has by his wise Providence taken away the one half of your self;
that which his Majesty does now expect from you is, To study a quiet submission
unto, and a holy improvement of this his afflicting hand.

If you do but commune seriously with your heart, you will see cause enough for
this holy silence. How precious soever this Jewel was in your eyes, it was of a
brittle nature. All the Sons and Daughters of Adam are Mortal Creatures, and
why should it be strange to see a Mortal creature dye? Reason will teach men
not to quarrel when they see that come to pass which they knew could not but
come to pass. Quisquis aliquem queritur Senec. Epist. Lib. 1. Ep. 99.
mortuum esse, queritur hominem fuisse, says Seneca, To make complaint that
our relations are dead, is to complain that they were mortal, and then it is
the Hand of God that has done what is done. Calvin writing to his friend who
had lately lost a hopeful Son, uses this as an Argument to quiet his Spirit,
because the stroke was given by God himself. Dominus qui in hac vitae statione
ad tempus ^lv. Epist. ad ^^chebu^g.
eum locaverat, evocavit. The sight of Gods hand is sufficient to command deep
silence to Creatures, for whatsoever God does, he carries it on, not only in
Righteousness, but in Wisdom, yea and in infinite Mercy to them that fear him.
All his Psalm. 25. 10.
paths are Mercy and Truth, unto them that keep his Covenant, and think upon
his Testimonies to do them. Bereaving Providence have Mercy and Truth in them
toward the godly, as well as enriching Providence. When God gave you so
prudent and loving a Yoke Fellow, he did not divest himself of his Propriety
in her; She was Gods more than yours, even when she was yours. The Borrower
has no cause to be displeased, when the Lender calls for that which is his
own. She whom you now mourn for, suffers no loss by this removal. A Wife is
far better in the Bosom of Christ, than in the bosom of any earthly
Husband. Though you want her Senec. Epist. l^b. 1. Ep. 69.
company, she wants not yours. Citius mori, vel tardius, ad rem non pertinet;
been mori, aut male ad rem pertinet. He that lives well lives much, though he
live not long. When you hear that your Ships are safe at their Port, you are
not troubled, though they be in Harbor sooner than you expected. Non sic
Calvin, Vt supra.
Dei beneficium est longa vita, ut aliquid nobis depereat, si paucorum annorum
spacio disjuncti ad meliorem vitam traducimur. God does not break his Promise
with his people about long life, when he cuts off a few years in this World,
and translates them to life eternal. God gives leave, yea he expects his people
should be sensible of afflicting Providence, but he will not allow them to
murmur under such Providence. He that sees not Gods hand, disowns his
Sovereignty; he that repines, denies his Righteousness.

As God requires submission, so he expects some good improvement should be made
of this his hand. There are Three things which God points out by this
Dispensation. Sir, I know you desire counsel as well as comfort, therefore I
use this freedom. Gods mind is,

First, That you should meditate much on your own end. Death comes near the
Husband, when it lays hold on the Wise of the bosom. Our dying friends upon
their departure leave us this Message, that we must follow.

Secondly, That you should see how uncertain all worldly things are. A virtuous
Wife, the best of worldly comforts, is but a dying comfort; the fashion of this
World passes away. The loss of worldly contentments should make us love the
world less.

Thirdly, That you should study more and more to make out your Spiritual
relation to Jesus Christ, and to rejoice in it. The relation between Christ and
a Believer can never be dissolved. He marries the Soul to himself for ever;
though he has taken away a loving Wife, he will not take away himself. A Soul
is never solitary while it enjoys communion with Jesus Christ.

Sir, you have now another Lodestone to dravv your heart Heavenward. The
great and mighty God enable you to submit to his holy Hand, give you more
fellowship with himself, and increase all his Graces in you. This is, and
shall be the prayer of

Sir, your Servant in the Work of the Lord. Ralph Robinson.
Lumbard-street, Jan. 12. 1654.
Safe Conduct, OR THE Saints guidance to GLORY.
PSALM. 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive me
to Glory.
THe Prophet was under a very fore conflict of temptation, when he composed
this Psalm. The occasion of his perplexity was the great prosperity of the
wicked, The occasion of the penning of the Psalm.
and the adversity of the people of God. He looked upon the ungodly and saw
them wash their steps in butter, and anoint themselves with the chief ointment,
they did sit upon beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves upon their Couches, and
eat the Lambs out of the flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the Stall.
They did chant to the sound of the viol, and drink wine in bowls, and enjoy all
manner of delights. He beheld the Godly, and lo they were filled with anguish
of heart; they did wear mourning garments, they did eat their bread with
tears, and mingle their drink with weeping, they were plagued all the day long,
and chastened every morning. Whilst others enjoyed peace, they were in great
bitterness; whilst others did lie down in green pastures, they did feed upon
ashes, and drink the wine of astonishment; this providence the Psalmist was not
able to reconcile with the divine promise, which tells the righteous it shall
be well with them, Isa. 3. 10. and from hence did arise inward trouble of Mind.

We find in Scripture, that diverse holy men have been offended with this
dispensation. The Prophet Jeremiah enters his plea, and takes the boldness to
argue with God about it. Righteous art thou O Lord when I plead with thee; yet
let me talk with thee of thy Jer: 12: 1: 2.
judgments; wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all
they happy that deal very treacherously? It was a great trouble to his soul,
that those who did continually reproach God, should be better provided for,
than those who made it their study to exalt him in the world. And Habbakkuk was
so astonished with this dealing of God, that he begins to expostulate with
his maker. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity; wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold
Hab. 1: 13.
thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous than he?
And Job long before either of these makes enquiry into this matter. Why, seeing
times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that know him not Job 24: 1. 2.
ad 12.
see his days? Some remove the land-markes, they violently take away flocks
and feed thereon. They drive away the ass of the fatherless, and take the
widows Ox for a pledge, etc. yet God lays not folly to them. In this
labryinth did Asaph for a time even lose himself; he confesses ingenuously
his steps were almost gone, his feet had well nigh slipped, he was about to
affirm that the Verse. 2.
wicked were on the better side of the hedge, he was ready to ask with those
mockers, what profit is it that we have kept the ordinances of God, and that
we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts? Its very dangerous Mal: 3:
14. Note.
to weigh the wise providence of God in our balance. Its unsafe to go about
to measure the actings of God by our Cubit; he that judges of the present
issuings of divine providence by carnal reason, will sin grievously against
the generation of the righteous. At last the holy man leaving the wisdom of
the flesh, and laying hold upon the wisdom of God, is brought out of these
troubled waters; he went into the Sanctuary of God, and there it was clearly
discovered to him, that notwithstanding all the flourishing prosperity of the
wicked, their end should be miserable, their root was rottenness, and their
blossom should go up as dust; and that notwithstanding the Isa 5. 24.
present sadness of the people of God, yet their end should be blessed.
Hereupon his heart is quieted for the present, and his hope quickened for the
future, that God who had led him out of this maze, from which he was not able
to extricate himself, would continually go before him, till he had brought him
past the fear of all such miscarrying. This he prays for, this he humbly
expects to obtain, Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel, and afterward receive
me to glory.

In the Text there are two general parts. The division of the Text.


First, The happiness of Believers in this life, Thou shall guide me with thy
Counsel.

Secondly, Their happiness in the other life, Afterward receive me to glory.
The former is the way, the latter is the end.

Before I lay down the Doctrines, it will be necessary to give a short
exposition of the words.

Thou shall guide me. The Psalmist had acknowledged The words opened.
himself to be as a beast before God, verse. 22. His own dim light was not
sufficient to direct him, and therefore he does in the Text rejoice in this,
that God would guide him. Some Expositors read it in the Imperative mood,
making it a Prayer, wherein the Prophet beggs, that God would guide him. In
confilio tuo deduc me, guide me with thy Counsel. Tremel Ames. etc.
This reading is proper enough, for in the Hebrew the future tense is usually
put for the Imperative mood, and the Imperative mood for the future tense.
Others read it according to our Translation, Thou shall guide me, making it the
Prophets confident assertion of a privilege which he did believe God would
make good to himself, and to the rest of the faithful; we may well apply it
both ways. The Psalmist knowing it to be a scripture privilege, is encouraged
to pray for it; having prayed for it, he is enabled Note.
confidently to believe it. Faith and prayer are mutual helps one to another.
Faith excites the soul to prayer, and prayer helps the soul in believing. Those
that are most importunate in begging, may be most confident in expecting any
spiritual blessing. A christian has no reason to think he shall enjoy any
thing he does not desire. A praying heart may assure it self that it shall
receive all promised good. Holy prayer does both ripen the promise, and
strengthen faith in waiting for the accomplishment of the promise.

With thy Counsel. (...) so the Septuagint. In thy Menoch. Lorin.
will, or according to the good pleasure of thy will. Diverse Interpreters
follow this reading. Believers are content that God should lead them, not as
they will, but as he will. Austin reads it, Thou shall guide me by thy grace,
not by my merits. The greatest part of Expositors of best esteem, read it as
our translators have rendered it, with thy Counsel. He had found the benefit
of Gods assisting grace under the present temptation, Thou have holden me by
my right hand: and thereupon he resigns up himself wholly to the guiddance of
the same Counsel.

And afterward receive me to glory. Diverse Interpreters understand this clause
only of outward glory; As if David, or Asaph in his name, had here professed
his confidence of Gods exalting him to the Kingdom of Israel, which God had
promised him. But I conceive the Psalmist has his thoughts upon a higher glory
than that was. Though the Text may have some reference to that glory, as Calvin
conceives, yet I suppose the principal thing intended, is the celestial glory;
which he had now by faith assurance of, and hoped hereafter actually to
possess.

I am induced to believe that this was his meaning upon a threefold
consideration.

First, we do not find that David was ever much enamoured on worldly glory,
he does often speak of it with a holy scorn and contempt. He professes in
one place that as to all such dignity, his soul (...) Psa. 39. 6.
was even as a weaned child, Psa. 131. 2. He did esteem all the gaudry and
pomp of this world but as a vain show. He judges that greatness which is so
much affected by worldly men, to be an image rather than a substance, a mere
fancy rather than a reality. David's noble heart was far above such petty
pageantry.

Secondly, The Glory which the Psalmist does now meditate on, was a
heart-quieting glory. The thoughts of this Glory, whatsoever it was, allayed
that indignation which he had in himself, because of the prosperity of wicked
men; and therefore it must needs be heavenly Glory, such glory as the ungodly
shall never enjoy, for it is opposed to their glory. No worldly glory can
suppress such mutinous rageings as were now in David's heart; worldly glory
does rather swell these waters than assuage them. The greater advancement an
ambitious heart has, the more does it boil with envy at the glory of others.

Thirdly, The words following do, as I conceive, clearly determine the sense,
to everlasting glory; whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on
earth that I desire besides thee. The glory he has in his eye is that which
consists in the enjoyment of God. Now God is not enjoyed to a Saints full
contentment, till the Soul be landed in heaven.

Having given the sense of the Text, I shall come to the Observations. And I
shall begin with the former branch of the Text. Thou shall guide me with thy
Counsel.

I shall consider this branch, both as David's desire, and as David's privilege.

If we look upon it as David's prayer, The lesson will be this.

That it is the desire of true believers to be guided in this life by the
Counsel of God.

If we consider it as David's privilege, the point will be this.

That all true Saints shall be guided in this life by the Counsel of God.

I shall handle these two points distinctly, and then make a joint Application
of both. And I begin with the first, which arises from the Text considered
as David's prayer. The First Doctrine. It Is the desire of Saints to be guided by
Gods Counsel.


It is the earnest desire of all real Saints, of all true Believers, to be
guided in this life by the Counsel of God. The same spirit which taught David
teaches other Saints to make this desire to God. If we should travel over all
nations, and consult the children of God one by one from the rising of the Sun
to the going down thereof, there would not one of that vast number refuse to
subscribe to this prayer, Lord be our guide.

There is not a day passes over the heads of any of those that use to call
upon the name of the Lord, but they do make this request to heaven, under some
expression or other, that they may have the blessing of divine guidance.
Scripture proofs. Psa. 5. 8.


The Prophet David very frequently in his retired Devotion beats upon this
string. Lead me O Lord in thy righteousness, because of mine enemies: make
thy way plain before my face. He saw himself beset with cruel enemies, which
endeavored to make a prey of him, and therefore goes to a righteous God for
defense and preservation; for this Text as Molerus well observes, is to be
understood of Gods preserving Justice, and not of his condemning Justice. And
in another place, show me thy ways O Lord, teach me thy paths; Psa. 25. 4. 5.
lead me in thy truth, and teach me. His heart is so exceedingly drawn out
after this blessing, that he does in various expressions repeat it again and
again. And to the same purpose elsewhere, For thy name sake Psa. 31. 3.
lead me and guide me. And when he was in that benighted condition that he
did walk in thick darkness and saw no light, he goes to the God of his
exceeding joy, and tenders up the same prayer, O send out thy Psa. 43. 3.
light and thy truth, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy hill and
to thy Tabernacles. He knew, though he was in darkness, yet God could light
him a Candle and make his darkness to be light. And yet again, as if he would
never let this request depart out of his heart, Order my steps in thy word, and
let not any iniquity Psa. 119. 132.
have dominion over me.

For the more profitable handling of the point, two things are to be opened.

First, what is to be understood by this expression The Doctrine opened.
Gods Counsel.

Secondly, Why Believers do so importunately pray for this divine guidance.

First, The guiding Counsel of God comprehends Gods Counsel what it
comprehends.
three things.

1 The word of God. 2 The Spirit of God. 3 The wise Providence of God.
First, The word of God, Thus diverse Interpreters 1 The word of God. In tua
lege, in tuis praecep^is deduxisti me. Menoch. in loc.
carry it, I mean the written word. This is frequently called the Counsel of
God, because therein is contained whatsoever God would have men believe or do,
for his Glory and their own Salvation. The written word is the Divine Rule
which God has given In observatione praeceptorum, So Carthus.
both for matters of Doctrine, and matters of Practice or obedience. The Holy
Ghost charging sinful men with disobedience against the word of God, does
express it in these terms, ye have set at naught all my Counsel; and again,
They would none of my Counsel. Pro. 1. 25. 30.
And the Apostle Paul speaking of his ministerial faithfulness in making
known the mind of God perfectly unto the Church, represents it under the very
same expression, I have not shamed to declare unto you Acts 20. 27.
all the Counsel of God. The holy Scriptures are called a light shining in a
dark place, A Lamp unto our feet, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Psa. 119. 105. They are the Rule of faith and manners, the very expression of
the wisdom of God. Austin calls the Scripture the Epistle of God to the
Creatures, by Quid est scriptura sacra nisi quaedam Epistola Omnipotentis Dei
ad creaturam suam in qua verba Dei so^ant and cor Dei discitur, Aug.
which they understand the very heart of God. Almighty God has in the sacred
Scriptures as it were unbowelled himself, and unfolded all his Counsel, to the
creatures, as far as it is necessary to be known for their direction and
guidance to everlasting life. The Holy Scripture is, as one calls it very
fitly. Fidei mensura, morum and errorum censura, and ad coelos viam monstrans
cynosura, The measure of faith, the censure of manners, and errors, and a guide
that shows us the way to eternal happiness in heaven. It is os spiritus
Sancti, manus Spiritus Sancti, the very mouth of the Holy Ghost, whereby the
Elect are called, and the hand of the Holy Ghost, whereby such as are called,
and faithful, and chosen, are guided to life and peace. Shut up the Scriptures,
and men will be in the dark as to the understanding of Gods Counsel. Take away
the Scriptures, and there will be no certain Rule to direct men what is to be
done, or what is to be believed. Should this blessed word be lost, the Elect
would want a Counselor, and a guide to lead them in the way to true
happiness. The Spirit of God. Lorinus in Loc. Calvin in Loc. Isa. 59. 21.


Secondly, The Spirit of God. So some expound it, of the spirit of Counsel and
judgment. The Spirit and the word must not be separated in this work of
guiding. These two are usually put together. My spirit that is upon thee, and
my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth. They
do not speak as the Oracles of God, who divide between the Spirit of God and
the word. Those that boast of the Spirit, and reject the word, they set up
their own vain imaginations, instead of the Spirit of God. By the word of God
we know the mind of the Spirit, and by the work of the Spirit, we feel the
efficacy of the word. The word of God shows us the way, and the Spirit of God
leads us in that way which the word points out. The Holy Ghost is called the
Mind of God, or which is the same, the Mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2. 16.
because he is the Churches interpreter to declare unto it the meaning of God
in the word. The work of divine guidance is attributed to the Spirit therefore
Isa. 63. 11. 12. 13 14.
as well as to the word. Where is he that put his holy spirit within him? That
led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious arm? That led them
through the deep as an horse in the Wilderness, that they should not stumble?
As a beast goes down into the valley, the spirit of the Lord caused him to
rest. God made Moses a guide to Israel, but it was the Spirit of God that
guided Moses. It was the holy Ghost that instructed Moses to lead the people,
and it was the divine power of the Holy Ghost that overruled the people and
made them willing to submit to his guidance. The Apostle ascribes this Office
to the Spirit, As many as are led Romans 8. 14.
by the Spirit of God, they are the sonns of God. Jesus Christ purchased the
Holy Ghost, and sent him down from heaven, after his own ascension, to be the
eternal guide of his Church; and therefore he tells his sorrowing Disciples,
that when he was come, he would lead them into all Truth. The word is Gods
Counsel Joh. 16. 13.
to discover the path in which we are to walk, the Spirit is the Counsel of
God that teaches us how to walk in that path. The Scripture is a Rule before
Isa. 30. 21.
us, to show us where we must go, the Spirit is a word behind us, to enable us
to go according to the direction of that word. The word of God is the compass
by which we are to shape our course, the Spirit is the great Pilot that steers
us in that course. We have no eyes to see the word till the Spirit inlighten
them; we have no ears to hear the word till the Spirit open them; we have no
hearts to obey the word till the Spirit bow and incline them.

Thirdly, The wise providence of God. I find 3 The providence of God.
some Expositors that do so understand the Text, of that directing providence
whereby the people of God are conducted while they are on earth. The providence
of God is often called the Eye of God, or in the plural number the Eyes of
God, because of the manifold workings of it. By these watchful eyes are the
servants of God guided in all the revolutions and turnings of this world, I
will guide thee with my eye. Psa. 32. 8. (...)
The Hebrew word which is there translated [guide] is from the very same root
with that which is in the Text rendered [counsel] The guidance of Gods counsel
and the guidance of his providence are one and the same thing. This Eye of God
is never withdrawn from the righteous, but is continually fixed upon them for
their preservation and defense. These eyes of providence run to and fro
throughout the whole earth, to take care of, and to make special provision
for, all Gods Psa. 34. 15.
Elect. The actings of divine providence are not only for the supplying of the
Saints in their necessities, but for the preserving of them from wanderings, and
for the reducing of them when they do wander. The Star of providence is
useful for the guiding of the saints feet, as well as the Star of Scripture.
Thus I have opened the first particular, what is comprehended in this
expression Gods Counsel, it refers to the word of God, to the Spirit of God, to
the Providence of God.

Secondly, Why the people of God do so passionately desire this divine
guidance. These prayers are Why the godly desire this guidance.
grounded upon very solid reasons, I shall reduce them briefly to these three.

First, They know they are liable to wander, and therefore want a guide. Its
said of the wicked, that 1 They are apt to winder.
they love to wander, Jer. 14. 10. they are never better pleased with
themselves, than when they walk in some path that is displeasing to God. To
provoke God is a pastime and sport to a graceless heart; when they do evil
then they rejoice; they have such a settled Jer. 11. 15.
enmity in their hearts against the holy commandment that they delight in
their walking contrary to it. This cannot be spoken of any godly man. Every
true saint can heartily say Amen to that holy breathing of Psa. 119. 10.
David, O let me not wander from thy Commandments. Godly men do with their
minds serve the law of God even when with their flesh they serve the law of
sin, Romans 7. ult. But though they do not take pleasure in their wanderings, yet
they are apt to wander, and that both in point of judgment and in point of
practice. The Psalmist does ingenuously acknowledge that his feet Verse 2.
were almost gone, his steps had well nigh slipped; Had not God come in to his
assistance he had both stumbled and fallen. Believers have flesh in them as
well as Romans 7. 23.
spirit; they have a law in their members, warring against the law of their
Minds; though they have sincerity of grace yet they have not perfection of
grace, though their hearts are set heavenward, yet they have a clog of
corruption that weighs them down toward the earth; unruly and unbridled
affections, by their violent motions, turn them too often out of the way. It
was the sad complaint of one, which may be the complaint of every good man,
Libenter bonus esse vellem sed cogitationes meae non patiuntur. The Apostle
tells us the English of it by his own experience, I find that when I would do
good evil is present with me. Rom 7. 21. (...). Jam. 1. 21.
Our affections, which are the wings of the soul, are so blinded with that
superfluity of naughtiness which is in us, that they cannot make their way
toward any good object with that speedy and direct course they desire. David,
a man after Gods own Psa 119. ult.
heart, had his swarvings and deviations. Eliah, a holy prophet of God, was
sometimes found as a bird wandering from her nest; what do thou here Eliah?
Peter and Barnabas, 1 King 19. 9.
two stars of the first magnitude, one of them at least an Apostle of Jesus
Christ, both of them Pillars in Gods Church, were reprehended by Paul for not
walking uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel. Abraham, (...). G^l. 2.
14.
the righteous man, the father of the faithful, was through carnal fear turned
twice out of the way of God. Noah, an upright man in a perverse generation, had
his turnings a side; he began to be an Gen 9. 20. 21.
husbandman and planted a vineyard, and he drunk of the wine and was drunken,
and he was uncovered within his Tent. Believers, though they be more then men,
yet they are still men, and because they are men they may be over taken. The
Apostle supposes this, and therefore gives advice to such as stand, how to
recover them that are fallen; Brethren, if a man be overtaken Gal 6. 1. Opened.
in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness. In this Text we are taught these three lessons, First, The
difference between the sins of the godly and the wicked; The wicked man over
(...).
takes sin, the godly man is overtaken by sin; the wicked man runs after
sin as men run after a prey, though sin run from him, yet will he follow
it, the godly run away from sin as men do from their enemies, they would be
glad to flee out of the reach and out of the sight of it; the wicked man
prevents sin, the godly man is prevented by sin. Secondly, It teaches us,
that the best of saints being but frail men, are liable to these sinful
surprisals. Quod cuiquam cuivis, that which befalls one Saint may befall every
Saint. Thirdly, It teaches us, that it is (...), i. e. Vos qui Spiritus
virtute sustinemini. Beza, in Loc.
by the power of Gods Spirit that any Saints are preserved from these falls.
The Apostle calls those that stand, Spiritual men, because it is by the
strength of the Spirit that they are upheld. True Believers have so much
acquaintance with their own hearts, that they know, if a strong temptation
assault them, they shall miscarry if God leave them, and therefore they have
cause to be so earnest with God for his guidance. And this the rather, because

2 They know they are not able to be Guides to themselves, 2 They cannot guide
themselves.
or to preserve themselves from wandering. Gods people are a Generation of
Self-distrusters, they dare adventure upon God without hesitancy in all Cases
be they never so difficult, they dare not depend upon themselves in any thing,
though never so facile and feasible; they have read that text which Jer. 10. 23
tells them, That the way of man is not in himself, that it is not in man that
walks to direct his steps. This they believe to be the Word of God, and
therefore dare not rest upon their own counsel. They have studied Gods
All Sufficiency, and the experience they have of their own frailty causes them
to acknowledge Self-insufficiency for any Spiritual undertaking. All Believers
pray also that Prayer daily, Domine libera me a meipso, Lord deliver me from my
self. They know every man is vanity, but of all vain men they believe
themselves to be most vain. They have learned from Solomon, that He that
trusts in his own heart is a fool, and their own Prove. 28. 26.
experience is to them a Commentary on that text. Of all Deceivers they have
found their own hearts most deceitful, and therefore dare not commit themselves
to the guidance of such Traitors. The people of God know, that he that will be
a Self-guider, shall really prove a Self-destroyer; the sense of Self-impotency
makes them fly to God for the guidance of his Counsel. And that especially,
because

Thirdly, They know, and are persuaded, that God 3 Gods Counsel is a sufficient
guide.
is able sufficiently to guide them. It is grown into a Theological Proverb,
They are well kept whom God keeps; they shall be exactly guided whom the great
God will please to guide. Hold thou me up, says the Kingly Prophet, and I
shall be safe. There is no safety Psa. 119. 117
without Gods support, and when God will put under his hand, there is no fear
of falling.

That you may see how fit the Counsel of God is for this work of Spiritual
guidance, it will be needful to say something particularly of the nature of the
Word of God, of the Spirit of God, and of the Providence of God; which I showed
you the Psalmist has reference to in this expression of Gods Counsel.

First, The Word of God is in every respect fit for The Word of God a fit guide
this work of guiding the Children of Men, while they are Sojourners in this
world. This will appear, if the following properties of it be well studied. As,

First, It is a plain word. The Papists that they may 1 Its plain.
have some colorable pretext for that Sacrilegious sin of forbidding the
common people to read the Scriptures, Censur. Coloni. ens. p. 1117. Vid. Gerh.
loc. Com. de Script. Sac. cap. 20.
charge them with obscurity, Omnia and singula, quae in Scriptur is comprehensa
sunt, tantis obvoluta sunt obscuritatibus, ut ne Doct^ssimi quidem certam
cognitionem inde colligere possint, nisi eam aliunde mutuentur; All and every
thing contained in the Scriptures, say they, is so dark and obscure, that they
that are most learned cannot draw any certain Conclusions from thence, unless
they have assistance from some other hand; they mean, unless they be helped by
unwritten traditions. One of them Blasphemously enough calls the Holy
Scriptures, N^sum Canis. in oper. Catech. p. 44.
cereum, A Nose of Wax, which does not give any certain knowledge, but may be
bowed to any Exposition, according as he that interprets pleases. Whatever
these ha^ers of the Word of God affirm, it is very evident, that the Scriptures
are perspicuous and plain, especially in those things which are of absolute
necessity to be known, and believed for Salvation. Though some things are hard
to be understood, which therefore they 2 Pet. 3, 16.
that are unlearned and unstable wrest unto their own destruction, as the
Apostle speaks; yet all things that are necessary to be done, or believed for
Salvation, are so plain, that he that runs may read them. If any thing be more
obscurely delivered in one place, it is fairly interpreted in another place.
The Commandment says Solomon, Prove. 6. 23.
is a Lamp, and the Law is Light. If any Doctrine of faith, if any precept for
Life and manners, abide obscure to us, it is not because the Scriptures are
dark, but because our understandings are blind, or because through
slothsulness we neglect to use those Spiritual keys of Prayer, Meditation,
comparing one text with another, which God has appointed as helps to unlock
the meaning of his Word. All the words Prove. 8. 9.
of Wisdom are right to them that find knowledge, and plain to him that
understands. He is either grossly ignorant, or desperately envious, that
charge the Word of God, at least in the principal Doctrins thereof, with
obscurity. God, who is the great Master both of Understanding and Language,
knows how to speak plainly, that the meanest capacity may be edified. The Sun
in the Firmament does not shine (...) Chrysostom.
with more clearness than the Sun of the Scriptures does, to those that do not
wilfully shut their eyes against it. Whatsoever is necessary, is plain,
evident, perspicuous to him that desires understanding. This makes it fit to be
a guide.

Secondly, It is a perfect word; there is nothing 2 It is perfect.
needful to be believed for Salvation, nothing necessary to be done, but it is
to be found in the Holy Scriptures, either in express terms, or by necessary
deduction and consequence. All false ways are here discovered, all Sins are
here forbidden, all Holiness is here commanded. The Prophet David tells us,
that The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; Psalm. 19. 7.
and the Apostle says, that All Scripture is given by inspiraetion of God,
etc. That the Man of God may be perfect, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
thoroughly furnished unto all good works; and therefore is a Curse denounced
against those that either add, or take away any thing from it, Revel. 22. 18,
19. The Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, as the Apostle speaks, and therefore perfect. It
proceeds from a most perfect voluntary cause, and therefore must needs be
exactly every way perfect. The Church of God needs not the help of any
unwritten moldy Traditions, to complete the Holy Scriptures of truth. We are
not commanded to believe Human Traditions, or the Doctrins of men, but such
things as are promulged and written by the Prophets and Apostles. Those that
argue without the Scriptures, do but tie Ropes of Sand, such Arguments have no
strength in them, Ego vocem magni pastoris inquiro, says Austin, Lege mihi hoc
de Propheta, recita de lege, Aug. lib. de pastore, cap. 14.
recita de Evangelio, recita de Apostolo, I enquire what the great Shepherd
says, read me such things out of the Writings of the Prophets, rehearse out of
the Law, out of the Evangelists, out of the Writings of the Apostles; whatever
is not according to the Law, and the Testimony, is to be rejected, as that that
has no light in it. As the Word of God is a pure Word, so it is a perfect
Word, and because of its perfection it is fit to be a Guide.

Thirdly, It is a sure Word, it is infallible. The Apostle speaking of the
written Word says, We have 3 It is sure.
a more sure word of Prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed. He had
been discoursing of that voice 2 Pet. 1. 19.
which came down from Heaven at the transfiguration of Christ in the Holy
Mount, and yet he says, That the word of Prophecy which God has put into the
hands of the Church, is a more sure guide than that, he does not say a more
true Word, for that voice came from the excellent glory, but a more sure word.
All (...).
Revelations are to be tried by the written word of Prophecy. The Apostle
commands us to try the Spirits, 1 Job. 4. 1. We have no other standard to try
any Doctrins which men pretend to be from the Spirit, but the Word of God,
which we are sure was indicted by the Spirit; and because it is the breathing
and inspiration of the holy Spirit, it must needs be infallible, as the Spirit
is. And it is a sure word in regard of the stability of it, as well as the
infallibility of it; it is a Word that abides for ever. It is David's
comfortable meditation, For ever O Lord thy Psalm. 119. 89.
Word is settled in heaven. The Mountains may fail, and the Hills may be
removed, but the Word of God stands fast for ever. Thy testimonies O Lord are
very sure, Psalm. 93. 5. The Church and People of God have no other foundation
for the assurance of their Salvation, but the unchangeableness of Gods Nature,
and the certainty of his Word, and being a sure Word it is fit to be a guide.

Fourthly, It is an Uniform word. The Holy ^ It is uniform.
Scripture is in all things constant, and like to it self. There is no discord,
or jarring, but a sweet Harmony and concord in all those blessed writings; some
appearing disagreement there may seem to be, but no real contradiction. He that
compares one place with another, shall find a sweet consent in all. That there
is any shadow of dissent between one text and another, arises, not from any
dissimilitude of Scripture to it self, but from the Readers ignorance, or
unexperiencedness in the word of righteousness. That which is forbidden by one
Prophet is forbidden by another, that which is enjoined by the Prophets is
enjoined by the Apostles in their writings. The Apostle Paul proves his Doctrine
concerning the Messiah out of the Prophets, and out of Moses; he said No other
things than those which the Prophetss and Moses did say should come. And the
Apostle Peter in that excellent Acts 26. 22. 23.
Sermon which he preached to Cornelius and his Friends, shows how unanimous the
Prophets were in their Writings about that Doctrine, To him give all Acts 10. 43.
the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins. And hereby indeed it appears that the Scriptures are
of Divine authority, because there is such a perfect harmony in them. Though
they were penned by several men, at several times, and these distant one from
another, not advising, or conferring one with another, yet they often speak the
very same words, and always, when they write of one subject, the same sense,
without the least contradiction, which is an unquestionable Argument to prove
that they were dictated unto them by the same Spirit. And because of this
consent, they are fit to be the Believers guide. And as the Word of God is so
fit for this work, so

Secondly, The Spirit of God is a fit Guide. This will evidently appear by the
ensuing considerations. The Spirit of God a fit Gu^de, because 1 The Spirit
makes the word plain.


First, The Spirit of God is able to expound the Word of God, and to make it
plain to our under standing. The Holy Ghost is the Churches Interpreter, he
gave the Scriptures, and he can reveal unto us the sense and meaning of the
Scriptures. He is called the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, because it is his
work to make known to the Church, the Spiritual Ephesians. 1. 17.
sense of that word which God has given to be the rule both of faith and
manners. Our Savior, when he was about to leave the world, tells his
Disciples, That he would give them his Spirit to be a guide in his absence, He
shall lead you, says he, into Joh. 16. 13, 14.
all truth. Now how the Holy Ghost should perform this work, is laid down in
the next Verse, He shall take of mine and show it unto you, he shall so
powerfully press the Doctrine of the Gospel upon their spirits, that they should
understand it to be Christ's Doctrine. It is by the effectual persuasions of the
Spirit, that we believe the Divine authority of the word.

Secondly, The Spirit of God is able to incline 2 The Spirit bows the heart to
obey the Word. Ezekiel. 36. 27.
and move the heart to yield obedience to the Counsel of the Word. It is Gods
promise in the Covenant of Grace to his people, that he will put his Spirit
within them, and cause them to walk in his Statutes, and that they shall keep
his Judgments, and do them. Did the Spirit only show the Believer the rule
according to which God would have him walk, and not enable him to a ready and
cheerful endeavor to conform to it, he would fall short of eternal life; for
man by Nature does not only want light to see his way, but a heart to walk in
the way when it is discovered. It is a good prayer which David makes to this
purpose, Incline mine heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
Psalm. 119. 36.
The Spirit of God sweetens the rule, and renders it acceptable and grateful to
the heart. The heart of man needs not only Moral persuasion, but the strength
of effectual and determining Grace, to engage it to obedience. The heart is
naturally imprisoned, that it cannot move Godward until it be set at liberty,
the Holy Ghost therefore which God has given to be a guide, draws it, and then
it runs; I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall Psalm. 119. 32.
enlarge my heart. Heart-enlargement is as necessary for the Christian
Travellor, as Heart-inlightning. Draw us, says the Church, and we will run
after thee. The Spirit of God draws no man to Heaven against his Cant. 1. 4.
will, but yet he must and does overpower the Will, and make it willing. Trahe
quodammodo invitam ut facias voluntariam, as Bernard glosseth upon that text.
Bernard in Loc.
The renewed Soul finds too often an indisposition in it self to follow
Christ, and therefore does still desire the attractive power of the Spirit.

Thirdly, The Spirit of God is able to preserve the 3 The Spirit preserves from
fainting.
Soul from tiring in the way; and herein it excels all other guides. No guide
can give the Travellour strength when he is weary, but the Spirit of God can,
and does give fresh strength unto all those whom he guides. The Prophet David
having had experience of this in himself, writes it down for the comfort of
others, He restores my soul, he leads me in the Psalm. 23. 3.
paths of righteousness for his names sake. The Spirit of God has a
restorative virtue as well as an inlightning virtue. Historians tell us, that
the rod of Myrtle in the hand of Travellours preserves them from weariness; I
know not how true that is, but I am sure the Spirit of God in the heart of the
Spiritual Travellor, does give him fresh strength when he is weary; They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they Isa. 40. 31.
shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint. The way of the Lord
could not be strength to the upright, if the Spirit did not increase strength
to such as walk in those ways. The Holy Ghost is not only a Guide to the
Believer, but his viaticum upon which he feeds, till he come to the end of his
Journey. The Spirit of God does by those continual influences which he gives
out to the Saints in their Pilgrimage, put new life into their hearts, that
they cannot tire till they come to take up their lodging in Heaven. He anoints
their heads with the fresh oil of his Grace, whereby they are enabled to go
from one measure of strength to another, till they appear before God in Sion.
Its said of the people of God, that they shall still bring forth fruit in old
age, they shall be fat and flourishing, Psa. 92. 14.
Other trees have a time of bearing, and a time of barrenness, but the trees
that are planted in Gods house are never past bearing; whence is it that the
people of God dye bearing fruit, but from the continual influences of the
Spirit of Grace?

If it be demanded, how the holy Ghost preserves the Saints from fainting? I
answer briefly. First, He carries the divine promises open before them in his
hand; those great and precious promises, as the Apostle By revealing the
promises, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
calls them, he claps warm upon their hearts every morning; and how can those
tire, so as to fall down, who have such sovereign plasters upon their souls?
The promises of God are such water of life, as that they will make the hearts
of dying men live; when Jonathan was faint, he did but dip the end of his rod
in the honey comb, and his Eyes were enlightened, 1 Samuel 14. 27. The Spirit of
God causes the fainting travellors to dip their rods every day in the
honeycomb of some promise, and by such Cordialls recovers their decayed
strength.

Secondly, He gives them some glymses of the By giving some tastes of glory.
glory of that heavenly Country whither they are going. Though the full meal of
glory be reserved till the saints come to heaven, yet they have some little
tastes of it in this life. The Scripture makes mention of the first fruits, of
the Spirit; what are these but the foretasts Romans 8. ^3.
of eternal life? they are some drops of that new wine which believers shall
drink with Christ in the Kingdom of God; they are as little bunches of grapes
sent down from the celestial Canaan. The Spirit of God does, as it were, cause
them to peep into heaven, and the least glimmerings of glory are sufficient to
make the lame man leap as an Heart. The Apostles, though they met with much
affliction in the way to heaven, yet they tell us they fainted not; what was it
that upheld them? we look not at the things 2 Cor. 4. 18.
which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. The Spirit sometimes
carries the Saints up to the top of mount Nebo, to take a little view of
Canaan, in the prospective glass of faith, and by this means keeps them from
sinking. Thus the Spirit preserves them from tiring, and therefore is fit to be
a guide.

Thirdly, The Providence of God, which is the Providence a fit guide because.
last thing I mentioned in this Counsel of God, this is also fit for the work
of guiding, especially when the word is the foundation of acting. I shall
briefly show this in four Considerations.

First, The watchfullnesse of Providence. An open 1 It is watchful.
fixed eye is a fit emblem or Hieroglyphick to represent the providence of God
over his people. The Saints eyes are often shut; Many dangers hang over their
heads, which they do not discern: but the eye of divine providence is always
open, and always fixed upon them for their preservation. He that keeps Psa.
12 1. 4.
Israel neither slumbreth nor sleeps. Divine providence has (...) as Basil
speaks, an eye that is never heavy with watching, that can never be overtaken
with sleep. The Providence of God is indeed all eye; we read of the seven eyes
of God, upon one stone Zech 3. 9.
shall be seven eyes. The Providence of God looks every way; no evil can
surprise the Church from any quarter of the world, but some eye of providence
will discern and observe it. Satan does sometimes steal upon believers, and
tread upon their heels, before they be a ware of him, but the eye of Gods
careful providence sees the very first step he takes toward them.

Secondly, The distinctnesse of Providence. As 2 It is distinct. The Schoolmen
say providence is infinita in omnibus, infinita in singulis.
there is a general providence whereby God takes care of all his creatures,
and a more special providence whereby he looks to his Church, so there is a
particular and distinct providence, whereby every individual Saint is
peculiarly guarded and guided, according to his particular concernments.
Providence watches as carefully over every sheep as over the whole flock, it
looks as exactly and distinctly after every believer as if there were but one
believer. Some have thought that every Saint has his tutelar Angel, I see no
reason for this, but we may say, that every Saint has a particular providence
which watches over him. A careful Father does not only look after all his
Children in common, but does consider the special concernments of every
individual child: so does the providence of our heavenly father take a
particular cognizance of all the particular fears, necessities, exigences of
every Child of his family, as if he had but that one to mind. Austin has a
sweet meditation to this purpose. O my good God, says he, Aug. soliloqu. c.
14.
thou do so behold my ways and my paths, and so watch for my safety, as
though thou had forgot all thine other creatures in heaven and earth, and
had cast all thy care upon me alone, having no care of the rest. And in
another place he says, that God takes as much care of all his people as if
they were but one, and as much care of every one as if that one were all. The
Eye of divine providence O tu bone omnipotens, qui sic curas u^umquemque
nostru^ tanquam solum cures, and sic omnes tanquam singulos. Confess. lib. 3.
c. 11.
looks at every Christian with a particular observance, and does as carefully
order every step as the whole life. Job speaking of that strict observation
that God took of what he did, says, that he numbered his steps, Chap. 14. 16.
which Junius interprets of that exact cognizance God took of every particular
action. The Eye of Divine providence watches the servants of God with a very
narrow and curious inspection, there is not the least motion unregarded.

Thirdly, The powerful working of providence. 3 Its strong in working.
The hand of divine providence has an almighty strength; it is great in power
and mighty in working; whatsoever difficulties are in the way of the spiritual
traveller, it can remove them; it can either overturn those high mountains, or
else lift him up above them, or carry him safety another way; when the believer
is environed with danger, that there seems to be no way of escape, Providence
can either find a door or create a door of deliverance. David was once
surrounded by Saul and his army, that there appeared no visible way of safety.
The text says, Saul and his 1 Samuel 23. 26, 27.
men had compassed him round about to take him; he was even as a bird in the
snare, and yet in that strait did the hand of divine Providence set him free. A
messenger is sent to bid him hasten away, for the Philistines have invaded the
land, and by this unexpected providence is the snare broken, and David
delivered. Divine providence can cause the strongest chains to break in pieces,
and the iron gates to open of their own accord; the hand of providence esteems
iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten Wood.

Fourthly, The wisdom of Providence. All the 4. It is wise in working.
motions of Providence are full of mysterious and deep wisdom; it can make all
things fall in, and concur methodically for the bringing about of the intended
design. Divine Providence is as wise in contriving, as it is powerful in
effecting; it can foresee dangers at a distance, and it knows how to prevent
them. Infinite wisdom is printed on all the footsteps of divine Providence.
One says, That the world in all the parts of it is ruled like a paper with
Music lines, and if men could see those lines they would be as glorious as
lines of gold. The actings and motions of Providence are sometimes insnarled
and entangled in our apprehension, we judge them to be ruinous to the Church,
but even in those Providence there is excellent method and order. David
speaking of the providential footsteps of God, says, Thy way is in the sea,
and thy paths in the great Psalm. 77. 19.
waters, and thy footsteps are not known. They are not known to us because of
our blindness, but they are known to God. Though we do not know what to make
of those cross lines that are drawn on the Globe of Providence, yet the hand
that has drawn them knows how to use them. Providence leads believers the
right way, when it seems to lead them the contrary way. The Psalmist speaking
of that glorious work of God in bringing Israel to Canaan, says, That he led
them forth by the right way, that they might go to a Psalm, 107. 7.
City of habitation. The way which God led them was not the nearest way, but it
was a direct way, yea it was the best way. It is better to go a little about,
and follow Gods Map, than to shorten our journey, and go according to the Map
of our own wisdom. Providence moves carefully, powerfully, wisely, and
therefore is fit for this work of guidance. Providence without the Word may
deceive us, but when we lay the Word before us for our direction, Providence
will wisely and powerfully conduct us to the end of our journey, according to
that blessed light. Thus much for the first Doctrine, which arises from the
words considered as a Prayer.

Before I make the Application of this point, I shall open the other, which is
the result of the Text, as it lays down a Spiritual privilege, and then I will
apply them jointly. It is this.

That all true Saints shall be guided in this life by the The second Doctrine.
The godly shall have Divine guidance.
Counsel of God. This happiness the Prophet desires, this blessing he does
confidently hope to enjoy. And what David or Asaph, as believers, did expect,
may upon the same grounds be expected by all believers, The very same Charter,
the very same Covenant of Grace, the very same Inheritance which appertains to
one Saint, belongs to every Saint. The Salvation of Gods people is called the
common Salvation, Jude 3. not because it is common to all men, but because it
is common to all Saints. One Heaven shall hold all the faithful; all the
precious Wheat shall be gathered into this one Garner. The great and main
privileges of the Covenant of Grace belong to one Heir of promise as well as
another.

When the Children of Israel were come out of The point proved by Scripture.
Egypt, and were to travel through that vast howling Wilderness unto the Land
of Canaan, the Lord did create a miraculous guidance for them, He went before
them by day in a pillar of a Cloud, to lead them the Exodus 13. 21, 22.
way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light to go by day and by
night; He took not away the pillar of the Cloud by day, nor the pillar of fire
by night, from before the people. For forty years together did the Lord Jehovah
lead his people by this strange guidance; which way soever the Winds blew this
Cloud kept its motion, neither wind nor storm could disperse it, or put it for
one moment out of its course. This conduct of the Israelites to the Land of
Canaan was a figure of that Conduct which God affords all his people through
the Wilderness of this world to the Celestial Canaan; he will never leave
them till he has put them into possession of that heavenly Country he has
prepared for them.

If we search the Scriptures, we shall meet with many places wherein this is
promised to the Servants of God. The Prophet, amongst diverse other privileges
of Believers, makes this to be one, He that has Isa. 49. 10.
mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide
them. The text alludes to the guidance of the Church through the Wilderness,
by that pillar of Cloud which God had provided. As he led the old Church, so
he will lead the Gospel Church; while God continues to be a merciful God, he
will be a guiding God to his people; Divine guidance is built on Divine mercy.
And elsewhere the same Prophet makes mention of this privilege by way of
promise, The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy Isa. 58. 11:
thy soul in drought. A believer has as good reason to believe that God will
guide him, as he has to think that God will feed him. And yet again does the
same Prophet assure the Saints of this, I will bring Isa. 42. 16.
the blind by a way that they know not, I will lead them in paths that they
have not known. These things will I do unto them, and not forsake them. When
the believer is in such an entangled and perplexed condition that he knows no
more which way to walk than a blind man in a Wilderness; then will God take
him by the hand, and make darkness light, and crooked things straight before
him. When all our counsel is perished, then may we expect the shinings forth
of Gods counsel.

As God has promised this guidance, so we shall find that believers have with
much confidence hoped for it. It is one Article of a Believers Creed, that God
will be his guide. This God, says the Psalm. 48. 14.
Church, is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto death. He
that has reason to believe that God is his God, may with all the confidence of
his heart believe that he will be his guide. When God engaged himself to be
our God, he did solemnly undertake to be our Guide; he could not be our God if
he were not our Guide, and therefore does the Prophet put them together, Isa.
48. 17. I am the Lord thy God which leads thee by the way that thou should
go. The Prophet David very confidently promises this to himself, speaking of
God he says, He leads me in the paths of righteousness for Psalm. 23. 3.
his names sake. The same God which puts a Believer into the path of
righteousness at first, will lead him in that path.

For the opening of this point, it will be necessary to discuss briefly these
three Particulars.

1 In what respect God will guide the Believer. The Doctrine opened.
2 Why God will guide him. 3 How a Believer can wander, seeing God does guide
him.
First, In what respect God will guide Believers. 1 In what respect God guides
Believers.
How will God guide them? what this promise of Divine guidance has reference
unto?

This Promise refers to two things.

1 To matters of Faith. 2 To matters of Practice.
First, God will guide his people in matters of Faith; he will teach them what
is truth, and what 1 In matters of faith.
is falsehood, he will direct them in point of Judgment as well as in point of
Practice.

1 God will give them understanding to discern the truth. 2 God will give them
hearts to embrace the truth. 3 God will establish and settle them in the truth.
And, 4 If through ignorance or temptation they be drawn aside, God will reduce
them, and bring them back to the truth.
The Scripture promises divine Conduct in point of faith, as well as in point
of practice, to the people of God; Ye shall know the truth, says our Savior
to Joh. 8. 32.
them that believed in him, and the truth shall make you free. And when he
promises the Holy Ghost the Comforter, he mentions this as one branch of his
Office, He shall lead you into all truth. Though the Joh. 16. 13.
people of God may be ignorant of some truth, though they may be leavened with
some Error, yet shall they by the conduct of the Holy Ghost, the perfect
Master of truth, be preserved from all fundamental errors in point of faith.
Men may perish as well through the want of the Doctrine of faith, as of the
grace of faith. As there are damnable Practices, so the Scripture tells us that
there are damnable Heresies, or Heresies of destruction, as the Apostle speaks,
2 Pet. (...).
2. 1. The Lord will by his counsel so guide all his Saints, that they shall
not live and dye in any of these Heresies. As there are Devilish Works, so
there are (...).
Devilish Doctrins, or doctrins of Devils, as the Scripture calls them, 2 Timothy
4. 1. God will by the conduct of his grace guide his Elect, that they shall not
embrace these Doctrins. Want of truth will shut men out of Heaven, as well as
want of grace. Heresy is a fruit of the Flesh, as well as Drunkenness, or
VVitchcraft, Gal. 5. 19, 20: Truth is a piece of Gods Image, as well as
Holiness. The grace of faith unites us to God, but the Doctrine of faith
strengthens this union; so far as any swerves from the truth, he swerves
from God. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you,
ye also shall continue in 1 John 2. 24.
the Son, and in the Father. Eximia laus sanae Doctrinae, says Calvin. We may
from this text learn what an excellent thing sound Doctrine is, in it we find
whatsoever appertains to the true enjoyment of God, and by it we are united
both to the Father and the Son. That Man of Sin is become the Antichrist, not
only because of false worship which he maintains, but also because of the
Corruption of the faith. Truth is a piece of the furniture and riches of the
Soul, as well as Holiness. A Gospel Spirit is a Spirit of a sound mind as well
as a spirit of faith and love, 2 Timothy 1. 7. Diseases in the head are mortal, as
well as Diseases in the heart. Now when God promises to guide his people, he
has respect to this, he will ingrave the truth in their minds, he will lead
them in the way of truth, and if at any time they turn aside to the error of
the wicked, his grace and his power shall recover them.

Secondly, God will guide his people in matters 2 In matters of practice.
of practice, his Eye shall be upon them to conduct them in the paths of
righteousness. As he will teach them what to believe, so he will direct them
what to practice. He shall keep the feet of his Saints; so Hannah 1 Samuel 2. 9.
in her song of thanksgiving. This promise, as it refers to new obedience,
comprizeth these four particulars.

First, God will let them see what is sin, and 1 God will make them know his
will.
what is duty; he will show them his way and make his paths plain before their
face. When others are in the dark, they shall have the light of God upon their
Tabernacles. The secret of the Lord, says David, is with them that fear him:
and he will show them his Covenant. Psa. 25. 14.
God will cause them to understand and know the meaning of his Law; his
statutes shall not be to them a riddle or a sealed book, but they shall be so
plain, that he that runs may read them. God will interpret the holy
Commandment that they shall be able, in all things necessary to salvation, to
understand the sense and meaning of it; this is that which God promises 1 John
2. 27. the anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and ye
need not that any man teach you. God will so inlighten their minds by his
Spirit, that when they read the word, or hear it preached, they shall be able
to say, this is the mind of God.

Secondly, God will give them a heart and a will 2 God will give them an heart
to obey.
to embrace his Commandments, to reject sin and close with duty. When others
find their hearts rebelling against the Law, they shall find their hearts ready
to comply and yield obedience universally to it. David often prays that God
would incline his heart to his testimonies. This God does for every Saint; he
does sweetly and yet powerfully bow the soul to a free spontaneous and ready
obedience, so that it chooses the way of Gods statutes, and cleaves to his
testimonies. This is the meaning of that gracious promise, I Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them. God does not only lay his Commandments
before a Believers face, but writes them in his heart, and then Jer. 31. 33.
the Soul resolves never to depart from the obedience of them. Gods
Commandments, at least some of them, are grievous to an unbeleever, but to one
whom God guides, every Commandment is sweet and precious; he reads no
Commandment but he entertains it with that prayer of the Psalmist, O that my
Psalm. 119. 5.
ways were directed to keep thy statutes! This prayer God answers to every Soul
that is led by him, he heals the Gangren of the corrupt will, by removing the
sowrnes that is upon it, and by his enlarging grace enables it willingly to run
the way of his Commandments; so that the Believer can say, I delight to do thy
Will O God, yea thy Law is within my heart. God bores the Ear, and the Soul is
no longer rebellious; God orders the steps of his Saints, and causes them to
delight in his way.

Thirdly, God does recover them from all their 3 God raises them when they
fall.
falls. The best of Believers have a spice of the Spiritual Falling Sickness,
they stumble and fall. This promise of Divine guidance gives security of timely
resurrection from such lapses. It is upon Record in Scripture, for the comfort
of Believers, that though Psalm. 37. 24.
they fall, they shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth them
with his hand. When they sink into misery God will lift them up, and when they
slip into sin God will restore them. He will put the bones into their places
when they are disjoynted, and when iniquities prevail over them, he will purge
them away. David fell through the power of temptation, but God restored him;
Peter sunk down through his heedlesness, but God lifted him up again. Noah, and
Lot, were overtaken and ensnared, but God cut the cords of the Net, and set
them both free. As often as Corruption casts the Saints down, so often does the
grace of God set them on their feet again. Believers have as many Spiritual
resurrections as they have Spiritual deaths, they have as many Spiritual
awakenings as they have Spiritual sleeps.

Fourthly, God will give them perseverance to 4 God gives them perseverance.
hold out to the end. This promise of guidance implies perseverance. Gods
guidance would be insufficient if it did not comprehend this grace. It is
promised to the righteous, That they shall hold on their Job 17. 9.
way, and to them that have clean hands, that they shall grow stronger and
stronger. God furnishes believers with daily supplies of strength for their
daily journyings. He gives them new recruits against new assaults, and new
supports against new temptations. He puts new Money into their Sacks mouth every
morning, and lays in fresh provision of grace every evening. When he sees their
Spiritual apparel begin to wear he repairs it, when he sees their Bottles low,
he does out of his Fountain fill them up again. God has promised Believers to
confirm them unto the end, and he 1 Cor. 1. 8.
will make this promise good. Whatsoever difficulties are in the way he will
remove, whatsoever temptations oppose, he will either beat them back, or carry
the Believer some other way. Whatsoever grace is weak he will strengthen it,
whatsoever piece of the Spiritual armor is wanting, he will give it in. He
that has been the Author, will be the Finisher of their faith. He will carry
them on his wings, as the Eagle does her young, over all mountainous and miry
places, till he has performed all that which he has engaged to do for them.
Thus you see what this privilege refers to, and how God will guide his people,
both in matters of faith, and in matters of practice.

Secondly, Why will God guide them. That they 2 Why God will guide them.
are not able to guide themselves has been abundantly proved in the opening of
the former point. That God is every way fit for this work has been already
showed. That no other can guide them will easily be granted, if it be believed
that all others want some to guide themselves. The Prophet speaking of
Jerusalem says, That there is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she
has brought forth, neither is there any that takes her by the hand of all the
Sons that she has brought up, Isa. 51. 18. so that there is ratio
necessitatis, the reason of necessity why God should guide them; if he conduct
them not, they are like to be without any sufficient leader. But besides this,
we may consider diverse things, which are as so many reasons of this work. As,

First, They are his own flock. God who is indeed They are his Flock.
an inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1. 18. he accounts them his own
possession, as if he could not be happy without the enjoyment of them. Often
does God call himself a Shepherd, and the Saints his Sheep, and because they
are his Sheep he will guide them. Hear O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest
Joseph like a Psalm. 80. 1:
flock. A good Shepherd will both feed, and guide his sheep. God is a good
Shepherd, though believers are unprofitable sheep, yet because they are the
sheep of his pasture he will guide them. God promises this guidance to his
people upon this account, and that with much seriousness. As a Shepherd seeks
out his Ezekiel. 34. 12, 13, etc.
flock in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered: so will I seek
out my sheep, says the Lord, and will deliver them out of all places where
they have been scattered, in the cloudy and dark day, etc. I will seek that
which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up
that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick. Though the
foolish sheep set light by the Shepherd, yet the Shepherd highly values the
sheep. They are his own election, they have something of his Image upon them,
and therefore he will not be wanting to guide them.

Secondly, If God did not guide them, he should gaddy heads, and corrupt Else
God should lose them.
hearts, and stumbling seet; they are ready upon every temptation to depart
from the faith, and to go astray from the paths of holiness; yea though they
have no tempter, yet the prevalency of that corruption which dwells in them will
cause them to swerve aside. I have gone astray, says David, like a lost sheep,
Without Psalm. 119. 176,
this guidance wandering believers, by their sinful gaddings about would lose
themselves, and eternally perish. God will not be bereaved of one of his
Saints, he will not dismember the Mystical Body of his Son; every Saint helps
to complete his fullness as a head, Ephesians. 1. 23. he will not impoverish Heaven to
enrich Hell. Should one Saint dye, Heaven would be the poorer by one; God will
not have one of those Mansions which Christ has purchased for the Saints,
stand empty. God will not beget Children for the Devil. Satan's eye is
continually watching Believers, not for good, but for destruction. He
compasses the earth without ceasing, and if God did not guide his Saints, he
should in a small time have no Saints on earth to guide; he will therefore
guide them that he may not lose them. It is the promise of Christ, they shall
Joh. 10. 28, 29
never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. They are therefore
preserved from perishing, because they are under Gods powerful guiding.

Thirdly, Their wanderings and miscarryings cast Their wandering dishonors
God.
some dishonor upon the Name of God; swerving Believers do not only provoke
God to anger, but expose his Glory to contempt in the world. The Lord tells
David, that his sins had occasioned the enemies of God to blaspheme his name;
David's sin blasphemed 2 Samuel 12. 14.
God, and by his sin he did set others on Blaspheming. Perhaps some might say
thus; This, this is the man after Gods own heart, how can he be a holy God that
has such unholy Servants? Thus is the holy Name of God wounded by professors
sins. The afflictions which the people of God bring upon themselves by their
sins, open the mouths of the wicked to reproach God. God tells the Jews what
the enemies said when they saw Israel in Captivity, These are the people of the
Lord, and are gone forth out of his Land. Ezekiel. 36. 20.
The Heathen contemned both them and their God, as if he had not been able to
have preserved them from bondage. Much more do the sinful practices, and sinful
opinions of Believers occasion Gods contempt; These are the people of the Lord,
and yet thus proud, and thus covetous, and thus false; these are your godly
men, these are they that have their Tongues tipped with discourses of Religion.
The strayings of such as look toward Religion, stab religion under the fifth
Rib, and make both it and God himself the very Song of the Drunkards. The holy
God does not love to have his great Name thus polluted, and therefore is
pleased to guide his people, that they may not by sin occasion such pollutions.
You see why God does guide them.

Thirdly, Seeing God guides Believers by his Counsel, Thirdly, How it comes to
pass that the Saints wander.
how does it come to pass that they do at any time miscarry? that they have
their wanderings was hinted before, and experience very sadly shows; how it
happens to be so is now to be discussed. There is no imperfection, or
insufficiency either in the Word of God, or in the Spirit of God, what then is
the reason?

First, Believers do not always follow the Divine 1 They will not follow Gods
direction.
Conduct, as is meet they should. Saints are dimsighted, they many times
mistake the rule; Saints are wilful, though they see the Rule, and hear the
Voice, This is the way walk in it, yet they will not walk therein; their
peevish and froward nature will not suffer them to follow the conduct of
Heaven, though it be discovered never so plainly. And besides, the Saints do
too often close with bad company, which hurry them aside from the ways of God.
Why Jer. 2. 36.
gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? It is Gods charge against his
own people. The dearest of Gods Saints have a gadding spirit within them, they
love to wander, they shut their Eyes and will not see, they stop their Ears and
will not hear; wilfulness occasions wanderings.

Secondly, God is pleased sometimes to withdraw 2 God with-draws himself.
his guidance from them. God does never totally and absolutely remove his
guiding grace from his Servants, yet he sees it meet sometimes to suspend it
in the powerful influences of it, and upon this suspension the Believer goes
astray. It is said concerning Hezekiah, That in the business of the
Ambassadors of the 2 Chro. 32. 31
Princes of Babylon, God left him to try him, that he might know all that was
in his heart. And, when God left him, he soon stumbled and fell. Believers are
not so thankful for the conduct of God as they ought to be, this unthankfulness
makes God look away. Believers are apt to ascribe their standing to themselves,
this causes God to leave them to themselves. God would rather have his
Children stumble than that they should be too well conceited of their own
sight. Believers do not lay such fast hold on God as they ought, therefore he
pulls back his hand. God would rather his people should now and then fall, than
that their dependence on him should be weakened. Believers are apt to grow too
confident, this provokes God to turn away his face, Psa. 30. 6. God would
rather have his Children lie a while in the dirt, than that they should be
proud of their standing. Believers are too adventurous, they are foolhardy,
and will now and then be walking upon the water. God would rather see his
Children sink up to the knees, than see them so fondly presumptuous. They do
not always follow God, God does not always in the same degree communicate his
power to them, and upon this twofold account it is that they wander for a
time, both in point of judgment, and in point of practice. Thus I have, with
what brevity and clearness I was able, opened these two points, That the people
of God do desire to be guided by the Counsel of God, and that God has settled
it as a privilege upon them, that they shall be so guided.

I proceed to the Application of these two points, which I shall reduce to
three heads,

Information, Reprehension, Exhortation.
First for Information; and here I shall only hint a 1 Use. Information.
few things, which by necessary consequence do arise from the points discussed.
As,

First, What a singular mercy it is that God has 1 The usefulness of the
Scripture.
given us the Scriptures; we should have wandered like blind men in the dark,
if this blessed Light, by which the whole Counsel of God both for matters of
faith, and matters of obedience is revealed, had not been set up among us. This
is one great piece of the Divine Counsel, by which the Saints are guided to
eternal life. Solomon speaking of the Word of God, tells us how useful it is in
this kind. When thou go it Prove. 6. 22.
shall lead thee, when thou sleep it shall keep thee, when thou awakest it
shall talk with thee. The Word of God is a guide to our thoughts, it directs us
how to think, and how to meditate. It is a guide to our Lips, it teaches us
when to speak, and what to speak. It is a guide to our Hands, it gives us
direction what to meddle with, and what to forbear. It is a guide to the Saints
in their Civil employments, it teaches them how to buy, and how to sell, and
how to trade. It is a guide to them in their Natural actions, it teaches them
how to eat, how to drink, how to sleep, that God may be glorified in all such
actions. It is a guide in religious performances, it teaches them how to hear,
how to pray, how to worship. It teaches us how to carry our selves in every
condition, how to abound without arrogance, how to want without impatience, how
to be full and not wanton, how to be empty and not repine. It teaches us how
to carry our selves in all relations. It is a Tutor to the Child, to teach him
how to obey. It is a Counselor to the Parent, to teach him how to govern. It
instructs Servants how to keep a good Conscience in doing faithful service. It
directs Masters how to render unto their Servants that which is equal. The Word
of God is useful in all cases. When God put the Bible into thy hand, he gave
thee a perfect Directory for all manner of concernments.

Secondly, How injurious are the Papists in for 2 The Sin of Papists in
prohibiting the Scriptures.
bidding the use of the Scriptures to the common people. God commands all men
to read the Word, they forbid those to meddle with it, that in regard of their
ignorance have more than ordinary need of it. This is a Sacrilegious
wickedness; what do they by this tyranny but force the people to forsake the
guidance of Gods Counsel? The Prophet informs us of the strange wilfulness of
the Jews in rejecting the advice of Gods Prophets, Get ye out of the way, turn
aside out of the path, cause the holy one of Israel to cease from before Isa,
30. 11.
us. The Popish Clergy, by locking up the Scriptures from the common people, do
as good as say to them, Get ye out of the way, turn aside out of the path.
They know they could never persuade the people to follow their blind guides,
if they did not deprive them of this Divine guidance. The Doctrine of implicit
faith, and blind obedience, would never go down so easily, if Gods counsel
revealed in the Word were not laid aside. They say the reading of the
Scriptures is the cause of Heresies, whereas our Savior affirms that ignorance
of the Scripture is the cause of Heresies, Ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures. These Souldevourers Mat. 22. 29.
do therefore silence the Oracle of God, that they may keep up among the
ignorant sort the credit of their own lying Oracles.

Thirdly, How useful is it that the Word should 3 Translations of Scripture
necessary.
be translated into vulgar Languages? it is not only useful, but of absolute
necessity. How can men follow the guidance of Gods counsel in the Scripture, if
they do not understand the Language of the Scripture? All the Counsels of God
in his Word will be Riddles and Parables to me, if I do not understand the
Language in which they are delivered. If the Trumpat give an uncertain sound,
who shall prepare himself to the 1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.
battle? It is an Argument which the Apostle brings to prove the absurdity of
worshipping God in a strange Tongue. I may urge it with the same strength to
the Point in hand. Things without life giving sound, whether Pipe, or Harp,
except they give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is
piped or harped? We are doubly engaged to God, in that through the abilities he
has given to men, the Divine guide does speak to us in a Language that we can
understand.

Fourthly, What a happiness is it to Believers that the Spirit of God dwells in
them? It is one of the 4 The indwelling of the Spirit a rich privilege.
great privileges of the Saints, that they are made an habitation of God
through the Spirit. When Jesus Christ left his Church, in regard of his bodily
presence, he promised to send the Spirit, who should abide with it Joh. 14.
16, 17.
for ever. He had purchased the Spirit as a Guide to his Church, and he
promises to pray the Father to make his purchase good. The blessedness of this
privilege appears in this amongst many other things, because the Spirit, with
the Word, is that heavenly Counselor by which we are guided. The direction of
the Word would not be effectual, without the teachings of the Spirit. The Word
shows us the way, and the Spirit guides our feet in the way. The Word is a
Crystal Glass, which shows us our duty; the Spirit gives us sight to see our
duty, and hearts to perform it. The Word is the Christians Compass, to instruct
him which way to shape his course; the Spirit is his Pilot, which steers him in
that course. If God had not put his Spirit in our hearts as well as his Word
in our mouth, we should never have arrived at the fair havens of peace.

Fifthly. It teaches us that believers are very dear to God; they are
exceeding precious in his sight. 5 True Believers are precious to God.
Several Arguments may be given to confirm this conclusion. All he has laid
up for them, all that he lays out upon them, testifies how much the Lord
delights in them. This privilege of which I am speaking is a sufficient
testimony of it. He would not be so ready to guide them if he did not respect
them; his Eye is upon them because his heart is upon them. Because they have
the affection of his soul, therefore they have the protection of his hand. They
have been Elected in his eternal Counsels, and therefore they are guided by
his revealed Counsels. Says David, know that the Lordhath separated, him that
is godly for himself; Psa. 4. 3.
he speaks I conceive chiefly of Gods setting him a part for the Kingdom, but
yet there is a truth in it, if we carry it higher. Believers are Jedidiahs,
they are Hephzibah's, they are Gods darlings, Gods delights; upon all the glory
shall be a defense, Isa. 4. 5. because they are glorious, God becomes their
guide. Therefore does he guide them because he loves them. A ragged Saint is
dearer to God than a glittring Emperor that wants grace.

Sixthly, Observe from hence the safety and security 6 The safe estate of
believers.
of true Believers. They have many enemies, but they have one guide that has
more strength than all their enemies. He that is a guide to the Saints is a
destroyer to them that would crush the saints. The same Exo. 14. 19. 20.
Pillar of Cloud which was a guide to Israel, to show them the way, was a
protection to them against the Egyptians. It was both a guiding Pillar and a
defensive Pillar. It was a Pillar of fire to the Israelites, but a cloud of
darkness to the Egyptians. Gods guiding of his Saints speaks his protection.
Saints are better guarded and guided than the Princes of the earth; they have
hosts of men for their defense, but the believers have the Lord of hosts for
their Salvation. He that meddles with Gods Saints assaults God himself. He
that touches you touches the apple of my eye, Zech. 2. 8. The apple of Gods
Eye is the believers guide, and the believers guard, he that touches him with
an intention to hurt him, smites at Gods Eye which is upon him. And he that
lifts up his hand against God, shall find Gods destroying hand stretched out
against him. I will lie down in peace says David, and sleep quietly, because
Psa 4. 8.
thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. It Is not a rich bed, nor a band of
Soldiers that causes sweet sleep. A galled conscience will work disturbance
through all such fences. The guard without the door will not quiet fightings
within. But he that can say, God is my guide and my guard, may sleep quietly
upon the top of a Mast. It is the Believers portion to have God for his guide;
and because of this portion he is secure whatever stirs are in the world. God
will either lead him through the storm, or he will guide him some other way to
avoid the storm, or else, if he fall under it, God will by the storm lead him
to that place where neither storms nor tempests are, nor shall be engendered to
eternity, which is indeed the best guidance of all. Thus I have dispatched the
first use, which was Information.

I go to the Second which is for Reproof.

Secondly, These points which have been handle 2 Use, Reprehension to those
that make other guides.
minister occasion of sharp reprehension and sad mourning. Is it the desire of
the godly, that God would guide them? Is it the portion of the godly, that God
will guide them by his Counsel? may we not then sigh even to the breaking of
our Loins, that there are so many that forsake this heavenly Pillar, and create
other guides and other Counselors to themselves? There are very few that
desire to be guided by Gods Counsel; there are very few indeed but they do
reject Gods Counsel, and that both in matters of Faith and matters of
practice; this is and shall be for a lamentation. There are diverse guides which
men create to themselves.

First, Some there are who make their own reason 1 Those that set up Reason for
a guide.
their guide; they will march under no other conduct than reason, either in
matters of faith or matters of practice; they will believe nothing but what
reason dictates, they will not receive the gold of the Sanctuary unless it be
touched by the blind Assay-master of reason. All the mysteries of Religion must
be weighed in the balance of reason, and if they be allowed by it they will
receive them, but if reason disapprove them, they are rejected as spurious and
illegitimate. Alas! Alas! Reason is an unsufficient guide to direct us,
especially in matters of faith. Our Savior sends men to Scripture in all such
cases, not to Reason. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have
eternal life, Joh 5. 39.
and they are they which testify of me. And elsewhere, to the Law and to the
Testimony. God needed Isa. 8. 20.
not have set his penmen on work to have written his will, if Reason had been
a sufficient Umpire in such matters. To make reason a guide in matters of
Faith, is to unscripture the Scriptures. Reason is not high enough, though it
stand on tipetoe, to see to the bottom of those deep mysteries of Faith, which
are revealed in scripture. Reason loses it self, and grows mad, when it dives
into these deeps. Reason is vitiated and corrupted by the fall, as well as the
Will; the carnal Romans 8. 7
mind is emnity against God. Man's head is by nature as full of rottenness as
his heart. Reason has need of the tutorage of the word, as well as the
affections. The light of reason is but as the light of the Gloworm, but the
light of Scripture is as bright as the Sun. Reason does stand in as much need
of the correction of Faith, as sense does of the correction of reason. St. Paul
tells 1 Cor. 2. 14.
us, that the natural man, take him in his highest seize, receives not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Reason is now become
like the wise Counselors of Pharaoh, brutish.

The Heathen that followed their own reason, how Romans 1. 21. 22.
did they wander from the truth? They became vain in their imaginations, and
their foolish heart was darkened; professing themselves to be wise they became
fools, as the Apostle speaks. It is precious counsel which Solomon gives Pro.
3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. He had a longer line of reason than any of Adams posterity that
succeeded him, and yet he prefers Faith in God before the deepest reason. He
that makes reason his guide, does in effect make it his God. He that is acted
according to the direction of Reason, especially in matters of Faith, will see
cause to bewail such unreasonable actings. The high scaling ladder of Faith
must be set upon the head of reason, if ever we would get a true apprehension
of the things of God. He that makes reason his guide, especially in matters of
Faith, may find it a Pillar of Cloud, but he shall never find it a Pillar of
Fire. Reason is a good staff, but no good guide. I shall add this for a
conclusion of all; It is the highest and best reason to forsake our own
wisdom, and in all divine matters to stick to the unerring Counsel of Gods
word and Spirit. Reason though a very glorious thing, is but the handmaid of
Scripture.

Secondly, Others there are that make men their 2 Those that make men their
guide.
guide. If we examine narrowly we shall find thousands in the world that set
up no other guide besides this. They walk according as they see others walk,
and they believe according to the belief of others. It cannot be denied, but it
is a duty to tread in the steps of good men. There is much of Gods Light in
their Light; we are many times incited to walk according to the holy patterns
of gracious men. It is the Apostles advice, Remember them which have the rule
over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God, whose faith follow,
considering the end of their conversation. Ministers are Heb. 13. 7.
guides by Doctrine, and they are guides by life, and it is a duty lying on the
flock to follow their holy example, as well as their Doctrine. And therefore
does the same Apostle in his Epistle to the Philippians Phil. 3. 17.
give this Counsel, Brethren be followers together of me and mark them which
walk so, as ye have us for an example. God has for this purpose set up his
graces in his Saints, that by the light of them others may be able to see the
way to Heaven more clearly. But yet to make men, the best and holiest of men,
absolutely our guide, either for Doctrine or Life, is unpleasing to God, and
unsafe for our selves. For,

First, We ought not to esteem of men above that which is meet, or as the
Apostle says, above that 1 Cor. 6. 6.
which is written. It is an honor too high, and too glorious to be put on any
man, to make him an universal guide. We are commanded by our Savior to call
no man Father on earth; it is not unlawful to call men Fathers Mat. 23. 9.
upon earth; the Fifth Commandment enjoins Pa^ernum honorem falso hominibus
tribui, si Dei gloriam obscurat. Calv.
both the name and the honor, but we are not to call men our Fathers, so as
thereby to obscure the glory of God, as Calvin expounds the place. Now to make
any man our guide in opposition to the Counsel of God, is, to call man our
Father in a sinful sense. He that thus makes man his guide makes man his God,
which is a breach of the first Commandment.

Secondly, The best of men is an insufficient guide, the wisest of men need the
guidance of God. The best of men are fallible. Men of low degree are vanity,
and Psalm. 62. 9.
men of high degree are a lie. The best of men are imperfect both in Knowledge
and Holiness, they are like the Moon, that has a dark side as well as a
bright. God has scattered his Graces among his people, but he has not given
any one Saint all his graces, I mean not all degrees of any grace; the best and
most perfect has grace in imperfection. The wicked are seducing guides, the
godly are defective guides, and therefore not to be followed any farther then
they follow the Counsels of God. The Apostle puts in that condition when he
propounds his own example, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. It is a
limitation 1 Cor. 11. 1.
that must never be left out. It is no dishonor to any man to dissent from
him, when he dissents from the Counsel of God.

Thirdly, Whatsoever we do, if we have no higher a rule for it, then man
will not be accepted of God. To assent to Divine truths only, because they are
believed of men, is to assent to them but with an Human faith. To do what God
commands, only because men do the same, is but a Human obedience, which God
will not reward. Thou have charged us, says Psalm. 119. 4, 5.
David, that we should keep thy precepts diligently. And then he prays, O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. That is true obedience, which is
not only agreeable to the holy Commandment, but is founded upon the Authority
of God, who gave the Commandment.

Thirdly, Others there are that make their Lusts 3 Those that make the flesh
their guide. Gal, 1. 16.
their guide. As they make provision for the flesh, so they ask direction from
the flesh. The Apostle, when he was called to preach the Gospel, tells us, That
he consulted not with flesh and blood, he did not confer with flesh and
blood; and yet there are many that have no other Counselor. They ask direction
of their Corruption, instead of asking at Gods mouth. When they are exhorted to
be humble, they ask counsel at the Lust of Pride; when they hear a Sermon of
Charity, they go to the Lust of Covetousness, and know whether that will
consent; when they are persuaded to be patient, they enquire at the Lust of
Frowardness, whether they should obey; whither Lust leads thither they follow,
and they will not be beaten off. To follow the guidance of Lust is very sad,
and will at last be very uncomfortable. Lust is an enemy, and who would be
guided by an enemy? To follow the guidance of Lust, is to follow the guidance
of the Devil. All sinful Lusts are the works of the Devil; for 1 John 3. 8.
this cause was the Son of God manifested, says the Apostle, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil; the sinful Lusts of the Soul are the Devils
Garrisons. He that goes to Lust for counsel, goes to Hell for counsel; and he
that takes direction from Hell will never find the way to Heaven. The Apostle
tells us, That he that Gal. 6. 8.
sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption. If the flesh be the
seed, Corruption will be the fruit. The flesh is to be crucified, They that are
Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. He that makes
Gal. 5. 24.
the flesh his Counselor will be crucified by the flesh, instead of crucifying
the flesh. That one text of the Apostle, Romans 8. 13. is enough to cause men to
withdraw their feet from following the flesh, If ye live after the flesh ye
shall dye, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live. The flesh knows the way to Hell, but it never trod one step in that
way that leads to Heaven. Sampson, by harkening to the allurements of Delilah,
lost both his eyes, afterward his liberty, and then his life. He that makes
the flesh his guide, shall find that Hell will be his eternal lodging. Thus
much shall serve for the rebuke of those who neglect the guidance of Gods 2
Reason of Reprehension to those that would have God guided by their Counsel.
Counsel, and set up other guides instead thereof.

Before I leave this Use, I must a little dispute with another sort, and they
are those, who instead of desiring to be guided by Gods Counsel, would have God
guided by their Counsel. There are many who take upon them the boldness to
dispute with God about his ordering the affairs of the world; they are offended
because the wheels of Providence do not move according to their mind, they
think if they had the reins of Government in their hands they could manage
things in a better way than God does. All that wrangle with their Maker about
his Dispensations are guilty of this sin. Jeremiah cries out, Why do the wicked
prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Jer. 12. 1,
2. Men's hearts, even good men, are ready to swell, because of such Providence
as they do not understand; such men should do well to consider, That by
censuring the motions of Providence they meddle with things that are too high
for them. Shall any teach God knowledge, says Job, seeing Job 21. 22.
he judges those that are high? Wise Artists will not be controld by bunglers;
The raw Mariner must not teach the skilful Pilot. It is man's duty to submit to
all the Dispensations of God, and to admire them, but not to quarrel with them.
God guided the world in Wisdom and Righteousness before we had breath, and so
will he do when we are in the dust. Clouds and Psalm. 97. 2.
darkness are round about him, righteousness and judgment are the habitation
of his Throne. The most cloudy paths of Providence are paths of Righteousness;
those motions which we are apt to judge irregular are very orderly. Those
actings which our foolish hearts sinfully call the deformities of Providence,
are the beauties of Providence, The foolishness of God, says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 1. 25.
is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men. That which
men count foolish has infinite wisdom in it, and that which men judge weak
has Almighty strength. When we are at a loss God is not at a loss. We see but
the present movings of Providence, but God sees his work from the beginning to
the end. God has from Eternity laid the frame of all his Works, and whether we
see it or no, he fits all his Providence to that Pattern. He can break
enemies by exalting them; Hamans highest advancement was the Prologue to his
fall. He can raise his people by their castings down. Joseph's Iron Chains were
a way to the Golden chain; he had never been a Ruler in Egypt, if he had not
been a slave in Egypt. God can reconcile Providence and Promises when they
seem to fight one against another. The Promise of God shall be made good,
though the Son of Promise be laid on the Altar. The Passengers with Paul shall
be saved, though the Ship be broken with the violence of the waves. Providence
can carry a man to shore on a broken piece of a Plank, as well as in the long
Boat. Some Providence are cross to us, but they are all direct to God. The
Saints of God when they come to Heaven shall admire those actings of Providence
most, which they have here most condemned. You that are the Servants of God,
take heed of questioning with God in such cases; you are not to prescribe God,
but to follow God. When he is in the Sanctuary, when his way is in the Sea,
when his footsteps are not known; follow him in a way of holy Prayer, in a way
of faithful dependence, in a way of humble submission, and you shall see that
his hidden ways were ways of wisdom. Let the Providence of God be never so
amazing, we may conclude of this, That he can do nothing against his own
Glory, that he will do nothing against the best good of them that fear his
name. Thus much for the Second Use, which was for Reprehension.

Thirdly for Exhortation. These two Doctrins do Use 3. Of Exhortation.
recommend three Duties unto all of us that are here present.

First, Bless God O ye Saints, for this great Privilege 1 Bless God for this
guidance.
of Divine guidance. When you have any occasion to go to a Lawyer for Counsel,
you give him his Fee without asking. When you hire a guide to conduct you in
the way, you are willing to give him satisfaction. God expects that his people
should with thankfulness acknowledge his great kindness in laying his Word
before them, in putting his Spirit within them, in making his Providence
subservient for their safe conduct. David wisely and Psalm. 16. 7.
graciously resolves upon this, I will bless the Lord who has given me
counsel, my reins also instruct me in the night seasons. God did not only give
him his Word to advise him, but his Spirit to teach him. The Holy Ghost did
stamp such powerful impressions on his affections, which he calls his reins,
that he was effectually bowed to embrace the Counsels of the Word. When the
Wise Men that went to find out Christ, saw the Star, the text says, they were
exceeding Mat. 2. 10.
glad; had not that directing Star gone before them, they had never found the
Babe Jesus. No doubt the Children of Israel lift up their hearts and glorified
God, when that pillar of Cloud and Fire was erected among them. And should not
the Believers heart rejoice, and leap for joy, that has as certain a guide to
go before him as that was? Let me but hint some advantages which accrue to the
people of God, by reason of this guiding Counsel, and they cannot but see
cause of continual thansgivings. I shall but instance in three particulars.

First, By virtue of this divine guidance you are 1 Hereby are we preserved
from sin.
preserved from those sinful ways, in which others walk to their everlasting
ruin. The Prophet David found this benefit: Concerning the works of men, by
the word of thy lips, I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer; and
hereupon he prays in the very next words, hold Psa. 17. 4, 5.
up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Why is it, that the
Saints do not defile their precious Souls with those horrid blasphemies,
wherewith others are infected, but because they are guided by the Counsel of
God? That you are not Drunkards, Murderers, Covenant-breakers, Idolaters,
Liars, is from hence, because God is pleased continually to guide you. That you
do not swim down the stream, with others, in a corrupt age, that you keep faith
and a good conscience in a faithless and adulterous generation, it is to be
ascribed to this guidance of heaven. That you do not deny Christ that bought
you, that you do not reject the Scriptures, that you do nor forsake the
Ordinances and Ministry, as many do, that you have not washed your hands in
innocent blood, and conspired against the life of the righteous, it is because
God has led you by the Counsel of his word and spirit. The best and holiest
person in this assembly, would have acted his part in the most horrid designs,
that others have been employed in carrying on, if God had left him to his own
heart. If you therefore account it a mercy that you have not stained your
hearts, and hands, and consciences, with the black and bloody guilt of the
worst of sins, bless the Lord who has given you Counsel.

Secondly, By means of this guidance, you are kept safe from those dangers
whereby others have been 2 Hereby are we kept from danger.
overtaken. It was by reason of the Pillar of Cloud, that the people of God
escaped the fury of Pharaoh Exo. 14. 20.
and his host, when they did pursue them with such impoysoned malice. The
Pillar came between the Camp of the Egyptians and the Camp of Israel, so that
the one came not near the other all the night. Gods guiding presence with
believers is for protection as well as direction. As God marches in the Vann
of the Army, to show his people the way, so his presence is in the ^ere, to
prevent their danger. Thy righteousness shall go before thee, says the
Prophet to the believer, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. Isa,
58. 8.
The fiery darts of Devils would long since have gangrened your flesh, and the
venom of their Arrows drunk up your spirits, if God by his guiding presence had
not stood by you for defense. The same God that has been a wall of fire for
your protection, has been a wall of fire for your enemies destruction. When
Israel saw themselves on dry land, and the Egyptians dead on the shore, then
they sung praises to God, Exo. 15. 1. It is by virtue of the fiery Pillar that
you have to this day escaped the rage of your Pursuers; let the remembrance of
it inflame your hearts into the highest praises. 3 Hereby is our way sweetened.


Thirdly by means of this guidance the way of your pilgrimage has been
sweetened to you. A good guide does not only preserve the passenger from
dangerous paths, but by his discourse and company renders the journey
comfortable. Through Gods guiding presence that has been with you in the way,
you have enjoyed sweet communion with him; you have had many a days
comfortable converse with God, you have hereby had opportunity to open your
souls to him, to lay your doubts, fears, temptations, before his face. God did
not only direct the people of Israel by the Pillar of Cloud, but he did from
thence reveal himself to them upon all occasions. He spoke to them, says
David, out of the fiery Pillar. God, in guiding Psa. 99. 7.
the Saints by his Counsel, does familiarly make himself known to them; who is
this that comes out Cant. 8 5.
of the Wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? The phrase does not only signify
conduct, but familiarity. God by the guiding of his people gives them
opportunity to see the boylings of his affection toward them, and to unlock
all their secrets unto him. He tells them many a pleasant story, whereby their
drooping hearts are cheered, and gives them leave to declare all their griefs
whereby their souls are dis-burthened. Now let me again beseech you, and
charge you, O ye holy ones of God, by all the sins from which you have been
preserved, by all the dangers from which you have been delivered, and by all
the sweet comforts which you have received by the guiding Counsel of God, to
get your hearts fired into flames of holy praises.

Secondly, Be willing to submit to the guidance 2 Submit to this guidance.
of Gods Counsel. Do not pull away the shoulder, do not harden your hearts, be
not stiff-necked, but where Gods bids you go thither resolve to go. The
Children of Israel did move when the Pillar of Cloud moved, and they went which
way soever it went; and when the Pillar stood still then they pitched their
Tents. At the Commandment of the Lord they journeyed, and at the Commandment
of the Lord they pitched Number 9. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
their Tents. If the Cloud did not move for many days together, they abode in
their Tents, and if the Cloud moved at midnight, they moved after it, whether
it was by day or by night that the Cloud was taken up, they journeyed. This
story sets a holy pattern before all true Israelites. As Israel did follow that
Pillar, so should we follow our Pillar. Israel followed the guidance of the
Pillar universally, which way soever it moved 1 Universally.
they marched after it. Believers must eye the Counsel of God in one thing as
well as another. It is said of Caleb, that he wholly followed the Lord. He
that Deuteronomy. 1. 36.
does not obey universally, does not obey wholly. He that does not regard the
divine Counsel in every thing, does not truly regard it in any thing. David
expresses the integrity of his heart by this, that he hated every false way.
One by-path will hinder the Travellor Psa. 1^9. 104.
from attaining to the end of his journey, as well as an hundred bypath.
Walking in one sinful way will shut the Soul out of heaven, as well as if it
embraced every sinful way.

Again, Israel followed the Pillar constantly, not only for a day, or a month,
but all the time they were 2 Constantly.
in the Wilderness. Believers must submit to the guidance of Gods Counsel
constantly. David resolves upon this, I have inclined my heart to perform thy
statutes Psa. 119. 112.
always, even unto the end. If a Travellour do not follow his Guide to the end
of his Journey, he may lose himself at the last. A Believer shall find as
much need of Gods Counsel the last day of his travel, as he did the first day
of his setting out. The greatest Conflicts are many times at the hour of death.
Many Ships have miscarried in the Harbor for want of care. The nearer any
person thinks himself to Heaven, the sadder will it be to him to be shut out of
Heaven. Let me but propound two or three Arguments Motives to follow Gods
counsel.
to persuade you to follow this Counsel of God, and I shall shut up this point.
Consider,

First, The infallibility of Gods Counsel; God never did, God never will
misguide any poor Soul that 1 God cannot misleade.
follows his counsel. Men are either Deceivers, or apt to be deceived; but God
cannot be deceived, nor will he deceive any. Infallibility is tied to Gods
Throne, but to no other in the world. It is impossible the Ship should be cast
away, when God sits at the Helm. Could we speak with all those Passengers that
are now landed in Heaven, they would bid us shut our eyes, and follow God
without the least doubting. How confident is the Prophet of his safety upon
this account? I have set the Lord always before me, because he Psalm. 16. 8.
is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. He that follows Gods counsel may be
assaulted, but he shall not be moved. We read of the Devils standing at the
right hand of Joshua, Zech. 3. 1. He is a shaking the people of God by his
temptations, but he cannot move them. A Believer needs not fear how many Devils
stand before him, so long as God stands at his right hand. Jacob might perhaps
think himself missed when he heard of Esau's coming to meet him, but God gave
Genesis 32. 90.
him cause to acknowledge, that that was the best way for his safety.

Secondly, If we do not follow the guidance of 2 He that will not have God for
his guide, shall be given up to his own guidance.
Gods Counsel, he will give us up to follow our own counsels. There is not a
greater judgment in this World, than for a man to be left to his own guidance.
He that is a Self-counsellor, will be a Self-murtherer. When a man is delivered
up to walk in the ways of his own heart, and in the sight of his own eyes, he
will never stop till he come to ruin. When the Pilot and Mariners forsake the
Ship, and let her drive, she does soon dash her self against Rocks, or fall
into the quick-sand. A man's own counsel will deal by him as Absoloms Mule did
by him, it will carry him to the place of danger, and there leave him. Now one
punishment which God inflicts on those that will not wait for his counsel, is
to surrender them to the conduct of their own counsel. The Prophet observes
this in Gods dealing with Israel, My people would not Psalm. 81. 11, 12
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to their
own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels. He that will not have
God to be his guide, shall have Lust to be his guide; and it is Nihil magis
timendum quam ita emaucipari homines a Deo, ut laescivic^tes in suis cousiliis
a Satanatrahantur. Calv.
easy to conclude where he will take up his Inn that is guided by his Lust.
It is the most dreadful thing in the World, says Calvin, for God to punish men
with this liberty, as that they should be left to their own devices. God
threatens the Jews, that a Leopard shall watch over their Cities, Jer. 5. 6. It
is ill living in those Cities where Leopards keep the Keys. When God gives a
man up to his own counsels, he does make a Leopard his watchman. When God
delivered up those Gentiles to their own imaginations, into what excess of
wickedness did they run? They were filled with Romans 1. 29, 30, 31.
all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness,
full of envy, murder, debate, etc. These are the best fruits that can be
expected, when God leaves a man to himself.

Thirdly, If we will not follow Gods guidance, we 3 Else God will not provide
for us.
shall not enjoy Gods provision. God is compared to a good Shepherd, who does
both lead and feed his sheep; if he may not be permitted to be a guiding Psalm.
23. 1, 2.
Shepherd, he will not be a feeding Shepherd; He that will not be led by Gods
Hand, cannot expect to be fed out of Gods Basket. The Spirit of God is called
both a Comforter and a Guide; He that will not follow the guidance of the
Spirit, shall never reap the comforts of the Spirit. The Word of God is
profitable, both for Consolation, and direction; He that will not submit to the
directing Word, shall never enjoy the comforting Word; God will not suckle you
at his breasts, if you will not be guided by his hand. A Servant can have no
confidence to come to his Masters house for meat and lodging, that will not be
advised by him in doing his work. He that will not walk according to the
conduct of Gods eye, shall have no share in the bounty of his hand. Let what
has been said persuade you to a ready, constant, universal submission to the
guidance of God.

Thirdly, Labor to be so qualified, that you may 3 Ca^ry your selves so that
God may guide you.
have assurance of Gods guidance. To this purpose there are diverse Graces that
I shall commend to you, which are as so many holy dispositions, that will give
you security that Gods counsel shall be your guide.

First, Take heed of looking with a pleasant countenance 1 Take heed of all sin.
on any sin. God will withdraw both his Eye, and his Hand from his own
Children, if he see their hearts hankering after any wickedness. David says of
himself, That if he regarded iniquity in his heart, Psalm. 66. 18.
God will not hear him. If a Believer regard iniquity in his heart, God will
not guide him. When the people of Israel had grievously sinned against God, he
refuses to go with them in that glorious manner he had done before, I will
not go up in the midst of thee, for thou Exodus 33. 3.
art a stiff-necked people. God will not be a guide to Robbers, nor a leader
to Thieves. Sin will drive God out of his own House, and make him carry himself
as a stranger to his own Children. Be ye clean, ye that Isa. 52. 11, 12
bear the vessels of the Lord, for the Lord will go before you, and the glory
of Israel will be your rereward. Gods presence with his people is an Argument
why they should be holy, and their holiness is to them a hopeful ground to
believe that God will be present. The holy God will not be a Convoy to his own
people when he sees them walk in unholy ways.

Secondly, Be humble in heart. Proud men are 2 Be humble:
neither willing to be guided, nor fit to be guided. All promises of Divine
direction are made to the lowly in heart, The meek will he guide in judgment,
and the meek Psalm. 25. 9.
will he teach his way. Proud hearts are unmeet to be guides to men, and
unworthy to be guided by God. A proud heart is a thwarting and a scornful
heart, and a scornful heart will never bow to instruction. All his Deuteronomy. 33. 3.
Saints are in thy hand, and they sat down at thy feet, every one shall
receive of thy words. He that expects to have the guidance of Gods Hand, must
sit down at his feet. Sitting at the feet is the posture of Humility, and that
is the Leatners posture. A proud spirit is a resisting and a contradicting
spirit, and a contradicting spirit is not easily ductise. Arrogance of heart is
compared to an Isa. 48. 4.
Iron Sinew, it is not an easy matter to lead a man whose sinews are all of
Iron. Pride makes a man think himself fit to dictate to all; and he that
conceives himself able to give counsel, will not easily incline to take
counsel. The Apostle tells us, that God resists the proud, Jam. 4. 6. they
fight against God, and God sets himself in array against them. But he gives
grace to the humble; he will give them quickening grace, and supporting grace,
and guiding grace. An obedient ear, and a lowly heart, shall never want the
guidance of Divine grace.

Thirdly, Depend on God for guidance. A fiducial 3 Depend on God.
reliance on God does exceedingly engage God, I will set him on high because he
has known my name, Psalm 91. 14. God loves to be trusted, and to be depended
upon. An ingenuous man will not fail his friend when he knows he relies on
him. God never did, never will cast off the care of those that do by faithful
recumbency cast their care on him. The Prophet David does often plead with God
for direction, upon on this Argument, In thee do I trust, cause me to know
Psalm. 143. 8.
the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul unto thee. A firm
trusting in God shall be recompensed with the wise guidance of God. God will
lift up the eye of his Care on that man that lifts up the eye of his Faith to
him. God takes it kindly, when a Soul will commit it self to him. Holy faith
will engage both the heart and the hand of God for preservation and direction.

Fourthly, Ask Gods advice in all your concernments. 4 Do nothing without Gods
advice.
He that desires to have God for his Counselor, must by Prayer go to him for
counsel continually. If we fondly lean to our own understanding, God will leave
us to our own understanding. If we begin once to trust to the guidance of our
own eyes, God will soon with draw his eye. Hear what counsel Solomon gives to
this purpose, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he Prove. 3, 6, 7.
shall direct thy paths. Be not wise in thine own eyes. There are two things
which deprive men of Gods direction; The one is, Trusting to their own wisdom;
the other is, The neglect of asking wisdom from God. Solomon labors to remove
both these in this text. He that is wise in his own eyes will never thank God
for counsel; if his matters succeed, he will sacrifice to his own prudence,
and not to God: And he that does not by prayer seek for counsel, will never
much value counsel. Abraham's Servant when he was to go totake a Wife for his
Masters Son, seeks to God for direction, and God was entreated. The profane
man that will not pray, puts in a Caveat against himself; but he that does
humbly sue to God has a promise of audience. If any of you lack wisdom let him
ask of God, Jam. 1. 5.
who gives liberally to all men, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given
him. A Father can hardly deny to stretch out the hand to his Child, when he
sees him on his knees begging. Those that dare not adventure to take one step
till they have consulted Heaven, shall not go one step without Heavens
direction.

Fifthly, Endeavor to guide others in the way. 5 Be a guide to others.
Job says, That he was eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, Job 29. 15.
As he did cloth them that were naked, with the fleece of his sheep, so he was
careful to advise them that were ignorant, by that knowledge God had given him.
God is well pleased to see his people, in a regular way, willing to be
instructers to others. God promises to water those that water others, The
liberal soul shall be made fat, and Prove. 11. 25.
he that waters shall be watered also himself. God will be a Sun to guide
him, that is willing to be a Star to guide others. He that sets himself to
reduce those that go astray, may comfortably hope that God will preserve him
from going astray. Well,

To wind up all in one word, Be entreated, as you tender The Conclusion.
your own Souls, and the honor of God, to pray for this Divine guidance, and
to accept of it. Pray that the unerring Word may be your rule, and the
infallible Spirit of God your guide in all your ways; you are undone for ever
if God do not continually guide you. There are many Seducers gone out into the
World, there are seducing Devils, and seducing Men, who are the instruments of
the Devil, walking about to deceive the simple; and which is worst of all,
every man has a seducing heart of his own, which without any force is ready to
turn aside from the ways of truth and holiness. If God do not guide us, we
shall eternally miscarry. God threatens Moab, Jer. 48. 12.
to send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander. This threatening is
accomplished in our days, God in his just judgment has for our sins sent
among us many wanderers. We have many Spiritual Vagrants, but we want a
Spiritual House of Correction for the punishing of these Vagrants. There are
many wandering Stars in the Firmament of our Church at this time, and which is,
and shall be for a lamentation, many are misled by them. There is a generation
of Ranters, Seekers, Quakers, risen up among us. Profaneness is now stamped
with the name of Religion, and this Religion has many professors. The holy
Scriptures of God are cried down by some with much boldness. The Divinity of
Christ our Lord denied, the Doctrine of the Trinity scorned, Sabbaths, Ministry,
and Ordinances trod under foot. There are among us Jesuits, who endeavor with
all their might to captivate us to the Romish Idolatry, and to bring us again
into that bondage. By reason of all these are the ways of truth evil spoken of.
And how much impiety of life have these wicked Opinions and Heresies
introduced? Pride, Drunkenness, Swearing, Lying, Cheating, and all manner of
ungodly practices are to be found amongst us. Who can stand in such an Age, if
God do not guide him? And therefore if you would not be carried away with this
deluge of wickedness, pray, pray, pray that God would guide you with his
unerring counsel.

I have done with the former Branch of the text, The second Branch of the text.
which I called, The godly man's happiness in this Life. I go on to the latter,
which is the Believers happiness in the other Life; this is laid down in these
words, And afterward receive me to glory.

What was needful to be said for the opening of the words, has been already
dispatched All that is now to be done is to lay down the Doctrine, and it is
this.

That those that are guided in this life by Gods Counsel, The Doctrine laid
down.
shall afterward be crowned with glory. Those that march under the Devils
conduct, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, shall take up their eternal
Quarters with him in Torment; but those that are led by the guidance of God
shall have an everlasting habitation with him in glory.

Glory is that state of happiness which the Saints The Doctrine opened.
shall enjoy in heaven. This happy condition is represented in the holy
Scriptures under several notions. It is called Rest, Unto you that are
troubled rest with us. 2 These. 1. 7. Peace, so the Prophet calls it Isa. 57. 2.
He shall enter into Peace. It is called joy, our Masters joy. Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord Matthew. 25. 21. Its called Life Matthew. 19. 17. And
everlasting life Joh. 3. 16. It is called a Kingdom. Luke 12. 32. The Kingdom
of Heaven Matthew. 5. 3. It is called Salvation Heb. 9. 28. It Is called a crown
Rev. 3. 11. A Crown of life Rev. 2. 10. A Crown of righteousness 2 Timothy 4. 8.
A Crown of glory 1 Pet. 5. 4, It is called refreshing Acts 3. 19. It is
expressed by sitting with Christ in his Throne Rev. 3. 21. by eating of the
Tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God Rev. 2. 7. Its called
Abraham's bosom Luke 16. 12. many excellent names are given to it, and in the
Text it is call glory.

In the prosecution of the point, I shall lay open these three particulars.

First, I shall speak something of the nature of this Glory.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to make good the Doctrine, that they that are
guided by the Counsel of God shall enjoy this glory.

Thirdly, When it is that the Saints do enter upon the actual possession of
this glory. And I shall be very brief in all these.

First, For the nature of this glory, I must premise The nature of this glory.
this, that it is impossible for any earthly creature fully to set forth this
glory to the life, or to make a perfect description of it. It is called
unspeakable glory. It is not only unspeakable but unconceivable. Says the
Apostle, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have 2 Cor. 12. 4.
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. It is as possible to 1 Cor. 2. 9. Regnum Dei omni fama majus, omni
laud melius, omni scientia innumerabilius, omni gloria, quae pu^atur,
excellentius. Austin.
paint the glorious Sun with a coal, as for any humane tongue to be able to
discover perfectly this heavenly glory. Should all the Angels of God set
themselves to write Treatises of this glory, they would not be able to eternity
to tell the world perfectly how glorious it is.

That which I purpose to say concerning it, I will sum up in these following
particulars.

First, That glory which the Saints shall be received 1 It is a complete glory.
into after this life, is a complete and perfect glory. It is a heaven full of
glory. The greatest glory which men possess in this life is but scanty and
imperfect, there is still something to be desired; but the glory of the other
life is in every respect perfect. The Apostle 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...).
calls it a far more exceeding weight of glory. It is a weighty glory; this
shows the substantialnesse and solidnesse of it. All the glory of this world is
but a mere shadow of glory, it makes some show but it has no weight, but the
glory of heaven has substance in it. And then it is a far more exceeding
weight. Interpreters are troubled how to render the words. Beza reads it an
excellently excellent weight of glory. It is a degree above the Superlative.
Add one Hyperbole to excellenter excellentis gloriae pondus. Beza
another, and the glory of heaven will still exceed all expression. The glory
of heaven is perfect both in respect of parts, and in respect of degrees. There
is no kind of glory, there is no degree of glory which creatures are capable
of, but the Saints enjoy it in heaven. In thy presence is fullness of joy, Psa.
16. 11. whatsoever is possessed in heaven is possessed fully. There is fullness
of knowledge, fullness and perfection of love, fullness of union, fullness of
communion. And then it is perfect glory, because it is universal. The whole
man is made glorious. The soul, the body, every faculty, every member is
invested with that glory which is proper to each. The Apostle expresses 2 Cor.
5. 4.
the Saints investiture with glory by the Metaphor of putting on a garment, not
that we would be unclothed but clothed upon; when God shall fully glorify his
saints there shall be no part of the body, no power of the Soul unglorified. If
I should fall upon a discourse of the particular happinesses which the
glorified Souls and bodies of Saints shall enjoy in heaven, I should tire out
your patience. Let it ^uffice to say this, that whatsoever makes for the
perfection of both, shall be fully possessed by both. The Schoolmen speak much
of the Stole of the Soul, and the Stole of the body; the Saints shall have
those robes put upon them, and shall not want any one Pearl or Spangle that
belongs to the perfection of either. The state of glory is described by our
coming unto a perfect man, Ephesians. 4. 13. The Saints here are in their Nonage,
the highest Believer is but a stripling at best; but when we come to heaven
then we are perfect men. The first moment the Soul peeps into glory, it shall
have all graces in perfection. Could we speak with those blessed souls that
are now in heaven, they would tell us, they desire nothing but the company of
those earthly Tabernacles in which they dwelled while they were in this World;
and to these they shall be reunited at the Resurrection.

Secondly, The glory which the Saints shall possess 2 It is a pure glory.
is a pure glory. There is not the least mixture of any thing that is
unglorious, or dishonorable; if it were not pure it would not be perfect.
There are but two things that can stain the glory of the Saints, Sin, and
Sorrow, and both these shall be for ever abolished. The Saints in glory shall
be as free from Sin as the Sun is from darkness. No defilement shall enter
into Heaven. The Soul when it leaves the Body is perfectly healed of all kind
of sinful distempers; and the Body when it comes out of the Fining-pot of the
grave shall not have so much as the smell of sin upon it. Sin brought Death
into the World, and Death carries out Sin. The Dominion of sin is removed from
the Saints in this Life, but then shall the very Being of sin be removed.
Unbelief, pride of heart, the Body of Death, which Believers complain against,
with so much sadness in this world, shall never trouble them more for ever.
Here the Spirit lusts against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17.
and the flesh lusts against the Spirit; but in Heaven, there shall be no
such sinful Lusts to war against the Soul. There shall be no concupiscence in
the Members, Non erit concupiscentia in membris, non exurget rebellio carnis,
etc. Cyprian.
no rebellion of the Flesh, no crookedness in the Will, no disorder in the
Affections. Nature shall then be every way entire and perfect. The Church shall
at the Day of Judgment be presented without spot or wrinckle, or any such
thing. Here the Saints are black and comely, here they are ring-straked,
spotted, and speckled, as Jacobs Cattle were; here they are partly Spiritual,
and partly Carnal, but in Heaven they shall be wholly Spiritual. Nothing like
sin shall appear on the glorified Bodies and Souls of Saints, to all eternity.
All Natural weaknesses shall be done away, much more all sinful weaknesses.

As Sin shall be abolished, so shall Sorrow. All sorrow is the fruit of sin,
and when the Mother is dead, no more Offspring can be expected. It was told
St. John, That those Saints which he saw arrayed in white Robes, were come out
of great tribulation. When Rev. 7. 14
man is born he comes into tribulation, but a Saint when he dies goes out of
tribulation. The Dead which dye in the Lord, are said to rest from their
labors. Rev. 14. 13
In Heaven the Children of God shall enjoy perfect freedom from whatsoever is
troublesome. Grief, Fear, Temptation, pain of Body, anguish of Mind shall be
heard of no more for ever. There is no groaning, no crying, no death, no
vexation, no sickness to be heard of in the streets of that City, where the
Saints inhabit. The body shall be raised a powerful body, an immortal, an
incorruptible body. The very roots of all distempers shall be plucked up out of
the body, and therefore the distempers themselves shall cease. And for outward
violence, that has no place neither, there are no oppressors in Heaven, no
injurious persons, no bloody Taskmasters to impose burdens, or inflict
stripes. When a Saint is past Death, he is past the fear of all misery. When
the body is wrapped up in the Winding Sheet, it is past all tribulation.

Thirdly, It is a satisfactory glory; It is such a glory 3 It is a satisfying
glory.
as does give full contentment to the heart that possesses it. If it did not
satisfy, it would not be perfect. The Prophet David speaking of the happy
state of Heaven, says, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Psalm. 17. 15
likeness. Though there are several degrees of Glory in Omnibus una salus
Sanctis, sed gloria dispar.
Heaven, as is more than probably gathered by Divines from Scripture; yet all
grant, That he that enjoys the lowest degree, is fully satisfied with what he
enjoys; he is not capable of desiring any one degree of glory above what he
possesses. God himself is the Objective happiness of the Saints, and he that
enjoys God must of necessity be satisfied with the enjoyment of him. The glory
of this World does not content the heart. Ambitious Haman thought all he had
nothing, Hest. 5. 13
because he wanted something he would have had. The want of Mordecays knee at
the Kings gate, made him forget the sweetness of the Queens Banquet. The Royal
feast did not satisfy, because Mordecai the Jew was not Servitor at the Table.
The Queens Wine was not sweet to his taste, because Mordecai was not
Cup Bearer. The heart of man is too big to be filled either with worldly
riches, or worldly honor. But the blessed Saints in glory are every way
satisfied. The Soul is so filled with the glory of God, that there is no room
to contain another ray.

Fourthly, It is an everlasting glory; it is a glory without abatement, and
without end. The Apostle 4 It is an eternal glory.
calls it an eternal weight of glory. All the glory of this World is of a
fading nature, it is a withering flower, 2 Cor. 4. 17
and no better. Hamans fall was as sudden as his rise. The same person is cried
up, and decried in one day, by the breath of the people. The Thrones of glory
which are on earth are often leveld with the ground. Kings lose their Crowns
and Scepters many times by violence; if they keep them till death, yet then do
they and their pomp descend together into the Grave. The Sun of earthly glory
has its setting, as well as rising. But the glory of the Saints above is an
abiding glory. Nescit vicissitudinem, nescit finem, manet tota simul and manet
in aeternum. The Apostle will tell you the B^^n. Sermon. de fallacia presentis
vitae.
English of it, It is an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades
not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4. The Saints shall never put off their glorious robes,
after they have once put them on. It is as possible to thrust God out of
Heaven, as to thrust a Saint from thence. The glory of Heaven would not be
perfect, if it were not eternal. The Saints would be in continual fear of
loosing it, and the fear of future loss would eat up all the joy of present
possession.

Fifthly, It is the same glory which Christ himself possesses. The Saints are
not only glorified with 5 It is the same glory which Christ has.
Christ, which is a great exaltation, but they do enjoy the very same glory
which Christ does; the same for kind, though not for degree. God has not one
Heaven for his Son, and another for his Saints, but one and the same Heaven for
both. The glory which thou gave me, I have given them. The Head and Members
are glorified together with the same kind of glory. Hence it is that the
Apostle says, Our vile bodies Joh. 17. 22
shall be fashioned like unto his glorious body. The bodies of Believers shall
be truly glorious as Christ's is, they Phil. 3. 21
shall be eternally glorious as his is, and they shall possess the same kind
of glory that he does. The Humane Nature of Christ shall shine far brighter
than the brightest Saint, but yet the same glory which beams upon his body
shall descend on theirs. The lowest Saint in Heaven shall be invested with the
same immortality, incorruptibility, impassibility, and Clarity, wherewith the
glorious Body of Christ is invested. When he appears, says the Apostle, we
shall be 2 John 3. 2.
like him, for we shall see him as he is. There is a likeness between Christ
and Believers here. As he is, so are we 1 John 4. 17.
in this world, but in Heaven there shall be a more perfect likeness than now
there is; then there shall be similitude, and no dissimilitude. The Saints are
said to sit down with Christ in his Throne, Rev. 3. 21. they are said to follow
the Lamb unto living fountains of waters, Rev. 7. 17. they are said to be
joynt-heirs with Christ, and to be glorified together with him, Romans 8. 17.
They are said to appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. All these expressions do
fully declare this truth, that they shall possess the same kind of glory he
does. The same face of God, which Jesus Christ beholds they shall behold. As
Christ has full, uninterrupted, eternal Communion with God, so shall they;
they shall eat of the same Tree of Life which Christ himself eats of; they
shall drink of the same Fountain of which he does, and they shall lodge in the
same bosom of God in which Christ himself lodges. Thus I have finished the
First thing, namely, the nature of that glory which the Saints shall possess,
If communion and fellowship with an infinite good, in a place made for glory
can make the Saints happy, they shall be perfectly and perpetually happy. 2
That all the-Saints shall enjoy this glory.


Secondly, That the Saints who are guided by this Counsel of God shall be
received into this glory. For the confirming of which truth, it will be enough
only to hint the following considerations.

First, This glory is frequently promised to them 1 It is promised. Joh. 10.
27, 28
in the Scripture. My sheep, says our Savior, hear my voice, and I know them,
and they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life. Everlasting life is the
reward which is by free Deed of Gift settled upon the followers of Christ. The
Israelites that followed the guidance of the Pillar of Cloud through the
Wilderness, came at last to Canaan; The Spiritual Israel, that follow the
guidance of the Pillar of Gods Word, have the security of the Divine promise,
that they shall sit down in the heavenly Canaan. The Saints are said to be
glorified even while they live on earth, Romans 8. 30. they shall as certainly
ascend to Heaven as if they were already there. The Divine promise is the best
security God can give, or Man desire. Heaven is called the Saints inheritance,
Col. 1. 12. though they lose other inheritances they shall never lose this.

Secondly, The way and the end cannot be separated. 2 The way and end are
inseparable.
He that keeps the way that leads to a City, cannot but come to that City. The
following of Gods Counsel is the direct way to Heaven, and he that walks in
the way to Heaven cannot miss of Heaven. Being Romans 6. 22
made free from sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your fruit unto
holiness, and the end everlasting life. Grace and Glory are made inseparable
companions; The Lord will give grace and glory. Grace and glory do Psalm. 84. 11
not differ specifically, but only gradually. Grace is unripened glory, Glory
is ripened grace. Grace is the Infant of Glory, Glory is the perfect man of
grace. Grace is the bud, Glory is the fruit. Grace is the Spring, Glory is the
Harvest. Grace is the first degree of glory, Glory is the highest degree of
Grace. The Apostle puts Glory and Virtue together, 2 Pet. 1. 3. When God calls
a Soul to Virtue, he really calls it to glory. Virtue is the threshold of that
house where Glory keeps court. He that is once over this threshold, shall not
turn back till he come to glory. The first moment the Soul is brought into a
state of saving grace, it is matriculated into a state of glory. Whom God
justifyeth, them he glorifieth.

Thirdly, Those that are guided by the Counsel of 3 They are the Sons of God.
God, are the Sons and Daughters of God. Divine guidance is a fruit of Divine
Adoption. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God.
Romans 8. 14
When God does actually make us his Children, he undertakes to lead us by his
Spirit. Earthly Parents are not able to guide their Children, but God can guide
all his. The Children of God know their heavenly Father has more wisdom than
they, they know Gods eyes are better than theirs; they know that God loves them
better than they can love themselves. All Gods Sons are willing to be guided,
and all that are willing to be guided are Sons. And if sons, then heirs; that
is the Apostles Argument, Romans 8. 27. Adoption tends to glorification. God may
chasten his Sons, but he will not damn any of his Sons. God has prepared
Heaven for his Children, and he is preparing his Children for Heaven. Grace is
the Nursery of Glory. As the Plants of Righteousness grow fit for Heaven they
are removed to Heaven. God will have all his Sons with him in his own Kingdom.
The glorious bosom of Abraham is ordained for the Sons of God, and the Sons of
God are ordained for it. Heaven is entayled upon the Sons and Daughters of God,
and this Entayl can never be cut off. This is sufficient to prove that which
was asserted, namely, That those that are guided by the Counsel of God shall be
received into glory.

Thirdly, When shall the Saints enter into the actual 3 When this glory is to
be possessed.
possession of this glory? For the resolving of this question I shall briefly
lay down two Propositions, which contain the whole state of the matter.

First, The Souls of Gods Elect, do immediately upon 1 The Soul enters upon it
at death.
their departure out of the body posses this happiness. There were some of old
in the Church, who thought that the Souls of men did sleep with their Bodies,
and that they did not either enjoy happiness, or suffer torment till the
Resurrection. Reverend Calv. Tractat. Theol. par. 2.
Calvin has a learned Treatise, which he calls Psychopannychia, wherein he
does confute this absurd Opinion, which it seems had infected many in those
times; the very mentioning of it is a sufficient Confutation. Those that know
any thing of Scripture, or of the Spiritual Nature of the reasonable Soul of
Man, cannot but understand the vanity of this opinion. If I could swallow down
such a gross Opinion as that of Soul-sleeping is, I should imagine those men's
Souls were in a dead sleep, who did first broach this Doctrine. The Soul of Man
is a Spirit, and Spirits do neither eat, nor sleep as Bodies do. The
reasonable Soul is a substance distinct from the Body, and therefore does not
dye, or sleep with the Body. Our Savior speaks of men that can kill the Body,
but he tells his Disciples they could not kill the Soul. If Mat. 10. 28
the Soul did sleep with the Body, those that did kill the one would kill the
other also. The Apostle Paul Phil. 1. 23
desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. His Body was not presently to
be with Christ. He did believe that that should lodge in the dust for a time,
but his Soul he knew should ascend to Heaven, when the Body did descend to the
Grave. Jesus Christ tells that Luke 23. 43
penitent Thief, that he should be with him that very day in Paradise. The Body
of our blessed Savior went to the Grave, and so also did the body of the
Thief, but both their Souls ascended immediately to Heaven. The Preacher
speaking of the dissolution of Man by death, tells us, That the dust shall
return to the Eccles. 12. 7
earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God that gave it. The Soul of
Lazarus was taken into Heaven as soon as it was breathed out of the sheath of
the body. When the bodies of the Saints retire to the House of Sleepers, as the
Grave is called, their Souls are immediately transported to Heaven, the Land of
the Living.

Secondly, Both Soul and Body shall enjoy all this 2 The whole man shall enjoy
it at the Day of Judgment.
glory at the Day of Judgment. The Scripture speaks of a general Resurrection
both of the just and unjust. As there is an Autumn or Leaf-fall of Death, so
there will be a Springtime of Resurrection. Those two old Friends, the Soul
and Body, which have been separated by death shall then meet again, and then
they shall partake together of the same condition. The Saints complete glory is
adjourned to that day, but then it shall be fully enjoyed; When Christ who is
our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Col. 3. 4
him in glory. In that day shall all Saints be glorified together, and every
Saint wholly glorified. The Apostle Paul tells us, that Christ's appearing to
Judge the World, is the day of the Elects general Coronation, 2 Timothy 4. 8. The
Crown is laid up amongst the other Regalia, but at that day the Diadem shall be
actually set upon the head of the Believer, and after that shall he wear it
without weariness, or fear of losing it, to all eternity.

Having thus opened the Doctrine, I come to the The Application.
Application, which I shall dispatch in a few particulars.

First, It strengthens our faith in that Article of 1 That there is an eternal
life.
eternal life. Though Atheists, and Epicures, scoff and deride the Doctrine of
everlasting Life, yet let the Saints of God believe it. If in this life only we
had 1 Cor. 15. 19.
hope in Christ, we were of all men most miserable; but blessed be God, there
is another, and a better being than can be expected in this World. Every stripe
inflicted upon the backs of Gods Saints, every mournful tear that distilleth
from their eyes, every pensive thought arising in their hearts, every
temptation assaulting them, every hours defection, every moments hiding of Gods
face in this life, are to them (...), as the Apostle speaks, manifest tokens of
a 2 These. 1. 5.
righteous Judgment to come, and of a state of happiness to be possessed. The
present condition of the Saints should not be so afflicting, if there were not
an Afterward of everlasting blessedness to be enjoyed. God would not suffer his
holy ones to eat so many sour Breakfasts on Earth, if he had not prepared for
them such a sweet Supper in Heaven.

Secondly, It shows us, that a holy life is of absolute 2 That holiness is
necessary for the attaining of happiness.
necessity unto salvation. There is no admittance unto glory but to those who
are guided by the Counsel of Gods Word and Spirit. Man's holiness is not the
Meritorious cause of salvation, but it is the way which leads to salvation. The
way of holiness, is that which brings the Soul to communion with the God of
holiness. No person shall have one foots breadth in Gods Tabernacle, but he
that is of cleanhands, and a pure heart, Psalm. 15. 1, 2. There is no coming to
the Non est via ad regnam sine primitiis regni, etc. Bern.
Kingdom without the first fruits of the Kingdom. No man shall reign with
Christ in Heaven, but he that first reigns as a King over his own corruptions.
Sinners would be as weary of Heaven, should they be taken thither unrenewed,
as Saints would be of Hell. Men do but deceive themselves, who think to pass
immediately from a state of Corruption into a state of Glory. There is neither
work, nor company in Heaven fit for wicked men. Without holiness no man Heb.
12. 14.
shall see the Lord. He shall never sit down with Christ at Gods right hand of
glory, who has not been guided by the right hand of his grace.

Thirdly, Let the Saints meditate much on this 3 Medt^te on this glory.
Celestial glory. God has revealed to the Elect this glory, and their
interest in it, that their thoughts might continually dwell upon it. It will be
profitable to the Saints to muse much on the happiness of the other World. I
will instance briefly in Four particulars.

First, It will make them undervalue the transitory glory of this World. How
comes it to pass that 1 This will abate our thirst after worldly glory.
earthly glory is so much affected, but because heavenly glory is so little
regarded? It is the Apostles Counsel to Christians to set their affections on
things above, not on things on the earth, Col. 3. 2. One hours musing on the
glory that is above, would cause the Soul to be as a weaned child to the glory
that is below; when a man has seen the glory of a Princes Court, he contemns
all that ever he saw in a Country Cottage. We read of a woman crowned with
Rev. 12. 1.
the Sun, and the Moon under her feet. He that has the celestial glory
before his eyes, will quickly cast the best of earthly glory behind his back.

Secondly, It will enable them to bear with patience 2 This will make
sufferings light. Rom 8. 18.
the greatest sufferings of this present life. I reckon, says the Apostle,
that all the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us. He that has his thoughts much on
the Crown, will despise the ignominy and shame of the Cross. Moses, when he
had through the prospective glass of Faith, looked a while on the Heb. 11. 23,
24, 25, 26.
recompense of the reward, chose affliction with the people of God, rather than
the preferments of Pharaohs Court. Reproach for Christ was preferred to the
treasures of Egypt, because he had respect to the recompense of the reward.
And Christ himself, who is far greater than Moses, for the joy that was Heb.
12. 2.
set before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame. Ille moeret si sibi
male sit in seculo, cui non potest been esse post seculum. The ill being of
this life is not Cyprian.
greatly sadning to that heart that knows it shall have a well-being in the
other life. The holy Martyrs did cheerfully kiss the flames, because they had
their thoughts on that glory which was far brighter than those flames.

Thirdly, It will make them more careful in all the 3 This will make us
serious in duties.
duties of religion. That Christian will be most abundant and most serious in
duties, who has his eye in heaven while he is doing duties. No Saints will
have such exact conversations on earth, as those that have their conversation
most in heaven. Such a Christian will reason it out with his Soul after this
manner. O my Soul, do thou pray for such glory, and yet so dead in prayer?
do thou hear for such happiness, and hear no better? do thou expect such
an inheritance, and yet do so little for God who has provided this
inheritance? should thy work be so little, when thy reward is so infinitely
great? It is the Apostles advice to Christians, that they 1 Cor. 15. 58.
would be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
because they know their labor is not in vain in the Lord. One serious thought
of heaven would shake off laziness, and work heart-inlargement in all the
services we do for God.

Fourthly, It will make them more desirous to be 4 This will make them willing
to be in heaven.
in heaven. He that by holy meditation lives much in heaven, will be weary of
living long on earth; when the Apostle Paul thought of being with Christ, he
wishes for a present dissolution, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. The Patriarchs Phil. 1. 23.
when they did meditate on their heavenly Country, thought they had continued
long enough in their earthly Country. He that has the eye of an Eagle to look
into the heavenly glory, will mount up as upon the wings of the Eagle to
possess that glory. Such a Saint will be glad to see the Cage opened that the
Soul may ascend.

Fourthly, and lastly, do not immoderately grieve 4 This may allay our grief
for the death of godly Relations.
for the departure of your godly friends whom you have cause to hope are
received into this glory. The world loses much by the death of the Saints, but
Saints by dying suffer no loss at all. They possess that happiness, which
both themselves and their godly friends have been long praying they might
enjoy. Could we peep into heaven and see those white garments which our dear
relations wear, we should wonder at the mourning vestures which we wear.
Could we behold the smiles of the Saints faces in heaven, we should admire at
the pensiveness of our own faces on earth. If our glorified friends could send
to us on earth, they would entreat us by all the love we bear to God and them,
not to lament their condition, but to weep for our selves and for our children.
Joseph sends his sorrowing Father this message, which he thought was
sufficient to comfort him, you shall tell my Father of all my glory in Egypt.
These tidings turned Jacobs sorrow into Genesis 45. 13. 27.
rejoicing, the Text says, his Spirit revived. Alas! What is the glory of
Egypt to the glory of heaven? The glory of Egypt is soon told, but the glory of
heaven is so great that it can never be told. If the full enjoyment of God, of
Jesus Christ, of communion with the blessed Spirit; If perfection of grace, if
the presence of all desirable good, if the absence of all evil can make
persons happy, then are the Saints that are lodged in heaven truly happy.
Reason and religion do forbid inordinate mourning for deceased believers. And
our sorrow is then immoderate, when it puts us on murmuring against that which
God has done, or when it indisposeth us for the performances of any service or
duty we owe to God or men.

If it should be in the hearts of any here present, to think, that their
deceased friends might by a little longer abiding on earth have done more
service for God, I shall fully answer such thoughts, by asserting this; That
Saints in heaven do more glorify God where they are, than they could have done
had they continued on earth. The best Saint on earth does God disservice as
well as service, yea he does him more disservice than service: But the lowest
Saint in heaven does God service without disservice, he shall never do the
least action, nor think one thought that tends to Gods dishonor. Saints on
earth honor God with weariness, but Saints in Heaven do unweariedly honor
him. Saints on earth worship God with many distractions, but they that are in
Heaven worship before him without distraction and without interruption. Saints
on earth do too often serve God with heaviness of heart, but those that are in
Heaven do him service with all the gladness of their hearts, and cheerful
service is the best service. Lift up therefore the hands which hang down, and
revive the Spirits that are overwhelmed. Power out no more tears for your
deceased friends, who are removed from a sea of trouble to a haven of rest,
where they are gloryfied with God, and where they do actually glorify God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in the highest perfection. Comfort your selves,
and comfort one another with these words.

Having finished the Scripture Text, I shall say something to the providentiall
Text. The sad providence which has occasioned this mournful meeting,
preaches many spiritual lessons to us all.

First, God has by death carried a young gentlewoman out of the world.
Strength and Beauty, Youth and flourishing days cannot privilege any from the
Grave. This providence repeats in our ears that serious Counsel of the
wiseman, Remember thy Creator i^ the days of thy Youth, Eccle. 12. 1. If we
look into the Tombs we shall find many cloysted up there, whose bones were
moystned with marrow, and whose breasts were full of Milk. The beauty of Rachel
will not keep her from the dust. The strength of Sampson will not preserve him
from death. The budding Flower falls to the earth as well as that which is
withered. The green Ear of Corn is nipt off, as well as that which is ripe for
the Sickle. You that have your veins full of blood must come to Golgotha, as
well as those whose Natural moisture decrepid Old Age has dried up.

Secondly, God has removed a Gentlewoman of good rank and quality, as to
outward things. It is not natural Parentage, or Wealth, that can put Death out
of Commission; Riches avail not in the day of death. VVealthy Abraham is gone
to the place of rottenness, as well as Lazarus the Beggar. If a man would give
a Coffin full of Gold to ransom himself from the Grave, it would not be
accepted. There is neither Redemption, nor Exchange of Prisoners in this War;
The rich man's Wealth is his strong City, Prove. 10. 15. Death will storm this
City, and carry a way the Owner, notwithstanding all his riches. Neither the
Guards of Princes, nor the Revenues of their Crowns can keep off Death for one
moment. Death can enter the Kings Court as easily as the Beggars Cottage. When
God sends Death to attatch a Mortal Creature, it esteems not Riches, no not
Gold, nor all the forces of strength.

Thirdly, God has taken away a religious Gentlewoman. Holiness and Piety do
not deliver any from the Grave. The first of Mortals that dyed was a righteous
man; The blood of the righteous Abel. Righteousness preserves from eternal
Death, not from the Temporal. Grace in the Saints never dies, but the Saints
dye notwithstanding all their graces. Believers must be wrapped in the
Winding Sheet as well as unbeleevers. The godly must lie under the Hears-cloth
as well as the wicked. Abraham is dead, and the Prophets are dead. There is
cause of mourning over dead Saints, no cause of wondering. Saints never live
till they dye, then they live for ever. These are general Meditations.

More particularly, In reference to this Gentlewoman, I shall speak somewhat
concerning her Life, and something concerning her Death, and that not so much
for her sake, as the benefit of others.

Concerning her Life these things are remarkable. God vouchsafed her the
blessing of godly and The Worshipful Joseph Brand Esquire and Mrs. Thomasin Brand
his religious Consort.
religious education. Her worthy Parents were studious, not only to provide
wealth for her, but their greatest care was, that Christ might be formed in
her. And this did much redound to their comfort, for she was, as both of them
have often expressed, a dutiful and obedient Child. The care of Parents for
the religious Education of their Children, does ordinarily return to a good
account in this life. When Parents teach Children to obey him that is the
Father of Spirits, God usually bows their hearts to be dutiful to their earthly
Parents.

She was a respective and loving Wife to her Husband, which made her
deservedly accounted by him The desire of his eyes. She was a help meet for
him, a suitable Yoke Fellow, who walked with him hand in hand in the ways of
God. The contentment he had in the enjoyment of such a Companion, does much
increase the sorrow of his heart for the loss of her.

She was of an humble and meek spirit. The enjoyment of the things of this
Life did not swell her heart. Those that were acquainted with her can truly
give this testimony of her, That she did not inordinately mind high things,
but could condescend to them of low estate. A full Purse and an humble Heart do
not always meet together.

She was no follower of the vain fashions of the World. Her Apparel was
decent and modest, not gairish. The Apostle gives this advice to Women, To
adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, as
becomes women professing godliness, 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. This Gentlewoman did
dress her self in this Scripture-glass. Spotted faces, and naked breasts are
Arguments of light spirits, and unmortified hearts. God was pleased by his
Grace to preserve this Gentlewoman, in a wanton Age; from these vanities.

She did labor to keep fast the faith that was once delivered to the Saints.
Though she was but young, having not fully completed the twentieth year of
her age, yet was she not one of those (...); as the Apostle speaks, silly
Women, that are drawn away by the cunning craftiness of those that creep into
Houses, and lead many captive. She was a lover of all the Ordinances of God,
and a frequenter of that instituted Ministry, which God has given testimony
unto by the conversion of many souls. God kept her by his Grace, that she did
not tread upon the threshold of those infectious places where Errors and
Blasphemies are usually broached.

Concerning her death, I have not much to speak. A good Life cannot but end in
a blessed Death. Her Sickness was not very long, but it was very sharp. Many
tormenting pains were in her head, which could not be removed till the last
medicine of Death took them away. In her Sickness she was very frequent in
Prayer for her self, and did importunately desire help from the prayers of
others. I was daily praying with her by her own desire, for diverse days
together, and sometimes twice a day, which gave me more opportunity to be
acquainted with her estate. She was for some time fearful of Death, as not
having that full Assurance she longed for, but at last God gave her the
victory over those fears. About two or three days before the Soul took its
leave of the Body, God was graciously pleased to give her in plenty of comfort.
Her sorrowful Husband, and Parents, coming into the Chamber, she brake forth
into these expressions, or to this effect, Now has God abundantly manifested
his love to my Soul in Jesus Christ; you are not able to conceive the joy I
feel, nor am I able to express it, I am now sure that Jesus Christ is mine. I
know that my sins are forgiven me for his sake. I am now both willing, and
desirous to dye, that I may be with Christ. This consolation cannot but be
judged to be from the blessed Spirit of God, because it was the fruit of
Prayer, and because it was given in after deep humblings, and Spiritual
Conflicts; as also because it was followed with many self-abhorrings, which are
the genuine effects of Gospel-comfort. When she mentioned these comforts,
she did usually add some such expression as this; I am a very unworthy
Creature, but I hope I am not deceived. One very considerable passage I cannot
but acquaint you with. Some days before her death, her gracious Mother seeing
the means used for her recovery to be in-effectual, retired her self into her
closet to pray for her; Amongst other Petitions she was very importunate, that
God would give her pardon and peace; Soon after returning into the room where
she lay, she found those very words in her mouth, Pardon and Peace, God has
sealed up to my Soul pardon and peace through Jesus Christ. This was a very
signal testimony that God had answered her request. Thus she continued,
sometimes bewayling her sins with much sorrow, sometimes sending up holy
ejaculations to God, as she was able, That God would never fail her, nor
forsake her; sometimes expressing her confidence of the love of God, in such
words as these; I have the whole Armor of God upon me, God has given me the
shield of faith, the breast plate of Righteousness, the helmet of Salvation, I
have now overcome the fiery darts of Satan, I do not in the least fear him, or
death. Amongst other Petitions she had frequently this in her mouth, Guide me
Lord by thy counsel, until thou bring me to glory.

That which now remains, is, To entreat all of us that are here present, to
resolve, and endeavor to be guided, both in matters of faith and obedience, by
the powerful counsel of Gods blessed Word and Spirit, that when our eyes are
closed up by death, we may be received in eternal glory.

FINIS.

