NEWS FROM FRANCE.

BEING A True Copy of a Letter sent from Mounsieur Du Plesis Cardinal
Richlieu, Cardinal of France, to the Queen, concerning many Matters of great
Note, and high Consequence.

Faithfully translated out of French into English, by Richard Jackson.

TOGETHER WITH HIS MAJESTY'S SECOND Message to the Parliament, concerning Sir
John Hothams Refusal to give his Majesty Entrance into his Town of Hull.
April 28. MDCXLII.

London, Printed for John Tompson, 1642.

THE True Copy of a Letter, sent from John Du Plosis, Cardinal Richleie,
Cardinal of France.
Most illustrious Princess,
THe News of your absence from England, and your arrival in Holland, did cause
most wonderful astonishment in your Royal Brothers Breast, and did beget a
passion correspondent to the Excellency of his Affection and Person.

We do conceive the cause to be the denial of your Liberties of Religion;
wherein the greatest part of that discontent must of necessity redound unto our
Royal Musters Dishonor.

The Conditions which were promised when you were first thought worthy to be
joined to Englands Monarch, are violated, and the most weighty privilege which
then was entreated of, and allowed, is now abridged you, and denied you, His
propriety of Nature cannot be extinguished by the Remote distance of your Royal
Person; Neither will He wink at your wrongs, wherein himself must, and will
stain a particular share. Your Excellency may still believe, and shall find,
that although we have lost the splendour and presence of your Person; you have
not lost the faith and truth of your Servants, whose Lives and Fortunes, shall
alwais be prepared in an Honorable Cause to serve your Highness.

The Cause of your remaining now in Holland may need no other demonstration
unto us, then what the Information of the Occurrences of the Affairs in England
does instruct us withal; by which we can apprehend the great affronts and
injuries offered unto your Excellent Majesty, in the abridgment of your Liebrty
of Conscience, and the tequestration of those Persons from your Presence: in
whose Loyalty you were pleased to receive some satisfaction and content.

I beseech you, let not your Grace be by this sudden storm any way discouraged,
but shine with your Native glory in despite of your Enemies prohibition, which
must not last long, but like a thick Cloud will be blown over and dissolved.

Your Glorious Constancy to your Faith, and exemplarie patience in your
sufferings, will be both remembered and revenged.

The same Almighty God, by whose providence you were born, and preserved unto
this height of Dignity, will also according to the merit of your Faith,
preserve you therein, and reward you abundant devotion, and constancy. They
deserve not the victorious Crown, who desist in the heat of the battle, and
whose timorous spirits aim at a victory without opposition. But I hope that
rather pleasure and desire of seeing those parts, rather drew abroad, then any
conceit of discontent, unto your Royal Person, for it cannot be believed, that
His Majesty Your Royal Englands King, would permit or conjure at the least
Dishonor which should be imagined to disquiet your sacred peace.

I beseech your Excellency to pardon, if in devotion of my engaged service I
have slipped forth any unbeseeming Language, in Clemency vouchsafe to look upon
my Errors, and Infirmities, if at this time any have rudely pressed into Your
Graces privacie, and wink at them as the dutiful mistakes of

Your Highness most faithful Servant, Joh. Richley.
Paris, April 1642.
His Majesty's second Message to the Parliament, concerning Sir John Hothams
Refusal to give his Majesty Entrance into his Town of Hull.
WE are so much concerned in the undutifull affront (an indignity all our
good Subjects must disdain in our behalf) We received from Sir John Hotham
at Hull, that we are impatient till we receive Justice from you; and are
compelled to call again for an Answer, being confident (however you would be
so careful, (though without Our consent) to put a Garrison into that Our
Town, to secure it and Our Magazine against any attempt of the Papists) that
you never intended to dispose and maintain it against Us your Sovereign:
Therefore we require you forthwith (for the business will admit no delay) That
you take some speedy course, that our said Town and Magazine be immediately
delivered up unto Us, and that such severe exemplary proceedings be against
those persons (who have offered Us this unsupportable affront and injury) as by
the Law is provided: And till this be done, We shall intend no business
whatsoever (other then the business of Ireland) For if we are brought into a
Condition so much worse then any of our Subjects, that whilst you all enjoy
your Privileges, and may not have your Possessions disturbed, or your Titles
questioned, We only may be spoiled, thrown out of our Towns, and our
Goods taken from us; it is time to examine how We have lost those Privileges,
and to try all possible ways, by the help of God, the Law of the Land, and
the affection of Our good Subjects, to recover them, and vindicate our self
from those Injuris. And if we shall miscarry herein, We shall be the first
Prince of this Kingdom that has done so; having no other end, but to de^ The
true Protestant Profession, The Law of the Land and The Liberty of the Subject:
And Ood so deal with Us, as we continue in those Resolutions.

FINIS.

