GANOGLIA.

Universa Arma. Hieron.

OR, The Christian Completely Armed: BEING A Treatise of the Christians Armor,
clearly opening every part thereof, both pressing to the putting of it on, and
instructing us so to use it, as we may not be foiled in time of Temptation.

Delivered by that late Reverend, and faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, Mr.
Ralph Robinson, Pastor of Mary Woolnoth, London, to his Congregation there, in
several Lectures: And now published for the further benefit of the Church of
God.

1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant: because your Adversary the Devil, as a
roaring Lion, wulketh about seeking whom he may devour, (...), whom he may
drink up at one draught. Justus ex fide vivit, sides tua justitia tua, qua
utique si credis, caves; si autem caeves conaris, and conatum tuum novit Deus,
and voluntatem tuam inspicit, and luctam cum carne considerat, and hortatur ut
pugnes, and adjuvat ut vincas, and certamen spectat, and deficieniem sublevat,
and vincentem Coronat. August. super Psalm. 32. Jan. 21. 1655.
Imprimatur,

Joseph Caryl.



LONDON: Printed by John Streater, for John Sims, at the Cross-keys in the
New-Building in Paul's Churchyard; and Elisha Wallis, at the three Black Lions
in the Old-Bayley, 1656.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
AMong many other privileges conferred upon thee, by the good hand of thy God,
this is not the least, that thou may enjoy the Labors of his Servants, as
standing Monuments of their fidelity, when they themselves are removed out of
the Land of the Living. Of which, the worthy Author of this Treatise, whom the
Lord was pleased to cut off, in the midst of his days; yea, in the flower of
his age, was not the meanest. What Solomon says of the virtuous woman, (Prove.
31. 31. Her Works praise her in the Gates) may be truly applied to him. This
part of his Works, speaks him both learned and pious; not a Novice in the
things of God, nor a Workman that needed to be ashamed; but a man of God,
thoroughly furnished to every good work. He was eminent for Prayer, in Meditation
frequent, and in Temptation much experienced: One that always valued his
Peoples souls above his own life; And, like a Candle, he quickly spent
himself, to give light to them. It was one of his Swan-like Expressions, (when
on his Deathbed) that he loved Praying and Fasting Days with all his heart:
The which, he declared abundantly, in his Practice, whilst he lived, being
frequent therein, both in public, and private. As for the Subject here treated
on, it is true, that there are many others that have written thereon; yet, we
know, that the commonest Meats do yield the most wholesome nourishment, whereas
newfound Dishes do but clog the stomach, and fill the body with unwholesome
Humors. Besides, if the sound and new manner of handling common things, may
commend them, (as it ever did, (...)) then I hope this Work will be welcome to
thee. For, by reading, thou shall find a vast difference between him and others
herein. Many Cases of Conscience are herein clearly resolved, and many
Objections fully answered, that others have omitted; and all in so plain a
style, that the meanest Capacity may understand it. At which, it may be, some
may take distaste: But I answer, It was intended for the Pulpit, not for the
Press; where, Mores non verba composuit, and animis dixit non auribus, The
scope of his Labors was his Auditors Instruction, not his own applause: nor
did he care so much to please, as to profit, 1 Cor. 14. 19. The many ways and
wiles whereby Satan labors to beguile the unstable, and to wound and
discourage the weak soul, are here unfolded; together, with several directions
for the waving of them: wherein thou shall find the Author still keeping
himself to the Metaphor in the Text, and therein discovering much, both of a
sound Head, and sanctified Heart. Like an able and skillful Physician, he does
first unbowel the Disease, and then applies his healing Medicines. Like an
experienced Commander, he first discovers the stratagems of this old and subtle
Adversary, and then instructs thee how to wave them. Like a judicious Pilot, he
fore-sees the many Shelvs and Rocks, on, or against which, the Pirat labors to
gravel or split the ship of thy Soul; and then sets up his Landmarks, whereby
thou may avoid them. Bless God for these Helps, and learn from them to fight
the good fight of Faith, till thou have finished thy course, and obtained thy
Crown. It behooves thee now (if ever) to stand upon thy guard, thy Enemy being
heated with rage, because he knows his time is short: yet despond not, for the
God of Peace will shortly tread him under thy feet. Sceva, at the siege of
Dyrrcahium, resisted Pompey's Army so long alone, that he had two hundred and
twenty Darts sticking in his Shield, and lost one of his eyes; and yet he gave
not over, till Caesar came to his rescue. A greater then Caesar is on thy side,
O Christian: Jesus Christ (the Captain of thy Salvation) has conquered him for
thee, (We are more then Conquerors, through him that loved us, Romans 8. 37.) and
in due time thou shall divide the spoil. Be not faithless, but believing; and
thereby give glory to God. Buckle on thy Armor, and David-like go out against
this Goliath, in the name of the Lord. It Is both approved, and complete.
Approved it is, and (like Joseph's Bow, Genesis 49. 24.) abiding in its full
strength, neither Age nor Use can impair it. It is also complete, Capa-pe,
answerable to the many Darts of thy Enemy. Here Is a Helmet for thy head, a
Breast Plate for thy heart, a Sword for thy hand, Shoes for thy feet, and an
indissoluble Bond, or Girdle, to fasten all together. I conclude all in the
Apostles Exhortation, 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit
you like men: Be strong, and the Lord be with you. So prays,

He that wishes to thine, as to his own Soul, Eternal Happiness, M. H.

Munimentum Christiani: OR, THE CHRISTIAN Completely Armed.
LECT. I. (...). Mary Wolnoth, October. 10. 1649. Lecture Days.
Ephesians. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Ver. 13. (...).

Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
withstand in the evil day, etc.


THis Epistle was written by Paul LECT. 1.
to the Church of Ephesus, the Metropolis or chief City of Asia the less, where
he had planted a Church, and preached the Gospel for the space of two whole
years, Act. 19. 10. At his departure from them, to Jerusalem, he did (by the
Spirit) foretell them of a very great alteration and change that would
suddenly happen amongst them, by reason of false Teathers that should arise,
Act. 20. 28, 29, 30. And being now a prisoner at Rome, an Ambassador in bonds,
as he tells them, cap. 6. 20. he writes this Epistle to them, persuading them to
continue steadfast in the profession of that Faith of the Gospel which he had
preached to them. In which we have these three parts:

1. The Preface in, Cap. 1. v. 1, 2.

2. The Matter of the Epistle, Cap. 1. v. 2. ad Cap. 6. v. 10. In which are
these two things: 1. He strongly asserts and proves that Fundamental Doctrine
of Justification by Grace, Cap. 1, 2, 3. And then afterward, 2. He makes
application of that Doctrine, in a Use of Exhortation, stirring them up to
Holiness of life, Cap. 4. cap. 5. cap. 6. ad v. 10. In which Exhortation, he
presses two kinds of Duties: First, such as concerned all Christians in their
general Vocation. This, from Cap. 4. 1. or Cap. 5. v. 21. And then, secondly,
such kind of Duties, as concerned Christians in their oeconomical Capacity as
they were Husbands, Wives, Parents, Children, Masters, Servants, Cap. 5. 22. ad
Cap. 6. v. 10. This is the second part of the Epistle.

3. The Conclusion, Cap. 6. v. 10. ad finem: In which he does (1) commend to
them the use of that Spiritual Armor, ver. 10. ad 19. (2.) He begs their
prayers for himself. v. 19, 20. (3) Informs them of his sending of Tychicus,
v. 21, 22. (4) He concludes with his usual Benediction and Prayer, v. 23, 24.

The Verses which I have read are the first part of the Conclusion, viz. a
short and compendious Tractate about the Spiritual Armor: concerning which, the
Apostle does two things:

1. Gives them a general Exhortation to use them, v. 13. Wherefore, etc.

2. Gives them a particular Catalogue, both of the Names and Uses of them, ver.
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

We are first to begin with the general Exhortation, as it is laid down in the
13 verse: Wherefore, take unto you the whole Armor, etc.

The Apostle had given this counsel, ver. 10. and yet because it was a very
necessary Doctrine, he does here repeat it in Terminis: From whence, before we
come to the particulars, we shall lay down this Doctrine in general, viz.
Doctrine general.


That necessary and useful Truths are not only once, but often to be preached
by the Ministers of God: Such Truths as are of special concernment, are to be
repeated again and again to the same people. We shall find, that the Holy
Prophets of God have done so: The Doctrine of Christ: The calling of the
Gentiles, etc.
We shall find the same Doctrine, preached by the same Prophet, over and over;
and we shall find after, Prophets repeating and rehearsing, what has been
urged by the former Prophets. And the Apostles inculcating the same things.
Rejoice in the Lord always; and again, I say rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. If we, or an
Angel from Spiritual joy a necessary Duty. Not harkening to Seducers, a
necessary Duty.
Heaven, preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed. He says it over again,
Gal. 1. 8, 9. And he tells the Phi^ippians, It was not grievous to him to write
the same things to them, Phil. 3. 1. How often does the Evangelist John repeat
the Doctrine of Brotherly Love? And our Brotherly love, a necessary Duty,
Savior himself preaches the same Doctrine over again. And we shall find
Solomon, in the Proverbs, often repeating the same things, Christ's tender of
Grace, a necessary Duty. Vanity of the World, a necessary Duty. Saints
Communion with Christ, a necessary Duty.
vid. Prove. 1. 20, 21. etc, and Cap. 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. you have the very same
thing again; and you will find the same in very many places of that book. And
in Eccles. Cap. 1. 2. the very same words again, Cap. 12. 8. And so in the
Canticles; as cap. 1. 15. compared with cap. 4. 1. So cap. 2. 16. compared with
cap. 6. 3.

And this is necessary, if we consider these three things; 1. The Incapacity of
men's minds to understand the things of God. The Scripture tells us, that the
mind of man is full of darkness and blindness, vid. Ephesians. 4. 18. The Apostle, in
that place, describes the condition of man, by Nature; telling, that there is a
thick skin, a vail of blindness covering their hearts; and 2 Cor. 4. 4. That
the God of this world has blinded their eyes. They are blind by Nature, and
they are blinded by Satan: It Is true, God gave man a seeing-eye, when he made
him at first. Adam knew the Nature of every Creature, and gave them apt Names,
answerable to their Nature, and he knew his God, etc. but by the Fall, the eye
of the Soul is become darkened, as to spiritual things and very dim as to other
things: Man by affecting a forbidden knowledge, fell into gross ignorance: he
would needs know as much as a God, and he became as ignorant as a Beast, Psalm.
49. 20. Dan. 4. 16. There is Ignorantia purae negationis, Genesis 3. 5.
which is no sin: Christ knew not the Day of Judgment; the Tradesman knows
not Astrology: and there is Ignorantia pravae dispositionis, when a man will be
so, and affects it etc. This is in man by Nature. And therefore the Apostle
says, That the pure natural man does not understand the things of the Spirit,
nor can he, because they are spiritually discerned, 2 Cor. 2. 14. They may, and
many of them do, understand the matters of God Historically and Notionally; but
Spiritually, and Savingly, and applicatorily, and transformingly they cannot.
And as for the people of God, who are enlightened by Grace, yet even they
labor under much ignorance still. We find, that even the Disciples of Christ,
though they had been tutored by him who was wiser then Solomon, yet they were
often at a loss, to understand those things which were not very obscure, vid.
Mat. 15. 16, 17, 18. And though Christ had often told them of his Passion, etc.
yet we find they were very much to seek in that very particular, after the
death of their Master, vid. Luke 24. 25, 26. This makes these repetitions very
necessary. If Man were as at first, a very hint or glympse, would be enough:
but in regard of his dullness, there is need of these Rehearsals; And know this,
that it is an Act of compassion in God, to the blindness of his Crearure, to
repeat the same things more then once. It Is said of Christ, that he can have
compassion on the Ignorant, Heb. 5. 2. These Rehearsals are one clear
Testimony, amongst many others, of his compassion to ignorant sinners. 2. The
Imbecility and weakness of the memory. The Memory is the Treasury and
Storehouse of the Soul; the peculiar Office of the memory, is to retain and
keep carefully all the Notions which are apprehended and taken in by the
Understanding, and all the Species which are drawn from several Objects by the
external and internal Senses. It Is the Registry of the Soul, where these
things should be faithfully recorded, and kept for after-time. Now there is a
very great imperfection in this Register: This weakness arises; 1. from that
Natural Distemper which is in it by reason of sin: The Fall of Man did so
bruise and crack this golden Vessel, that it does leak ever since, and cannot
hold that which is put into it. The Apostle in Hebr. 2. 1. speaks of this
Distemper, (...). The memory is like a Vessel which is rent and full of holes.
Those golden Hoopes, which God in the first Creation, did set about this
Vessel, are either quite broken off, or much loosened. And then there are,
secondly, also other things, which make it so lubrick and crazy, as to the
retaining of things Spiritual and Divine, viz.

First, it is overcharged with too many Three Causes of a weak Memory.
worldly and sinful things: the world is so much laid up in this Treasury, that
there is very little room for Heavenly things to be stowed there.

Secondly, want of Meditation and recollection: by this means it comes to pass,
that many Truths which are recorded in the Memory, are as if they had never
been set down, in regard of use and improvement; because by meditation and
discourse they are not revived. There is an Act of the Memory proper unto man,
which the Philosopher calls Eustach Phys. p. 261.
Reminiscentia, when a thing which has been recorded, and is forgotten, is, by
the help of Discourse, and Reasoning, recovered again, and made present: and
without this, it is impossible to keep alive the remembrance of many things.
Now it is a very general fault, not only amongst wicked men, but even amongst
the people of God, that they neglect this Duty of Discourse and Meditation:
they do not chew the Cud, as they are required; and so quite lose many things
which they have heard, understood, and sometimes remembered. Isaac went into the
fields to meditate, Genesis 24. 63. David used to meditate on Gods Statutes, as
well as to read and hear them, Psalm. 119. 15.

Thirdly, the Devil he pilfers out many Truths: he comes with his false Key,
and picks the Lock of the Memory, and so the soul is bereaved of many a
precious Truth, vid. Mat. 13. 19. He comes, and searches the books, and
whatever he finds there, that may be prejudicial to his Kingdom, he either
quite takes it off the File, or else so blurs it with his black Lines, that in
a very short time the Record becomes altogether useless. Therefore, for the
strengthening of the weak Memory, it is not without need, that things of moment
and concernment should be inculcated and repeated. 3. in regard of the Will;
and that 1. from the deadness, and slowness, and untowardness of the Will and
Affections to embrace and give entertainment to saving truths, at first, when
offered. The heart of man is like hard Marble, harder then any Adamant, Zech.
7. 12. Impressions are not made upon it with one blow: the Iron is not heated
through, with once putting into the fire: there is a reluctance and
contradiction in the Will against the receiving of things of this Nature. Ye
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart, ye have always resisted the Holy
Ghost, Act. 7. 51. The Apostle speaks of many Remora's and Obstructions in the
heart, which hinder the effectual working of the Word, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Strong
holds, carnal reasonings, things exalting themselves against the knowledge of
God, and high thoughts, etc. The soul is full of surmisings, prejudices,
objections, and strong opposings: the strong man armed keeps the house, and by
force of Arms contends against divine Truths, especially such as are of
weightiest concernment, And therefore there is need of urging and pressing the
same things over and over, and that with earnestness, that these high Towers
may be levelled.

And then (2.) After that the heart has submitted and yielded, it does in a
very short time through the prevalency of indwelling corruption, revolt and
grow stiff again, and is very backward to practice Truths subjected unto: It
was the sad complaint of one of the Ancients, that of all Trades and
Employments, Chrysostom.
that of the Ministry is most difficult, as in other respects, so in this, that
he can never find his work as he leaves it. Let a Carpenter, or Mason, or any
other Crafts-man, shape and square, and polish his work, and when he returns he
finds it so; but the Devil he mars a Ministers work, as soon as ever he has
done. When he has dug a well of godly sorrow, this Philistine comes and
stops it up presently. When he has stubd up the thorns, the Devil comes and
plants them again, or more in their room. When he has cast down the Wall; in
one week, yea in one night, he finds it set up again, etc. Every observing,
and selfe-searching Christian, knows the truth of this by sad experience. When
any holy Resolution has been with much laboring begot in the heart, Satan and
his own corruption working together, do soon cool and check: the form he
brought with him, from hearing the word, is soon unfashioned again.

Oh Israel, thy goodness is as the Morning dew, and as the early Cloud, it
presently vanishes away. Hos. 6. 4. Commands are not easily obeyed, therefore
there must be precept upon precept. The consolations of the Gospel are not
easily preserved: therefore there must be promise upon promise. Its a hard
thing to go on in duty constantly, the heart will backslide: Its a hard thing
to keep it light, and constant, and close, etc.

The Church of Ephesus had left her first love, Rev. 2. 4. 5. Ephraim was a
backsliding heyfer, Hos. 4. 16. they were revolted and gone. Thy people, says
God to Moses, have soon corrupted themselves, etc. Exodus 32. 7. 8. Paul had
faithfully preached the Doctrine of justification by faith, to the Galathians,
when he was personally with them; but in a very short time, they were
apostatized by the fraudulency and craftiness of false Teachers: therefore he
is forced to write to them the same things again, vid. Gal. 1. 6. We see the
Disciples of Christ, though they were commanded and entreated by their Master
to watch with him, when he was in his Agony, ready to die for them; yet as soon
as he was departed, they fell asleep again; and though he came and reproved
them, yet they fell asleep again, vid. Matthew. 26. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
45. A man would wonder, that when Christ had told them, that the pangs of death
were upon him, yet they should fall asleep, etc. We have a discovery, in them,
of the hearts Apostasy. Use 2.


This should be a Directory for the Ministers of the Gospel: That they would
not be contented only once to name necessary truths, but to be ever and anon
(as they observe the slackness and negligence of people, in practicing)
pressing, and urging the same again, and again. There are some Doctrines which
are as standing Dishes, as the Doctrine of faith, Repentance, etc. these are of
necessary and daily use; and people must be often put in mind of them. There are
some sins which are predominant in every Age: these the Ministers of Christ
must be often beating down and reproving: There are some duties to which men
are very averse, these must be often urged. Hypocrisy was a reigning sin
amongst the Jews, therefore our Savior at every turn was beating down that
sin. Apostasy from the truth of the Gospel, by hearkening to seducers, was the
great sin of the Churches of the Gospel: therefore all the Apostles, who writ
to those Churches, did urge and press a care about that more then once or
twice, etc. Only the Ministers of God must be careful of these three things,
in reference to this business.

1. That they do it not because of sluggishnes or sloathfulness of spirit:
Idleness is a very great sin in any Calling, much more in the Ministry, their
Calling being of greater importance then any other. If the Lord of the Vineyard
come and find them sleeping, and snorting, by reason of negligence, he will
cut them asunder, and give them their portion with the Hypocrites, Matthew. 24.
48, 49, 50, 51. God has given them a large task, they have a broad field to
walk in, they are to preach the whole Counsel of God, and therefore they must
not insist upon the same things, out of a spirit of laziness, but merely out of
respect to, and compassion of, the necessity of the people. And then, 2. That
they be as careful in studying the same Doctrines, as if they had never made
any mention of them before; That if it fall into their way to speak about the
same Duty, or about the same sin, concerning which they have formerly spoken,
they may have fresh Arguments, to recommend the same duty, and fresh
considerations, to manifest and make evident, the vileness of the same sin,
etc. They must still dive further into the Scriptures, and meditate more
earnestly, that they may speak more convincingly then before, to the
Consciences of such as hear them.

3. That they seek earnestly to God by prayer, in the behalf of the people,
that their hearts may so readily practice the Duty enjoined and avoid the sin
reproved, that they may have no further occasion to remember them any more of
the same things.

Let the people of God be willing, when necessity Use 2.
requires, to hear of the same duty, and of the same sin, over and over. Many
men cannot endure to hear of a Duty twice, though they can be content to omit
it when the Minister has done all he is able; nor are they patient to hear the
same sin twice reproved, though they can be content to commit it an hundred
times over, it may be, in one week. It is no advantage to the Minister; but
it is a great benefit to you. It Is safe for you, Phil. 3. 1. It Is an Argument of
love and care, in the Ministers of God, over your souls. They are afraid you
should miss the way to Heaven; and therefore they give you your direction over
again. They are afraid the Sore should not be well healed; and therefore they
apply another Plaster to it, that the Cure may be perfect. They would present
every man perfect to Christ, Col. 1. 28. therefore they inculcate things.

If you would hear no more of the same Duty, do you practice it carefully: If
you would not hear of the same sin again, cease from it; break it off by
repentance, and then you shall hear no more of it. And indeed, this is one
great use which all Christians should make of these Repetitions. 1. To be
convinced of the badness of their own hearts: And 2. to learn more diligently
to practice what is frequently commended; and to avoid what is so often
forbidden. Otherwise, know this, that such Rehearsals will be very sad
Aggravations of sin another day. When Conscience shall bring in testimony, that
such a Duty was preached over and over, and yet you would never practice it;
such a sin was forbidden you many a time, yet you would not leave it. You
heard it pressed upon you (more then perhaps a hundred times) that you should
believe, repent, pray in your Families, and instruct your Children, and read
the Scriptures; etc. but you could never get up your hearts to the Duty. You
heard more then once, perhaps a thousand times, that you should not swear, nor
lie, nor abuse the Creatures to excess, nor break the Sabbath, etc. yet you
would go on, etc. These often Repeatings of your duties will be high
aggravations, and so many Witnesses of your contempt. And indeed, this is one
End why they are used in the Scriptures, and commanded to be used in the
Ministry, That those that do not obey, after all these inculcations; may be
left without excuse, and condemned by so many Witnesses. The Apostle uses such
an Argument as this to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 13. This is the third time I am
He alludes to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 3.
coming to you; At the mouth of 2 or 3 Witnesses shall every word be
established. He had sent them three Warnings, that he would come to use,
against the stubborn in spirit. Authority Christ had given him for the
punishing of their sin; and if they did not repent before his coming, this
threefold Warning would be as a threefold Testimony, to prove them
incorrigible; So will all the Repeatings of the same Duties, both in the
Scripture, and in the mouth of Gods Ministers, be in stead of so many clear
Testimonies of your incorrigibleness, when Christ comes to judge and punish the
disobedience of the World: And look how often your Admonitions and Rebukes have
been repeated; so often shall the stripes of Gods hand be repeated also. He
that being often reproved, hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy. Prove. 29. 1.


We find in the Gospel, that our Savior makes this a sharp and clear
conviction of the Jews stubborness, that they would not submit to his yoke, and
be brought into obedience, though they were often required, and urged
thereunto. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc. how
often would I have gathered thy Children together, as the Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not, Lukc 13. 34. behold your house is
lest unto you desolate. It Is damnable to refuse any Duty, though but once
commanded; and to run into any act of sin, though but once forbidden; but not
to hearken, after a thousand Admonitions, will be a proof of stubbornness by a
thousand Witnesses. And the torment of the Conscience in Hell will rise in
extremity answerable to the number of the Warnings you have had to have kept
you out of Hell. All Admonitions slighted in this life, will be remembered in
Hell, and not one of them forgotren; and every Admonition will be a new flame,
to afflict and torment the never-dying soul. Consider these things, and be no
longer rebellious: Let not this Admonition be added as another Witness, to
those many which will appear against you.

LECT. 2. October. 17. 1649.
WE now come to the LECT. 2.
handling of the words particularly as they are recorded in the 13. v.
Wherefore take to you the whole armor, etc. In which words we have these two
things, 1. A serious exhortation and advice given to all Christians. Take unto
your selves the whole Armor of God. 2. The Motives inforceing the practice of
this counsel: and they are two, viz. 1. Enablement in opposing, that ye may be
able to withstand, they cannot possibly make any resistance if they do not
observe this Direction.

2. A promise of victory, having done all: to stand. There Is no good opposing
without these arms. And there is certain hopes of overcoming, if they be
rightly used.

I shall first open the words in a short explication, and secondly gather up
the strength of them by doctrinall observation.

Wherefore, take unto you etc: (...), for this cause. This denotes the ground
of the exhortation. The Apostle had mentioned, v. 11. 12. great opposition by a
powerful and subtle adversary. The Adversary is the devil; set out by a large
description. (1) Of his Policy in that expression of, Wiles, (...) (2) Of his
power, in those expressions of principalities, powers, spiritual wickednesses
in heavenly places. The necessity of opposing this Adversary is hinted in the
word, Wrestling; we must wrestle and that against a potent and politic enemy,
(...), for this cause its necessary that we be not unfurnished, but provided
before hand. Mat. 16. 19. Acts 1. 2. 11.


Take unto you, (...), The word signifies to take unto our selves, or to take
up a thing; and sometimes to regaine and recover what we have lost or let go out
of our possession: we must take up what God offers; and if our Armesbe beaten
out of our hands, we must take them up again.

The whole armor of God, (...), It signifies armor of all sorts, whereby the
soldier is made fit for an encounter with his Adversary: which is here called
the Armor of God, quia nobis divinitus subministratur, nec in externo ro^ore
consistit, Baldvin. in locum.

That ye may be able; (...). Our ability is not in our selves.

To withstand, (...).

This word signifies the manner of opposition namely face to face, hand to
hand, foot to foot. Dr. Gouge, upon the place.

In the evil day: (...).

In that evil day. (...) here is put for time indefinitly whether long or
short, Mat. 3. 1. (...) the word notes sometimes the evil of sin, Math. 9. 4.
Joh. 3. 19. sometimes the evil of punnishment or trouble. So it is here,
therefore Beza reads it, Tempore adverso.

In the evil day. It notes tempus Cribrationis; What that day is, and why its
called evil, we shall show hereafter.

And having done all to stand. This hints a certain victory to him that
withstands aright. (...) The word signifies Rem inchoatam provehere eo usq
donec absolvatur. The word nots that a christian must expect more assaults then
one: and that the victory is not to be expected till all assaults be perfectly
finished. Thus for explication. The words thus opened have these doctrines.

1. That, Every Christian is liable unto an evil day of Assaulting, and
temptation from Satan.

This is necessarily employed in the exhortation: it were superfluous, and
unnecessary counsel to advise christians to get this furniture, if they were
not certain to have a day of battle. All christians are not actually
assaulted alike, some are continually assaulted; others very rarely, yet is
there no believing christian freed from these conflicts and assaults: every
believer must expect them.

1 The Scripture speaks of an hour of temptation which shall come upon all the
earth, Rev. 3. 10.

2. Our Savior, tells Peter that Satan has desired to have him, and therest
of his brethren, that he may sift them as wheat, Luc. 22. 31. He tells them
indeed that he has prayed for him and the rest, that their faith do not fail,
but he does not tell them, that he has prayed against their sifting. And

3. We find that many of the servants of God have been under these assaults.
Paul, David, Job, And Quod cuiquam, cuivis, that which does befall any one
Saint is liable to all: they have not only been liable to temptations from
God, temptationes Probationis, but they have also been liable to temptations
from Satan temptationes Deceptionis.

4. Christ would have all to pray against it, Mat. 6.

(...) Some refer it to the providing of the Armor: so the Sytiack
Interpreter, ut praeparati, id est, postquam omnia comparaveritis ad hanc
obeundam pugnam necessaria, Beza. Others refer it to the assaults of the
adversary devictis omnibus hostibus.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to open these three things.

I. I shall show you, What evil day This is. II. I shall show you, Why its
called an evil day. III Why God suffers his people to be thus assaulted.
I. Any day, in which God permits Satan and gives him liberty, may become an
evil day: temptation will turn the brightest and most comfortable day into an
evil and bitter day. Though he be continually assaulting 1 Pet. 5, 8. yet
there are some special days and seasons, in which Satan does more fiercely
assault and set upon the soul. I shall name a few. viz. these 8 ensuing
particulars.

1. The time of outward personal calamity and affliction; when God shall by
any providence bring a believer under outward calamity and trouble of any sort,
sickness, or poverty, or imprisonment, or banishment this is a special day
for Satan to assault in. Thus we see it in the case of Job, when God had taken
away his goods, and stricken him in his Children, and laid his hand upon his
body in a violent manner, then Satan he brings his forces to assault his soul
and mind with temptations, vid. Job. 2.

As such a time Satan assaults the soul with these two temptations.

(1.) To murmur and to blaspheme God, vid. Job. 2. 9. His endeavor is to
persuade the afflicted soul into an ill opinion of his God; that God does not
love them, if he did he would not so distress them. He did prevail with Job
in this evil day, to curse the day of his birth, Job. 3. init.

(2) To use some sinful in direct means to be delivered out of such troubles.
This way he assaulted David in the evil day: he persuaded him to fly out of
the land of Judea amongst the Philistims, 1 Samuel 27. 1. 2. And in this evil
day he assaulted our Savior with the like temptation, If thou be the Son of
God, command these stones to be made bread, Math. 4. 3. It was an unlawful
means to work a miracle at the direction and command of Satan. Thus was
Nehemiah assaulted Neh. 6. 10. which was (doubtless) from Satan though not
immediately, but by the hand of a pretended friend. Thus he tempted Abraham, to
equivocate and deny his wife in a day of outward trouble, vid. Genesis 12, 11. 12,
13.

2. The day of Church-calamity, especially when cruel Heretics and cunning
Seducers are risen up. This is one special time of Satan's assaulting such as
are truly godly. And indeed this is, I suppose, the evil day of which the
Apostles speaks more particularly in this place. We read Act. 20. 29, 30. that
the Apostle taking his last leave of this Church of Ephesus, does by the Spirit
of prophecy give them to understand in his farewell Sermon That when he was gone
away, there should enter in grievous wolves, which should not spare the flock;
and that there should arise seducers from amongst themselves which should
preach (...) preserve things to draw away disciples after them.

And now writing to this very Church he does put them in mind of this evil
day, Zanchy in his Commentaries upon this Text gives us this Interpretation,
making this day to be meant especially of that time when God permits Satan
quasi solutum grassari, et Ecclesiamturbari per tyrannos, per haereticos tam
occultos and hppocritas, quam manifestos. And indeed as this day is an evil
day, so it is a fit day for Satan to assault and make his Onset. In such a Day.

(1) He does endeavor to prevail with christians to doubt of the truth which
they had receivved and embraced, and many times to cast it off, and to run
after fables. You shall find that in such a day as this, Satan has carried
many captive by this temptation, vid. Gal. 1. 6. In this evil day, there was a
great Apostasy from the faith of the Gospel. And 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. we have a
prophecy of the defection which should be made in such times, vid. 2 Cor. 11.
2. 3.

(2) He tempts many in such a day to revile and speak evil of the truth, 2
Pet. 2. 2. Satan is, no doubt, very busy at such a time, both by fear of
persecution, and by promise of rewards, and by hopes of sinful liberty to draw
off men from the simplicity of the Gospel to embrace his delusions. We find in
our own Church by the lukewarmnesse of most, and the defection of many, that
such a day is a great assaulting day.

3 The day of sinful miscarriage: When a child of God slips through infirmity
and frailty into some enormity, this is a special day of temptation to the
soul. Satan makes many onsets in such a day, viz.

(1) He assaults the soul by temptations to Conceal and hide the sin committed:
thus he assaulted David, Psalm. 32. 3. Satan that drew him into the sin
assaulted and tempted him afterward not to confess his sin. And David lay a
long time in that snare, till God sent Nathan to set conscience a speaking.

(2) He tempts the soul to Excuse the sin, at least in part. Thus he assaulted
our first parents, first he drew them into sin, and then tempts them to make
excuse, The Serpent says the woman beguiled me, and I did eat, Genesis 3. 13. And
says the man, The woman which thou gav'st me she gave me of the tree and I did
eat, Genesis 3. 12 And thus was Aaron assaulted by Satan when he had sinned, vid.
Exodus 32. 22. 23. 24. We may see how irrational his answer is: he would have
excused his sin, and he does indeed, by all he says, aggravate his sin.

Thus he tempted Abraham to make an excuse for his lying, Genesis 20. 12. She is
the daughter of my Father, but not the daughter of my Mother, etc.

(3) He tempts them in such a day to call in question their Conversion and
Regeneration because of their sin. David seems to be under this temptation,
when he had fallen into the sins of murder and adultery, Psa. 51. 10. Create
in me a clean heart, o God, and renew a right spirit within me. He was tempted
to believe that such sins were inconsistent with conversion, therefore he calls
for a new Creation. 4. He tempts the soul to despair of remission and pardon,
and reconciliation with God. Under this tempation was the Church, in Lam. 3.
42, They prayed and had not present sense of forgiveness, therefore they were
ready to question whether God had or would forgive their sin.

4. The day of spiritual desertion, when God for sin hides the light of his
countenance from the soul: Such a day is a peculiar day of temptation; Satan
will rage with violence at such a time.

(1) He will persuade the soul that God has utterly cast him off. Thus it was
with Jonah, Cap. 2. 4. And under this temptation was Asaph in such a day, Psalm.
77, 7, 8. 9. Will the Lord cast off for ever? will he be favorable no more? Is
his mercy gone for ever? has God forgotten to be gracious? has he in anger
shut up his tender mercies? And so it was with Heman, Psalm. 88. 14. Lord, why
castest thou off my soul, why hidest thou thy face from me?

(2) He persuades the soul at such a time to cast off God and to cast off duty,
and to leave waiting upon God. He persuades the soul that all religion is in
vain and to no purpose, that he does but dishonor God in making mention of
his name, etc.

5. The day of extraordinary Enlargement and inward manifestations of God. When
the soul has had more then ordinary communion with God, then Satan usually
tempts.

And in such a day he assaults the soul.

(1) Which spiritual security, vid. Cant. 5. 1, 2. In the former verse we see
Christ and the Church feasting together. Jesus Christ had showed her more then
ordinary favor; now Satan takes occasion of tempting the soul; and the next
news you hear, she is sung into a spiritual slumber. I sleep but my heart
waketh.

(2) With spiritual pride, Satan then sets the soul upon applauding it self,
as if for some worth in it self, it had enjoyed such great enlargements, vid. 2
Cor. 12. 7. The Apostle in that story discovers to us what snare the tempter
uses after great Revelations. Euge, Barnarde.

6. After some great temporal Advancement or Deliverance. When God had given
David many victories, and had made his name dreadful to the nations, then does
Satan set upon him, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. In the former Chapter you may read of his
great successes over the Philistims, and Moabites, and the King of Zobah, and
the Syrians and Edomites, vid. Cap. 18. and Cap. 19. over the Moabites, and
Cap. 20. you have a list of his worthies. Then Cap. 21. 1. Satan tempts him,
etc.

And the Temptation of such an evil day is, To swell up the heart with pride
and vain glory: so it was with David. Satan tempted him to number the people.
And so Hezekiah, when God had given him a great deliverance from a mortal
disease, Satan tempted him to pride, Isa. 39. 1. 2.

7. The day of death. This is indeed a peculiar day of Temptation. There are
some Interpreters which understand the Text to be meant, if not only, yet
chiefly of that day. And indeed, this no doubt is a tempting time. This Satan
knows, is the last storm that ever he shall make upon the soul; if he conquer
not now, he shall never conquer: therefore he uses all the power, and all the
policy he has to carry captive the soul at this last encounter. We see by
daily experience, that Satan shoots his Arrows at the Saints on this day. There
are very few that go out of the World, without strong and many Onsets of Satan.

8. The day of the success and prosperity of wicked men, especially if they
live actually, in wicked ways: when it is as Psalm. 37. 7. Eccles. 4. 1. Heb.
12. 13. Satan will be sure to assault the Servants of God in this day. And that
with these two Temptations.

(1) He will tempt them to deny Providence, That God does not take any notice,
or regard of the Actions of men, vid. Mal. 2. 17. and Cap. 3. 15.

(2) He will tempt them, to justify the cause of the wicked, and to condemn
the cause of the righteous, vid. Psalm. 73. verse 13. Satan suggested such
thoughts, to that holy man there.

This is the first Particular, When this evil day is.

LECT. 3. October. 24. 1649.
II. Why this day is called (...). An evil day.

NOt in regard of the final conclusion LECT. 3
and event of it. For the day of Temptation is to the Children of God, the
forerunner of a glorious Victory. There never was, never shall, any of the
true Servants of God be lost, or utterly overcome in this day: my Father is
stronger then all, and no man shall pluck them out of my Fathers hands, John
10. 29. He is greater in wisdom, and he is greater in power. Hell where is thy
Victory? Satan cannot show any soul for whom Jesus Christ intentionally dyed,
that he was prevailed against: No, no, neither life, nor death, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, etc. shall ever be able to separate any Child of
God, from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus his Lord, Romans 8. ult.
Though Jesus Christ did not pray against the Temptation of his people, yet he
has prayed against the failing of their faith in Temptation. Luke 22. 31.
Satan must prevail against Christ, before he can prevail against any of
Christ's. That which was the blessing of Gad, is the blessing of every true
Israelite. A troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome him at the last,
Genesis 49. 10. Michael and his Angels fought with the Dragon, and the Dragon
fought, and his Angels; but they prevailed not, nor shall they ever prevail,
Rev. 12. 8. So that in regard of the final issue, it is so far from being an
evil day, that it is indeed a good day.

But it may be called an evil day, in two respects, viz.

1. In regard of Satan's Intention, he aims at nothing but evil, he means to
swallow up, to ruin, to devour, and to lead the soul captive for ever, 1 Pet.
5. 8. We may say of the Devil, in all his assaults, as God says of the King of
Assyria, whom God used, to chastise his Church, Isay 10. 7, 8, 9, 10. God put
his people under his power only for correction; but he aimed at their
destruction. Howbeit, he means not so, neither does his heart think so, but
it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off Nations, not a few, etc.

2. In regard of present effects and Apprehensions: It creates many fears, much
sadness, many doubtings unto a Child of God, that is in such a condition:
Therefore an evil day.

(1.) Temptation bereaves the soul of present comfort, and fills it full of
horrors and tremblings. If you read over the 88. Psalm, you may see how it was
with Heman, in the day of his Temptation. My soul is full of troubles, my life
draws nigh unto the grave, v. 2. Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in the
darkness, in the deeps, while I suffer thy terrors, I am distracted, v. 15.

2. Temptation hinders the soul from doing that good, and receiving that good,
it might do and receive, at another time. It hinders from praying, from
hearing, from meditation, etc.

(3.) It does many times involve the soul in many sins: it causes sometimes
distrust, sometime creates prejudice in the soul against God, and godliness,
and sometimes evil speakings, sometimes neglects of duty. Those who are
hampered under such Assaults, find and can discover the evil of it, better
then we can speak or conceive.

III. Why does God suffer his people to be thus assaulted and tempted? Why does
he permit such days to come upon them?

1. In regard of himself. That he may manifest his Power, and Providence, and
wisdom, and Grace, and faithfulness to his people, both in supporting, and in
delivering them out of Temptation. These Attributes of God are most clearly
discovered in such a day. My grace shall be sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
Paul never apprehended so much of the Allsufficiency of Gods grace, or power,
etc. as he did when he was under the buffettings of Satan. Now he understood
what Almighty Power was, and what Providence was, and what Faithfulness was,
and what infinite Wisdom meant, etc.

II. In regard of his people. 1. To teach them to hate sin, and to watch
against it. The soul that has been much under these Assaults, will not be so
bold as others are: the smoke of sin, the very sight of it, will be offensive
to his eyes.

2. To teach him how to handle and use his spiritual Armor. Christian Graces
are best used, and most improved in a day of Temptation. Now he knows how to
use faith and patience, and hope, and sees what strength is in them; he knows
now the power of faith, vid. 2 These. 1. 11. Now he sees the efficacy of Hope,
and the potency of Prayer: he now sees the excellency of all his graces, the
necessity and usefulness of them, that which he knew before in the Notion; he
now knows by Experience, And then

3. To make them more experimentally feel the love of Christ, in submitting
Himself to Temptations for their sakes. The tempted soul knows best the sorrow
of Christ's Temptations, and the greatness of his Affection in being willing to
be tempted for their sakes. As Christ would actually be tempted, that he might
experimentally succor them that are tempted, Heb. 2: 18. so he will have his
people tempted, that they may the more experimentally know how to prize His
Temptations.

4. To kill their sins, vid. 2 Cor. 12. 7. The bran is sifted out only.

III. In regard of Satan. 1. God will have him do some service for Himself, and
some service also for His people. All the Temptations of Satan are indeed acts
of Service, which the Devil does for God and his Church. Satan did God
service, and Paul too, in buffetting of him, vid. 2 Samuel 24. 1. compared with 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Satan is but Gods Servant, and his peoples Drudge, in doing this
work for them. He is your Scullion, by his Temptations to rub you bright, etc.
As the good Angels are ministering spirits, employed for the good of them that
are Heirs of salvation, Heb: 1. ult. so are the wicked Angels too; though in
tempting, they neither aim at Gods honor, nor your good.

2. It Is for the increasing of his Torment. This is done two ways. 1. It adds
torment to him, to see himself baffeled and disappointed in his Assaults. He
always comes off foiled at last, when he meddles with any of Gods Servants.
How did Job baffle this roaring Lion? Job got and kept the field, and the
Devil with all his Troops were utterly routed.

3. All his Temptations and Assaults, shall add to his Eternal torment, when
he comes to have his last final Doom. The Apostle tells us, that the Angels
that sinned are delivered into chains of darkness, and reserved unto judgment,
2 Pet. 2. 4. And all the mischief he does now in the world will be laid to his
charge at that Day. Satan does but blow his own fire, and heat his own Hell,
and dig that bottomless Pit deeper, by his malice and rage, in assaulting the
godly: So much the more wrath will be powered upon him, for the killing of Job's
Children, and the destroying of his goods, and the tempting of him in his soul.
Then shall Paul's buffettings, and David's annoyings, be returned with fury upon
his own head.

Let all Christians take heed of passing any Use 2.
rash sentence, either against themselves, or against any others, that they are
not the children of God, because of Satan's assaults. It is the great design
that Satan drives on: by the assaulting of the servants of God, to make them
question their Election and Interest in God, that so he may take off their
hearts from cheerfulness in his service; as is evident in the case of Job. And
he does too much prevail upon many by this means, who through incogitancy and
unbelief, are ready to blot their names out of Gods book, because of such
Conflicts. If God took any delight in me, he would not suffer the Adversary
thus to assault me? I cannot either pray or hear, sleep or wake, but Satan
afflicts me; God has made me the Mark of Satan, at which he shoots his Arrows
continually. This Doctrine may be a Cordial for such Christians: Thy condition
may be made uncomfortable, by reason of Temptations; but all that Satan does,
or can do, is not able to make thy condition unsafe. Job was Job still, even
when Satan shot at him; Peter was the beloved Disciple of Christ, though he was
sifted by Temptations. Paul was a chosen Vessel still, though the Messenger of
Satan did sore buffet him. Yea, to put all out of doubt, Jesus Christ himself
was as sorely assaulted, as thou can be, and yet the Elect of God, in whom
his soul delighted, Esa. 42. 1. Read but the fourth Chapter of Matthew. ver. 1,
2. and 11. and do but consider that Story well, and it will prevent thee from
being discouraged in the day of thy Conflict. 1. God permits Satan there to
appear in a bodily shape to Jesus Christ, ver. 3. This is more then God has
given him leave to do against thee. If it were thus with thee; yet thou
should not conclude any thing against thy self. 2. God permitted him to have
power to carry and transport the body of Christ from place to place, ver. 5, 8.
He had liberty given him to transport the body of Christ, first from the
Wilderness, to the City; and from the City, to the Pinnacle of the Temple. This
has not yet befallen thee; If it had, there would be no cause to conclude thy
self cast off by God. And if you look upon the Nature of the Temptations of
Christ, you will then find a threefold Onset, and a threefold Repulse.

First, Temptation is, ver. 3, 4. There he tempts him. 1. To question his
Sonship, If thou be the Son of God, etc. 2. He tempts him to question the Care
and Providence of God over him, that he suffered him to be hungry, and to want
bread. Surely, his Care was not great that had not provided any thing for him,
after so long fasting. And then, 3. He tempts him to use indirect means, for
present supply, to work a Miracle at his Command; Command that these stones be
made bread.

2d. Temptation is, ver. 5, 6, 7. There Satan tempts him to take away his life:
If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, etc. And he brings Scipture to
set on this Temptation, though he wrested the meaning of it: It Is possible
Satan may tempt a dear Child of God, to lay violent hands upon himself.

3d. Temptation is, v. 8, 9. He tempts him there to Idolatry, Blasphemy; to
deny the true God, and to worship him as his God. All these will I give thee,
etc. Let this Scripture be well studied, and it will preserve you from
concluding your selves Reprobates, because of Temptations; especially
considering this, that one Reason why Christ would suffer himself to be
assaulted, was, that his Temptations might be as a staff to uphold his servants
in all Ages, from being overmuch discouraged under their Temptations.

And then further, God does put honor upon his people, by suffering them to be
assaulted. God did much honor Job, by calling him out to fight with Satan, and
to overcome him in open war. It was an honor which God put upon Paul, that he
should be called out to play at Cudgels with Satan, and to win the field of
him, through the power of Christ. It Is counted an honor amongst Soldiers to
be singled out to some difficult service: so it is in the Spiritual Warfare.

And besides; Such violent Temptations, they are rather hopeful Evidences that
we are the Children of God, then otherwise; especially, when we find desires to
oppose them. Those whom an Enemy has already in his power, they are not
usually assaulted much: Assaults are made upon such as are unsubdued, and stand
out in opposition, etc.

What great cause all the servants of GOD have to be watchful, and to stand
continually upon their guard, that they may be prepared and provided for these
evil days of Temptation. Do not say, I am sure to be freed from Temptation,
the evil one shall not come near me. This security is like to bring the evil
day sooner upon you; and if it come upon you unprovided, it will be a very sad
day. Soldiers that are besieged by a strong and watchful Adversary, if they be
secure and sleepy may be surprised on a sudden. Invadunt urbem vino somnoque
sepultam. Every Christian has a strong and watchful adversary lying in siege
to annoy him; and his security may betray him into his Enemies hand. It is good
counsel which the Apostle gives to this purpose, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be
vigilant, because the Devil your Adversary goes about as a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour. Satan's work is to compass the Earth, and to walk up
and down in it, Job 1. 7. And if he find Christians like the Inhabitants of
Laish secure, and quiet, he is much encouraged to make desperate assaults upon
them. The Scripture speaks much in the commendation of Holy Fear; it is one of
the best Preservatives in the World, to keep the Soul out of snares. Blessed is
the man that fears always; but he that hardens his heart shall fall into
mischief, Prove. 28. 14. Noah's fear made him prepare an Ark at the Command of
God; by which, he and his Family were preserved, when the rest of the careless
World were drowned, Heb. 11. 7. He was fearful, and provided against dangers,
which were not yet within the Ken of his Eye (...). The things, which he
provided for, were at a great distance 120 years off; He might have reasoned
thus with himself, I may be dead long before the Flood. He was now 500 years
old, and yet he was religiously afraid, and set himself to prepare for it.
Satan's Temptations are within the clear view of every Christian: therefore,
it is prudence to be provided against them, and that speedily: And the rather
should we do this, because the end of all these premonitions is, to shake off
carnal security, and to put our selves into a fit posture to receive this
Assailant.

What cause of thankfulness unto God have all those christians who are freed
and delivered from this evil day? Does God keep Satan chained up that he does
not annoy thee? art thou preserved from his vexations? Certainly thou have
cause every day to return praises for this unto thy Savior who keeps thee so
in safety, that the evil one does not touch thee. And we have the more cause
to do this (1) because we put our selves daily into his hands and yet are
preserved from him; we even allure Satan to set upon us, and send messengers
daily to him to invite him to make assaults, and yet God is pleased to
restrain him. And then (2) because he is eager to set upon us: never was any
ravenous hungry Lion more greedy of his prey then Satan is to prey upon the
soul by temptation. Our Savior would have us to pray daily that God would keep
us out of the devils hands. Mat. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from the evil. And whatsoever we are to pray against as an evil,
we should be thankful to God for preservation from it as a great blessing. Did
we but feel those heart-akings which some of the godly do groan under, by
reason of the vexations of the Evil one, we would not rise in the morning, nor
go to bed at night, without praising God for our freedom from him.

This lets us see what difference there is between the state of the godly on
earth and the 4. Use.
state of the godly in Heaven. In this life they are liable to assaults, but in
the other life they are set free from all batteries: here they are militant,
there they shall be all triumphant: here they walk in Arms, there they sit
with Palms in their hands, Crowns on their heads and white Robes upon their
backs. In heaven there is no sin, and therefore no temptation: the earthly
Paradise was not free from temptation; but in the celestial Paradise, there is
no tempter. The Devil for his sin was once cast out of Heaven, and there is no
re-entry thither, Rev. 12. 8. He has his diocese on earth, as ye heard out of
Job. 1. 7. There he rags and there he fights, but he has no room in Heaven,
he is the Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. but he can ascend no
higher. If you can but make shift to yet well out of the world, Satan and you
shall have done for ever.

LECT. 4th. October. 31. 1649.
Ephesians. 6. 13.
WE have done with the first Doctrine that Christians are liable to an evil
day of Temptation. The second Doctrine follows, which is also employed, viz.

That it is the duty of every Christian, manfully to withstand and oppose Satan
in the evil day of Temptation. We must (...) As often as the Devil shall rise
up against us, so often must we rise up against him, and make resistance;
whether he assault us immediately by throwing his suggestions and injections
into the soul with his own hand, or whether he make use of any other Instrument
to tempt us in his stead; whether the Instrument be a friend, or an enemy;
whatsoever kind of Temptation it be, or whatsoever way of assault be used, it
is the Duty and part of a Christian, to make open and resolute resistance.

I shall 1. Frove the (...). That it is so. 2. Prove the (...). Why it is so.

1. For the Quodsit. Let these three things be considered, which do
sufficiently make it out.

(1) What ever is positively and peremptorily commanded unto Christians, that
ought to be performed: The Command of God lays an obligation upon the soul,
which is indispensible. But God charge this upon all, by way of Precept. I
shall bring two Texts, James 4. 7. Resist the Devil, etc. And again, (...).
1 Pet. 8. 9. Your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, whom resist steadfast in the faith. In which place
these 2. things are to be observed. (...).
First, the Devils unwearied diligence in assaulting, he goes about, casting
his darts, and spreading his snares, that he may surprise and catch us. And
secondly the Christians Duty in reference to these assaults: He must resist
steadfast in the faith. Ephesians. 4. 27.

(2.) The commendable examples which we have in Scripture, are to be imitated;
Now we have very Rare examples of this Duty. We have the example of Christ, and
of holy men, led by the spirit of Christ. He resisted both the immediate, and
the mediate Assaults of that Wicked-one. In Matthew. 4. we have Satan appearing
to Christ in a visible shape, tempting him, and fighting with him. He makes a
threefold assault, If thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made
bread, v. 3. If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down, v. 6. All these
will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. v. 9. And we find a
threefold opposition. It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by
the word of God. v. 4. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, v.
7. And again, it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve. v. 10. Though our Savior was patiently contented to be
buffetted by men, yet he would not endure the buffettings of Satan. When the
Jews smote him with the palms of their hands, and with reeds upon the head, he
made no resistance: but when Satan smites him with temptations, then he
opposed. And when he assaulted him by an Instrument, we find he made the same
Opposition. In Mat. 16. 22, 23. Our Savior had there discoursed with his
Disciples about his passion, verse 21. The Son of man must go up to Jerusalem,
and suffer many things of the Elders and chief Priests, and Scribes, and be
killed, and the third day be raised again. The Devil knowing well, that the
Death of Christ would be the ruin of his kingdom; for he remembered what was
threatened in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15. The seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head: Therefore he instills this motion into Peter; if it were
possible, to divert him from the work of Redemption. Our Savior seeing from
whence this suggestion came, makes a violent resistance, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an offense unto me. The very same words he uttered to Satan,
immediately tempting him, Matthew. 4. 10. he now uses to Peter, the Deputy of
Satan in this action, (...). And as our Savior, so those who were acted by his
spirit: Job when his Wise was made the Devils hand, to convey poison into his
soul, in the evil day of his affliction, he does resolutely oppose the
Temptation: Curse God, says she, and die, Job 2. 9. Rid thy self of this
intolerable burden, which is heavier then death it self. Thou speak, says
he, as one of the foolish women speak, What, shall we receive good at the hand
of the Lord, and shall we not receive evil also? verse. 10. He would not drink
of Satan's Cup, though his own Wife was made the Cup Bearer, but puts it away
from him with indignation, and just rebuke.

(3.) We are commanded to pray, that God would not suffer us to be led into
temptation, so as that we should consent and yield to it, Matthew. 6. 13. Lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil. In which Petition we pray,
that, if God do suffer Satan to break loose upon us, and to shoot his Arrows at
us, yet that he would not give us up into his power, but enable us by his
grace, that we may never yield with willing consent, to comply with any of his
Temptations. Now its a sure Rule, That what good we beg by prayer, from the
hand of God, we use all lawful means to accomplish; And whatsoever evil we
pray against, that we diligently use our own endeavor, by all good means, to
avoid and eschew the same; otherwise our prayers will be but idle, unbelieving
Prayers, and mere taking of the name of God in vain: we must Work out our
salvation, as well as Pray that we may be saved: yea our very praying for
salvation, lays this obligation upon us, to work out our salvation: Our very
praying for our daily bread, binds us to use holy labor and diligence, that
we may have bread to eat; and our very praying for remission of sins, engages
us to join Repentance and Faith in Christ, that our sins may be forgiven: so
does our praying, that we may not be overcome by temptation, engage us to make
resistance against assayling temptation. When the Children of Israel were
endangered by the Egyptians behind, and the red Sea before; Moses cried unto
God by prayer: And when he had done, stood still; says God to him, Exodus 14.
14. Wherefore cryest thou unto me? Speak unto the Children of Israel, that they
go forward; but lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the Sea,
and divide it. As if God should have said: if you pray to be delivered, you
must work to be delivered: you must watch as well as pray. If you would have me
to save you, you must use all lawful means for your own preservation. And we
have the like reasoning with Joshuah: When there was such a defeat received
before the City of Ai in the Land of Canaan, Joshuah and the Elders of Israel
fell down before the Lord, and cast dust upon their heads, and make a very
patheticall and fervent prayer, Cap. 7. 6. 7, 8. Alas, O Lord God, wherefore
have thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hands
of the Amonites, to destroy us, etc? The Canaanites and all the Inhabitants of
the Land, shall hear of it, and shall environ us round about, and cut off our
name from the earth, etc. Says God, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. wherefore lie thou
thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned and transgressed my Covenant, etc. Up,
sanctify the people, etc. As if God should have said, If you do expect to have
this breach repaired, you must removere prohibens, take away that which has
brought upon your selves, and which will continue this ill success, if it be
not removed. Thus for the Quod sit, That it is so.

2. For the Cur sit, Why it is so. There is very great reason for this
Opposition.

(1.) From the worth and preciousness of that which lies at stake in this
controversy. Satan's name is in Hebrew Abaddon, and in Greek Apollyon; and in
English, A Destroyer, Rev. 9. 11. And the end of his design in all his
Assaults, is answerable to his Name, he comes to rob, kill, and destroy; and
that not the body and outward man only, but that which is of more value then
all the world besides, the Immortal Soul.

Satan says, as the King of Sodom to Abraham, Genesis 14. 21. Give me the Souls,
and take the goods to thy self. He matters not who carry away all other spoil,
so that he may have the soul for his Dividend. He fights against them by his
Temptations, that he may deprive them of that eternal and exceeding weight of
glory. Hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown. Rev. 3. 11.
Satan does not contend for Counters, but for Crowns; and those not temporal
and corruptible, but eternal and incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9. 25. Non
controvertitur de limitibus, sed de ipsa haereditate. You read of an
Inheritance incorruptible, immortal, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for you. 1 Pet. 1. 4. The end of all Satan's Assaults, is to
wipe you of this Inheritance. He assaults you, that he may bring you into
bondage to his Commonwealth and Tyranny, the worst of all Tyrannies.
Contentions and oppositions for trivial and trifling matters, are not worth
taking up; and if they be taken up, every prudent man will soon lay them
asleep; but when great things are at stake, Cowards will be valiant. Such is
the matter of a Christians opposition. Ergo.

(2.) From the justness and lawfulness of the War. There are two things which
make a War lawful and just. 1. The Call of a just Authority. 2. A just
cause. If either of these be wanting, there can be no comfort in undertaking
any War. To go forth in any public War against any, without the Call of
lawful Authority, is to commit murder. I say in public War, because in
case of absolute necessity, when a man is assaulted by Thieves and Robbers (pro
termino in divisibili for that very instant) he is his own Magistrate. Andrews
upon the Commandments. p. 741. Exodus 22. 2. Necessitas dicit legem Legi. Its
observed, that when Joshuah was dead, the Children of Israel could not go out
to war though with the Canaanites, whom God had devoted to destruction, till
they had received Authority from God, they would first have a lawful Guide,
Judge 1. 1. After the death of Joshua, it came to pass, that the Children of
Israel, asked of the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them? And David would not fight with Goliath,
until he had a commission from Saul, 1 Samuel, 17. 37.

And to undertake a war when the cause is not just, is no less then a breach
of the same commandment, Thou shall not kill. Especially in the magistrate who
makes such a war: for whether the private person who is a subject, is to
dispute the law fulness of the Princes war; or whether he be not engaged to
assist upon his command, if he know not the war to be absolutely unrighteous,
is a great dispute; but it is without controversy that the Authority making an
unlawful war, is guilty of Murder. But now in this matter, there is a
concurrence of both these, (1) you have a lawful Authority calling you out to
fight. God who is the Supreme Authority, to whomall creatures owe obedience and
subjection, he calls you to make opposition against Satan.

And then. (2) The cause is very just. For Satan in assaulting any of the
Children of God is a mere usurper: he has no right over you, you are not his
but the Lords, by creation, by redemption, by special dedication, etc. Satan
is Tyrannus sine titulo: you do but defend your own souls, and the Territory
and Dominion of God and Jesus Christ in you and over you, whose Dominion you
are bound to preserve.

3 From the Necessity of opposing: There Is no other means which can do us any
good, if this be neglected. There are but these four things which can be
imagined to help an assaulted Christian. Flying, Yielding, Compounding, and
Opposing; now none of these besides the last, will be available in this case.

1. Flying is to no purpose: Whither can he Fly? (1) There Is no castle or place
of refuge on earth which can keep out Satan. The Devils are Spirits,
Spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6. 12. and we know no earthly place can keep out
a Spirit. Spirits have not flesh and bones, they can easily penetrate into any
place: you cannot keep out the air out of any close Dungeon; and how then can
you keep out Satan who is more spiritual then the air or the light? (2) The
Devil is swift of foot, he can easily overtake you, if you should fly. And
it is observable that in all the spiritual Armor there is nothing appointed to
cover the backparts. If you once turn your back, you give the Devil a fair
mark where his Arrows will presently fasten.

2. Yielding will not help you; the Devil is a very merciless creature: he
that submits himself to his fury, puts the Knife into his own bowels. The
Devil gives no quarter to any sinner that ever yields some. Say of the Lion,
that he will spare the prey that lies under his feet; but this roaring Lion
the Devil is most cruel to them that stoop. And then besides; he that
yields, puts himself out of the compass of Christ's prayer. I have prayed for
thee that thy faith fail not, Luc. 22. 32. Christ does not make intercession
for yielding sinners, but for opposing sinners; he prays that the faith of
contending sinners do not fail, but he does not intercede that such as will
not fight, should be defended.

3 Compounding is unavayleable: Satan will never make any composition but for
his own advantage: and the Devils advantage will be the sinners detriment if
not his destruction. And besides; if he should seal to any good terms, yet
would he keep none. He is a perfidious creature, as well as a merciless
creature: when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; forhe is a liar, and
the Father thereof, Joh. 8. 44. I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all
his Prophets, says Satan to God, when he had power given him over Ahab. 1.
Reg. 22. 22. He is a dissembler, therefore when he makes his voice gracious,
believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart, Pro. 27. 25.
The Devil sometimes transforms himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor: 11. 14,
but he is never more an Angel of darkness than when he is transformed into an
Angel of light. He is never a greater enemy then when he appears in the shape
of a friend. When he set upon our first parents, he came to them as a friend,
pretending his grief that they were debarred from the tree of knowledge, and
makes himself a greater friend than God was. Has God said, Ye shall not eat of
every tree in the Garden? Genesis 3. 1. as if he should say, My soul is troubled
for you, that the desire of your soul should be withheld from you: take but my
counsel, your condition shall be betterd: But what was at the bottom of that
friendship, we find by sad experience. When he set upon the second Adam, he
pretends the like friendship to him; If thou be the Son of God, command that
these stones be made bread, Mat. 4. 3. He seems to be much affected, that a
person of such worth as Christ was, should want bread, after forty days
fasting; but his intention was to have choked Christ, and all his Elect, with
his bread. If ever Satan reach out his hand to kiss you, be sure there is a
dagger under his garment to stab you; like Judas, he has the greatest prank of
Treason to act, When he comes with an Hail Master.

(4) From the benefit of resisting: As there is hazard of ruin in submitting;
so there is certainty of Victory in opposing. When Christ had made avaliant
resistance, the text says, the Devil gave way, and left him, Mat. 4. 11. And
so will he, at least, be enforced to leave, if you continue in your opposition.
We have not only a Promise for this, Jam. 4. 7. but we have many Experiences:
Job, by his constancy in opposing, over-came the Tempter at last: God appears
in the end of the battle, and gives him the garland Cap. 42. 7, 8. Peter was
sifted much, but he overcame at last. Paul was long and sorely buffeting; yet
triumphed before his death in that (...) or song of Victory, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
and is now in despite of the Devil a triumphant Saint. And all that glorious
Company in Heaven, who are described with Palms in their hands, and Robes upon
their backs, and Crowns upon their heads, Rev. 7. 9. are at this present,
singing the song of Victory unto God, and unto the Lamb.

Reproof to two sorts of persons: Use 1.


(1.) Such as, instead of withstanding Satan the evil Spirit, withstand and
oppose the Spirit of Christ, quenching, and grieving, and resisting his blessed
Motions. Steven says this to the charge of those obstinate Jews, Act. 7. 51.
Ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye have always resisted
the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye. There are many in this way of
opposition, resisting the Spirit in the Ministry of the Word, and in the
immediate motions and suggestions put into their hearts. When the Spirit moves
them to pray, they oppose him: When the Spirit bids them hear, they stop their
ears; and when the Spirit bids them, Seek ye my face; they answer, Thy face
will we not seek. I would have such men to consider a few things seriously:
These two things.

1. There Is no man knows whether the Spirit will move once more in his heart,
or no: That which Solomon says in another case, we may as truly say in this
case, Eccles. 8. 8. There is no man has power over the Spirit, to retain the
Spirit. The Spirit of God is a free Agent; He works when, and where, and as
long as he pleases; he blows where he lists, etc. Many a man would now be
glad to feel those movings upon his soul, which he has stifled formerly by his
own sinful opposings, but cannot redeem them.

2. How unable you will be to act in any good, when the Holy Spirit of God is
silenced. It Is the Spirit of God which works in you, both to will and to do,
Phil. 2. 23. And if this Wheel do not turn, there will never be any good motion
in the Soul. The Soul without the Holy Spirit, is but as a dead Corpse with a
living soul, not able to act at all: If there be neither Wind nor Tide, the
Ship cannot sail. The Spirit of God is both the Wind and Tide of all Motions in
the soul; and if this stir not, there is no action. It is with man, in regard
of spiritual operations, as it was with the Wheels in Ezekiels Vision, and the
living Creatures, Ezekiel. 1. 19, 20. 21. When the living Creatures went, the
Wheels went by them; and when the living Creatures stood, the Wheels stood;
and when the living Creatures were lifted up, the Wheels were lifted up etc.
The Soul of Man is a Wheel which is fit for motion; but it cannot move when the
Spirit of God does not move: If the Spirit stand still, the Wheels stand
still; and if the Spirit be lifted up, the Wheels are lifted up: otherwise no
motion.

(2.) Such as instead of withstanding the Assaults of Satan, do indeed carry on
the assaults of Satan; use all means they can, that they may both fashion, and
animate, and give breath to all Satan's Conceptions, in their own, and others
hearts. They hatch the Cockatrice eggs, and weave the Spiders web, Isa. 59. 5.
They are ready to put Tools and Instruments into the hand of the Devil, and to
do his work for him. The Apostle speaks of some that make provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans 13. ult. So, many make provision for
the Devil, that they may accomplish his temptations: They use all means to edge
his temptations, that they may pierce to the bottom: they put feathers upon
his arrows, that they may fly swiftly. Jonadab was guilty of this sin toward
Ammon; He sets on the temptation of the Devil, and promotes sin, and becomes
a Pander to his lust, 2 Samuel 13. 4, 5. Jezabel she promotes Satan's temptation
against her husband; I will, says she give thee the vineyard of Naboth, 1 Reg.
21. 7. She became a very Devil to her Husband, so do many persons to themselves
go up and down, seeking occasions and opportunities, to further Satan's
temptation. If Satan tempt them to drunkenness, they go presently abroad to
seek Companions; and if he persuade them to uncleanness, they use all helps
and incentives to that sin, etc. It is a very cursed thing, and a
sacrilegious sin, to help the Devil against Christ, either in your selves, or
others. The Serpent was cursed for being an Instrument to the Adversary, in his
assaulting of our first Parents, Genesis 3. 14. And Jezabel bears this infamous
brand; She made Ahab to sin. Jezabel his wife stirred up, etc. Such as blow up
Satan's sparks of temptation in their own hearts are Felones de se,
Self-Murtherers, which of all Murderers are the most bloody, and confiscate
all they have.

Exhortation: to persuade all Christians to Use 2.
this resolution. Play the men, and stand out against the Devil and all his
Instruments. Keep your footing, and yield not in any case; though he come upon
you, as Goliath did upon David, with open mouth; yet keep your ground, and
flinch not at any hand. And for your encouragement, consider:

(1.) That Satan is but a Creature, though he be strong and cruel; yet his
strength is but a created strength: he is potent, but not omnipotent.
Omnipotency is incompatible to a Creature. He is the strong man armed; but
Jesus Christ is stronger then he: and though you cannot, yet he can disarm him,
and take away that wherein he trusts, Luke 11. 22.

(2.) That he is a Creature under a Curse: This may take off much from that
dreadfulness which many look upon him with, vid. Genesis 3. 14. Cursed shall thou
be above all the Beasts of the field* etc. There is nothing which may more
encourage a Child of God in his spiritual Encounters, then this, That all he
dispures against are under a Divine Execration: Gods Curse is a weakening thing.

(3) He is a wounded and conquered Creature, Genesis 3. 15. He shall break thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Our Savior, I remember, encourages his
Disciples against troubles from the World, by this very Argument, I have
overcome the World, Joh. 16. 33. He has overcome the Devil, as well as the
World, for he triumphed over Principalities and Powers on the Cross, Col. 2.
15. Christ put Satan to flight in his assaults, Matthew. 4. 11. and that as our
Head. Satan overcame all Mankind in the first Adam; but in the second Adam he
is overcome by all the Elect in Christ's Victories, Ephesians. 2. 6. So in this.

(4) He is a chained Creature also, Rev. 20. 1, 2. God keeps him fast in Irons;
he was put into Fetters ever since his (2 Pet. 2. 4.) first Rebellion, and he
cannot shake them off, Jude 6. And this chain does so confine him, that he
cannot stir, until God slack his Chain. Let me touch his flesh and bone, and he
will curse thee to thy face; Job 2. 5. And ye know he was not able to enter
into the Herd of Swine, till Christ had slackened his chain, Luke 8. 32. how
much more is a Saint better then a Swine? I shall to these Encouragements add
one more: Remember your Sacramental Oath in Baptism made to God: then it was,
you took Prestmoney to serve in Gods wars; And that you should oppose the
Devil, was a part of your engagements: Perjury is a heinous sin; the very
light of Nature abhors it, and God has, and will severely avenge it, vid.
Zech. 5. 4.

Now if you would Oppose to any benefit, you should be careful of these three
things:

1. Study his stratagems, 2 Cor. 2. 11. This will help you much in Opposing.
The Apostle, in Ephesians. 6. 11. mentions his wiles.

2. Oppose him at a distance: It Is best fighting an enemy in his own
Territories; prudent Warriors endeavor to do so.

3. Use the right Armor: Of which, we shall speak in the next Doctrine.

LECT. 5. November. 7. 1649.
Ephesians. 6. 13. Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be
able to withstand in the evil day; and having done all, to stand.
WE have done with the LECT. 5
2d. Doctrine, That it is the duty of a Christian to withstand Satan in the
evil day of temptation: The third Observation follows, viz.

Whosoever would be able to withstand Satan Doct. 3.
in the evil day of Assault, must be careful that he take to himself the
whole Armor of God. This is twice told us in this Chapter: once in the 11.
Verse; and here again in this Verse, to show you the certainty, and necessity
of it. There can be no hopes of doing any good against the Devil when he sets
upon us; no possibility of withstanding to any purpose; without the taking and
using of this Armor.

In the handling of this Proposition, I shall briefly speak to these four Heads:

(1) I shall show what this Armor is. (2) Why it is called the Armor of God.
(3) Why Christians must take to themselves this Armor? (4) Why they must take
the whole Armor of God?
Jerome thinks, by the whole Armor of God, we are to understand Christ, so
as, To put on the Armor of God, is nothing else but, To put on Christ; Si enim
eingulum veritas est, and lorica justitia est; Salvator autem, and veritas and
justitia nominatur, nulli dubium quin ipse cingulum sit and lorica, etc.

But I suppose in this place, by the Armor of God, we are to understand these
two things:

First, The Graces of Gods Spirit; such as Faith, Hope, Patience, etc. This the
Apostle clearly shows in the following verses, where he reckons up the
particulars of this Armor. He mentions the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of
Hope, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and the girdle of Truth, ver. 14, 16,
17. Hereby intimating to us, that these, and such like graces of God, are those
spiritual Arms which Christians should use in this Warfare, vid. Romans 13. 12.
Graces are called, The Armor of Light: (...): And 2 Cor. 6. 7. We read of The
Armor of Righteousness.

Secondly, The Ordinances of God: such as the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, etc.
This also is hinted by the Apostle in the following verses, where he commands
us to use Prayer, as one of these Weapons: under which particular, I conceive,
by a Synecdoche, all the other Ordinances of God are comprehended: so that the
whole Spiritual Armor is comprehended under one of these two Heads; of Divine
Graces, and Divine Ordinances. 2 Cor. 10. 4. The Ordinances are called, The
Weapons of our Warfare. (...).

Now these are called Armor; because they are of the same use to the soul,
which material Arms are to the outward Man: To defend the soul from Assaults,
and to offend and wound assaulting Enemies.

Secondly, why it is called the Armor of God? For this, let us consider these
four Reasons, viz.

(1.) Because it is of Divine Original. God is the sole Author and Maker of
this Armor: (1.) For the Graces of the Spirit, we know that they are of a
Divine descent: he makes and works them in the soul. It is above created Art,
or Strength, to plant any of these Flowers in the soul. They are called the
fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. They are of the Spirits planting: he is
therefore called the Spirit of Grace, Zach. 12. 10. And God is called the God
of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all Grace who has called us into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after ye have suffered a while, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle, etc.

2. And for the Ordinances, they are also Divine Institutions, prayer,
preaching, Sacraments are all of Gods appointment. He gave some to be Apostles,
some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, for the work of the
Ministry, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. 12. None of the Ordinances could have any spiritual
Math. 28. 19
efficacy, if they had not a divine Original.

They could neither convince the Conscience, nor convert the heart: they could
neither terrify, nor comfort, cast down, nor lift up the soul, if they were
not of a heavenly Descent.

(2.) As this Armor is of Divine Original, so it has a Divine Approbation.
God has given his Approbation to this Armor, and to no other. He has
manifested his Allowance of it both,

1. By the many Commands given to all his Soldiers, that they should use it,
he has charged them positively, that whenever they go out to battle, they
should gird themselves herewith. And

2. By the many signal and remarkable Victories he has bestowed upon his
Servants, when they have been careful to make use of it, he has always given
them good success. Herewith Job overcame, and herewith Paul came off
victorious; and by this Armor, Peter was promised the Conquest, when Satan
sifted him. God is exceedingly pleased with these Weapons, he delights in the
graces of his spirit, and in his people for those graces. How pleasant art
thou, O love for delights! Cant. 7. 6. And he takes much contentment in his own
Ordinances also. Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet
is thy voice; and thy countenance is comely, Cant. 2. 14. And therefore the
Church prays, Let my prayer come forth in thy sight, as the incense, and the
lifting up of my hands, as the evening sacrifice. Psalm. 141. 2. And therefore
also it is, that God is always present with his Ordinances, and with his
Servants, whenever they are either publicly, or privately exercised in them.

3. They may be called the Armor of God, In regard of Conservation. God does
uphold, maintain, and preserve this Armor, They are in his custody and
keeping, he takes the care of them.

If we look upon our graces, the Scripture makes it very clear, that as they
are planted, so they are preserved by God. He that keeps the feet of his
Saints, keeps much more the graces of his Saints. Awake o Northwinde, and
come o South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth,
Cant. 4. 16. If God did not exerci^e his providentiall care in preserving, as
well as he put forth his creating Power, in planting grace at first: the roots
of grace would not only, not blow forth, but die, and come to nothing in a
short time: faith is that which keeps us; but it is God which keeps our faith,
and all our other graces are in his hand.

And as our graces, so are the Ordinances also preserved, and maintained by
God. These Candles would soon be blown out, if he did not keep them burning by
his continual care and watchful providence. As Christ has the Stars in his
right hand, Rev. 2. 1. so he has all the Ordinances in his right hand.

(4.) They are the Armor of God, In regard of their success and efficacy. All
the virtue of this Armor, depends wholly upon God alone, and not upon the
Creature; (1) for our graces, they are strengthened by his power, Isay 41. 10.
Fear not, I am with thee, be not afraid, I am thy God, I will strengthen thee,
yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my
righteousness. Our Faith, and Hope, and all our graces would be broken to
shivers, at one stroke of temptation, if the Lord did not establish and confirm
them. I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of
Joseph, and I will strengthen them in the Lord, and they shall walk up and down
in his name, says the Lord, Zech: 10. 6. 12, This is that which our Savior
tells Peter, Luke 22. 32. I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. We
could never resist the violent assaults of Satan, if the Lord did not undergird
our graces with his own Almighty strength. This is plainly laid down in this
very Chapter, verse 10. 11. be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might, Put on the whole Armor of God. God will not strengthen us, if we
neglect this Armor, and this Armor will not be able to defend us, unless God
give it power. My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect
in weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Paul's graces would presently have been broken, 1
Cor. 15. 10, (...).
had not Gods strength been perfected in his weak graces. This power made them
impregnable.

(2.) For your Ordinances of God, which are the other part of this Armor, It
is from God that they are enabled to do us good in temptation. The Weapons of
our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, for the pulling down of
strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. The paper walls of prayer, preaching, Sacraments,
are so thin, that they would never hold out against all the strong Gun-shots of
Satan, were they not fortified by a greater power then their own. These
Glasse-windows could not hold out in these violent storms, if they were not
covered with the strong Curtains of Divine power. These Sandy banks would be
washed away with one single flood of temptation, if the strength of the
Almighty did not stand as an invincible Breast-work to secure them: these
Pitchers would presently be dashed in pieces, and these dim Lamps soon
extinguished; did not God uphold them. The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon:
this was Gideons word, when he went with his Pitchers against the Midianites,
Jude 7. 18. Gideons Sword would soon have been beaten out of his hands, had not
the Sword of the Lord been drawn to defend his Sword. The Ordinances of God are
but like a Barley Cake which would never tumble down, against the Hosts of this
King of Midian, did not the great Jehovah take them into his own hand, and put
power into it.

3. Why should Christians take unto them this Armor. I shall give these two
Reasons, viz.

(1) From the uneffectualness of all other Armor. It is impossible to prevail
against the Devil any other way. There are but three kinds of Weapons. The
Weapons of men, The Weapons of the Devil, and the Weapons of God. (1.) The
Weapons of men are such as carnal reason puts into our hands: as Physic, and
pleasant Company, and earthly delights, etc. These will not serve us in this
War. Physicians may do some good to purge out Melancholy, and other abounding
humors, which Satan makes some use of, to help him in his assaults; but this
will not do the cure perfectly. The assault is made not upon the body, but upon
the soul; and the bodily Physician cannot give any receipt to antidote that.
They may antidote the body against pestilentiall infections; but the
Apothecaries Shop has no Medicine which can preserve the soul from a
temptation, nor heal a spiritual wound. There are some bodily diseases which
they cannot cure; there are scandala medicorum. We read of a diseased Woman in
the Gospel, which had been many years under the hands of many Physicians, but
could not be cured till she was touched by the hand of Jesus Christ, Mark 5.
26. And if a bodily disease put them so to it, what help can the soul have from
them in a day of temptation? As Job said to his friends, when they reasoned
with him, so it may be said to the most learned and religious of Physicians; Ye
are all Physicians of no value, Job 13. 4. In this matter the soul, the
Conscience, the inward man is not the subject of the Physicians Act, but the
body. I shall conclude this with that which God speaks concerning Ephraim in
another case, Hos. 5. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his
wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, yet could he
not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. If a College of Physicians were
convened together, to prescribe remedy for a soul vexed with temptation, they
could administer nothing effectual to heal such a wound. Nor will pleasant
Company, nor earthly delights do any good in this case. They may a little
alleviate for a time, but they cannot cure. The Servants of Saul, when they saw
their Lord troubled with an evil spirit, advise him to this way of Remedy: Let
our Lord command thy Servants which are before thee, to seek out a man who is a
cunning player on a Harp; and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit
from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shall be
well, 1 Samuel 16. 15, 16. But although David by his Music cheared him for the
present, as is recorded, ver. 23. yet the disease was not cured, the evil
spirit returned to him again afterward. Carnal delights, and sinful
pleasures, they are the Devils Engines which help him on with his work upon
your soul: they are his Proneers, which make the rough places smooth, they make
the breaches of the soul wider then they were before, that Satan now enters
more easily then he did, and spoils the soul, though perhaps more insensibly,
yet not less violently. Saul's Armor will do no good against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.
38. 39. And as the Weapons of men cannot profit, much less can (2.) the
weapons of Satan do any good. Exorcismes, spells, enchantments, crossings, and
such like Diabolical Devices, are very unlike to help the soul in these
Battles. This is to cast out Satan by Satan, which our Savior makes to be a
very improbable thing. How can Satan cast out Satan? Mark 3. 23. The Devil is a
politic Creature, too wise to make Engines to annoy himself. Division would
soon destroy his Kingdom, therefore he will not fight against himself; Or if he
do seem to be overcome at any time, by any of these weapons, which he puts into
thy hand, it is but that he may by this means make thee faster in his snare. A
wise Soldier will suspect any weapon sent from his enemy: when Saul went to
the Witch at Endor, to be relieved in his evil day, Satan answered him; but he
did by this means get faster hold then he had before: so vain are all these
weapons.

(2) From the effectualnesse of these weapons: they have ever been succesfull
when they have been used aright by any of Gods Servants: What is said of the
bow of Jonathan and the sword of Saul is truly said of this Armor, they never
returned empty from the blood of the slain, and from the fat of the mighty, 2.
Sam. 1. 22. never any harnessed with this Armor lost the field finally. It Is
Armor of proof, it may be battered, it cannot be quite broken. There are
thousands and ten thousands in heaven triumphing at this day, who have overcome
that red Dragon, and all his hosts by this Armor.

IV. Why we must take the whole Armor.

(1) Because Satan will be sure to encounter us on every side, he uses all
kind of temptations, besieges us round, and therefore we must have all kind of
Armor. He has temptations for the head, therefore we must have a Helmet to
keep that safe: he has temptations for the heart, therefore we must take the
Breast Plate: he has temptations for the feet, therefore we must not leave off
the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel, etc. There is not any part of the
soul or body, but he assaults it with peculiar and proper temptations, etc. No
man knows where Satan will shoot.

(2.) Because if any place lie unguarded, it will be as dangerous, as if the
whole were unarmed. Satan will creep in at any hole; and wheresoever he smites,
he smites mortally. It Is as good to have all naked, as any part unweaponed.
Satan is an exact Marks-man, he can shoot at an hairs breadth, and not miss
the Mark, as its said of those Benjamites, Judges 20. 16.

(3.) There is such a connection between one part and another, that the absence
of but one weakeneth the strength of all the rest. For the Graces of the
spirit: there is such a concatenation amongst them, that if one be left
behind, all the rest are much loosened and made less serviceable. They are as
links of a Chain, one helps to keep another; so that if you do but break one,
the rest drop asunder. Tribulation works patience, and patience experience,
and experience hope, etc. Romans 5. 3, 4. All the graces are as the stones of a
building, or the beams of an house, they corroborate and strengthen one
another: faith strengthens love, and love helps faith, and love and faith
quickens hope, and hope sets joy on work, etc. It were easy to show you what
mutual dependence one of the graces has upon another. And so do the
Ordinances which are another part of this Armor, they help one another: the
word helps us in prayer, and prayer help^ us in managing the word, and the word
and prayer make the Sacraments useful, and the Sacraments again they fit the
soul for the word and prayer, etc. So that he that shall neglect any piece,
does necessarily much enerve all the rest.

(4.) He that shall neglect any, may expect that God should even curse the rest
to him, as a punishment of that neglect. For to leave off any piece of the
spiritual Armor willingly, argues in a man, (1.) Spiritual pride and
confidence of his own strength; he thinks himself not to want so much as God
has provided: it argues, (2.) Disesteem of that piece of Armor which is
neglected, that there is neither desireableness, nor usefulness in it: and it
(3.) argues sloathfulness and security of spirit: and then it argues (4.)
contempt of God and his Authority, in prescribing what he would have his
Soldiers to observe, etc. For as the Apostle argues in another case, he that
said, Do not commit Adultery, said also, Do not kill, etc. James 2. 11. so he
that says, take the Helmet, says also, take the Shield, etc. Now such a
Christian may justly expect, that God will punish his pride and disrespect, and
sloathfulness, and contempt, with the blasting of all other pieces of his
Armor, that he that would not take all, should have no benefit of any.

Information. We may draw from hence 1. Use.
these 12. Conclusions, viz.

LECT. 6. November. 14. 1649.
1. THat its a very difficult and hard task LECT. 6
for a Christian to oppose Satan, when he comes in a way of Assault. This is
naturally inferred from hence, All the Armor of God must be taken, and all
little enough to furnish us for this day. Many an ignorant and self-confident
Christian thinks it one of the easiest works in all the world, to repel Satan,
and put him to flight: it is but bidding him defiance, and he is presently gone.
This Text will teach us another lesson, if we mark it well.

We may guess at the difficulty of opposing a contrary power, by the provision
made for that opposition: When we see many hundreds of Soldiers listed, and
store of Artillery and Ammunition provided, and many days spent in fitting the
Soldier for his work, we presently imagine, that all this presupposes more
then an ordinary adversary: so when we hear the Apostle charging these
Ephesians once, and again to take to themselves, and to put upon them the whole
Armor of God: we cannot but conclude, that there is like to be more than
ordinary contentions before such an Adversary be overcome. Look but upon that
description which is made of this Adversary, in the 12. v. of this Chapter, Not
with flesh and blood, but with Principalities and Powers, etc. I name this
difficulty, not to discourage any Christian but to stir up watchfulness, and
diligence in all Christians, that knowing the difficulty beforehand, they may
be the better fitted to entertain him when he comes. Three things well
considered, besides this in the Text, will discover the difficulty of
withstanding Satan's temptations.

1. He is a very potent enemy, Ephesians. 4. 12. Principalities, Powers, Spiritual
wickednesses in heavenly places. 2. He is a very subtle enemy, Genesis 3. 1. 3. He
is a very diligent and industrious enemy: He compasses the earth to and fro,
Job 2. 2.
He turns every stone, and leaves no means unattempted, that may promote his
mischievous design.

Now I add this Note, for these three Reasons:

1. That we may see, How much compassion we owe to such as are assaulted by him.

2. How much we ought to pity such as are surprised, overtaken, and for a time
overcome by his strong assaults: Be not over-harsh, nor over-rigid in
censuring, and condemning them who are captivated by the power of Satan, vid.
Gal. 6. 1.

3. That all who are enabled to keep the field in this war, may confess how
much they owe to God, who inableth them to be Conquerors in so difficult a
battle.

Secondly, This shows us the insufficiency, weakness, and emptiness of our
selves, and of every thing in our selves, to carry on the spiritual Warfare.
We must take, not our own Armor, that is quickly broken into pieces, but the
Armor of God. Had we any thing of our own, there would be no need of sending
us to another treasury. There is so much Atheism, Pride, self-Idolatry, and
vain confidence in the heart of man, that he is very desirous to magnify
himself, and unwilling to acknowledge his own poverty. We are ready to say as
that proud King of Assyria did, Isa. 10. 13, 14. By the strength of my hand I
have done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent; I have removed the hounds of
the people, and have robbed their Treasures, and I have put down the
Inhabitants like a valiant man. And my hand has found as a Nest the riches of
the people, etc. never minding that all his success and strength was from God
who had made him his Battle-axe to do all that work. We are ready to assume all
to our selves, in our spiritual warring against Satan. I have put the
Adversary to flight; I have resisted him by my own strength and industry:
whereas it is GOD that furnishes us with Armor, and that girds this Armor
upon us, and that makes our endeavors successful by his own grace. Our sword
would soon be broken in pieces; our heels would soon be tript up from under
us, if God did not under-gird our souls with his strength. My grace is
sufficient, says God to Paul, when Satan made war against him, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
God's grace was Paul's sufficiency, else he had been the Devils Vassal. By
thee, says David, have I run through a troop, by my God have I leaped over a
wall; it is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect. He
teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by my arms. Thou
have also given me the shield of thy salvation, thy right hand has holden me
up, and thy gentleness has made me great. Thou have girded me with strength
unto the battle, thou have subdued under me, those that rose against me, Psalm.
18. 29, 34, 35, 39. Whenever thou read this Text, that thou art sent to
Gods Armory, sit down, and make acknowledgment of thy own poverty; and say, All
my springs are in thee. God will never have the glory either of thy opposing,
or overcoming, till thou see it to be him that works all thy works in thee,
and for thee, Esa. 26. 12.

Thirdly, That God has made sufficient provision for his people to safeguard
and defend them against all the attempts of Satan. Here is a Panoplia, not only
one sort of Armor but Armor of all kinds. The treasury is richly furnished,
the christian soldier needs not to want any thing, if he be not defective to
himself, here is provision for the head, for the breast, for the heart, for
the hand, etc. it is a perfect Armor, (Cap a pe) there is nothing wanting for the
full accoutring of soul and boby. Let Satan use what way of Assaults he
pleases, here is defense made against him, my grace is sufficient for thee, 2
Cor. 12. 9. As the hills stand about Jerusalem: So the Lord is, round about his
people, Psalm. 125. 1, 2. There Is no side lies undefended if the Christian do
not voluntarily omit his Armor. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun,
who rides upon the heaven for thy help, and the eternal God is thy refuge
and underneath are the everlasting Arms, etc: Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27. If Satan come
over their heads to assault them, God rides upon the sky in his excellency: If
Satan get beneath them to undermine them, there is provision also: underneath
are the everlasting Arms, Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch
no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, etc. For ye shall not go out
with haste, nor go by flight for the Lord will go before you, and the God of
Israel will be your rereward, Esa 52. 11, 12. If Satan set upon them in the
Front, they shall be defended there, God will go before them; And if he fall
upon the Rear, to cut off the hind-most of them, as Amaleck did on Israel when
they came out of Egypt, even there also shall be sufficient provision; the God
of Israel will be their Rereward. Earthly Generals are many times constrained to
call the Soldiery to fight, unarmed or half armed; they have not all sorts of
Weapons at all Encounters. God never bids any of his Soldiers fight, but he
first lays out for them all kind of Weapons. I add this Note, for this
consideration: To let a Christian see, that if he be at any time foiled in
these disputes, he is not to blame Gods Armor, which is very complete and
perfect; but either his own negligence, in not putting on his Arms, or his
cowardice in not using them aright. We may say of the Spiritual Armor, as the
Apostle does of the Scripture, 2 Timothy 3. 17. All Scripture, etc. So is the
Armor of God, profitable for Offense, for Defense, to make the Christian
Soldier complete, thoroughly furnished for every kind of temptation.

Fourthly, That Christian endeavor is absolutely necessary for those who would
be preserved and secured from Satan in the day of Temptation. This is gathered
clearly from the Apostles charge of Taking unto us, and of Putting on this
Armor. God has provided us complete arms; but if we desire either to defend
our selves, or to offend our enemies, there lies an absolute Necessity upon
us, that we take them, and use them. Work out your salvation, says the
Apostle, with fear and trembling; for it is God that works in you, both to
will, and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 12. Our working is not the cause
of our salvation: but it is absolutely necessary, that we work, if we will be
saved: We cannot be saved, without our endeavor, though we are not saved for
our endeavor. Qui creavit te sine te, non servabit te sine te. Paul had a
promise, that both himself, and all that were with him in the ship, should come
safe to Land, Act. 27. 23, 24, 25. but yet both he, and the rest, must work for
their own preservation: and therefore when some of the Mariners were about to
desert the ship, he tells them, That except those men stayed in the ship, they
could not be saved, v. 30, 31. That of the Psalmist, Psalm. 127. ^, 2. Except
the Lord keep the City, etc. is very considerable to this purpose. All humane
endeavors are to no purpose^, unless God crown their endeavors with his
blessing; and yet it is as true, that God will not effectually give his
blessing, without the concurrence of humane endeavor. When Satan would have
persuaded our Savior to have cast himself down upon the Pinnacle of the Temple,
upon confidence of Divine Protection, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep, etc. Mat. 4. 5, 6. Our Savior repels his temptation with this
answer, ver. 7. It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. It is not
religious trusting, but presumptuous tempting of God, for a man to think that
God will preserve him from destruction, though he neglect the means of his own
safety* The Soldier cannot think, that the Armor in the Magazine will defend
him; it is the Armor upon the body that will preserve him. A man may perish at
a full table, if he do not eat of that which is provided; and a Christian may
be overcome, notwithstanding all his Armor, if he do not use it, as God
requires: Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it upon the boil for a
plaster, and he shall recover, Esa. 38. 21. A lump of figs would not
immediately have cured a Plague Sore without a special blessing; and yet if
that plaster had not been applied, Hezekiah had not recovered. God can work
without means, and against means oftentimes; but he has no where said, that
he will do so when Creatures neglect means afforded. If David had gone against
Goliath without his sling, he might have returned without victory. If the people
of Israel had neglected to encompass Jericho, they could not have expected the
spoil of that City: their shouting was not the cause of the falling down of the
Walls of Jericho; and yet if they had not shouted, the walls had never fallen;
vid. Luke 8. 35. Though Christ raised her by a Miracle, he would not preserve
her by a Miracle. A Christian must use all lawful means to accomplish Gods
Promises; and when he has done, must wait for the accomplishment of the
Promise, as if nothing had been done.

(5.) That the Ordinances of God, and the graces of God, are not weak, but
strong things. This is gathered from the Notion of Armor, under which these
things are here represented: Armor has strength in it. The Apostle tells us,
concerning the Ordinances, that they are mighty, through God, for the pulling
down of strong Holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. and the same Apostle tells us elsewhere,
that the Gospel in the public preaching thereof is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. And for the graces of God,
they also have a mighty strength in them. We read of the power of Faith, 2
These. 1. 11. Faith is a very powerful grace, it enableth the soul to do, and
bear many things, which it could neither do, nor suffer, without this grace:
it is that by which a Christian obtaines victory over a mighty world, 1 John 5.
4. Hope, another grace of the Spirit, has great strength in it: it is
therefore called the Anchor of the soul, Heb. 6. 19. An Anchor is a strong
thing; by the strength of the Anchor, the ship rides safe and steadfast in
stormy and tempestuous raging weather. By the Anchor of Hope, the soul is kept
steadfast in times of shaking and confusion. There is indeed this difference
between the strength of the spiritual Armor, and material Armor. The strength
of other Armor, is not from him that wears it, nor from him that appoints it;
but from the natural frame and contexture of it: but the strength of the
spiritual Armor is not from any thing naturally in it, but only from the
Institution of him that has appointed it. And therefore the Apostle says,
that the Weapons of our Warfare are mighty through God: of themselves they are
feeble, and very weak; but, through God, they become potent and mighty. If
either Graces, or Ordinances, should be left to work by the force which is
naturally in them, and should not be strengthened, and managed by a power from
God, without themselves, they would be no better then broken Armor: they would
be but like bruised Reeds, quickly shaken to shivers by the least wind of
temptation: hereby weak Christians have waxed valiant in battle, and turned to
flight the armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11. 34.

(6) That it is no wonder to see Satan so to prevail over graceless persons by
the power of his Temptations. The Apostle tells us, that the Devil works in
the hearts of the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. A Child of
disobedience is not one that sometimes does an act of Disobedience, for so do
the very Children of God. I find, that when I would do good, evil is present;
and that the evil I would not, that I do, Romans 7. 19. But a Son or Daughter of
Disobedience, is the denomination of such as make disobedience their trade;
such a one as willingly fulfills the desires of the flesh, and of the mind; as
he is described, v. 3. one that is a servant unto sin, That serves diverse
lusts and pleasures, Tit. 3. 3. In such a one the Devil does effectually and
powerfully work: he is acted and moved by the Devil, as the body is by the
soul; and that not once, or now and then only, but constantly, and
continually, as the Particle (now) notes; it signifies a continued act. The
souls, and minds, and consciences, of such men, are the shops in which Satan
continually works, and that successfully. And the same Apostle, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
speaking of the same persons, tells us, that they are taken captive by Satan at
his will. If we consider this text, we shall find it a thing not much to be
admired at, for they have not the graces of the Spirit whereby they should make
effectual opposition against his assaults: and therefore it is no wonder if they
be vassalizd to do all the desires of the Devils heart. A strong King, with a
multitude of men well appointed, may easily do his pleasure upon a few naked
and unarmed men; especially, if they have no desire to make resistance:
graceless persons they have no mind to oppose the Devil: sin is as pleasant
to them, as it is to him; and if they had a mind to withstand, yet they have no
arms; and therefore, volentes nolentes, they must obey. If Satan tempt them to
Blaspheme, to Murder, to be Rebellious, to break holy Engagements, to
subscribe wicked Engagements; they want armor to withstand, and therefore they
must of necessity yield obedience.

(7) It Is no wonder to hear of Satan's prevailing upon those persons, and in
those places where the Ordinances are not planted. Some of the Heathens, they
are contented to worship the Devil as their God; and many in our own Land, in
the dark corners of it, they are tempted to Sorcery, Witchcrafts, and to
Divinations, and such Diabolical Arts. This is a condition to be much
lamented, but it is certainly not much to be admired, unless it be, that it is
no worse; for they are destitute of that which is, and should be for the
defense against such assaults; they are unwalled Villages, which lie open to
the Devil at his pleasure. The Ordinances of God, are a guard, to prevent the
incursions and invasions of Satan; this guard they want: and therefore no
wonder, if Hell be amongst them. Where there is no Vision, says Solomon, the
People perish, Prove. 29. 18. Piscator reads it, Nudatur populus, the people is
naked; and the word in Hebrew signifies, as well to uncover, and make bare, as
it does cessare, or rebellis esse, or dissipare, as others render it. The
Ordinances of God are a very great part of a peoples defense; and if this
defense be removed, or not erected, Satan must needs rage very furiously
amongst such a People.

(8) This let us us see why Satan is such an enemy both to the grace of God, and
to the Ordinances of God. That he is an enemy to grace, will appear from all
the endeavor he uses, both to hinder the planting of it, where it is not; and
to root it up, where it is planted and established.

Never did the Lord go about to work saving grace and conversion in the heart
of any Creature, but Satan used all his power and policy to hinder this
Conception, either by himself immediately, or by some of his Instruments. When
Paul by the preaching of the Gospel at Paphos, began to work some saving effect
upon the Deputy Sergius Paulus, Elymas the Sorcerer, the Devils Instrument,
labors by all means to turn him from the Faith, that he might not be
converted, Act. 13. 8. And when he cannot hinder the effecting of the work, he
uses all means to destroy it, as soon as it is wrought. The Devil is like
unto Pharaoh, if he cannot hinder the conception of grace in the heart at
first, yet he will endeavor that the Manchild may be utterly destroyed, as
soon as ever it is born. He stands vigilantly before the woman, which was ready
to be delivered, for to devour her Child as soo^ (...) it was born, Rev. 12. 4.
And if he cannot hinder it from living, yet he does what he can to keep it from
thriving, by reproach, by persecution, by quenching the motion of Gods Spirit,
and all other ways. And he is no less an enemy to the Ordinances of God, then
he is to the graces of God. When Paul and Silas were going to prayer, a Spirit
of Divination met them to take them off from that Duty, Act. 16. 16. When Paul
endeavored to set up the Gospel and the Ordinances at Thessalonica, Satan
stirs up the unbelieving Jews to raise persecution, that the work might be
hindered, Act. 17. 5, 6, 7.

And when he endeavored to have come to the Thessalonians, afterward Satan
took him off, and hindered him once, and a second time, 1 These. 2. 18. Nothing
does he desire to overthrow more earnestly then the Ordinances: he knows he
can never set up his golden Calves, till he has taken down the golden
Candlesticks: The reason of his endeavors, is this; These Graces and Ordinances
are the souls Armor, by which he is hindered in his Temptations; and if he can
but destroy this Armor, he knows he shall invade the soul at his pleasure,
without disturbance. When an enemy would be Master of a City, we know they take
away that which may hinder them: they first seize upon the place of Ammunition,
remove the Guards, and Gates, and Ch^^ns, out of their places; and so bring the
Inhabitants into perfect slavery. Graces and Ordinances are the Ammunition of
the Soul: when the Devil has removed these, he has nothing to oppose him: he
may then come when he will, to rifle and plunder the soul. In order to the
accomplishment of this, it is, that he has such an aching tooth against the
Ministry, and Ministers, that desire to be firm and faithful; he knows, the
Ordinances and they, must fall together: therefore he endeavors either to
corrupt them; or if that cannot be, utterly to destroy them, that so he may
rule and bear sway without control.

(9.) What great Adversaries are those to themselves, that have quite cast off
the Ordinances of God? Amongst many other soul-destroying Opinions which
prevail in our licentious times, this is one, That the fullness of time is not
yet come for Ordinances, That Ordinances are but fleshly and carnal things,
and that Christ is crucified in all these things to a Christian, etc. and
hereupon some have quite laid them aside. They will neither pray, nor hear, nor
communicate in the Sacraments; but are above all these things. These men have
done the Devils work for him, they have disarmed themselves: and its just with
God to leave them to the Devils cruelty, to deal with them as he pleases,
that he should hurry them into Atheism, profanesse, and all kind of ungodly
practices here; and into Hell hereafter. Certainly, Satan has not truer
friends to his cause and Crown, in all the world, then these men are.

(10.) How necessary it is for Christians, to use all care for the proving of
their graces, and for the strengthening of their graces. The Scripture calls
much upon us, to make trial of the truth of our graces. Examine your selves
whether ye be in the faith or no, etc. 2 Cor. 13. 5. Graces are our Arms, and
if our graces be counterfeit, Satan will soon pierce them in the day of
temptation. To fight with false graces, is as dangerous, as to fight with
painted Armor, instead of true Armor: never be contented therefore, till you
come to the certain knowledge of the truth of every grace.

And as its necessary to prove them, so its good to be strengthening them
against the day of assault. This God calls for as well as the other. Add to
your faith virtue, and to your virtue patience, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 5. 6, 7. and 2
Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace, etc. Thin Armor is almost as unserviceable as
false Armor: a Sword without an edge will not be much better in a day of
temptation, then a wooden Sword. Weak graces will make but weak defense, and
not strong offense neither, especially against such an enemy as we have to do
withal. (1.) Jesus Christ has received for Christians, not only variety of
grace, but fullness of every grace also. Of his fullness we have all received
grace for grace, John 1. 16. one degree of grace after another. Now the
strengthening of our union with Christ, will be the strengthening of our
graces: the further a Christian gets into Christ, the more life and vigor will
there be in his graces. (2.) The Ordinances of God are not only for the
begetting of grace, but for the nourishing of grace; and though all Ordinances
be not for conversion, yet all are for edification and confirmation, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. Frequent and conscionable u^e of the Ordinances, will make weak graces
strong. (3.) Exercise is the way to increase: laboring men are usually
strongest men, if they have all other things answerable. Your laboring
Christians, will certainly be the strongest Christians: want of use rusts your
armor, and weakens it. Want of use, makes strong graces weak; but exercise
and labor makes weak graces strong, John 15. 2. Every branch in me that
bears fruit, he purges, that it may bring forth more fruit. To him that has
shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but from him that has not, shall
be taken away, that which he seems to have. Luke 8. 18. having is put for
using, as the scope of the parable shows.

11. What great cause we all have to magnify Gods goodness, in continuing
amongst us his Ordinances, and in keeping the work of Grace still alive in our
hearts? That we have Armor to fight with against Satan, when very many lie
open to his Incursions, and have no defense. The Bulwarks of Gods Ordinances
are demolished, and cast down in many Churches, and there Satan rangeth at
pleasure; And we shall see cause to have our hearts enlarged the wider, to
praise the Lord: if it be considered, what endeavors we have used to pluck
these walls down with our own hands, by casting much reproach upon them, and by
being barren under them, and by withdrawing our selves very much from them. And
so for our graces, what means have we not used to uncloath and divest our own
souls of this Armor: We have neglected to fortify and strengthen them when
they have been weak. We have undermined them with our own hands, and gone about
to heave them off with our own hands, and yet God keeps them on us still.

(12.) What a wicked thing is it, to endeavor to quench and kill the graces of
God in the hearts of men? He that takes a staff out of the hand of a man, or
Child, when a Lion is coming with open mouth upon him, would he not be guilty
of his death? Grace is all the Armor a Child of God has to defend himself
against the assaults of that roaring Lion, and to seek to strip him out of that
Armor, is to make your selves guilty of all his ruin. Solomon says, He that
takes away a Garment in cold weather, is as he that sings Songs to an heavy
heart, Prove. 25. 20. The graces of God are as the Bladders, which keep us from
sinking in the Sea of Temptation: now to take away the bladders from a man
ready to drown, is no small cruelty, etc.

Exhortation. That all Christians would, 2. Use.
when they are beset with temptations, betake themselves to these Arms. Your
hearts may think of running some other way; but it will be to no purpose. All
other Arms will be but encouragements to this Assaylant, and will betray you
into his hand. I shall need no other motive but this, in the Text, viz. certain
hope of overcoming, for so the Text says, that ye may be able to withstand in
the evil day, and having done all to stand. Which brings in the 4th Doctrine.

LECT. 7th. November. 21. 1649.
Ephesians. 6. 13. Having done all to stand, etc.
WE now come to the last LECT. 7
Doctrine of this 13. v. which is from thesecond encouragement given to this
opposition, in these words: And having done all to stand, The words have been
explicated before. (...) notes, the conclusion and finishing of all Assaults,
and standing here notes Victory. The Doctrine is this, that

Whosoever shall take to himself the whole Doct. 4.
Armor of God, and use it aright, shall be enabled not only to make resistance
in the evil day of temptation, but shall also certainly stand and be
victorious after all Assaults are ended. In this proposition there is something
employed: And something expressly asserted.

That which is employed is, That a Christian must expect multiplicity of
Assaults. (...). The Devil will not leave off with one conflict. When he made
War with Job, he used more then one temptation, vid. Job 1. 11, 12. there is
one skirmish: yet Cap. 2. 7. he sets upon him again: And afterward again,
ver^e 9. he assaults him by his wife, with another temptation. And there is no
doubt, but he assailed him many times beside, during his affliction. When he
had power given him to make War upon Christ, he was not contented with one
Assault: we read of three several battles fought in that one Chapter, Matthew.
4. 3. 5. 8. One in the Wilderness, v. 3: another on the Pinnacle of the Temple,
verse 5: and another upon a high Mountain, verse 8. And it should seem, that he
was not quiet afterward; for although one of the Evangelists tell us, that
then the Devil left him, Mat. 4. 11. yet another of the Evangelists hints some
after-assaults, Luke 4. 13. And when the Devil had ended all the Temptation,
[he departed from him] for a season, (...). Hereby intimating that Satan was
busy with Christ, all the days of his continuance on earth. As he was vir
dolorum in respect of outward griefs: So in regard of the multiplicity of
Assaults, he was vir tentationum. When Balaam was brought by Balak, to curse
Israel, we find how many attempts he makes for that purpose: first at the high
places of Baal, Numb. 22. 41. When his Enchantments would not prevail in that
place, he brings him to the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and there he
has another bout, Numb. 23. 14. and though he saw himself defeated there also,
yet he brings him to another place, to the top of Peor, that looks toward
Jeshimon, Numb. 23. 28. Balak in these his endeavors against Israel, is a
figure of Satan, in his endeavors to destroy the godly by his temptation, he
is not satisfied with one single battle; but though he be shamefully
vanquished, yet he will rally and set upon the soul again: we read 1. Reg. 20.
20, 21. of a great victory obtained by the Children of Israel, over the
Syrians. Benhadad accompanied with 32. Kings more, comes with a huge Host to
besiege Samariae, verse 1. that great Army is totally routed by a small Army,
under the conduct of the young men of the Princes of the Provinces: yet verse
22. the Prophet tells the King of Israel, that at the return of the year, the
Syrians would make another Invasion, and so they did, though it was to their
utter ruin. The Devil is like the King of Syria in this respect: though he be
oftentimes baffled by the Servants of God, yet he will renew his Assaults and
Temptations.

For (1.) The Devil is a very malicious Creature, he hates the Servants of
God, with a perfect hatred. Your adversary the Devil, etc. 1 Pet. 5. 8. Malice
is an insatiable thing, its never weary of prosecuting all means that can be
devised, for the utter ruin of the thing or person it opposes. As love never
thinks it can do enough for the advantage of the object beloved, so envy and
malice is never weary of attempting the destruction of the object hated. Now
Satan envieth the godly with an irreconcilable envy. I will put enmity between
thee and the woman, between thy seed and her seed, Genesis 3. 15. Saul envied
David, and therefore though God did often cross his designs against him, yet
he would go on in designing his destruction to the very end of his life; The
Devil envieth them, (1.) because God loves them. He envieth them, (2) because
They have the Image of God upon them, which ever since himself lost it, he has
an Antipathy against. And he hates them, (3) Because they are the only people
that troubled him: he cannot hold his usurped jurisdiction, because of them.
And (4.) his envy is much increased against them, by all the defeats he has
received from them: Every overthrowe they give him, keens the edge of his
malice, to make another attempt upon them. -- manet alta mente repostum
Judicium Paridis, spretaeque injuria formae.

And (2.) He has not only one, but variety of ways to tempt them; and though
one fail, yet he hopes another may take. The Apostle verse 11. of this sixth
Chapter of Ephesians. mentions (...). He has diversity of stratagems, and
artificial methods, and he cannot use all these in one battle. He tempts (1.)
sometimes Suadendo bonum, propter majus malum inde or^^urum. Sometimes, (2.)
Suadendo malum sub specie boni: Sometimes, (3.) Dissuadendo bonum, tanquam
malum. And (4.) sometimes, Dissuadendo malum, ut pejus inducat, See Chemnit.
Harm. p. 212. It is not to be wondered, if an adversary that has a huge Army,
make frequent invasions. Satan does not want Soldiers; he can find a Legion
(which is 6666.) in one man.

I Will apply this, and so come to that which is expressed:

(1) We may take notice from hence of the 1. Use.
preciousness of the soul: Satan would never make so many attempts about it, if
it were not a pearl of great value. Many men there are that make very little
reckoning of their souls. They only have Animam pro Sale: it is only as Salt
to keep the body from putrefaction, and many cast it upon the Dunghill as salt
that has lost its savor. How many, to save a dead estate, are content to cast
away a never-dying soul? Poor Peter, to secure a brittle life, forswears his
Master, and puts his soul to a sad hazard. Judas to gain 30 pieces of silver,
seals the Devil an Indenture of his soul, etc. Some have said of the Lawyers,
that they have linguas venales: I fear many men in our times, would I could not
say, some good men, have animas venales, they put their souls to sale. God
grant, that by Repentance, they may haste to redeem them. Many men, rather then
lose a place of profit, will venture the loss of a soul that cannot be valued;
And many, rather then not satisfy a sinful Lust, will ruin and destroy a
glorious soul. What Is the reason of this? The soul is, (1.) an invisible
Spirit; and because it is not seen, many think it is not at all: or if it be,
yet that it is little worth: The glory of the things of this World, is visible
to the eye of the body; but the glory of the soul is only visible to the eye
of Faith. And (2.) the Caring for the Soul, is time enough to be thought upon
when we are a dying, so many think, therefore they neglect all thought of it.
Satan has another opinion of it, then we have, else he would never sweat and
toil, and multiply temptations, as we see he does, to subdue it to himself.

We may learn from hence, that a Child of God is never out of danger and fear
of Temptation, till all his work on earth be finished. He cannot say when he
rises, I shall this day be free from temptation; and when he lies down in the
evening, he cannot say, The evil one shall not assault me till the morning. He
may say, through God, Satan shall not destroy me; but he cannot say, Satan
shall not assault me. In other wars, when the forces of the enemy are all
scattered, the Soldier may put off his Armor, and say, This night shall be a
night of rest; the enemy that is now broken, cannot in a short time be able to
disturb me: But the Christian Soldier cannot say, When he has scattered one
of Satan's temptations, Now my soul take thy ease, eat, drink, and be merry,
thou art sure of a weeks respite, etc. Though thou have broken some of Satan's
forces; yet can thou not say upon any ground, I shall have a moments rest.
He can presently recruit the old temptations: or if not, yet he can send out
new temptations; and if thou take not heed, he will destroy thee by thy own
victory. If thou overcome a temptation, to drive thee to despair, he can, out
of that victory, make a temptation to bring thee to presumption, if thou be not
very cautious. Be watchful therefore and sober, because your Adversary (...)
goes about seeking to devour. Keep your guards continually, and keep them
strongly. Presumption, and Security, has been the Pit-fall of many a soul. I
said in my prosperity, I shall never be removed, etc. thou did but turn thy
face, and I was troubled, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. While men slept, the enemy came and
sowed tares, etc. the Christians sleeping time, is the Devils Seed-time: if
your Candle go out but one moment, that moment you may be surprised.

Thus much for that which is employed: That which is expressed, is this:

That though a Christian be often assaulted, yet if he take and use the Armor
of God aright, he shall overcome and keep the field when all assaults are over.
He shall stand, when the Devil and all his Hosts are destroyed and fallen: They
may lose the day for a time, and be so beaten and bruised, that in the thoughts
both of themselves, and others, they shall never be able to recover; but at the
last, their dead bodies shall rise again, and then they shall obtain the final
victory over Satan, and all his Instruments. I shall, first, prove that it is
so: secondly, show, By what means.

That it is so, is proved three ways:

(1.) This was prefigured and shadowed out by the Victories of the old Church
over their enemies. I shall instance but in one, viz. the great victory over
Pharaoh, and his great Host, Exodus 14. I need not give you the Narrative of it:
That this was a figure of the Victory which the Elect shall obtain over Satan,
and his Instruments, is clear from Rev. 15. 3. where we have the Song of Moses,
and of the Lamb: Why the Song of Moses and of the Lamb? But to point out
this, that the overthrowing of Pharaoh, was a figure of the overthrow of Satan:
and the triumphal song of Moses was a figure of that Song which the godly
should sing in Heaven, for the overthrowing of Satan, and all his Instruments,
whereby they have been sadly assaulted in this world. As certainly, as Pharaoh
was overcome by the people of Israel, so certainly shall every true Israelite
overcome this Hellish Pharaoh. Some also make the cutting off of Goliah's head,
to be a figure of the same thing. As Goliath was overcome by David, and the
Israelites; so shall this great Goliath, the Devil, in all his assaults, be
overcome by Jesus Christ, and all the Israel of God.

(2.) This is clearly laid down in many Promises, vid. Jam. 4. 7. Resist the
Devil, and he will flee. It is not only a Prediction, but a Promise, He
[shall] flee. Romans 16. 20. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet,
shortly. It Is Gods power that brings him down; but yet we are the Conquerors:
He is bruised under [our] feet: so 1 John 5. 18.

(3.) We have glorious Examples, as well as Promises: Job was fearfully
troubled with him, and sometimes foiled by him. When he cursed the day of his
birth, then did Satan prevail, but he overcame at last; and as a stout
Champion, kept the field, till GOD himself came, and proclaimed him Conqueror.
Paul was buffeted for a good space; but he overcame at last: You may hear him
sounding Victoria before his death, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8. Satan is not able to show
one of the people of God over whom he did ever yet finally prevail, nor ever
shall be able.

II. By what means do they stand? Which are as the Reasons of this Victory.

(1.) They are upheld by a Divine Power. God is with them in the day of
Temptation; and if God be with us, who can be against us? That which God
promised Jeremiah the Prophet, when he sent him in his name to fight against a
stubborn and refractory people, Jer. 1. 19. He makes good to all such as
rightly use this Armor in the day of Satan's encounter. They shall fight
against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee,
says the Lord, to deliver thee. Satan is subject to the power of God, and must
be subject. Hell and destruction are before the Lord, Prove. 15. 11. To be
before the Lord, does not only denote, that all things are bare and naked to
his eye; but also that all things are under his power and subjection. Is not
the whole Land before thee, says Abraham to Lot? Genesis 13. 9. i. e. is it not
in thy power to pitch and set down where thou please? Satan, and his Power,
is in subjection to God. He can with one word speaking, bring him upon his
knees, and make him lick the dust. I command thee, Come out of him, and enter
no more into him for ever. All evil Spirits are in the hand of God, as well as
good Spirits. The evil Spirit from God came upon Saul, 1 Samuel 18. 10. He is
said to come from God, because he was set on, and restrained, and taken off by
the Lord at his pleasure.

(2.) They stand by the virtue of Christ's death. The Devil was vanquished by
Christ, through his sufferings: He triumphed over Principalities and Powers
upon the Cross, Col. 2. 15. By Death, he destroyed him that had the power of
Death, Heb. 2. 14. Jesus Christ cut off the head of this Goliath with his own
Sword, as David, a Type of Christ, did before. Now all who fight aright with
Gods Armor, draw virtue from Christ's death, whereby they are sure to prevail.

The Martyrs crowned in Heaven, are said to overcome through the blood of the
Lamb, Rev. 12. 11. They overcame him, as an Accuser, by the blood of Christ:
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is Christ that died,
Romans 8. 33, 34. By applying this Blood, they put him to silence: And they
overcame him as a Tempter also, by the Blood of the Lamb: By casting this blood
in his face, they put him to flight. Pharaoh was drowned in the red Sea; The
Devil, in the red Sea of Christ's blood.

(3.) They have an interest in Christ's exaltation and victory. Jesus Christ
overcame Satan as the Head of the Church Militant, not for himself alone, but
for the whole body. As all Mankind were overcome in the overthrow the first
Adam received in Paradise; so all the Elect do overcome in, and by the victory
of the second Adam. This is that which our Savior comfort his Disciples
with, against the Opposition of the world, Joh. 16. 33. Be of good cheer, I
have over come the world, that is to say, My Conquest is your Conquest; I have
overcome not only for my self, but for you also. His Victory would have
ministered no comfort to them, if they had not apprehended from his words, their
joint-interest in it. And as they partake with him in his overthrow of the
world, so do they share with him in his overthrow of the Devil. And they are
exalted with him in his Exaltation.

That of the Apostle, is full of comfort to this purpose, Ephesians. 2. 4, 5, 6.
God who is rich in mercy, etc. has quickened us together with Christ, and
raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus. Christ must either descend from the Throne, or else we, as Conquerours
with him, must ascend to the Throne. Christ, and his Seed, are put as
joynt-Conquerors into the first Promise, Genesis 3. 15. It shall break thy head,
and thou shall bruise his heel: As Christ's Resurrection, is by the Apostle made
the pledge of the Resurrection of our bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 20: so is the Victory
and Exaltation of Christ, the Pledge and Earnest both of our Victory and
Coronation: And therefore he says to the Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 21. To
him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. In Earthly Wars, all
the Soldiers have a share in the Victories of the Commander in chief. Christ
is the Commander in chief in the Lords Host, and his Victories are not only
his, but the Churches also.

(4.) They overcome by the strength of Christ's Intercession. I have prayed for
thee, that thy Faith do not fail, Luke 22. 32. Faith, and all other Graces,
would soon be brought to nothing, did not Jesus Christ make continual mediation
to strengthen them. And the Ordinances would prove but Paper-Armes, if the
Prayer of Jesus Christ did not mightily empower them. This was figured clearly
in that notable instance which is upon Record, in Exodus 17. 9, 10, 11. Amalek
and Israel were joined in battle in Rephidim. Moses while they were fighting,
stood upon the Mount praying, and the issue was; While Moses held up his hands,
Israel prevailed. By this Example, God would, in a figure, have his people
learn whence it is, that they stand against all Satan's encounters; not by their
own strength, but by the holding up of the hands of Moses, by the intercession
of Jesus Christ in the Holy Mountain. His hands are never heavy, neither is his
heart heavy; he needs no supporters to stay up his hands, as Moses did; he
lives for ever, to make intercession.

Information: (1.) Take notice of the certainty 1. Use.
of the salvation of the people of God. If any thing could deprive them of
their Crown, it would be the prevalency of Satan's Temptations, but he cannot
prevail against them finally; they must stand, when he is fallen. And upon this
ground it is, that the Apostle does so triumph in the assurance of his own
glorification, Romans 8. 38, 39.

(2.) We may from hence also take notice, that all the Defeatments and
Overthrows, and Foyls, which any Christian receives from the Devil, either
immediately assaulting, or assaulting by his Instruments, are of, and from
themselves: God has furnished them with sufficient Furniture, to enable them
to with-stand and overcome, and therefore if they be at any time overtaken and
brought into bondage, they may blame their own negligence, they cannot accuse
their God.

Exhortation. Let this put courage and valor, 2. Use.
and resolution, into the hearts of all Christians, against the evil day. Keep
your ground, hold fast your Weapons in your hands; and though Satan beat you
down upon your knees, yet up again, and continue fighting, and you shall
certainly overcome at last: nothing can hinder you from overcoming, but either
want of the right Armor, or else want of opposing. Certain knowledge of
victory before hand would make a Coward valiant: you have a promise of certain
victory, and therefore let not your hearts be faint. Charles the fifth, when he
was going to rush with his Horse into the battle, he was earnestly requested to
retreat, lest by his mishap the whole Army should be discouraged; but he made
this Heroic answer. An Emperor was never shot through with a Bullet. A
Christian may encourage himself against Satan, upon far better grounds. A Child
of God was never shot to death by any Temptation of Satan, etc. Its a
mavelous encouragement in these black days of trial. I do not think, that
there was ever any age of the Church in which Satan had more stratagems and
devices to draw the people of God into sin, then now he has. He has his
Temptations of profit, and his Temptations of loss: a Christian cannot go into
any Company, but some snare or other is laid for him, some Devil or other is
ready to meet him. Well, do but resist, and you shall overcome. The Devil
cannot force you, he can do you no hurt, without your own consent: and to
consent to an enemy, when you are sure of victory, is neither wisdom nor
manhood.

The three Children did bravely in the day of their temptation, they defied
Satan and his Instruments, disobeyed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies,
that they might not serve nor worship any God, except their own God: neither
the sweet melody of the Instruments of Music, nor the ready compliance of
others, nor the dreadful terror of the burning Furnace, could make them stoop,
and by their valor they did overcome; and they obtained such a perfect
victory, that they had not so much as a skar upon them: The fire had no power
over their bodies, nor was a hair of their head singed: neither were their
Coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed on them. You may read both the
battle and Conquest, Dan. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. ad finem. Yea, their very
enemies at last, proclaimed them Conquerours, and a glorious decree is made,
that no God besides their God, should be worshipped, and that it should be
present death for any within the Kings Dominions, to speak the least word
against their God. verse. 28. 29. And they themselves are promoted higher then
ever they were in the Province of Babylon. A man would little have thought,
when he saw the three Children bound by the Command of an angry King, and cast
into a hot Furnace, that this should have been the way to their preferment, and
yet God made it so to be.

Daniel also, he did like a man of God, in the day of his Temptation, He was
tempted to forbear praying for 30. days. It was a bare omission, nothing was
he compelled to do against the Law of God, only to forbear holy invocation for
a months time: he had liberty to pray in his heart, and to pray in a corner
unseen, he might have had 1000. things to have pretended for his omission, He
was a man of note, had a high place in the Kingdom, and was likely to rise yet
higher, if obedience to his God did not hinder his preferment, he was able to
do great services for the Church, by his Interest in the Kingdom, and would he
now cut off himself, and prejudice the Church for so small a matter? All these
things and many more, no doubt, were suggested to him, by Satan and his
Instruments; but Daniel like a man of courage, opposes all these; and what the
issue was, you may read Dan. 6. per totum. He beat the Devil in his own Den,
by the help of Gods Angel; he clapped a muzzle upon the mouths of the hungry
Lions, lived to see the just hand of God upon his conspirators, who had
contrived his death, were promoted higher then ever, and which was best of all,
obtained a Decree from the King, that all men should tremble at the God of
Daniel. And who knows whether in our evil day of Church Calamities: the
Prince of darkness and his adherents may not be utterly foiled by the constancy
of a few of the people of God, in opposing temptations.

This Doctrine is singularly comfortable to 3. Use.
many poor Christians, who are actually engaged against Satan. Many perhaps of
Gods Children are even wearied out with a long siege: night and day for many
months together, does the Devil play upon them, with his Temptations of all
sorts. They cannot sleep, or eat, or confer, or hear, etc. but Satan's Darts fly
in their face; in the morning they say, would to God it were evening, etc.
Here Is good news for such Christians, Yet a little while, and he that shall
come, will come, and will not tarry. Cast not away your confidence, which has
great recompense of reward, Heb. 10. 35, 36, 37. Here is relief a coming to
you, you know not how near it may be; and if you hold out, it will not come too
late. The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.
Shortly* Ay, shortly, in the fittest time, in the neediest time: that is done
speedily, that is done seasonably. You are sure the siege shall be raised; and
therefore do not surrender upon any condition. Charge your Cannons again, and
shoot them, and continue so, and you will do execution at last to purpose. And
know this, that the nearer you are to ruin in your own sense, the nearer you
are to victory. Meditate upon the four Reasons I gave you to prove the
Doctrine, and let your hands and hearts be strengthened in the Lord. And know
this, that the day of victory will recompense all your waiting and fears, vid.
Matthew. 4. 11. Consider that. And so much for the thirteenth verse.

LECT. VIII. November. 28. 1649.
EPHESIANS. 6. 14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, etc.

(...).


IN the former Verse, the Apostle gives a LECT. 8
general Exhortation to the Christian Soldier, to cloth himself with the whole
Armor of GOD, and to withstand Satan in the evil day of Temptation. In this
and the following Verses, which contain the second general part of the Text; He
gives him a particular Catalogue of the several pieces of this Armor,
Offensive and Defensive, with Directions how to make particular use of them,
that he may be enabled to overcome. There are, in the whole, seven pieces of
this Armor; two of which, are laid down in this verse, viz. The Girdle of
Truth; and, The Breast Plate of Righteousness. He does allude to the Habit,
wherewith Soldiers were used to be accoutred in those times, that they might
be fit to encounter an Adversary: And he does compare the several Graces of the
Spirit, to the several pieces of that Armor, to let Christians see, that the
graces of God, are as necessary for the soul, to resist and overcome
temptation, as Armor is for the Soldier, to resist and overcome his enemy in
the day of battle. We may in the general, note from this comparison, made
between the graces of God, and the Soldiers Armor.

That Spiritual and Heavenly matters Note,
are ordinarily, in Scripture, set out by Earthly and Natural things. The
graces of God are set out by Armor; and the Christian managing of our graces,
is taught us by the Soldiers right using and managing of his Armor in the day
of battle. The glorious Mysteries of Religion, in Scripture, are commonly
delivered and held out by the resemblance of outward and natural things. A
Christians fruitfulness, and growth in grace, is set out by growth and
fruitfulness of trees, Psalm. 1. 3. He shall be like a tree planted by the
Rivers of waters, etc. The glory, and beauty, and fragrancy of graces, is set
out by the beauty and fragrancy of flowers, and sweet perfumes, in many places
of the song of Solomon; particularly, Cap. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. The great
Mystery of our union with Christ, is set out by the vine and branches Joh. 15.
^nit. and of the Foundation stone, and the rest of the stones builded upon it,
Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. Spiritual security is set out by the natural sleep, Cap. 5.
2. applying of Christ, by Faith, is set out by natural eating and drinking,
John 6. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and
I in him. Justification by the Righteousness of Christ, imputed to a sinner,
is, in Scripture, set out by the garments put upon the body, Isa. 61. 10. I
will rejoice in the Lord etc. for he has clothed me with the garments of
salvation, etc. The Communion between Jesus Christ, and a Believing Soul, is
set out by the joy and delight of friends feasting together, Rev. 3. 20. Behold
I stand at the door and knock, etc. I will sup with him, etc. Spiritual
Desertion, is set out by the horror of Natural Darkness, Isa. 5. 10. The
preaching of the Word in the public Ministry, is set out by the work of the
Husbandman in sowing his Seed, Matthew. 13. 3, 4. The carrying on of the Work of
Grace, and Conversion in the Hearts of men, is set out by the growth of the
seed sown in the earth, Mar. 4. 26, 27, 28. The glory of the Saints at the
Resurrection, and in the other Life, is set out by the glorious shining of the
Sun and Stars, Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of
the Firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever
and ever.

I note this for these two Reasons:

1. That Christians may see what use they may make of Natural and Earthly
things: There is not any natural Action; there is not any kind of Employment,
or Trade of Life; there is not any Creature, by which a Christian might not
learn some Spiritual Lesson, did God but give him a Spiritual Heart. When thou
see the Merchant busle about his business, then might thou learn diligence
in the things of the Gospel; For the Kingdom of Heaven is as a Merchant man,
etc. When thou see the Soldier buckle on his Arms, and march with them to
meet the enemy, then might thou think of the putting on, and using thy
graces, etc. And for this cause, it is that our Savior did so frequently
preach in Parables and Similitudes, drawn from earthly things, that by this
means the sons of men might be the better able to conceive of Heavenly Matters
when they are thus delivered in their own way: And that they might have ever
before them visible Monitors to bring to their minds the things of God. Indeed,
if these spiritual things had not first been revealed and taught in the
Scriptures, the beholding of things Natural would never have taught us such
Doctrines; but being now made known in the written Word, our Memories,
Understandings, and Affections, may be very much helped by the studying and
contemplation of things natural which set them forth.

2. How necessary it is for the Ministers of Christ, who are to interpret,
open, and apply the Scriptures to men, to have an universal knowledge of all
kind of Learning. Many think, that Humane Knowledge, and Learning, is of no
absolute necessity to fit a man for the Ministry. If he have but knowledge in
the History of the Bible, and a gracious work upon his heart, he is
sufficiently enabled, without the knowledge of other Learning. This Text shows
us the contrary: some places of Scripture cannot be well interpreted, without
the knowledge of Natural Philosophy. Others cannot be rightly understood,
without some skill in Astrology. Others, require the knowledge of Agriculture
to expound them to profit. Others, of the Art of Navigation. Others, of
Military Affairs. Similitudes, almost from all kinds of Arts, Sciences,
Trades, are used in the Scriptures; and the more general a Ministers Knowledge
is in all these things, the better will he be enabled to interpret the whole
Word of GOD in the course of his public Ministry. He must study all kind of
books. And make his Observation from all kind of employments of men, that he
may be completely fitted for this great Work.

But I come to the Particulars:

First, The girdle of Truth: [Having your Loins girt about with Truth.] In
lumbis maxima vis est stantium. His male affectis contrahitur corpus; aut certe
vacillans, vel modice impulsum, corruit, Bullinger. Therefore, the Apostle
begins with these, which he would have girded with Truth. Truth, in the
Scripture, is used to fet out two things: there is a twofold Acception of
Truth.

1. It is used for the Doctrine of Truth. That Doctrine which is held out and
revealed to the sons of men in the written Word; and thus Truth is opposed unto
Error. In this sense it is used in many places? as, Gal. 3. 1. O foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched you that you should not obey the truth? And, 1 Timothy 2. 4. God will have all men saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth. And 3. Ep. Joh. 4. I have no greater joy, then to hear that my children
walk in the truth.

2. It is used for the grace of truth: And so it is opposed to Hypocrisy: In
this sense it is used, Psalm. 51. 6. Thou desire truth in the inward parts;
that is sincerity and integrity of heart: so Josh. 24. 14. Fear the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity and truth; and so, Joh. 4. 24. God is a a spirit and
they that worship him, must worship him inspirit, and in truth. Spiritual
Worship is there opposed to Ceremonial; and Truth of Worship is opposed to
Hypocritical Worship. Now, amongst Interpreters, there are some who expound
this Text of the grace of truth: so does Calvin, and others. Others, understand
it, as spoken of the Doctrine of truth: Baldwin, vera Doctrina and Religione,
Zanchy. Constantia in Doctrina veritatis. Dickson.

1. Both Interpretations are agreeable to the Analogy of Faith.

2. Useful Instructions may be gathered from both.

3. There is nothing in the Text which does necessarily limit and confine it to
one; and therefore I shall refer it to both: for, Vbi Scriptura non distinguit,
non est distinguendum. And so I shall lay before you a twofold Observation
from this twofold Interpretation.

1. Understanding it of the Doctrine of Truth, as some do, we note this
Doctrine, viz.

That firmness and stability in the Doctrine of 1. Doct.
Truth, is an excellent means to be preserved, and to overcome Satan and his
Instruments in the day of Temptation. I say, Firmness and Stability, because
the phrase of being girded about, notes constancy and firmness in the Truth:
When the Loins are fast tied, and compassed about with this girdle, they are in
a good way of security from the assaults of Satan, when those who forsake and
fall from the Truth, are snared and overcome: then shall those who adhere and
stick fast to the Doctrine of Truth be delivered and escape. This is promised
to the Angel of the Church in Philadelphia, upon this very consideration, Rev.
3. 10. Because thou have kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee
from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth.

If a Church, or Person, be steadfast in the Doctrine of Truth, God will either
keep them from temptation, or else he will preserve them in temptation; that
when others fall, they shall stand.

I shall give you three Reasons of this, viz.

(1.) Truth unites us to God, and God to us: It is of God, and has a Divine
Strength. God is truth; and so far as a person has the truth, he has God; and
so far as he loses the Truth, he loses God. It Is true, a person may have
the Truth of God sticking in his Judgment: He may be very steadfast and constant
in it; so that he may willingly part, not only with his substance, but even
with his life, to maintain it, and yet not be savingly united to God, by
Christ, for salvation. It Is not the fides quae creditur, but the fides qua
creditur, which is the bond of this Union. But yet the very holding of the
Doctrine of Truth, gives a person some kind of union with God; by which union,
he is more able to stand when any storm comes, then he that is destitute of the
Truth.

(2.) Truth helps a Christian both to discover a Temptation, and to answer
Arguments used to set on the Temptation. The Truth of God, in the Judgment, is
one of the Eyes of the Soul: he that wants this, is blind, and cannot see afar
off. Now as a clear Eye is a very great help to the Soldier, for the
discovering of the Dart, or the Bullet, before it be upon him: so is the clear
distinct knowledge of the Truth a very great help to a Christian, to discern the
temptation before it be upon him. He is better able, by the power of Truth, to
see the reach of Satan, and what it is that he drives at, when he spreads his
snare to surprise him, then another can be, who has lost the Truth. Any
fallacy is easily put upon a person that is destitute of the truth of an Art or
Science; whereas he that has the knowledge of that Art, is able presently to
avoid it, and to answer it. And therefore the Devil when he comes to tempt the
woman to sin, first labors to blind her Understanding; Ye shall not die, but
ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil, Genesis 3. 4, 5. and when he has
stolen that principle of truth out of her judgment, We may not eat, lest we
die, He does, without any difficulty, persuade her to eat of the fruit.

(3.) Truth does much help a Christian in the managing of all other parts of
his Armor aright. He that has lost the Doctrine of Truth, will be unable to
use the Bread-Plate of Righteousness: For, to the using of this after a right
manner it is requisite, that the Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, to a sinner, be t^roughly understood, and firmly believed. The
Helmet of Hope will soon be knocked off the head of a Christian, if he do not
well understand the Nature of the Grace Hope.

The shield of faith will be presently pierced by Satan, if he that wears it
do not rightly understand the nature of faith: and prayer will do but little
good, if he that makes the prayer be unsound in the truth. Prayer is to be made
in faith, else it does not prevail; it is to be made not only with the grace of
faith, but also according to the Doct: of faith. A Doctrinal error in prayers,
will nullify them, as well as want of the grace of Faith; for this is the
confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he
hears us, 1 John 5. 14.

Information. We may from this Doctrine 1. Use.
gather these three conclusions, viz.

(1.) This shows us how necessary it is for a Christian to have a clear and
exact knowledge in the Mysteries of Truth. It is not in vain, that the
Scripture does so earnestly call upon men, to learn, and to get, and to keep,
the truth of Doctrine delivered in the Scriptures. Buy the truth and sell it
not, Prove. 23. 23. Stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or our Epistle, 2 These. 2. 15. not unwritten
traditions, the Doctrines and Commandments of men, but such as have been taught
by the Apostles, either by word, or by their writings. Watch ye, stand fast in
the faith, quit you like men, be strong, 1 Cor. 16. 13. The word of God is full
of such warnings, and admonitions, as these are. And not without cause, whether
we consider the worth of truth in it self, or the usefulness of it unto us.
Its necessary to the soul in many respects: its the light by which we see our
way, by which we know what to do, what not to do: its a great part of our
spiritual Armor, by which we fight against temptations. Its as great a
strengthening to the Christian, in fighting against Satan and his Instruments,
as the Soldiers belt or girdle is to him in the day of battle. Take two
Christians of equal grace, and let them be assaulted with the same Temptation,
and let the one be sound in the Doctrine of Truth; and the other corrupt, and
you will easily see the difference between the one and the other, by the issue
of the temptation: the Doctrine of truth is as necessary for fighting against
Satan, as the grace of truth. I note this to let all of us see, what little
reason any have to be displeased, either with the Ministers of God, or other of
the Servants of God, for their earnestness and pertinacy, (if I may so speak)
in preserving the truth of Doctrine, both among themselves and others. They
know the many advantages of it, and therefore they are so zealous for the
maintaining of it. Paul though he was of as flexible and condescending a spirit
as any other, whether Apostle or ordinary Saint, in all other things (for he
became all things to all men, that he might by all means save some, 1 Cor. 9.
19. 20, 21, 22.) yet he was so positive, and peremptory for the Doctrine of
truth, that he would not give place by subjection to false Brethren for an
hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with the people of God, Gal.
2. 4.

(2) It Is no wonder to see Satan use such endeavor to deprive the Sons of men
of the Doctrine of truth. In all ages of the Church he has raised up his
Instruments to draw men aside, from the truth of Doctrine. There shall be false
Teachers, says the Apostle, amongst you, as there were false Prophets amongst
the people, 2 Pet. 2. 2. The Church of God, as it was never destitute of true
Prophets, so never was it without false Prophets. In the Church of Israel there
were a numerous Company of seducing Prophets: As there was an Elijah, a holy
and zealous Prophet of God, so there were 456. Prophets of Baal, 1 King. 18.
22. The state was corrupted, and they made to themselves a corrupt Ministry of
their own, an apostatizing State must have an apostatizing Clergy, that will
humor them, and subscribe to them in every thing they do: when Satan had
persuaded Jeroboam to set up golden Calves, he helped him to a Ministry that
would worship them, and teach others to do the like. State Ministers will cry
up Calves for gods, rather then want promotion, or lose preferment. And thus it
was in the Gospel Church. All Paul's Epistles show it. This arises (1.) partly
from the sinfulness of men. They must have their lusts, and a lust cannot
thrive, if it have not a false Prophet to nurse it, and give it suck. And (2)
partly from God, he in his wisdom and justice permits it to be so, that they
that would not obey the words of a true Prophet, should follow the pernicious
Doctrines of fal^ Prophets, 1. Reg. 22. 23. And then (3) it comes to pass from
the policy and malice of Satan, that he may by this means rob men of the truth,
and so make them fit preys for his temptations. And we need not much wonder at
this policy, Satan knows he is in danger of being foiled, if he suffer this
girdle to be upon the soul; and that he shall certainly overcome, if he can but
pluck this off the loins: therefore he is so diligent in attempting it, laying
snares to entrap the true Ministers of God, and opening a wide door for false
Prophets and seducers to enter in, and corrupt the truth.

(3) We have no cause to wonder, to see the Devil so prevalent amongst
heretical and erroneous persons. Woeful experience shows us, what desolations
are made by Satan in our corrupt Generation: what mischievous ways of iniquity
many are led into. Many are drawn aside, into great profaneness of life:
others are sunk deep into rebellion, others are gone aside into the way of
perjury and Covenant Breaking, others into ways of cruelty, persecution and
oppression, others almost into gross Atheism: we may take up the Complaint of
the Prophet Isay 59. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Your hands are defiled with blood, and
your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue has
muttered perverseness: none calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth,
they trust in vanity and speak lies, they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity, they hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders Webs: he that
eats of the Eggs dies, and that which is crushed, breaks out into a Viper:
their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.
Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed Innocent blood: their
thoughts are thoughts of iniquity, wasting and destruction are in their paths.
The way of peace they know not, and there is no judgment in their goings: they
have made them crooked paths, whosoever goes therein shall not know peace. A
man would wonder to see and hear the horrible wickednesses that many are fallen
into: some openly profane the Sabbaths, others defile their Neighbors wife,
and think they do not sin in so doing. The cause of all these may be given in
the words of the same Prophet Isay 59. 14. 15. Truth is fallen in the streets,
yea truth fails. The Devil has taken away from them this Girdle of Truth,
and now they stop at no kind of abominations. The Girdle of truth is quite
loosed, and this does so enervate and weaken them, that they are forced to do
what ever the Devil requires of them. And can ye wonder at it? The loss of
truth will certainly introduce all kind of iniquity. And that both ex Natura
Rei, and ex justo Dei judicio. (1.) Ex Natura Rei. The understanding is the
first wheel in man, it turns about the whole man, as the Helm does the Ship:
if the judgment be rotten, neither the heart, nor the life can be sound. We
find therefore in Scripture, these two joined together, faith and a good
Conscience. Ever when men have been corrupted in the head, they have been
corrupted in their lives, 1 Timothy 1. 19. holding faith and a good Conscience
etc. he that puts away faith, must put away a good Conscience, whether he will
or no: he that makes shipwreck of faith, will soon make shipwreck both of
Conscience and Conversation. (2.) Ex justo Dei jud^cio. Its Gods way to punish
the rejection of truth, with giving men up to ungodline^s of life. Thus God
punished the Heathen, Romans 1. 25. 26, 27, 28, 29. where you have both the sin,
and the just punishment of it. So 2 These. 2. 10. 11, 12.

Exhortation. Let all Christians be careful to keep fast about them this
Girdle. We have a kind of Popish Proverb among us, ungirt, unblessed. There is
a truth in it, in this sense. If Satan find you without your Girdle upon your
loins, he will easily prevail with you in the day of temptation. Labor
therefore to get and to keep this Girdle; and if you see it grow weak, labor
to strengthen it. Let me add a few helps by way of direction, and I have done.

(1.) Avoid the company and breath of known Seducers. They will either quite
take away your girdle, or else they will much slacken it in a very short time,
if you have to do with them. If any man come to your house, and bring not this
Doctrine, receive him not, nor bid him, God speed, 2 John 9. 10. They have
sleight of hand, they can cut your purses, while they look in your faces; from
such turn aside, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

(2.) Do not think meanly of such Truths, as are of an inferior Nature, and
more remote from the Foundation. He that cuts off every day a small shred from
his girdle, will very soon snap it quite asunder. Though every Truth be not
fundamental, yet every Truth is a guard to the Foundation: the outer skin of an
Apple lies remote from the heart; yet if you pluck that off, the very heart
will be sooner rotten. The finger is not a vital part; but a Gangrene in the
finger, will (in a short time) reach to the very Vitals, and corrupt the blood
and spirits.

(3.) Be much in prayer to him that keeps both the hearts and the feet of his
Saints, that he would keep the Truth in you, and you in the Truth.

Holy Father, says our Savior, keep through thine own Name, those whom thou
have given me, Joh. 17. 11. Let us often pray this Prayer of Christ; Holy
Father, keep us through thy Holy Name. Tie on this girdle of Truth that it may
neither slip off, nor be taken off. The Apostle Jude puts these two together,
ver. 20. Building up your selves in your most Holy Faith, praying in the Holy
Ghost.

(4.) Take heed, as of all sins, so especially of the sin of Pride. As Heresy
is the mother of pride and scornfulness; so Pride is the Highway to be
Heretical. A proud person will soon be an erroneous person: If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, etc. he is proud knowing
nothing, etc. 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4. Pride will make the Heart swell so big, that
the Girdle of Truth about your Loins, will soon be knapt asunder. Humility, and
Watchfulness, are the best Buckles for this Girdle, and the way to preserve
Truth; but Pride and Carelessness is the way to lose it.

(5.) Keep a good Conscience in all things toward God, and toward Man. As the
falling off from the Mystery of Faith, will corrupt the Conscience; so a
corrupt Conscience, and an ungodly Life, will, in time, destroy the Mystery of
Faith. There is this Reason for it: The Doctrine of godliness, reproves the
Deeds of ungodliness: and therefore whoever goes on in ungodly Practices, will,
at last, cast off the Doctrine of godliness, that he may not be a Reprover to
himself. Keep the Grace of Truth, that you may preserve the Doctrine of Truth
also. Thus for the first Interpretation.

LECT. IX. December. 5. 1649.
Ephesians. 6. 14. Having your Loins girt about with Truth, etc.
IT old you the last Lecture, that Expositors LECT. 9
give a two-sold Interpretation of Truth in this place: Some understand it, as
spoken, of the Doctrine of Truth. Others, expounding it, of the Grace of Truth.
We have gone over the former Interpretation already, as it relates to the Truth
of Doctrine: From which, we noted, That firmness and stability in the Truth of
Doctrine, etc. We have now to consider it, as relating to the Grace of Truth;
for so its used in Scripture as I showed you the last day, Psalm. 51. 6. Josh.
24. 14. Joh. 4. 24. and so it is understood in this Text by many, yea, the most
Interpreters, that I have had opportunity to inquire into: Calv. vocabulo
veritatis sincerum animum intelligit. Piscator, veritatis vocabulo intelligit
conscientiae integritatem, etc. Taking it in this sense: the Doctrine is this,
viz. that

Integrity and truth of heart, is of special use to Doct.
obtain vistory over Satan in the evil day of Temptation. Whosoever would
overcome the Devil, must have his Loins girded about with Truth in the inward
parts. He that wants this girdle, may struggle, for a while, with a Temptation;
and may, perhaps, overcome a particular temptation, but he can never hold
against every temptation. Sooner or later, he will be brought into bondage by
the Temptations of the Devil. By the help of this Girdle it was, that Holy Job
won and kept the field, and got the day of Satan, in that great Conflict and
Dispute he had with him: And by this Girdle it was, that other of Gods
assaulted servants did finally overcome.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall do these three things:

1. I shall briefly open the Nature of this Grace. 2. I shall give you the
Reasons of the Doctrine. 3. I shall lay down a Caution, or two, for the
understanding of the Doctrine.
1. That we may find out what is meant by this Grace of Truth, I shall bring
several Texts of Scripture which do explain it:

First, Partly by way of Opposition. And,

Secondly, Partly by Exposition, or Illustration.

1. By way of Opposition.

(1.) We find it opposed to Deceitfulness, and Fraudulency, and
False-heartedness. So 2 Cor. 6. 8. As Deceivers, and yet true. He is a man of
truth; that is, a man without deceit. Thus our Savior speaks of Nathanael,
Jo. 1. 47. Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.

An Israelite in truth, or a true Israelite, is one in whom guile and
deceitfulness is not: he is one that has not two faces; he will not juggle
either with God, or men, or himself. Not, as if a man of truth might not
sometimes fall into an act of deceitfulness. Abraham had truth in the inward
parts; and yet we know, once and a second time, he fell into an act of gross
Dissimulation: once in Egypt, Genesis 12. 13. and a second time at Gerar, Genesis 20.
2. But a man of Truth does not allow or approve of any such acts in himself; it
is not his Constitution; it is not his Custom; he has his conversation, in
Integrity, and godly Simplicity, as the Apostles speak of themselves, 2 Cor. 1.
12. and therefore he cannot be called a guilefull man, or a false-hearted man,
though he may do a guileful act.

(2.) It is opposed to Pretense, Phil. 1. 18. The Apostle speaking of
False-Teachers, has this expression; Whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ
is preached, and therein I rejoice, and will rejoice; Pretense, and Truth, are
there opposed one against another. Now, a man of Truth, is such a one, as is
really what he pretends to be, whose inwards, and outward, are of the same
alloy and complexion; when a man is Holy in Heart, as well as in outward
appearance. The Apostle speaks of some that did glory in appearance, but not
in heart, 2 Cor. 5. 12. Our Savior charge the Scribes and Pharisees with
this; Ye are like unto whited Sepulchers, which appear beautiful without, but
inwardly are full of rottenness and putrefaction, Matthew. 23. 27. When a man
shall pretend to be a Saint, and act the part of a Devil: When a man, like
Joab, shall pretend a friendly salute, Art thou in health my brother; and really
intend to wash his hands in his blood, 2 Samuel 20. 9. When a man shall pretend,
like Judas, to kiss his Master, and intend only to betray his Master: When men
shall oppress, and devour widows houses, and, for a pretense, make long
prayers, Matthew. 23. 14. Such kind of persons are utterly destitute of this
Grace of Truth; such a one was that wicked Ishmael, the son of Nethaniah: of
whom you read, Jer. 41. 6, 7. He goes forth to meet a company of sad-hearted
men, and pretends to conduct them to Gedaliah the Governor: but when he has
them in a snare, cuts their throats, and buries them in a Pit.

(3.) It Is opposed to Word and Tongue, 1 John 3. 18. My beloved let us not love
in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed, and in Truth. When the Tongue and the
Lips, are as different from the Heart and Actions, as the Jews and Samaritans,
which have no Commerce one with another, this Grace of Truth is not in such
persons. A man of truth is one whose hands and feet, act what his lips and
tongue profess.

The Prophet speaks of some men that had an oily Lip, but a bloody Heart,
Psalm. 55. 20, 21. He has put forth his hands against such as be at peace with
him; he has broken his Covenant. The words of his mouth were smoother then
butter; but war was in his heart. His words were softer then oil, yet were
they drawn swords: this was a very truthless man: such men as these, we read
of, Jam. 2. 15, 16. They had the language of the merciful man; Go in peace, and
be warmed and filled: Here is Charity in the Tongue and Lip, but they gave
nothing, either to feed, or refresh him: this was not truth of Charity: so we
may say of other Graces.

2. By way of Exposition, or Illustration; and so there are many synonymous
words used to explain truth of Heart, viz.

1. It Is explained by perfection, 2 Reg. 20. 3. I beseech thee, o Lord,
remember now how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart.
A true hearted Christian, is a perfect hearted Christian.

There is a twofold Perfection: The one is Legal: The other is Evangelical.
The Legal Perfection is not to be found in any mere man, since the Apostasy of
Adam. The Papists they dispute not only for the possibility of the attainment
of this perfection; but they teach also that it is actually attained by many.
But that is a mere Dream, and purposely held by them to maintain their wicked
Doctrine of Merit and Supererogation; for the Scripture clearly asserts the
contrary; and the servants of God in the highest form, have utterly disavowed
any such thought. Job in the Old Testament, Job. 9. 20. If I justify my self,
my mouth shall condemn me; if I say, I am perfect, it also shall prove me
perverse.

And Paul, in the New Testament, though he might have stood upon his legal
righteousness as much as any other, Phil. 3. 2. yet Phil. 3. 12. he disclaimes
Perfection. Perfection of this kind is a thing to be much wished for: but it is
not attainable by any, 2 Cor. 13. ver. 10.

The Evangelical Perfection is twofold: the one, of Justification. And in this
respect, every one who truly is in Christ, by saving Faith, is exactly perfect.
Thou art all fair my Love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4. 7. Jesus Christ,
by one offering, has for ever perfected them that are sanctified. Heb. 10. 14.
The other, is of Sanctification: And in this respect the truly-godly, are
called perfect in three respects:

First, because they are so in part; there is in them a perfection of parts:
they are renewed throughout in every Faculty of the Soul: the Understanding,
Will, Conscience, Affections, etc. are all sanctified truly, though not
thoroughly.

Secondly, because they are in the progress of Perfection; it is that Mark they
level at, they will not sit down without it: so Paul, Phil. 3. 14. I press
toward the Mark, for the prize of the high-calling, etc. this he calls
Perfection, v. 15. Let as many as be perfect be thus minded.

Thirdly, because they allow in themselves none of their imperfections: Their
smperfections are their burden, their sorrow, their shame; they take no
contentment or pleasure in them.

2. It Is explained by uprightness of heart: so ye have it, 1. Reg. 3. 6. Thou
have showed unto thy servant David, my Father, great mercy, according as he
walked before thee in truth, and in uprightness of heart, and in righteousness.
Uprightness of Heart, is a Heart without crookedness; a Heart that does not
bend and bow, this way, and that way, for gain, for advantage sake. A swarving
Heart, is opposed to an upright Heart, Psalm. 125. 4, 5. Do good, o Lord, to
those that are good, etc. As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways,
etc. A Heart of Truth, is a Heart that does not warp to the right, nor to the
left hand; he will not be swayed from his way, for fear of men, for hopes of
preferment, for the avoiding of outward detriment and loss. He is a man that
looks right on, and his eyelids look straight before him; he does not turn to
the right hand, or to the left, Prove. 4. 25, 27, It Is a metaphor, as some
think, taken from the Plowman; He has his eyes not wandering this way, and
that way, but he looks straight before him, that he may make the furrow even:
so does a man of truth, he is fixed in his way and work, and his desire is,
that he may make an even furrow, that he may draw a strait line, and keep
himself in Gods way: let come on him, what will. Not, as if a Child of God
might not warp from Gods way, they have their deviations. Peter and Barnabas,
two great Apostles, they did not always (...) vid. Gal. 2. 12. 13, 14. but
then they do not continue in their wanderings, they do not justify their
turnings aside, they do not compel others to turn aside after them, or do say,
that they have done well in so doing: They are not angry with such as reprove
them for their deviations. Neither Peter nor Barnabas so much as murmured, much
less reviled Paul, because he told them of their present deviations; but
presently reformed.

3. Its expounded by Sincerity, and godly simplicity. So ye have it, 1 Cor. 5.
8. Therefore let us keep the feast, etc. with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth. Truth and sincerity are all one, and sincerity and simplicity are
one and the same thing also, 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. That which is
sincere is simple, and unmixed, like white wool never died. Mel sincerum is
honey unmingled, without wax: Farina sincera is flower never leavened. A heart
of truth is a heart uncompounded, a heart not double; a man of truth has not a
heart and a heart, one for God, and another for Mammon; one for sin, and
another for righteousness: he has but one tongue and one heart, he is single
tongued and single minded, his tongue and heart go together as Companions. And
(then) sincerity notes soundness, a sincere heart is a sound heart: a heart not
putrified with rottenness and hypocrisy. Though all men have hypocrisy in
them, yet all men are not Hypocrites. Now take up all these together, and they
will declare fully what is meant by the grace of truth, with which the Apostle
would have us to be girded. Not false hearted, not in pretense and appearance,
not in word and tongue; but a perfect, an upright, a sincere, uncompounded
Christian.

2. For Caution, I shall lay down two Rules.

(1.) Though truth be of such use, etc. yet may a sincere and true hearted
Christian be foiled for a time, by some prevailing temptation. We are not to
judge, either our selves or others, to be presently hypocrites, because we are
surprised and overcome by a Temptation. Hezekiah was a man of a perfect heart,
2 Reg. 20. 3. and yet he was vanquished in battle in the day of temptation, 2 Chronicles. 32. 31. In the buisness of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon,
etc. God left him to try him, David was a man of an incorrupt heart, God gives
him that testimony, and yet in the matter of Vriah, Satan overcame him. As a
hypocrite and wicked man may stand out in some temptation, so may a single
hearted Christian be overtaken and ensnared. Its true, they will recover
themselves again out of these snares, as Hezekiah and David did; but they may
be for a time taken prisoners. Noah was a perfect man, and that in a perverse
and crooked Generation, Genesis 6. 9. yet Satan surprised him, and drew him into
the sin of drunkenness, Genesis 9. 21. Lot was an upright man in the sink of
Sodom, and yet he was overcome by temptation, and drawn into the foul sins of
drunkenness and incest., Genesis 19. 32, 33, 34, 35. We may soon take away
sincerity from the earth, if we make such conclusions.

(2.) Though truth be of such use, etc. yet no Christian stands in the day of
temptation for the merit of his sincerity. Though no man have a promise of
standing without this grace of truth, yet is not any man's truth of heart the
meritorious cause of his standing. We stand by our sincerity, but not for our
sincerity. As the Apostle concludes concerning faith. 1 Pet. 1. 5. so we may
conclude concerning uprightness. We are kept by the power of God through
sincerity. Sincerity is the isntrumental cause, but the power of God is the
efficient. This Paul confesses in his temptation, 2 Cor. 12. 9. I will glory
in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

III. The Reasons of the Doctrine, how it is that truth of heart is so useful
for this warfare.

1. Because this is the strength of all other graces, and of all Ordinances:
Some Divines look upon sincerity, not as a distinct grace, but as that which is
the perfection of every grace. Truth of love is the perfection of love. Truth
of faith is the perfection of faith. Truth of obedience is the perfection of
obedience, etc. All which is within a man without the grace of truth; is but
like rotten wood, which will soon break, and never do any service in the day of
Battle. All which a man does without sincerity, is to no purpose. He can suck
out no virtue from any of the Ordinances of God, neither prayer, word,
Sacraments, etc.

2. Sincerity is that which engages God to take our part in all temptations.
Wherever integrity is, there God is by his special grace, to assist and
enable the soul. He stands far off from the rotten hearted Christian; but his
countenance does behold the upright. Psalm. 11. 7. That is an excellent place to
this purpose, which we have in Genesis 20. 5. 6. In the integrity of my heart,
etc. Yea I know thou did this in the integrity of thy heart, etc. therefore
suffered I thee not to touch her. We cannot say of Abimelech, that he was a
sincere believer; for he was a profane King, his integrity or truth of heart
was but a mere morrall integrity, he would not have taken Sarah, had he known
her to be the Wife of another man; and therefore he professes, what he had
done, was done in the simplicity of his spirit, God bears him witness, that he
spoke the truth, and therefore says God, I have kept thee, that thou have not
touched her. God did so approve of that simplicity of his, that he preserved
him from falling into that great sin, and delivered him from the Devils snare:
if natural and moral honesty does engage God to take part with a man, how
much more will the grace of sincerity engage him? James 4. 7, 8. Resist the
Devil and he shall fly. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you. etc.
Purify your hearts ye double minded. The Apostle in that place would have
Christians to engage God on their part, in the day of temptation. There will be
no prevailing, if God be not on our part. But how shall we obtain this
assistance from God? he tells us, Purify your hearts, ye double-minded. A
single-hearted Christian shall not want, either the presence or power of God,
in the day of Battle. This is clear also, Genesis 15. 1. with 17. 1.

Information 1. Do not wonder to see Satan 1. Use.
prevail so much against hypocritical and false hearted men. The Heretic
wants the Doctrine of truth, therefore he is ensnared: the Hypocrite wants the
Grace of truth, and therefore he cannot stand: the one wants soundness of head,
the other soundness of heart, he is ungirt and unblest. Satan may easily wind
him any way, he may make him carry any yoke: he may make him to serve him in
any kind of employment, though never so vile, never so abominable, contrary to
the light of the word, and light of nature, vid. 2 Timothy 3. 1. 2. Men shall be
lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, boasters, etc. who are they that are
drawn aside into such paths as these? They are hypocritical men, that want the
grace of truth, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. A
man that wants the grace of sincerity, if the Devil will have him to be proud,
he will be puffed up presently. If Satan say Blaspheme, his lips are full of
blasphemies presently, and those of the worst kind, doctrinal blasphemies. If
Satan command him to be incontinent he cannot withstand. If he will have him
break Covenant, he has no powerto oppose, he wilnot only break Covenant, but
forswear it. If he be tempted to commit treason, he rebels presently: and if to
disobey Parents, natural or civil, his hand is lifted up against his Father,
etc. Satan can lead him into any path that wants this Girdle.

LECT. 10. December. 12. 1649.
2. HOw requisite it is for Christians to examine and prove themselves, Lect.
10.
whether they have this Grace of Truth in their hearts, or no. The Holy Ghost
here puts great stress upon it, setting it in the first place. He is like to be
quite undone in that day of temptation, that wants it. Every Christian is
willing to suppose that he has it: therefore it is good to be at certainty
about it.

I shall for the helping of you, lay down these ensuing Rules, by way of
Evidences viz.

1. He that has the Grace of Truth in his heart chooses the Word of Truth to
be the Rule of all his Actions. He dares not make men his Rule, because he
knows men of high degree are vanity; and men of low degree are a Lie, Psalm.
62. 9. He knows wicked men are out of the way, and good men may miss the way:
and therefore he dares not walk according to men. Micajah would not say, Go up
and prosper, though all the Prophets of Ahab had said the same with one
consent. Whatsoever God puts into my mouth, that will I speak, 1 Reg. 22. 14.
This is that which David lays down, Psalm. 119. 1. and this is that which he
practiced in himself, Psalm. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, thy
judgments have I laid before me. And as he dares not make men his Rule, so
neither dare he make any outward Dispensations of Providence his Rule. He is a
man that adores Providence, and admires Providence, and rests satisfied with
all Acts of Providence, and searches into Providence, but he dares not make
it the Rule to walk by, the Glass to dress himself by.

1. He knows all things come alike to all; and that the worst men, and worst
causes, have sometimes good success, at least, for a long time. And,

2. He also knows, that the ways of Providence are very often like the way of
a ship in the Sea, or of an Eagle in the Air; they are full of Riddles and
Labyrinths, so that man cannot expound or trace them.

3. He knows, that the actings and workings of Providence, are various; these
wheels do not always keep the same track, therefore he dares not make them
his Rule. The Word of Truth is visible, certain, uniform, given for a Rule; and
therefore this he chooses; from this he does not willingly depart, vid. Psalm.
18. 21, 22, 23.

(3.) He that has the Grace of Truth in his heart, uses true and warrantable
means, for the accomplishment of all his Actions. He does not think it lawful
to pass through all kind of forms that he may attain his desires; he dares not
put upon him any shape but one. Not but that a sincere Christian may be hurried
by a Temptation, to use some means unjustifiable. Jacob, and his Mother
Rebeckah, both of them holy persons, yet did use dissimulation, to obtain the
blessing from old Jacob, Genesis 27. 6, 7, 8, etc. But they were severely punished
for this sin: Jacob was banished from his Fathers house, served 20 years a
hard Master, where he had wages changed ten times: and we do not read, that he
and his mother ever saw one another upon earth. But though a child of God,
whose heart is sincere, may fall into such a practice, yet he dares not
justify any such action. David durst not take away the life of Saul, to come
to the Crown, though he was anointed King by that God, who disposes of all
kingdoms; he would not permit another to do it, vid. 1 Samuel 26. 7, 8, 9, 10,
11. yea, when an Amalekite came and told him, that he had slain Saul, and that
by his own desire, when he was full of anguish, and could not have lived many
hours, David commanded him to be put to death for that wicked act, 2 Samuel 1.
13, 14, 15. He that has truth of heart, knows well, that God has forbid him
to do evil, that good may come thereby, and that he must not lie for God, Job
13. 7, 8. He will not choose sin, to escape affliction. Elihu charge Job
with this, and uses it as an Argument to prove him unsincere, Job 36. 21. A
true-hearted man knows that God has prescribed means, and looks at them as
much as ends; and yet wicked means discredit and condemn the best ends: vid. 1 Samuel 13. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. there was a very good end, etc. not fighting
without seeking Gods face, etc. So 1 Samuel 15. 15, 16, 21, 22. This was a good
end, to sacrifice to God of the spoil of his enemies, etc. but the means were
naught: therefore GOD abhorres it, as an act of Rebellion.

(2.) He that has truth of heart, does all his Actions to a good end. His
aims are sincere, and incorrupt; at least, he desires they may be so, and is
much troubled that they are not so. He knows that a good Action is
discredited, if he that does it have not a good end, 2 Chronicles. 25. 2. Jehu
failed in this, 2 Reg. 10. He did very many good things, put all the Priests of
Baal to death, etc, destroyed Baal out of Israel, ver. 28. God testifies for
him that he had done, that which was in his heart, ver. 38. unto the house of
Ahab: But all these things were done for base ends, to establish himself in the
Kingdom: therefore, Hos. 1. 4. God threatens to avenge the blood of Jezreel on
the house of Jehu. Our Savior makes this a distinguishing Evidence between a
painted Hypocrite, and a real Saint, Mat. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. They may give as
many, and as great Alms; They may give God as many, and as long Prayers, as a
sincere Christian does; but they differ in their ends. The end of the one, is
to get glory from men, to satisfy the voice of Conscience, etc. The end of the
other, is to approve his Heart to God, to glorify his Heavenly Father, and to
testify his Obedience to the Command of God.

(4.) He that has the Grace of Truth in his heart, is the same in private,
that he is in public. The Lining, and the Outside of his garment, are both of
one piece; he is clean within, as well as without: a spot upon his skin, is as
great a trouble to him, as a stain upon his garment. This is that, which our
Savior makes a distinguishing Note between a Hypocrite, and a sincere
Christian, Matthew. 15. 7, 8. the Hypocrite is only for the outside of Cup or
Platter, that that may be clean; but the inward part is full of wickedness.
This is David's Character of himself, Psalm. 18. 23. I was also incorrupt before
him, and kept my self from mine iniquity; i. e. from secret sins, as well as
public. And Psalm. 101. 2. I will walk in the midst of my house with a perfect
heart. A sincere Christian is as good in his own house, as in Gods house; in
the Closet, as well as in the Streets; in his secret Chamber, as well as in the
Church. He desires to have a clean heart, as well as clean hands, Jam. 4. 8.
Cleanse your hands ye sinners, purify your hearts, ye double-minded.

(5.) He that has truth, will be the same in trouble, and after trouble, Psalm.
78. 34, 35, 36.

Exhortation: That all that profess themselves Christians, would both carefully
get and keep this girdle of Truth.

I shall here urge it by some Motives; and then lay down some Helps and
Directions.

1. For Motives.
(1.) Sincerity is the best security, Prove. 10. 9. He tbat walks uprightly,
walks surely; but he that perverteth his ways, shall be known: God knows
him already, and men shall know him, when the Mask of Hypocrisy is pulled off
his face: his rough garment which he wore to deceive, shall in due time be
plucked off, and then his deceit shall be made manifest. He walks under Divine
Protection; he walks under the shadow of Divine Promises, therefore he is in
safety. He may sometimes come into danger; but he shall be delivered either in
danger, or from danger, or by danger: Yea, sometimes God brings him into a
lesser danger, to preserve him from a greater, vid. Jer. 38. 38. His
imprisonment saved him from the danger he might have been in by the enemy, when
Jerusalem was taken. The three Children, Dan. 3. and Dan. 6. were preserved by
their Integrity. The Prophet David never was in such danger, as when he warped
a little, and went into the Land of the Philistines: He got a strong Hold of
Zicklag, from the King of Gath; but that Fort was destroyed and he was never in
such distress in all his troubles, 1 Samuel 30. init. His own guard had there
been his Executioners, had not God, by a mighty hand, staved them off.

(2.) Integrity of Heart, is the best Guide in straits, and doubtful Cases.
This is promised. Prove. 11. 3. The integrity of the Upright shall guide them;
but the perverseness of Transgressors shall destroy them. It Is a mavelous
happiness to have a perfect and faithful guide in dark and dangerous Travels.
It Is a privilege belonging to the godly man, to have Divine guidance, Psalm.
32. 8. He that is sincere, shall have this guidance. It is evinced by what has
been said: Integrity makes the Word his Rule: And that Word is a Lantern; yea,
it is a Light shining in a dark place, 2 Pet. 1. 19. and he that follows this
Light, shall see his way, when others are in obscurity: vid. Isa. 30. 21. The
Spirit of God, who is the Souls guide, dwells in a sincere heart, therefore he
shall be led in the right path.

(3.) Sincerity of heart will procure Gods acceptance of all your services.
Though they be very weak, and very imperfect, yet if they be seasoned with the
Salt of sincerity, they shall not be cast away, Prove. 15. 8. The Sacrifice of
the Wicked, is abomination to the Lord; but the Prayer of the Upright, is his
delight. It Is a mavelous comfort to a Child of God, that his Duties find
acceptance: When they do but suppose that their services are rejected, how are
they cast down? how are they disquieted? Nothing can satisfy them in such a
Case. Well! if your hearts be sincere, your prayers shall be as Incense, and
sweet Odours, in the sight of God.

(4.) The Services and Ordinances of God shall convey strength to you. When the
false-hearted Christian shall winder and molder away, and all which he seemed
to have, shall come to nothing; then shall the true hearted-Christian be as one
anointed with fresh Oil, he shall be active, vigorous, and strong, This is
promised in many places, Job 17. 9. The Upright shall hold on his way, and he
that has clean hands shall add to strength. The meat and nourishment which is
taken by a man, whose vitals are consumed, gives no true strength to him: He
may, perhaps, for a little time, appear to be fat, and in good liking, but all
his growth is but wind and emptiness, which in a fit of sickness will soon wash
off: But the meat of a man that is sound, turns into nourishment, and makes
him grow: so it is with the Soul, the rotten Hypocrite he gets no nourishment
by the Ordinances; but the sound Christian gets strength by them. He may not
presently perceive his growth nor does he grow always alike in all graces; but
in some grace or other he increases, and shall increase his Spiritual
strength, Prove. 10. 19. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright; but
destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity.

(5.) God will pardon, and graciously pass by many failings and infirmities, if
the heart be sound. 1 King. 15. 12, 13, 14. King Asa was guilty in many things:
there were very visible Defects found in him, contrary to that which the Law of
God required. He took away the Sodomites which were in the Land; he removed all
the Idols which his Forefathers had made; He deposed his Mother from her
Regency, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, but the high places remained
still: Nevertheless, the heart of Asa was perfect with the Lord all his days:
And because he was a man of a sound heart, God accepted what he had done well,
and graciously pardoned his Omissions. And therefore it is, that David makes
the soundness of his heart an Argument, to move God to forgive his sin, Psalm.
51. 6. Behold thou requirest truth in the inward parts, that is to say. Lord,
although according unto the letter of the Law, thou have cause to cast me off,
yet according to the tenor of the Gospel, I hope thou will pardon me, for thou
know my heart is right in thy sight: and, Psalm. 7, 8. he prays, that God
would judge him according to his integrity, and according to the righteousness
that was in him.

6. This Grace of Truth is the way to have fellowship and communion with God.
Hypocrisy, and false-heartedness, is a bar in the way of our Communion; God
will not show his face with joy unto such, whose hearts are rotten. Hypocrites
may tell you of much Communion they have with God, and of great joys they find
in their spirits: but this their joy is but like a Land-flood, it is quickly
dried up again; a few Sunshine days sokes-in all this joy: It is, indeed, but
a false joy which comes from Satan, transformed into an Angel of Light, and it
shall be but for a moment. Job tells us, Job 13. 6. that a hypocrite shall not
come before him. He shall not see the face of God with any joy. No, no,
Communion with God is only promised to sincerity, Jam. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God
etc. Cleanse your hands ye sinners, purify your hearts ye double minded. And
therefore David, upon the profession of this integrity, calls upon God for his
presence, Psalm. 101. 2. O when will thou come unto me: I will walk in the midst
of my house with a perfect heart.

7. Integrity is the way to dant all your enemies. To warp from the ways of
God, will much encourage your adversaries; it will make them more bold, and
more violent: but perseverance and holding on in your integrity, will* in due
time, make your hearts fail. Herod was afraid of John Baptist, because he was a
sincere man, Mark 6. 20. And it is said of Saul, that because David behaved
himself wisely, he was afraid of him, 1 Samuel 18. 15.

8. Sincerity of Heart will be a strengthening Cordial to your souls, in the
day of affliction and trouble. Integrity is the best way to keep you from
trouble, and to deliver you out of trouble: but if at any time ye do fall, and
lie under trouble, Integrity will be a soft Pillow to rest your heads upon, in
the evil day: vid. 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, etc. This was that which
made the Martyrs so joyful in Prison: This was that which kept up the heart of
Job in his great sufferings; and this made Paul and Silas sing with so much
joy, when their feet were fast in the stocks, Act. 16.

9. Integrity will make the end of your life peaceable. You may have
Contentions and Warrings, and unquietness in the way: but you shall be sure to
find calmness, and serenity, and peace, in the end. This is promised, Psalm. 37.
37. Mark the upright man, etc. for the end of that man is peace. The beginning,
and the middle of the Hypocrite, may be in some kind of tranquillity; but the
end will be a storm. Job had many a sore storm; but his latter end was
peaceable and serene: That Is well, that ends well: the Hypocrites portion is to
lie down in sorrow, Esa 50. 10, 11. Thus for Motives.

2. For Directions, to get and keep sincerity, take these, viz.
(1.) Study well, and improve aright the Doctrine of Gods Omnipresence, and
Omniscience. He that does truly believe that Gods Eye is upon him, will not
give way to Deceitfulness and Hypocrisy in heart: remember that God is a
Heart-searching God. This is that Direction which God himself gave to Abraham,
to keep his heart sound, Genesis 15. 1. Walk before me, and be upright, This was
that which kept David entire, Psalm. 18. 23. I was upright before him, or in his
sight, and kept my self from mine iniquity. The want of this, is made the
reason of all the fals-hood of Ephraim, Hos. 7. 1, 2. They consider not in all
their hearts, etc.

(2.) Take heed of worldly policy. Fleshly wisdom is like rust; it will eat up
sincerity, if ye hearken to it. The Apostle opposes these two one unto
another, 2 Cor. 1. 12. In sincerity and godly simplicity, not with fleshly
wisdom. The (...) is enmity with God. God would have his people to be prudent,
and to hear the voice of right reason; Reason is not given in vain: Be wise as
Serpents, etc. but he would not have them make carnal Wisdom their Oracle. He
consults first, the justum, and then the commodum. He that consults with flesh
and blood will hardly keep upright in declining-Times. Fleshly Wisdom would
have dictated a hundred things to Daniel, would he have hearkened to it.

(3.) Be much in the Duty of self-searching. Take heed of putting too much
credit and confidence in your own hearts; He that trusts in his own heart, is a
fool, Prove. 28. 26. You have the seed of rottenness in your souls; and if you
do not keep them in a constant course of Physic, they will grow corrupt,
before you be aware. David's prayer should be your prayer, Psalm. 139. 23. 24.
Search me, O Lord, etc.

(4.) Consider the end of Hypocrisy: It will be your shame in this world,
Psalm. 119. 80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, etc. Hypocrisy is an
inlet and door to all other sins, 2 Timothy 3. init. a man that has the form of
godliness, without the power, will be any thing in time. It will be your sorrow
in another world. Hell is said to be made for Hypocrites, Mat. 24. 51.

Thus much for the first piece of this Armor, The Girdle of Truth.

LECT. 11. December. 19. 1649.
EPHESIANS. 6. 14. Stand therefore, having your loins girt about with truth, [and
having on this Breast Plate of righteousness.]

V. 14. (...)


THese words contain the second piece of the spiritual Armor. And this is
fitly added to the former, having your loins girt about with truth. In lumbis
maxima vis est stantium. If the loins be infirm, the whole man is full of
trembling, and with the least violence presently falls to the ground. Integrity
and sincerity strengthen the loins, and make the body stable. Deem Christiano
veritatem and corruet protinus. Bullinger in locum. Now the breast is as
necessary for our sure standing, as the loins: though the loins be girded, yet
if the breast be open to violence, the party comes suddenly to the ground. All
the vital parts, the heart, liver, lungs, etc. are in the breast; and if those
be not carefully secured, and preserved, death and falling does suddenly ensue.
A little wound in the breast is mortal, and incurable. Therefore the Apostle
would have his Soldier to make careful provision for that part, he must be as
careful to put on his Breast Plate, as his Girdle. (...) signifies both the
breast, viz. the whole upper part of the body before, from the neck to the
thighs, and it also signifies, that Armor which is used by Soldiers in the
Wars, to defend that part of the body. The Breast Plate is the defensive
Armor, which the Soldier wears to secure the forepart of his body, from the
violence of Sword, Pistol, Lance, or other Weapon, used by the adversary in
time of battle. This the Latins call Loricam. Now the Apostle would have his
Christian Soldier, to take and use this in the day of temptation. That which
is brought to set out this piece of Armor, is the grace of Righteousness,
(...). That we may understand his meaning, we are to consider the Acception of
this word in the Scriptures. Now there is a twofold Righteousness, The one
Legal, the other Evangelicall. Legal Righteousness is a perfect, complete,
strict conformity to the Law of God in every thing. This righteousness is not
that which is meant in this place; for there is not one (mere) man in this
world, who ever did, or ever shall wear this Breast Plate, since the fall of
Adam. He indeed had this Armor put upon him in his Creation; but he and we in
him lost it by the fall, and shall never be able to recover it again. God
looked down from Heaven, upon the Children of men, etc. but they are all gone
out of the way, there is none righteous, no not one. Evangelicall Righteousness
is that which is interpreted so in the Gospel, a qualified righteousness. Now
this righteousness of the Gospel is twofold, viz.

1. A righteousness of imputation or justification, by virtue of which, a
person stands righteous, and unspotted before God: this is nothing else but the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed or reckoned unto a believing sinner,
whereby he is constituted righteous in foro Dei. This is called in Scripture,
sometimes the Righteousness of God, because approved of God, contrived of God,
imputed by God, sometimes The Righteousness of Faith, because its applied,
received, and put on by Faith, as a hand or Instrument appointed for that
purpose. Somet^mes the righteousness of Christ, because its wrought by Jesus
Christ for us. This Divines Call, The Righteousness of our Person, A
Righteousness without us, A Righteousness communicated to us, A Righteousness
upon us, etc.

2. A Righteousness of Sanctification, by which we work righteousness. This is
twofold. 1. Habitual, which is nothing else but the new nature, or new man
created, and implanted in the heart of a Christian, at the time of his new
birth, or Regeneration, called by Divines, Inherent righteousness, or a
righteousness in us. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 24. that ye put on the
new man, which after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness; and of
this also the Apostle speaks, 1 John 3. 9. his seed abides in him.

2. Actual, which is nothing else but the manifestation and exercise of the
work of righteousness in a holy and unblameable conversation toward God and
Man in our thoughts, speeches, actions. This is called the working of
righteousness, Acts 10. 35. the doing of righteousness, 1 John 3. 7. he that
does righteousness is righteous, as he is righteous. This is called by Divines,
A Righteousness from us, The Righteousness of our course or Conversation.
Sometimes this Righteousness is joined with holiness. And then Righteousness
strictly refers to the Duties of the second Table, and holiness to the Duties
of the first Table, Tit. 2. 12. Luke 1. 75. sometimes it is put alone, and then
it comprehends all Duties to God and man, Luke 1. 6. its said of Zachary and
Elizabeth, that they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless.

Now there are some Expositors, which by the Breast Plate of righteousness,
understand the righteousness of Imputation, the righteousness of Christ imputed
by faith, for our justification. But this I suppose, is not the meaning of the
Apostle here, because he does afterward speak particularly of the shield of
Faith, verse 16. under which this righteousness of Faith is comprehended.
Others by the Breast Plate of righteousness, understand only this last, viz.
righteousness of conversation, unblameableness, and innocence of life, so Calv.
Zanch. Deodat, Bulling. Piscator, and generally the whole Current of
Interpreters. And this is most likely to be his meaning, if we consider what
goes before, viz. the Girdle of Truth, he first commends unto them, inward
sincerity, or truth of heart, and then that which is always an effect or
consequence thereof, holiness of conversation. Taking this to be the meaning of
it, the Doctrine is this.

That holiness and righteousness of conversation, Doct.
is of excellent and necessary use for him that would stand, and overcome Satan
in the day of temptation. The Breast Plate of a righteous life is necessary to
be put on, and used by every Christian Soldier, that would be victorious in
the day of spiritual Assaults. In the opening of this Doctrine, I shall clear
these two things.

1. Wherein righteousness of conversation consists: what are the characters of
a righteous man?

2. Wherein the usefulness of it lies, as to the withstanding and overcoming
in the day of Temptation.

1. Righteousness of Conversation takes in these two things, which may be as
Evidences and Trials.

(1.) He that desires universally to obey all the Commands of the first and
second Table. Respect unto all the Commandments of God is that which in the
Language of Scripture does denominate a person truly righteous. Not that there
is any man on earth, that perfectly fulfills the Law of God, Who can say, I
have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin? Prove. 20. 9. If any man should
dare to affirm this, the Holy Ghost tells him he is a liar, and a
self-deceiver, 1 John 1. 8. But yet there are many, who do truly endeavor to
be conformable to the whole will of God; and these are in a qualified
interpretation, righteous persons. This is that which the Apostle testifies of
himself, before the Governor Felix, Acts 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self
to have always a Conscience void of offense, toward God and toward man.
There are some who are careful of the Commands of the second Table, they would
have a good Conscience toward men; they would not cheat, nor defraud, they
would pay every man his own, they are morally righteous; but they take no great
care of the duties of the first Table, they are willingly unrighteous toward
God, at least in some duties, make no conscience of prayer (public, private,
secret,) are not exact about the Sabbath, etc. these are unrighteous persons,
they defraud God of his right. Others are seemingly righteous toward God, but
they are willingly wanting, and defective, in that which concerns man, at least
in something: these are as far from righteousness, as the other. Zachary and
Eliz. are said to walk in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord,
blameless, Luke 1. 6. They were without all question blameworthy in many
things; but they did not willingly neglect any known duty; they did not say
unto any Command of God, stand by, but did desire to obey universally. True
holiness says not as Naaman. In this thing the Lord pardon thy Servant, etc. 2
Reg. 5. 18. but says with David, Concerning thy precepts, I account them in
all things to be just, and therefore I hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 128.
little duties as well as great, small lies, mere omissions, etc. It is not one
action which denominates a man righteous; but universality of obedience. God
gives this commendation to Caleb, the Son of Jephunneth, that he wholly
followed the Lord, Deuteronomy. 1. 36. and Moses gives the same testimony to Joshuah,
Josh. 14. 9. A righteous person knows, (1) That there is the same purity in
all Gods Commands. And (2) that there is the same obligation for every Command.
He that says, do not commit Adultery, says also, Do not kill, etc. Jam. 2.
10, 11. And (3.) that one sin allowed, will ruin and sink his soul, and
disturb his peace, as well as many. And (4.) he hates sin as sin, and he loves
obedience as obedience, and therefore applies himself to all holiness.

(2.) He that lives a righteous life, does cordially bewail every Act of
unrighteousnese. His sin is his sorrow and burden, and his Conscience is
wounded for the least iniquity, not only that which is known to men, but even
that which is known to God only: his secret wanderings produce both secret and
open grief. Its said of David, that his heart smote him, for the cutting off of
the lap of Saul's Garment, 1 Samuel 24. 5. and 2 Samuel 24. 10. the same is said of
him, for the numbering of the people. Neither of these were sins of any high or
scandalous nature, and yet they occasioned great trouble to David's soul. Yea,
true holiness does much lament the body of sin, that dwells within him, though
it do not break forth into actual exorbitancies. Thus it was with Paul, Romans
7. 23. 24. I see a Law in my members, etc. O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me, etc. yea and secret sins, as well as known sins. And all this
sorrow in the heart of a righteous person, is not only, or principally, for
the mischief sin has or may work unto himself here, or hereafter; but chiefly
out of that Antipathy which is in his heart against sin, and out of respect to
God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, who is offended and wronged by his sin. An
unrighteous person casts his sins behind his back, never remembers them,
unless it be with sensual delight, or at most, legal sorrow, and that not so
much for hatred of sin, as fear of Hell; but a truly righteous person sets them
continually before his face. And that not only before, but after pardon. Psalm.
51. 3. and yet Nathan had told him before, that God had put away his sin, he
should not die, 2 Samuel 12. 13. And so, Mary Magdalen.

(3.) He that is of a righteous life is as careful to abstain from appearances
of evil, as from apparent and direct evil. He dares not touch any thing that
looks sin-like, or that has the least affinity with it. If any thing be
propounded to him, which has the face of vice, he dares not for all the world,
have any thing to do with it, he will not eat swines flesh, or drink the broth,
Isay 64. 4. If the thing be doubtful, whether it may or may not be done, he
will do that which is most safe, and leave it undon. Any thing which may be
justly an occasion of sin to others. Any thing which may have sinful
consequences: Any thing which may be liable to misconstruction. Any thing which
may prove detrimentall to others. Any thing which may strengthen, confirm, and
settle wicked men in sin, though the thing should not perhaps be a sin in it
self: yet he that has the Breast Plate of righteousness, dares not do it,
because it has the appearance of sin. Any thing that is of evil report. It
was lawful for Paul to eat flesh, (whatsoever is sold in the Shambles, that
eat, asking no question for Conscience sake: (yet, when that action might have
an appearance of evil, and be a scandal to others, he resolves not to do it,
1 Cor. 8. 13. Paul might as lawfully have circumcised Titus as he did Timothy;
but when he foresaw, that it would have produced an evil consequence, viz. it
would have confirmed the Jews, in the error of the Circumcision, he would not
do it, Gal. 2. 3, 4 Holy Daniel, Cap. 1. 8. would not eat of the Kings meat,
nor drink of his wine: there was an appearance of evil: he did not know but
something might be in it, which was unclean to a Jew by the Law; or something
which had been consecrated to Idols. Tertullian will have no lights in the
worship of God, because mos erat haereticorum, Heretics used so to do. 1. A
righteous person has an Antipathy against sin, and this makes his heart rise
against any thing that is but like it. 2. A righteous person is acquainted with
the subtlety of the Devil, and the incroaching nature of sin, he that gives way
to the appearances of sin, will in a short time yield to that which is
apparently evil.

LECT. XII. December. 26. 1649.
(4.) HE that leads a life truly righteous, Lect. 12.
desires and endeavors every day to be more righteous. He is one, whose care
is to cleanse himself from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7. 1. This Character the Holy Ghost gives
of the righteous man, Rev. 22. 11. He that is righteous, let him be righteous
still; and he that is holy, let him be holy still. The particle [Still] denotes
not only continuance, but progress in holiness. He desires not only to bring
forth the fruits of righteousness, but to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, and to abound more and more: he does desire daily to put off the
old man, and to put on the new man, which (after God) is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 22, 24.

First, he sees the vileness and odiousness of sin, and therefore would have
it further mortified: he sees the excellency and beauty of holiness, and
therefore he would have it increased: and, to this purpose, desires to make
conscionable use of all means of Mortification and Renovation.

Secondly, he sees what a little measure of holiness it is, which he has yet
attained unto, and this makes him mend his pace.

(5.) The righteous man is one who works righteousness in all times. Not only
when it is gainful, but even then when it is dangerous and prejudicial. This is
David's character of himself, Psalm. 119. 20. My soul breaks for the longing
i^ has to thy judgments at all times. And this is that character which he
makes of others, Psalm. 106. 3. Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that
does righteousness at all times. A righteous person will do righteously not
only when he may be rewarded, but also when he is sure he shall be persecuted
for righteousness sake. He can distinguish between fas and nefas, when the
generation, wherein he lives, is wholly devoted to wickedness. This is the
character of Noah's righteousness, Genesis 7. 1. You have a description of that
Generation, Chap. 6. 5. In this Generation Noah kept his righteousness.

This the Apostle exhorts the Philippians, Phil. 2. 15. That ye may be harmless
and blameless, etc. in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.

Yea, a righteous man in such a generation, by a spiritual kind of
Antiperistasis, endeavors to walk more righteously. For,

(1.) Times and Ages, Men and Custom, are not the guide of his Life, but
Conscience rightly informed by the Word of God.

(2.) The more loose his generation is, the more necessity he sees lying upon
himself to practice Holiness, both to keep it up in the world, and to confute
the want of it in other men. If he live in a Covenant Breaking, and
Covenant-denying, and Covenant-forswearing generation, he sees that he has the
more reason to walk in Covenant maintaining, and Covenant keeping, etc.

(6) The righteous person is one who does in his heart bewail the unrighteous
practices of other men. This is the Evidence of Lots righteousness: vid. 2 Pet.
2. 8. That righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing, and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. Thus also did the
Holy men in Jerusalem, in a time of wickedness, Ezekiel. 9. The sins, which were a
sport to others, were a sad grief to their souls. When others were singing to
their idols, they were sorrowing for that mirth: they did not only murmr
against their sins, but they did mourn for them, and that with sighing and
tears.

1. A righteous man knows both the filthiness of sin, and the mischief of
sin.

2. A righteous person has fervent love to God, and hearty Affection to the
souls of men: this makes him mourn for the sins he cannot mend.

(7) The righteous person is one who is gladly willing to be told of any act of
unrighteousness. He is sorry to do unrighteously; but not sorry to be told of
his unrighteous Doing. He will thank God for making any an Instrument of
reproving, and he will honor and love the Instrument for his faithful
admonition. He will not like Ahab imprison a Micajah, nor yet with Herod cut
off the head of a faithful Reprover; but will be pleased with the discovery of
sin, though from an enemy. Famous and renowned is the example of David for
this, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. He had received an unworthy affront from a man to whom
he had showed much kindness, ver. 15, 16. The men were very good to us, neither
missed we any thing as long as we were conversant with them in the field, etc.

And now he was upon his march in the heat of blood to avenge that wrong: It
was but a woman who came to meet him, and one who was so nearly related to
Nabal, that what she said, might be rendered suspected; and yet because she
spoke both Reason and Religion, David was convinced of his sin, blessed God,
and blesses her, retreats from his march; yea, his soul was so knit to Abigail
for her faithful advice, that as soon as her husband was dead, he took her to
wife, and she was ever after precious in his sight. Solomon maks this a
distinctive note between the godly wise, and the wicked: the one loves sin,
but hates rebuke: the other loves rebuke, but hates sin, Prove. 9. 8. A
faithful Reprover, is as a Looking-glass, wherein our spots are seen; and he
that loves to be clean, hates no Looking-glass, unless it be a false one, that
makes him fairer then he is. A faithful Rebuker is as a Physician to the soul,
he comes to lance, but it is in order to a cure: no man that loves to live,
hates the Physician, unless he be in a distemper; but honors him, and bids him
welcome. Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; let him reprove
me, it shall be a precious oil, which shall not break my head: so the righteous
person thinks, and so he speaks, Psalm. 141. 5. A righteous person is as
willing to have his sin discovered, as his graces; and as willing to be
smitten for his sin, as encouraged for well-doing. He loves a plain-dealing
Ministry, that will tell him of his sin without flattery: he would not have
bitter put for sweet, or sweet for bitter.

Secondly, wherein the usefulness of this Breast Plate stands, as to the
resisting of Temptation. I shall show you this in these three Particulars, viz.

(1) Righteousness gives boldness and courage to the soul in the day of
Temptation. Resolution of spirit is of very great advantage to a soldier: If
the heart be faint, the hands tremble. When the people of Israel went out to
War against their enemies, God gave this Law amongst others, that the Officers
should make a Proclamation in the head of the Army, That whosoever was fearful
and faint-hearted, should go and return to his house, lest his Brethrens heart
faint as well as his, Deuteronomy. 20. 8. Cowardliness does give a very great
advantage to the enemy. Now Righteousness, and Innocence of life, makes the
soul valiant. Hic murus aheneus esto, Nil conscire sibi nulla pallescere culpa.
Innocence of life, is the best Cordial to remove tremblings from the soul. Pro:
28. 1. The wicked flee, when no man pursues; but the Righteous are bold as a
Lion. The word is, as a young Lion, in the Hebrew: Of all Beasts, the Lion is
most valiant; he is the King of Beasts; and of all Lions, the young Lion is
most valiant, in regard of the abundance of natural heat which is in him.
Righteousness gives a Lyon-like boldness to the soul in the day of Temptation:
guilt makes the heart melt. Thou have driven me out this day from the face of
the earth, etc. And it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me shall
slay me, Genesis 4. 14. Carnificem fuum gerebat; his Conscience was his Tormenter,
and the guilt of his sin did so infeeble his spirits, that though there was
not then a man living besides his Father, yet he thought he should be taken
away by a violent death.

Now the ground of the courage arising from Righteousness, is, not from the
merit of Righteousness; for, in respect of Merit, all our Righteousnesses are
as a filthy rag, Isa 64. 6. But, upon these considerations, it makes the soul
valiant, in that (1.) It pacifieth the Conscience, by giving us an evidence of
our Justification, and of the acceptance of our persons, through grace, in the
sight of God. Holiness, and Righteousness, is an Argument that we are the
redeemed Ones of Jesus Christ, Luke 1. 74, 75. Righteousness of Conversation,
gives the soul an evidence of its election, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Departing from
Iniquity, is a testimony that a person is sealed up for salvation, and eternal
life: vid. 1. Ioh. 3. 9, 10. (2.) It gives courage, in that it lets a soul see
that it has a right to all the Promises. All the Promises are made to
righteous walking: Promises of Support, Promises of perseverance, Promises of
deliverance; Righteousness gives the soul a propriety in all these, and so
makes it valiant: See but that one Promise, 1 Ioh. 5. 18. that is a Promise of
security against Satan.

He shall not touch him, that is, not with a destructive Touch; he shall not
draw him into that sin which is unto death; he shall not finally overcome him,
etc. This Promise is made to every one that is born of God; and whosoever is
born of God, does righteously, as he is righteous: the righteous man, and the
regenerate, are all one.

(2.) Righteousness makes the soul strong, as well as valiant. Strength and
Power is of very great use to a soldier in the day of battle: it makes him
able both to defend himself, and to offend his enemy. Now Righteousness, and
Holiness, strengthens a Christian two ways.

First, In that it does demolish and destroy that which makes the soul weak.
Sin is the weakness and infirmity of the soul: it is the Devils great strength,
and that which gives him all the advantage he has against the soul: Our sins,
are Satan's Armor, that wherein he trusts, and with which he fights against
us: if he did not find assistance within us, he could not do us any mischief by
that which is without us. The Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in
me, Joh. 14. 30. and because he had nothing in him, he could do nothing against
him. Our sins are the Devils strong Holds, in which he fights against us. Now
Righteousness does expel sin, as the Light expels the darkness: It does
cast down these strong Holds; it does dissolve the works of the Devil, and
takes from him that Armor wherein he trusts and so gives us strength.

Secondly, It strengthens the soul, in that it brings with it all strength.
Wheresoever Righteousness is, there is God, and there is Christ, and there is
the Spirit; the Spirit of Might, and the Spirit of Power. It Is true,
Righteousness is not either in the heart, or in the life, till God have wrought
it. Righteousness does not bring God, but God brings Righteousness unto the
soul: but when God has wrought this Work, then does Holiness engage God.
Righteousness puts the soul under the shadow of Gods wings, so that whatsoever
strength, power and virtue is in God, is engaged for the righteous man's
defense. This ye have clearly laid down, Psalm. 92. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. It was the great happiness of the Israelites, that the Eternal
God was their refuge, Dent. 33. 27. This was their strength in all the battles
they fought; and he that walks holily is under this happiness; Psalm. 84. 11.

(3.) Without righteousness of life, no use can be made of any other pieces of
this Armor. 1. He cannot gird himself with Truth: Righteousness of life, and
truth of heart, are as the tree and fruit, they always go together: he that
has an unholy life, is certainly unholy in heart: the Kings daughter is all
glorious within, and her Clothing of wrought gold, Psalm. 45. 13.

2. He cannot put on the shoes of the Gospel of peace; for there is no peace
to the wicked, says my God, Esa 57, 21.

3. He cannot put on the Helmet of Salvation. A man who is unholy in life, is
destitute of all true hopes of Heaven; for every one that has this hope
purifyeth himself, as God is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

(4.) Nor can he take the Shield of Faith, Faith is always an heart-purifying
grace, Act. 15. 9. A wicked life is the consequence of an unbelieving heart.

(5.) Nor can he take the Sword of the Spirit: This sword is not a defending
sword, but a wounding sword to an unholy life: every part of Gods Word, is, for
the present, against him: the word terrifyeth and condemns him.

(6.) Nor will Prayer and Supplication do him any good: God has no ear for the
prayers of a wicked man, Psalm. 66. 18. yea his prayers are turned into sin,
Prove. 28. 9. But now he whose conversation is righteous, can make use of all
the other. He can use the girdle; he can, and may draw comforts from the Gospel
of peace; he may cover himself with the shield of Faith; the Sword of the
Spirit is a defending Weapon to him, and his prayers are full of virtue and
efficacy.

Information. (1) This may apologize for 1. Use.
the care and exactness of the servants of God in their endeavors after purity
and holiness of life. Wicked men are ready to blast, and reproach the children
of God for their diligence in laboring after purity, because they will not run
with others into the same excess of Riot, therefore they speak evil of them, 1
Pet. 4. 4. Let such men consider what follows, ver. 5. They shall give
account to him that is ready to judge the quick and the dead. In the day of
judgment it shall appear, that such exactness was not unnecessary: when you
shall see such as you have reproached numbered among the Saints; then you will
befool your selves, and say, We fools counted their lives madness, and their
end full of reproach, Wisd. 5. init. How are they reckoned amongst the sons of
God, and have their Inheritance amongst the Saints? You that are now troubled
at their holy lives, will be then astonished at their unexpected salvation. The
servants of God know the usefulness of holiness here, and the eternal happiness
of it in the other world; and you also will in the day of the Lord return and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not, Mal. 3. 18. Men do not use to blame a soldier that
goes to meet a cruel and potent enemy, because he is careful to provide a
strong Breast Plate: they rather blame his rashness and indiscretion, that
shall go naked: Righteousness is the only Breast Plate to keep out Satan's
arrows, and therefore they are very wise, whatever men think, who are careful
both to provide it, and wear it.

(2.) We need not wonder to see men of dissolute and lewd lives, to be so
woefully subdued unto the will of Satan, and so unable to resist any temptation.
Well says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2. 2. That the Prince of the power of the Air,
works in the children of disobedience, (...); he does work effectually, as
the word signifies; he commands, and they obey; he tempts, and they yield; he
suggests, and they consent to his suggestions; if he tempt them to swear, to
lie, to murder, to commit adultery, they make no resistance, but are carried
captive, by sin, at his Will, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Amongst many other Reasons that
might be rendered, the Doctrine gives us one, which is sufficient to stay our
wonderment: Their breast lies naked to his arrows, and therefore they cannot but
fall; and when they are fallen, they cannot recover. As the Heretic and
Hypocrite are overcome for want of the girdle of Truth, so the profane person
is surprised for want of the Breast Plate of Righteousness.

LECT. XIII. Jan. 2. 1649.
EXhortation, That all the people of God Use 2.
would be careful to get and keep this Breast Plate. You can do nothing by way
of resistance against the Devil in the day of Temptation without this
Breast Plate: therefore the Counsel is very necessary. In the carrying on of
this exhortation, I shall (1.) lay down some other motives, (2.) Prescribe you
some helps. The motives are these.

Motive 1. The want of a righteous and hol^ life will exceedingly open the
mouths of ungod^y men, to blaspheme God and his ways. This is the Apostles
Argument, 2 Pet. 2. 12. 15. The honesty of the lives of Gods people, will stop
the mouths of the wicked; but the dishonesty and blameableness of their
Conversation, will be an occasion to make them speak evil, both of God, and of
his Religion, unholy and unrighteous Actings will lay a stumbling block in the
way of many, upon which they may stumble into Hell. Now Christians are
forbidden to give any offense, either to Jew or Gentile, or to the Church of
God, vid. 2 Pet. 2. 2. Many shall follow, etc. by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of: when Christians that have professed and
practiced the truth, shall apostatize* men, that never cared for the truth,
shall say, Behold the end of their contendings about truth! David's sin did much
hurt in this respect, 2 Samuel 12. 14. This is that which God charge upon his
people, Ezekiel. 36. 20.

Now a holy life removes this scandal.

2. Mot. The want of a righteous life will grieve the holy Spirit of God. This
is the Apostles Argument, Ephesians. 4. 28. 29, 30. Let him that stole, steal no
more, etc. The spirit of God cannot properly be grieved. God is (...) but when
he carries himself as a man that is grieved, then the Scripture uses that
expression. I am broken with your whorish heart, says God, which has gone a
whoring from me, Ezekiel. 6. 9. To grieve the spirit of a man, is a very sinful
thing, much more to grieve the spirit of a good man; but most of all, to grieve
the spirit of God. God is your Father, God is your friend, God is your Husband,
God is your Comforter, God is your Savior: and will ye the satisfying of a
lust grieve his spirit.

Motive 3. Unrighteousness of life will render all your holy duties,
abominations unto God. A dead fly causes the precious ointment of the
Apothecary, to send forth a stinking savor, etc. Eccles. 10. 1. You may see
what God says to his people to this purpose, Isa. 1. 11. etc. To what purpose,
etc. God will frown upon your prayers, when you come to his Table, he will hide
his face from you, when you come to hear his word, he will not be friendly to
you, etc.

Motive 4. Righteousness of life is a good way to gain others to the love of
Religion. Its a very convincing thing to the Conscience of a natural man. It
will speak when words are forgotten; it will be remembered, when Sermons are out
of mind. The primitive Christians did much good upon the Heathen, by the
holiness of their lives. And for this cause it is, that believing wives are
exhorted to holiness of life, that their Husbands which did not obey the word,
might be gained by their conversation. 2 Pet. 3. 1. 2. Your faith is profitable
to yourselves, your holiness to other men.

Motive 5. All Christians that believe are spiritual Priests unto God, and
therefore they should be holy. The high Priest was to wear a curious
Breast Plate, vid. Exodus 28. 15. 16. etc. ver. 30. there must be in it the Vrim
and the Thummim, Light and Perfection. If your lives be unholy, you are no fit
Priests to God, you want your Breast Plate. Thus for Motives.

Now for Helps and Directions take these.

1. Study well the righteousness, purity and holiness of the Nature of God. The
Holiness of God is the Original of all holiness. It is both the Motive and the
Example of all holiness in the Creature: when the Prophet Isay contemplates the
holiness of God, he cries out of his own unholiness, Esaias 6. 3. 5. Holy, holy,
holy is the Lord God of Hoasts, woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man
of unclean lips. He that is much employed in the contemplation of the purity of
God, will not take any contentment in his own impurity. The holiness of God in
Scripture is propounded for this very purpose, that by looking upon it, the
Sons of men may stir up their minds to pursue holiness, 2 Pet. 1. 15. 16. As
he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation,
because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy. It is ignorance of God, or
forgetfulness, which is the cause of the love of unholiness. When the soul
comes once in good earnest, to consider the purity of God, his own impurity
will be his sorrow and burden. These thoughts will let the soul see, that its
impossible for him to have any Communion with such a God, to whom he is so
unlike. Similitude is the ground of Communion, as dissimilitude is of disunion
and separation. This is that which the Apostle lays as one foundation of
comfortable communion with God, James 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, etc. cleanse your
hands ye sinners, purify your hearts, ye double minded. Righteousness and
unrighteousness can have no fellowship, light and darkness can have no
Communion, the Temple of God and Idols cannot agree together, 2 Cor. 6. 14. 16.

(2.) Study the Holiness and purity of the humane nature of Jesus Christ your
head. He had this Breast Plate continually upon him, Isay 59. 17. He put on
righteousness, as a Breast Plate, and an Helmet of salvation upon his head: and
all his Soldiers must be accoutred as their General is. He lived 33. years in
the world, and all that time never stepped once aside, out of the way of
righteousness. He did no sin, neither was there any guile found in his mouth.
He is called in regard of his humane nature* (...) that holy thing, Luke 1. 35.
This consideration would mightily inflame a Christian to the love and practice
of holiness; for he would thus argue with himself. Is it meet, that so corrupt
a member should have so holy a head? Is it meet, so holy a Master should have
so unholy Disciples? There are two principal ends of the Incarnation of Jesus
Christ, One is, that he might in our nature make satisfaction for our guilt.
The other is, that he might fulfill all righteousness for us, and that there
might be in our nature a perfect pattern of holiness for our Imitation, 1 Pet.
2. 21. leaving us an example, etc. And no man can expect any benefit by Christ's
satisfaction, who does not endeavor the Imitation of his example: thou have no
hopes of being healed with his stripes, if thou be not willing to be guided by
his example, verse. 21. 23, 24. Upon this ground it is evident, that the
studying of his holiness, will be of singular use to make us holy. Its the
Apostles direction, 1 John 3. 3.

(3.) Look back often to the righteousness of the state of innocence. Mankind
was created at the first in Adam, after the Image of God, in holiness and
righteousness: he had both the girdle of truth upon his loins, and the
Breast Plate of Righteousness upon his breast: there was no impurity within,
there was no irregularity outwardly, till he had sinned. Serious meditations of
this, will have some influence upon the soul, to help forward the practice of
holiness. There is a natural desire in all men, in whom there is any nobleness
of spirit, to regain and recover the honors preferments and Revenues, which
have of ancient time been instated upon their Families. The very reading of
some ancient Records, which show that such Dignities have been conferred upon
their predecessors, does put an edge upon their spirits, to endeavor that they
and their posterity may be reinvested with the same dignities. When the second
Temples foundation was laid after the return of the people from captivity its
said, that many of the Priests and Levites, and chief of the Fathers, who were
ancient men, that had seen the first Temple, wept with a loud voice, Ezra 3.
12. The latter house was more glorious then the first, in this respect, because
Jesus Christ should come to his Temple, and fill it with his glory, he of whom
the Temple was a Type. But in regard of outward magnificency, the former Temple
did far excel this, and therefore the old men wept, when they saw this begun,
to think how far short it came of the other, I would apply it to our purpose
thus. If a Christian would but view the first Temple, and behold often the
glorious holiness of man in Paradise, he would not be able to look upon the
present miscarriages of his life without weeping. It would make him use all
endeavor to bring up both his inward and outward man to some good proportion,
(at least as much as is possible) to that Standard of original righteousness,
which is quite lost by the Fall. And for this purpose, it is, that God has
left some rudera abiding still in man, that by viewing the first building, he
may be provoked to endeavor the repair of it. The Apostle makes this as a help
to direct the Ephesians to exact holiness of life, Ephesians. 4. 22. 23, 24. Put on
the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

(4.) Meditate on the righteousness of that place, whither you desire to be
translated after this life. Heaven has nothing in it but holiness and glory:
its called in Scripture, an Inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 4. and the Holy
Ghost tells us, there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles,
neither whatsoever works abomination, Rev. 21. 27. The unrighteous shall
never inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. The cleanness and beautifulness
of a room is a great persuasion to men to cleanse their feet, that they may be
fit to enter into it. Heaven is a clean place, the streets of that City are
pure gold, as it were transparent glass, Rev. 21. 21. A spotted life is not
fit for an unspotted Heaven. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. It is not the happiness of the
Servants of God to be at peace with all men in this world; they do follow it,
but they cannot overtake it; but holy they must be, else they shall have no
part in the Kingdom of holiness. When a man intends to plant himself into
foreign parts, he is very careful to be as well acquainted as may be, both
with the Language and customs of that Country. Every Christian desires to be
transplanted into Heaven, a place of holiness, and therefore should be careful
to be fitted beforehand, for that holy place. A heavenly conversation is fit
for one, who intends to be an Inhabitant in Heaven, Tit. 2. 12. 13.

(5.) Consider the righteousness of your Christian profession. Your profession
is a profession of holiness, and its fit the practice should be answerable to
the Profession. A Christian calling, is an high Calling, Kings, Priests, etc.
Phil. 3. 14. and it is also an holy Calling, Christians are called to be
Saints. God, says the Apostle, has saved us, and called us with an holy
Calling, 2 Timothy 1. 9. And if a Christian would but well remember, either the
highness or holiness of his Calling, he would not walk so disorderly, as
sometimes he does. Men's Callings are very forcible to take them off from
employments that are unsuitable, and to put them upon such as are agreeable to
their Callings. A Merchant will not rake in Dunghills, it is work unfit for his
Calling. Kings will not buy and sell, and trade; it is not suitable to their
Calling. It is not for Kings, oh Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor
for Princes, strong drink. Prove. 31. 4. It is not for any person to be given to
drink, etc. but of all men, its most unfit for Kings to do it. Their employment
is of a higher nature, then the employment of ordinary men. When Nehemiah was
tempted to have fled from his work, into the Temple for safety, the
consideration of his profession kept him from yielding. Should such a man as I
flee? Neh. 6. 11. I who came hither to stand out against opposition, I who have
had such experience of divine preservation, I that have professed so much
confidence in God, etc. If such Meditations were fixed upon a Christians heart,
he would never willingly give way to any unrighteous practice.

(6.) Consider much of the righteousness and holiness of that word of God,
which is given for the rule of your walking. Every word of God is pure. The Law
of God is a holy and righteous Law, the Gospel is a Gospel of holiness; and its
fit that such as have chosen this Rule, should be holy in all manner of
Conversation. The Apostle gives this, both as a Motive and Direction to holy
walking, Phil. 1. 27. Let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel, Phil.
1. 27. And Tit. 2. 11, 12. The grace of God that brings salvation, has
appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. He that has
the Gospel before his eyes, will put away sin from his eyes. I thought on thy
precepts, and turned my feet to thy Commandments, says David, Psalm. 119. 59.
he that forgets Gods Testimonies, will soon be drawn aside from the way of
obedience; but he that carefully remembers these, will walk holily. David gives
this as the reason, why the godly man does not walk in the way of the ungodly,
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of scorners, because his
delight is in the word of God, and therein he meditates day and night, Psalm. 1.
2, 3. 2 Cor. 8. 18.

(7) Study carefully the great and many privileges which are instated upon
you, in, and by the Covenant of Grace. The end of all the Dignities conferred by
God upon men, is, in respect of them, that they should walk in newness of life.
Election is for this end, Ephesians. 1. 4. God has chosen men in Christ before the
foundation of the world, (not because they were holy, but) that they should be
holy, and without blame before him in love. The end of Redemption is holiness
of life, Luke 1. 75. Christ came as much to redeem the people from iniquity, as
from hell, Tit. 2. 14. The end of Adoption is, that we should be harmless and
blameless the Sons of God without rebuke, that we should live as Gods children,
and walk as Children of the Light. The end of our Justification is
Sanctification of Life: many lewd and ignorant Christians argue from
privileges to laziness: they continue in sin, because grace abounds. But the
Scripture argues from great privileges to purity of life: vid. Romans 12. 1. I
beseech you therefore Brethren, etc. The particular mercy he had spoken to, is
the great mercy of a sinners justification by faith. Of this he had been
disputing in the former Chapter. In the 12. Chapter he comes to make the main
Use of it, which is an Exhortation to Holiness. And from the same Doctrine,
Ephesians. 4. 1. he draws the very same inference; I therefore the prisoner of the
Lord beseech you, etc. The end of all the Promises, is holiness of life, 2 Cor.
7. 1. Having therefore these Promises, etc. The Apostle Peter, from many other
rare privileges, draws the same conclusion, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Dishonesty of Conversation, does not only convince a Christian of
unthankfulness for his privileges, but it is a shame to his privileges.

(8.) Meditate much on the unrighteousness of your former conversation, when ye
knew not God. It is the mind of God, that Christians, after their effectual
conversion, should remember their unregenerate condition, Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.
There are many good uses which a Christian may make of such meditations; it
makes him thankful, etc. Amongst others, this is one, it will be a good help to
promote his holy walking, after Conversion. Such meditations will bring to his
mind. (1.) The filthiness of sin, which will set his heart against it. And
(2.) they will let him see how much time he wasted in sin, which will be a
great help to make him more careful, for the future, over his ways. This is
laid down in many places of Scripture, as a help to holy walking: vid, 1 Pet.
4. 3. the Apostle, in the second verse, exhorts them to cease from sin; and
his Argument is, because that was their practice in the days of their vanity,
when they walked after the course of the world. And we have the same Argument,
1 Pet. 1. 14. Not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts in your
ignorance. This is one Reason why such as have been most notoriously wicked
before Conversion, are sometimes more then ordinarily holy after Conversion:
When sin has abounded before Regeneration, Grace has much more abounded in
them after Conversion. Mary Magdalen, one of the most noted sinners of her age,
(our Savior cast 7 Devils out of her;) and, after her Calling, one of the most
exact Christians of her time. You read very much of her forwardness, and zeal,
and holiness; she is usually put in the first place, whereas she is spoken of:
vid. Matthew. 27. 55, 56. Matthew. 28. 1. In the end of the Sabbath came Mary
Magdalen, etc. Joh. 20. 18. Mary Magdalen came and told the Disciples, etc. One
ground of this, is, because they reflect upon their former Conversation; and,
because they find that exceeding vile, therefore they are so very careful now
to walk with all exactness: As those that have been most prodigal, when they
are reclaimed, are ordinarily very frugal, etc.

(9) Meditate on the many engagements which lie upon you for holy walking. You
all lie under Sacramental Bonds: when you were baptized, then you entered into
an Engagement and Oath of Allegiance, that you would give up your selves in
obedience unto God. The Apostle, upon this ground, argues with the Romans,
Romans 6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Baptism is a holy Bond, which though it be but once
entered into, yet the obligation of it remains for ever upon the soul. And what
that obligation is, you have, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Teuching you to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded. This Baptismal Vow, you have renewed at the
Lords Table many a time, on your sick beds, or in the day of other troubles:
Looking often upon these, will be very helpful. The thoughtfull remembrance of
Engagements, were very useful to David for this purpose; I have sworn it, and
I will perform it, to keep thy righteous judgments, Psalm. 119. 106. violating
of holy Vows, and breaking of religious Covenants, though the matter of them be
but civil, is a sin of a high nature, Ezekiel. 17. per totum, especially, ver.
18, 19, 20, 21. So Ezekiel. 34. 17, 18, 19.

(10) Get much of the holy reverential fear of God into your spirits. Fearing
of God, and eschewing of sin, are frequently joined together in Scripture: so
are fearing of God, and keeping of his Commandments, Job 1. 1. Eccles. 12. 13.
The Apostle makes the want of Gods fear to be the inlet of all
unrighteousness, and dissolute practices, Romans 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17,
18. And the Apostle makes this fear of God to be the means of purifying the
life, 2 Cor. 7. 1. If the heart grow Fearless, the life will grow Profane,
Prove. 28. 14.

(11) Study, and think well upon the Doctrine of Death, and of Judgment. Look
upon Death as near at hand, let the sound of the Passing Bell, and the sight of
the Grave be continually in your Senses, and let the sound of the last trumpet
be in your ears: Awake ye dead, and come to judgment: Forgetfulness of Death
and Judgment, is the cause of so much licentiousness; and the remembrance of
these, are of great force to keep the life holy: see 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and ver.
10, 11. Seeing all these things must be dissolved, etc.

(12) Consider the unloveliness of unholy practices in other men. Behold the
Drunkard in his vomit, and the Adulterer in his uncleanness, etc. This will
work in your Souls, hatred against sin, and zeal for the contrary virtues.

(13) Look very narrowly to the heart, the inward man. It Is impossible to
preserve Holiness of life, if Corruptions be not daily purged out of the heart.
Let the blood of Jesus be sprinkled upon the heart every day: purge the
Conscience, and then the Conversation will be kept clean also: Out of the
abundance of the heart, etc. Matthew. 15. 18.

EPHESIANS. 6. 14. (...) Lect. 14. Janu. 9. 1649.
(...).
IN these words we have the third piece of the spiritual Armor, The
preparation of the Gospel of peace. In which we shall consider of these three
things. 1. The Epithet given to the Gospel, Evangelium pacis. 2. The Armor it
self, The preparation of the Gospel. 3. The Subject of this Armor, the part of
the body upon which it is to be put, the Feet. I shall at this time only go
over the first of these; viz. The Commendation given to the Gospel, And it
teaches us this lesson: viz.

That the Gospel is a Gospel of peace. Doctrine.


In the opening of which Doctrine I shall 1. show you what the Gospel is. 2.
What peace this is. 3. How the Gospel is a Gospel of peace. 4. Answer an
Objection against it.

1. The Gospel, according to the notation of the word signifies, good news,
glad tidings, so the greek word (...), and so the hebrew word Desporah
signifies: it is here used to set forth the joyful tidings of salvation by
Jesus Christ, first preached to Adam in Paradise by God himself, Genesis 3. 15.
afterward by the Prophets, by Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles. The
Doctrine of free grace and obtaining righteousness by faith in Christ without
the works of the Law Its called in the Scripture sometimes, The word of Gods
grace, Acts 14. 3. because it does reveal the riches of Gods grace to the
children of men for their salvation: Sometimes its called, the word of faith,
Romans 10. 8. because it holds out faith in Christ as the instrumental cause of
our salvation. Sometimes its called, the grace of God, Titus 2. 11. Sometimes
its called, the mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 4. because it does reveal Jesus
Christ to the sons of men in his person, natures, offices, benefits conveyed by
him to such as believe Sometimes, the hidden wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 2. 7. Its
wisdom, because it contains the wise design and plot of God for the saving of
sinners: And its hidden, because it was from eternity hidden in the secret
counsels of God, till he was pleased to make it known to Adam, and because Romans
16. 25.
it is still hidden from many who have not the knowledge of it, and because
many, who know it in the letter, do not savingly embrace and entertain it.
Sometimes its called, the word of life, Phil. 2. 16. because by the right
beleiving of it men are translated from the state of death to the state of
life. Sometimes, the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. because in
this shop it is, that all those riches are laid abroad to the view of men.
Sometimes its called, the good word of God, Hebr, 6 5. Every word of God is
good, the Law is a good word, all the threatenings are good, they come from him
who is good, the matter of them is good, the end of them is good, but the
Gospel is by way of eminency called, the good word, because the greatest
goodness and mercy that God ever manifested to his creatures is contained in
the Gospel. God was very good to man in creation, the goodness of God was
expressed in the Covenant of works, but the highest expression of goodness and
love lies in the Gospel. And in the Text its called, the Gospel of peace, the
reason of which we shall see when we have done with the next particle: viz.

2. What peace is here meant. There is a threefold peace. 1. Peace with the
Creature, of this Eliphaz in Job speaks, Chap. 5. 23. Thou shall be in league
with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be in peace
with thee. He is said to be at peace with the Creatures, who is in such a
condition, that no Creature can be an instrument of his hurt, but all creatures
are instruments of his good and serviceable to him for his advantage. All
things are yours, things present and things to come. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. 2. Peace
with a man's self. Peace of conscience, of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 15. 13.
The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing. This peace is a
fruit and consequence of faith; of this our Savior speaks, Math. 11. 28. Come
unto me, etc. and ye shall find rest to your souls. When the soul apprehending
the pardon of sin, and assurance of Gods love, is freed from those fears and
horrors which attend unjustified sinners. 3. Peace with God. Which is nothing
else but Reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ, of which the Apostle
speaks, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our
Lord Jesus Christ,

For the understanding of this we are to consider man in his threefold state.

1. In the state of Innocence. In this state man had peace and communion with
God: God and man were united in a Covenant of friendship. There was nothing but
Amicableness between God and man: man was able to know God as the chief good.
To will God as the last end of all. To give God the glory of his works
actively. To converse with God. There was nothing in him opposite to God, or in
God, till man by sin on his part had made a breach.

2. In the state of corruption, or the fallen estate of man. This is a state of
enmity and wrath, God and man in this state are at deadly fewd one with
another. They are said to be afar off from God; they are said to be, without
hope and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Sin has made such a wide
distance, that there is no hopes for God and man to come together as friends,
until some means be used for the removal of this distance. This is the state
in which all unregenerate persons are, The wrath of God abides on them, John
3. 36. In this state man is opposite to God, His nature is opposite to God, His
ways are contrary to God. His heart is full of hatred to him. And in this
state God has put man under Romans 1. 30.
the curse, and is resolved to have his envy out of him.

3. In the state of Graee or regeneration. This is a state of reconciliation.
It consists in these four things.

1. The wrath and displeasure on Gods part is quite done away, so that he loves
the persons and carries no indignation in his breast against them.

Some think that there is no real wrath in God toward the vessels of
election, while they are in their natural condition, only it is so in the
apprehension of the elect, and that reconciliation is begun when they apprehend
it.

But certain it is, that there is not only an apprehension of Gods wrath, but
they are really under Gods wrath, God has really put them under the creatures,
and under the curse of the Law.

Jesus Christ was not only in apprehension, but really under the wrath of God;
he was really made a curse, Gal. 3. 13. God put him under the Law, to be dealt
withal as those that are under the Law.

Now by reconciliation this wrath is done away. Yet does not this imply any
change in God, for God is to be considered two ways.

1. As he is in himself. And so he has not several things in him. Those inward
acts of God are his Being, and there are not several Attributes in him, etc.

2. As he is pleased to manifest himself in his several ways and workings
toward his Creatures, in this respect, according as the Creature is in
himself, so is Gods reflection upon the Creature; (as the Sun through the glass
shines according to the color of the glass.) Now it implies no mutation in
Gods Being to express himself diversely in his working toward the Creatures,
according to their different condition.

2. God takes away the enmity that is naturally in the hearts of men, and so
makes them willing to accept of Reconciliation, and to be at peace with him.

3. There is a solemn league and covenant made, wherein God and man join
together, which the Scripture calls a Covenant of Grace, Hosea 2. 19, 02.

4. There is mutual friendship and delight between God and the Creature,
whereby God communicates his good unto the Creature, and the Creature
communicates his good of love, fear, service and obedience unto God. God says
to the Creature, I will be thy God; the Creature says to God, behold I am thy
servant, thy subject, to honor, obey, serve thee for ever.

Now this Peace is wrought in and by Jesus Christ, by way of transaction with
the Father, and that after this manner.

1. He is willing to be charged with our debt. 2. He is willing to satisfy the
fullest demands of Divine wrath and justice for our debt, Isa. 53. 10. 3. He
undertakes also to bring poor Creatures to submit to God, to love him, to fear
him, to give up themselves to be ruled and governed by him; of which the
Apostle speaks plainly, Colos. 1. 20, 21, 22. And (having made peace through
the blood of his cross) by him to reconcile all things to himself: by him, I
say, whether things in heaven or things in earth. And you that were sometimes
alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh, through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreprovable in his sight. Jesus Christ did as well undertake
to make the elect unblameable as to free them from condemnation.

Now though the Gospel be called a Gospel of peace in respect of all these,
yet this last is principally to be understood in this place, the two former are
but effects and consequences of this. The Gospel is a Gospel of Reconciliation,
so the Apostle calls it, 2 Cor. 5. 19.

3. In what respects is the Gospel a Gospel of peace.

1. In regard of Discovery and manifestation. The Gospel is that which makes
known this peace unto the sons of men. As the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 27.
Therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith. As life and
immortality is brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. so is peace and
reconciliation. The Gospel is that silver Trumpet by which this Jubilee of peace
is proclaimed to the world. Acts 10. 36. The word which God sent unto the
children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ. It is the Gospel which
preaches this peace to men. The world was never acquainted with this peace
till the Gospel of God came to their ears. The Nations that want the Gospel
are mere strangers to this peace. Luke 1. 79. It is the light of the Gospel
that guides men's feet into the way of this peace.

2. In regard of Conveyance and Communication. The Gospel does not only barely
publish, but does actually work this peace. It is by the Spirit of God, through
the preaching of the Gospel, that the hearts of men are inclined to accept of
this peace. Psalm. 110. 2. 3. The Lord shall send the rod of his strength out of
Zion, i. e. the Gospel, and then it follows, Thy people shall be willing in
the day of thy power; when the rod of Gods strength comes effectually to work
upon the soul, then is the unwilling soul made willing.

3. Inregard of Conservation. The Gospel is the Ark, wherein are kept all the
Articles and Agreements between God and man. All the transactions between God
and Christ, for the making of this peace are preserved and kept safe in the
Gospel. This is the golden pot, wherein this Manna is preserved for all the
generations of the Church.

4. In regard of Recovery. When the soul that is reconciled to God has lost
the sense and apprehension of its peace with God, it does by the studying and
hearing of the Gospel, require and recover the assurance of its former Peace.

5. In regard of Confirmation. The Gospel seals and confirms this peace.

4, I shall now answer one Objection: viz. that of our Savior, Math. 10. 34.
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not to send peace but a
sword, for I am come to set a man at variance against his father, etc. and we
see by experience; that where the Gospel comes, divisions, contentions and
quarrellings do presently arise, etc. Luke 12. 49. I am come to send fire on
the earth, and what would I if it be already kindled? Hence some have
profanely wished the Bible burnt, as the great Incendiary of the world.

Sol. These Contentions are not the natural effects of the Gospel, for it does
naturally work peace and amity, The Wisdom which is from above is first pure
and then peaceable, etc. Jam. 3. 17. but they arise accidentally from the
Gospel. The Gospel meets with the lusts and corruptions of men's hearts, and
these being awakened breed contentions. The Devil he is enraged against the
Gospel, and therefore he stirs up men's corruptions to make head against it. The
Gospel calls upon men to be strict, holy, to deny themselves, etc. the natural
heart abhors this, and so becomes, not only disobedient, but contentious, Romans
2. 8.

The Gospel is the cause of Contentions, as meat is the cause of ill humors.
The natural property of it is to nourish, etc. but because it meets with a
diseased stomach, it accidentally weakens. Or as a good physic is the cause of
sicknesses, etc.

1. Use. Information. We may from hence draw many conclusions: Viz.

1. This shows the pretiousness and glory of the Gospel. The Apostle calls it a
glorious Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. 11. The ministry of the Law was glorious, but the
Gospel is much more glorious: vid. 2 Cor. 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Many things there
are that proclaim the glorious excellency of the Gospel: I shall not instance
in any other than what is in the Text; Its a Gospel of peace. Peace is a
glorious thing, the lowest of all kinds of peace is one of the greatest of
outward blessings, peace with men. Its that which often in Scripture
comprehends all outward blessings. Its the breeder and preserver of all outward
happiness; plenty is the daughter of peace, Micah 4. 3. Its the sweetner of all
outward mercies. Peace is as salt to meat, as the light to the World. How much
more glorious is this peace, Peace with God? The peace of conscience is a peace
transcending humane understanding, Phil. 4 7. and that is but the fruit of this
peace.

2. That the ministey of the Gospel is a glorious ministry. They are the
Ambassadors of the Gospel of peace. Isai, 62. 7. How beautiful upon the mounts
are the feet of them that bring glad tidings, that publish peace. The word of
reconciliation is committed to them, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Ambassadors of war are
unwelcome messengers to all Nations, but those that come to proclaim peace are
kindly received. And yet a wretched world is as weary of the ministry of the
Gospel, as if it were the ministration of death: Most do as the Gadarenes did
by Christ, entreat them to depart out of their coasts. Noah was glad when the
Dove came with an olive branch: if the peace of the Gospel had more place in
the hearts of men, the publishers of it would have more respect.

3. That the professors of the Gospel should be of peaceable dispositions. The
Gospel when it comes with power makes men like it self; it tames and sweetens
the spirits of men; makes rough places smooth, men of rough, boystrous and
fierce spirits to become gentle, Isai. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Implacableness and
violence of Spirit as it does much dishonor the Gospel of peace, so is it a
frame altogether anti-evangelical. The Gospel has no leaven or sourness in it,
and he who professes the Gospel should be so likewise: If ye have heard him,
and have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, put away malice, etc.
Ephesians. 4. 21, 31. Wheresoever the Gospel comes with efficacy and power, it does
imprint upon the soul its own image, Romans 6. 17. But God be thanked, that ye
were the servants of sin: but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine, which was delivered to you. As the Gospel is holy, so should the
professors of it be holy. As the Gospel is heavenly, so should the professors
of it be heavenly: and as the Gospel is a Gospel of peace, so they that profess
it should be men of peace. The Apostle desires the Philippiane, that their
conversation might be as becomes the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. A peaceable
conversation is a Gospel*like conversation.

4. This lets us see what a great loss it is to be deprived of the Gospel. Its
threatened in the Scripture as one of the sorest judgments, Math 21. 43. The
Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, etc. Its a great loss to loose the
lowest kind of peace, Rev. 6. 4. much more to loose the Gospel which conveyes
the highest peace. You that are unreconciled, if the Gospel go, you are like to
die in your enmity; and you that are reconciled, will have no ordinary means
left you, either of preserving or renewing the assurance of your reconciliation.

5. This lets us see why it is that Satan is such an enemy to the spreading of
the Gospel. In all ages we find, that his great plot has been, either to
remove or to corrupt the Gospel. All the false Teachers which arose in the
Gospel Churches were raised for this end: he has stirred up Heretics and
Tyrants in every age to blow out the Gospel. I would have come to you once and
again, but Satan hindered, 1 These. 2. 18. vid. Acts 13. 50. Acts 14. 2, etc.
Still when the Gospel came persecution followed, Acts 16. 16. etc. the reason,
the Gospel is a Gospel of peace, and Satan would keep men unreconciled.

6. Great cause of thankfulness for the enjoyment of the Gospel.

USE. II. Lect. 15. Janu. 16. 1649.

Examination. Let all try whether they have an interest in this peace, which is
published in, and confirmed by the Gospel.

Whether the Gospel have wrought this great work between God and them, that
they can say God and they are at peace. Its necessary to make this inquiry. 1.
Because all men by nature are under wrath and enmity, Ephesians. 2. 2. 2. Because its
very natural to the sons of men to suppose and conclude, that God and they are
at peace, especially such as have lived under the Gospel of peace.

Before I come to positive evidences, I shall discover some mistakes or false
reasonings about this peace; and they are of two sorts. 1. Such as are made
evidences of peace, and are not, these concern wicked men. 2. Such as the godly
are under, arguing those things to be evidences of want of peace which are not
so.

For the former.

1. No man can argue that he is at peace with God, because of the enjoyment of
outward common Privileges. As Baptism, the admission of a person to the Lords
Table. This was the Argument of the Jews, which was often rejected, both by the
Prophets, by Jobn Baptist, and Christ himself: vide Jerem. 7. 4, etc. Trust not
in lying words, Math. 3. 9. 10. Think not to say within your selves, we have
Abraham to our father, etc. John 8. 33. We be Abraham's seed, and were never in
bondage, etc. The Scripture cuts off this kind of reasoning in many places,
Romans 2. all; he is not a Jew, etc. Circumcision and uncircumcision make no
difference in this matter. Jerem. 9. 25, 26. Thou may enjoy all the outward
privileges of the friends of God, and yet live and die in enmity: So did
Ishmael, Saul, Judas, Simon Magus, and yet had neither part nor lot in this
matter.

2. No man can argue that he is at peace with God, because of outward
Profession. The worst of men may attain to this. Judas was one that made a
Profession, he was an Apostle, an extraordinary Minister, and yet an enemy to
God, a child of perdition. Those that shall be rejected at the last day, are
such as made profession, Luke 13. 25, 26, 27. and yet there was no Covenant of
peace between God and them: I know them not. A man must profess Religion before
he can be an hypocrite.

3. The bare performance of external duties, and outward actions of Religion,
is no Argument that a soul is heir to this peace. For though he that is at
peace with God will be careful of doing such duties, yet there is no external
duty or action of Religion, which may not be done by one who is in a state of
enmity: Actions indeed which are intrinsecally good, as beleiving in God,
fearing of God, etc. he cannot do; but all external duties he may do. Jezebel
she keeps a fast, an extraordinary duty. Jehu goes farther than most of Gods
friends in these actions, Reg. 10 per tot. Those in Esaias 58. 2, 3, 4, did very
much, yet all of them in a state of enmity.

4. It Is no argument to prove, that a man is at peace with God, because he does
not show so much enmity against God as others do. A man may far exceed many
others, and yet be no friend, only he may be a less enemy. This was the
Pharisees Argument: God I thank thee, I am not as other men, etc. Luke 18. 11.
mere restraining grace. Civil education, carnal policy, want of temptations,
and a hundred such things may cause a man to hide enmity, and not to show it so
much as others, and yet he is no friend to God, or God to him. All Serpents
have not the same measure of poison.

5 No man can argue, that he is at peace with God, because he is not so full of
enmity as he was before. The weapons may perhaps be knocked out of thy hand:
Thou may not have the same opportunity thou had before to show thy enmity.
Thy enmity may perhaps have some other way of working than before. It may be
God has thee in some bonds or other, that thou dare not show thy self as
thou have done and would do were thou at liberty. It may be thou art not so
able to manifest thine enmity as thou have been. An enemy may be taken
prisoner, may be wounded, etc. that he cannot express his emity, and yet have
as much gall in him as ever he had.

For the latter.

1. A man cannot argue that he is not at peace with God, because of the
oppression of some outward Afflictions. Many of the friends of God reason
against themselves by this Argument: they think if God and they were at peace,
they should not feel the blows of his hand, as now they do. This was the
reasoning which Jobs friends used to prove God and him to be enemies one to
another, Job 4. 6, 7. They thought such sad afflictions were not consistent
with a state of peace. This kind of reasoning would have excluded Jesus Christ
himself from being at peace with God, who was the beloved of his soul. The Jews
did upon this ground look upon him as Gods enemy: Esaias 53. 4. Surely he has
born our griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem him stricken,
smitten of God and afflicted. And so they reasoned against him when he was on
the Cross. He trusted in God that he would deliver him, let him deliver if he
delight in him, Math. 27. 43. The Scripture tells us that this is a false rule,
Eccle. 9. 1. 2. As wicked men cannot argue they are Gods friends, because of
freedom from troubles, no more can the godly argue that they are Gods enemies,
because of the presence of such things. God makes his love to his people to be
the ground of the chastening with the rods of men, Revel. 3. 19. and Heb. 12 7,
8.

2. A man cannot argue that he is not at peace with God, because he wants the
present feeling and comfortable evidences of his peace. Peace may be concluded
in Heaven between God and the soul, and not yet proclaimed feelingly in the
conscience of the sinner. Heman the Ezrahite was a man at peace with God, the
Scripture gives that testimony of him in many places, and yet he wanted the
feeling of his peace, Psalm 88. per totum. Jesus Christ himself did for a time
want the present comforts of his peace; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me. There are diverse cases in which a soul, who is at peace with God may be
without the present apprehensions thereof.

1. In the beginning and infancy of Conversion: a child has reason as soon as
he is born, but he wants a reflected act to know that he has it.

2. In the hour of Temptation: when temptation is high, consolation is often
low.

3. In the day of spiritual Desertion: When God hides his face the soul is full
of troubles, yea, it walks in darkness and can see no light, Isai. 50. 10.

4. In the time of Relapses, when the soul has been overtaken and drawn into
some sin. This was David's case, Psalm 51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation: he had not lost the Jewel of salvation, but he had lost the joy of
his salvation.

3. A man cannot argue that he is not at peace with God, because he finds grace
to be but very weak. His faith is but weak, his zeal is but cold, his desires
are but flint, etc. It Is not strength of grace but truth of grace, which is an
evidence of Reconciliation: A little light in the morning is better than the
bright moonshine in the night, because it is the light of the morning. God will
not despise the day of small things, and man should not despise it, Zech. 4. 10.

And besides: 1. Sometimes some graces may be suspended, that some other graces
may be more fully discovered: faith may act but weakly, that humility and
self-denial may be increased.

2. Sometimes the same grace may be suspended in one act, that it may be more
intended in some other act, which is every way as profitable for the soul.
Faith is sometimes remitted in regard of comforting, that it may be intended in
its act of purifying.

4. A man cannot argue want of peace with God from the presence of some
corruption, and the present feeling of some enmity in the soul. If peace with
God were inconsistent with the being of corruption, there would be no peace
with God on this side heaven. The Song of the Angels at the birth of Christ is,
Glory be to God on high, on earth peace, Luke 2. 14. That clause must be
blotted out, if a state of reconciliation be not consistent with the being of
corruption. Paul was at peace with God, and yet he had a law in his members,
Romans 7. 23. he would have done good, but evil was present, he had a body of
death and a root of bitterness still in him, and this brought forth both gall
and wormwood. Freedom from corruption is desired and endeavored by the Saints
on earth, but it is not enjoyed by any but the Saints in heaven. The body of
death is not destroyed but by the death of the body.

5. A man cannot conclude that he is not at peace with God, because his sins
have been very great. Esaias 55. 7. As the heavens are high above the earth, so
are my ways, etc. Paul had been a very great sinner, 1 Timothy 1. 13. A
blasphemer, a persecutor and injurious, and yet when he wrote that, was under a
covenant of peace. So Manasseh, etc.

But I come to positive evidences.

1. He that is at peace with God is at war with sin, with all sin, and that
continually. Hatred of sin is a sure evidence of Reconciliation with God. I
will hearken what the Lord will say, for he will speak peace to his Servants,
but let not them return again to folly, Psalm. 85. 8. Folly and sin are Synonyma
in Scripture, as holiness and wisdom are. And he that has heard God speaking
peace, will be very careful of not returning to sin. A person at peace with God
may act sinfully, but he hates it even when he acts it, he mourns for it, he
uses all means to mortify and destroy it. I will heal their backslidings, I
will love them freely, etc. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with
Idols? Hosea 14. 4, 8. Yea, the soul shall be ashamed of its sinful courses
when God and it are reconciled. There are some who think, that sorrow and shame
for sin are unfit for a state of Reconciliation, and that its a disparagement
to the state of Reconciliation, to be exercised with Humiliation, whereas
indeed its the proper fruit of it. Mary Magdalen never abounded so much in
sorrow and shame for sin, as after God had spoken peace to her; she wept much,
because much was forgiven her; and its prophesied of Jerusalem, that shame and
grief should fill her heart and face when God was reconciled to her: Ezekiel
16. 61, 63. Put this home.

2. He that is at peace with God, is at peace with the Word of God, and every
part of it. Reconciliation with God brings forth Reconciliation with the
Scriptures, with the Precepts as well as with the Promises. He is at peace with
every duty enjoined in the Book of God. While the soul is at enmity with God,
it is at enmity with the world, at least with some part of it. This Command he
cannot agree with, this is too strict, the other is too harsh: This is an hard
saying, who can hear it? The Apostle describes such men by their
contentiousness and disobedience, Romans 2. 8. but when God has taken away the
enmity of the heart, all these contentions against the Scripture are allayed:
he now hides the Word within his heart, he loves it and prizeth it more than
his appointed food, its the joy and rejoicing of his heart, sweeter to his
taste than the honey and honeycomb. The Law is written in his heart, now its
his bosom friend, the man of his counsel.

3. He that is at peace with God is never so well as when he is in Gods
presence: He loves to be where God is. Reconciliation will manifest it self by
desire of communion. Enemies care not for the presence one of another, but
friends rejoice to converse together. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves,
where thou feedest, Cantic. 1. 6. A soul reconciled is described by this; that
he is made nigh, Ephesians. 2. 13. The soul before reconciliation is far off from
God: far off in regard of Gods acceptance, and far off in regard of
affection and desire, but whenever reconciled, then the distance is removed,
and he is brought nigh, nigh in regard of relation, and nigh in regard of
affection and union; he takes pleasure in those places, in those exercises, in
that society, where God is graciously present. Put this home. Can you say as
Psalm 84. 1. Psalm. 42. 1. Psalm. 63. 1, 2.

4. He that is reconciled to God, can never be contented when any breach is
made, till it be again made up. A soul at peace with God may by sin loose the
sense of it, and thereby breed strangeness between God and himself. But he
cannot be at rest till the cloud be removed. David Psalm 51. 12. he had
assurance of pardon before. The Lord has put away thy sin, etc. 2 Samuel 12. 13.
but Gods face was not as it had wont to be toward him, he could not see those
smiles which he was wont to behold in his fathers face, he could not discern
the light of Gods countenance as before, this makes him cry out, Restore, etc.
Thus it was with the Church in those remarkable places, Cant. 3. inite. and
Cant. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. She was in a very sad condition till she had got the fight
of his face. A reconciled person is afraid of doing any thing that may cause
strangeness, and very restless till any breach may be removed.

5. He that is at peace with God, is at peace with all the servants of God. He
is a true cordial friend unto all those whom God loves, and an adversary to all
those whom God hates. Do not I love them that love thee, and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? Psalm. 139. 21, 22. He will not say a
confederacy to any, who hate God in any of their sinful ways.

6. He that is at peace with God is a man universally reformed. Renovation is
always a fruit of Reconciliation. Inwardly in heart, will, conscience,
understanding: Outwardly in words and works is he renewed according unto the
Scriptures. God never makes peace with any soul, but he makes that soul like
himself. Old things are past away, and all things are become new. This is the
Apostles evidence, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18.

USE III.
Exhortation. Let all those who live under the Gospel of peace labor for an
interest in this peace. We pray you in Christ stead be reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5. 20.

Mot. 1. Without peace there can be no glory. Reconciliation is a necessary
preparative to salvation. God saves no enemies but by making of them friends,
Col. 1. 21.

Mot. 2. He that is at peace with God here, shall certainly be glorified with
God hereafter. Reconciliation is a harder work than salvation. There is more
difficulty to reconcile an enemy, than to save a friend. There is less
opposition between grace and glory, than between grace and nature, the
difference between those is but gradual, but between the other specifical.
Hence the Apostle argues, Romans 5. 10. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his life.

Mot. 3. Peace with God is the foundation of peace with creatures, and peace
with conscience. The creatures are by sin our enemies, and nothing but peace
with the Creator can make their enmity cease. Vide Hosea 2. 18, 19. When God is
in covenant, then are the creatures in Covenant; so peace of conscience is a
fruit of this peace. He that is at peace with God has a ground of peace with
himself, though he do not see it. He that is at enmity with God has no ground
of peace, though he think otherwise: Conscience may be sleepily quiet, but it
is not truly peaceable.

Mot. 4. Peace with God will be your joy and rejoicing in all kind of outward
evils: Otherwise the Gospel of peace will be to you a Gospel of war. They
shall have enmity from God with a witness, who die in enmity under the Gospel:
John 16. 33. Peace in Christ will make the soul of good cheer in all worldly
tribulation: And Joh. 14, 27. he leaves them this as a cordial against all
outward troubles and fear.

Mot. 5. Peace with God is the foundation of all commerce with God, Romans 5. 1,
2. There is no commerce or trading between Nations that are at war one with
another; war stops trading.

Mot. 6. The Christians shall be as secure as if they had raised seven Armies
as means to be at peace.

1. Cast away your sins by repentance, sin made and continues the enmity. No
peace so long as our sins remain, Esaias 57. 21, 2 Reg. 9. 22.

2. Lay hold by faith on Jesus Christ, as he is held out in the Gospel; he is
the Prince of peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. he purchases, he conveyeth it. Levit. 1. 4.
No atonement without a sacrifice.

Thus much for the Epithet, The Gospel of peace.

EPHESIANS. 6. 15. Having your feet shod, etc. Lect. 16. Janu. 23. 1649.

I Observed three things in this verse. 1. The Title or Epithet given to the
Gospel, The Gospel of peace. 2. the Armor enjoined, The preparation of the
Gospel. 3. The part of the body on which this Armor is to be put, The Feet. I
have done with the first of these, from whence this lesson was gathered; That
the Gospel is a Gospel of peace. I shall now speak to the two other together,
Having your feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel.

Having your feet shod: (...). The phrase is an allusion to the custom of
Warriors in those times, who when they went forth Calvin in Loc.
to war did use boots or legharness, whereby they defended their legs and feet
against cold and other things which might lie in their way. It was the manner
of Soldiers in those days, to stick in the way of their enemy, nails, pikes,
and other such things as might offend and wound the legs and feet of the enemy,
and so hinder them in their march, and make them retire: to prevent this
danger, they used leg Armor, which the Latins called Calligas, the Greeks
(...) Goliath, its said, had greaves of brass upon his legs, 1 Samuel 17. 6. To
prevent the like inconveniences in this spiritual war, the Apostle would have
the Christian Soldier to have his feet, that is, his affections, which are as
the feet of the soul, shod with this piece of Armor, which he here calls, the
preparation, etc.

With the preparation of the Gospel: (...). Interpreters are of different
opinions about this piece of Armor.

Some understand it to be meant of the knowledge of the Gospel: of this opinion
is Beza, Sicut (...) milites graeci, caligas milites latini gerebant, ita ad in
eundum praelium and vitae istius cursum inter medios hosts tenendum, vult
Apostolus ut Evangelii pacis cognitione simus preparati.

Others understand it of peace of Conscience, Rogers pract. Cat. part. 3. p.
169. So Gualter.

Others understand it of the Gospel it self, making it an allusion to that in
Psalm 119. 105. Thy word is a lanthorn to my feet, etc. So Gualter, Tota
instituenda vitae ratio ut in Evangelio curramus. Non proprii sequendi
Affectus, sed verbum Domini. Vide Bullinger in loc. This I suppose would
confound it with that piece of Armor, v. 17. the Word of God.

Others expound it of a readiness to preach the Gospel, making it a parrallel
place with that in Isa. 52. 7.

Others expound it of the promises and comforts of the Gospel: Downham.

Others expound it of readiness to promote the Gospel: So Estius, Studium
Evangelii propagandi.

Others expound it of patience: D. Gouge.

Others expound it generally of such kind of furniture as the Gospel of peace
helps us to. Baynes p. 784.

Now of all these opinions none are contrary to the Analogy of faith, each of
them afford useful instructions.

That which I shall pitch upon, as that which I humbly conceive to be nearest
the meaning of the Apostle, is this, viz. A firm Resolution to go through with
the profession of the Gospel against all impediments and difficulties which may
lie in our way. Vide Vsh. Cat. p. 334. This I suppose to be his meaning.

1. Because he makes mention of the feet. The feet are the instruments of
traveling, journeying is the proper work of the feet, and the shoes upon the
feet fit you for travel. When Moses would have the people resolved to march out
of Egypt, he tells them they must eat the Passover with their loins girded, and
their shoes on their feet, Exodus 12. 11. The shoes note, both readiness to
depart, and resolution to go on till they came to Canaan, though they should
meet with oppositions and hardships.

2. Because of the word Preparation, which is used in other places for firmness
of resolution to go on with the Gospel, notwithstanding all difficulties: Vide
Acts 21 13. I am prepared, not only to be bound, but to die, etc. (...) So 1
Pet. 3. 15. speaking of trouble and affliction, says he, Be not afraid of
their terrors, but sanctify the Lord in your hearts, and be ready to give an
answer, etc. (...) understanding it thus, it teaches us this lesson: viz. That,

He that would overcome the Devil in the day of temptation, must be steadfastly
resolved to go through Doctrine.
with the profession of the Gospel, notwithstanding all impediments and
oppositions which he shall meet withal in the world.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall open these two things.

1. That God requires this resolution. 2. That this is very necessary for him
that would stand in the day of temptation.
1. That God requires that every Christian should have these shoes upon his
feet, is expressly taught in the Scriptures: Vide Luke 9. 22, 23, 24. he
foretells his own sufferings, and the sufferings which those that profess his
Gospel must expect, and then he arms them with this resolution. To take up the
cross and to follow him. This is that for which the Angel of the Church of
Pergamus is commended, Revel. 2. 13. Thou hold fast my Name, and have not
denied my faith, etc. This Resolution is that which was in Peter and the rest
of the Apostles; Christ tells them, that they should all of them be offended
because of him, and they should all be scattered from him, Math. 26. 31. Peter
tells him, that for his part he was resolved that though he should die with him,
yet he would never forsake him or deny him, and all the other Disciples were of
the same mind, v. 35. here they had these shoes upon their feet, though they
shortly after fell off when the storm came.

2. Wherein the usefulness of this Armor lies, as to the resisting of
temptation.

1. These resolutions will exceedingly strengthen the soul in the day of
temptation. He that wants these shoes will be weak when Satan sets upon him;
whereas he that has these upon his feet will be bold and valiant. There is not
any better bulwark in the day of battle then Resolution of heart before the day
of battle. Opposition may come suddenly and violently, but it will not come so
terrifyingly upon him that has armed himself with Resolution to stand it out.
Our Savior sets out this by a double Parable, Luke 14. 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.
which of you intending to build a Tower, etc. A man will never be able to
finish, that does not resolve to be at the full cost of the building.

2. These Resolutions will weaken and discourage Satan in his Assaults. Where
he shall perceive these shoes upon the feet of the soul, he will be much
danted and dishartened in his undertakings. When the Rulers, and Elders, and
Scribes, the instruments of State, saw the resolvedness of Peter and John to go
on in their way, notwithstanding all their threatenings and persecutions, they
were much astonished, says the Text, Act. 4 13. and they took knowledge of
them that they had been with Jesus. They thought that there was something more
then man in them, which made them so regardless of their power; and this for
the present abated their fury, they threatened them and let them go, v. 21. had
they seen that they had been barefooted their carriage would have been more
fierce, but seeing them shod with these shoes, they were glad to be rid of
them.

Information. 1. This lets us see why it is, that Use 1.
Apostates and Back-sliders are so easily carried captive by Satan in the day
of temptation. They want these shoes upon their feet, and therefore they
cannot stand. The Heretic falls into the net of Satan, because he wants the
girdle of the Truth of Doctrine. The hypocrite he falls, because he wants the
girdle of Sincerity. The profane person cannot stand, because he wants the
breastplate: and the Apostate is overcome, because he is without the shoes of
the preparation of the Gospel, either he has no resolution, or no
well-grounded resolution. The Apostate is the stony ground, he may hear the
Word, and receive it with joy, but when persecution arises because of the
Word, he is presently offended, Math. 13. 20, 21. if you would be preserved
from falling by temptation, you must labor to be preserved from backsliding
from profession.

2. This lets us see, that it is a difficult and hard thing to keep the right
profession of the Gospel, especially in times of opposition. It were needless
to commend this unto Christians, if it were not an hard work, to go on with it
at such a time. They all forsook him and fled, Mar. 14 50. When storms were
high, and persecution hot, the Disciples of Christ were offended: he whose
profession is but counterfeit will fall off quite, he whose profession is in
truth may be offended with Christ and his Gospel. I note this for two reasons.
1. That none might be too confident of themselves: 2. That none be too
censorious against those who retreat and shrink in such a time.

3. The excellency of perseverance in the profession of the Gospel. Its
excellency, as in other respects so in this appears clearly, that its a mighty
defense in the day of temptation.

4. What cause they have to bless God, who find such Resolutions wrought in
their hearts. These shoes are not only their beauty, but their safety. How
beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O Princes Daughter, Cant. 7. 1.

Exhortation. To persuade all Christians to Use 2.
arm themselves with these Resolutions. Get these shoes upon your feet,
resolve that whatever trouble come, whatsoever storms arise, yet you will go
through with your profession, and never forsake it. It is necessary for those
that live in such black days as these of ours are, to set themselves to this
work. The winds begin to grow loud, the sky is dark and lowering, persecutions
may come suddenly, and they are like to fall violently; its time to get, and
necessary to keep these shoes on their feet. I shall lay down something by way
of Motives: something by way of means.

1. Mot. All the promises are made to them that persevere. It is not he that
begins, but he that continues unto the end, that shall be saved, Math. 10.
22. When the even was come the Lord of the vineyard says unto the Steward,
Call the laborers and give them their hire, Math. 20. 8. Nemo coronatur ante
quintum Actum. Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown
of life, Rev. 2. 10. To them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
honor and glory, and immortality, eternal life, Romans 2. 7.

2. Mot. It Is difficulty and opposition that distinguishes true profefsion from
false profession. Math. 13. 20, 21. A rotten ship may sail very fast, and carry
the passengers safe in a calm Sea, but only a sound vessel will hold out when
tempests arise. Persecutions are called, the trial of our faith, 1 Pet. 1. 7.
because when a soul is under persecutions, then it appears whether his
profession was gold or dross. A temporary profession is like the house built
upon the sand, it stood all the summer time, but when the winds blew, and the
rain came, and the floods lift up their voice, then it fell, Math. 7. 24, 25,
26, 27.

3. Mot. Adhering to the profession of the Gospel in times of opposition, does
most of all honor the Gospel. Obed Edom honored the Ark of God much by taking
it into his house in a time of danger, 2 Samuel 6. 9, 10. It was no great thanks
to David to fetch the Ark into the City of David, when it brought prosperity
with it, v. 12. any one would entertain a prosperous Ark, but he that is a
right Christian will make room for it when it brings affliction.

4. Mot. The Gospel will abundantly recompense all their sufferings. The Ark
did make good satisfaction to Obed Edom for taking it in in a boystrous time, 2 Samuel 6. 11. Its a Gospel of comfort at every time, but never so full of comfort
as in a time of affliction. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. The Gospel is always a
Gospel of peace, but the peace of it is most discovered in a time of trouble.
He that forsakes father or mother, etc. for my sake and the Gospel, shall have
an hundredfold in this world with persecution, and in the world to come
everlasting life, Math. 19. 29.

5. Mot. All the sufferings which arise for the Gospel are for this end, to try
whether men will adhere to it or no. There must be heresies, that they which
are approved may be made manifest, 2 Cor. 11. 19.

6. Mot. It Is a privilege to suffer for the Gospel. Unto you it is given in the
behalf of Christ, etc. Phil. 1. 29. (...) All the elect are called to be
believers, but not to be sufferers: suffering for the Gospel is in some
respects a privilege above beleiving the Gospel.

7. Mot. He that is not willing to cleave to the Gospel in a day of suffering,
shall have no benefit by the Gospel in the other world. He that will not suffer
for it, shall not be saved by it, Mark 8. 38.

8. Mot. He that is not willing to suffer for the Gospel, shall suffer without
the Gospel, Mar. 8. 35.

Thus much for motives.

The Means or Directions are these,

1. Study the excellency of the Gospel. A thorough perfect knowledge of the
Gospel will make a Christian resolved to go through with profession of it
whatsoever follow. Beza expounds the preparation of the Gospel to be the
knowledge of the Gospel. The knowledge of it will help us to the preparation of
it. He that knows the effects of it, and the comforts of it, and the
privileges of it, will not only live with it, but be content to die with it.
Its a Gospel of peace: Its a Gospel of grace, Its a Gospel of holiness: Act.
20. 24.
Its a Gospel of salvation: Its a Gospel of life: Its a Gospel of glory.

2. Learn perfectly that christian Lesson of self-denial. This will make you
cleave to the Gospel in the worst condition, Math. 16. 24. He that knows not
how to deny himself will be easily induced to deny the Gospel, especially when
the cross and the Gospel go together, he may follow Christ when he can take up
Christ and pleasure, but he will never be able to take up the cross, unless he
be able to lay aside himself.

3. Get your hearts above the world, and all worldly entanglements. No man that
warreth intangleth himself with the things of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. It is not
possible to embrace the Gospel and the world together, especially when the
world and the Gospel are at variance Sell all thou have, and give to the poor,
and follow me, says Christ to that young man, Luke 18. 22, 23. Abiice terram,
accipe Caelum? you know what the issue was, he went away sorrowful, for he was
very rich. He that would go through with the profession of the Gospel, must say
to life, and friends, and all worldly things, get ye hence, when these things
and the Gospel stand in competition. Demas has forsaken me, having embraced
this present world, 2 Timothy 4. 10.

4. Get a great measure of Christian patience. He that has not patience to
enable him to suffer for the Gospel, will forsake the Gospel when suffering
comes. In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke 21. 19. and Hebr. 10: 36.
Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might
receive the promise.

5. Have your eye often upon the cloud of witnesses. Study the examples of the
servants of God, who have gone through with the profession of the Gospel,
notwithstanding all oppositions. They have followed Jesus Christ, and stuck to
the Gospel, in contempt, in poverty, in reproach, in nakedness, etc. and by the
Gospel of peace through Jesus Christ they are now laid up in everlasting peace.
They were stoned, they were sawen asunder, were tempted, were slain with the
sword, they wandered about in sheepskins, and goatskins, being destitute,
afflicted, tormented, Heb. 11. 37.

1. Consider the danger of Apostasy. Many dreadful things are spoken against
backsliding from the profession of the Gospel.

2. The Apostate is in a worse condition than he The Gospel is worse for him,
and he for the Gospel.
that never made profession of the Gospel. It had been better not to have known
the way of truth, than after they have known it to turn aside from the holy
commandment, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 22. He loses all the benefit of his former
profession.

2. The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways. Prove. 14. 14.
God will give him up to himself, to be his own guide, to be his own rule, he
shall be given up to his own passion, to his own lust, to his own pride, etc.
of all sinners the backsliders are usually greatest, God takes his hand from
them, and lets them follow their own counsels, and he who is his own guide will
soon work his own ruin, Romans 1. ver. 24, 26, 28, 29, etc. The soul of God
shall have no pleasure in him. Heb. 10. 38. As he takes no delight in the
Gospel, so God will take no delight in him. Yea, its a Mejos^s. God will take
displeasure in him here, and he will take vengeance on him hereafter to the
full. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for
the Kingdom of God, Luke 9. 62.

7. Make your resolutions in the strength of Christ, and by daily fervent
prayer give up your selves to the keeping of God, that he would preserve you to
the end. Take heed with Peter of resolving in your own pride, Math. 26. 33. And
then pray that God would keep these resolutions in your hearts, and your hearts
in these resolutions: these shoes will fall off if you do not tie them on,
and keep them on. David's prayer, 1 Chronicles. 29. 18. should be yours every day.

So much for the third piece of Armor.

EPHESIANS. 6. 16. (...) Lect. 17. Janu. 30. 1649.
(...).
IN these words we have the fourth piece of the spiritual Armor, which the
Apostle recommends unto Christians for their safe standing in the day of
temptation, viz. The Shield of Faith. In which we have two things. 1. The
injunction of the use of it, Taking the shield of faith. 2. The persuasive or
motive to it, drawn from the singular benefit of it, which is set out two
ways. 1. By way of comparison, Above all: its the most excellent part of all
the Armor. 2. By the effect of it, Wherewith ye shall be able to quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked. In which we have two things. 1. The nature of
Satan, the wicked. 2. The nature of his temptations, the fiery darts --

In the Text you see there is something more directly propounded, v^z. That a
Christian must take the shield of faith. Something which is collaterally or
more indirectly brought in, viz. the nature of Satan, and the nature of his
temptations: I cannot well without injury to the Text, and detriment to the
Hearers, speak of them together, and therefore I must necessarily handle them
distinctly and apart. And I shall first begin with that which is last in the
words, viz. the collateral or more indirect part, which is brought in
occasionally, viz. the fiery darts of the wicked. One expression sets out what
Satan is in himself. The other discovers the Nature of his temptations against
the servants of God. These two I shall open in two propositions. viz.

1. That the Devil is a wicked one.

2. The temptations of this wicked one against the sons of men are fiery darts.

And then we shall speak of the substantial part of the Text, viz. the shield
it self.

I begin with the former.

Satan is a wicked Creature. The wicked one. Doctrine.


Many titles of reproach are given unto Satan in the Scripture. He is called,
The accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12. 10. his work is to slander and accuse God
to the Saints, and them to God: Does Job serve God for naught.? The word (...)
signifies slandering and calumniation; false accusers, 2 Timothy 3. 3. it is in
the Greek (...) 1 Timothy 3. 11. its required of the Wives of the Deacons amongst
other things, that they be not slanderers, (...). He is called, The enemy or
envious man, Math. 13. 28, 29. (...). He is called, the Dragon, Rev. 12. 9. And
the old Serpent, ibid. Serpent for subtilty, and Dragon for cruelty. The
roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. The Father of lies, John 8. 44. The God of this
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. The Prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. 2. 2. The
unclean Spirit, Math. 10. 1. Abaddon, Apollyon, Revel. 9. 11. The Angel of the
bottomless pit, ibid. The Tempter, Math 4. 3. The Murderer, John 8. 44. And
here in this place he is called, (...), that wicked one.

This name is given to him in many places of Scripture, Viz: Math. 13. 19. Then
comes the wicked one and catches the Word, Math. 13. 38. The tares are the
children of the wicked one. 1 John 2. 13. I write unto you young men, because
ye have overcome the wicked one. 1 John 5. 18. Whosoever is born of God keeps
himself, and that wicked one touches him not. And he is thus called in these
two respects.

1. In regard of his own nature. He is made up of nothing but wickedness. God
did at first create the Devils holy and righteous, as the other Angels which
still keep their habitations, but by their fall they have poisoned their
nature, and filled it full of wickedness and impiety. They were by their first
creation spiritual excellencies, but by reason of their fall they are spiritual
wickednesses, Ephesians. 6. 12. (...) We use to paint the Devils black, to show how
black they have made their natures, which when they came out of Gods hand were
so white, unspotted and glorious. Yea, the Devils are incorrigibly wicked; they
are totally wicked; they are restlesly wicked; they are impenitently wicked;
they are hopelesly wicked.

2. In regard of his practice upon others. His great design is to draw men into
sin, and to keep them in wickedness. He goes about unweariedly compassing the
earth to and fro, and all that he may tempt men to acts of wickedness. The
Devil is the Author of all the wickedness which is committed in the world. He
is a Liar, and the father thereof, John 8. 44. He is a Murderer, and the
Father thereof: he is a Blasphemer, and the father thereof, etc. All sin has
its rise from Satan, either in whole or in part. The first sin that ever was
committed in the world was by his instigation: vide Genesis 3. init. And
whatsoever iniquity is conceived to this day in the hearts, and committed by
the hands of any creatures, the Devil has some hand in the bringing of it to
pass. David's sin in numbering the people 1 John 3. 8. the works of the Devil.
was from Satan, 1 Chronicles. 21, 1. The sin of Ananias and Saphira in lying and
dissembling was from Satan, Acts 5 3 Why has Satan filled thy heart to lie to
the holy Ghost. 1. He suggests evil motions. 2. He keeps them warm in the
heart. 3. He helps the soul to opportunities to practice evil things. 4. He
hinders from the use of what might refrein and keep the soul from sinning. 5.
He prepares fit instruments to bring to pass the evil that is intended, etc. 6.
He helps to harden the heart, and to blind the understanding, and to stupifie
the conscience, etc. some way or other he has a hand in all the wickedness
which is done in the world. It Is true, the Devils contriving of sin does not
excuse the sinner, for he does give his consent: Satan has no power to force
or compel the will, only to persuade by Arguments and temptations, etc. Every
man is tempted when he is drawn aside of his own lust and enticed, Jam. 1. 14.
A wicked heart is the womb, but the Devil is the father that begets all manner
of wickedness; and therefore worthily called, that wicked one.

Information. 1. This shows the infamy of sin. Its a thing which is full of
disgrace and dishonor, Use 1.
the Scripture fastens reproach upon wickedness; it dishonours Nations and
persons; righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people,
Prove. 14. 34. Omnis (...) is (...). A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his
reproach shall never be done away, Prove. 6. 33. Adultery is a shameful thing,
swearing, and lying, and drunkenness, and idolatry, and perjury, are shameful
things, wickedness is a shame to men's names and to their families: I might show
this in many particulars, but I shall only urge it from this Doctrine. It is
the Devils name: he has many names which bear disgrace in them, but of all his
names this in the Text is one of the worst, if not the worst of all: He is the
wicked one. To be called a wicked one has more ignominy in it, than to be
called a poor one, or a weak one, etc. The Devils have some excellencies in
them; they are Spirits, they are strong Spirits, they are wise Spirits, ah, but
they are wicked spirits! they are Angels, ah, but they are unclean Angels! The
wickedness of the Devils does disgrace all their excellencies. Call a person by
what name of excellency you can, call him rich, call him learned, call him
noble, call him a prudent man, yet if you say wicked, you lay all his
excellencies in the dust: Wickedness stains and soyls all the glory and beauty
both of persons and Nations. Naaman Captain of the Host of the King of Syria
was a great man with his Master, etc. but he was a Leper, 2 Reg. 5: 1. this one
word marrs all his glory. To say, such a one is a man of parts, a man of
valor, a man of great estate, a man of deep knowledgde, but he is a wicked
man, he is a drunkard, a swearer, a liar, a perfidious man, etc. this one word
does unsay all his excellencies, and casts a cloud upon all his glory.

2. That wicked men are of all Creatures the most like to the Devil. They have
his image upon them, they have his nature, they bear his name; the Devil is
(...), and so is a wicked man. Holy men are like to God, they are called by his
Name; God is holy, and they are holy, God is righteous, and they are righteous;
but wicked men have the very name and the very nature of Satan; he is unholy,
and so are they; and the more any person abounds in wickedness, the more like
he grows still to the Devil, who is wicked, and the father of wickedness: Its
said of Caein, that he was of that wicked one, and slew his brother, 1 John 3:
12. We may say so of every other sinner: The swearer is of that wicked one, the
profane person is of that wicked one, etc. He that commits sin is of the
Devil, 1 John 3. 8. he is of him, not only as he is tempted by him, but
because he does simbolize with him in nature, he has his character and image
printed upon his soul.

3, That Hell must needs be a wicked place. All the Inhabitants of it are
wicked: There are none there but wicked Angels, and wicked men, and all the
work which is done there is nothing but wickedness, therefore it must of
necessity be a wicked place: Hell is a place of torment as well as of sin; I am
tormented in these flames: but the wickedness of Hell is worse than the
torments of Hell, its the wickedness of the Devils, and of men acted by Devils,
that bring them to that place of torments. A Hell of torments is rather to be
chosen than a Hell of wickedness: It was Anselms speech; If hell, says he,
were on one hand without sin, and sin on the other hand without hell, and I
must needs choose one, I would rather choose hell than sin. A hell of torments
without sin, is better than a hell of sin without torments.

4. That those that are under the Devils power are in a very sad condition. Its
a sad thing to be under the command of wicked Governors, Prove, 28. 15. As a
roaring Lion and a ranging Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people. It
were as good to live in the wilderness amongst ravening Lions, as under the
Dominion of wicked Rulers: wickedness fits them for all acts of oppression,
injustice and cruelty: When children that want knowledge, and babes which are
without understanding rule, then the people shall be oppressed every one by
another, Esaias 3. 5. how much more when wicked men rule: when wickedness sits at
the helm, there will be no want of misery in the ship. That the hypocrite reign
not, lest the people be ensnared, Job 34: 30. people must expect nothing but
snares, till the reign of the hypocrite be expired: Solomon tell us, that when
the wicked bear rule, the people mourn, Prove. 29: 2. All in a Land are mourners
in such a time, unless it be those that live by wickedness. If it be so sad to
be under the power of wicked men, how sad is it to be under the power of Satan?
there is more wickedness in one Devil than in many wicked men put together: And
then he has more power and policy than men have to bring to pass the
wickedness that is in him; therefore is the condition of all to be lamented
that are under his jurisdiction; and thus are all wicked and unregenate men,
Ephesians. 1, 2, 3.

5. This shows us why it is, that Satan does so hate God and all his Saints:
He is an irreconcilable Adversary to God and to all that are godly. The reason
is plain, there is a contrariety of nature between God and Satan, and between
Satan and godly ones, and where there is contrariety of nature, there will be
enmity and opposition. Gal: 5: 17: The righteous is an abomination to the
wicked.

Exhortation. 1. Let it be a motive to all Use 2.
men, especially to the holy ones of God, to mortify and put off all manner of
wickedness. Let the Devil and his instruments be wicked, but be not you wicked.
It was David's Argument, whereby he was stayed from laying hands upon King Saul,
when he was earnestly persuaded to kill him, 1 Samuel 24. 13. Wickedness
proceeds from the wicked, but my hand shall not be upon thee. Wicked acts are
diabolical acts, they proceed from him, and they lead men to him. And it is not
fit, that the Children of God should symbolize with the Devil. It Is the Apostles
Argument to take off the people of God from Idol-worship, 1 Cor. 10. 20. The
things which the Gentiles sacrifice they sacrifice to Devils and not to God,
and I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils. Swearing, lying,
forswearing, cheating, etc. these are works fit for the evil one and his
Angels, and not for Saints. Be not therefore partakers with them.

2. Bless God for delivering you from under the power and dominion of Satan.
Vide Col. 1. 13. You were once at the command of that wicked one as well as
others, and you should have continued for ever in that condition, if God had
not freed you from his tyranny. David praises God for cutting asunder the
cords of wicked men, in which he was sometimes holden, Psalm 129. 4. The
plowers plowed upon my back, and made long their furrows: but the righteous
Lord, etc. How much more cause have you to praise God for deliverance from
wicked Devils, who had power, not only to mischief your bodies, but your souls
also?

3. Do not trust the Devll when he pretends to sanctify. He is so politic,
that he can sometimes for his advantage transform himself into an Angel of
light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. Mystery Babylon has in her hand a golden cup, full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornication. Rev. 17. 4. The Devil, the
grand Imposter of all, does oftentimes carry his worst poison in a golden cup,
he can speak Scripture to draw you from Scripture, he can tempt you to be
irreligious, by religious Arguments falsely and deceitfully applied; he can
tempt men to profane Sabbaths, upon a pretense of standing for Christian
liberty, etc. he can argue men from waiting upon Ordinances, because the Spirit
is able to teach them, etc. This is his great masterpiece that he is now
acting in the world, his wine is now carried in a golden cup. But let all the
godly know, that he is still the wicked one, and though he speak divinely, yet
he always acts diabolically; though the voice be Jacobs voice, yet the hands
are the hands of Esau; he never works more wickedly, than when he seems to act
most holily.

Thus much for the first proposition.

2. That the temptations of Satan are fiery darts. He shoots arrows of fire at
the Servants of God. Its sometimes true in the very letter; the Devil uses
fire to destroy the Servants of God. The Apostle mentions the fiery trial, 1
Peter 4: 12. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some
strange thing happened to you: i. e. fiery persecutions. The Devil sometimes
stirs up Tyrants by material fire to devour the bodies of Gods Saints. The
three Children were cast in a fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 21. And we read of some
Christians, Heb. 11: 34. that quenched the violence of the fire. In the
primitive time fiery persecutions were raised against the Christians. And in
the Marian days, many of Gods Witnesses went to Heaven in fiery Chariots, they
gave their bodies to be burned, that they might not worship any God but their
own God. And we do not know whether the same kind of persecutions may not yet
arise amongst us in our days; we dwell amongst the children of men, who are
set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword,
Psalm 37: 4. And if these fiery persecutions should return, God would deal no
otherwise with us than he has done with his former Servants, who through faith
have triumphed in these flames. But the Apostle, I suppose, does not here speak
of persecutions, but of other temptations. He alludes to the custom of
Soldiers in former times, who used to dip the heads of their Arrows in poison,
and so shooting them at their enemies fired their flesh. Satan's temptations are
here compared to these fiery darts.

In the handling of it I shall first show you, why his temptations are called
fiery Arrows. Secondly, I shall make some inferences from it by way of use.

1. They are called fiery darts in these two respects.

1. For the dreadfulness and terror of them. Fire is a very terrifying thing,
it works much astonishment and fear upon the hearts of men that behold it. To
see Houses or Cities set on fire works great amazement upon the Spirits of men.
the temptations of Satan are dreadful temptations to such as have the right
apprehension of them. Sometimes he tempts men to deny Jesus Christ that bought
them. Sometimes he tempts them to blaspheme God: Sometimes to self-murder,
Math. 26. 70. Job 2. 9.
Math. 4. 6. Sometimes to cast off Religion as a vain thing. Psalm 73: 13.
These temptations, as they are dreadful in their own nature, so they work much
trouble and amazement in the Spirits of them that are thus assaulted, it is a
dreadful thing to have such a suggestion, though it be never consented unto by
the heart.

2. For the destructiveness of them. Fire is a very devouring creature: Sodom
and Gomorrah, and the adjoining Cities were in a few hours consumed to ashes
by the violence of fire, Genesis 19. 24, 25. The temptations of Satan are wasting
things. All the comfort of a Christian is presently devoured by them. The
strength of the body is decayed, the strength of the spirits is wasted, and the
whole man is brought very low, and made like withered grass by the violent
scorching of these flames. The temptations of probation, which God sends upon
his people for their trial, do much wast both soul and body: Job 6: 4. The
arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my spirits.
And so do the temptations of Satan: One hours temptation drinks up more spirits
than many weeks sicknesses. Psalm 88: 15.

2. The Inferences by way of use are these.

1. Such as are under these burning flames stand in much need of your pity and
prayers. Persons that are in a house set on fire are objects of pity in all
men's thoughts, every one is sensible of such a sad condition. Such as lie under
temptations are in a worse condition, their souls are set on fire, did you but
feel their burnings, you would pity them. The case of the Israelites was sad,
when God sent fiery Serpents to bite them, Exodus 21: 6. Tempted Christians are
haunted with fiery Serpents worse than those, let them be releived with your
counsel and Prayers.

2. Be not too censorious against those that are overcome by Satan's
temptations. Be not over severe against such. Temptations are fiery darts, and
if these darts fasten upon any of your brethren, and pierce somewhat deep, do
not use too much sharpness against them. Its an easy thing for such
combustible matter as flesh and blood to be overcome by fiery arrows,
especially if God be pleased to withdraw present help, Vide Gall. 6. 1. 2.

3. Let it be a Caution to us all that we do not dally and play with
Temptations. Do not by carelessness Dangerous for children to play with fire.
and looseness lay your breasts open to these fiery darts. Can a man take fire
in his bosom and his cloths not be burnt? Can one walk upon coals and his feet
not be burnt? Prove. 6. 27. Its an easy matter to betray your selves into the
hand of Satan, but not so easy to deliver your selves. A house is soon set on
fire, but not so soon quenched.

4. Those who are enabled to stand under the Temptations of Satan, have cause
to be very thankful. Though you be afrighted by this fire, yet have you cause
to magnify God that you are not devoured, that you can dwell with these
burnings, here is great mercy.

5. Let all who are under Temptations make what have they can to quench them. A
spark may suddenly grow to a flame, if great care be not taken to get it out.
Now this may be done, 1. By fervent prayer. The prayer of Moses quenched the
fire at Tabirah Numb. 11. 2. 2. By withdrawing all combustible matter. Sin
makes Temptations burn violently. 3. By the sprinkling of Christ's blood. A drop
of that quenches this Wildfire. 4. By the Shield of faith, of which more in
the next Doctrine. Thus much for the first part of the verse.

EPHESIANS. 6. 16. (...), etc.
WE have done with the former part of the Lect. 18. February 6. 1649.
verse, viz. that which is indirectly or collaterally and occasionally brought
in, the nature of Satan, and the nature of his temptations. Satan is the wicked
one, and his darts are fiery darts. I am now to speak to that which is the
principal or substantial thing intended, viz. Taking the shield of Faith, etc.
In which we have two things, 1. The Armor it self. (...). 2. The commendation
or the excellency of this Shield. This is set out in two expressions. 1. Above
all. 2. Whereby you shall be able to quench, etc. All of them put together make
this Doctrine, viz.

That he that would quench the fiery darts of the Devil, must be careful above
all things to take and use the shield of Faith. Doctrine.


In the opening of which Doctrine, I shall handle these four particulars.

1. Open the nature of the grace of Faith. 2. Show you wherein Faith is
compared to a Shield. 3. Why we must take this above all. 4. How this grace of
Faith quenches the temptations of Satan.
1. For the nature of Faith. Before I can show this, we must briefly show the
several kinds of faith, that so we may see what faith is here meant, Now there
is a fourfold kind of faith. Historical. Temporary. The faith of Miracles.
Justifying ^reden Deo.
faith. 1. Historical faith is the knowledge and belief of the truth of divine
Revelations upon the testimony of God himself. Of this the Apostle speaks,
Jam. 2. 19. This faith was in Simon Magus, Acts 8. 13. 2. The faith of
Miracles, is a special gift of bringing to pass some extraordinary work or
foretelling some certain event by devine revelation, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Mat. 17. 20.
3. Temporary faith, is an assent unto the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
accompanied with the external profession thereof, and some kind of joy in the
knowledge thereof for a time, vide Mat. 13. 20, 21. Of this faith the Apostle
speaks when he says that Hymeneus and Philetus have overthrown the faith of
some, 2 Timothy 2. 18. 4. Justifying and saving faith, of which the text speaks,
the great effect of it does clearly evince it to be a faith of the best kind,
for no other faith besides justifying, can quench the fiery darts of Satan. Now
in opening the nature of this grace I shall do two things. 1. I shall give you
a description of it. 2. I shall show the several steps or degrees of it.

1. For the Description of it; I shall give it thus. Saving faith is a
supernatural special gift of grace, wrought in the heart of an elect person by
the spirit of God, through the preaching of the word of the Gospel, whereby he
is enabled to believe, that Jesus Christ is not only the Savior of the World,
but his Savior, and thereupon cast himself upon him for life and salvation
according to the promise. I shall open this Description.

1. It Is a a gift of grace, Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29. Acts 18. 27. He helped them
much who had believed through grace. 1. The first preparing of the heart to it.
2. The first plantation of it, the infusing of the habit. 3. The means whereby
it is wrought. 4. The preservation and continuance of it, all these are of
grace. Faith is a part of the new Creature, the great and chief part of it, and
the new Creature is merely of garce. It Is called indeed a man's own faith
subjective, but effective, originaliter, it is merely of grace, Col. 2. 12. The
faith of the operation of God.

2. It Is a special supernatural gift. This does distinguish it from all other
kinds of faith, and all other common gifts, which are bestowed promiscuously
upon men by the Lord, Heb. 6. 4. It Is an evtraordinary gift afforded unto none
but special favorites.

3. It Is wrought in the heart of an elect person. It Is bestowed only upon the
elect. Here the Apostle calls it the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1. 1. Ye believe
not because ye are not of my Sheep, John 10. 26. And then it is wrought in the
heart: the Scripture makes the herrt or will to be the seat of faith, Romans 10.
10. With the heart man believes unto righteousness. The will rather than the
understanding is the subject of faith, because faith is an act of Election
whereby the soul chooses Christ. Now election is more than an act of the
understanding.

4. It Is wrought by the spirit of God through the preaching of the Gospel. This
sets out both the efficient cause, and the instrumental cause. The efficient
cause is the Holy Ghost, not excluding the Father and the Son, for Opera
Tunilatis ad extra sunt indivisa, but the Holy Ghost is the immediate worker of
it; the Father and Son work this and all other graces by the Spirit, and
therefore he is called The spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4. 13. And the Spirit works
it powerfully, not only inciting and stirring up the soul to believe by a moral
persuasion only, but by an Almighty strength creating such an habit in the
heart. The Apostle therefore mentions the same power for the working of faith,
which raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19. And then the ministry
of the Gospel, that's the instrumental cause, Rom 10. 17. called therefore the
word of faith, Romans 10. 8. Faith is therefore called the fruit of the lips,
Isa. 57. 19. And we shall do well to take notice of this, that the Apostle
makes it to be the word preached by a lawful instituted Ministry, Romans 10. 15.
Its not the preaching of men that run upon their own account, but of such as
are lawfully sent to preach the Gospel.

5. Whereby he is persuaded that Jusus Christ is not only the Savior of the
World, but his Savior also. Faith must have not only have a general belief,
but a particular application also. The just shall live by his faith. Who loved
me and gave himself for me.

6. And thereupon casts himself upon Christ for life and salvation according to
the promise. This shows the very nature of faith. It Is Recumbency upon Christ.
It Is cleaving to God with full purpose of heart, Acts 11. 23. It Is the casting of
our burden upon Christ. It Is coming to Christ as to a living Stone. Faith is
nothing else but the souls venturing it self upon Christ according to the
promise. This I ad according to the promise, to distinguish true faith, from
false presumption.

2. The several steps or degrees of this grace. I shall give you that in six
particulars.

1. Knowledge. It Is impossible that there should be faith in Christ, or in any
thing propounded by God, till there be the Knowledge of it. It Is true knowledge
is not faith; they are two several distinct habits, yet it necessarily preceeds
faith. Faith is the sight of the mind, now sight presupposes a visible object.
The Apostle makes it impossible to believe where knowledge is not, To. 10. 14.
How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? there is a knowledge
indeed which follows faith, 1 John 4. 16. We have known and believed the love
that God has to us. Faith is called knowledge, Isa. 53. 11. Faith is an
Cognovenius credendo Calvin.
advised grace, it will not rush headlong into unknown paths, when Christ asks
the man when he had restored to his sight, whether he did believe on the Son of
God, he answered that question with another, Who is he Lord that I might
believe on him? John 9. 35, 36, 37, 38. and when he knew the person, then he
both believed and worshipped him.

2. Assent. After the knowledge of the thing propounded is wrought in the
understanding, then follows the Act of the Will giving an assent unto that
which is known, John 3. 33. This setting to of the seal, is nothing else but
the firm assent of the soul unto the truth revealed, that Gods Testimony is
true in every thing, to which it gives witness. This is that which is recorded
of Abraham, Genesis 15. 6. He believed in the Lord, i. e. he did freely yield his
assent to the truth, firmness stability of all that which God had delivered to
him. Now this assent is 1. General and universal to all the declarations of
God. 2. It Is builded properly and principally upon the Authority of God who has
revealed it.

3. Upon this Assent is raised in the soul a strong affection unto, and a high
esteem of all the Revelation and discovery made by God. Appreciation unto you
who believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2. 7. The soul surveyeth all those things
declared in the word with a very judicious eye, and judges meanly of all other
things in comparison of them.

4. Upon this prizing of these things follows a very earnest longing and
desire in the soul to be made pertaker of all those precious excellencies.
Desire of enjoying does naturally follow affection: this desire is unsatiable,
unquenchable. Hence it is set out by hungring and thirsting, Isa. 55. 1. Hunger
and thirst, cannot be satisfied without the enjoyment of meat and drink.

4. Upon this Desire follows Affiance and Confidence. The soul is so wrought
upon that it can come to Christ as a living Stone, and upon him and the promise
of grace and pardon made in him is enabled to set down its rest as upon the
only pillar of salvation. This is that which the Psalmist calls the fixing of
the heart, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. It imports a secure and settled resting upon God.
The Prophet calls it staying a man's self upon God, Isa. 50. 10. so Isa. 26. 3.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee. David calls
it Rolling our way upon the Lord. Psalm. 37. 7. it is agreeable to that in Mat.
11. 28.

6. Upon this follows the souls Election and choice of that which is held ont
in the Divine Revelation. The soul does freely and spontaneously choose the
promises of the Gospel, and makes them his own. This is one of the highest
steps of faith, when the soul is not only willing to accept but to choose the
way of truth, and to choose all the contents of the promise. This is that which
David professes of himself, Psalm. 119. 30, 31. I have chosen the way of truth,
thy judgments have I laid before me. I have stuck unto thy Testimonies, O
Lord, put me not to shame.

2. Wherein lies the comparison between faith and a shield?

1. Faith is like a shield for the strength of it. Of all the parts of Armor
which the Soldier wears the Shield was the strongest. Polybius tells Historian,
li. 6. p. 467.
us the manner of it. It was made of a double board glewed strongly together,
it had a double cover, one of strong linen cloth, another of raw Neats
leather, that it might quench the fiery Arrows of the enemy when they hit upon
it; about the edges of it above and beneath there went a strong plate of Iron,
that it might not be cut above with the edge of the enemies sword, and that it
might not rot below with hanging upon the ground, on the outside of it there
was a strong bosse of Iron which they called the umbo, to preserve it from
being battered with stones, spears, and other violent weapons. Faith is the
strongest of all the graces; it is impenetrable and impregnable. You read of
the power of faith, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 11. The faith of miracles is of such strength,
that it does pluck up mountains by the ^oots, Mat. 17. 20. Saving faith must
needs be much more strong.

2. Faith is a shhield for largeness. The Roman shield did cover the whole
body. Polybius tells us that it was two foot and a half broad, and above four
foot in length, so that he that could skilfully Polyb. ut supra.
handle the shield might be safegarded on every part. It Is called in Greek (...)
from (...), a gate or door, because of the largeness of it. Faith is a very
large grace, of a great extent. It covers the head and the heart, and the feet,
and the body, etc. He that can but handle this shield of faith after a right
manner, may lie safe in the midst of the hottest temptations.

3. Why we must take this above all?

Because this grace is that which Strengthens and Acts all the other. The
shield has this excellency in it, that it does protect not only the body of
the soldier more than any other piece of Armor, but also that it does defend
all the rest. It is Armatura armaturae, If any violence be offered to the head
the shield is lifted upto defend that piece, if the head piece be either
cracked or knocked off, the shield supplies the place of the head piece; if the
breast plate be broken, the shield supplies the man of a breast plate; if the
girdle be slipped off, the shield supplies the place of the girdle; if the shoes
be rent, the shield is instead of shoes, its a lifeguard to every part of the
Armor, he that has a shield has double harness. The grace of faith is that
which gives strength to all other graces. The Doctrine of truth will not hold
out one combat if the grace of faith be not implied, it is the grace of faith
which strengthens the doctrine of faith. The breastplate of righteousness will
soon bepierced if it be not secured by the shield of faith, faith is the
preserver and the strengthner of righteousness, the shoes of resolution will
soon wear away, if they be not soaled with faith, its faith that mainteines
courage and whets resolution. Hope will soon go out if it be not fed with
faith, if faith fail, hope gives up the ghost, hope expects what faith
believes, and if faith langish hope withers, hope is the flame of faith, and
if the fire of faith be put out, the flame of hope is exringuished. The sword
of the spirit, the word of God is as a sword without an edge, if faith do not
sharpen it. The word preached did not profit says the Apostle, because it was
not mixed with faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. Faith is that which pulls
the sword out of the scabberd. The word of God without faith, is like a sword
locked up in the scabbard, its like a sword in the hand of a Child, but the word
in the hand of faith, is like a sword in the hand of a Giant. Prayer without
faith is ineffectual, Jam. 1. 6. It has no promise of acceptance with God.
Whatsoever ye ask in prayer, believe that you have it, and you shall receive
it, Mark 11. 24. Prayer without faith, is like dead Physic: it is faith that is
the soul and life of prayer. As all the Stars have the light from the Sun,
though they have some kind of natural light in themselves; so the grace of
faith has an influence upon all the other pieces of the spiritual Armor, both
for the preservation and their quickening. And therefore faith is sometimes put
for all the strentgh of a Christian. I have prayed for thee that thy faith do
not fail, Luke 22. 32. If faith fail all fails, and if faith hold all holds.

4. How the grace of faith quenches the fiery temptations of Satan. I shall
show it in two particulars.

1. Faith quenches Temptations by removing out of the soul that which keeps
Temptations burning. Sin and corruption in the soul is that fuel which fires
Satan's temptations, the lusts of our own hearts keep these temptations flaming
in the soul. Now faith is a purifier, it takes away all the rotrenness which
keeps temptatiuns alive, Act. 15. 9. There are three things which concur to the
purifying of the soul. 1. The efficient cause, this is the spirit of God, who
is therefore called the spirit of sanctification and holiness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
2. The meritorius cause, this is the laver of Christ's blood. 3. The
instrumental cause, this is faith; Faith is the branch of Hysop which was to be
dipped in the blood of purification, for the sanctification of him that was
unclean, Lev. 14. 6. There are many ways whereby faith cleanses the heart. 1.
Faith cleanses as it takes hold upon the promise of sanctification. The
promise Ezech, 36. 25. Now faith is that grace which works this promise so as
to bring cleansing out of it; Faith sucks cleansing out of this promise.

2. Faith purifieth as it brings the word of God home effectually and
powerfully to the soul. The word of God has a cleansing virtue, John 15.

3. Now ye are clean through the word I have spoken to you. Faith applies this
cleansing word to the soul, and so purifieth. 3. Faith purifieth in that it
makes all other ordinances effectual for our cleansing, as Sacraments, Prayer,
neither the blood of Christ in baptism, nor the Supper become purgative
without faith, Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near in full assurance of faith, having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, etc.

4. Faith cleanses as it sets other graces a work in the soul; Love, fear,
humility, repentance, etc. are made operatively the grace of faith, Faith is as
the primum mobile, which by its moving sets all other graces a moving, vide
Heb. 11. We read there how by faith all other graces were made operative. Faith
sets Noah's fear, Abraham's obedience, Moses his self-denial, etc. a working.
Faith puts the soul upon praying, repenting, examining, etc. all which have a
tendency to purification. 5. Faith cleanses as it strengthens the souls union
with Jesus Christ. The soul is purified by union with Christ, now its the work
of faith to incorporate the soul further into this root. Faith shows the soul
more and more of the glory of Christ, and so transforms us into the same Image
from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18.

2. Faith quenches the fiery darts of Satan by bringing to the soul that which
helps the soul to put them out. Faith interposeth five Screens to keep off
Satan's darts, viz. 1. Faith brings the merit of Christ's death, and helps the
soul to fence it self with that against temptation. Faith goes out to the
Cross of Jesus Christ and lets the soul see his triumph over principalities
and powers, Coll. 2. 15. Faith fetches to the soul the water of the well of
Bethelem which is by the gate, and pours that upon the fiery darts; the blood
of Christ's Cross will quench all the wild fire of temptation, and this faith
brings. 2. Faith brings to the soul the merit of Christ's Intercession which he
makes continually for his people at Gods right hand. I have prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not, Luke 22. 32. Faith interposeth this botween the soul
and the fiery darts, and so puts them out. 3. Faith brings to the soul the
promises of Victors which God has made to his people over their temptations.
As that Romans 1. 20. The Savior of peace shall bruise, etc. Faith interposeth
this promise between the soul and the fiery darts, and so quenches them. 4
Faith brings to the soul all the Attributes of God; his power, his wisdom,
his all sufficiency, and sets these between the soul and the fiery darts, and
so quenches them. Thou come against me with a sword and spear, but I come
against thee in the name of the Lord God of Israel. 2 Samuel 17. 45. 5 Faith
brings to the soul all the excellencies of Gods former assistance both to
himself and to other the servants of God in the day of their temptations, it
lets the soul see how Job, and David, and Peter overcame, etc. The Lord who
delivered me out of the paw, etc. 1. Sam. 17. 37.

USE. I.
INformation. We may from hence draw these four Conclusions. 1. This shows us
both the Lect. 19. Feb. 13. 1649.
Necessity and the Excellency of the grace of justifying Faith. The Apostle
calls it (...), 2 Pet. 1. 1. Its a very precious grace. Many things may be said
to set out the necessity and the worth of this grace. Faith is that by which
alone we please God, Heb. 11. 6. Neither praying, hearing, meditating,
suffering, etc. is accepted of God without faith, Heb. 11. 4. Faith is that by
which we receive all the intelligence we have from heaven, while we are in our
earthly pilgramage, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Faith is that vessel by which only we draw
water out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. Faith is that which unites us
to Christ and Christ to us. Faith is the souls eye by which it sees things
invisible, Heb. 11. 7. Faith is the souls hand by which it receives all the
good which is in the promise, Take, eat, this is my body. Faith is the souls
foot by which it stands in storms, and by which it is carried through its
pilgramage, Come unto me all ye that labor, etc. Faith is the foot on which we
come: Thou stand by faith, be not high minded but fear. Faith is that by
which we spiritually live, The life that I live in the flesh, I live by faith
in the Son of God, etc. It would take up a whole volum to set out to the life
the Necessity and Excellency of this grace of faith. I shall only keep to the
Doctrine, its the souls shield whereby it is defended in time of Temptation,
whereby all the venomous Arrows of Satan are extinguished and put out. He that
wants faith is weak, blind, lame, dead, etc.

2. This lets us see why it is that Satan prevails so much in the world. All
men says the Apostle have not faith, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. Most men fight without a
shield, and so lie open to Satan's darts. Hypocrites they are overcome for want
of the girdle; vicious persons are vanquished for want of the breastplate; weak
hearted persons are put to the worse for want of the shoes; and unbeleevers
fall in battle for want of the shield. There are so few conquerours, because
there are so few believers. When the Son of man comes shall he find faith in
the erath? Luke 18. 8. Our Savior speaks there of Christ's coming in this life
to avenge and deliver his elect, the earth shall be so low and deliverance
shall be so improfitable that the report of it will not be believed. as the
people of God in former time, had not faith to believe their deliverance from
Captivity, Isa 63. 1. 2. So shall it be says our Savior when Christ comes to
avenge his afflicted people under the Gospel that cry unto him. And if there be
so few that can believe a temporal deliverance, how few are there that can
believe for the saving of their souls? No wonder then if Satan overcome so many.

3. How needful it is for the Minister of the Gospel to be often preaching
about the Doctrine of faith. Those weapons and postures which are of greatest
use to the Soldier, the Captain ought to be most diligent in instructing the
Soldier in them. The Ministers of the Gospel are the Captains of the Lords
Host, they are to train and exercise all the spiritual Soldiers of Christ,
they are to teach them the use of their Arms, and all their postures, that they
may be deetrous in the day of battle. If any Soldier be wounded for want of
arms, or of skill to use them through their default, God will require it at their
hands. Now of all the pieces of spiritual Armor, the shield of faith is the
most necessary, and therefore the Doctrine of faith should be most frequently
preached.

4. This shows what necessarily lies upon the sons of men to prove and examine
the truth of their faith. If the shield of faith be rotten or counterfeit the
soul is undone in the day of Temptation, if the shield of faith be sound, and
armor of proof, the strongest assaults of Satan will be repelled with comfort.
Prove your selves whether you be in the faith or no, 2 Cor. 13. 5. It Is
necessary to try 1. Because there is not a man in the world which has heard of
Jesus Christ, but thinks he believes in him. To be accounted an Infidel or
unbeleever is a matter of such reproach and infamy, as that no man is willing
to lie under it. 2. Because the heart is very deceitful, and in nothing more
subject to be mistaken than in this case. There is a false presumption and
foolish fancy, which would gladly be called by the name of faith, John. 2. 23.
24. When Jesus was at Jerusalem many believed in his name, when they sawthe
miracles which he did; but Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he
knew all men. They did presume that they believed in Christ, but Jesus Christ
knew their faith was nothing else but a mere fancy and groundless presumption.
3. Because the Devil uses all the skill he can to deceive the sinner, and to
make him confident that he does believe; as he endeavors to persuade the true
Beleiver, that his fruit is rotten, so he endeavors to persuade the
unbeleiver, that his presumption is faith.

That I may help them in this inquiry I shall do two things.

1. Discover some mistaken grounds which men go upon, thinking that to be an
evidence of saving faith, which is not so. 2. Lay down some positive evidences
of true faith.
1. There are two great mistakes about faith, by which many are deceived: Viz.

1. Some are deceived in regard of knowledge and assent. They think they have
true justifying faith, because they have the doctrine of the Gospel, and give,
as they think, a right assent to the same: for the removal of this mistake I
shall first show, that both these may be without saving faith. Secondly I shall
show, how the knowledge of an unbeleiver and his assent differ from the
knowledge and assent of true faith.

1. That Knowledge and Assent is not faith. It Is granted, that there is no faith
truly wrought without Knowledge and Assent, but that there may be Knowledge
and some Assent where saving faith is not, appears by these two reasons. 1. The
most wicked and profane persons in the world may have, and many times do
attain unto a more exact knowledge of the Doctrine of the Scriptures, than many
a true Beleiver: And they may also assent unto those truths. The Apostle speaks
of some by way of supposition, that may understand all mysteries, and have all
knowledge, and yet want saving faith, 1 Cor. 13. 2. All this is but an
historical faith. Judas had the knowledge of the Scriptures, and gave assent to
them; he preached the Gospel to others, and yet wanted faith, John 6. 64. There
are some of you that believe not: you know what will be the plea of many in the
latter day, Math. 7. 22. and yet had not one dram of saving faith. I shall
desire you to peruse but that one Scripture well, Romans 2. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. and then you will conclude, that neither the knowledge of, nor the
assenting to the doctrine of the Scriptures is saving faith, but are ordinarily
without it*

2. The very Devils themselves are beyond the most intelligent Christians in
all matters of knowledge. They know the history of the Bible more exactly than
we. Satan was not ignorant of Scripture when he set upon our Savior, Math. 4.
6. And the Devil also gives assent to the truth of the Scriptures, Jam 2. 19.
He acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, Math. 8. 29. What have we to do
with thee Jesus thou Son of God: as full a confession for the matter and
substance of it, as that which Peter made, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God. Now that which is fained in the worst of men, and in the very
Devils, can neither be true faith, nor an evidence of it.

2. If we come to examine that knowledge and assent which is in wicked men with
that which is in a true beleiver, we shall find a vast difference; for 1.
concerning their knowledge, there are three differences.

1. The knowledge of a true Beleiver is an experimental knowledge, but the
knowledge of an unbeleiver is merely notional and speculative. A Beleiver has
in his heart a lively sense and feeling of all those truths which he has the
knowledge of in his understanding. They are truths in his heart as well as in
his head. That promise of God, Jer. 31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts; is made good to every true Beleiver, and
to him alone. His heart is an Index or Commentary, by which, through the Spirit
of God, he can understand divine truths, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Ye are manifestly
declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us, written not with ink, but
with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshy
tables of the heart This is the meaning of that of our Savior, John 7. 16, 17.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self.

2. The knowledge of faith is a practical transforming knowledge. His knowledge
is diffused into every step of his life into every action; his life is reformed
by his knowledge, and conformed to the truths of God; whereas the knowledge of
an unbeleiver neither changes his heart nor life, except it be from evil to
worse, his knowledge puffs him up, 1 Cor. 8. 1. it makes him more proud and
more sensual. Its said of the Heathen, that they retained nor God in their
knowledge, Romans 1. 28. but became vain in their imaginations, the one has
only the form of knowledge, Romans 2. 20. the other has not only the form, but
the power and the life also.

3. The knowledge of faith is a knowledge which raises the heart nearer to God
The knowledge of a Beleiver crucifieth the world unto him, and him unto the
world, Gal. 6. 14. vide Phil. 3. 8. 10. whereas the knowledge of an unbeleiver
bows down his soul nearer the earth.

2. Concerning the assent of an unbeleiver, it differs from the assent of true
faith thus.

1. The assent of faith is a cheerful assent. Its free. But the assent of an
unbeleiver is without joy. Jam. 2. 19. The devils believe and tremble, so do
the unbeleiver, at least, concerning some truths.

2. The assent of faith is universal. So is not the assent of an unbeleiver, at
least his cheerful assent.

There are some truths in the Scripture which threaten ruin and destruction to
all in his condition, these he cannot assent to, at least joyfully.

There are some truths, which call him to the practice of such things which he
has no affection to; the crucifying of sin, the mortifying of corruptions,
cutting off the right hand, etc. he had rather these were not truths than real
truths, he has secret wishes, that these truths were either raced out, or else
that they had been propounded with a greater latitude.

2. Mistake is about Application. He that can truly apply Christ to himself,
has true faith in Christ, for this is the Ratio formalis, the special act of
faith. Now many an unbeleiver thinks he can apply Christ as well as any other.
Those in Luke 13. 25, 26 come to Christ with much seeming confidence, as if
they had been of intimate acquaintance with him, Lord, Lord, open to us, and
yet never had saving faith in him.

I shall here show a threefold difference, between the Application of a
Beleiver and an unbeleiver.

1. The Application of saving faith is from something of Christ wrought
savingly within him. He finds the Image of Christ in him, he has well grounded
hopes of it, and therefore applies Christ to him: As Thomas, in another case,
sees the print of the nails, and then says, My Lord and my God; So a true
Beleiver sees upon his soul the print of the nails, the dyings of the Lord
Jesus, the Characters of his death, burial, resurrection, and therefore applies
him to himself. Whereas the application of Christ, made by an unbeleiver, is
merely from that discovery which is made of Christ in the Scripture, and not
from any intrinsecal worth which he finds upon his own heart: vide Galat. 2 20.
there you have Paul's application; I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
etc. What ground can you show within you why Christ is yours?

2. The Application of saving faith is always agreeable to the tenor of the
Promise and Covenant wherein Christ is held forth. Vide Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26, 27.
Faith applies the grace of Christ as well as the merit of Christ, applies
Christ for sanctification as well as for justification, applies the water as
well as the blood; the application which an unbeleiver makes is only or
chiefly of the comforts and of the purchase of Christ, etc. he applies the
Merit of Christ, not the Spirit of Christ, the Promises, not the Commands, etc.
whereas true faith applies him universally, his Kingly and Prophetical Office,
as well as his Priestly: vide Phil. 3. 9, 10.

3. The Application of faith is always accompanied with self-Resignation. The
true Beleiver does as cheerfully surrender himself to Christ, as applies Christ
to himself. So did the Apostle, Phil. 3. 12. he would not only apprehend, but
be apprehended: And so the Church, Cant. 2. 16. My beloved is mine, and I am
his: He does not only apply the sin offering, but he offers also the burnt
Offering. The Apostle, Romans 12. 1. would have Christians to yield themselves to
God, etc. The unbeleiver he only applies Christ to himself, he does not
voluntarily yield himself to Christ, he does not dedicate himself to Christ by
holiness and obedience.

2. I shall now give some positive evidences of true faith. I shall ground them
upon several places of Scripture.

1. That of the Apostle, Acts 15. 9. Purifying your hearts by faith. Heart
purity is a necessary concomitant and consequence of saving faith. Jesus
Christ, says the Apostle, is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30. If by faith thou have Christ for thy
righteousness, he is also thy sanctification. He whose heart is unpurified, is
destitute of the grace of faith.

Now the purification of the heart may be known by these five evidences.

1. A purified heart is a heart that truly bewails all pollutions and
impurities. The most clean heart has some pollution unmortified, but he has
no defilement unlamented, his stains, and sores, and spots are his greatest
burden, his heaviest sorrow. Paul's body of death put him to more grief than
all the troubles which befell him in his whole life, Romans 7. 23, 24. Is it so
with thee? Do thou bewail the uncleanness of thy heart cordially, sadly,
secretly? Thou would gladly be delivered from it? Thou can neither eat,
nor drink, nor sleep quietly with it? The impurity of thy heart turns thy
sweetnesses into bitterness? This is certainly an effect of true faith. Vide
Zech. 12. 10. Looking upon Christ is beleiving in him, this beleiving is
expressed by sorrowing. And if thou would in truth be rid of thy
corruptions, thou will then diligently make use of all means, be they never so
painful, never so costly, that may cleanse them away.

2. A purified heart will kindly accept of brotherly reproof for his impurity,
or any advice that may make him clean. He will love a person better all his
life for any faithful rebuke or counsel. Psalm 141. 5. Let the righteous smite
me, it shall be a kindness, etc. David shows the purity of his heart, by his
accepting the rebukes of Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. A heart that is purified
is best pleased with that Sermon that comes closest to his conscience; he would
have all his heart discovered to himself. Hide nothing from me, said Eli to
Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 17. Yea, he begs that God would search his heart for him,
Psalm 139. 23, 24. Whereas a heart that is unclean cares not to have any spot
discovered; he either openly flies in the face, or else secretly hates any that
makes his sin known to him.

3. A purified heart both loves others for their purity, and endeavors as far
as he can to make others pure. He loves purity in an enemy, and his desire is,
that all others might be made pure, and that out of love to God and to purity.

4. A heart purified will be very cautious of defiling it self. It is exceeding
fearful of stepping aside; he will very carefully pick every step of his way
that he may not be polluted. I have made a covenant with mine eyes, etc. Job
31. 1. A pure heart will abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 22.
The Apostle makes carefulness an effect of true Repentance, 2 Chronicles. 7. 11.

5. A purified heart will not rest in quietness after defilement, till he be
cleansed again. He runs to the laver of Christ's blood, and washes himself with
the tears of repentance that he may be clean again: As its said of Job
concerning his children, Job 1. 5. so does a pure heart concerning himself:
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, etc. Psalm 51. 2.

2. That of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 7. To you that believe he is precious. High
appreciations of Jesus Christ are the effects of faith.

Christ is to a beleiver more precious than all external privileges, Phil. 3.
8.

Christ is more precious to a Beleiver than life, with all the accommodations
thereof, Acts 20. 24. Unbeleif rejects Christ as a vessel, in which there is no
pleasure, 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Esaias 53. 1, 2, 3.

How shall I know whether Christ be precious to me or no?

1. If Christ be precious to thee, he shall reign in thee, and rule over thee.
His precepts will be as desirable as his death and passion. My yoke is easy,
and my burden is light, Math. 11. 29.

2. His dishonours of any kind will pierce thy heart, if he be precious to
thee. If Christ suffer either in his Truths, or Worship, or Government, thou will suffer with him by simpathy, and endeavor to repair his honor.

3. It will be thy meat and drink to do him service, if he be precious to thee.
Thou will lift him up in the world, and say, My beloved is white and ruddy,
etc. Cant. 5. 10.

4. All his Ordinances and Institutions will be delightful to thy soul, if
Christ be precious to thee. His Word, his Sacraments, Cant. 1. 7. yea, the very
rebukes of Christ will be precious to thy soul.

3. That of the Apostle, 1 John 5. 4. This is the victory that overcomes the
world, even our faith. The Apostle has reduced all worldly things to three
heads, 1 John 2. 16. The lust of the flesh, such things as the flesh desires,
sensual Bona corporis.
delights, pleasures, etc. The lust of the eye, that is, Quicquid oculis
spectabile est, Divitiae, fundi, Bona fortunae. Bona animi.
predia, argentum aurum, gemmae, etc. The pride of life, that is, Omnis
dignitates, quae in hoc vita desiderari possunt; Honors, Empires, Dominations,
Preferments, etc. Now whosoever has the grace of true faith, has got the
mastery over these things. This victory is not so perfect, but that a true
beleiver may sometimes be foiled by these things; the victory will not be
perfect till death; but he has got the victory.

1. In point of Affection. He loves none of these things comparably to heavenly
things, Phil. 3. 20. Rev. 12. 1. his affections are above them.

2: In point of Contentation. He does not satisfy his heart with any of these
things.

3. In regard of purpose and resolution. He is resolved to subdue them
perfectly: faith lets him see the emptiness of all these things, and shows him
far better things than these are, and so brings him to a very low esteem of all
these things.

How shall a man know whether he have overcome these things:

1: When a Christian can bear the loss of these things without sinking and
overwhelming. When a man can loose a place, or an estate, etc. and yet can say
with Job, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, etc. Job 1. all: Job had got the
victory over the world, else he could not so undejectedly have stood under the
loss of such an estate; the loss of such things abate not his confidence in
God, Hab. 3. 17. 1 Samuel 30. 6.

2. When a man will not use any unlawful ways either to get or keep such
things When a man will not do any thing against a good conscience, either to
save or get any worldly advantage. The purse will not have a lusting voice if
the world be overcome: Daniel showed himself to be a conqueror over the world,
cap. 6. The loss of peerage and preferments would not make him to submit to a
wicked Decree, though established by lawful power, and though it was but a bare
Omission. Moses his voluntary parting with the pleasures of Egypt, when they
were inconsistent with a good conscience, was an evidence of his overcoming the
world, and so of his faith, Heb: 11. 24, 25, 26, 27. (...), when he was a child
he pleased himself with such toys, but when he was of age he had learned
better. When a man will bow to any Idol to save his purse or skin, he is a
slave to the world.

3. When a person places no confidence in any worldly thing. He enjoyes the
world without pride, vainglory and carnal confidence. This man is the worlds
master, etc. Its otherwise with him that is under the world, the rich man's
wealth is his strong City, Vide Luke 12. 19.

4. When a person will lay them out for God and good uses, with cheerfulness
and readiness of mind.

EPHESIANS. 6. 16. Above all taking the shield of faith, etc. Lect. 20. Febr. 20.
1649.

USE II.
A Word of Exhortation. I shall direct this, 1. To all those who have this
shield of faith, to them I have two things to say. 2. To such as are destitute
of this piece of Armor, to them I have only one thing to say.

That which I would say to you that have obtained this precious Armor of
faith, is comprised in these two words.

1. Take heed that you do not suffer your selves to be disputed out of your
faith. The Devil uses all means to beguil wicked men into a fond persuasion
that they have faith, upon such evidences that will not hold, for the
prevention of that, I did in the former Use, both discover such mistakes, and
lay down some positive evidences. On the other side, Satan does what he can to
argue true Beleivers out of an opinion of their faith, laboring to persuade
them, that they have not this grace in their hearts. For the helping of the
Servants of God against this stratagem, I shall propound some of those
arguings, and give answers to them. They are these three.

1. Satan will argue a nullity of faith sometimes from the absence of
assurance, and sense of present comfort. This is an Objection which ordinarily
Beleivers make against themselves, to their very great prejudice.

For the answering of this Argument, I shall lay down these two propositions.

1. That there may be, and ordinarily is, true saving faith where there is no
assurance. There may be the faith of adherence, where there never yet was the
faith of evidence. The sons of Jacob had their money in their sacks mouths a
good space before they knew of it; the treasure of faith is in the soul often
very long before the soul have assurance of it: These three Arguments will
prove this position.

1. From the descriptions that are made of faith in the word of God. Its
called, coming to Christ, Math. 11. 28. Its called, casting our burden upon the
Lord, Psalm 37. 5. Its nothing but the souls venturing it self upon Christ;
faith is but the coming to Christ, as Esther did to Ahasuerus, If I perish, I
perish. Its called, looking upon Christ, Mic. 7. 7. None of all these are words
of assurance. A man may come to another, and not be assured that he will not
turn from him. A man may roll his burden upon the shoulder of another, who is
not assured that he will carry it for him. A man may look for a person, whom he
is not assured he shall find, etc.

2. From the instances given in Scripture of some that have had true faith, and
wanted assurance. The father of that Daemoniack, of whom we read, Mar. 9. 22.
he was not assured that Christ was able to cast out the dumb spirit, much less
was he assured that Christ was willing: If thou can do any thing, have
compassion on us and help us: This was far from assurance, and so that which he
says ver. 24. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbeleif: here was no perfect
assurance, and yet true faith, as the Esaias 50. 10 Psalm 38. per totum. Heman a
true beleiver
issue of the story says; the Devil was cast out of his child.

3. There must be faith from the nature of the thing, before there can be
assurance. Therefore there may be faith without assurance, Make your calling
and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. A man may not only be elected, but called,
and yet not sure of his effectual calling: you must have a title to a
possession, before you can be certainly assured of such an interest. Sealing
with the holy Spirit of promise comes after beleiving ordinarily, Ephesians. 1. 13. A
child as soon as he is born has reason, but he wants a reflected act to know
that he has reason; so it is in Regeneration.

2. Assurance may be lost for a time in those, who have formerly enjoyed it. He
that has walked in the light of Gods countenance, may come to walk in darkness
again, Esaias 50. 10. There are three cases in which this does ordinarily fall
out. 1. In the hour of temptation, when God lets Satan loose to buffet the
soul, assurance may be lost in such a time. 2. in the day of spiritual
desertion, when God hides his face from the soul: Jesus Christ was in this
condition, My God, my God, etc. Math: 27. 46. A man in a swound does not know
he lives. 3. In the state of relapses, when a beleiver has fallen into some
sin, God withdraws the assurance of his graces and leaves him to gain his faith
and other graces, takes away the joy of his faith, and leaves him nothing but
deadness and horror in his conscience. This was the Prophet David's case, Psalm
51. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. Though he had not lost the
grace of faith, yet he had quite lost the joy of his faith.

2. Satan endeavors sometimes to argue Christians out of their faith, by
comparing it with the faith of other of God Servants which has been very
strong. Abraham, says Satan, was strong in faith, he did not desceptare, but
was mighty in faith, Romans 4. 20. Job he had a powerful faith: Though he kill
me, etc. Job 13. 15. but thy faith is weak, etc. To help you against this
stratagem, I shall lay down these four considerations. Viz,

1. That the strongest of these great Champions have had their staggerings and
their faintings. Abraham though he was mighty in faith at that time when God
promised him a son, yet at another time did both stagger and fall: Twice he
denied his Wife for fear of men; once in Egypt, Genesis 12. 12. a second time at
Gerar, Genesis 20. 2. David though he had so much strength of faith at one time,
that he durst encounter Goliath with his sling, when the hearts of all the
valiant men of Israel trembled, 1 Samuel 17. 32. yet at another time his faith
was so faint, that he said, all men were liars, Psalm 116. 11. and for want of
faith fled out of the land of Israel into the country of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 27. 1. Moses whose faith was so strong, that he forsook the pleasures of
Pharaohs Court, and chose rather to suffer affliction, etc Heb. 11. 24, 25. and
yet at another time, when he had had many experiences of the power of God, was
not able to believe that God could bring water out of the Rock, he smote the
Rock twice, Numb. 20. 10, 11. God bids him speak to the Rock, and he smites it
twice out of unbeleif. And though he was so strong in faith, that at one time
he could believe that the red Sea should be divided, Exodus 14. yet at another
time he was so weak in faith, that he thought God had over-spoken his power,
when he promised to give the people flesh for a month: Numb. 11. 21. The
people amongst whom I am are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said,
I will give them flesh for a whole month, etc.

2. Though these had never staggered, yet is the promise made not to degrees of
faith, but to truth of faith. The Devil is not able to show one word in all the
Book of God, which requires such a measure of faith for salvation! Yea, the
Promises are made to the weakest acts of faith: Look unto me and be saved, all
ye ends of the earth, Esaias 45. 22. Looking is but a weak act of faith, and yet
salvation is promised to it. Weak faith unites a person to Jesus Christ as well
as strong faith. A shaking hand can receive an alms as well as a strong hand.
He that shoots in a long Bow, draws all by the strength of his arm, much
strength is required to draw the bow, but he that shoots in a Cross-bow has
strength enough if he can but let off the string, a child may shoot as far as a
Giant, because the strength lies in the Bow, not in the Arm; so is it with
faith. If the King should pass a grant, that every living man in his Kingdom
should enjoy such and such privileges, do you think weak men would be
excluded? They are men as well as the strongest. God has made such a Charter,
that one that has true faith in him shall enjoy such and such privileges, and
the weak beleiver is a beliver as well as the strongest.

3. Weak faith has defacto found very gracious acceptance with God. That in
Mark 9. 22, 23, 24. And the promise, Mat. 12. 20. He will not break the bruised
reed, nor qvench the smoking flax. A reed when it is whole has no great
strength in it, but when it is bruised it is then weak indeed, and yet that
has been and will be averted.

4. Though every believer have not so much faith as Abraham, and Paul, and
David, etc. yet every believer has as much merit as they had. The very same
Christ, the same Righteousness, the same Covenant of Grace, the same Promises.;
None of all these were justified by their faith as an act or work, but by their
faith as an instrument apprehending Christ the object of faith. Now though
every believer have not the same faith, yet he has the same object of faith,
and therefore the same acceptance.

3. Satan sometimes argues nullity of faith, from the non-acceptance of our
prayers. If you had faith God would hear your prayers, but you have prayed a
long time for such a mercy, and can get no answer from God, therefore your
faith is not true faith, but a groundless presumption. For the answering of
this objection, I shall lay down these three Considerations, viz.

1. We are to distinguish between Gods act in answering prayers, and man's act
in receiving that answer. A Believer may think his prayers not to be answered
sometimes, because he does not mind the answer of his prayers. I will hearken
says the Psalm. 55. 8.
Psalmist, what the Lord God will say, for he will speak peace to his servants,
etc. Believers are sometimes stupid and cannot hearken, sometimes sullen and
will not hearken; they do not look after their prayers, they do not stand upon
the watch tower, as the Prophet resolves, Hab. 2. 1. Gods answer to our prayers
are sometimes given in silently and secretly, that without very much attention
we cannot tell what the answer imports. Very often the soul thinks his prayers
are cast out when he has the answer of them in his bosom.

2. God has more ways of answering Prayers than one. God may give a very full
answer to our prayers, though he do not answer them in that particular way we
desire. God has no where promised to answer the prayers of believers in Kind,
though he have promised that he will answer them according to their benefit. We
have three remarkable instances of this. That in Acts 1. 7. Our Savior refused
to answer them according to the matter of their desire, It is not for you to
know the times and seasons, etc. But yet he answers them according to their
necessity, You shall receive power from on high, etc. That in 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
God refused to answer Paul's prayer in Specie, the thorn in flesh, whatsoever it
was, whether a bodily disease as some think, or a spiritual distemper as others
conceive, was not removed, and yet his prayer was answered, My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in weakness. And that of
our Savior Heb. 5. 7. He was heard in that he feared. The particular thing he
desired was not granted. If it be possible let this cup pass from me. The cup
did not pass away, but Christ had assistance and enablement to bear it without
sinking, and therein his prayer was heard. We ask sometimes that which is not
good for us, at least not so good as some other thing. Now if God give us a
better thing for a thing which is less good, does he not hear? If God deny
Moses to go into Canaan, and take him into Heaven, what loss does he sustein?
Deus non audit ad voluntatem ut audiat ad necessitatem. There Is denial in
mercy, as well as hearing in mercy, and there is hearing in judgment, as well
as denial in judgment, Psalm. 78. 30.

3. God many times delays, when he does not deny.

1. We many times ask the present enjoyment of things not so good at that
season, Rev. 6. 10. 11. How long Lord, etc. They must yet tarry till the mercy
was seasonable. Their feet shall slide in due time, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. 2. We are not
so importunate in our suits as we should be, our prayers though for things
seasonably good, may be too faint; God in such cases delays to quicken our
zeal. Anselme in his meditations speaks excellently to this purpose: Gloria
mea, Deus meus, abscondis the saurum tuum ut niciles cupidum, recondis
margaritam, ut augeas quaerentis amorem, differs P. 194.
dare ut doleas petere, dissimulas audire pellutem ut facias preserverantem 3.
God is well pleased with our music, therefore he lets us lay begging. This is
the first branch of the Exhortarion.

2. Labor earnestly to repair, confirm and strengthen this shield of faith.
Though weak faith if it be true, will carry you to heaven, yet will not weak
faith carry you through strong Assaults. If this shield be cracked and broken,
you may be sorely foiled in the day of temptation. I shall propound a few Helps
for the strengthening of faith.

1. Be frequent in acting your faith. Habits are weakened by being idle, but
they are strengthened by daily exercise. Scribendo disces scribere. and
Credendo disces credere. The more frequent a Christian is in putting forth acts
of faith, the stronger will the Habit of faith be. There is this difference
between the shield of faith and other shields, those by too much use are made
weak; but this shield is the stronger by every battle, it cannot be used too
often. Vide Romans 1. 17.

2. Be much in fervent prayer to God that he would strengthen your faith. The
Apostle made use of this help, Luke 17. 5. Faith and Prayer are supporters one
of another, our faith teaches us both what to ask, and how to ask; and our
praying helps believing. If prayer be restrained, faith will be weakened, but if
prayer be continued faith will be confirmed.

3. Be frequent in the right use of the Word and Sacrament. The Word is the
ordinary means for the breeding of faith, and the Word and Sacrament are the
food whereby faith is nourished and increased. The Sacraments are the seals of
the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. 11. He that is frequent in the application
of these seals, is like to be most confirmed in believing. Christians do very
much prejudice their faith by neglecting of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
which is appointed of God for the nourishment of faith.

4 Study carefully the promises of the Covenant of grace. Gods promises are
made of purpose to confirm faith in us. The promises are the fuel of faith.

5. Study the Attributes of Gods Nature. His Power, Wisdom, Faithfulness,
Truth, Mercy. This was that which strengthened the faith of Moses, Heb. 11. 27.
These are strong props which will keep faith from sinking when its ready to
dye. This is the first branch of the Exhortation which concerns Believers.

2. That which I would say to unbeleevers is this, That they would labor for
this grace of justifying and saving faith. There are many things which may be
as motives to press you to it.

1. All the promises of grace are to you of none effect. They all run upon the
condition of believing. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the
promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

2. All the blood and sufferings of Jesus Christ is of none effect to an
unbeleever. It Is faith that gives the soul an interest in Christ's blood.

3. All their holy duties and religious actions without faith are displeasing
unto God. Heb. 11. 6. Without faith it is impossible to please God. Sacrafices
without faith is no better than the cutting off a dogs neck, Incence without
faith is no better than the blessing of an Idol, killing of an Ox, is no
better than the killing of a Man, offering of Oblation, is no better than the
offering of Swines blood, etc. Isa. 66. 3. But I shall only urge it upon this
ground, you can never do any good against Satan in the day of temptation, if
you want this shield. As it happened to the accusers of Daniel, when they were
cast into the Lions den, so it will happen to you in the day of temptation if
you want this shield. Its said the Lions had the mastery over them, and brake
all their bones in pieces or ever they came to the bottom of the den, Dan. 6.
24. So it will be with you, the roaring Lion will have the mastery over you and
break you into pieces, if you want this shield.

But you will say, what course should we take to get this grace.

1. Study the mischief of an unbeleeving heart. The Apostle calls it an evil
heart of unbeleef, Heb. 3. 12.

1. Its sinfully evil. Hard, dark, dead, impenitent, filthy, deceitful and
false, deceiving others and it self also.

2. Its penally evil.

1. It makes all the Ordinances ineffectual. Heb. 4. 2.

2. It binds all a man's sins upon his own back. It seals up all our sins,
because it keeps us from that which is the only remedy against sin.

3. It defiles every thing to a man. To the clean all things are clean, but to
the unbeleevers and them that are defiled is nothing clean, but even their
Consciences are defiled, Tit. 1. 15.

4. It brings certain condemnation. As salvation is the end of our faith, 1
Pet. 1. 9. So is damnation the end of unbeleef, John 3. 36. He that believes
not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

2. Study the Insufficiency of Self, Look upon the rottenness and nothingness
of all Moral Civil righteousness. Too high thoughts of Civil righteousness,
is that which hinders thousands from believing. Remember that of the Apostle
Phil. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Though I might also have confidence in the flesh, if
any other man thinks he has whereof he might trust in the flesh: I more.
Circumcised the eighth day of the stock of Israel, of the Tribe of Benjamine,
an Hebrew of the Hebrews, etc. Concerning the righteousness which is in the Law
blameless, etc. But what were gain to me, those I counted loss, etc. Yea
doubtless I account all things but loss, etc.

3. Study thoroughly the All-sufficient fullness of Jesus Christ, who is the
object of faith. He is not a broken reed, he is not an house of sand, but a
rock; a corner stone, upon whom whosoever believes shall never be ashamed. The
ignorance of Jesus Christ is that which hinders many from believing in him.
Isa. 53. init. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? for he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out
of a dry ground, he has no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see him,
there is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of
men, etc.

Study him well therefore, in Point of Merit; in point of grace. Study him in
all his Offices of King, Priest, Prophet, and then you will say as the
Daughters of Jerusalem did, Cant. 6. 1. Whether is thy beloved gone, O thou
fairest, etc.

4. Study the deep guilt of Adam, in the polution of thy own Nature. Those that
are whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Conviction of our
guilt and misery, is a necessary preparative to saving faith. Now the Scripture
does clearly affirm, that all men have sinned and are come short of the glory
of God, Romans 3. 23. And Romans 5. 12. And then take in this consideration that
neither your selves, nor any other Creature, is able to free you from that
guilt, that there is no other way of salvation but only by hanging upon Jesus
Christ alone, He it is which God has sanctified and set apart for the
satisfying of his own Justice, and reconciling the World to himself.

5. Consider the willingness of Jesus Christ to ease, and save, and take of
burdens. Though the disease be never so desperate, and the Physician never so
able, yet if his willingness be not known little encouragement will be to any
to go to him, but Jesus Christ is as willing as able.

1. He was sanctified for that work. Vide Isa. 61. 1. 2. The Spirit of the Lord
God is upon me, for he has anointed me to preach good tidings to the meek,
etc. The Son of Man came to seek and save that which was lost.

2. Read and peruse all the solemn invitations which are given unto men to
believe in him, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me, etc. Isa. 55. 1. 2. And Christ is
not in jest, but very real in making these tenders.

3. Read and peruse seriously all the Asseverations which are used to assure
men that if they will come, they shall not be refused. Vide John 6. 37. Verily
verily I say unto you, he that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out.
Never any was cast out, never any will be cast out, that comes to him after a
right manner.

4. Read and consider all the Lamentations and sad Complaints made by Jesus
Christ, of the backwardness and unwillingness of men to lay hold upon him. Ye
will not come unto me that ye may have life. John 5. 40. And that in Luke 13.
34. of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. How often would I have gathered
thy Children together, as an Hen does her brood, etc. and ye would not.

6. Wait constantly upon the public Ministry which God has appointed to be
the ordinary means of working faith in the heart. He that neglects this means,
and does not conscionably attend upon it, will dye either presuming or
dispairing.

And you will be encouraged to this, if you consider how many thousands have
been brought out of themselves unto faith in Christ, by the power of Gods
Spirit working in and by this means. Hereby Lydia was brought out of unbeleef.
Hereby the Jews who crucified Christ were brought to believe in Jesus Christ
for the saving of their souls, Acts 2. 37. Now when they heard this, they were
pricked in their heart, etc. There is still the same Institution, and the same
effectual Power of the holy Spirit in this Ordinance, for the working of the
same disposition in thy heart.

Thus much for the fourth piece of this spiritual Armor, the shield of Faith.
The next is the Helmet of Salvation, of which in the next verse,

EPHESIANS. 6. 17. (...) And take the Helmet of Salvation.
IN these words we have the fifth Lect. 27. Feb. 21. 1649.
piece of the spiritual Armor, which is recommended to a Christian for his
safe standing in the day of spiritual encounters, viz. The Helmet of Salvation.
It is called in Greek (...). Because it does totum caput circumqua que munire.
The Helmet is that defensive Armor wherewith the Soldier does protect his
head and face from danger in the day of battle. That which is meant by this
Helmet is the grace of the hope of salvation, so it is interpreted by this
Apostle, in 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Let us who are of the day be sober, putting on the
breast plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation.

The hope of salvation, is called Salvation by a metonymy, because it does
expect salvation, and because where it is true, it does produce and bring forth
salvation. As salvation is the end of faith, so it is also the end of hope,
Col. 1. 5. And therefore the Holy Ghost gives to it the name of salvation. We
read in Scripture of a twofold salvation. A Temporal and an Eternal Salvation.
Of the temporal Salvation we read, Exodus 14. 13. 1. The outward deliverance of
the Lord, Psalm. 37. 39. etc. Of eternal Salvation we read Luke 19. 9. Though
hope be exercised about temporal Salvation, etc. Yet here eternal Salvation is
meant. In the words we may for method sake observe tow things.

1. The thing enjoined, The hope of Salvation. 2. The manner of the injunction,
Take.
The lesson from the whole is this, Viz.

He that would withstand and overcome Satan in the day of Temptation must be
very careful to Doctrine
take and keep the well grounded Hope of eternal Salvation as an Helmet upon
his head.

In the handling of which Doctrine, I shall open these three things.

1. I shall open the nature of this grace of Hope, show how it agrees with, and
how it differs from the former grace of Faith. 2. I shall show you wherein the
grace of Hope is like a Helmet. 3 Wherein its useful to resist and overcome
Temptations.
1. Hope is a saving grace of Gods holy spirit wrought in a regenerate person,
whereby he does firmly and patiently expect the certain accomplishment of all
future good which God has promised, and faith believes. In the opening of this
Description we shall see both wherein it agrees, and wherein it differs from
faith.

There is such an Affinity between faith an hope that they can hardly be
differenced, they cannot be separated one from another; they have respect one
to another, as the two Cherubins on the mercy seat, Exodus 25. 20. And yet they
are really distinguished in the Scripture, they are several things, Now abides
Faith, Hope, and Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 13. The Scripture makes them three several
things. The agreement and difference of them will be manifested by the
unfolding of the former Description.

1. Hope is a saving grace of Gods Spirit. I say a saving grace to difference
it from that natural Hope which is not saving; we read of a hope that is as a
spiders web, Job 8. 14. Of a hope that shall be cut off, Job 8. 14. Of a hope
that shall be as the giving up of the ghost, Job 11. 20. And then I say of Gods
Spirit, to show the pedigree and the original of it. The Scripture makes it to
be a fruit and work of Gods Spirit. Now herein faith and hope agree, they are
both in regard of their nature saving graces, and they are both from the spirit
of God, as the fountain and efficient cause.

2. Wrought in a regenerate person. This is the subject of it. Neither the
profane person, nor the hypocrite has this glorious flower of hope growing in
them, that natural hope is found both in wicked persons and hypocrites, but
this saving hope has abiding only in the hearts of such as are truly
converted. Now here also it agrees with faith. As both of them proceed from the
same root, so both of them have the same general subject, they differ in the
particular subject, Luther ut supra.
faith is in the understanding, hope in the Will.

3. Whereby he does expect. This word notes the nature of this grace.
Expectation or waiting is the proper work of hope. Thus the Scripture does
express it, Psalm. 62. 5. My soul wait thou only upon God, for my expectation
is from him. Psalm. 130. 5. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait, and in his
word do I hope. Psalm. 123. 2. As the eyes of servants, etc. so our eyes wait
upon the Lord, until that he have mercy upon us. Nor is it a slight careless
expectation, but a very vehement intention, both of body in expecting and
waiting, when a man does stretch out his spirit and mind to look for a thing,
so the word (Karah) signifies, Isa. 8. 17. I will wait upon the Magna
intention and corporis erectione expectare,
Lord that hides his face, etc. and I will look for him. The Apostle sets it
out by a greek word of the same signification, (...), Romans 8. 19. The earnest
expectation of the Creature, etc. It signifies to look with a stretched out
neck, as a condemned prisoner for a hope for pardon. Now herein it differs from
faith, faith is not in expectation, but in making things evident; hope is in
expectation and waiting for things evidenced by faith.

4. It expects firmly and patiently. These two properties of hope we have in
Scripture. 1. It expects firmly or certainly. The Apostle mentions the full
Assurance of hope, Heb. 6. 11. Hope is never without assu^ance, says Mr.
Pemble, though not of the thing, yet of persuasion, for the firmness and
stedfastness of it is compared to an Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have as
an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast. 2. It expects with patience, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 5. The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and the patient
waiting for Christ. Faith is our Logic, says Luther, to conceive what we must
believe; Hope is our Rhetoric to persuade us in tribulation unto patience.
Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him Psalm. 37. 7. and Psalm. 40. 1. I
waited patiently for the Lord, etc.

5. The accomplishment of future good. This shows the object of Hope, generally
that which is good; particularly or specially future good. Herein it differs
from faith. The object of faith is not only good things, but evil things
also. Faith believes the threatenings as well as the promises; Faith does
believe there is an Hell as well as an Heaven; but Hope only looks at good
things. Evil things are the proper object of fear and hatred, not of hope. And
then this differs in the spiritual object. Hope only looks at good things to
come, what a man sees, why Romans 8. 24.
does he yet hope for it? hope that is seen is not hope. That's the difference
between hope and vision. But now faith looks not only at things that are to
come, but also at things that are past, and at things that are present. It
looks to things past. We believe that the World was created, that Adam fell,
that the old world was drowned, that Christ was born of the Virgin Mary, that
he suffered, that he dyed, etc. We believe also things that are present. We
believe that Christ is at the right hand of God, that he makes present
intercession. And we also believe things that are to come. We believe that
Antichrist shall fall, that Christ shall come to judge the World, that our dead
bodies shall be raised, etc.

6. Which God has promised. Herein faith and hope agree, they have both the
same Basis or foundation, viz. The word of promise. The Scripture asserts the
promise to be the foundation of hope, Tit. 1. 2. There could be no reason of
expectation unless the thing expected were bottomed upon a divine promise. Its
loose fancy, not well grounded waiting, which is not erected upon a promise.

7. And Faith believes. This holds out another difference between Faith and
Hope. They differ in their order. Faith goes before, Hope follows, the
stedfastness of hope is from the certainty of faith, faith believes the truth
of the thing, and hope waits for the accomplishment of it. The Apostle tells us
that faith is the substance or ground of things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. Faith is
the Mother of hope, and hope is the Daughter of faith; faith discovers the
treasure, and hope gathers it and lays it up. Faith is the fire of hope, and
hope is the flame of faith.

2. Wherein the Resemblance between Hope and a Helmet. Consider that in four
things.

1. The Helmet does defend the head from violence offered either by sword,
pistol, etc. The grace of Hope does safeguard the soul from the violence of
Satan.

2. The Helmet is the highest of all the Souldieres Armor. The grace of Hope is
that which looks still upwards; it is the highest of the graces, it has its eye
fixed upon the things which are in Heaven.

(3.) The Helmet does make the Soldier, of dreadful appearance to his
adversary. Polybius tells us, that the Roman Soldiers had upon their Helmets,
garlands sticking upon spikes so high, that they seemed of a double height, and
did appear very formidable to the enemy: Men of low stature seemed exceeding
high, by reason of their Helmets, and that dress which they wore upon them. The
Grace of Hope upon the head, makes the Christian Soldier very formidable to
Satan, it does lift him up even to Heaven. Little David, with his Helmet of
Hope, appeared of a greater height then Goliath, though he had a Helmet of
Brass. Hope sets the Soul upon a Rock, which is higher then all his Adversaries.

(4.) The Helmet does give warmth and heat to the head: it has a refreshing,
as well as a defending virtue in it. The Grace of Hope, warms and refreshes the
Heart.

III. Wherein this Grace is useful to a Christian in the time of Temptation.

(1.) The Grace of Hope helps Christian Courage. It sharpens the edge of
Christian Valor: faintness and fearfulness of Spirit, gives a very great
advantage to the enemy. That was a good Martial Law which God gave his people,
Deuteronomy. 20. 8. If the heart once sink through cowardice, and pusillanimity, the
hands grow weak. Now the grace of Hope keeps the heart from sinking; yea, it
adds courage to the heart: We have a Proverb, But for Hope, the heart would
break. I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in
the Land of the Living, Psalm. 27. 13. Upon this, he gives an Exhortation to
others, to hope in God, with a promise of strength, v. 14. Wait on the Lord, be
of good courage, etc. The exercise of this grace, kept the Apostles from
sinking, 2 Cor. 14. 16, 18. For this cause we faint not, etc. While we look not
at the things which are seen; but at the things which are not seen, etc.

(2.) The Grace of Hope does strengthen Faith. Though Faith breed Hope, yet
does Hope strengthen Faith: It is as a staff to her aged mother, as one well
observes. Faith is the Evidence of things not seen: Faith makes things that are
not seen evident, and then the grace of Hope helps the Evidence of Faith.

(3.) The Grace of Hope helps the Soul to persevere. Victory is promised only
to such as hold out unto the end. Be thou faithful unto the death, etc. Rev. 2.
10. Now without Hope, there can be no perseverance. He that has lost his hope,
will either yield, or run, or make some unworthy composition: but now Hope will
carry on the Soul in its opposition.

There are two things which Hope does to help us to persevere.

First, It fastens the Eye upon the sight of the Crown; it lays that at the
foot of the Soul, and encourages it to continue.

Secondly, It fetches in help from heaven; it fastens the Eye upon Jesus
Christ, and lets it see that He is fighting for them, while they are fighting
for themselves: It shows the Soul Recruits marching from Heaven, for its
Relief and assistance.

Information. (1.) This lets us see the benefit and excellency of the Grace of
Hope. The Scripture speaks very much in the commendation of it. It Is the
second of those three choice Graces, Faith, Hope, Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 13. It Is
that which brings heaven down to the Soul, or raises the Soul to heaven, even
when the Soul is here on earth. It Is the Soul's Comforter in all the troubles,
afflictions, and evils, which it sustains in this life. It Is that by which we
overcome Satan in the day of Temptations. It Is the Soul's Anchor, by which it
rides safely in the tempestuous Sea of Temptations. Of all the Graces, it is
that which promises least, but there is no Grace that is of more use then this.
It Is well compared by one to an Egg that has more in it then is seen. An Egg
has nothing to be seen, but a dry barren shell, unprofitable for nourishment;
but if you break the shell, you shall find it full of most delicate
nourishment. The Grace of Hope, to the outward appearance, is like to a dry
shall; but if you open this shell, you will find it full of most delicate
nourishment. We are upheld by Hope, when we stand: We rise by Hope, when we are
cast down. We live by Hope: We are saved by Hope.

It Is that which encourages us to all Duties: We pray in hope, we hear in
hope. Take away Hope, and the Soul will not be able to do any duty. It Is that
by which we bear all disappointments. It Is a Sun in the darkest midnight. Take
away Hope, and the Soul will be swallowed up with the least cross, every wind
will blow it down, every wave will drown it, every difficulty will overwhelm
it. It Is the Grace of Hope which holds the Chin above water in every trouble:
its the grace of Hope, by which we live in the want of present comforts. Take
away this Grace of Hope, and all the Promises are but as withered grass, and
dry bones, and empty vessels, which cannot give satisfaction. All
disquietments, and vexatious cares, arise either from the want, or the weakness
of the Grace of Hope. David charge all his disquietness upon this, Psalm. 142.
11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why art thou vexed within me? Hope in
God, for I shall yet praise him etc. Hope settles the heart in every condition:
it turns darkness into light, and storms into calmes, and makes the shadow of
death as the morning. Tbou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed
on thee, because he trusts in thee, Esa 26. 3.

I am the larger in this, because there is such a general neglecting of the
exercise of this Grace: The Grace of Hope is almost lost; Christians make but
little use, and very little account of it. Faith is in some repute, but Hope is
buried; whereas, indeed, Faith is not more excellent then Hope. Hope begins,
where Faith ends.

(2.) This lets us see why Satan uses so much endeavor to drive the servants
of God into a state of desperation. There are two great Rocks on which Satan
labors to split the souls of men: the one, is upon the Rock of Presumption;
many souls perish this way: The other is, the Rock of Despair; and there are
many more then a few destroyed this way. Judas, and Cain, and Saul, fell by
this Temptation. My punishment is greater then I can bear, says Cain. And
Judas, out of horror of Conscience, puts an end to his own life, Mat. 27. 5.
Satan is very busy in our age this way, suggesting unto the hearts of men,
that salvation does not belong to them. We see there is reason why Satan should
use his skill this way: This is a Christians Headpiece; and if he can but
persuade him to cast off this, he will very easily make a prey of him. Despair
of mercy, is a greater sin, then all other sins; Judas despair was greater then
his Treason.

First, It Is derogatory to the Mercy of GOD, for it calls in question his truth
and goodness.

Secondly, It Is derogatory to the Merits of Jesus Christ; it calls in question
the All Sufficiency of his blood, etc.

(3.) That the assurance of Salvation is a Doctrine very profitable for
Christians, and very prejudicial to Satan. If the hope of Salvation help a
Christian in temptarion, surely the assurance of it will much more help him in
these Assaults.

The Papists look upon it as a great and groundless presumption, for any man
to talk of assurance of his salvation: But we know from Scripture,

First, That many have attained to assurance: we know, that if our Earthly
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, etc. 2 Cor. 5. init.

Secondly, That all the people of God are commanded to labor after the
attainment of it, 2 Pet. 1. 10.

Thirdly, That so many Evidences of a man that shall be saved, are not laid
down in vain. The Scripture is full of the Characters of a person that shall be
saved. We know we are translated from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren, 1 John 3. 14. Know ye not, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13. 5.

Fourthly, That one great Office of the Spirit of God which dwells in the
hearts of the regenerate, is to seal them, Ephesians. 1. 13. To testify with their
Spirits that they are the Children of God, Romans 8. 16. The Holy Ghost is a
witnessing and sealing Spirit, as well as a sanctifying Spirit; a Spirit of
Revelation, as well as a Spirit of Grace. Now the Argument is firm: If the hope
of Salvation be a Helmet to protect us; then is the full Assurance of Salvation
a helmet much more strong.

LECT. XXII. March 6. 1649.
Exhortation. (1.) To all in general. Let this put all the Sons of men upon
the getting of well-grounded hopes of salvation.

FOr the urging of this Exhortation, these Use 2.
two things are to be opened, viz. 1. To remove some false grounds of hope. 2.
To hold out some positive grounds, upon which Salvation may be infallibly and
certainly hoped for, and expected.

(1.) There are three false grounds, upon which many are deceived, viz.

1. Outward prosperity is no certain ground of salvation. Many men do certainly
conclude their Estate is good, and that they shall be saved, and that God does
undoubtedly love them with a saving love, because their portion is fat in this
world; they have the blessing of God upon whatever they put their hands to, God
prospers them greatly in the world, etc. therefore they hope they shall be
saved.

For the removing of this, (1.) Something is to be granted. (2.) Something to
be denied. (1.) It is to be granted, That true piety and holiness, is the high
and ready way to outward prosperity, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the promise of
the life that now is, and of the life that is to come. Many promises are made
in the Scripture, of these outward things to the godly, as Prove. 3. 16. 17.
Psalm. 112. 1, 2, 3. only this promise is to be understood, with this caution
of Reference and subordination to their spiritual good. This Caution is
always in Scripture to be understood, when prosperity is promised to the
godly, and it is sometimes expressed, as in Psalm. 34. 10. (2.) It is to be
denied, that outward prosperity is any evidence of salvation. And that I shall
prove by these three Arguments. 1. The worst of men have, and may enjoy much of
these things, who shall never see salvation. Mat. 16. 26, our Savior supposes
there more then ever any man shall enjoy, he that has the whole world, must
have these four things. 1. All the Riches, Honors, Pleasures of the world. 2.
A heart capable to take delight in all these. 3. A time of enjoying these from
the first man to the last. 4. Freedom from all vexations and troubles of
spirit. All these things are necessarily required, to the making good of this
supposition. And yet if any man could attain to this, yet he might for ever be
a castaway, and lose his soul. There are many rich men now suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire, Luke 12. 18. etc. Luke 16. 19, 20, 23. The best of
men have, and may want outward prosperity, Heb. 11. 37. Some are there
mentioned, of whom the world was not worthy, and yet were destitute, afflicted,
tormented. Most or all the Prophets and Apostles, yea Christ himself must be
excluded out of Heaven, if this were an evidence of salvation. 3. There would
be no sin in covetousness, if this were any ground of salvation. The Scripture
reckons covetousness amongst the grossest and worst of sins, Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 5.
5. 1 Cor. 6. 10. Its no sin for a man to get an evidence of salvation with all
his diligence. The love of money would not be the root of all evil, as the
Apostle brands it, 1 Timothy 6. 10. but the root of all good, if this were an
evidence of salvation.

II. Outward Profession is no certain ground of salvation. Many men build their
hopes of salvation, only on profession. They hear, they pray, etc. That this
is no infallible evidence of salvation, will appear by these two Arguments.

(1.) Because many who have been forward in profession, have been rejected in
regard of eternal salvation, Luke 13. 26, 27. Isay 58. 2, 3. A natural
principle may carry a man to all the duties of outward profession.

(2.) Because then there would be no such thing in the Church as hypocrisy,
whereas the Scripture makes a difference between the form of godliness, and the
power of godliness, 2 Timothy 3. 5.

III. Civil moral Righteousness is no infallible evidence of salvation. Many
persons build their salvation upon this, that they are civilly just, they are
free from scandalous sins. They are no Thieves, Adulterers, etc.

It were to be wished, that all men were free from these gross offenses: he
that walks in any of these, can certainly have no hope of salvation; for the
grace of God that brings salvation, has appeared unto men, etc. Tit. 2. 11,
12. But yet there are many presidents in Scripture, which prove that all this
may be in such, as are out of the state of salvation.

1. That in Luke 18. 11. God I thank thee I am not as other men, etc. He was no
swearer, no Drunkard, etc. and yet in the Gall of bitterness, etc.

2. That in Mat. 25. 1. 2. They were Virgins, not Harlots: they kept company
with the wise Virgins, and were not only in their own apprehension, but in the
charitable judgment of others, in a good condition; and yet when the
Bridegroom came, they would not be admitted, they wanted Oil in their Lamps,
and so were excluded the Mariage-Chamber, and that with this sad word, I know
you not.

3. That in Mat. 11. 12. He was no scandalous sinner. As far as men could look,
he was very right, none but the eye of the King, who sees what is in man, could
discern any defect in him, and yet cast out with shame into outer darkness,
verse 13.

4. That young man in Mat. 19. 18, 19, 20. He was not only free from scandal,
but he was very exact in many outward things. All these have I kept from my
youth. There were so many common graces in him, as were worth the drawing out
of affection. Jesus loved him, says another Evangelist, Mark 16. 21. and yet
out of the state of salvation for the present: he went away sorrowful, for he
was very rich.

5. That in 2 Pet. 2. 18. 20. The Apostle speaks of such as were not
scandalous, they had escaped the pollution of the world, and yet far from
salvation.

6. The separation which shall be made at the last day, Mat. 25. 32. is a proof
of this. It is not of sheep and Wolves, but of sheep and Goats. Sheep and Goats
feed together, and herd together, and yet Goats shall be condemned as well as
Wolves.

7. That in Mat. 5. 20. How exact the Scribes and Pharisees were, for all acts
of external righteousness, will appear from that of the Apostle, Phil. 3. 5.
6. concerning the righteousness of the Law blameless, and yet at that time, out
of the state of salvation. Sin may be restrained, when it is not mortified. A
person may be under the reign and Dominion of sin, who is not under the rage
and fury of sin. Sin may be restrained in men unconverted,

1. By civil education. Thus it was with Paul, before his conversion, Phil. 3.
5, 6.

2. By outward affliction, Psalm. 78. 34. when he slew them, they sought him, 2
Reg. 17. 25, 26. God sent Lions amongst them. Those devouring Creatures
restrained their sin for a time.

3. By the external power of Ordinances. Humane Ordinances may restrain sin, as
Magistrates, Romans 13. 3, 4. When the Angel of God came to Balaam with his dtawn
Sword, he put him to a present stop: the Sword of Magistracy may do this.

Divine Ordinances. The thundering of judgment and damnation from the public
Ministry, may restrain sin for a time. Go down says God, to Moses, and set
bounds, Exodus 19. 12. vid. Cap. 20. 18. When the people heard the thundrings,
etc. they removed, and stood a far off.

4. By common grace, such was Abimelech's restraint, Genesis 20. 6.

Secondly, For positive evidences, I shall name but these three, viz.

1. That in Col. 1. 27. Christ in them the Hope of Glory. The Rule of evidence
is this, Jesus Christ is in that person, who has a well-grounded hope of
everlasting glory. No man has any foundation of hoping for eternal salvation,
but only he that has Jesus Christ dwelling in him. I might bring many
concurrent testimonies of Scripture, for the proving of this, as 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Hence it is, that the Apostle calls Christ our hope, 1 Timothy 1. 1. It is by
Christ alone that we have hope. As he alone is our peace, so is he alone our
hope. Now we may know, that Christ is in us, by these two evidences.

1. If Christ be in you the body is dead in regard of sin, Romans 8. 10. he, that
is withour Christ is dead in sin, and he in whom Christ is, is dead to sin. The
Dominion of sin is destroyed. The love of sin is removed. Sin does not reign,
sin is not affected, where Jesus Christ dwells in power. Sin may be where
Christ is, but it does not bear sway; it has not a quiet Being, it is opposed,
it is lamented, and that not only that sin which breaks out in the life, but
also that root of bitterness which abides in the heart: Sin undiscerned of the
eye of man, as well as that which is discovered to the eye of man. Sin Dormant,
as well as sin Rampant, sins of daily incursion and infirmity, as well as
scandalous sins. Omissions of good, as well as the perpetration of evil.

2. If Christ be in them, the Image of Christ is in them. 2 Cor. 5. 17. All
things are become new. The mind and understanding are renewed: he sees what he
did not before discern, The loathsomness of sin, the beauty of holiness, the
preciousness of Christ, the excellency of the soul, the emptiness of all
worldly things.

The will is renewed, Acts 9. 6. Before Christ came it was hard, stubborn,
contentions, selfish; but now its made pliable, ductile, submissive to God in
all things, and that with cheerfulness and constancy, and speediness, Acts 9.
6. Lord what will thou have me to do? before it was an Iron sinew, a Brazen
Wall, now it is fleshly and yielding.

The Conscience is renewed. Before it was sleepy, secure, stupid: now it is
watchful, tender, sensible both of the least sin, and of the least duty.

The affections are renewed: love, joy, hatred, fear, sorrow, anger, zeal, were
before misplaced: now they are set on right objects, and greatly intended
toward their objects. He loves God with a great love, he hates sin with a
perfect hatred. He rejoices in the hope of the glory of God, more then ever he
did in the things of this life. He fears his God more then ever he slighted
him. He is more grieved for sin, then ever he was for any worldly loss: He is
more angry with the wicked, then ever he was with the godly. His zeal is more
fervent for God, then ever it was for the world before conversion.

2. That in 1 John 3. 3. Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself as
God is pure. It is laid down not only by way of duty, but by way of evidence
and character. He is continually cleansing and purging himself from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. No
pattern will serve him, but God himself the exemplar of all holiness. He
finds it written, Be ye holy as I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16. and no other Copy is
in his account fair enough for him to write after. If you read but verse 13,
14. you shall find the Apostle brings it in, as the Character and evidence of
one that has a right hope of Heaven. Gird up the loins of your mind, etc. And
the like you have Tit. 2. 11, 12, 13. You that think you have holiness enough,
you that can allow of any spots of sin, do not talk of hoping for Heaven. This
is not the fruit of such hope. No man is more frequent in washing himself, then
he that has hopes of salvation. There is this reason for it, he sees Heaven to
be an holy place, and he desires to be made like it before he come to enjoy it.

3. That in Phil. 3. 20. Our Conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for
the Savior. He that has a well-grounded hope of salvation after this life,
has his thoughts and heart much in Heaven while he is in this life. This has
been the guise of men that hoped for salvation, 2 Cor. 4. 18. Cap. 5. init. His
heart is not taken up much with any earthly thing. He is not too much lifted up
with the enjoyment, nor too much cast down with fear of losing these mean
things. His spirit is loosened from them, his heart is above them, his soul
converseth daily with things of an higher nature. He is with God when he goes
to sleep, and when he awakes, he is with him. He has the Kingdom of God within
him. Put this home, and see how it is with you. Wheresoever your Treasure is,
there (undoubtedly) will your hearts be also, Luke 12. 34.

2. I have a word of Exhortation to you in particular, who have hopes of Heaven
upon good grounds. Nourish and preserve this Helmet. Keep it upon your heads,
and labor to confirm it. Show all diligence to the full assurance of hope unto
the end. The Doctrine has motive enough in it. I shall but give some helps or
directions, and so conclude.

The Directions are these 6. viz.

[1] Labor to be armed against all the Arguments of Satan, to drive you to
despair. He objects for this purpose three things especially.

(1.) Your own unworthiness. You are great sinners, etc. Against this do you
consider by way of answer.

(1.) That as great sinners as you are, or ever were, are now in Heaven,
Manasseh, Magdalen etc.

(2.) That you do not expect Heaven for your own worthiness, but for the
worthiness of Christ, Ezekiel. 36. 32. I do not this for your sakes, etc.

(3.) That a Christians worthiness does not consist in legal perfection, but
in sincerity and remission of sin.

(4.) That you will not add to your unworthiness, the great sin of rejecting
Jesus Christ and despair.

(5.) That its better to perish hoping, then perish despairing.

(II.) The present overcastings of the light of Gods countenance, and your many
outward troubles, Against this, consider (1.) It Is no new thing to the dear
servants of God, to be under Spiritual Desertions, and outward troubles. David,
Psalm. 43. Generally, all that are now in heaven, have bin under these Clouds.
(2) These Providence are soonest removed by the grace of Hope. God has
appointed them to strengthen this Grace, not to destroy it, Psalm. 43. ult. Lam.
3. 18, 19, 20, 21. (3.) God can make the Valley of Achor a door of Hope, Hos.
2. 15.

[III.] Many have been shipwracked upon false hopes: Ergo. Against this,
answer, 1. That many have perished for want of Hope; many have been destroyed
by despair, Cain, Judas, Saul:

2. Those who have perished, did not perish because they hoped, but because
they hoped amiss. 3. A commanded Duty is not to be neglected because many by
doing it amiss have been rejected. Nourish the Grace of Faith; if Faith be
strong which is the Mother, Hope the Daughter will be strong. Act your Hope
upon Christ's All Sufficiency, Gods faithfulness Heb. 6. 17, 18. The example of
the Saints. Be much in prayer.

Keep your hearts in the love of God, Jude, ver. 21. This is the way to keep up
Hope.

LECT. XXIII. March 13. 1649.
EPHESIANS. 6. 17. (...), (...). And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, etc.
IN these words we have the sixth piece of the Spiritual Armor, which the
Apostle would have all Christians to use for their safe standing, and certain
Victory, in the day of Temptation: In which we have two things:

First, The Armor it self: the Word of God.

Secondly, The Notion under which this Word of God is recommended to
Christians: the Sword of the Spirit.

The Sword. The Sword is a piece of Armor which the Soldier uses both to
defend himself, and to wound, and offend his enemy: it is both offensive and
defensive: it is called (...), according to Eustathius, (...), because it does
rejoice in blood; according to Stephanus, from the Verb (...), to fight, or
(...), and (...) tollo, because it is the Instrument of fighting.

Of the Spirit] Spirit is used sometimes Essentially, for all the three
persons, Joh. 4. 24. Sometimes its used Personally, for the third person of the
Trinity, the Holy Ghost: and so I suppose it is used in this place. The Reasons
of it I shall show afterward. Which is the Word of God] There Is a twofold
Word of God.

1. The Substantial, or Essential Word of God, viz. Jesus Christ, the second
Person of the Trinity, Rev. 19. 13. 1 John 5. 7. Joh. 1. 1. He is called the
Word of GOD, for two Reasons:

First, because as the Word is Character mentis, in men; so Christ the Son is
the Character, or express Effigies of the Fathers Counsel: The word, or speech,
is Interpres mentis: so Christ is Interpres Patris, Joh. 1. 18.

Secondly, He is called the Word of God, in regard of his personal properties
of working: whereas the Father works by way of hidden counsel; the Holy Ghost,
by way of internal virtue; the Son works by way of Word, laying open the
counsel of God, and putting it into execution by his Almighty Word; that is, by
the power of his Will outwardly set forth.

2. The written Word: This is nothing else but the Writings of Prophets,
Apostles, and other holy men of God, contained in the Holy Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament: which, for the excellency of them, are called The Bible,
or The Book, because it is the most excellent Book, the Book of Books. This is
that Word of God which the Apostle here recommends unto the Christian Soldier:
It is not (...), as the Substantial word is called; but (...), which is the
name given to the written Word.

I might make many Doctrines, but I will put altogether into this one, viz.

DOCT.

He that would be enabled to withstand, and to overcome Satan in his
Temptations, must be careful to take and use the Sword of the Spirit, which is
the written Word of God.

By this Sword it was, that our Savior did both preserve himself, and turned
the Devil to flight in his day of Temptation: He drew out this Sword Scriptum
est, and with the power of it overcame his adversary, Matthew. 4.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall open these three things:

(1.) Give some Reasons, to prove, that the Holy Scriptures are the Word of God.

(2.) Show you the Reason of this Title, the Sword of the Spirit.

(3.) Show you how this Sword is useful to help a Christian in the day of
Temptations.

First, That the Scriptures are the Word of God.

1. From the evidence of Scripture it self. For this, I shall refer you to
these places, 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God,
(...), 2 Pet. 1. 21. Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of man, but
holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, Psalm, 119. 105. Thy
Word is a Lamp to my feet: So ver. 72. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me,
then thousands of gold and silver. I might give you thousands of places to this
purpose.

Secondly, From the nature of the Writings themselves.

1. The matter of them is of such height and sublimity, as that Reason is too
low to make such discoveries. The mystery of the Trinity, is a thing above the
comprehension of Reason: Reason may a little illustrate it, now when it is
revealed; but Reason could never have found it out. The great mystery of
Christ's Incarnation; the Personal Union of the two Natures: this is a mystery
not only above Reason, but above the Angelical Understanding, 1 Pet. 1. 12.

The Angels pry into this mystery: they could never have found it out, had it
not been revealed in the Scriptures, vid. Ephesians. 3. 10. This manifold wisdom of
God is made known unto Principalities and Powers by the Church. The Doctrine of
the Resurrection of the Body, is a Doctrine too high for Reason to have found
out. The Corruption of man's nature by the sin of Adam, etc.

2. The harmonious consent, and sweet agreement which is between one part of
Scripture, and another. Though they were penned by several persons, in several
Ages, in several places far distant, from one another, the Penmen neither
advising, nor conferring with one another; yet in nothing contradictory, but
sweetly corresponding one with another; one Prophet writing nothing contrary to
another: All the Evangelists conspiring and agreeing mutually one with another,
as if they had been all in one and the same place: which is impossible, and was
never seen amongst the Writings of men.

3. The rare Predictions which are in the Scriptures, accomplished at the very
seasons. No Creature can foretell, or foreknow things beforehand; and the
Prophecies of the Scripture are not laid down (Oracle-wise) with ambiguity, but
with positive certainty, expressing the very times of things, the names of
persons, the period of States, etc. Genesis 3. 15. It was four thousand years
before his birth; and yet when the fullness of time came, God sent forth his
Son made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4. So that Prediction, Genesis 15. 13, 14, Thy Seed
shall be a stranger, etc. This deliverance was foretold four hundred years
beforehand. So that, in 1 King. 13. 2, 3. the Prophecy against the Altar of
Bethel in Jeroboams time, it was, as Chronologers observe, 330 and odd years
before; and yet 2 King. 23. 16. it was fulfilled in its season. That in Esa.
45. 1. concerning Cyrus. Cyrus was not born of a hundred years after that. All
the Prophetical Doctrines concerning Christ, of his Sufferings, Death,
Burial, his Crucifying with Thieves, Resurrection; All as punctually foretold
by the Prophets, as related by the Evangelists afterward, who were
Eyewitnesses of them.

4. The manner of enjoining the Doctrines therein contained: Merely the
Authority of the Speaker. Thus says the Lord, Hear the Word of the Lord, etc.
Other Writings go about to move men to entertain them by the strength of
Natural Reason; so did the Philosophers. It Is said of Plato, that when he read
the first Chapter of Genesis, he used these words: Hic vir multa dicit, nihil
probat.

5. The Scriptures enjoin many things which are contrary to reason: That a man
should deny himself, Mat. 16. 2. That when we have done all we can, we are
unprofitable servants; that a man must trust to the righteousness of another;
that he that will be wise, must become a fool that he may be wise; that he that
will save his life shall lose it, etc. This makes the Apostle say, 1 Cor. 2.
14. That a natural man cannot discern the things of the Spirit, etc.

6. The Scriptures do prescribe not only Laws for the outward man, but for
the heart also. Thought is free from the cognizance of human Laws, but not from
this Law, Curse not the King no not in thy thought. Eccles. 10. 20. How long
shall vain thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4. 14. God saw that every
imagination of the heart of man was evil, Genesis 6. 5. He that looks upon a
woman to lust after her, has committed Adultery with her in his heart. Keep
thy heart with all diligence, Prove. 4. 23. We have obeyed from the heart the
form of Doctrine, etc. Romans 6. 17.

7. The heavenliness of the Doctrine. It lifts up men above all earthly things:
it calls on men to mortify their earthly members; to set their affections on
things above, not on things below, etc.

8. The blessings and rewards, punishments and threatenings, propounded in the
Scripture, are not temporal only, but spiritual and eternal. Giving men up to
vile Affections, Romans 1. 24. Seeing ye shall see, and not perceive, etc. Esa 6.
latter end. I will not punish their daughters, when they commit Adultery, Hos.
4. 14. If any hear, and open, I will come in, and sup with him, etc. Revel. 3.
20. If any man keep my Commandments, I will love him, and my Father will love
him and communicate himself to him, etc. Joh. 14. 23.

9. The scope and chief aim of it is, to debase all Creatures, and to advance
and set up God alone. Whether ye eat or drink, etc. do all to the glory of God,
1 Cor. 3. Fear God, and keep his Commandments, Eccles. 12, Let God be true,
and every man a Liar, etc.

III. From the rare effects of the Scriptures. They have a power to terrify,
to comfort, to quicken, to pull down strong Holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. To open
blind eyes; to convert dead souls, etc. Quale causatum, talis causa. Such
illustrious divine effects, must needs have a divine cause.

4. From the testimony and witness of the Holy Ghost in the hearts of men. It
is the work of the Holy Ghost, to subdue the heart, to believe, and submit to
the Word, 1 John 2. 20. Ye have an unction from that Holy One, etc. John 14.
26. When the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, is come, he shall teach you
all things; and whatsoever I have said to you, he shall bring to your
remembrance. This persuasion must either be from Satan, or from a man's own
fancy, or else from God. It cannot be from Satan; for the Doctrine contained in
the Scriptures overthrows him, and his Kingdom, and Design. It cannot be from
our own fancy; the Doctrine of the Scripture is supra captum nostrum: ergo. I
could give other Arguments, Ex absurdo, Ex consensu Ecclesiae, Ex Amanuensibus,
etc. but these may suffice.

Secondly, Why the Word of God is called, the Sword of the Spirit. Consider
four things for this.

1. It Is from the Spirit Originally. He is the Composer and Framer of this
blessed Book, 2 Pet. 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost. Herein it differs from that material Sword: That, is made and
fashioned by man: This, by the Spirit.

2. All the efficacy of it depends upon the Spirit. He it is that makes it
powerful for the working of those effects which are done by it upon men. It
would be but a wooden sword, without either edge or point, if the Spirit of
God did not give virtue to it. This the Apostle affirms, 2 Cor. 10. 4. We see
it by experience, the same word is a dead letter upon some, and a convincing
and converting word to others: the reason is, because the word is set on by the
Spirit in one, and not in the other.

3. It has an effectual influence upon the Spirits of men. It does not only
reach to the body and outward man, but even to the Spirit and Conscience also.
This the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two-edged Sword, piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and intents of the heart. Herein it differs from all material
Swords. They only pierce the body, they cannot either wound or defend the
Conscience, but this Sword has a power, through the Spirit, both to afflict
and quiet, to settle and unsettle the very Spirit and Soul of man.

4. The manner of the operation of this Sword is only Spiritual. It works not
as the material Sword, by bloody piercings and woundings, but by Spiritual
Arguments only. There is nothing visible to the eye of the body in the working
of this Sword; it does all for which it is appointed in a spiritual way, by
spiritual Convictions, and Spiritual Comforts, and Spiritual Reproofs, etc.

III. Wherein this is useful to help us against Temptations.

(1.) The Word of God helps a Christian to answer all Satan's objections.
Whatsoever sin he tempts you to commit; whatsoever Duty he persuades you to
cast off; whatsoever medium he uses to press his temptation, the Word of God
will be able to put full and pertinent answers into your mouths against the
same. When I opened the 13. verse, I showed you there were eight evil days,
in which Satan did violently set upon the soul.

The Day of Personal outward Affliction.

The Day of Church-calamity, especially when Heretics and Seducers are risen
up in the Church.

The Day of sinful miscarriage and failing.

The Day of Spiritual Desertion and obscurity.

The Day of extraordinary Soul-enlargment, by Divine Manifestations, and Incoms
from Heaven.

The Day of Temporal deliverance, and advancement.

The Day of the success of wicked men.

The Day of Death.

I showed you what temptations are most peculiar to such a day. Now the Word of
God will furnish you with sufficient Arguments to antidote your Souls against
the infection of every one of those Temptations. If Satan tempt to pride of
heart, the Scripture will arm you against that sin by showing you the
mischief of Pride. God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble,
Jam. 4. 6. If Satan tempt you to Covetousness, the Scripture will show you the
danger of that sin: It will tell you that The love of money is the root of
all evil, 1 Timothy 6. 10. And that a man's life consists not in the abundance of
what he enjoys, Luke 12. 15. If Satan tempt you to unrighteousness and
oppression the Scripture will arm you against that sin. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. If Satan tempt
you to Perjury and Covenant Breaking the Scripture will show you the sad
effects which have followed upon that sin. Zedekiah for this sin, had his
eyes put out, and was a Captive all his days, Ezekiel. 17. 18. If Satan tempt you
to be heretical, or erroneous, the Scripture will show the miserable fruits of
Heresy: Because they did not receive the truth in the love of it, God gave
them up to delusions to believe a Lie, that they might all be damned, etc. 2
These. 2. 11, 12. If Satan tempt you to apostatize from the truth for fear of
suffering, the Scripture will tell you, that if any withdraw, Gods soul will
have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. ult. and he that puts his hands to the
Plough, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven Luke 9. ult. If
Satan tempt you to be hypocritical, the Word of God will tell you, that Hell is
prepared for Hypocrites. If Satan tempt you to cast off Duties, as Prayer,
Hearing, the Word of God will tell you the sad consequences of such neglect,
etc. And our Savior teaches us this use of the Scripture in the day of
Temptation, by his own practice, Satan tempts him to work a miracle at his
command, by turning stones into bread, in the time of hunger, Mat. 4. He
answers that temptation, by showing him out of the Scripture, That man lives
not by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God,
ver. 4. Satan tempts him again to cast him self down from the pinnacle, upon a
persuasion of the protection of God. Our Savior answers that, from the
Scripture, ver. 7. Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. Satan sets upon him
with a third Argument, to fall down and worship him; Our Savior answers that
by a Testimony from Scripture, showing him, that Divine Adoration was due to
God only, ver. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou
shall serve.

(2.) The Word of God strengthens and teaches a Christian how to use aright
all the other parts of the Spiritual Armor.

First, For the Girdle of Truth; if you understand it of the Doctrine of Truth,
the Word helps you in that: hereby we know, what is Truth, what is Falsehood.
Take away the Word of God, and there is no standard to measure Truth withal:
If you understand it of the Grace of Truth, Sincerity and Uprightness of heart,
the Word of God is the Preserver of it. I was upright before him, and kept my
self from mine iniquity, for all his judgments were before me, and I did not
put away his Statutes from me, Psalm. 18. 22, 23. The Word of God, as the Sun,
exhales all the vapors of hypocrisy out of our hearts.

Secondly, For the Breast Plate of Righteousness. The Word of God strengthens,
and preserves that, if we understand it of the righteousness of our persons,
the Word of God teaches where it lies, and how to put it on, and to use it,
Romans 1. 17.

This righteousness is revealed in the Word. If you understand it of the
righteousness of our course and conversation, the Word of God directs us for
this also, Psalm. 119. 9. The Word is the measure of righteousness; he has
showed thee, O man, what is good, Mic. 6. 8.

3. For the Shoes of the preparation of the Gospel. It is the Word of God that
helps us to take up, and enables us to persevere in these resolutions of going
through with the profession of the Gospel, against all difficulties, and
inconveniences, and disadvantages: the Word whets the edge of these
resolutions, when they grow dull and blunt.

4. For the Shield of Faith. The Word is both the Seed which breeds it, and the
Nurse which feeds it, and gives it suck. It Is called the Word of Faith, not
only because it is the Object of Faith, that which is to be believed; but also
because it is the Seed of Faith, and the Food of Faith. Faith must have a
written word to lean upon, else it dies.

5. For the Helmet of Hope. The Word of God, to the grace of Hope, is as the
light to the eye of the body: it is the Cable of the Anchor of Hope: the Word
lays the promise down, upon which Hope is grounded: the Word shows Gods
faithfulness, whereby Hope is cherished: the Word is the fuel that keeps it
burning. I have hoped in thy Word.

6. For Prayer and Supplication. We can neither tell what to pray for, nor how
to pray aright, without the direction of the Word of God. By the Word of God,
we come to know what we want: By the Word of God we come to know what God has
promised: The word of God heats the affections to pray with zeal, strengthens
the heart to pray in confidence, enables the Spirit to pray with perseverance.
Take away the Fuel of the Word, and the fire of Prayer will be abated, if not
quenched.

LECT. XXIV. March 20. 1649.
USE I. Information. (1.) That it is a mavelous great mercy, that God has
been pleased to commit his Mind to writing.
WE might else have been to seek for this Sword, when we should have had
occasion to use it. The Church of God for about 2500. years wanted this
blessing. The Doctrine of God was preserved by the Tradition of a lively voice,
(...), Heb. 1. 1. Sometimes by the immediate voice of God himself, by the
Ministry of Angels, Heb. 2. 2. By Dreams; by Visions; by Vrim and Thummim; but
never in writing till the time of Moses. Then God was pleased to commit it to
writing for many causes.

First, That by this means it might be kept more pure and incorrupt. We read
how much soil the Truth of God contracted, by passing through the hands of men,
while it was by Tradition transmitted from Parents to Children, Genesis 35. 2. We
read, that even in Jacobs Family, there were Idols found; And so Josh. 24. 14.
And the Idols of Egypt were amongst the Israel of God. Though they were Holy,
and religious, yet was there much pollution cleaving to the Worship of God in
those days.

Secondly, for the help of man's weak memory: many of Divine Truths, might, in
continuance of time, have slipped out of the leaking* Vessel of man's memory, and
so the Church of God should have suffered much loss.

Thirdly, for the greater stability and firmness of the Doctrine of Truth
against all those who should either deny it, or corrupt it, or infirm it, vid.
Luke 1. 3, 4. By the word (...) he does secretly innuere, propter corruptelas
quorundam qui viva voce aliena ab Evangelica veritate tradiderunt, opus fuisse
accurato scripto, rem, prout gesta fuit, usque ad finem exponente. The Church
of God by this means has a greater certainty against the fraud and deceit of
Seducers of the truth of God.

4. For the more facile propagation and spreading of the Doctrine of Truth:
while it was delivered by Tradition, it was only consined among the Jews, and
there was no probability that ever it should spread any further than their
Coasts: but by the writing of it, it is divulged throughout the world. It Is a
mercy to be acknowledged! Had not the Word been written, this Sword would have
been as a Sword in the Scabbard or Armory; but by the writing of it, it is
drawn out of the sheath, and made of much more use to us, in the day of battle.

2. That it is an exceeding great mercy that the written Word of God is in our
hands. It might have been written, and yet kept hid from us, as it is yet from
the greatest part of the world, amongst whom this Light has never shined. This
is a privilege, which is as the Crown of glory upon the people of the Jews,
that to them are committed these Oracles of GOD, Romans 3. 2. By this they were
advanced above other Nations, Deuteronomy. 33. 2. Psalm. 147. 20. It Is our happiness
that we enjoy this Sword. The misery of the people of Israel is set out by
this, that in the days of war, when they had many enemies against them, there
was neither Sword nor Spear in the hands of any of the people, but in the hands
of Saul and Jonathan only, 1 Samuel 13. 22. This would have bin our sad
condition, if God had not transmitted the Bible to our hand. We see how often
Satan prevails over us now we have the Scriptures; but if we had wanted this
Sword, it would have been altogether impossible to have made resistance.

3. This is an Apology for the care and dil^gence of the servants of God in
studying the Scriptures. Profane men look upon the practice of the godly in
this respect, as preciseness and unnecessary care. What needs all this, etc.
They know the word of God is their sword, they are never safe, if this sword be
not girt upon their thighs: They know if either they want this sword, or be
unskilful in the use of it, they must needs perish in the day of battle. Who
blames a soldier for wearing his sword about him? especially when enemies are
pursuing his life. It is not only his honor, but his safety so to do. The
servants of God know that if they leave off this spiritual sword but for a day,
they shall be surely overcome by Satan; and it is better to be reproached by men
for wearing it, then to be destroyed by Satan by leaving it off. The word of
God they know is not only their Sword to defend them in battle, but their Sun
to give them light. This Sword has this advantage of all other Swords, that by
it they see the lurking places, where the enemy lies hid; and they see also the
refuges where themselves may be secured. It is also, that food by which they
are revived and strengthened, to hold out in battle. It is their Cordial, as
well as their Sword. It is their honey that opens their eyes, when they grow
faint with fighting: it puts spirits into their spirits, when they are decayed:
This Sword teaches them how to fight. Other Swords only help the soldier how
to use his skill: they do not give him any skill; but this Sword teaches
skill. It should not be accounted a fault, but a virtue in the soldiers of
Christ, that they are so much in the study of the word of God.

4. No wonder to see the Devil so victorious, where the word of God is wanting.
What strange abominations do the Gentiles that want the Word fall into by the
temptations of Satan? What Idolatries are there in those places? It Is not to
be wondered at. They want the Sword of the Spirit, by which they should defend
themselves against temptations; and because they want this, they cannot stand;
they are unarmed men.

5. That they are Satan's friends, and enemies both to themselves and others,
who lay aside the Scriptures of God. There are many in our sinful and wanton
Age, who deny the authority of the Scriptures, affirming, that they are not
from God: Others, that ca^t them off, as useless things, that depend upon
Revelations, etc. These that deny the Scriptures, they are in this, worse then
Satan their Father. He believes that the Scriptures are of God, Matthew. 4. 6. It
is written, says Satan, that he will give his Angels charge over thee, etc.
There is thus much Divinity, and Faith in Hell: the History of the Bible is
believed there, though it be questioned, and denied on earth. These men are
certainly in pay in the Devils service: they disarm themselves, and they
endeavor to disarm others. And it is no wonder to see them so desperately
overcome as they are, running out to profaneness in life, to heresies and
blasphemies in Opinion. Satan has not greater Champions in the world then
these are: they fight against God; they fight for Satan, as visibly and
directly as ever men did. Such also, as though they think the Scriptures be of
God, yet they cast them aside, and create another Sword instead of this
unwritten Revelations, Dreams, and Enthusiasms of their own head. God has made
the written Word to be the Touchstone of all Revelations, Isa 8. 20. To the
Law and Testimony, (...). 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. we have a more sure word of
prophecy etc. Gal. 1. 8. If we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other
Gospel, etc. It Is the imputing of imperfection to the Divine Canon. It Is the
symbolizing with Papists in their unwritten Traditions, always condemned by
the Protestant Divines: unwritten Revelations, and unwritten Traditions are not
much different. There is indeed a Revelation which all the Saints are to
desire. We read of it, Ephesians. 1. 17. When God opens the Understanding
savingly to embrace the written Word; but Revelations above, or against, or
contrary to, or beside, or without the Word, are but the fancies of men. The
Devil will not much be afraid of such a Sword as this is, in the day of
Temptations: this is not a spiritual sword, but a carnal sword: this is not the
sword of the Lord, but the sword of Saul, which will never hurt this great
Goliath in the day of battle. Our Savior, if ever any, might have trusted to
the Sword of Revelation; but ye see, he draws out the sword of the written
word, and with that puts Satan to flight, Mat. 4. 4, 6, etc.

6. The benefit and necessity of the Translations of Scripture. That the Word
of God should be translated into that language which is known and familiar to
every Nation, is not only beneficial, but necessary. God wrote the Law in that
Tongue, which the Jews, to whom it was given, understood: so did the Prophets
write, and so did they preach.

The gift of Tongues is given for this purpose: The Apostles quoting some
places of the Old Testament, and the New, use the very words of the Septuagint,
which was a Translation. God would have all things in the Church to
Edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26. This Sword of the Spirit would have been unuseful
to most in our Church, and to most in all the Churches of Christ, had not the
Word been translated. It would have been as a Sword fastened in the sheath, or
locked up in the Armory, had it not been translated into our own Language; we
should never have known how to have handled it, etc. if it had not been
transmitted to us in a known Tongue. It Is true, in all Controversies of
Religion, we are finally to appeal to the Original Texts, as being immediately
inspired of God; but yet are Translations useful, and the very Word of God, by
which a Christian may fight as confidently, and as successfully against Satan,
as if he were able to produce the Original Text. Gods goodness is to be
acknowledged in giving gifts to men, to draw this Sword for us, and to give it
us in our own Tongue.

Exhortation. It should put us upon these things. 1. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you 2. Use.
richly in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. Labor for an exact knowledge in the
Scriptures, that you may be skilful in this word of righteousness. Its said of
Apollos, that he was mighty in the Scriptures, Acts 18. 24. The better you are
skilled in the Scriptures, the more able you will be to defend your selves
against your spiritual Adversaries. To this purpose these two things are to be
considered.

1. Take heed of those deceipts, whereby the Devil endeavors to take you off
from this study, vid. Mat. 13. 9.

2. Make use of such helps as may further your knowledge in them.

1. For Satan's deceipts, they are such as these.

1. He sometimes persuades men, that the study of the Scriptures does not
belong to them. Ministers indeed should study them; but private persons need
not trouble themselves with this study. I shall therefore lay down these
following Arguments, to prove that the study of the Scriptures belongs to all
persons, viz.

1. The subject matter or the things contained in the Scriptures, do appertain
to private persons, as well as to others. Every man is interested in the
Doctrine which the word of God teaches. The knowledge of God, of Jesus Christ,
of the Fall of man, of the way of his Recovery, the Doctrine of Faith,
Repentance, obedience, are to be known of every person that would be saved.
There is not any kind of life, any relation, into which such persons enter;
but the peculiar and special duties belonging to it, are laid down in the
Scriptures. There is the duty of Magistrates, of Ministers, of Parents,
Children, of Masters, Servants, of old, young, of the rich and poor, etc. All
persons are bound to the obedience of the duties, the Scriptures command, and
to abstain from the sins, the Scripture forbids, Ergo.

2. All men are to be judged by the Scriptures after this life, I mean all that
live where they sound. Such as have sinned without Law, shall perish without
Law, but such as have sinned under the Law, shall be judged by the Law, Romans 2.
12. yea and by the Gospel, as well as by the Law, Romans 2. 16. This is that
which our Savior says, John 12. 48. Now every man must come to judgment for
himself, Ergo, its necessary, that he should know that word, by which God will
judge him.

3. The word of God is directed to all and every man, that lives where it is
published. The Law of God was given to all the people of Israel, as well one as
another. Hear oh Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, the writings of the
Prophets were sent to all the Members of the Church, Isay 1. 1. The Apostolical
writings were dedicated to all and every one of the Members of the Church, Romans
1. 7. To all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be Saints. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
To the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified, etc. 2
Cor. 1. 1. To the Church of God which is at Corinth, with all the Saints that
are in all Achaja. The like you will find in the dedication of all the other
Epistles, Ephesians. 1. 1. Phil. 1. 1. The Saints and Bishops are promiscuously
mingled together.

4. An Implicit faith will save no man in the day of Gods appearing. The just
shall live by his faith, Romans 1. 17. Hab. 2. 4. Every man is to have rejoicing
in himself, not in another. Ergo, our faith must not stand in the judgment of
man: we must have grounds of our own, for every matter of practice, and for
every Doctrine of faith, etc.

2. Sometimes he takes men off from the study of them, by the obscurity and
difficulty of them. They are perplex and knotty, etc. Those that are most able,
wrest them to their own ruin, etc. 2 Pet. 3. 16. Against this design we should
consider four things.

1. That although some places of Scripture be dark, obscure, etc. yet those
things which are fundamentally necessary to salvation, are plainly and
familiarly laid down, that the meanest capacity may understand them: As there
are great deeps, wherein the Elephant may swim, so are there fords where the
Lamb may wade.

2. That the obscurity and difficulty of some places, should rather persuade us
to the diligent study of them. The true ground of the difficulty of some places
in Scripture is, to prevent nauseating and loathing of them, by men of large
apprehensions: there is work enough to exercise their understandings.

2. To raise our hearts to the admiration of the infinite wisdom of God, the
Author of them.

3. To excite men to be more diligent in the study of them.

III. That, as many wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction: so, many are
ignorant of them to their own destruction. The Lord will come in flaming sire,
to render judgment and vengeance to them that know not God, 2 These. 1. 8. Ye
err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God.

4. That obscurity which is in the Scriptures, does not arise from the nature
of that which is affirmed, or from the intention of the person affirming; but
either from the ignorance, or wilfulness, of him that wrests it.

3. Sometimes he takes men off from the study of the Scriptures, by showing
them the wicked practices of such as are so much for the Scriptures. Are there
any sort of men more loose, etc? Against this design, we should consider these
things.

1. That there are some, who by the studying of the Scriptures, are enabled to
mortify sin, and live holily. Their lives are exemplary, etc.

2. The looseness and sinfulness of some, who study the Scriptures, arises not
from the knowledge of the word of God; but either from ignorance of it, or want
of practicing it. It is not because they know what they should do, but because
they be not careful to do what they know.

II. For helps to attain to the exact knowledge of the Scriptures, take these.

1. Be careful every day to read some part of them: Frequent-reading of them
will make us exact in them. Alphonso King of Spain read over the Bible 14.
times, with Lyraes Postils. And Austin writes of Antonius a Monk, that having
no learning, by hearing the Scriptures often read, got them without book,
Boyss. Post. p. 178. vid. Acts 17. 11. Let no day pass without reading some
part of the word of God.

2. Careful Meditation. This is chewing of the Cudd. Meditatio sine lectione,
arida; lectio sine meditatione, infructuosa.

3. The help of good Commentaries. God has afforded his people plentiful helps
of this nature. Turn over Interpreters, that ye may see and find out the sense
of Scripture, which is indeed the Scripture. Non in verbi^ est Evangelium, sed
in sensu; non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in verborum foliis, sed in
radice rationis.

4. A good digestion of the public Sermons you hear. In all Sermons some
places of Scripture are opened or explained. These would be improved and laid
up carefully.

5. Care to live answerable to that measure of knowledge you have received,
Mat. 25. 28: To every one that has it shall be given.

6. Frequent Prayer: Crying after knowledge, is the way to attain unto
knowledge, Prove. 2. 3.

7. Frequent enquiry of others, especially the Ministers of God, Mal. 2. 7. The
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth. The Apostles when they met with any thing they did not understand, they
used to come to Christ for instruction, Mark 7. 17. Lord teach us this Parable:
we would not have you pin your faith on the Ministers sleeve, but we would have
you to repair to them for the untying of your knots.

2. Make use of the word of God in the day of battle, as the soldier does of
his sword. Draw out this sword, and strike down temptations by the power of it.
Arm your selves with it, and then use it. Many Christians are like some men
that wear a sword, but they let it rust in the scabbard, through cowardice they
are afraid to draw it. Many Christians know well how to use the sword of the
spirit; but when they are assaulted, they are so astonished, that they make no
use of it. I beseech you cast off this sloathfulness, and stir up your selves;
and when you see a temptation arise, thrust this sword presently into the
bowels of it, and defend your selves. In the word of God you have these five
things, that you may make much use of in the day of Assaults. Precepts,
Prohibitions, Promises, Threatenings, Examples: if the temptation be, To take
you off from any known duty, urge the Precept: if the suggestion be to draw you
into some act of sin, draw out the Prohibition, and wave it off with it. If
Satan seek, either by himself, or by any of his Instruments, to allure you into
sin, by fair promises: (this way he sometimes takes, Heb. 11. 37. they were
tempted, etc. All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship
me:) then do you draw forth the promises of God, and see what he has promised
to obedience. Gods promises will not only balance, but over-weigh all the
Promises which Satan and his Instruments can make. If Satan and his Instruments
threaten, then have recourse to the threatenings of God. And then for the
Examples in Scripture, great use may be made of them: The example of Job; he
was assaulted, and God rescued him. Paul, he was buffeted, and God delivered
him. Peter, he was surprised, and God rescued him, etc. If Satan should boast
of his spoils and victories, as the King of Assyria did by his General, to King
Hezekiah, Isa. 37. 11, 12, 13. If Satan should thus boast, the Examples in
Scripture will help you to repel these boastings. Satan, thou could not
overcome Job, though God gave thee a full blow at him. Thou could not
overcome Paul, though God gave thee leave to buffet him, not once, nor twice
but often. Satan cannot devise any kind of Temptation, but the Word of God will
put a hundred answers into your mouths, to oppose it, and beat it back.

Thus I have dispatched the sixth piece of the Spiritual Armor, The Sword of
the Spirit, which is, The Word of God.

LECT. XXV. March 27. 1650.
Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all Prayer and supplication in the spirit,
etc. (...).
IN these words we have the last piece of the spiritual Armor, which the
Apostle recommends unto Christians for their safe standing, and certain Victory
over Satan and his Temptations, viz. Prayer and Supplication. Some Interpreters
think, this is no piece of Armor, because there is no expression of any piece
of material Armor, to which it is resembled; but I conceive it is a special
piece of Armor, both offensive and defensive, and that the Apostle forbears
perticularly to resemble it to any one piece of material Armor, because no
one piece does sufficiently set out the excellency of it. It is Armatura
Armaturae, has an influence upon all the other pieces. And therefore reserved
to the last place, as that without with all the rest are unserviceable.

In the whole verse we shall consider two things.

1. The Armor it self. Prayer and Supplication.

2. The particular qualifications of this Duty: this is expressed in these
things.

1. It must be constant, praying always, (...), according to opportunity. 2.
We must use all kinds of prayer, with all prayer. 3. It must be in the spirit,
(...). 4. We must watch unto the duty. 5. It must be with perseverance. 6. It
must be charitable, Not for our selves only, but for all the Saints.
Though I might make many observations of these, yet I shall only give you
one, which is the main in which I shall have occasion to open all these
particulars. And it is this.

He that would stand in the day of Temptation, and be victorious over Satan,
must be very careful to make use of the duty of Prayer and Supplication unto
God. Or thus, Prayer and Supplication to God, is an excellent and special
thing to help a Christian to conquer and overcome all the Temptations of Satan,
and his Instruments. This is the way to stand, this is the way to overcome.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall do these three things.

1. Open briefly the nature of Prayer.

2. Show you what are the Ingredients of a conquering Prayer: where I shall
open those six things which I named before.

3. How this duty of Prayer helps a Christian in this spiritual War.

1. What Prayer is. There are two parts of Prayer largely taken. Petition,
Thanksgiving. I shall not at this time meddle with the latter, but speak only
of petitionary Prayer, which is chiefly meant in this place, of which I lay
down this Description.

Prayer is a religious Invocation, or calling upon the true God in the name of
Jesus Christ the Mediator for the obtaining of good things, necessary for soul
and body, and averting of evil things, that God may be better glorified.

I do purposely omit many things in this Description, which are necessary and
essential to Prayer, because they are particularly expressed in those
Qualifications and Ingredients, which will come to be handled in the next
particular. I shall briefly open this Description.

1. It Is Invocation or calling upon God, so the Scripture uses to express it,
Zech. 13. 9. They shall call on my name, and I will hear them, Romans 10. 14. How
shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? so 1 Pet. 1. 17. and 1
Cor. 1. 2. It Is called sometimes the making of our request to God, Phil. 4. 6.
sometimes the seeking of Gods face, Speaking unto God, entreating the Lord,
etc. All which import invocation. I put this in for these two Reasons, viz.

1. Because it is in it self an Act of Religion, of solemn worship and
Adoration, so much the word (...) signifies. It is sometimes used for all
Religion, Genesis 4. 26. The restoring of the worship of God from corruption,
wherein it had now for a long time been, is set out Synecdochically by that
part of it.

2. To distinguish it from those Invocations which are not religious, but rash,
passionate, inadvised and profane wishes: such as men in discontent and
distemper put up to God: as also to distinguish it from those Prayers which
want those Religious and holy affections and Ingredients which should be in a
holy Prayer, Heb. 12. 28. Eccles. 5. 1. 3. It Is calling upon the true God. This
I add for these three Reasons.

1. To exclude all prayer made to Saints, Angels, the Virgin Mary, or any other
Creature. Prayer being an Act of Religious worship, cannot without manifest
Idolatry be directed to any Creature, Rev. 22. 9. Mat. 4. 10. Judge. 13. 16.
That in Genesis 48. 16. is not to be understood of a created Angel, but of Jehovah
the Son of God, the increated Angel of the Covenant, vid. Hos. 12. 4, 5.
compared with Genesis 32. 28. It was not any created Angel; but God himself who
redeemed him out of evil.

2. To exclude all prayer to false Gods, such as Heathens do invoke, vid. Psalm.
44. 21.

3. To teach us that we must direct our prayers to God in Trinity. We must
invocate the Trinity of persons in the unity of the Godhead. When in prayer we
name one person of the Trinity: we must in our heart and mind include the
other two; for however, the persons be distinct in themselves: yet in all the
duties of worship which we perform, the name of any person, Father, Son, or
Holy Ghost, is to be taken essentially, not personally. We are to conceive, the
Father subsisting in the same Godhead, with the Son and Holy Ghost, and in all
workings, ad extra, the three persons of the Trinity work together, and are
only distinguished in manner of working. Therefore we must not separate them in
worship.

And when we pray to Christ, we are not to sever his two Natures in our mind;
but we must call upon him as God and man; for however, the Manhood is not to be
worshipped with religious worship for it self, or by it self, because it is by
it self a Creature: yet as it is personally united to the Godhead, it is part
of that person which is true God, and therefore to be worshipped with one and
the same worship, wherewith the Godhead is worshipped, Heb. 1. 6.

4. It Is in the name of Christ the Mediator. In the state of innocence man
might worship God without a Mediator, but since sin made the breach, God will
accept no worship from man, but what is tendered in the hands of a Mediator.
This Mediator is Jesus Christ alone, 1 Timothy 2. 5. This was typified in the Law.
The High Priest alone did enter into the Sanctuary, and carry the names of the
Children of Israel before the Lord, and the people stood without, Exodus 28. 29.
this did typifie Christ's Mediation. The Mercy seat had two things, The Cloud of
Incense that covered it, The blood of the Bullock sprinkled before it, Lev. 16.
13, 14. That blood typified Christ's satisfaction. The Cloud of incense, his
intercession. The Patriarchs of old made all their Prayers in Christ's name,
Deuteronomy. 9. 17. Christ is the Jacobs Ladder: No man comes to the Father but by
him. He is our Brother Benjamin, without whom God will not bid us welcome, vid.
Ephesians. 3. 12. This I add for two Reasons.

First, To exclude the mediation of Saints and Angels: the Papists make
Co-Mediators with Christ:

Secondly, To take off that fond conceit of the meritoriousness of our prayers.
These come in the name of your prayers, not in Christ's name.

5. For the obtaining of good things necessary for soul and body, and the
averting of evil things. Here we have both Petition and Deprecation. That which
is to be prayed for comprehends:

1. Good things. 2. Things lawful, 1 John 5. 14. 3. Things necessary; not
trifles, not vanities; not res ludicrae: we must not (...) 4. Things for soul
and body, daily bread, pardon of sin.
That which is to be prayed against, or deprecated: Evil things, Penal Evils,
Sinful Evils.

Only things spiritually good must be prayed for: In the first place, Matthew. 6.
33.

Absolutely. All outward things must be prayed for, and prayed against not
absolutely, but with subordination to the Will of God, and our good. Not as I
will, but as thou will.

6. That God may be the better glorified. This I add, to let you see what the
supreme and principal end of a Christian should be in prayer: Not so much the
satisfaction of his own wants, or the removal of his own annoyance, as the
glorifying of God, vid. 1 Pet. 4. 11. Hallowed be thy name, is put into the
first place of that pattern for prayer; and, Thine is the Kingdom, power and
glory, into the Conclusion, to let us see that Gods honor must be both the
Alphae and Omega of our Prayers.

Secondly, what are the Ingredients of a Conquering Prayer?

In the opening of this, I shall give you an Exposition of that which I made
the latter part of the Text, and it has these six things in it.

1. A conquering Prayer must be a frequent Prayer, (...). As often as God gives
us an occasion, and fit opportunity, so often must we perform this Duty of
Prayer. First, The Scripture does not only enjoin the Duty of Prayer, but
requires frequency in it, Luke 18. 1. 1 These. 5. 17. Daily prayer is commanded
by our Savior, Matthew. 6. 11. Give us this day our daily bread. Daily prayer;
yea, Morning and Evening prayer, was typified by the morning and evening
Sacrifice under the Law, vid. Exo. 29. 38, 39. and Numb. 28. 3. That was to be
offered by the Israelites every morning, and every evening, without
intermission; yea, upon their Sabbaths, and other Festivals, though there were
other peculiar Sacrifices to be offered by the people, yet the daily Sacrifice
was not to be omitted, Numb. 28. 10.

Secondly, the servants of God have been frequent in prayer, Daniel used to
pray three times a day, Dan. 6. 10. David seven times a day, Psalm. 119. 164.
Yea, he was vir orationis, for his frequency in it, Psalm. 109. 4. The story
relates it of John the Evangelist, that by his frequent prayer, his knees were
grown like Camels hoofs for hardness.

Thirdly, Satan tempts us frequently: he is every moment spreading his Net, and
laying his Snare to entrap the Soul: he takes every opportunity to assault us:
ergo, we should take every opportunity to defend our selves against his
Assaults, 1 Pet. 5. 8. Your Adversary goes about continually seeking whom to
devour. Himself says, Job 1. 7. That he is continually circuiting, and going
up and down to destroy. It Is not one Arrow that will secure us against such
frequent and reiterated Temptations. He made three Assaults upon our Savior in
a little space of time, Mat. 4. init. and when he left him, it was but for a
season, Luke 4. 13.

2. He that would overcome, must use all kind of prayer. (...). Prayer is
diversely distinguished. In regard of the manner of performing it, it is either,
1. Mental, or Vocal. Mental prayer is, when the heart only prays without the
voice: such was that of Moses, Exodus 14. 15. Such was that of Hanna, 1 Samuel 1.
13. These are mutae preces, and tamen clamantes. Vocal Prayer is, when the
desires of the heart are drawn out into verbal expressions: such was that of
David, Psalm. 5. 3. Psalm. 64. 1.

2. Either with others, or else solitary with our selves alone: Prayer, with
others, is either more public, as in the Congregation; or more private, as in
the Family. Solitary prayer is, when the Christian enters into his Closet,
retires himself from all company, and then powers out his desires to God: such
is that our Savior enjoins, Matthew. 6. 6. Such was that of our Savior, Luke 5.
16. In regard of the matter, Prayer is either for the obtaining of good things;
this is called (...) in the Text: or else it is for the diverting of evil,
which is called (...). Now all kind of prayer must be used by him that would
overcome Temptations: He must pray privately and publicly, mentally and
vocally, etc. Every kind of prayer has in it something which is more
peculiarly excellent, which is not so excellent in any other kind of prayer:
Public prayer excels in one kind; private prayer is more excellent in other
respects, Nehem. 2. 4. Mental prayer, in some respects, excels vocal in
others. In public prayer there, is more strength, vis unita fortior. In
private and secret prayer there is less distraction. There is in the public,
more Communion with Saints: There is in the private often more Communion with
God, less interruption, encumbrance, etc. Satan uses all kind of Temptations,
and therefore we should use all kind of prayer. The whole virtue of prayer lies
not in any one kind, but in all kinds.

3. A Conquering Prayer must be in the Spirit. (...). This has four things in
it:

1. It must be in the Spirit, and not only in the outward man. So the
Scholiast, (...) that is, (...). It must not be a work of the head, or hands,
or eyes only; but chiefly a work of the heart. Prayer is called the pouring
out of the soul, 1 Samuel 1. 15. The pouring out of the heart, Psalm. 62. 8. The
lifting up, or stretching out of the soul, Psalm. 25. 1. We read indeed of the
lifting up of the hands, Psalm. 28. 2. Of the lifting up of the eyes, Psalm. 123.
1. Of the bowing of the knee, Ephesians. 3. 14. These are fit and convenient
postures, to manifest the inward affections of the heart; but the main work of
prayer is in the inward man, Quod cor non facit, non fit. Satan is a Spiritual
Enemy. Satan's Temptations, are Spiritual Temptations; and therefore prayer will
do no good against him, which is not Spiritual. God will never honor a prayer
with victory over Satan, which is only a bodily service; yea, prayer without
the heart, drives God away, and brings temptations into the soul. It will never
be a Satan-conquering, but a self-weakning prayer.

2. Prayer in the Spirit, i. e. Zealous and fervent, not cold and faint. So
it is used in the Scripture, Romans 12. 11. A cold faint prayer will never prove a
Conquering-prayer. It Is fervent prayer, that is the effectual prayer, Jam. 5.
16. (...). Such have been the prayers of the victorious servants of God. Such
was Jacobs prayer, Genesis 32. 31. compared with Hos. 12. 4. Such was the prayer
of Elias, Jam. 5. 16. compared with 1 King. 18. 42. We read of striving in
prayer, Romans 15. 30. (...). Wrestling in prayer, Genesis 32. 24. Laboring
fervently Col. 4. 12. Praying exceedingly, (...) 1 These. 3. 10. Pouring out a
prayer, Psalm. 102. tit. Lifting up a prayer, Esa 64. 7. Stirring up our selves
in prayer, Esa 64. 7. All which expressions note ardency. Satan is not cold,
but servent; not faint, but zealous in his Assaults: he fights against us in
his Spirit, that is, with all his might; and if we do not pray in the Spirit,
we shall rather encourage him then get the Victory.

3. In the Spirit; that is, in sincerity. Spirit is used, in Scripture, in
opposition to hypocrisy, Joh. 4. 24. Ambrose expounds this, of purity of
heart, and integrity. Hoc est in Spiritu semper ^rare, munda conscientia, and
fide integra, precem ad Deum dirigere. In carne enim orat, qui polluta mente
orat. A prayer proceeding from an impure heart, is like rotten Arrows against
an Enemy, which will neither wound him. nor kill him. Hypocritical prayers
shall not be heard of God, Psalm. 66. 18. Nor shall they be feared of Satan.
Satan is not hypocritical, and in appearance, but real and in good earnest in
his temptations; and so must a Christian be in his prayer, that means to
overcome.

4. In the Spirit, i. e. By the help of the Holy Spirit. The Saints have this
happiness, that the Holy Ghost makes intercession in them with sighs and
groans, which cannot be uttered, Romans 8. 26. Now he prays in the Spirit, that
prays by the help and assistance of the Spirit: he that acts the Graces of
the Spirit in Prayer, Faith, Hope, Heavenliness, etc. Some deride Prayer in and
by the Spirit. Satan is a Spirit, and no prayer will put him to flight, but
that which is framed in the heart by the Holy Spirit of prayer. It is not the
gift of Prayer, but the grace of Prayer which gets the day.

4. A Conquering Prayer, must be a watchful Prayer. (...). This is required as
a necessary Qualification of Prayer, Mat. 26. 41.

There is a twofold watchfulness, in reference unto prayer.

1. A watchfulness (unto prayer:) Of this we read, 1 Pet. 4. 7. Be ye sober,
and watch unto prayer. A watchfulness (in prayer:) Of which we read, Col. 4. 2.
Watch in prayer with thanksgiving. He that would overcome Satan by prayer, must
do both these; He must watch unto prayer; that is:

1. He must have the thoughts of his heart taken up about this Duty: he must
prepare for it, both matters for it, and time for it: he must so order his
affairs, that he may solemnly wait upon this work of prayer: many Christians
are so entangled about other things, they do so watch for the matters of this
life, that they have no fit time for prayer.

2. He must watch and observe those special seasons, in which God does move and
stir up his heart to this Duty. He must watch (in Prayer;) that is, he must
watch against Drowsiness, against Distractions, and wanderings, against
whatsoever may divert him from prayer. It is to be the care of a Christian,
that his heart may be composed in prayer, that Satan may not take him off from
the work he has in hand.

Satan watches unto Temptation, and watches In Temptation; and if we do not
watch both Into supplication, and In supplication, he will have a very great
advantage against us; your drowsy, careless, loose, unsettled prayer, is the
way to encourage, not to dishearten Satan.

5. A conquering Prayer, must be a persevering Prayer. (...). It signifies
such an invincible constancy, and perseverance, as will be beaten off by no
kind of opposition, or difficulty whatsoever. This is required in many places,
Romans 12. 12. Col. 4. 2. We must not only pray for a day, or a year, and then
cease; our prayers must continue as long as the battle continues. All victory
is promised to him only that perseveres. Satan is never weary of tempting, and
we must never be weary of praying. You must be still charging and discharging
this Ordinance of Prayer, as Satan is charging and discharging upon you by his
Temptations: Discontinuing of this, may lose the battle. The Apostle exhorts
Christians to have a care that their prayers be not cut off, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
(...). The cutting off prayer, is as dangerous as the total neglecting of
prayer.

6. A conquering Prayer, must be a charitable prayer. This is, in these words,
(...). Not, as if we must pray for none but Saints. God gives us leave to pray
for all sinners, except those who have sinned that unpardonable sin. Samuel
prayed for Saul. Abraham prayed for Ishmael etc. It Is not exclusive of others:
His meaning is, we must pray for others, especially for the Saints: the Eye of
Charity, in this, as in other pieces of it, is to look first at the Saints. The
Saints are liable most of all to the violence of the same Temptation, which we
are liable to. The Saints being helped by our prayers, will be the better able
to pray for us, and to help us in our Assaults, by their prayers. And besides,
Prayers for the Saints, will engage God to hear the prayers that we make for
our selves, in our own Temptations. I might add more Qualifications out of
other Scriptures; but I resolve not to go out of the Text.

Thirdly, Wherein the usefulness of Prayer, as to the overcoming of Satan, and
his Temptations, lies. This I shall show in these things, viz,

LECT. XXVI. April 3. 1650.
FIrst, Prayer is the way to prevent Temptations from entering. It does make the
soul, in a manner impenetrable, Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter
not into Temptation. Satan's hands are tied up by the power of Prayer sometimes,
that he cannot shoot an Arrow of Temptation against the Soul. Lead us not into
temptation, Mat. 6. 13. It Is a hard thing for Satan, with all his wiles, to
make his fiery Darts fasten upon the Soul of a praying Christian.

Secondly, Prayer is the way to pull out Satan's Darts when they are fastened:
For, 1. Prayer sets the blessed Trinity on work for the Souls assistance. It
engages God to take our part in the day of battle. When Moses held up his
hands, Israel prevailed: when he let his hands down, Amaleck prevailed, Exodus
17. 11. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, Psalm. 50.
15. The Prayer of the Disciples did awake Jesus Christ, and set him awork for
them, when the winds and waves did threaten shipwreck, and present ruin, Mat.
8. 24, 25, 26. When the waves and storms of Temptation threaten the ruin of
the Soul, Prayer awakes Christ, and sets him on action for the Souls safety.
The prayer of Paul, when he was actually engaged with Satan in a very hot
Dispute, brought him in, assistance from Heaven. I besought the Lord thrice,
that it might depart from me; and he said, My grace is sufficient for thee, for
my strength is made perfect in weakness, etc. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Prayer brings in
supply of assisting Grace.

2. Prayer gives strength to all the other pieces of the Christian Armor. It
is reserved by the Apostle to the last place, because both is an evidence we
have the other, and because it is so helpful to all the rest. 1. It does keep
the Girdle of Truth upon the Loins: Holy Prayers are as the Clasps of this
Girdle, which tie it together, and keep it from falling off. 2. It is that
which does tie together the Breast Plate of Righteousness. 3. It keeps on the
Shoes of the preparation of the Gospel upon our feet. Take away the strings of
Prayer, and these shoes will soon slip off the feet. 4. It strengthens the
Shield of Faith, and keeps it from breaking. I have prayed for thee, that thy
Faith do not fail. If either Christ's prayer for us, or our prayer for our
selves fail, the Shield of Faith will fail also, Jude 20. 5. It keeps Hope
alive; he that is most frequent in prayer, will be most lively in hoping. 6. It
puts an edge to the Sword of the Spirit: the Word of God stirs us up to
prayer; and then Prayer makes the Word sharp and prevalent.

3. Prayer expels those Corruptions, which weaken and prejudice the Soul, and
give advantage to Satan in the day of Temptation. The strength of sin, in the
soul, is the strength of Satan; all his advantage is from our own Corruptions.
Now Prayer does help on the work of Mortification, and Sanctification; it
purges the Conscience, it purifieth the heart, it fastens grace in the root,
and increases it in the branch, etc. Every holy Prayer pares off something
from that body of Death, which is Satan's Armory, and strong hold in us.

4. Prayer adds boldness and courage.

Information. 1. This lets us see the reason why Satan is such an enemy to
Prayer. That he uses all means to take off the servants of God from this Duty,
the Scripture tells, and the experiences of all the people of God make it good.
What distractions and disturbances does he ordinarily work in the hearts of
men, when they are employed in this service? The Saints of God never find him
more busy with them, then at such a time. When Paul was going to prayer, a
Spirit of Divination meets him, and labors to divert his thoughts, Act. 16.
16. A Child of God can never have an intention to wrestle with God in Prayer,
but some messenger of Satan, or other, is ready to wrestle with him to take him
off. This Text shows us the reason: He knows well, that the servants of God are
never more successful against his Temptations; nor that he is never more
defeated in his designs against them, than when they set their faces to seek
God. He has been so often overcome by this Holy Ordinance of God, that he is
afraid of it. Hence it is, that he is so diligent, both to take them off from
it, and to interrupt them in it. He is most afraid of a Child of God, when he
is on his knees. This makes him so strangely attempt to break off the Exercise
of it.

2. This shows us, that Satan must needs prevail very much, where Prayer is
neglected. Do not wonder to see the Devils Throne erected so high in those
Families, and in those Persons, where Prayer and Invocation is cast aside.
There Is nothing in such a soul, to hinder either his Residence, or Domination.
Watch and pray, says Christ, that ye enter not into Temptation, Mat. 26. 41.
Those that disuse Prayer, must necessarily be under the power of black
Temptations. They have no defense to keep Satan out; nor have they any way to
cast him out, when he is once entered.

3. This lets us see the power of Holy Prayer. It Is a very strong thing: he
that considers well what prayer has wrought, cannot imagine it to be a weak
thing. It has for a time stopped the course of Nature: Sun stand thou still in
Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon, Josh. 10. 12, 13. It has
divided the waters of the Sea, Exodus 14. 21, 22. It has quenched the burning
flames, Numb. 11. 1, 2. It has cast Devils out of their possession. The Prayer
of Luther, and other servants of God, recovered a man out of the hands of
Satan, who had made an Indenture of his soul to him, and sealed it with his own
blood. The Indenture sealed, was cast in, into the place where they were
praying. And our Savior tells, That no Devil has such deep possession, but by
Prayer and Fasting he may be cast out, Matthew. 17. 21. In a word, Prayer has
overcome God himself, Genesis 32. 26. Luther was wont to say, There is a kind of
Omnipotency in Prayer. It never yet did, it never shall, through God, meet with
any thing too hard for it. No Journey was ever too long for it: no Mountain too
high: no Waters too deep: no Burden too heavy: no Temptation too strong. It
never was, it never shall be, finally and totally overcome by any Adversary.

4. That a Christians Victory over the Temptations of Satan does not depend
upon himself, but upon God alone. This is gathered from hence: When he has
dressed himself, and got his weapons into his hands, he must then look to his
Commander in chief, and conquer by prayer. He does not overcome by fighting,
but by praying. All his preparation, all his graces, all his Armor, all his
endeavor, will not carry him through the battle with success, unless God stand
by him. When he has done all he can, Prayer must be his last refuge, that God
would vanquish his enemies for him.

5. This is an Apology for the people of God, who desire to be frequent in
Prayer. They have found the benefit of it, and they still know the excellency
of it. It Is a piece of that Armor which they must use: nay, it is upon the
matter, their whole Armor: all the rest does no good without it; therefore are
they so careful to use it. They know the danger of Satan's Assaults, and they
know if they be not frequent and fervent in Prayer, they shall be overcome;
therefore they willingly neglect no opportunity of performing this service:
they know praying Christians, are the safest Christians.

6. That the gift and grace of Prayer, is a mavelous great blessing, That God
has given his Spirit, to be a Spirit of Prayer in us; that God has given to
his people ability to pour out their hearts by prayer, with cries and groans,
that cannot be expressed; that Jesus Christ has given us a Rule how to pray, a
pattern for Prayer: This is a singular mercy, that you are enabled to make use
of this Ordinance of Prayer. There are many that know not how to pray after a
right manner. If God have taught any of you how to pray, you are to acknowledge
it as a mavelous mercy, and to bless his name.

7. How much you are indebted to them that pray for you. They supply you with
Armor.

Exhortation. Be entreated and persuaded in 2. Use.
the Lord Jesus Christ to make use of this piece of Armor. Pray always with
all Prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watch thereunto with all
perseverance, and supplication, for all Saints. In this Exhortation, I shall do
three things.

1. Give you some Motives. 2. Help you against the Wiles of Satan, whereby he
endeavors to take you off. 3. Give you some helps.
I might give you many Motives: I could tell you, that it is the way to have
your wants supplied: It Is the Key of the Treasury of Gods blessings: God has
appointed this as the great Channel of conveyance of all blessings, Jam. 1. 5.
It Is the way to have every thing sanctified to your use: it makes bitter things
sweet, and sweet things more sweet: it is that Salt which savours every thing, 1 Timothy 4. 5. It turns all afflictions into gold, all poison into physic, 2 Cor.
12. 8, 9. It Is the way to expel inordinate cares and fears, Phil. 4. 6. He
that is much in prayer, will be little in Care. It Is the Nurse of all graces:
it preserves the fear of God in their hearts, Job 15. 4. It preserves the love
of God. It nourishes Humility: it keeps the Conscience clean and tender; it
preserves and maintains heavenly-mindedness, etc. But I shall only urge that
which is in the Text.

It Is the way to have certain victory over all Temptations. Satan may shatter a
praying Christian, but he shall never conquer him: He may, for a time, bring
him into his Net; but God will rescue him, and bring him out again. Whenever
I call upon God, says David, then shall mine enemies be put to flight, Psalm.
56. 9. Prayer, rightly managed, will carry you through an Host of Temptations.
These black Regiments will and must give way to the power of prayer, if you
continue instant in it. You cannot get victory over the least Temptation
without prayer; and the greatest Temptation shall be subdued, if you continue
in this Duty. Satan is as well able to overcome God, as to overcome prayer,
which has the strength of God in it.

2. To help you against the wiles of Satan: He has many Devices to take off
the Children of God from prayer, viz, these six things.

1. God knows what I want, though I do not pray. I cannot, by prayer, move God
to bestow any thing which he has not intended to bestow, etc. Ergo, What need
is there of prayer? Against this wile of Satan, consider these three things.

I. The receiving of the good things we want, is not the only end of Prayer.
It is one great end, but there are many other things besides, which should move
us to this Duty. We are to pray, 1. In obedience to the Command of God. It is a
piece of Divine Worship and Adoration: it is a part of that homage which all
the sons of men owe unto God.

II. That thou may enjoy Communion and Fellowship with God, by the use of
this Ordinance of Prayer.

III. To acknowledge thy submission to God, and thy dependence upon God: Not to
pray, is to cast off that Dominion which God has over thee: it is to deny thy
reliance upon God. It Is to say, thy dependence is not upon God, but upon thy
self.

2. Thou can have no ground to believe, that any good thing shall be bestowed
upon thee without Prayer. Prayer, though it be not the cause, yet it is the
condition, or the mean, of obtaining all that good which God has promised unto
his people vid. Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will yet for all this be enquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them. No man can say, I shall have this mercy,
though I do not pray.

3. It Is not the bare enjoying of the good we want which should satisfy us. We
should also labor to enjoy it in mercy, to enjoy it as a blessing. Now it is an
everlasting, and most certain Truth, that whatsoever is not obtained by prayer,
is not given in mercy, vid. 1 Timothy 4. 5. A man has not a sanctified right to
any thing he possesses without prayer.

2. Satan sometimes labors to take off men from Prayer, by objecting their
infirmities and weaknesses. Thy heart is thus and thus distempered, etc.
Against this, I would give you these two Answers.

1. It Is not the infirmities and weaknesses of a Christian which are seen and
lamented, that can hinder the efficacy and success of his Prayers. Sin
obstinately and avowedly continued in, will indeed cut off the success of
Prayers, and make both them, and him that makes them abominable to God, Prove.
28. 9. But infirmities which are continually resisted and bewailed shall never
make the prayer to be rejected. I might give you many instances; as that of
Jonah, A man full passions, etc. Yet Chap. 2. 10. God heard his Prayer. King
Asa, a man full of infirmities, imprisons the Seer, oppresses the people, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. yet God heard his prayer, Chap. 14. 11, 12. But I shall give
only that one remarkable instance, which is recorded as a help against this
Rock, Jam. 5. 17. Elias was a man of like passions, as we are, etc. Yet was
heard very graciously: Heaven was opened, and shut at his prayers. Gods hearing
of our prayers, does not depend upon our Sanctification, but upon our
Justification. He does not hear our prayers, because either we, or our prayers,
are perfect; but because our persons are accepted. God does not hear our
prayers, for our prayers sake, but for his own names sake, and for his sons
sake, etc.

2. This should rather encourage us to the Duty. Discontinuance of prayer, will
not remove, but increase our imperfections: if grace be weak, the omission of
prayer will make it weaker: if Corruption be strong, disuse of prayer will make
it stronger. The distempers of the heart, whatsoever they are, will not be
abated, but augmented, by the omission of this Duty of prayer.

3. Satan will persuade men, perhaps, that they are not in a state of Grace.
It Is true, if they had but only infirmities, they might be encouraged to pray,
etc. but they are unregenerate persons, etc. Against this, I would give these
Answers. Besides this, in the general, that it is a good sign there is
something of grace, when Satan persuades men to the contrary, etc. Consider,

1. That Prayer is a work fit for such as are not converted, as well as such as
are converted. It Is the Duty of men to pray, as they are reasonable Creatures,
who owe homage to God.

2. Prayer is to be made for Conversion, as well as after Conversion. A man is
not to pray only because he is forgiven; but also, he is to pray that he may
be forgiven: see Act. 8. 22. Repent, says Peter, to Simon Magus, of this thy
wickedness, and pray God, if (perhaps) the thought of thy heart may be forgiven
thee, etc.

4. Those who never pray, they prosper in the world, as well as such who are
most careful of this Duty. This is another of Satan's Devices. Against this,
consider these things.

1. Outward prosperity is not the only reason why men should pray. Yea, this,
is one of all the meanest ends of prayer.

2. All prosperity, which is not the effect of Prayer, is indeed a Curse, and
not a blessing. Nothing is sanctified, as I said before, but that which comes
in by prayer. If his Children be multiplied, it is for the sword, Job 27. 14.
If his Table be richly furnished, it is to ensuare him: his Wealth is his Trap,
etc. Whatsoever a man enjoyes, without prayer, is, in Gods Account, no better
then Robbery.

3. God has an eternity of adversity, and misery, after this life. They have
received their Consolations in this life, Luke 6. 24.

5. Satan takes off others, by objecting their Disabilities. Thou wants those
gifts and endowments, which others have: Ergo. Against this, I would say these
things:

1. God does not so much look at the gift of Prayer, as at the Spirit of
Prayer. Though it be the Duty of every person to labor for fit words of
Prayer; yet God does not hear prayer for the elegancy of phrase, but for the
heavenliness, and spiritualness, and brokennesse of heart of him that prays.
The publicans prayer had not much eloquence in it, God be merciful to me a
sinner; and yet God accepted it. The Spirit of God helps our infirmities, says
the Apostle, with sighs and groans, etc. One sigh and groan from a broken
heart, is better pleasing to God, then all humane eloquence, if the heart be
not affected.

2. Pray that thou may have better gifts. God has promised his Holy Spirit
to them that ask, Luke 11. 13.

3. Thou do not pray to God as a critical observer of incongruous
expressions; but to God, as a Father; Who is well pleased with the prayers of
his Children, because they are his children.

6. Satan perhaps, will endeavor to take off Prayer, from thy long-waiting for
an Answer. Thou have prayed many a time, but received no answer, etc. Ergo. I
would against this Stratagem, give these things, by way of answer.

1. God has more ways of answering prayers then one. There are three
remarkable instances in Scripture of this, vid. Acts 1. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.
Heb. 5. 7. The particular thing was not granted, and yet his prayer was heard.

2. Delays are not denyals. God defers to hear, not because he does not love
us, or delight in us, but for other ends. As,

To exercise of Faith, Hab. 2. 3, 4.

To exercise our Patience.

To stir up our zeal and importunity in asking.

To give us what we ask in a fitter season, Rev. 6, 10, 11.

That is a very strange expression which we have in Joh. 11. 5, 6. Jesus loved
Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus: and see what follows, v. 6. When he heard
therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he
was: A very strange effect of love; A plain contradiction, if Reason might be
Judge. Deferring to hear prayers, is not always an evidence of hatred, but
sometimes an evidence of love, Calv. in locum.

3. Let this rather be a Motive to confirm, then a discouragement to take thee
off from prayer. God will hear at last, that is certain: and, do not lose ten or
twenty years waiting, for want of a little patience.

4. Though God should never hear, yet it were thy duty to pray.

3. To lay down some helps for prayer: these things will be of very great use
to this purpose, to teach us to pray, viz.

1. Be well acquainted with the Doctrine of the Bible, that you may thereby get
the perfect knowledge of the good which God has therein promised unto his
people.

2. Get a through and perfect sense of your own wants: Sense of want, will make
the dumb Child to beg.

3. Observe well the prayers you hear made by them, that have the abilities of
prayer.

4. Labor for the Spirit of the Lord, which is not only a Spirit of Grace,
but of Supplication.

5. Get others to desire God to teach you how to pray.

6. Be often practicing, according to the abiiities you have. Precando disces
precari. Thus much for the Spiritual Armor.

FINIS*

