THE FALSEHOOD OF Mr. WILLIAM PRYN'S TRVTH TRIVMPHING, In the Antiquity of
Popish Princes and PARLIAMENTS.

TO WHICH, He attributes a Sole, Sovereigne, Legislative, Coercive power in all
matters of Religion; discovered to be full of absurdities, contradictions*
sacrilege, and to make more in favor of Rome and Antichrist, than all the
books and pamphlets which were ever published, whether by Papal or Episcopal
Prelates, or Parisites, since the Reformation.

WITH Twelve Queries, Eight whereof visit Mr. Pryn the second time, because
they could not be satisfied at the first.

Printed in London, 1645.

EPIST. DEDICATORY. To Mr. William Fryn of Lincolnes Inn, Esquire.
SIR,
I May safely appeal to Whatsoever is of esteem and dear unto you, how I
could much rather have bemoaned in private that perverse and implacable spirit
of yours, had not you of late so inconsiderately bespattered so many Pamphlets,
which have infected the very air, far worse than any most malignant
epidemicall contagion, by having inherited the privilege to be cried up and
down the streets and public places, instead of Royal Proclamations, to the
great scandal of your most conscientious Brethren, and suppressing truth both
Spiritual and Civil, which had more than begun to shine out so gloriously,
since the first assembling of this present Parliament.

You have done as much as in you lies to divide the Independents from the
Parliament, by grudging them a peaceable abiding place in the land of their
inheritance; and provoked our Brethren of Scotland by fixing or fastening upon
Christian Emperors, Kings, Magistrates, Parliaments, the undoubted legislative
coercive power in all matters of Religion, Title page; and that even without
the assistance or advice of Synods; page 88. I do but advertise you thereof,
though it be known so publicly, that Aulicus took notice of it so long
since: consider the high consequences thereof, and the mischief it may grow
unto, unless prevented opportunely.

Both King and Parliament pretend to have taken up Arms to defend the
Protestant Religion, etc. and yet fight one against another, no less, than
both of them opposed it: The King wonders the Parliament should entertain
Brownists and Anabaptists to fight for the Protestant Religion; and the
Parliament marvels no less that the King should entertain Papists to do the
same: But may they not both alike wonder at each other in this particular? or
rather, why should either of them at all wonder at such proceedings, since the
Papists in matter of doctrine believe all which Protestants believe; and both
Brownists and Anabaptists hate Popery and superstition as much as Protestants?
But if the Protestant Religion can be truly propagated by fighting; surely both
Papists, Brownists and Anabaptists, even Turks and very Dogs may be brought
and taught to fight for it, all alike; but when you have spent your spirits,
and distilled away your brains, you will perceive at last if ever your eyes be
open as I desire unfainedly) that it is the most irrational and Vn-Gospel-like
course under heaven, to employ the arm of flesh to work upon the spirit.

Take heed then what you say; or explain to us what you and your party mean,
when you make the supreme Civil Magistrate to be custodem utriusque tabulae:
Tell us whether the Great Turk, Emperor, Kings of Spain, France, Poland, etc.
be not lawful Civil Magistrates; how you can abridge them this Prerogative of
both Tables, or quit their duty in taking charge of them, more than any Prince
or Magistrate of Christendom.

Did not Paul tell Timothy, and Mr. Pryn in him, that the time would come when
men would not endure sound doctrine, but turn away their ears from the truth,
heaping to themselves teachers after their own lusts, 2 Timothy 12 3, 4, 5. What
if Mr. Pryn were another Timothy, or had the very spirit of the self same
Timothy, and could infallibly assure us that these were the times which Paul
then spoke of, and the Independents those who were then foretold to have
itching ears, and to be turned unto fables? may Mr. Pryn be more officious, or
exceed the commission which was given unto Timothy, himself? Paul, and Christ,
whose Apostle and Minister Paul was, gave Timothy no other, than that in such a
case he should be watchful in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of
an Evangelist, make full proof of his Ministry, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with
all long-suffering and doctrine, v. 2.

Consider, I beseech you, for the love of God and men, or your own sake, if
you have any symtomes of respect to either; Does the Apostle, think you, there
understand by reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and doctrine,
that Timothy should upbraid, reproach, defame such as but differed from him in
some opinion only, as you have done to Mr. John Goodwin, and that not for
turning away from, but for holding out such truths, as none in Scripture are
more evident, or may more warrantably, and that more easily too, be made good,
next to the very Scriptures themselves to any equal judge, and even to every
man himself, who will not put out the eyes of his own reason and
understanding, to be led blindefold and superstitiously by other men's, whereof
we can have no other assurance than what is full Popishly implicit? To do the
work of an Evangelist, to make full proof of his Ministry, is it, think
you, to become an informer of the Civil Magistrate? to provoke them unto wrath
and rage against your Brethren of the Independent way? to become an accuser of
them, a persecuter, a very executioner, (properties most eminently peculiar to
the Arch-enemy both of God, and any thing like godliness in any of his Saints)
as you have done most tragically to your eternal infamy, unless God in mercy
work your bitterness of spirit into a more Christian temper of mildness and
humility? which till attained to, shall continually be the prayer of One, who,
till you be such, or at least, less Basilisk-like, must only rest,

Your friend in private.

Christian Reader;
I Conceive it may not a little conduce toward the enlightening the
Presbyterian party, to see the whole Catalogue of their errors, did they but
once cast an eye upon the fierce clashings and diametricall contradictions, in
which their most eminent Champions would inconsiderately involve them: to which
purpose, amongst many, I do here in the two next pages present thee with some
few of them as in a looking-glass; peruse them impartially, and when thou
find that no distinctions, how sophistical soever, can possibly reconcile
such contrarieties, be jealous and suspect the rest; free thy conscience from
the thraldom and bondage of these Egyptian Spiritual Taskemasters; disclaim
the very countenancing such spirits, who care not what trash and trumperies
they vent, so they may gain Proselites and Contributions: Let Reason be thy
guide, Peace and Truth thy aim; and the God of Peace and Truth, who requires
no other than a reasonable service, will infallibly be both thy rewarder and
reward it self: Farewell.

Divines of the Church of Scotland, Discipl. page 89.
THe National Assemblies ought always to be received in their own liberty,
and have their own place. -- And all men, as well Magistrates as inferiors,
to be subject to the judgment of the same in Ecclesiastical causes without
any reclamation or appellation to any judge, Civil or Ecclesiastical within
the Realm.

Doctor Adam Stuart's second part of his Duply to the two Brethren, p. 30.
The Civil Magistrate is subject in a spiritual way unto the Church; He must
learn Gods will by the Ministers of the Church, who are Gods Ambassadors sent
to him; He must be subject to Ecclesiastical censures.

Mr. William Pryn in the Title page terms his Truth triumphing over Falsehood.
A just and seasonable vindication of the undoubted Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, Right, Legislative, Coercive power of Christian Emperors, Kings,
Magistrates, Parliaments in all matters of Religion, Church Government,
Discipline, Ceremonies, Manners.

Author of the Pamphlet, entitled, The readiness of the Scots advance into
England, 6. of November, 1643.
The General Assembly is subordinate to no Civil judicature whatsoever, etc.

Apollonius Considerat. Quarund. Controvers. etc. p. 108.
Particular Churches as well as General Assemblies have their authority
immediately from God.

Mr. Thomas Edwards says in his Antapologia, p. 163.
Junius, Zanchius, Amesius, etc. make the subject matter of political
adminstration to be res humanae, humane things and matters; but of
Ecclesiastical, divine and sacred.

Page 166. Is it that you do give a power to the Magistrate in Ecclesiastical
things, of the ultimate determination of matters purely Ecclesiastical, which
the Presbyterians principles do not, as in matters of doctrine scandal etc.
And page 168. Spiritual remedies and means must be used in the Kingdom of
Christ, and by them Christ does his work. And hence in Ecclesiastical
Discipline, and those scandalls in the Church, which are the point in hand;
punishments in the body or in the purse, which can be by the power of the
Magistrate, have no place.

Divines of the Church of Scotland in a book called, A Dispute against the
English Popish Ceremonies obtruded upon the Church of Scotland, p. 150.
It follows that Christ has committed the power of judging, defining, and
making laws about those matters, viz. which concern the worship of God, not to
Magistrates, but to the Ministers of the Church.

Calvin Institut. l. 4. c. 11. sect. 16.
Since the Church has of its own any power of compelling, neither may require
it (I speak of Civil coercive power) it is the duty of pious Kings and
Princes to uphold Religion by their laws, edicts and judgments.

Junius Controvers. 3. l. 3. c. 26. sect. 12.
Whereas some things are matters of conscience, and belong to the judicatory of
Heaven (that I may speak according to the Canonists;) others humane and
temporal appertaining to an earthly judicatorie; in sacred, divine, and Church
affairs, the judgment is never lawfully committed unto the Civil Magistrate,
no, not to the Emperor himself, because holy things are of another Kingdom
and cognizance.

Six Impossibilities which do necessarily accompany persecution for cause of
Conscience.
1 IT is impossible that the Gospel should come to be preached unto all
Nations, if men may be questioned for matters of conscience.

2 It is impossible that such as know but in part, should grow in knowledge or
from one measure and degree of faith unto another.

3 It is impossible that in a rational way there should be a firm secure
peace throughout the world, nay not in a Province, City or Town, so long as
men make a point of conscience to compel one another to their opinions.

4 It is impossible to prescribe such a way for suppressing new or different
opinions whatsoever, which to any State or Church may seem heretical, but
there will still be left a gap, a possibility of fighting against God, even
when such State or Church think they fight for him most of all.

5 It is impossible that either the weak believers, mis-beleevers or
unbeleevers can be won by our godly conversation as is required, 1 Pet. 2. 12.
and 3. 1. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 12. 16. so long as we will not suffer them to live
amongst us.

6 It is impossible for a man to hold fast the truth, or be fully persuaded in
his own heart of what he does, of what Religion he makes choice of; unless
after he has searched the Scriptures, and try'de the spirits whether they be
of God or no, it be lawful for him to reject that which shall appear to him
as evil, and adhere to that which seems good in his own judgment and
apprehension.

The Falsehood of Mr. William Prynn's Truth Triumphing, briefly discovered.
Sir:
YOur Title says, Truth triumphing over Falsehood, Antiquity over Novelty; you
mean, I suppose, Antic Truth over Novel Falsehood; And the truth is, whoever
considers your ensuing Discourse, will find it to be Antic Truth, very
Antic; such as to the Reformed World of Christians would well near have quite
been antiquated, and totally become ridiculous, had not such unskilful
Antiquaries as William Prynne of Lincolns Inn, Esquire, taken so much
unnecessary and thankles pains in gathering them up from Dunghills, and by
whole Volumnes and Impressions to delude and cozen the unstable people of his
party; the truth whereof, that himself and all others into whose hands this
paper happens, may suddenly perceive; besides the several absurdities and
contradictions, let them only take notice, that both the Truth and Antiquity
he so much speaks and boasts of, are deduced only from the abominable
presidents of superstitious Popery; some whereof I shall particularly, and yet
briefly mention, as I find them confusedly pestred amongst themselves, in the
undigested rapsody of his more vain Discourse.

But before I leave the specious Title thereof, I desire all Readers may
observe how amongst others, you term it a Vindication of the undoubted
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction Legislative of Christian Emperors by Scripture
texts; as if amongst your Antic readings you had discovered some
New Foundland, wherein you would make your over credulous Disciples think
there had lived Christian Emperors before, or at the writing of the Scriptures
who verified your Antic Doctrine and Assertions.

This Grand task, like a very Atlas, you pretend to take upon you in
Refutation of Mr. John Goodwin, without so much as disturbing any of his
arguments, or of the Answers to your twelve Questions, which, both your Epistle
and the latter part of your Book take notice of; but because you cannot make a
satisfactory Reply, and yet are not so ingenuous as to acknowledge it and yield
to Truth, you traduce as malicious and full of virulencie against Presbytery
and the Scots, page 125. and worse then the Popish Gunpowder plot, Epist.
Dedic. Are not these powerful Arguments able to confute the very Apostles had
they but been alleged in their days by such an irreconcilable and implacable
spirit as is Mr. Prynn's (witness, besides others, his proceedings against
Colonel Fines?) Surely your friends will think you have better in your
budget, or be ashamed of you, when they have leisure but to consider of it.

It Is true, you complain that Mr. Rutherfords due Rights of Presbytery, Mr.
Thomas Edwards his Anti-Apologia, and Gulielmus Apollonius, with the Vallacrean
Ministers, were never answered.

It Is likely the Independents do not desire to make, no nor be thought to
have any difference with their Scotch Brethren, if possibly to be avoided; and
you know the Proverb says, The second blow makes the fray; And though you
would not take notice of a completely fit and full answer to Mr. Edwards, and
so much the more, because 'twas made by a mild, meek spirited servant of God,
quite contrary to that of Mr. Edwards his; I hope Mr. Pryn will no longer say
Mr. Edwards is not answered, now that Mr. Chidley has so clearly and fairly
foyld him the second time; And that you may see Apollonius speaks no better
Latin for Presbytery than you do English, please but to cast your eye upon
cap. 3. p. 44, 45. in answer to the Assemblies letters to the Churches of
Zealand, where he says in substance, That the body of Believers in general
have not a power of governing and judging Ecclesiastical matters by any
spiritual jurisdiction; but that the Presbyters themselves have received this
power of ruling immediately from Christ the King of the Church: which, what
ever he allege to prove it with, these gross absurdities, besides how many
others, will plainly follow:

1. That all Church Officers have either intruded themselves into their
offices, or else they must have been thrust in by some supernatural means;
of the latter there is no evidence; of the former there is no allowance.

2. If the Believers the Brethren did not choose the Officers, so neither might
they turn them out.

3. Then in such case it would be in the Officers power to tyrannize even to
the highest extent their own lust should lead them to, without any just
authority on earth to question or restrain them; for if their Presbytery,
their officiating, their governing, ruling, be by divine Right, and not the
peoples free choice; however they behave themselves in it, they cannot be
turned out by the people.

But how does it appear that they have their Office or Eldership immediately
from God? Is it sufficient for them to say so? Then may any other number of
their Brethren pretend the like.

He alleadges 2. Cor. 5. 20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ as though
God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to
God: But may not so many Tinkers use the very same Text, and saying they are
Christ's Ambassadors, thrust themselves over any Congregation in the world if
this be fair dealing? If there goes no more thereunto but confidence and
laying claim, he that can justle hardest will doubtless get it, though Simon
Magus could not carry it with money.

But what kind of Ambassadors did Paul make himself and those Primitive
Christians to be? What power did they take upon them? And how far? They were
Christ's Ambassadors; we know them by their entreating, mildness, gentleness
and long-suffering, as in the same 2 Cor. 5. 20. with Romans 15. 1. Gal. 6. 1. 2.
1. Pet. 5. 2. 2 Timothy 4. 2. Ephesians. 4. 2. But the Prelaticall Presbytery, the
pretended Ambassadors of Christ in these times, we know to be Wolves that
worry, sterve or flea the very Lambs of Christ alive; and as if their cruelty
were not satisfied with the destruction of their bodies, endeavor what they
can, to put a yoke of bondage upon the very souls of their Brethren, Act. 20.
from v. 28. to 31. Matthew. 20. 25, 26. 3 John 9.

The other place produced is, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as of
the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God; but the
Presbyters which we speak of, instead of taking upon them a Ministry, lay
claim unto a Jurisdiction, Dominion, a Prelaty; Instead of being Stewards,
they command, require, expecting lordly obedience and submission; They scorn
to use entreating and beseeching, as Paul the aged, 2 Cor. 10. 1. 3. stet pro
ratione voluntas is their motto, their symboll.

Thus we may see the Texts produced to maintain the Presbyteriall government
to be of Divine Right, make eminently against it; neither is it more evident in
Scripture, than from reason and experience, to wit, That what power the
Presbyters have and exercise, they have it from man, and not immediately from
God, since the Brethren do either explicitly or implicitly make choice of
them, and might as well have chosen any other if they had pleased: Church
Officers are no more immediately from God, than Civil Officers.

The truth is, Apollonius acknowledges the Presbytery to be the
Representative Church, but denies the means, without which I never yet knew it
pretended so much as possible to be constituted: First, he says, Multitudo
fidelium in Ecclesia potestatem regendi, and jurisdictione spirituali negotia
Ecclesiastica dijudicandi non habet jure Dei, proinde eam senioribus and
Presbyteris delegare non potest: Hoc sensu igitur Representativam Ecclesiam non
agnoscimus. Nec talem agnoscimus Ecclesiam Representativam quae a multitudine
fidelium missa, absolutam potestatem per leges and jurisdictiones actus suos
obligandi multitudinem ejus fidem and conscientias subjiciendi; ita ut absque
examine ut laudatum susciperet quicquid ab hac Ecclesia statutum foret. At
Ecclesiam Representativam hanc ex sacris literis agnoscimus, quae est caetus
Presbyterorum a multitudine Ecclesiae electus, qui authoritate and
jurisdictione Ecclesiastica a Christo accepta Ecclesiae praeest and invigilat,
and decretis secundum sacram Scripturam factis and jurisdictione spirituali eam
regit: which in effect is thus: First, That Believers in general have no power
to judge concerning Church affairs, therefore they cannot give or derive unto
the Presbyters what they themselves never had; and secondly, that the Laws of
Country are not sufficient to authorize Believers for choosing Church
Commissioners, who may afterward oblige them and their consciences by
whatsoever decrees shall be by them agreed upon without examining it
themselves; But says he, a Representative Church is an Assembly of Presbyters
chosen by the multitude, who having received Ecclesiastical authority and
jurisdiction from Christ, do watch over the Church, and govern it according
to the Scripture. To him therefore, or Mr. Pryn that quotes him, I should
desire to make these following Queries.

The truth is, Apollonius acknowledges the Presbytery to be the
Representative Church, but denies the means, without which I never yet knew it
pretended so much as possible to be constituted: First, he says, Multitudo
fidelium in Ecclesia potestatem regendi, and jurisdictione spirituali negotia
Ecclesiastica dijudicandi non habet jure Dei, proinde eam senioribus and
Presbyteris delegare non potest: Hoc sensu igitur Representativam Ecclesiam non
agnoscimus. Nec talem agnoscimus Ecclesiam Representativam quae a multitudine
fidelium missa, absolutam potestatem per leges and jurisdictiones actus suos
obligandi multitudinem ejus fidem and conscientias subjiciendi; ita ut absque
examine ut laudatum susciperet quicquid ab hac Ecclesia statutum foret. At
Ecclesiam Representativam hanc ex sacris literis agnoscimus, quae est caetus
Presbyterorum a multitudine Ecclesiae electus, qui authoritate and
jurisdictione Ecclesiastica a Christo accepta Ecclesiae praeest and invigilat,
and decretis secundum sacram Scripturam factis and jurisdictione spirituali eam
regit: which in effect is thus: First, That Believers in general have no power
to judge concerning Church affairs, therefore they cannot give or derive unto
the Presbyters what they themselves never had; and secondly, that the Laws of
Country are not sufficient to authorize Believers for choosing Church
Commissioners, who may afterward oblige them and their consciences by
whatsoever decrees shall be by them agreed upon without examining it
themselves; But says he, a Representative Church is an Assembly of Presbyters
chosen by the multitude, who having received Ecclesiastical authority and
jurisdiction from Christ, do watch over the Church, and govern it according
to the Scripture. To him therefore, or Mr. Pryn that quotes him, I should
desire to make these following Queries.

At what time do the Presbyters receive their Church power from Christ? By
what means and mediation? Whether before they be chosen Presbyters or
afterward? If before; Whether did this power lie idle in them till they became
Presbyters? And might it not possibly have continued so all their life time, if
they had never been chosen Presbyters, or are they predestined to be
chosen, when Christ has once made a deed of gift unto them of some considerable
proportion of spiritual power? But if we see they cannot exercise any
spiritual power until they be chosen Presbyters, and that we might have
chosen others as well as they; Do you think the people will ever be brought
to think they have any other jurisdiction than what they give, and suffer them
to enjoy? Whether do the Presbyters ever part from their spiritual power
after they have once received it? and how come they to lose possession and the
exercise thereof ever after? Surely if these Queries be well answered, all the
power the Presbyters have, besides what the people derive unto them, will be
one of the strongest fantastical delusions and Chimera's which ever yet was
heard of.

But because you make so much of Apollonius, since he is upon the Stage, if the
indifferent Reader please to run over these few following passages, he will
not only find him contradict himself, but Mr. Pryn also in the very title and
whole subject matter of his Book: Mr. Pryn throughout this volumne of his
affirms and endeavors to prove, that, Princes and Parliaments have the sole
sovereign and legislative power in all matters of Religion both for Discipline
and Doctrine.

On the contrary Apollonius says it is in Ecclesiastical Assemblies and
Synods in these words, c. 6. p. 107. Competit ex jure Dei Ecclesiis in
Classibus and Synodis junctis, potestas Canones legesque Ecclesiasticas
ferendi, quae omnes Ecclesias particulares unius Provinciae aut Regni
constringunt ad obedientiam: which is in effect, That, Ecclesiastical
Assemblies, Synods, have by Divine Right a power of making Canons and
Ecclesiastical Laws which do bind unto obedience all the particular
Churches of a Province or Kingdom, (he may as well say of all the world:) and
p. 109. He tells us that, That Union and Communion of particular Churches in
Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government common to them all, which is
exercised in Synods and Classes, is of Divine Right, and proposed to us in the
example of the Apostolical Church, for imitation.

Thus is Apollonius point blanke in opposition to Mr. Pryn; neither is he at
better agreement with himself, for p. 108. He says, The power of Synods does
not take away or disturb the Ecclesiastical power and liberty of particular
Churches; but serves to direct, conserve and promote their Ecclesiastical
power and liberty, that they may become more efficacious, powerful and fit to
edify; and yet p. 144. He says; Classibus and Synodis competit authoritativa
quaedam inspectio, and judicium non tantum discretionis sed and jurisdictionis
and approbationis in excommunicationibus a particularibus Ecclesiis peragendis;
ita ut nulla Ecclesia particularis quae communionem suam Ecclesiasticam cum
aliis Ecclesiis in Synodis and Classibus colit, aliquod suae communionis
membrum excommunicare, and Sathanae tradere legitime possit absque Classis aut
Synodi authoritativo judicio and approbatione: that is, There is due to Classes
and Synods a certain authorative inspection and judgment, not only of
discretion, but also of jurisdiction and approbation in excommunications to be
passed by particular Churches; so that no particular Church which keeps
Ecclesiastical fellowship with other Churches assembled in a Synod may
lawfully excommunicate or deliver up to Satan any of their members, without
the authoritative judgment and approbation of the Synod; and to mend the
matter he yet tells us, p. 108. That the power which particular Churches have,
is granted them immediately from ^od, not derived unto them by Synods; as also,
that the power of Synods is granted them immediately from God, not derived to
them from particular Churches: which is as much as if he had said, that each of
them must be Independent and absolute of it self; and yet one must submit
unto the other; contradiction upon contradiction, or else I understand it not.

But to return again to Mr. Pryn himself; who would think that any one who
had but the headpiece of a man, much less one that takes upon him to be a
Champion, should be so miserably transported with vainglory as thus to play
the Bragadocio, and fill the world with books and pamphlets as if he had got
the victory, or spoken somewhat to the purpose, when yet it may appear upon
due search of an indifferent judge, that neither in the whole catalogue of his
books which was lately printed, nor in whatsoever came since to light, will
there be found so much as one leaf truly worth reading, or any whit availing
him in this controversy which he (not without recanting in his own heart I
believe by this time, to see he thrives no better in it) has undertaken
against the Independents; remaining still so shameless, that not being able to
conceal, or any longer to uphold his vain undertaking, flies unto the High
Court of Parliament, endeavoring to exasperate their power against such, whose
prayers and contributions, in likelihood, have been the only, or chiefest
means to keep him thus long alive?

But alas, what can we expect of this volumne of Civill-Common-Law-Divinity of
yours, when you acknowledge it to be distracted subitane collections,
indigested nocturnall lucubrations (you may like enough say dreams) borrowed
from the hours allotted to your necessary natural rest, Epist. Dedic. One
would have thought the Answerer of your subitane apprehensions digested into 12
considerable serious questions, when you confessed, you had neither leisure nor
opportunity, had given you a seasonable and sufficient item, not to trouble the
world with such trash again; and yet you are not ashamed to say you published
them principally for satisfaction of the learned, and such as most seduce the
ignorant; when doubtless such learning as this of yours, is good for nothing
else but to seduce the ignorant, who more admire a margent full of rusty antic
Authors, than whole leaves and chapters of arguments and sound reason; and
according to your own arguing you do hereby as you think, with your indigested
readings of superstitious Popish writers, enable such, as you call learned,
still farther to seduce the ignorant.

You tell the Parliament in your Epistle Dedicatory, that having had the honor
of vindicating their sovereigne power in all Civil and Military affairs, you
expected a quietus est from all other coutroversies concerning the jurisdiction
of Parliaments especially in Ecclesiastical matters: Surely you might have
said with as much truth and reason, that having vindicated the sovereigne power
of the Roman Emperors, suppose the persecuting Nero, Domitian, Trajan, or who
else lived in any of the Apostles or Primitive times, you had likewise
vindicated their legislative power in matters of Christianity, about
propagating the Gospel, etc. justifying them in putting to death our Savior,
and so many of his Saints: The just rights and power of Magistrates, are to all
Magistrates alike; all one, whether they be Christian or Pagan: Their power is
given them as Magistrates, not as Christians; and the subjection which we were
commanded in the Gospel, Matthew. 22. 21. Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 12. 13. to
render them, was as to Heathen Magistrates, since at that time there were no
other.

But why tro do you say, how most men imagined that controversies about the
Parliaments jurisdiction in Ecclesiastical matters had been put to eternal
silence, when our lordly Prelates lost their votes and session in Parliament by
a public law? Did you not intend that Presbyters should succeed Bishops? or
did you think them to be less lordly than their Reverend Fathers from whom
they spring? Surely you show your self very ignorant of the Presbyterians
pretenses, or endeavor much to conceal them.

Meethinks you might have seen a Pamphlet entitled The readiness of the Scots
advance into England, wherein, besides others, is a letter bearing date the 6
of November, 1643. from Edenborough, upon occasion as it relates of certain
propositions made by the French Agent unto the Privy Council there, which
says, The General Assembly is subordinate to no Civil judicature whatsoever,
etc. And because I find Mr. Pryn so captious, and apt to seek subterfugies;
lest he should cast this off as the bare assertion of some Anonimous, he may,
if he please, find not a little to the same purpose in A. Stewards
Observations and Annotations upon the Apologeticall Narration, in these words;
The Civil Magistrate arrogates not unto himself (not so much as) any
directive power in matters of Religion, p. 5. The Civil Magistrate arrogates
no spiritual authority to himself, p. 48. The Parliament indeed is the
supreme Judicature, severe Tribunal, the most sacred Refuge, etc. in Civil
causes, but it pretends no directive power in matters of Religion, by teaching,
or preaching, or judging of controversies of Religion, nor any executive power
that is intrinsecall to the Church, as in the vocation, deposition, and
suspention of Ministers, etc. which are merely spiritual, p. 6. If your
meaning be that the Parliament should judge between the Independents and
Presbyterians, you go against the Parliaments intentions, ibid. and lastly.
For intrinsecall spiritual power, it is not in your power to grant the Civil
Magistrate any at all; neither can you give him more spiritual obedience than
Scripture permits you, or give him a part of the spiritual power which you
have received of God: It is only in God who can give power therein to any man,
we dare not be so bold, p. 28. All this the Answerer of your 12 considerable
Questions, as you called them, auvertised you of in p. 26. And for Apollonius
whom you so much glory in, as I told you a little before, he says that both
particular Churches, as well as General Assemblies have their authority
immediately from God, p. 108. which diametricall variance amongst these
Presbyterian Champions, doubtless must needs be ominous, and presage no less
than ruin, so much more speedier as they protract the reconciling them: In
which respect if Mr. Pryn would be so good for the Gospels sake, as to give the
Independents rest, and take A. S. with Apollonius to task; who knows but that
they may do some good upon one another? I am sure it were not more than
needful, each of their phansies abounding with excrescencies, which they might
much advantage each other in cutting off.

But what avails it to have the head of one lordly Episcopal Prelate cut
off, when a Hydra, a multitude, above 77 times as many Presbyteriall Prelates
succeed instead thereof? Prelatia, Prelaty, Prelacy, as we use it vulgarly, is
a preferring one before another; and the Presbyteriall government is much more
truly said to be Prelaticall, than either Episcopal or Papal; unless you
will say that neither Episcopal nor Papal be Prelaticall at all; for in
either of those Governments there are but few Prelates; but in the other there
are many; to wit, so many Prelates as there are Presbyters, each whereof is an
absolute Prelate, that is one preferred above his Brethren.

You speak of the defunct Prelates souls transmigrated into the Independents,
acknowledging them for the most part really cordial in their affections,
actions to the Parliament and Church of England, for which, and for their
piety, you say, they are to be highly honored: But me thinks this amounts to
little less than contradiction; Can the earthly Tabernacles of Independents,
with the defunct Prelates souls in them make men of piety, cordial in their
affections, actions to the Parliament, and Church of England highly to be
honored? I wish Mr. Pryn would tell me whether it were the Prelaticall souls,
or their earthly Tabernacles for whose sake he casts this grand Elogium on
them: Doubtless the soul must have pre-eminence of the body, unless your
mind be altered, and hold the immortality of the soul, which you seemed to
discountenance in your 12 Inconsiderable serious Questions, p. 7. But if
Independents having Prelaticall souls in their earthly Tabernacles are for the
most part men of piety highly to be honored; why should not the Prelates be
so too? The truth is, I cannot deny but Mr. Pryn was once by more then a many
and they godly too, held to be a man of piety, and was highly honored; in
whose books and pamphlets, notwithstanding, which have been published of late,
may be observed, more corrupted principles, and a far worse spirit of
persecution, than ever was discovered in the late Delinquent decapilated
Archbishop, from his first ascending unto his highest growth of authority and
greatness; and in the Diary of his life, which I suppose Mr. Pryn printed not
to do him honor (though after ages will not be tied to be no wiser than Mr.
Pryn) I find such eminent signs of a moral noble pious mind, according to
such weak principles as he had been bred up in, (his own persecuting
disposition disabling him from being instructed better;) and particularly so
ingenuous a passage in his Funeral Sermon whereby he justifies the Parliament
in putting him to death, as I may safely profess unto all the world, I never
could yet discern any thing near of like piety or ingenuity to be in Mr.
Pryn, by all that ever I yet heard of him from first to last, or by all the
books of his which ever came to may hands, wherein yet I have hitherto done
him the honor in being at charges to buy as many, I mean one of every sort,
as I could ever meet withal.

But I wish seriously that both Presbyteriall Prelates, and all others now
surviving, who are any ways possessed with this unruly spirit, this legion of
persecution, would, even for their own sakes, not so suddenly forget the
little late Arch-Prelate, though his head be off; since for my part, through
some small knowledge and experience of him both in his life and death, I am
fully satisfied, that his endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, and introducing another Religion, for which he was charged, and
suffered death, arose only from that depraved principle of enduring no body of
any other Religion or opinion but his own: I hope both Mr. Pryn and others of
the same alay may think it worth revolving in their saddest thoughts:
Persecuters are worse than birds and beasts of rapine amongst the rest, whom
even Nature teaches to associate and join together against this common and
most pestilent of all enemies: Bears and Lions are not so hurtful in a
Country, as a misguided zeal grown furious, is torrent like, and carries all
before it: Such whose Religion teaches to persecute, or but prevails upon to
make use of Civil coercive means for differences of Religion of Opinion, will
easily be carried on from one degree unto another, until their ends be
compassed, whether by fire or water, Gun-powder-plots, or Maritim Invasions;
Nothing comes amiss to them whom Religion once innitiates with the cruelties
of compelling consciences.

It Is worth observing, how whilst the truth constrained Mr. Pryn to
acknowledge the Independents piety, with their real and cordial affections
and actions unto the Parliament and Church of England in his Epistle to the
Parliament, he tells them only that they are justly to be blamed as great
disturbers of our public peace and unity (the better to amuse them) whilst in
his other pamphlets and this farraginous hotch-potch of obsolet, Anticke Popish
Histories and Presidents, for the most part, which perhaps he thinks few or
none of them will voutsafe to read through, he seeks to captivate and poison
the peoples understanding into an evil conception of the Independents, and so
incense them, whilst he himself exclames, traduces, and persecutes them, unto
his power, with fire and faggot, merely for nothing but because they sue and
seek for, in all humility and meekness, a possibility of keeping a good
conscience both toward God and man; This is all they desire as touching
Ecclesiastical matters; let Mr. Pryn, who thinks himself to have deserved so
well of Parliaments, become their Advocate, procure but thus much for them, and
take the rest for his fees.

He flourishes, and cries out against the Arminians of the Netherlands about
ascribing, at the first, unto the Civil Magistrate, a power of passing
ultimate judgments in all controversies of Faith and other Ecclesiastical
matters arising in the Church; and afterward contracting or denying such a
power belonging to the Civil Magistrate: Might he not even as well, nay much
better blame former Parliaments of England for first acknowledging the Pope
head of the English Church, and afterward renouncing of the Pope (much against
his Holiness his good liking no doubt) to choose Henry 8. in his stead? And if
Henry 8. then but a Papist were a fit Head of the Church; Queen Elizabeth was
no less: (though the Papists cry out of a femall Head of the Church of
England, as much as Protestants of a femall Pope of Rome) and then surely King
Charles must have succeeded in this Headship of the Church of England, and here
I desire to leave him, and yet to find him here rather than a Presbyterian
Synodall Head, until Mr. Pryn resolve me what it is to be Head of the English
Church; what his Power and Authority is over the Churches Body; whether the
Body may or can do any thing without the Head: And whether any, or what power
one member or part of the Body has over another: But before you put pen to
paper, or your paper to the Press at least, that you will remember how King
Charles the only supreme Head of the English Church according to the oath of
Supremacy, is now at Oxford, with such, and so great a part of the English
National Church, which if they should call another Assemby of Divines would
likely pass judgment in sundry points of Faith and other Ecclesiastical
matters, quite contrary to the Parliament and Divines at Westminster.

Page 29. of your Discourse you quote a passage out of the last Convocation
Canons that had the etc. in the tail, which you approve of, saying; The power
to call and dissolve Councels both National and Provincial is the true right
of all Christian Kings within their own Realms or Territories: Now if this be
so; to what purpose do the Assembly of Divines at Westminster spend time in
sitting there? Why should the Commonwealth be at 4s. a day charges for each of
them? Why do they not repair unto their flocks? Where will King Charles his
Writ appear for summoning them? and for want thereof, will not all the pains
they take be lost? Might not therefore the disturbance and offense they give
their Independent Brethren have well been spared? Are not both Houses of
Parliament tacitly aspersed by Mr. Pryn for causing them thus to assemble
without King Charles his Writ, and so against his true Rights and Prerogative
Royal? and lastly, if this be not an absolute making void and null, whatsoever
the Assembly shall conclude on, or the Parliament establish by their advice,
besides a justifying of the Independents for not submitting thereunto, let Mr.
Pryn himself upon review be judge: For certainly it will seem strange to
every body else, how Mr. Pryn producing, besides others, in page 25, 26, 27,
28, 29. no less than four of King Charles his letters, only to prove the due
right of Christian Princes for calling such Assemblies, can any ways make
legal the present sitting of the Divines at Westminster; or how he can make
atonement for himself to give occasion that both their assembling and whole
proceedings may thus be called in question.

But p. 88. you bring in a Parenthesis (which doubtless the Assembly will
think had far better been left out) that the assent of the Clergy is only by
way of assistance and advice, not simply necessary to the Parliaments
determining what is heresy; however, for my part, I do not much dissent with
you therein; and if the Assembly did like as well thereof, should think it
might somewhat qualify their over forward and eager appetites, which else
might too likely lead them to declare those ways heretical, after which Paul
was not ashamed to say he worshipped the God of his Fathers, Act. 24. 14.

But may not both Kings and Parliaments reprove you (like an unlucky Cow, who
having given great quantity of milk kicks it down with her foot) for
contradicting your self, and plundring them so speedily of all Ecclesiastical
power which before in a good mood you cast upon them so liberally without
allowance, saying p. 141. That there is the self same reason and equity for
several combined Churches in a Council, Synod, Presbytery to have a coercive
power over every particular Congregation in their limits, as for any particular
Congregation to claim or exercise a jurisdiction in point of direction or
correction, over any or every particular member of it. This assertion, I
conceive, is yet more prodigious than all your Popish presidents with which you
ever were acquainted, and I believe that never any body hereafter will so much
as acknowledge you in this opinion: Whereas the Title of your Book and whole
Discourse in general ascribe all power and authority unto the Civil
Magistrate both in Civil and Ecclesiastical matters; This passage gives the
same unto a Synod, even a Coercive, that is, all Power and Authority, and that
both in Civil and Ecclesiastical matters, provided they do but color and
call them Ecclesiastical, for nothing of Coercive can be otherwise than Civil
properly: If you excuse your self by saying you meant a Synod ratified by
Authority of Parliament; I answer, that you must mean a Synod so ratified by
Authority of Parliament, as some Presbyterians of Scotland mean when they
expect that Parliaments must do it ex officio, whether they be willing or
unwilling; and if your meaning had been otherwise, you might have brought your
comparison between a Parliament and particular Congregations, not a Synod;
besides that, the power of direction, which you acknowledge to be in every
particular Congregation toward any or every member thereof, I do not find to
be granted them, or so much as meddled with by Authority of Parliament; so
likewise, if you will have it any ways hold parallel, you must mean the
Synods Canons so confirmed by authority of Parliament, as that the Parliaments
confirmation must still wait upon and follow the Synods beck and requisition.

That part of the Statute 37. H. 8. c. 17. which you bring to establish the
King Head of the Church, says, That by Holy Scripture All Authority and Power
is wholly given to him to hear and determine All manner of causes
Ecclesiastical, and to correct All vice and sin whatsoever, and such persons
as his Majesty shall appoint thereunto: So that whereas a negative voice which
has been, and is still the great controversy betwixt the King and Parliament
in Civil matters only; this Statute 37. H. 8. c. 17. with Mr. Pryns opinion
and consequences thereupon, do freely grant the King in all spiritual causes
and affairs: Surely if all Englishmen did agree with Mr. Pryn in this
particular; the King might like enough be willing for the present to part from
his negative voice in Civil matters, in full assurance of regaining it in
recompense of Pardons and Dispensations, which he might grant by virtue of his
Headship of the Church, with the sole authority of correcting all vice and
sin, and final determining all causes Ecclesiastical.

The truth is, that Christian Kings and Princes have de facto done much with
Civil censures in maintenance of Religion, whether right or wrong, established
by Law: But the point is, what they did, or might do lawfully, de jure: Whence
is their power derived? Surely the power of Princes pretending to the name of
Christian, whether Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Brownists or Anabaptists,
and even of Turkish and Pagan Princes is all alike: So that whatsoever power
the best Reformed Princes can justly assume unto themselves in Ecclesiastical
affairs; even Popish Kings and the Great Turk may fully pretend and act as
much in and about the Churches within their Territories, and neither of them be
more disobeyed or resisted than the other: The power is given to them as
Magistrates and Princes, not as Christians; otherwise they might be deposed at
any time if they became Antichristian, which is exploded for a Popish doctrine.

But as Artaxerxes did not make that Decree for building of the Temple out of
love or conscience unto the God of Ezra, Ezra 7. from v. 21. to 26. So can it
not be concluded from Kings and Magistrates interposing their Civil power
about matters merely Ecclesiastical, that therefore they might and did do it
by full authority from God; since by the self same manner of arguing, it would
follow that Popery were the truest Religion, because most Christian Princes, as
they are called, have established Popery.

But it may have been observed, how Princes and Magistrates in all ages who
have had the Sword of Justice in their keeping, have for the most part been
kept in an ignorant and superstitious overawfulnesse by the Clergy of those
times, who still for their own private ends, prevailed with them to
countenance and enforce their Constitutions by coercive means upon the people;
by which device of theirs, both Prince and People became so entangled and
ensnared to them by degrees; that if either of them afterward sought to
withdraw themselves forth from this bondage, they still found such a party of
the other, as was able to curb and bring them again into subjection of Holy
Church; as they pretended, though never so Popish or otherwise corrupt; And
this series of corrupted and corrupting presidents with their tyrannical
dominion over men's faith and consciences, which the Apostle Paul disclaimed, 2
Cor. 1. 24. Mr. Pryn produces as orthodox, requiring it should be established
after the manner of Medes and Persians irrevocable, and made very Scripture of;
ascribing by this Antic rabble of quotations as great a power unto the Civil
Magistrate in spiritual matters as ever any Pope of Rome assumed unto himself.

But if the Civil Magistrate must be masters of our faith, determining all
controversies in Church affairs; why, I pray, was Mr. Pryn so refractory to
the Bishops who then were authorized by the Civil Magistrate of the united
Kingdom, which now to the universal grief, is so mortally divided? These are
hard questions I confess; but Mr. Pryn will get the more glory when he knows
how to answer them.

If the Arminians upon the improving of their studies about their other
controversies, or the Civil Magistrates bad employing a power ascribed, but
not due to them, saw their error and amended; must they be upbrayded? I would
be loath that Mr. Pryn should want of such encouragements of providence and
mercy, lest it might hinder his repentance of what, I fear me, he is too
highly guilty; God is contented to tole us to him and to his truth, even with
variety of inticements and provocations: frail mankind is dull and stupid; no
less than Gods infinite wisdom together with his unmeasurable bounty will
serve to animate and raise us up to new discoveries of knowledge and obedience.

Take this then for your learning, that whosoever attributes to any man or
Magistrate, a power of imposing any thing upon the consciences of others in
matters of Religion, do justify them in whatsoever they impose, though it be
erroneous, so they impose according to their own judgments and
understandings, condemning the other for not submitting, though it be unto
erroneous impositions: for if the one may impose, his own reason must teach
him what he may impose; And if he have just authority to impose, the other is
obliged in conscience to obey; and so by consequence, should be engaged to
submit implicitly to whatsoever superstitious ceremonies and worship were put
upon him.

In your Epistle to the Reader, you say the Independents may upon the same
grounds deny the Catholic Church, an article of the Creed, upon which they
deny a National Church; as though so many more particular Churches might not
as well make one Catholic, as several, but yet so many fewer National
Churches; or as though particular Christians who lived straggling in Turkey or
any Pagan Countries where they could not possibly be members of a National
Church, could not possibly be members of the Catholic Church.

You accuse the Independents as believing most things with a reserve, according
to their present light, with a liberty of changing as new light shall be
discovered to them: But did ever any man so overshoot himself? Certainly this
is so high a character of the Independents compleatest posture ensuring or
growing stature in the School of Christ, as could be applied unto them,
wherein they glory not a little, and place it as the only groundwork and
foundation, without which they cannot grow in grace from one degree of faith
unto another, until they become perfect Men, perfect Saints, unto the measure
of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. and yet your
Law-Divinity knows no better, than to say, this is in truth to bring a
Skepticisme into Religion.

And whereas you say their principles dissolve all relations, all
subordinations, and humane society it self: I answer, that this is even as if
you should affirm a Turk not to be a man, unless he will be a Christian,
unless he will be a member of some National Church; nay, of every National
Church, since his not being of any one is all alike prejudicial or damageable:
But they are the Presbyteriall and such other Prelaticall tenets which destroy,
and expressly murder all humane society, in avouching as William Pryn with his
ense recidendum, and A. Stewart, does, that says whosoever is cut off or cast
out of the Church, must likewise be cast out, and cut off from the Civil
state, p. 166. in 2. part of his Duply, etc.

Sir, I confess I have spent more time and paper about your Epistles than I
intended, which if you and the Reader will but excuse, I shall endeavor to
make you amends in part by troubling you the less with your rusty, musty
rubbish of Popish times and presidents.

Page 1. Your first proposition is, That the calling of Synods or Assemblies
about Church matters belongs not to Bishops, Ministers, nor private or
particular Congregations; but to Princes or supreme temporal Magistrates and
Powers; So that if the Magistrate be Turkish under whose jurisdiction live many
Protestant Greeks, I mean such as disavow the Pope with the greatest part of
his unsound doctrine; If he be Popish as the Emperor of Germany, with the
Kings of France and Polonia, in whose territories inhabit millions of
Protestants, all which Protestants must never meet together in Synods and
Assemblies about Church affairs, because those Emperors and Kings are never
likely to summon Synods for them, or put them in mind to do it themselves.

You still quote multitudes of texts to prove your Propositions with, in hopes
perhaps that if one fail you another may do the deed; but you happen to be so
successelesse therein, as if you used still to press the Scriptures which came
first to hand, ranking them in your margent whether they would or no; which
it is true, has stood you in stead no more, than a forced Militia does the King
or Parliament; and yet doubtless, that God with whom the Word was from the
beginning, and who is the very Word, Joh. 1. 1. will not approve that his
blessed Word should be made use (...) and employed so vainly, impertinently,
preposterously, rashly, and irreverently: Wherefore I would gladly advise Mr.
Pryn for the future, to insert the very words themselves of every text he
quotes, in hopes that if he do but once read them over by himself, he will
find they make nothing to the purpose, and so have ingenuity enough to leave
them out.

After you have done belying sacred Scripture, you fly for assistance unto
profane, and from thence tell us by whose authority the first General
Counsels were convocated; which proves nothing else, but that whether it be
King or Parliament that have the strongest sword, or shall prevail and get the
better over the other in this Civil War; the Assembly of Divines now at
Westminster must sit no longer, not any of their coat ever meet again above
two in company, unless the present ruling party please, lest they be termed a
Conventicle, and fall into a Pramunire.

But by what authority tro did the pretended Synod of Jerusalem assemble? Act.
15. What Kings or Parliaments Writs, or Letters Patent had they for so doing?
What Court countenance did they procure to second their proceedings? for my
part, I had rather follow such a president, and err with them, if you will
needs esteem it such; than degenerate with the weaker Christians of after ages,
in supplicating of Powers and Princes in such a manner, whereby they should be
moved to think I granted them such a power, as God never gave them, or
confirmed them in, supposing they had a just liberty of denying, what through
want perhaps of Christian courage only, or the Civil powers protection, I
durst not put in practice without their order and commission.

Page 4. I am glad to find you acknowledging a passage of the Bishops letters,
wherein they return thanks to Valentinian and Theodosius for assembling the
Council of Illirium, which says, Vt nemo deesset volens; nemo cog^tur
invitus; That no Bishop might be absent who was desirous to be there, and none
compelled who were unwilling to be present; from whence follows an
irrefragable consequence, that their Counsels, Decrees or Canons, did not
bind all people universally, but only such as of their own accords submitted
thereunto: If Mr. Pryn will but procure the same just privilege for his
Independent Brethren, they will have the less occasion of exceptions, if he
domineere over the volunteers of the Presbyterian party.

Page 87. You say, The Statutes in Q. Mary's days repealing diverse Acts
touching Religion in K. Edward 6. his Reign, and setting up Mass and the old
[Popish] Liturgies again, do sufficiently evidence the jurisdiction of our
Princes and Parliaments in matters of the Church and Religion; which is in
effect; first, That this present Parliament, or any other hereafter have a
jurisdiction to set up Popery again, and so Judaisme or Turcisme, even what
they please; for all Parliaments have equal power: And secondly, that if they
do set up Popery, Judaisme or Turcisme, that then all England must submit
thereunto, and consequently become Papists, Jews and Turks (or Hypocrites
which is more worse then either:) for whatsoever a Magistrate, especially the
supreme, has jurisdiction in, that, he may justly and lawfully put in
execution; and that, the people may not disobey, upon pain of sinning, and
danger of damnation, Rom 13. 2.

But under what color and pretense then did Mr. Pryn refuse subjection unto
Church government by Episcopacy, and according to the Common-Prayer-Booke? Do
not take it ill that I spur the question so soon unto you again; I may ask
it oft-times, before you will be able to answer once, without condemning your
self according to your principles and laws, by which you proyoke justice
against the Independents.

Were not Episcopacy and the Common-Prayer-Booke established by Act of
Parliament, which had as great a power than as this present Parliament has now,
or any other can have hereafter? Nay, you say expressly, p. 88. That the
Statute, 1 Eliz. chap. 2. for uniformity of Common Prayer and Service in the
Church, and administration of the Sacraments, enjoining conformity under
temporal and Ecclesiastical punishments is an irrefragable proof of the
Parliaments power in all Church matters: What was it tro, that then encouraged
you to withstand the jurisdiction of Parliaments when they agreed not with your
own humor and disposition, which you now press so violently upon the tender
consciences of your Independent Brethren? Can there appear any other clearer
reason for it, to the apprehension of standers by, moderate men even of Mr.
Pryns best friends, or any that have their wits about them; than that Mr. Pryn
having suffered (for Christ's cause as he thought, to think more charitably of
him than he does of others) upon false principles, grew weary of it, and
resolved that as the Bishops domineered and persecuted him; so he would repair
himself by persecuting others?

But did the only wise God, think we, resolve to create man after his own
Image, to estate him in such a sad and execrable condition, worse then that of
Beasts, Wolves, Bears, and Tygres; as that he must necessarily tyrannize, or
be tyrannized over both in soul and body? and yet it cannot possibly be
otherwise, if you will grant a power to Kings, Parliaments or Synods to require
conformity from others in any thing which is not agreeable to their
consciences; for if such a latitude and height of jurisdiction be granted but
to the more orthodox Kings, Parliaments and Synods; both Papists, Lutherans,
Calvinists and Independents, pretending and really taking themselves to be the
most orthodox, are bound in conscience to lay claim to, and put in execution
this power of compelling all the world unto their uniformity; and so infallibly
produce the most cursed enmity and hatred betwixt all people but differing in
opinion, exceeding that of Cannibals; or the profoundest of antipathies between
any irrational creatures whatsoever; and therefore you are mightily mistaken
p. 96. to be so confident that Independents would preach universal obedience
and subjection under penalties Ecclesiastical and Civil, if the Parliament
should establish an Independent government, which are clearly incompatible, and
contradictory to themselves and principles; the ignorance whereof, though to
some it may seem as slight, as easily apprehended by a willing and enquiring
spirit, I persuade my self, has not only transported Mr. Pryn himself, but
many others into multitudes of impertinencies and absurdities.

Oh that Mr. Pryn therefore, or any one of the Presbyterian way, who wishes
well to godliness, would but please to cast an eye upon John the Baptist,
chap. 10. and considerately give their opinion, whether to be persecuted be not
even the most infallible mark of the true Church and Saints of Christ;
notwithstanding most Christians thus persecute one another.

Page 94. and 109. You say the opposites to Parliaments Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction have formerly and more especially in this present Parliament,
addressed several petitions to this High and Honorable Court for Reformation
of the Church, etc. wherein, under favor, I conceive you have misapprehended
their proceedings and intentions, which doubtless were for the most part, or
best affected, that the Parliament, in whom they acknowledged the sovereigne
power to reside, would permit, countenance and encourage all godly men of gifts
in preaching down Heresies, errors, Idolatry, Popery, etc. many whereof had
either been formerly established by law, or not permitted to be preached down
through the Prelates corruption contrary to the Law.

This is the best, even all the Reformation, which the Civil Magistrate, as
Civil, has a capacity of compassing against all Heresies and errors, which
must necessarily be vanquished by the sword of the Spirit, and cannot possibly
be suppressed by carnal weapons or the Civil sword; they may destroy the
flesh, but cannot properly be said to touch and work upon the spirit.

Page 109. After a frantic, infectious, pestilentiall feaver-fit of railing,
the likest that of Billingsgate, you tell Mr. John Goodwin, with much gravity,
forsooth, but far more saucie ignorance, that it was no less than high
presumption for him, being a mere Divine, and a man altogether ignorant of, or
unskilful in the ancient Rights and privileges of our Parliament (as his
writings demonstrate, and himself intimates, page 5.) to undertake and
determine, to judge of them so peremptorily, and in such manner as he has done,
etc. But how come you tro, a mere Lawyer (I wish you were good at that, at any
thing) to take so much upon you in Divinity, (if Divinity and the knowledge of
Parliamentary privileges be inconsistent, as you seem to insinuate) to pin
the Gospel with its propagation and whole affairs upon Civil powers; the
greatest share, or major part, whereof (which should both by your polity and
divinity be submitted to) is in the hands of Turks of Infidels? where is your
license from the Court of Heaven for subjugating the Gospel of peace to your
litigious law-cases and presidents, most whereof are all Popish? To sacrifice
the Scriptures, the Word, even God himself, Joh. 1. 1. whole Christianity,
both Discipline and Doctrine unto Acts of Parliaments, which have been
heretofore so Popish, and may possibly be so again hereafter; to which
according to your grounds, the whole Kingdom must conform and be obedient not
only passively but actively, and that for conscience sake?

But what lawful calling or warrant have you (if a man may be so bold with you
as you are with other men) from Gods Word, or our Laws, to handle the
Jurisdiction and Rights of Parliament more then Mr. Goodwin? Was not his
Imprimatur as legal or authentical as yours? Do you think the Parliament
had not far rather hear the submissive cautions and mementoes of a loving
tender and affectionate remembrancer, as in the presence of the God of Heaven,
whose duty is to teach all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. as occasion is offered, from
Parliament to peasant; than be flattered and soothed up with fusty sweepings of
Popish presidents, by one, who yet (I think) pretends to be (no Canon but) a
Protestant Lawyer, best versed at Common Pleas and Chancery bills? Certainly
it is none of Mr. Pryns least oversights thus to bring himself, a Lawyer, whose
wrangling faculty sets and keeps all people at worse war amongst themselves,
than all foreign enemies can do, with Mr. Goodwin, whose zeal, piety, and
fervent interceding toward the Throne of Grace for reconciling unto the God of
peace, not only all such as join with him, but whosoever else are capable
thereof, has been heretofore, and is at present well known to all the godly
and well affected in or about the City both far and near, which does and still
will tend so much more to Mr. Pryns great reproach and infamy, for thus
shamefully traducing him?

If Mr. Pryn were a man truly godly and conscientious, he might long ere this
time have considered the unlawfulness of his very Calling, according to the
greatest part of Lawyers practice, in entertaining more causes than they can
possibly take care of as they ought, in taking of excessive fees, prolonging
suites, and so involving the whole Kingdom in their sophistical quirkes,
tricks and quille^s, as that a man can neither buy nor sell, speak nor do any
thing, but he must be liable to fall into their talons, without ever being able
to redeem himself; the Lawyers having most of their mysteries written in a
little less then heathen language, and detaining us in such ignorance or
captivity, as that we may not plead nor understand our own cases; by which and
such like devises of theirs, they are become the greatest grievance, crying
loudest to Heaven for justice to be done upon them by this Parliament, next to
the corrupted depraved Clergymen.

Page 153. When you are told that the Apostolical Church of Jerusalem, Act.
15. (improperly by you and all Popish writers called a Synod, and Grand
president for Synods) was infallible, and therefore might say it pleased the
Holy Ghost and them; and that, since you cannot say of whatsoever you shall
do, that it does infallibly please the Holy Ghost, and for that cause may not
be permitted to make binding determinations: you answer (most appositly no
doubt) that the Apostles preached by an infallible spirit, ergo, none ought to
preach but such as have alike infallible spirit with the Apostles.

But I wonder Mr. Pryns wits are thus a wool-gathering; or rather that he
proclaims it to the world so much; for I must needs say, I never knew them
otherwise! Cannot you let Independents preach by way of instruction, advice,
etc. though you were not sure whether they have the Holy Ghost or no; as well
as they give you leave to do the like if you can; yea, to sit and vote in
Parliaments and Synods, enacting Ordinances, Decrees, and what you please, even
as much as your pretended Synod of Jerusalem (call it a Parliament too if you
will) since there is no remedy, though to my knowledge you are brim full of
little else than all fallibility? But when you have attained to be a Parliament
or Synod-man, do no more than that Apostolical infallible Assembly of
Jerusalem did; say, we do well if we observe your Ordinances and Decrees; and
if we do not, we may do better, and therein be confident you say well
infallibly: Thus you hear how you may become a Synod-man, and how your
Independent Brethren may easily have leave to preach, though neither of you be
infallible; Let your Decrees and Ordinance pass as peaceably as their Sermons,
and both may lodge together, and likelier become friends the sooner.

Act. 15. 4. 22. We find the pretended Synod styled a Church [that is the
Church at Jerusalem] if a Church, it must have Church officers, that is, ruling
and teaching Elders and Deacons; which I do not perceive observed in any Synod
since, nor can possibly be, unless they can turn the fixed Churches of any
particular place into Synods; and if that could be done, what would this be
otherwise than for one sister-Church to make and impose Canons and Decrees,
according to you principles, upon all other sister-Churches?

Now and then, it is true, you refresh us with an ingenuous confession, which if
you did but follow close, would clear your understanding from multitudes of
gross errors, and unparalled mistakes.

You acknowledge a possibility of erring, or some actual errors in Councels,
Synods, Parliaments, and that such as apparently erroneous and repugnant unto
Scriptures may be disobeyed: And now I see you have almost satisfied one of the
8 Queries in answer to your 12 considerable serious Questions, which hitherto I
thought you had not been able to give the least satisfaction to, because I
heard it not in Print cried up and down the streets, a privilege which any
thing, or every thing of Mr. Pryns enjoyes peculiarly.

But this short acknowledgement of yours, if you understand what you say, and
stick to it, will undoubtedly bring you over unto the Independents.

And now (that your book, and such as read it over may make a comfortable end)
since you are so good to grant a little, you shall see the Independents will
comply with you, and say they will ask no more: They only desire it may be
lawful for them to disobey your Counsels, Synods, Parliaments when they
actually err, and are apparently repugnant unto Scripture: But now, when they
tell you so at any time, and challenge this free grant of yours, professing in
the presence of God and Men, that they speak the truth and lie not, their
conscience bearing witness, Romans 9. 1. unless you will renounce Christianity
in practice, you must believe them, and not measure their consciences and
understandings by your own, lest they come short of their due; you must not be
both judge and party: no, nor judge only, where all ought to be Brethren,
Matthew. 23. 8. Their own reason must guide them: Their own understanding must
be the ultimate resolver of their wills; and none but their own faith can
save them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 6. 4. 5. Romans 14. 12. From the nonsubmitting unto
some Counsels, Synods, and Parliaments, which you perhaps may not think
erroneous, will follow no other worse consequence, than this; That a man may
likewise refuse to hear or not believe some Sermons, which you perhaps may
hold worth hearing, and necessary to be believed (though others as wise and
godly as your self, do think the contrary) which you may well be so
indulgent as to grant your Independent Brethren, since they will do the like
for you, expecting with long-suffering until you be convinced, or you convince
them, peaceably.

Page 154. You proceed and say, admit Synods, Counsels, Parliaments have
sometimes erred out of human frailty; yet this is a most certain truth, that
they are not so apt to err, as private men, or Conventicles of persons less
learned, less experienced, etc. But this may not pass for orthodox neither,
if, not many wise, not many learned are called, be Scripture, 1 Cor. 1. 20. 26.
besides, experience teaches us, that God does not discover his truth by
wholesale, nor to whole National Churches or General Counsels at once, but
rather by degrees, and that for the most part, at first, to some contemptible
person, perhaps, in the eyes of the world, who had no earthly superfluities, or
so much as any natural pre-eminence to tempt or to withdraw him from being
Gods Ambassador or Trumpeter to publish it unto a people or whole Nation, it
may be, not without his utmost peril.

And besides; do we not find that even these more learned, of whom the
Counsels and Synods are pretended to be compacted, are they, who most of all
deceive? Are they not by their unsanctified human learning and wisdom, the
better enabled; nay, do they not by that means become like so many decoy's to
lead the multitude, the rabble after them over hedge and ditch, and, too too
often, into the very ditch it self?

But what if Synods, Counsels and Parliaments were less apt to err, and best
qualified to discover Truth, and debate matters of controversy? It will not
follow from thence, that either of them may therefore impose their supposed
Truths (for other than suppose they cannot be, for want of infallibility) or
final determinations upon the other: If there were a necessity that the
greater part should have this spiritual dominion, or rather a Civil power in
a spiritual government over the lesser, or the lesser over the greater; then
there might be some color for the greater to have precedencie in some
respects: But since either of them would be absolutely sinful, we must grant
it unto neither.

Page 155. You say, That though it cannot be proved that all the Elders,
Brethren, and whole Church of Jerusalem were infallibly inspired, yet they all
said it seems good to the Holy Ghost and them: To which I answer, that their
saying so, was an infallible sign that all of them were then, as concerning
what they affirmed, infallibly inspired; otherwise, not only the Brethren with
the rest of the Church, but the Apostles also might possibly have told a lie,
in saying so, in joining with them in one common verdict, Act. 15. v. 23. Nay,
it might even now, and ever may be said hereafter to the end of the world, that
this passage in the Acts of the Apostles, It seems good to the Holy Ghost and
us, is not of infallible truth, unless, that both the Apostles, Brethren, and
whole Church had been infallibly assisted in saying so; They spoke not One for
All, but All of them in One, or One Spirit, even God himself, who is One, in
All of them infallible: Say but as much, and upon as good grounds and reason,
in behalf of the Synod which sits now at Westminster, and you say something:
but for your great promise under the Gospel, that God will power out his
Spirit upon all flesh; surely it makes as much for Independents, unless you
suppose them to be some Newfound Land-fish: But you yield it may be objected,
how perhaps all or the greatest part of the Parliament and Assembly are not
endued with the sanctifying Spirit of God, therefore they cannot use this
language, [It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us:] This objecting of yours I
confess is somewhat ingenious; but alas! it seems, you desire not to continue
so, in that you take such pains in shruging and shifting to evade the force
and truth thereof, by saying, It Is only known to God who are his; and admit
there may be some few among them, who have not Gods sanctifying Spirit, yet I
doubt not but very many, if not the major part of them have: Is not this
profoundly answered? Thousands of conscientious godly people object, how it is
possible that all, or the greatest part of the Parliament and Assembly may not
be endued with the sanctifying Spirit of God; and Mr. Pryn pretends to answer
them by saying, he doubts not but they have: Is he not a doughty champion? But
what if it should be objected, that it may yet more fully, than by perchance,
be said, it cannot be made appear that there is so much as one, neither in the
Parliament nor Assembly, who have had an infallible assistance of the
sanctifying Spirit, in any thing they have done already, or shall ever do
hereafter? and must we then necessarily be of their Religion, of their faith
implicitly? yet we submit, you see, unto them in Civil matters; our estates,
our lives, and what ever we have that is mortal, has been devoted, if not
sacrificed to justify their power, and our subjection, but the rest must be
reserved for him only, who is Lord Paramont of spirits as well as flesh.

Surely, Mr. Pryn, it is no small disservice which you do both Parliament and
Assembly, in thus exposing their proceedings to be questioned by no little, and
that the most conscionable and best affected party of the Kingdom; such
spirits of contention, as this of yours, were those which made the first great
breach amongst the Parliaments friends; I mean, betwixt the Independents and
Presbyterians; and now your self as the chief Ringleader has begun a
subdivision, even among the Presbyterians, by attributing (after such an
imperious and reproaching manner toward all such as dissent from your opinion)
that supreme legislative power to Civil Magistrates in all matters of
Religion, which our Brethren of Scotland appropriate only to National
Assemblies: How great a stumbling-blocke this may grow to in time, and the
miserable consequences thereof, I leave to your saddest morning thoughts to be
better considered on; and wish you would forbear to publish such midnight,
subitane, distracted lucubrations, as you your self well call them, to the
great detriment and endangering both of Church and Commonwealth.

Twelve Queries, Eight whereof presume to make a second visit to Mr. Pryn,
importuning his resolution in Christian modesty and charity, for the
satisfaction of many troubled consciences.
1 WHether have not Parliaments and Synods of England in times past established
Popery? And whether may they not possibly do so again hereafter?

2 Whether in case a Parliament and Synod should set up Popery, may they
therein be disobeyed by the people? If they may be disobeyed in one particular,
whether may they not upon the like grounds be disobeyed in another? whether the
people be not judge of the grounds for denying obedience to Parliament and
Synod in such a case? Whether the pretense of giving a Parliament and Synod
power to establish Religion, and yet reserve in our own hands a Prerogative of
yielding or denying obedience thereunto, as we our selves think good, be not
an absolute contradiction? and lastly, Whether they that attribute such a power
to Parliaments and Synods as they themselves will question and disobey, when
they think good, do not in effect weaken and quite enervate the power of
Parliaments, or else condemn themselves in censuring the Independents for
withholding of obedience from Parliament and Synod in such things wherein they
never gave, or meant them to have power?

3 If the whole Kingdom may deny obedience unto Popish Acts and Canons, or
upon any other the like just occasion, and they themselves be judge whether the
occasion be just or no; whether may not Independents, a part of the Kingdom
only do the like in all respects? or whether ought they because a lesser part
of the Kingdom, to yield obedience to Popish Acts and Canons, because a major
part approve of and agree with a Parliament and Synod in establishing them?

4 Whether would it not be an ungodly course for any people to hazard any thing
at the disposal of others, or to be carried by most voices, which may
possibly, if not more then probably be decided in such a manner as the yielding
obedience thereunto would be burdensome to their consciences, if not absolutely
sinful?

5 Whether were it not an ungodly course for the whole Commons of a Kingdom,
so far differing in Religion as that they profess before hand that they dare
not yield to one another upon peril of damnation, to make choice of a
Parliament and Synod, with entering into Vow and Covenant to become afterward
all of that Religion whatsoever the Parliament and Synod should agree on?
whether it be not absurd for men to say they will be of such a Religion as
shall be settled, before they see evidence to convince them? and whether it be
in the power of man to be really of what Religion he will, until he see reason
and demonstration for it?

6 If a representative State or Magistrate may make Laws for setting up a
Religion, or establishing what Church government they please; whether have not
the people the same power originally in themselves, to assume again, and put it
in execution when they please? and whether were this otherwise then to
attribute unto a mixed multitude to the World, if not absolutely as it is
distinguished from the Saints in Scripture, Joh. 15. 18, 19. and 17. 6. 9. 11.
14. at least by most voices, to make choice of a Religion, Laws and Discipline,
wherewith the Saints, household, and Church of God must necessarily be governed?

7 Suppose a Luther an and Calvinist, or any others differing in opinion;
whether they may out of hypocrisy or implicitly submit and be conformable to
one another discipline and doctrine whereof they doubt, before they be
convinced? Whether have either of them an infallible way to convince the other,
and bring them over to be sincerely of their opinion before their
understandings besatisfied? if they have, why do they not put it in execution?
if they have not, why should they be offended with one another if they continue
differing?

8 Whether opposing Gods people or their ways be not a fighting against God?
whether it be not extremest rashness, if not absolute madness and
presumption to attempt any thing which may possibly prove a fighting against
God? and whether any man in these days can have a fuller assurance in his own
conscience, or give better evidence unto others that he does not oppose the
people of God whilst he opposes such as differ from him in opinion, than Paul
whilst he persecuted the Church, Phil. 3 6. thought he ought to do many things
contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26. 9?

9 Which of the two parties may best be thought proud, presumptuous or
contentious? whether Independents who seek only to enjoy their own
consciences in all peaceablenesse and meekness, without giving the least
disturbance to such as differ from them in opinion; or the Presbyterians, who
Haman like, are never at rest within themselves, until they bring all others
to be conformable unto them both for Discipline and Doctrine, though to an
equal judge they may probably, be as erroneous as other men's; and possibly,
most superstitious and heretical?

10 If there be but one Christ and many Antichrists; one true way and many
false: Whether do not all men and women in general, and every one in
particular, run a greater hazard to have the truth withheld from them both in
Discipline and Doctrine, if all manner of opinions and religious worship but
one, were banished the Country where they live, than if there were a toleration
of them all?

11 If a State may lawfully compel a Nation to be of this or that Religion, as
in Spain, Italy, and England, during the Bishops Reign; Whether is it
possible for the people of such a Nation to be damned by submitting to such
State Religions, though false? Whether are not such respective States bound in
justice to be accountable for all the souls which do miscarry by conforming
unto such State Religions? And whether were it discretion for any man to run
a hazard of so many souls, though he might thereby gain the Empire of the
World?

12 Whether are not all Religions alike, nothing available to salvation, to him
that takes his Religion upon trust? If we be obliged to try the Spirits, to
search the Scriptures, and hold fast the truth, whether must we not be fully
persuaded thereof in our selves, according to our own reason and
understanding? Whether is there a necessity that the State Religion for the
time in fashion, must always appear to be the true one, in every man's
judgment, who really endeavors and desires to have such an opinion of it, so
it might be with a good conscience? And what Gospel warrant is there for
Magistrates imprisoning, fining, banishing, or so much as discountenancing any
man for not believing, or not doing that, which he could not possibly believe,
or do without sinning damnably?

FINIS.

