A SERMON PREACHED AT WALDEN in ESSEX, May 29th. AT THE INTERRING of the Corpse
of the right HONORABLE SUSANNA, Countess of SUFFOLK.

Being a modest and short Narration of some remarkable passages in the holy
life and death of that memorable LADY.

Who dyed May 19th. 1649.

By EDW: RAINBOWE. D. D.

Hier: Ep: ad Marcellam. In optimis praedicandis bonorum ad virtutem Studia
concitentur.

London, Printed by W. Wilson, for Gabriell Bedell, M. M. and T. C. and are to
be sold at their shop at the Middle Temple Gate* 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JAMES Earl of SVFFOLKE.
My Lord,
THat I have not paid a more speedy obedience to your Lodships Commands, and
the admonitions of some of my worthiest friends, in making public these
following conceptions, proceeded from no other reason than that, in my more
deliberate review, I thought it some injury to her high deserts to have
expressed so little, where with truth and evidence so much might have been
asserted. It had been a task not less pleasing to my self, and more
satisfactory to all that knew her, to have pend an History rather than a
Sermon: and if a happier pen had undertaken this subject, the story of her life
might prove a most persuasive Orator for goodness and piety, the highest
effects of Sermons. But considering the place where I was no make this
discourse, I could not otherwise contrive, but that what could be spoken in the
praise of so incomperable a Lady, must hold small proportion with what must be
suppressed in silence, and because I would be true to the Title, I have made no
addition, nor considerable alteration.

That the Image of her Virtues may find a place in your Lordships memory, and
may live in your daily imitation, and of all who shall see some glimpses of it
in this unartificiall but faithful representation, to the glory of him whose
Image she bore, is the fervent prayer of

Your Lordships most humbly devoted servant EDW: RAINDOWE.
Audley-End. Sept. 11. 1649.
ECCLES. 7. 1. A good name is better than Precious Ointment; and the Day of
Death than the Day of ones Birth.
THe Text needs no preface; the sad occasion of our present meeting, our last
duty to a deceased Lady, in whose grave Honor, Virtue, Goodness, Grace, a
rare measure of humane perfections seem to be interred; this sets a black and
mournful Preface before the Text. But comfort ye, beloved! the occasion indeed
is a sad Preface to the Text, but the Text may afford a comfortable theme and
argument unto the occasion. I come not here to afflict you altogether from the
memory of your sins, which now bid you weep over her grave, but also to
afford some comfort from the sense of her happiness, and to desire you to take
some pleasure in her fame and memory. The text and the occasion mingled
together make a chequer-worke, a mixture of black and white, mourning and joy;
when we present to your imaginations how Precious a Vessel of Ointment is this
day broken, and that the Day of Death has seized on her, who can blame our
grief? But if we will consider, that by breaking this box of Spiknard, her
Good name, which is better than precious ointment, is powered forth, and makes a
sweet fragrancy in the world; and that to those, who dye in the Lord, and with
such a Good Name, the Day of Death is better than the Day of their Birth;
surely then we will not grieve, as without Hope. That I may therefore gain some
alacrity from your Attentions, and Vigor to mine own Spirit, let me entreat
you to take your eyes a while from the occasion, from her Hearse, and look upon
the text and the consolation which is afforded in it. A Good Name, etc.

The words contain a twofold comparison of two kinds of Blessings; and he that
pronounced the sentence was the fittest man that ever lived to be an
Arbitrator; Solomon, the wise and the happy; a King whose both hands God had
filled with blessings of every kind, and having a heart as large as the
Seashore, and wisdom to discern, having gained abundance to his hearts
desire, and his knowledge being master over all things small and great, low and
tall, from the Hysop which grows upon the wall to the Highest Cedar; he
stands here in this text, as it were with the scales in his hand, and having
before, in the foregoing chapters, thrown out of the Balance all that Dross and
froth of the world, Vain Desires, Riches, Pleasures, Labors, I say having
found these to be vanity it self, or lighter than vanity, and cast them out of
the comparison, having by many negatives excluded what is not, what cannot make
up Happinass (whatsoever the blind, unequal world may judge) he now comes to
be positive, and to let us see that there is a Happiness belongs to Man, and
further proceeds to show wherein it consists, and in what degrees, and first
begins with the means to it, the first of which he counts to be a Good name.

And here not changing the way and method of his arguing, by way of comparison,
proving the excellency of that which he commends by showing that it weighs
down in the Balance, and is better than those things, wherein men are wont to
place most excellency; he thus argues, A good name is good, for it is better
than Precious Ointment; and the Day of Death, for that is better than the Day
of ones Birth.

So that in the words you find a twofold comparison, the first betwixt a Good
Name and Precious Ointment, that is, Riches and Delights, the second betwixt
Life and Death, the coming into this world, and (by a Syllepsis) the living in
it, and betwixt the departing from this world, and the going out of it; Solomon
gives not the verdict, as perchance the world would give it; A Good name in his
Balance weigh's down Delights and Pleasures, to shake hands with this
temporal life, in his esteem, is better than to embrace it.

Before I weigh these together let me first show you those commodities
distinctly, and severally, after that we shall more clearly make good the
difference and the excellency by comparing them together.

First, let me show you what a Good Name is, and how weighty a blessing.
Secondly, Precious Ointment or costly delights, how light they are. Thirdly,
present them together to be weighed.

For the second comparison of Life and Death, which I take chifely to be an
explication of the former, an addition of more weight to that scale of the
Balance wherein a Good Name is placed, I shall first speak of it, so, that is,
relatively, as it serves to inhance a Good Name. Secondly, Absolutely, as it is
a true assertion in it self, that the Day of Death is better than the Day of
ones Birth or living in the world. And then in the last place I shall endeavor
to apply it to our selves and the present occasion.

For the first, take notice that a Good Name although it be grounded upon some
Habits or Qualities inherent in our selves, or supposed so to be by others, yet
it is aliquid extra, something without us, it is that which others apply to us,
think, or speak of us. We must distinguish betwixt a Good Name fundamentally,
meritorious and inward, and a Good Name applicatively, dispensed, and outward.
To deserve a Good Name, or to have a Good Name; A Good name really, or a Good
name, only Nominally; in the eyes of God, or from the tongues of Men. And so
there is a threefold Good name, according to a threefold condition of men.
There are men merely Natural, others civilly Moral, and a third sort
Christian and Religious; so you may have what every one of these three call a
Good name for compliance either with Nature, Morality, or Grace.

First, for Natural parts as Judgment, Wit, Memory, Strength, Indowments, or
from great performances by them done; Thus you may be said by some men to have
a Good Name even for evil actions; The world will speak well of you, if you
live according to the custom of the world. Beware, says our Savior, when men
speak well of you, that is, when you have a Good Name with the men of this
world, their praise is an ill sign, none has a Good Name with them, except
they run to the same excess of Riot with them. This Good Name is no Precious
Ointment, but a stain, a besmearing, it makes no perfume, but a stench in the
nostrills of men truly, nay only morally, Good.

Examine what Good signifies with wicked and profane men, as a Good Gamster, a
Good Companion, a Good Fellow, that is a good drinker, or good to drive away
the precious time; here how much the better, the worse; a Good Name here is a
very eare-mark, a brand, a stigmatizing, that is not the Good Name commended in
the text, the Natural man's Good-name. So a Great Name is not always a Good
Name, as Alexanders, Caesar's, the Babel-builders, no more than his who burnt a
temple to be talked of, to have a Great Name.

Secondly, the Moral man's Good Name or Fame for acts or habits morally Good,
either Practical or Speculative; a man may have a Good Name for excelling in
his Art or Profession, as a Good Physician, a Good Divine, in Mechanics a Good
Engineer, a Good Artificer; but chiefly for the Habits of Moral Virtues, as
for Justice, Temperance, Valor, Sobriety, Thrift and the like: for either
excelling in some one, or some few of these virtues a man may have a Good Name,
and this Good Name is very commendable in its degree and station, especially if
it be grounded on Real, not Counterfeit Virtues, and these universal,
sincere, not with any mixture of Vice, as to have a Name for Justice,
Temperance, Prudence, or other virtues, is to have a Good Name, but not the
Good Name here meant.

Thirdly and lastly, to make Moral Virtues complete by the Theological or
Christian Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, this is the Christians Good Name;
to have Morality baptized, to turn Virtue into Grace, to plant all those fair
Cyens on the Fruitful stock of Faith, to get first that Mother Grace of Faith,
and then to add to your Faith Virtue, as 2 Pet. 1. 5. Giving all diligence
(says he) add to your Faith Virtue. Let Faith be first in the number, then
add and multiply. Add to your Faith Virtue, and to Virtue knowledge, and to
Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness,
and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness Charity;
Charity, in whose womb lie all the Virtues, all the Duties of the second
Table: he that has, and exercises these, has laid a good Foundation, has
gained a good Report, his Name shall be written Good, upon that Foundation; he
has approved himself unto God and Men, It Is not the Praises of men, but to
approve himself and his Conscience to God which he seeks, but yet the
Generation of the Faithful shall call him Blessed. And this is that, which I
call the Christians Good Name.

That Is the first thing, what is here meant by a Good Name. Now that we may
come nearer to the comparison.

Secondly, why is it said, Than Precious Ointment. By Ointment so set out,
under the Title of Precious, is meant the Richest, the most delicious
pleasures. In those Countries and Times these Ointments were used for the
greatest and most sumptuous Delights and Refreshments, whether for their
fragrancy and aromaticall sweetness, which ravished the Sense of smelling, a
sense of great pleasure and delight; or else that they were made of healthful
ingredients, and compositions of oil, and such as made the face to shine, that
is conduced to make them cheerful and merry; or because they were also
sovereign balm and medicinable to heal and strengthen; or lastly, because the
greatest cost that might be was frequently laid out in such Ointments: as that
remembered to have been bestowed on our Savior by the woman of Bethany, Mark.
14. 3. Spikenard very precious, which made such a fragrancy, that it has given
a Good Name to that woman, according to our Saviors prediction, in all places,
where the Gospel is, or has been preached. Although I might show some other
grounds for the similitude, the inward fragrancy and the outward diffusion;
making the face to shine, and making the man to shine, etc. yet these I pass
over, and many the like. The meaning of drawing Precious Ointment into the
comparison, is this, (by a Synechdoche or a comprehending many things under one
word.) A Good Name is better than Precious Ointment, that is, better than
whatsoever is Delicious, Pleasant, or Wholesome, or Costly; in a word, its
better than all corporal Pleasures; that is the firm assertion of the Text.
And because Contraria juxta se posita, etc. Contraries placed together appear
best, place them now in the Scales, Virtue, Piety, Grace in the one Scale,
Worldly Pleasures and Delights in the other, and See, with a sound Judgment and
steady hand, which will be of most weight and price.

I will not here show you the base, low, and unsatisfying objects of the one,
such as never quench the thirst of desire, and in the other that by them we are
carried up to God, the chiefest and only filling Good; I need not tell you the
one are transitory and fade in a moment, that the other carry us to Eternity,
and remain with us there; that the end of Pleasure is pain and shame, ( What
pleasure have you in those things, whereof you are now ashamed) that the end of
Virtue and Godliness is Comfort here, and Glory hereafter. Si quid been feceris
cum dolor, etc. The saying is eminent; if you do any thing well, though with
travel and pain, the pains and travel cease and vanish, but the good
Conscience of the Deed, and the Good Name remain for ever; But on the
contrary, Si quid male feceris cum voluptate, etc. If you do any thing ill with
Pleasure, the Pleasure will soon pass, but the ill will stick as an indelible
character, the guilt and the stain will never off in this life, no nor in the
other; bad deeds will haunt our Ghosts, We are thy works and will follow thee.

But I will not spend time in comparing these together, there is so visible a
disparity and distance, we need not weigh them; every one, who has any
Christian discretion can judge by the eye, or the hand, which is most weighty;
Bodily, Outward, Temporal Delights, or a Good Name gained from Virtue, Faith,
Godliness, for so I take it for the Christians Good Name fundamentally,
grounded on true Desert, not for the vain Applause of Men, who as often call
Evil Good, as Goodness it self.

That shall suffice in brief, to have touched upon the first comparison, A Good
Name, namely the true and sound name of Faith and Holiness.

Now I come to the second, betwixt being born, or betwixt the state of this
life, and that which we are put into by Death, The Day of Death is better than
the Day of ones Birth.

And these words I take as depending upon and connected to the former, that the
sense may be this, A good Name is better than Precious Ointment, and to him
that has obtained this Good Name deservedly (for so we suppose it) else it is
not Radically Good, the Day of his Death is better than the Day of his Birth.

The truth of the comparison appears therefore, first in this relative sense,
although secondly it be absolutely true also, That the Day of Death is better
than the Day of Birth.

But first in relation to a Good Name, and that first in regard of the time and
season for the production of it; Death is the proper season for a Good Name;
after life enters, in nature, after Birth, the first thing we commonly think
of, is a Name; to give a Name to him that is born; so after Death, the first
thing men say or do, is to give a Name to the Party deceased, but that after
birth, was a Name of civil Distinction, this a Name of Moral or Religious
difference; that was a Name, and no more; this a Name with an adjunct, Good or
Bad: At Circumcision the Jews, at Baptism the Christians, give proper Names,
so after Death men obtain proper Names according to their deserts; we call that
their Christian Name, but this indeed ought most properly so to be called, if
so deserved: at Death we may know on whom most properly to fasten the Christian
Name, the Name of true Christian, Israelite indeed. Circumcision in the flesh
followed Nativity, and Christian Name (as we call it) by receiving into the
outward bosom of the Church; but after Death, you many times discover there
was Circumcision in the heart, that he was a Christian by the inward Baptism
of the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of Men, but of God.

Secondly, as Death is the proper season for the essence of a Good Name, so for
the certainty of it; Men may make a fair show all their life, and may deserve
well, but all is well, that ends well; Who can tell whether a bright day may
not set in a Cloudy or Rainy Evening? Mors sola fatetur, Death only can tell
the measure of a Good Name, reach to the End of it, all other things, Opinions,
hopes, Confidences may go a great way, but they may come short, nothing but
Death puts out of doubt, when that has set the seal to a Good Name, all is
finished.

So that now you see the dependence of these two comparisons, why King Solomon
joins these two together, a Good Name, Death, Ointment, and Birth; A Good Name
is better than all outward Delights, if Death gives the casting voice, set the
seal to it, and the Day of Death better than the Day of Birth, because it gives
the being and certainty to a Good Name, a Name with an adjunct, an Epithet or
Title of Honor. Life gives a bare name only, and no more.

I could now by plentiful proofs show you that the Day of Death in an absolute
sense, is better than the Day of ones Birth, or the time of Life; If I would
set before you the infirmities which we bring into this world, the frailties
and dangers, the diseases, the miseries, the sins that pursue us, overtake us,
go along with us, dwell with us, in us; whilst we have our dwelling in these
houses of flesh, these habitations of Clay. Beloved, though I be silent, the
tragical times, the fears even of worse, the calamities of the Church of God
in all places, your own eyes and senses, what you see at home, what you hear
abroad, what this Coffin tells you, what you feel within you, what worse you may
justly fear, are sufficient witnesses, that this life has little of true worth
and happiness to support it; others may weep when we go out of the world,
ourselves have more reason (and so they say Nature has taught us) to weep when
we come in. That then which relieves us, that resques us from those enemies
that surround us, that takes away want, finishes misery, and ceases the reign
of sin, if we did not arrive at a positive happiness, but if all were
terminated in deliverance from these, and then we had no more being at all, but
were to be wrapped up in our first nothing, yet certainly this very deliverance
from misery and torment might be a happiness, and that accounted happy that
brings it; This, at least the Day of Death brings forth, it changes us from a
state of sin and wretohedness, and in this very regard it is to be preferred to
a life, which chains us up in both. But that is not all, its not only
privative, but positive; where it sees the seal of a Good Name set upon any, it
opens the Door, it sets open the everlasting Gate of Happiness, whosoever has
that Name engraven on his forehead, that Good Name, that New Name from his
being a New Creature, for being in Christ, that has such a Name as God
vouchsafes to write in his Book the Book of Life, the Day of Death, to such an
one, is the morning of blessedness which never shall have an evening; it is not
possible to compare it, it is not proportionable to enter comparison here
betwixt the Day of Natural Birth and Death, which is their Birth Day to
Eternity.

Thus you have briefly seen what a Good Name is, and whereon grounded, and the
weight of it; Precious Ointments also, Pleasures and Delights, the lightness of
them in comparison. You have seen that the Day of Death is a proper season when
a Good Name buds forth, flourishes, and is ascertained, and that therefore it
is better for those who have that Name than the Day of their Natural Birth;
likewise that the Day of Death is to be preferred to the Day of Birth, because
it puts an end to sin and misery, which that begins, and is the way to
Happiness.

What now remains? what shall I say for application? should I reprove those who
err in opinion, and build their Good Name upon Greatness, Glory, Fame,
Natural indowments, Moral accomplishments, Beauty, Wit, Mirth, Friendship and
the like, or any thing not Christian; Or should I stir you up to lay a sure
foundation for a Good Name in Faith, Holiness and Virtue; Should I lessen the
terrors of Death, and hasten any of you in the desires of it, which gives so
fair a season to this Glorious Flower, a Good Name, which shuts the door on sin
and misery, and opens to eternal joys, in all these the text might be a
copious theme, and I can hardly refrain from enlarging.

But because Examples have a more lively force on the souls of men than simple
Precepts, and Practice is the only warrant, that rules are Good, and that it
has seemed Good to him who has the issues of Life and Death in his hand to
lay such a Pregnant Spectacle before our eyes, as may give an exemplary
testimony to the truth of this text, I shall now take leave to set before your
Christian attention some few such observations from and upon the Life and Death
of this Eminent Personage, whom the uncontrolable Will of the Almighty has
made the sad occasion of our present meeting, as may in hance the price of a
Good Name, and make Death have its true comfort, when we see it happen after a
well-spent and well-ended life.

And now well remembering where I am, and in whose dreadful presence, before
that God of truth, who can measure the Deeds and words of men, and see what
conformity they hold, in a Congregation also, amongst many of whom the light of
her conversation did shine and could not be hid, I shall in all sincerity
endeavor to speak nothing for Favor, Relation, Flattery, or to gain a
Vainglorious Name to her that is gone, or him that speaks, but to set forth
such real Virtues as shined in her life, that we may all have occasion to
glorify God, who was graciously pleased to instamp such lively Characters of
his Image upon a poor corruptible Creature, and to aspire after all that is
praiseworthy in so precious an example, that at our Death we all may have
lively hopes to be also numbered amongst the living, and to leave a Good Name
fragrant and refreshing to all those who live after us.

And now, where shall I begin? and how shall I find an end? both did seem alike
difficult to my preparations; whereon shall I lay the foundation to build a
Precious Name and Memorial for her, who her self had purchased it so many
ways? Shall I tell you of her natural parts and indowments? Shall I tell you
how her Parents and her self had perfected those by careful education, art,
and industry? Shall I let you know how those were made Graceful by a meek,
pleasant, and affable Deportment? How they were adorned with the choysest
Jewels, which every Virtue could afford her, or which is rarest, that all these
were consecrated by a Religious, even frame and temper? and lastly, which is
the highest Perfection attainable on Earth, that she and they were sanctified
by the visible operations of the Spirit of God, whose Image sat bright and
Glorious on her Soul, and did shine through all her Conversation? These are the
solid sure foundations of a Good Name, and all these crowded so into my
thoughts at once, that they were easily lost in the many fair paths and
turnings, through which (look which way soever you would) her Excellencies,
Parts, Virtues, Graces, were ready to invite and draw my meditations.

But that this universality may not disorder your thoughts, as they have done
mine, I must not seek such arguments for her Praise being dead, (as have no
fast bottom for an Inward Good Name, and) for which she would not only
dispraise, but sharply censure me if she were living. Namely, for any thing she
had by nature; although from that too in this regard, seeing whatsoever Nature
had given her, she made a Vessel to lay up some Grace or other in.

If I should tell you of the Sharpness of her Wit, I could not better instance
to prove it, than that in Questions of Religion, chiefly Cases of Conscience
and difficult places of Scriptures, she was most sudden at making Nice Doubts,
and extraordinary happy in resolving them, at least to the satisfying of
others, although such was her Humility, and low esteem of her own Gifts, that
she would earnestly labor for the resolution of others, rather than trust to
her own.

Her Judgment was most sound, which might appear, as by concurrence with the
Wise and Learned in opinions about secular affairs, private or public, so
chiefly in the Controversies in Religion; that amids all those differences and
varieties of opinions, to the Knowledge of which she was drawn by her carious
Soul, which had a mighty thirst after all kind of knowledge, especially in
matters which concerned God, Religion, and Eternity, I say, though she knew
all, Good and Evil, yet she had a Discerning Judgment, and Exercised Senses to
choose the Good, and refuse the Evil, not only in points simply necessary to
Salvation, in which we may believe the Spirit of God would not let her fall,
but in Speculative truths her opinions were not tainted, nor her mind shaken,
with any of those plausible Errors, wherewith the Times havenow so miserably
infested and distracted the Church of God, and ted Captive many well-meaning
Souls, but her knowing and well-grounded assent went along first with the Sure
Rule, the Written Word of God, then with those, who for sticking to that, have
been held the Soundest and most Classical; Wheresoever, in cases, she differd
from the most-received opinions, it was commonly in Practical points, and
seldom but she inclined to the more strict, her very Error (if it were one)
deserving its own pardon.

Her Fancy was most Divine, and although she fed it very much with Humane
Authors, delighting in Wit, that was Pure, and filled with ingenious and
artificial conceit, Poetry especially, in the apprehension of which she was
very Dexterous, and would ever set a Mark upon such expressions as were most
emphaticall and quaint, many times adding a Grace by her particular
interpretation, even beyond the intention of the Author, but with exceeding
fitness and significancy; yet she most confined her Fancy to Gather Flowers in
Paradise, in Gods Garden, in his Book, and in such as exercised their wits in
that Field, especially in Divine Poetry, in which kind she took an excessive
delight to be conversant in Mr. Herberts Temple, in which she found out such
fit and significant elegancies, that when she read or repeated them, it was
hard to determine whether the Author or she made the sense, such innumerable
descants would she make upon every single expression there; And to show what
delight she took in that heavenly Wit, I have heard her more than once,
seriously aver, that if there were no more extent but her copy, some hundreds
of pounds should not purohase that little Book from her, and if it had come to
the offer, I am well assured no money (of which she was no admirer at all, of
Wit, Devout Sanctified Wit especially, very much) could have gained it from her.

Her Memory excelled not her other Parts, and yet was even to admiration Happy,
of which the proofs were not so many in secular affairs, because her exercises
in them were but of discretion, Necessity, and to please Others; Her joy and
delight were in suoh things as adorned her Soul, and in such her Memory was the
most Faithful Servant that could be imagined; she did not make it her Task to
get things without Book, but what she liked, her Memory, like a good Steward,
would carefully lay up, even without bidding; Begin a Religious Ode of Mr.
Herberts, which she had read, and she would ordinarily repeat the rest without
sticking or missing; nay scarce could you begin any verse in the Bible to which
she would not presently addethe latter end, as to the Psalms of David, and some
other places, I have been an Ear-witness the trials, and this only by the
willingness of her Memory, not any tasking of it; These she had at her Heart,
therefore might say them by Heart, she had them rooted in her Heart and
Affections, and therefore might more easily rehearse them, they lay uppermost,
and therefore were ready at all occasions. Out of the abundance of the Heart the
Mouth speaks.

I must not forget to give one pregnant instance of her Memory, when employed
about these better things, she has sometimes the day after the Lords Day,
locked up her self in private, and from her Memory committed to writing a
Sermon, which she had heard the Day before, so perfectly that little was
wanting in the very words wherein it was delivered. Some here have been an
Eyewitness of one Sermon which she thus took from the mouth of a Grave Prelat,
who yet (blessed be God for it) preaches weekly in London; This she had
propounded to her self to do constantly, and with great alacrity pleased her
self in the thoughts of it, but necessary occasions on the day following, for
the most part robbing her of her much-desired privacie, she was with great
grief (and I have heard her complain) compelled to lay that practiceaside,
until God should give her more fixed opportunities.

When I think what Nature made her, I cannot also but remember that Grace
restored her, even her Body, to be a living Temple of the Holy Ghost, and these
three choice ornaments of hers, her Memory, Judgment, and Fancy, may find some
fit resemblance with those three peculiar Treasures, which were laid up in the
Sanctum Sanctorum of the Temple of God; namely the Pot of Manna, the Tables of
the Covenant, and Aarons rod that budded: Her Judgment was as the Pot of Manna,
in which she could find all wholesome soul-feeding Doctrines; her Memory as the
Tables of the Covenant, Gods Law being her meditatation day and night; her
Fancy as Aarons Rod that budded fresh buds of refined Wit and invention
always sprouting from it.

Besides these she had a most Methodicall Head, to dispose of all her affairs
Personal, Domestic, Civil, Religious, into the clearest order that might be;
And to this a natural Aptness to any Art, or any Employment, even to Tongues
and Sciences, Music, Needle Work, Cutting, Drawing, and whatsoever was
useful, or harmlesly delightful.

But what do I speak so long of these Natural Gifts, Vessels so soon broken,
though so well seasoned, nay and adorned; which although, like the vessels in
the Temple, consecrated almost wholly to sacred uses, yet as those Vessels,
and that Temple, were broken and demolished after the coming of Christ, that
God might be more served in Spirit and Truth, so the Temple of her Body being
destroved by the coming and Call of Christ, these hallowed Vessels are broken
with it, and now she serves God wholly in Spirit, as a pure Cherubim, Wit,
Understanding and Memory being wholly taken up, and ravished with the fruition
of Him in Heaven, after whom they so aspired, even whilst she was on Earth.

As these Natural endowments might procure her a Good Name with those, who
look no higher, than mere Nature, so if I should touch at those Virtues, which
gain reputation for Morality, I might advance her esteem in this Sphere, as
one, who was the most absolute Governess over her own Passions, that these
times could instance in; she was seldom angry, so far as to chiding, and if it
came to that, she commonly checked her self, and if she observed any did mark
her, it should end in laughing at her own Passion; it being often told her,
that she knew to do any thing more skilfully, than to chide, especially if it
were for any worldly matter; But if it were for any thing that concerned the
Cause of God, she would be more serious in it; and often turn her Anger into a
zealous reprehension and displeasure; An Oath in her hearing, or if by Chance
some scurrilous, light, or profane Speech should slip from any, it would make
her blood to rise in her Face, if she had interest in the offenders, they were
sure to be reproved, and many, to reduce them from their rash inclinations in
that kind, she would invent to impose some handsome Penalties; if they were
strangers she would let fall some witty Check, consistent with civility, or by
withdrawing her self signify her dislike.

Notwithstanding this, she had a Natural Comity, pleasantness of Behavior,
and Civil Vrbanity, by which seldom any who fell under her reproof could
depart sorrowful out of her presence, except it were because they did depart,
or for that by not setting a Watch to the Door of their Mouths they had given
just offense to her tender Christian Ears These Virtues I name, because where
discretion puts them forth in Society, they are as Precious Balms to heal the
wounds, which others sinful behavior inflict on Company, or go uncured by
that sullen absence of those, who are morose, and know not how to apply
remedies in season and out of season, fit and suitable to the maladies.

It were an endless labor to speak of her behavior, which for the most part
was innocently cheerful, unaffected toward Superiors and Equals,
undissembled toward friends, familiar toward inferiors, affable and
accessible to all, and in much conversation her Words were commonly Gracious
and seasoned with Salt; she was Constant in her Friendship, and none more
useful, willing to take any pains, where she pretended that; unapt to hear ill
of any, of whom she had once conceived well; nothing was so great a disease to
her, as an accusation of those, of whom she had a good opinion; her servants
fared not the worse for that, to whose errors she could be as Indulgent, as to
Friends, and never looked on any servant which she had, and believed Faithful
and Virtuous, but as upon an humble Friend. This, and her diffusive kindness,
which extended to all she knew miserable, has (I dare say) much increased the
true tears which have this day fallen; none understood relations, none could
possibly observe them better than she, I appeal to Husband, Parents, Kindred,
Friends, Servants, Neighbors, to witness this truth.

I would not enlarge on these, which seem to be but Moral Virtues, if they had
been indeed no more but mere Morality; but I am assured they flowed from a
gracious disposition in her; they were the streams from Jordane, the Laver of
Regeneration, and we may well baptize them Christian Virtues in her; For it is
well known, that all her actions, which deliberation did give birth unto, she
did them out of a Conscience of duty, and as in the Sight of God.

Hence was that Holy Fortitude and Boldness for Truth, for which she durst be
Valiant, she would suffer any inconvenience, rather than she would tell an
Untruth, or make an Excuse, or let any of her Servants do it, or by any
Equivocation deceive or elude a question; For this have I known her much
afflicted, when she had business, especially her Religious Tasks, how to shun
company, and shun a Lie, that she might not be found out; but any Rock would
she venture upon rather than an Untruth; and indeed it is to be doubted, that
the not fearing to split against this has made many make Shipwreck of Faith
and a good Conscience.

Her Charity I need not speak of; the tongues of the Poor and Distressed, whom
her pitiful heart has often relieved, may save me that labor, and now she is
gone, shall cry it at your doors, and in your street, if they be not starved in
their houses, from which, I can aver, she has kept some Families, although
their relieved bowels made it divulged, not the least ostentation in her.
Indeed she was made up of Christian kindness and Pity; and though I told you
she was a Perfect Governess of her Passions, yet her Compassion always
governed her; nor did I ever know her shut her hand, when any in want opened
their mouth for an Alms, she could not excuse her self by sometimes having no
money about her, if any of her attendants had, they were sure to be Almoners.

But her highway Charity was not the tithe of what she gave, they need not
come to her to ask, but Clothing, and Food, and Physic, and other Comforts,
were sent to their habitations, that had any, nay and these provided also for
some, who must otherwise have lain without doors, and her self a frequent
Visitour to be truly informed of their persons, and condition.

But what do I speak of her Charity to the Bodies of the Poor? she had a Way of
relieving the Souls of all by her daily Alms of Prayers offered up; by her
Instructions where she found the Ignorant, by her Counsels to the Doubting and
Scrupulous; How has she been moved to see some Wretches by distraction
deprived of their Reason? how she would inquire after the known and secret
causes of such Distempers, and cast about to have some Cure if possible? I am
sure she has spoke and wrote, and traveled for one well known in this place,
whom it pleased God to let fall into that to be lamented condition.

But still she had more kinds of Charity than I have named, one was in
forgiving Injuries which might be by mistakes perchance, but if wilfullly or
maliciously cast upon her, it was the same thing, indeed the same Nothing in
her account or Memory. I told you of her Memory, how Tenacious it was; but
truly if it were to lay up an ill Turn, it had no hold at all; Benefits and
Good Turns, Good Deeds and good sayings were engraven in her heart, as if
written in Adamant, never to be blotted out, Offenses and Injuries never came
near it, her Memory was Water to them, even the water of Lethe, which makes
forget all things, all things of that nature I am sure were soon forgot by her;
An Unkindness indeed, for the time might make a deep impression, a great wound
in her heart, where all things were so contrary to it, so made up of Kindness,
Pity, and Charity, so that it could never beget another the like unkindness
there.

A further kind of Charity was that which the Apostle speaks of, indeed as a
fruit of the same true Christian Charity; that it thinks none evil, 1 Cor.
13. 5. She was in so perfect Charity with all conditions of men, that in these
boisterous times, where difference in opinion, either in civil affairs or
points of Religion, has bred so much ill blood, or indeed shed so much blood,
both Good and Ill; if she chanced to converse with such from whom her judgment
differd in every kind, and did hear them make serious professions that they
practiced according to that light, which was in their understanding, although
she could never be won in the least degree to approve of their erroneous
opinions, yet she has been in perfect Charity, and would not shun conversation
with their persons, if any relation required it, believing they could not be so
wicked, as to dissemble in their Professions, but pitied them for being
delivered up, and prayed to deliver them from the Spirit of Error.

Lastly, for it is an hard matter for those who knew her Charity to be brief in
relating that, wherein she was so copious in dispensing, yet if you would Know
hers, and the effects of it in their full Latitude, I beseech you read it in
that Chapter of Charity, 1 Cor. 13. which she seemed by her practice to have
learned by heart again, and again; Hoping all things, believing all things,
enduring all things, And yet she had one further effect of her Charity, which I
find not there, and that was a burning Desire for the Salvation of every man's
soul, Ally or Stranger, Friend or Foe; how fervent and earnest she was a little
before her death for the Salvation of some within her Family, even of her
servants, her most zealous prayer testified. Tell her of slaughter, or the
violent or sudden Death of any, how her heart would shrink within her, and
commonly the first question was, how was he Prepared for his Soul? I could fill
the world with instances of this kind, but I forbear.

I could now speak of the lively Signs of her Faith and Hope, by which her
Soul mounted even into the Bosom of Christ, above all fears and griefs, which
these Times brought thick upon her; Fear indeed, if it came suddenly, would a
little surprise her, an incidency to that Sex, and the tenderness of her
nature, but as soon would she recollect her self, and by reason and religious
arguments dispell all carnal fears.

So did her Grief yield to Faith and Patience, and the Comforts which she could
fetch readily out of Gods Storehouse, and pertinently for her present malady,
and the cure of it. When her firstborn Son, her then only Child, had the pangs
of death upon him, she (after prayers and tears) sat very disconsolate, and
when at the report of his departure, floods of tears would needs flow from her
eyes, to stop these Floodgates she took her Bible, and fell to singing of
Psalms, until she had broken the violent torrent of her passion, and brought
her soul to a cheerful submission to the will of God.

I have spoken of her natnrall Parts and endowments, a little touch I have
given of some of her Virtues and the Ornaments of her Mind. Those more outward
of her body, as she undervalued them, so I pass them over: yet one thing let me
tell you of her Apparel, and indeed the chief, which she delighted in, and
that which was seen above and over all the rest, was that Garment which the
Apostle commends, Humility, she was clothed all over with that, the Ornaments
of her Mind and Body all shined through that, and the Veil of Modesty.

But for her Attire and Dressing, this I can aver, that her self had the least
affectation for it, for her self, but only for those who were related to her,
that she might not seem mean or unworthy their alliance or affections. This
resolution she had taken up long since, and avowed to wear no other Garments
but Black, so long as she should live, not only presaging what the Tragical
times might require, but as being the gravest and most suitable to her
disposition. And to check all thoughts of Fancy or delighting in outward
ornaments, amongst some Places in her Bible, at which she set a Memento, and a
Mark to be often read, there yet sticks a pin which she fastened with her own
hands in the Margent against that Place in the third of the first of St. Peter,
where the Duty of Christian Wives to their Husbands is prescribed, but
particularly it points at the third, fourth, and fifth verses, Whose adorning,
let it not be the outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of putting on of
Apparel, or of wearing of Gold, but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in
that which is not corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the sight of God of great price; the place is worth the
consideration of all, epecially of that Sex.

A rare mark of modest Gravity of one of her Place and Age: she having now
(which adds much to all that I have or shall say) but past the two and
twentieth Year of her Age, not come to her full strength and flourishing; such
a blossom I think can scarce be paralleld.

Having, as I said, spoken a little of her endowments, and the habits of her
Mind, spare me a little time to let you see that her practice was according to
those Habits, which she had not as Talents buried in a napkin, but with mighty
diligence and vigor improved them to her Master's use, to glorify God the
giver of those Gifts, to edify and benefit those to whom she related, and to
make her own calling and election sure.

I shall speak but of those which were the constant Practice of her life, and
such as may seem preparations for her Death, and I will be as brief as it is
possible to be in such an argument.

She began the Day with God, and as she opened it, so she shut up the evening
with the same Key of Prayer. Most commonly as soon as she could break sleep
from her eyes (or because she would not take her fill of sleep, which she
thought she loved too much, others must wake her) gliding into her Closet, and
before she dressed her body, (except some urgent occasion required it) she
perfumed her breath with prayer, and then read her daily Task in the Bible,
which was the Psalms of David usually observed for the day of the Month, and
six Chapters, intending by that course to read the whole Bible over twice in
the year, which I am confident she did not fail of, for these last seven years;
for if necessity did compel her to omit once or twice, she doubled or tripled
her number at the next opportunity.

She ordered her Soul first, and then all other things were set in exactest
order, Books, Time, etc. she had digested her hours into methods for affairs,
repasts, readings of Books of Humanity, Divinity, Devotion chiefly, as may
appear both by the Books marked in the Margent, and noted with her own hand, as
also by her papers and memorialls, when she began to read any Book. Besides
reading her tasks in the Bible, which she did for the daily bread and food of
her soul, she for pious recreation and more exact knowledge, had set time apart
to examine the hard places by Deodates Notes, and of others, which she had by
her, and because she could not stop her current of reading at that instant to
stay and search every difficulty, she set a mark at them to be searched at her
further leisure. She had marks of several kinds, some for difficulties, some
for Memorialls of choice places, or pertinent to some peculiar purposes, but I
know it was her resolution to have read the Bible together with Expositors in a
daily task, besides her number of six Chapters a day, and the Psalms, and
besides that she noted such Places as she intended to confer with Divines or
others about the meaning of them.

We find in his Epistles, that Marcellina and Anapsychia wrote to St. Hierom,
for his opinion of the Souls original: she had no Hierom, but in that
particular question she spent much time, and the letters are yet extant which
she wrote for satisfaction in other doubts of Scripture difficulties. In a
word, she was so assiduous in reading of the Bible, that (as Hierom notes to
Marcella a noble Matron, the news of her friends death came, when they were
reading the Psalms of David) she might seem to desire that all news, good or
bad, might find her so employed.

I shall not need to name the other books, which fed her devotion, indeed on
some she desired to have a holy surfeit, to name a few, were to injure her, none
came in her way, which she would not taste, and if they relisht, feed on; When
she began to read an Author is sometimes to be found in her Calendar, and in
those books, wherein she most delighted, how far she had read, and with what
she was most affected, is to be seen by marks in the Margent.

She had a Zeal for the observation of the Lords day, and times set apart for
Devotion, but especially before she received the Holy Communion (which she did
strive to do very frequently, as finding much comfort by it) then she used all
exact strictness and serious Preparation.

She sometimes her self would Repeat with some of her Family, what she had
remembered of the Sermons; which she could also note in the Church, and used it
for a time, until she either found it a little damped the devoutness of her
attention, or because she had a purpose so to order it, that she might
afterward have privacie and leisure to write down what her memory would retain
(which how much it was I have told you before) Indeed the distracted condition
of her affairs, and the times, did still force her to defer that order and
settled way for duties in her Family, which she had framed in her mind, and
seriously intended to perform, if it had pleased God to give opportunity for
settling; but in the mean time she desired that all, whom she had power over,
would supply such necessary defects (which she often Grieved at) with their
particular care in their private service of God, and their frequenting the
public Ordinances.

If I would pursue particulars, it were hard to find any shore in the wide
Ocean of her Praises, and yet in describing her life, I need not fear flattery,
for truly to set out only some part of her Worth, and to keep back the rest, or
to draw her picture with my rude pencil, is far beneath the true and genuine
Beauty which was in her large Soul, so no fear of excess.

But if any should be offended at these praises which I bring for the Dead, I
have found two Apologies in one Epistle of St. Hierom for his praises of
Asella, a godly, deceased, noble Matron, Nemo reprehendat etc. says he, let no
man blame me for setting forth praises due to the Virtues of the Dead; it may
stir up the living to contend to attain to the like Virtues. Another is that,
which I may peculiarly assume in this place, I praise her being. Dead, says
he, lest any should think those praises, which I gave her when she was Alive,
should have proceeded from flattery, not from truth, Living and Dead she has
filld me justly with that argument.

But if any should say, why nothing but praise? had she no Errors, no
infirmities or sins? truly yes, she had, and, as if she had desired with the
Apostle, only to Glory in her Infirmities; as if the world were not envious or
not prying enough to find them out, she has left a Catalogue of them upon
record under her own hand, as has been seen since her death amongst her
papers; as if she had rather wished this solemnity might have been spent in
rehearsing them, than any of her Virtues: She had written down forty six
particulars, which she used to bewail as faults, or infirmities, or wants. And
perchance some might now desire to hear of them (such is our own corruption,
that we love, like impure flies, to feed on other men's sores) but should I name
those secret faults, which she impartially laid open betwixt God and her own
Soul, I should much disappoint and frustrate the expectation of those; And it
might perchance be taken for the greatest flattery, when they shall hear her
secret faults to be such, as might indeed have been spoken in a Pulpit, whilst
she was alive, and would have been thought done on purpose to gain her
applause, compared with what most of us know to be the Plague of our own
hearts; But her sins and infirmities, so often her bewailed, and buried in the
grave of Christ, I doubt not but your Christian Charity will think fit to be
buried with her, or in a deeper Grave, the grave of Oblivion, whilst her
Virtues and Good Name due to them; shall live, and flourish, and find a
perpetual monument in every one of our hearts. She was, as all Gods Children
are, sometimes under great sorrow and dejection of spirit, and tried by great
Temptations, under which some few years ago she lay for a time, and it cost her
many tears, which God at the last regarded, and heard her Prayers, delivered
her out of the snare, and set her on an high and sure Rock by Faith.

And so I shall I have done with that part of practice, wherein the course of
her life was seen; I desire to add something of that, which might seem to fit
and prepare her for, or at least to attend her at her Death.

Indeed her whole life was that, which sound Philosophers, or rather sound
Christians would have it A constant Meditation, or Preparation for Death; She
was never long unprepared for that; the assurance of which, how great a Comfort
it has been to her surviving friends, is not easily imaginable.

For it pleased God to let the violence of her disease seize upon her choycest
and most exquisite part her Intellectualls (although with some short and sweet
returns) for three or four days before she dyed.

From which I desire all Christians to observe Gods dealings with her, with
praise to his providence, and caution to themselves; It is the mercy of God to
the living, to admonish by examples of such, whom he wholly disinables in time
of sickness, to prepare for their eternal condition whilst they have health,
leisure and undisturbedness of understanding. To her Soul, so constantly
prepared, and every day waiting, when he would call or knock, it was not
sudden; but if at this instant he should summon any of us in that kind, I
beseech you in the fear of God, let us consider whether we have our souls in
like readiness: and if not, delay no longer.

But to clear up all doubts concerning her, let me tell you her Behavior on
her Deathbed was the most sweet, and the most comfortable, and Christian, that
ever I heard of, and to satisfy all your Scruples, this last was not it, or
not only it. She was Twice thrown down upon the Bed of Death, she might say
indeed she Dyed daily by renewed acts of mortification. But in a true and
proper sense, before this last expiring, she had totally resigned up her self,
and expected every moment when the Angels should fetch her Soul from her body
once before.

The story is famously known to all that knew her, about six months ago (in
the month of November last past) she having reckoned her self to be with
child, and finding unusual Symptoms, such as in that case she never had
experience of, she thought that God did now admonish to set her house in order,
and to set her Soul in order, for it was very probable, he might finish her
days on earth, at her bringing forth.

She wisely and frequently pondered this in her heart, and was noted to double
her guard, her diligence at her duties, and to be ready to answer at every Call.

The time past, which she expected should be the hour of Deliverance, and after
it some weeks, which caused great doubting of her condition, whether she had
conceived at all, and sometimes Physicians and those about her concluded the
Contrary, but no doubt did she make of being Prepared for Death, of which she
often discoursed, and what thoughts she had of its Nearness; and because she
had bodily strength and went abroad, she took the opportuuity of gaining
Spiritual Strength to her Faith and other Graces, by partaking of the Holy
Communion; six days or there abouts after that, (a month after her time) she
fell into the Pangs of women in travel, and when the Midwife had spent all the
day, and could give no help, but totally despaired, in the evening it was
discovered, that it was no living Child, of which she labored, but of that,
which in the Judgment of all about her, must within a few hours (or days at
most) make her a dead woman.

She soon apprehended their fears, and earnestly begged now (as she did at all
times) that she might be plainly dealt with concerning her condition for Life
or Death, which she would in no Case endure to be dissembled to her, or
concealed from her; her friends did observe her desire, and confessed their
hopes of Life to be small or not any, but desired her to submit to Gods will in
her dissolution.

How would you now imagine she received the Sentence of Death? with Frights or
Fears, or Sorrow and Grief to part with the world, and her dear Relations in
it? Truly with a very contrary guise. She sent for those, who nearliest related
to her, and her Kindred and Friends, and composing her coutenance and gesture
to the most Majestic and undejected Gravity that I ever beheld, She fell to
taking leave, bequeathing, not her worldly affairs, but spiritual Comforts,
her fervent Prayers, Divine Blessings, her Weighty Counsels and Admonitions
fitted particularly, and made proper to every one to whom she gave her heavenly
Legacies, especially to her Lord, her Children, her Allies, and Servants, and
all were such as might tend to direct them in ways of well-doing, by which
they might through Christ's merits, meet again in Glory. But all this with such
Affection, such Zeal, such Courage, such Demonstration of Faith and Assurance
of her going now from Pain and Misery to Joys unspeakable, that the image of
that day and her aspect shall never depart out of the memory of some, who
beheld it. If you had seen her on her then supposed deathbed, you would have
thought of Moses on Pisgah, or Jacob on his deathbed dividing his blessings,
of dying Joshua, or of David, or the best composed Saints.

To see her dearest Pledges and Relations, Friends and Servants standing by,
flowing with Tears and Lamentations, and her self steadfast and unconcerned,
Counselling, Comforting, Blessing them with her last breath (as she and they
believed) it made an appearance, as if all they had been the Parties, which
must die, and she only to give them Christian advice to susser death with
Patience, as if she had been in perfect health, they in present danger of
Death, such was her Assurance and Joy from the Holy Ghost, as if she had begun
to taste Eternity, and the happiness of that life in the very tidings of Death.

Her Legacy left to her two dear Children was her desire to her Lord, that
whatsoever provision he should make for their outward condition, of which she
was neither distrustful, nor yet solicitous; but fervently she besought him,
that they might be brought up in the strictest way of Religion and Life, even
in that strictness of life, which the world might count Puritanisme. The
strictest ways were always accounted best for her own self in her life, and
now at her Death she bore witness to them and commended them to the Dearest
Pledges of her Love.

After, she spent her time in declaring the Assiance she had on the Merits, and
the Assurance she had on the Love of Christ; She did not conceal also, how she
had wrestled with Doubtings, and did propound the greatest Scruple, which lay
upon her Conscience for the sincerity of her Repentance. She spoke of the
Comfort she had at her last receiving the Sacrament, she confessed indeed, that
she might have soyld herself after, but yet the last night she had also begged
pardon (and I was told by those; that knew it, that she had then been a whole
hour in private upon her knees, although at that time no danger of Death was
feared) and further professed, that now nothing was a greater burden than
this, that although she was Willing to Dye, yet she found also a willingness in
her heart to Live, which she much blamed in her self. Although that might
proceed from the consideration of the good of those she was to Leave, rather
than that it was better for her to stay, the same dispute which the Apostle had
with himself, Phil. 2. 23. To be with Christ was far better (for her)
nevertheless to abide in the flesh was more needful (for us) And so it seemed
good to our heavenly Father; (She was born by accident six Weeks, as they
counted it, before her time, and had lived so many Months after her time might
seem to have been expired; Nature seemed importunate to gain her into the
world, and as unwilling to let her depart out of it, to lose one of her
choycest Children) It seemed good to Almighty God, even to let the Sun of her
Life go back some few Degrees, after it seemed to be in the very lowest point
of Setting; his mavelous providence pointing out such ways, and making all
circumstances so concur even beyond hope, (whereof if any one had failed, there
could have been no possibility of recovery) that she seemed rather by a Divine
Miracle raised from the Dead, than by any humane help or hand restored from
danger.

And indeed as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. 35. Women received their dead
raised to life again; so did they then look upon this not as a Recovery, but as
a Resurrection. And if you please, reckon her Death from that very hour, that
she resigned up her self to it so freely, and if we look upon her walking
since, we may believe she was as one Dead to the world, as one that was Risen
with Christ, and had her Conversation in Heaven intentionally, her affection, I
am sure on things above not on things on Earth. Account her now as Dead, as one
whose life was hid with Christ in God. For shall I speak plainly, she walked on
Earth but she lived not after this, as to her self, to others indeed she did,
and to their especial Comfort.

I have observed two or three things for which God in his providence might
bestow this little time, and lend her to her friends on Earth; he might seem to
spare her a little, and give her space for these reasons. The one was in mercy
to her Father. The other to her Dear Relations at home. The third was to finish
some work upon her own Soul, for the good example of others, her own work was
done; however, in all these I may say she lived not to her self as in the world.

To her The E. of Holland.
Father in his extreme affliction God made her an unexpressible Comfort. I
speak not in regard of any temporal things, which God had determined as we now
see to cut away wholly from him, as to this life, and all the Comforts of it;
which notwithstanding to procure, What Pains, Travail, Watchings, Fastings, in
that extreme cold season did she undergo, (even beyond what might be expected
from her Sex, but especially one of the tenderest breeding in it) was very
observable by all, and satisfactory to him abundantly.

But to show that it was the service of his Soul that she aimed at, as if her
Soul had been held in life, for that purpose that she might be an instrument to
draw her Fathers with her to Eternity.

Let me tell you but this. When all hopes of Life were past, and after she with
the rest of those, who were dear to him, had taken their final leave, that the
rest of his hours might be spent with his spiritual Comfortors, She could not
give sleep to her eyes, nor slumber to her eyelids, until she had once more
visited and discoursed with him, but yet in matters relating wholly to Eternity.
And therefore coming betimes in the Morning, first timorously, into his chamber
(after she had watched all night in a room hard by for that purpose) when he
had with joy discernd and welcomed her, they presently fell into Conference; in
which she with an humble boldness, did so question and answer, rip up and
stitch together again, gently wound and then give balm, in a word, did so apply
both Law and Gospel to him, that being refreshed with these comforts; he cried
out, Happy I that I should from a Child of mine own receive such consolation.
And after that he told a Reverend Divine, who came to administer the like
consolation, That he thanked God he had a Child there, who, (though he said it
before her face) was able to be his Counselor in all his doubts. Also another
Divine present, heard her half an hour to admiration as he professed.

After her Fathers death none so nearly relating bore all with the like
Christian patience as she, acknowledging it the wise method of Almighty God
thus to bestow mercy on a Soul, which, without so great a measure of
affliction, in health, and in the Glory of his prosperity, could not, or would
not ever have so humbly and sincerely sought it from the bed of sickness, if
death had taken him from that.

And amongst other expressions, by which she mightily comforted her self and
others, in her clear assurance of his salvavation, she often said that she
could not (if it were possible and lawful) with her heart and judgment wish
him alive again, although it were well known, that never Parent lay deeper in
the affections of a Child than he in hers. But she durst not wish him so bad a
change, as to leave heaven for earth, (especially this earth as things now make
it.)

After she had thus acted her part with her Father, although much weakened by
watching and fasting (having taken no sustenance for forty eight hours
together, as I am informed, nor come in bed, notwithstanding the extremity of
the season and her great toil) Then she applied her self vigorously to the
settling of all things, which concerned the secular affairs of her Family, that
so she might totally and wholly, be vacant to God, and the business of her Soul,
which having now finished, and set all in exact method, as to the very least
particular, she then with great resolution declared to one, with whom she might
be private, that now she would settle as she had long intended and desired, in
the Country, and there would never be at rest till she had made her Calling
and Election sure, indeed, that she would confer with some (one she named) how
she might, if possibly, arrive at an absolute assurance of Salvation.

To another she said, that now, if God would give her leave, she would go into
the Country, and she had cast her Family-business into such a way, that for
her self she would have nothing to do but to be Ready to Dye. And God took her
at her word, He put these holy Resolutions into her heart, and because it was
in her heart to do it, it was the clear purpose of that, He who searches the
heart and bends the Will; and having proved her heart to be upright before
God; He accepted it and took the will for the Deed; don it was in his esteem;
the Task of her life was finished to her Father, to her Family, to her Soul.
(For, this let me note, there was not a night in six months since her last
recovery from her mortal sickness, that she rose from off her knees from her
prayers without tears running down her Cheeks, as I am certainly informed by
those who had reason to know it.)

And now it was time for God to take to himself, what he had so fitted for
himself; and this she presently foresaw, and took the first approach of her
disease to be the summons of Death, and earnestly desired conference with one,
whom in her Souls affairs she had trusted. She foresaw her journey, and
therefore had made provision for a Viaticum, and intended the next Lords Day
following (and so had prepared her thoughts) to have received the Sacrament:
and having conferrd before with him, from whose hands she intended to receive
that Holy Mystery, she discovered her spiritual condition to him plainly and
Clearly: and Charged him to deal as severely and impartially, and still would
urge him again and again, after this manner. O but you deal more gently with
me, than you would with another, I beseech you let me know the worst.

Her main Scruple at that time was (as she was always full of Scruples; her
Conscience being the tenderest part about her) Indeed the last Lords Day she
was troubled at her distractions at Church, and was melancholy at it after she
came home, and asked, if others used to be so; but now her trouble arose from
this That she could not discern, but that her Love to God had too much relation
to the reward; She knew that his essential excellencies ought to draw all love
toward him for himself; but still Salvation and Glory, and that in serving him
there was great Reward, this came, as she thought, too much into her mind, and
this she feared was too Mercenary, and Servile, and a Love not high enough to
bestow on God. She was at last well satisfied in this point, how the love of
God might well consist with an eye to the recompense of Reward, and was quiet
in her mind, until the distemper of her disease did disturb her understanding;
at the first seizing on her, she did, with some sudden show of fear presage her
Death, but within a few hours she declared that she feared it not at all.

Although, as I told you, her disease got into her brain and bred some
disturbance there, yet it pleased God to afford her many clear and bright
Glimpses; One remarkable wherein she poured forth her Soul in a large prayer,
the words of which cannot be recollected, but in effect, it was of such most
fervent, melting, moving passages, as if she would out-wrestle God, and rend
from him his mercies by unresistable violence, and take the Kingdom of Heaven
by Force out of his hands, especially, as for laying before him his Name, his
Attributes, his bowels, his Christ, all his Comfortable Promises, which she
fetched with most admirable skill, choice, and Fluency from every precious vein
in the Rich Mine of his Word. This was the last continued act of Reason, which
she performed, only when her strength was even spent, she owned her Dear
relations, when they came unto her, did let them understand, she was now
married to Christ, joined with most heedfull attentions in Prayer, with one,
whom she then desired to do that office, gave signs of approbation, and
requested that he which poured it out on her behalf would not go out of the
room; after that, within little more than an hour, in a quiet kind of sleep,
the passages of life being stopped, she yielded up her Spirit unto God that
gave it, leaving behind her the bitterest and loudest lamentations of her
friends, to whom she was the most desired Creature that God ever placed in
their eyes and relations.

Thus dyed Susanna Countess of Suffolk, and thus she lived twenty two years a
rare example of early and pregnant Graces.

And now if I have set her Image so fresh before your eyes, that you make haste
to meet her there with any of your tears, let me, as I began, draw them to the
Text, that by the comfort of it they may be wiped away.

What think you now, if we build her a good Name on this Foundation? She has
left us all Materials. What can be wanting, Greatness, Goodness, Nature, Grace,
Wit, Memory, a good Understanding, a gracious Heart, unfeigned Faith; (look at
the Apostles materials, and see what is wanting, Faith, Virtue, Knowledge,
Brotherly Kindness, etc. 2 Pet 1. 12.) As David who had in his heart and
purpose to build a Temple to God, left all materials, Silver, and Gold, and
Precious Stones, and the willing hearts of the People for Solomon to build a
Temple out of. Tryly, she has left us all the materials that may be, to build
a Temple of her good Name, the bright Silver of her Natural Parts and
endowments, the purer Gold of her Virtues and purchased habits, and above all
the shining Jewels of Gods Graces and Image; her precious faith, as the Apostle
phrases it, her burning Zeal, fervent Charity, pure Religion and undefiled. She
was all for Sanctuary-words.

Whilst she lived, with those wise-hearted Women Exodus 38. that brought for the
service of the Tabernacle their blue, and purple, and Skarlet, and fine linen,
and their looking-Glasses: All her ornaments, all her faculties and Phancies,
all her desires were to build up her self a Tabernacle, a Temple for the
service of the living God; and besides, blessed be God, she has left willing
hearts behind her, the greatest love, and the greatest desire of her self that
has been heard of, those that have been ready to weep out their eyes for her
being dead, would willingly have plucked out their eyes (as the Apostle says)
to have kept her alive.

Seeing then Death has broken this Alablaster Box of precious ointment to
pour the liquor of it on her head, to anoint her to her Burial, and to leave a
fragrancy which may fill the world with her sweet memorial, let us give her
what is better than Precious ointment, and what she has deserved from us, (as
being the gift of God to her) A good Name; which so often, as it shall sound
her memory in our ears, let her virtues (if their be any Virtue, any Goodness,
any Praise) come into our minds; let the imitation of them be aspired after in
one ardent desire, that we may bless God, who lent us so rich an example, and
may all laud and glorify his name, who has give her such a glorious Name, and
us so clear an assurance, that the Day of her Death was better to her, than the
Day of her Birth.

FINIS.

