THE LOYAL SUBJECTS LAMENTATION FOR LONDONS Perverseness, in the Malignant
Choice of some Rotten Members, on Tuesday the 19. of March 1661.
OH horrid Monsters! what strange News is here,
When Factious Locusts thus in Swarms appear.
At Guild-Hall-Gate, where they do freely Vote
For such vild Scabs, who soon would cut the Throat
Of Justice, and would have all idle sport
In Churches used; Nay, they a Tennis-Court
Would make it, if they could (by Lot or Fate)
Obtain the Power to Rule in Church or State.
The City Vermin in Guild Hall did cry
(Both Independent and Presbytery.)
For Love, whose zeal so hot was set on work,
That he declared he would rather see a Turk
Then a Sursingle, Rub on, there is none can
Bowl better then this Independent man.
Then Anabaptists they aloud did cry
With Jack Presbyter against Episcopy.
Saying, Fowk was a Member fit they knew,
Who had the Brains to cheat a subtle Jew.
So well his Cash, with cursed Self he loves,
As did appear by those left handed gloves.
He sold the Jew alone, but after they
Were gone, he made his Chapman soundly pay
For Fellows to them, thus his pregnant wit
Makes him a man for Parliament so fit.
Next Echoed forth a dismal thundering Voice,
Crying for Thompson; Oh such hellish Choice
Will us undo; London, thy case all pity,
And pray these Vermin may not spoil thy City.
Such Shrubs and Stumps will spoil a Royal Oak,
Who have their Rise from stinking Indian smoke.
As this rare Pedlar, whose ever smoking Brains
Does smoke and smell as hot and strong as Grains,
The House wherein he sits, O England, pity,
For why, The only honest man amongst them if any.
his breath will poison a Committee.
The next was Jones, another Smoaker, chose,
That all good subjects by the Choice suppose
They did appoint that day for to undo
Themselves, their King, I and their Country too.
But stay, methinks I hear blind Justice say
The Vote is carried a contrary way;
For Independent Voices did appear:
The Anabaptist and the Presbyter,
Many of whom we may Malignants make
Because they never yielded yet to take
The Oath of true Allegiance to their King*
Which well their persons might in question bring
With their estates; How can the Vote
Of such stand firm, who have no note
Of Loyalty; I do presume they are
Chose by Malignants; Ergo, it is not fair.
Thus have you Four sad Stewards chose, God send
Them never to sit, or soon to have an end.
London, lament your Case, you plainly see
Your worthy Burgesses, and what they be,
Base factious Persons, of a rigid spirit,
Chose by sad persons without Grace or merit.
Yet if they stand without a just Return,
God send the Commons House may soon Adjourne.
And all that can displease so mild a KING
As CHARLES the Second, God in due time bring
Them to an end, and grant they may as well
HOYLE themselves as did Achitophel.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1660


