LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE: OR THE Sole means to obtain Peace and Truth.

Not only reconciling His MAJESTY with His Subjects, but all Christian States
and Princes to one another, with the freest passage for the GOSPEL.

Very seasonable and necessary in these distracted times, when most men are
weary of War, and cannot find the way to Peace.

Printed in the Year 1643.

To every Christian Reader that seeks Truth as well as Peace.
Beloved in Christ Jesus:
LEt not the seeming noveltie of opinions deter thee from searching out the
Truth, and be assured that Gods people, as well as worldlings have their times
to fish in troubled waters; wherefore before thou proceed on with this
Discourse, promise me, I beseech thee, to read it out; and if thou then repent
thee of thy pains, let me but know so much, and I shall willingly take upon me
a double penance for thy satisfaction and amends.

I am not ignorant that the lawfulness of newtrality is much controverted both
in policy and conscience, but men of moderation which endeavor to qualify or
decline the precipice of extremes, ought not to be accounted newtralls or
lukewarm: Such then (as I presume) will no more be of opinion, that all on
the Kings side are Papists or Popishly affected, then that all on the
Parliaments are Brownists, Anabaptists, or thereunto inclined; nor all that are
at Oxford enemies of God and godly men, or all at London to take up Arms only
for good of either; but that there are on both sides great numbers, though not
equal, which wish sincerely and mean well, not withstanding there may have
been many weaknesses, infirmities and errors expressed by them; for, the
presence and influence of both the Armies I conceive but much alike conducing
to make the people really good or bad, though they must outwardly comply with
both, so long as they are near them, and have any thing to lose, and do not
yet perceive, but that such Members of the Lords and Commons House, are much
the same, notwithstanding their passing to and fro between London and Oxford.

But the London Pamphlets querie, whether Papists are likely to settle the
Protestant Religion? And Aulicus seeming no less scrupulous, asks whether
Brownists or Anabaptists will? But if a third should resolve them both, and
say, that the Protestant Religion has not been in England these eighty years,
he might run the hazard to be thought a libeller, and yet it may chance be
found so, if we examine what it is, whence it came, whether it be not confined
amongst the Lutherans, and how much we differ from it, though we still retain
the name: But what matters it, whether we be called Protestants or otherwise?
or is truth and propriety the worse, because (...) endeavor, or attain them
by the help of Papists and of Brownists? (...) not Papists and Brownists as
lawfully serve their King and Country, (...) thundering legions of Primitive
Christians did the (...) The King says he took up defensive Arms; and both
Houses of (...) a verre that they did so: The Parliament party fear that if
(...) though his Majesty himself be not Popishly affected, the Bishop(...) be
(...) by their jurisdiction, suppress all such as did (...) both to (...)
discipline and doctrine: On the other side, the Kings party is in as great a
fear, that if the Parliaments side should get the upper hand, though they do
not establish (...) or Anabaptisme, yet they would settle a Presbytery, which
may as much a bridge them the Liberty of Conscience, as they themselves have
been a bridged under Episcopacie heretofore; in which respect, each party for
the present, pretends to grant such a liberty as shall be suitable and complying
with tender consciences, but neither dare yield unto, or trust the other: In
such a case as this, is there no remedy? Has God left us quite destitute of
means to stop so great a gap to prevent the total ruin and desolation of
three Nations, not without the greatest scandal and offense which ever befell
the Reformed Protestant Religion? The fear is equal and extreme on both
sides, though either of them is like enough to say, the others fear is but
imaginary, yet both of them, since they say so, and cannot be disproved, are to
be treated and proceeded with, alike: To this the King adds, and says, that
besides sundry demonstrations of His grace and favor, I have granted a
perpetual Parliament, and if ever that should have an end, they have still a
trieniall Parliament to perpetuity, which of themselves only transcend all the
grants that ever my Predecessors made unto their Subjects: and notwithstanding
all this, they attempt my life, and take away my Revenues, Royalty, and
Religion too, if it were possible: On the contrary, the two Houses of
Parliament in their several Remonstrances have informed his Majesty, how
through predominancie of evil counselors the Subjects liberties have had
several great breaches made upon them, innovations of Doctrine and Discipline
in their Religion, and they are really and totally possessed, that by the same,
and such like evil counselors which are likely to succeed, their whole
privileges and propriety will be forced from them, and the profession of the
true Protestant Religion utterly abolished; assuring his Majesty
notwithstanding, that if he will be pleased to return unto his great Council,
cause delinquents to be brought to trial, and settle the Militia of the
Kingdom in such persons as both Houses may confide in, there shall be no
failing on their parts to make him a glorious Prince, beloved at home, feared
abroad, and enlarge his Revenues beyond all his Predecessors; but not finding
how to qualify the diffidence which each has of the other, both sides have
strengthened themselves, brought several Armies into the field, fought some
pitched battles, and had so many skirmishes and encounters, as, besides the
firing of whole Towns, deflouring of Virgins, committing rapes, rapines, and a
thousand other villainies, has been the death perhaps of above a hundred
thousand souls in England only, then which, what could possibly befall more
offensive unto God; or damageable to the State? Surely both parties should be
desirous of composing such a difference, which in so high a nature and degree,
is totally destructive unto both? But alas! the jealousies are such, that
neither dare well offer, or entertain a Treaty, lest the other should make
advantage of it; and yet a King cannot be said to deal too great a measure of
love unto his people, nor subjects to out-doe their duty unto their King; nor
the sword be said or thought properly or justly to have a capacity and power of
settling true Religion; (...) of all ranks and conditions whatsoever, more
glorify the King of Kings, then in renouncing all earthly interests and
advantages, rather then his great Name should be evil spoken of, or the blood
of his dearest Saints to be spilt upon the ground, and yet we cannot possibly
imagine, without the greatest scandal of our own charity, and offense unto
the weaker brethren, but that some of them have already dyed on either side,
God of his infinite mercy direct them both, that neither of them come short or
be found guilty in either.

Another of the London queries is, Whether if Religion, and the Stat ebe in
imminent danger of an Oxford party, both Houses of Parliament, and so great a
portion as adheres unto them, may not defend themselves by Arms? and since
Aulicus seems to be as much afraid that both Religion, Laws, and Privileges of
Parliament are equally endangered by the London Apprentices, and those that
went to Westminster, some will think it best to answer both in one, and say,
necessity has no law, it is above all law, and though there be neither Act of
Parliament, Ordinance of both Houses, or so much as a bare order of either,
necessity will notwithstanding sufficiently warrant and instruct the people, as
certainly and lawfully, though not so readily, to defend themselves from ruin
and destruction; grant then that the danger be imminent, the necessity is
implied therein, and all the rest will follow: This is a truth, though such a
one as must be justly balanced, and tenderly made use of; it is no doctrine of
libertinisme, though libertines should abuse it, and for a curb to such as
would fly out on either side: If all fortifications throughout the Kingdom
were once demolished, it would be to little purpose for a King to require more
of the Subjects then the Laws permit, and they had willingness to perform: or
for the representatives to engage the Kingdom farther then they that chose
them, shall unanimously approve thereof: And since the strength and power is
naturally in the people, as God doubtless allows thereof, that they might
have a possibility to shelter themselves against the extremities of tyranny in
what government soever; so will none truly conscientious, easily take occasion
hereby to deny subjection to the Powers: It is not sufficient to say there is
imminent danger and necessity, both God and man must see it is so, and unless
we be both wise and conscientious in the mangage of it, standers by and others,
the Saints of all neighboring States and Nations will judge otherwise thereof
hereafter, what ever we our selves declare therein at present: what would the
King or Parliament gain thereby, if either of them did prevail by sword? in
such case the conquered party must be still kept under by a martial law and
power, which would so long continue grievous to them both, until the whole
Kingdom be weary of it, and jointly agree to cast the yoke from off them; so
that unless the conditions be free, just and equal in apprehension of them
both, Prerogative continued unto the King, Privileges to both Houses of
Parliament, and Liberties unto the Subject, we cannot expect a during peace,
much less a Reformation of what is amiss either in Civil or Ecclesiastical
affairs, nor Gods blessing upon any of them.

Having thus heard what is alleged, and tried and prepared our consciences on
both sides let us think upon a Treaty, and rather then be without it, the wars
may still be prosecuted, as if there were no Treaty? And because it may seem
that the King and Parliament do not confide in one another, I wish with all
meekness and submission that they may both consider whether it is not
necessary that some such middle way be thought on, as neither of them remain
at the mere power and mercy of the other, and yet it would not be good to
divide the Kingdom again into a Heptarchie, or more, or fewer portions, but if
it should be thought fitting toward the compassing a speedier disbanding of
the Soldiers and demolishing all Inland works, whereby the Country is not
only plundered of what they have at present, but absolutely discouraged to till
the ground, and nourish cattle, lest both stock and fruit be taken from them
afterward; that in this interim only, each of them may have a rational
security and safeguard against the others attempt, whilst the blood which has
been so long boiling, be grown cold again, and every one of us better fitted
and disposed to embrace each other more cordially, that in such case, and for
such purpose only, certain garrisons for a short time may still remain in
some of the Seaports as both King and Parliament shall approve of.

For more facilitating of so good a work, give me leave to premise these few
things: 1. That the King being but one, cannot possibly overmatch the Subjects,
unless they will themselves, and therefore the Houses of Parliament may with
less danger treat him more like a King. 2. The King being sole disposer of his
own, may better resolve to forgo the present enjoyment of some small part
there of a while, when He shall find that God will try Him, in calling for it
to purchase His own peace, and three Kingdoms welfare, which both Houses
cannot comply in, unless the major part be willing. 3. Though the general
good of all his Subjects ought rather to oversway a King, then all his own
interests in the Kingdom, yet since it is more barsh to Royal flesh and blood
(borne to rule and govern others) to renounce their own just rights, much
more to deliver up unto the adverse party, all such as have adhered to Him; so
may the Parliament express much Nobleness and Wisdom in being tender of
pressing Him with so great a trial. 4. That though either side conceive the
Propositions which shall be made unequal, and little hopes of bettering them
for the present; yet I presume the difference will not be so great, but both of
them may expect security therein at time of need; and in case either side
should take advantage, and break out again, a good cause and conscience with a
less Army, may more hopefully expect assistance from God to overcome a
greater. 5. If Arms being laid down on both sides, the King through
importunity of evil counselors should refuse to pass any other Acts for
redress of sundry grievances which the Subjects yet lie under, both Houses
have the same liberty to withold their consent in such other Acts as were for
the Kings advantage, and I humbly propound whether it may not appear upon
enquiry, that (concerning civil interests) the Subjects, for the present,
stand in less need of new Acts to be passed in their favor then the King does
of Subsidies, His Majesty being no little indebted, His charge so much
increased, and His revenue lessened. 6. If evil Counselors or Courtiers
should return again to innovate either in Church or State, they cannot have
the boldness or power to work such mischiese, but a trieniall Parliament will
easily be able to make them weary of it. And lastly, That it cannot be for the
good of King and People, that the three estates in Parliament, though Arms
were quite laid down, should stand severely upon the privilege of their
negative respective voices, but necessarily must comply with one another to
make their mutual happiness complete.

And because I am verily persuaded that one great reason which moved God to
permit these Kingdoms to be thus divided, and engaged in a civil War, was the
general obstinacy and averseness of most men of all ranks and qualities in
each Nation, to tolerate, and bear with tender consciences, and different
opinions of their brethren, unless they were thereunto so far necessitated,
that without it, there must inevitably ensue on both sides a total ruin and
destruction, which is full near, the present woeful condition that all three,
so lately flourishing Kingdoms, are now plunged into, God of his great mercy
vouchsafe effectually to show them their deliverance: in this respect, as also
in that I cannot think, that God has suffered so much bloodshed, either to
establish the Kings Prerogative, or the Privilege of Parliament only, but that
He has yet a far greater work of his own to bring about, I humbly conceive
that Liberty of Conscience may deservedly require to be first treated on, what,
and how far forth it may and ought to be permitted; which being thoroughly
debated, and agreed on by both sides as the first Article, to be forthwith
ratified by the three citates in Parliament, all the rest will doubtless
follow more willingly and sweetly.

If a man will rail against the high Commission Court, or in a seditious
manner revile Episcopacie or Presbytery, he shall not want multitudes to
countenance and cry him up, but such as in a Christian way, go about with
meekness to discover, and desire the spring head may be reformed, the
unwarrantable power of both witheld, from whence the spiritual wickednesses
arise and without which, though we should chance be eased a while by change,
upon the abolishing of Prelacie, yet the mild and gentle interregnum, would
prove so much more cruel to us afterward, when a succeeding government,
having the self same corrupting principles with Episcopacie, and knowing its
own strength, shall, contrary to Paul's doctrine, 2 Cor. 1. 24. assume again
the dominion of our consciences, after we had tasted the sweetness of
Christian liberty, and flattered our selves with the continuance of it; such I
say, may run the hazard to be accounted presumptuous, turbulent, or innovaters,
so dim sighted are most men in the mystery of godliness, and so inclinable to
be transported with carnal wisdom and security: It is not the imperiousness
of Episcopacie, Presbytery, or a (...), in what degree of comparison soever
they shall rank themselves, which can securge men into a spiritual Temple fit
for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, no (...) much conducing thereunto as a fatherly
reproving, a brotherly ad(...) most patheticall beseeching one another, like
that of St. Paul (...) the bowels and tenderest compassion of Jesus Christ,
(...) practiced by either of them in respect of what they ought, and how little
fruit we see thereof, I desire no ways to aggravate, but mention only, (God is
my record) not so much for their sorrow, as amendment, having just cause to
pray that I may find repentance for my share thereof, which is not with the
least.

Let both the Oxford and London party consider duly, whether to be persecuted
be not a sign of the true Church, since Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. 12. All that
will live godly must suffer persecution, and consequently though we had not one
word more in all the Bible to this purpose, whether that government be not
likeliest to be such as Christ intended to rule his people by, whom he calls
his Sheep his Lambs, Joh. 21. 15, 16 no creatures of prey, which most
respects, and bears with tender consciences? and since all governments may
degenerate into tyranny, though for the present, all things were settled
according to either of their desires, whether notwithstanding they ought not to
wish, and even in mere policy endeavor that there, might be a tolleration of
weak consciences, lest through the vicissitude and wheeling about of time,
their own consciences might come again to be oppressed hereafter: for Solomon
says, Ec. 1. 9. There is no new thing under the sun, and the thing which has
been, is that which shall be done again hereafter: and the general applause
and confidence which Episcopacie had so lately of its own strength in this
Kingdom, should be a warning for all other governments not to subject
themselves through presumption of their power and party unto the like downfall
and destruction: and such as have either felt or understood the spiritual
bondage which this Kingdom has twice suffered in time of Popery and Prelacie
by reason of their coercive jurisdiction, unless they be both earnest with God
and man, that the same be not given unto any other government, will bring upon
their own souls, the miscarriage of all such as perish through the tyranny
which it will infallibly fall into the exercise hereafter; it was not their
Popery or Prelacie (that was to themselves) which so much oppressed us, as
their power, otherwise, the persons of such which still remained in the same
Popish and Prelaticall opinions, ought to have been rather proceeded against,
and not that power to be arraigned and condemned both of spiritual and
corporal rape and murder in Prelacie, which was so sooner after to be again
enthroned in Presbytery: I humbly querie what it might be that moved both
Houses of Parliament to vote and prepare a Bill against Episcopacie, or that
prevailed with the Estates of Scotland to declare it Antichristian; if it were
only an abusing of such power as was given to the Church, and might possibly
have been well employed, then may a Reformation or punishing of such Bishops as
abused it, redress our grievances, and the government still remain
established; but if it were the great Diana, Act. 19. 24, 28. that strumpet and
Idol which is common to them all, that plenepotentiary jurisdiction to
administer or pass sentence against their brethren in person or estate, by
virtue of a coercive discipline and dominion, how can it safely be given unto
any other government, since that both Popular and Aristocraticall with all
others, are as infallibly, though not equally subject to tyrannize, as the
Papaller Episcopal? And whereas it is said that Presbytery disclaimes coercive
power to be in the Church, but about it only to be employed by the Civil
Magistrate in behalf and benefit of the Church, I would feign be informed,
whether the Civil Magistrate be Judge when it is fitting to employ such power
for behoof of the Church; and if he be, whether then the Civil Magistrate be
not above the Church, and every member and the whole Church liable to
correction though they offend not in their own opinions; and if the Civil
Magistrate may not move therein until the Church or Presbytery require,
whether such may not be said the Churches using of the Civil sword in a more
superlative and sovereigne way, little differing from what they practice in the
Papacy, which is first to degrade and disrobe all Ecclesiastical persons, and
so deliver up, both them and all others that shall be found guilty unto the
Civil Magistrate, which may not refuse to see the execution done.

And because it may be objected that many places of Scripture herein alleged,
may as well seem to speak for a tolleration of Popery, and my self therein to
plead for it, let such be pleased to rest satisfied, that though I cannot for
the present make full discovery in the word of God, why, or how Papists should
be forced by fines and other penalties to be of our Religion, yet I take not
upon me to be spokesman for a tolleration of theirs, by reason of their
Idolatry; but my humble desires are prostrated unto the King and Parliament
that all other Christians who are now reproached under the name of Puritans,
Separatists or Nonconformists of what kind soever, who are so far from being
suspected, that they must needs be acknowledged the greatest enemies to
Idolatry, may enjoy such peace and freedom, as will permit them to keep
always a good conscience both before God and man, Act. 24. 16. And that they
would vouchsafe, out of the love they bear to Gods Cause and People, to take
into further consideration, that if as Reformed Protestants, we may not suffer
Papists and Turks to make profession of their Religion amongst us, in a
qualified and more moderate manner, as in some parts of Germany, where they
have Churches, but are not permitted their public Processions, or open
exposing of the Sacrament, as they call it, which no Protestants can walk the
streets about, without being subject to be scandalized thereat, how far, in
such case, it may be found agreeable to the Word of God, for Protestants to
transplant themselves by Colonies, or as particular Merchants to go and live
in Turkey, or in Italy and Spain especially, where, though they were not
troubled with the Inquisition, though they were not forced to Church, which
they frequent notwithstanding to prevent the danger of it, though they might
enjoy their own Religion quietly, whether they may for this respect live in
Italy and Spain, where they cannot choose but see (and must likewise seem to
countenance by putting off of hats, setting out lights, adorning with pictures,
hangings, or otherwise that part of their houses where the Procession passes,
sometimes with corporal kneeling, and seldom without bowing) even at their
own windows, and in the streets as they walk about their business, the
superstitious pageantrie of their will worship, and Idolatry, which is the
condition of all our Merchants and Travelers that go amongst them.

And whereas many will not stick to say, that such are lukewarm or of no
Religion, who desire a tolleration of so many: I answer, That it is the
freedom of their own conscience which they desire, not to be indifferently of
any Religion, or profanely of none at all, but that they might enjoy always
peaceably that Religion, which they have examined and found to be the true one,
and not be subject to a change so often as the Civil State, or those of the
highest Court shall please to vary; for since they are chosen anew so often as
a Parliament is called, they may every time be of different, if not of opposite
opinions and religions; and far more is it to be feared, that such will be
found careless, if not negligent, in the choice of their Religion, as little
troubling themselves to try the spirit^ whether they be of God or no, 1 John
4. 1. or examine the opinions and doctrines which are taught, receive them
currantly, what ever they be, so they come sealed and delivered by authority of
State.

It has more then once come into my thoughts, what might move the wisdom of
God, to leave the Scriptures so liable to the diversities of interpretations,
which in regard it savoured more of curiosity then edisying, I purposely
forbore to ruminate thereon; however at the same instant, it came into my mind
as not altogether impossible, that God might be so pleased, to make men more
diligent and inquisitive to search after truth, and conscientious in embracing
it with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. after which manner we are required to
work out our salvation: In this respect, the very Law of Moses consisting in a
dead letter, which the Devil himself could scarce controvert or pick a
quarrel with, did not render the Jews so scrupulous and conscionable, as the
Gospel does Christians; and even amongst all those that profess Christianity,
I conceive it may easily be observed, that such as study the variety of
opinions, and try the spirits out of a zeal to truth, choosing their Religion
by their own judgments, though erroneous, are yet more jealous of Gods
worship, and conscionable toward men. Shall men so far distrust themselves to
fear they may be misled into a false religion or opinion, because they have
liberty to make profession of the truth? or can a man be in a better condition
then he can wish himself to be? are we the more acceptable to God because we
will not be of the true Religion, unless we be forced thereto? or are we the
more excusable in being of the false, because we are willing to be compelled
into it? is the tyranny of the body so grievous to us, and are we in love with
spiritual bondage? To be of a Religion because it is countenanced by the law
in that Country where thou live, or because most men are of the same, is no
good reason; it is not a hundred years since Popery was established by law in
England, and may be so again for all that we can tell, most part of Europe
still being Papists: Dear Reader, search, examine thine own heart, and
consider whether it may not be found in the last day, that many men have taken
up that Religion which was with most importunity thrust upon them, rather then
they would take pains to make trial of it: Oh, but some will say it is
presumption to be wiser then a Synod or a State; consider again, I beseech
thee in the fear of God, who is more arrogant and presumptuous, he that
seeks to enjoy his own conscience peaceably, only admonishing and informing
such as run erroneous ways with all humility and love, or those that
imperiously, and will they nill they, constrain others to make profession of
such opinions as they themselves are of? and yet there is no medium between an
implicit faith, and that which a man's own judgment and understanding leads
him to.

But some will still object and say, what shall be done to those that are
obstinately malignant, and maliciously perverse in their own opinions? I
answer, That as in the Parable it is said, If they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead, Luke
16. 31. So if informing, exhorting, and such fair means, or others which are
Scripture proof, do not prevail with such as are led into false opinions,
harsh and compulsive, or other which are unwarrantable cannot, and therefore to
charge a man that he is wilfully blind, and will not see the truth, if he
submit himself to hear and read what shall be lawfully required of him in
that behalf, is the most uncivil, unreasonable, and unchristianlike offense
that words know how to utter, and flatly against all reason, ordinary policy,
and Scripture, to endeavor or think that the mystical Body of our Savior may
possibly be built up after such a manner, as it should always remain in
continual fear and power of men to pull it down again; and though we should
suppose, that this very man who is thus reproached, had yielded and complied in
whatsoever could have been expected from him, yet it was impossible for him to
be in heart of this or that opinion, to believe this or that doctrine of truth,
until God had touched his heart, and called him thereunto, till when they
ought still in meekness to instruct even those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledgement of truth, 2 Timothy
2. 25. as appears more largely in the following Discourse: We say that Church
Papists are most dangerous, and hypocrites the worst of men, what ground have
we then, or how can we excuse our provoking them to go to Church, or tempting
them to be such by so many several ways? that may be lawful to one who
thinks so, which to another would be sin, because he doubts thereof: have we
not learned that eating of meats only was sin in some good Christians, 1 Cor.
8. 10, 11. when others might freely eat thereof without any guiltiness at all?
how much more may the same case happen in points of discipline or doctrine,
wherein the worship of God is more highly interessed and concerned.

I confess my self much inferior to the task I have undertook, and should
in no sort have presumed upon it, had I not apprehended my self to be called
thereunto, through the silence of so many who were abundantly better qualified
to undergo it; however I doubt not but God will be so far forth pleased to
second my weak endeavors, as sundry well disposed souls may be provoked to
light their torches at these sparkles, and prosecute it with more advantage;
for this cause am I moved to make them public, not for any private respect or
interest of mine own, further then they are involved in the general; for if at
any time I stood in need of liberty and freedom in mine own particular, I am
not such a stranger to foreign Countries, both of several climates and
professions, but that I can find the way thither again to purchase my
enlargement.

I know I have not observed the symmetrie and rules of Architecture in
contriving so large a Portall for so small a Fabric, however, before I take my
leave, let me advertise thee, that I plead not against, but for liberty, and
that the best of all liberties, the Liberty of Conscience; not for, but against
imprisoning, sining, or tormenting, of all others the most tyrannical, for
matters merely of Religion; not for, but against the shedding blood, Christian
blood, Protestant blood of the most conscientious Christians, Gods dearest
Saints, the Lords inheritance, for whose salvation only our Savior shed his
own most precious blood. Dear Reader, let but the thought hereof prevail with
thee to demurre a little, and consider, whether this controversy, about
liberty or bondage, life and death both temporal and spiritual, though
heretofore seldom thought on, be not worth debating; Nulla unquam de morte
hominis cunctatio long^: disclaim all cornall wisdom which knew not what to
counsel thee; renounce thine own self will and wishes, that foolishly have
wished and willed so many things unduly, as had not God witheld them from thee,
must needs have been thy final ruin: And now at last, fit and prepare thy
mind to receive in such further light and truth, as the Blessed Spirit shall
please to visit thee withal, and rest assured, that God who now stands looking
out for such laborers, will in some degree and measure according to thy
readiness, make thee an instrument of a sanctified peace and reformation,
where with three Kingdoms are now in travel, to his own glory, and thy
eternal happiness: Which God of his infinite goodness bestow upon thee, and
all such as in sincerity seek Peace and Truth:

Amen.
BEsides mispointing, the Errata are many, and some of them very gross, in
which respect the Reader will doubtless find the benefit thereof, if before
he proceed any further he resolve to rectify these that follow, viz. Page 4.
lin^ 17. for perish, read persist. ibid. p. l. 35. take. p. 6. l. 13.
ingenuous. ib. p. l. 38. Barbery p. 9. l. 12. many times. p. 10. l. 20 persist.
p. 12. l. 22. whence. p. 14. l. 26. those. p. 18. l. 33. ingenuous. p. 20. l.
5. doubting. p. 22. l. 14. make. p. 24. l. 39. one on. p. 28. l. 32 expressly.
ib. p. l. 41. these. p. 29. l. 3. cannot possibly. p. 30. l. 29. with. p. 32.
l. 13. make. p. 33. l. 11. apprehended. p. 47. l. 15. from though he write, to
the end of l. 17. must come in at l. 20. after Beza. p. 49. l. 22.
extraordinarily. ib. p. l. 29. us. ib. p l. 38. principles. p. 50. l. 12. your.
ib. p. l. 27. as is yet. p. 51. l. 41. rather than. p. 55. l. 20. have not. p.
56. l. 6. principles.

Liberty of Conscience: OR, The only means to obtain PEACE and TRUTH.
THE Sword, Pestilence, and Famine, are the three most dreadful scourges
wherewith God uses to chastise a stubborn People; and although that Sin be
the only general cause to pull down vengeance, and God ordinarily makes use
of natural means to convey it upon us in what kind soever; yet in the
former, man appears to be a more principal and immediate instrument, then in
the two latter, and doubtless by Gods permission, has a greater liberty and
power to begin, and put an end to it, which was the cause that the Sword
only has destroyed far more without comparison, then Famine and pestilence
together: wherefore when David found himself in a strait by the three
propositions of Sword, Pestilence and Famine. which God made unto him as a
punishment for numbering of the people, knowing full well the cruelties of man,
chose to fall into 1 Chronicles. 25.
the hand of God, wh^^therefore sent the Pestilence upon Israel, which in this
respect besides others may justly be thought the more merciful of all three,
and by consequence of what was said, it will follow, that such as have the
keeping of the Sword, with power to draw and put it up again, must be
accountable for all the bloodshed: Had Kings no other thorns about their
Crowns, doubtless this one if duly thought on, would keep them circumspect
and watchful in every action, the least whereof, though insensibly, conduces
somewhat toward Peace or Warfare.

Wars, and rumors of wars have ever been, and are at present throughout
the world; but since Princes became Christians, it may have been observed, how
Christendom a spot of ground only, has continually been the Cockpit, and all
the world besides but as a breathing place; however we ought not for this cause
to be forward in justifying Wars the more, but rather make search and strict
enquiry whence it comes to pass, that Christians are so plunged therein, since
they of all other people can justify it least.

I know there may be a just-War, but what I am now to say, is meant only
against that which is unjust, and so desire it may be understood, whereof I do
the more presume because no War but has much evil as the effect thereof;
and however for such as do begin a War, we may charitably conceive of both
sides, that they apprehend it to be lawful, yet if we examine standers by, and
hear what all that are not interessed do judge thereof, we shall find them
generally condemning both sides, though one perhaps in a greater measure than
another.

St. Paul says, that covetousness is the root of all evil, and War 1 Timothy
6. 10.
which is the greatest of those evils, questionless was never yet without a
coveting; however, because that neither coveting, nor such other motives as are
the real and original causes of taking up of Arms, have not for the most
part been found, or thought sufficient to prevail, or bear sway enough with
all such as are to be required to contribute largely for the maintenance
thereof; I say, it may most commonly be observed, that whatsoever were the
real, though more secret ground of War, Religion was still pretended to be the
principal, or at least endeavored to be made seem so far forth hazarded and
engaged in the quarrel, that no man might adventure to call in question the
lawfulness thereof, or seem backward in supplying without palpable scandal
and suspicion of luke-warmnesse in Religion: I need not bring examples for
proof hereof, every man's own acquaintance in Histories will furnish himself
abundantly.

But in regard that Religion, though perhaps it seldom was the primary and
sole cause of making War (in that I think few have been so conscientious, yet
such as some Casuists conceive, were but a misgrounded conscience in respect of
an offensive War) has notwithstanding been, and still is the most powerful
means and stratagem to countenance and continue it, whereby that which ought
to be most dear and sacred, becomes a pander to satisfy our lusts, the
consideration whereof, the shedding so much Christian blood, the obstructing of
the Gospels propagation, the miserable devastation of whole Countries, with
infinite perpetrating and multiplication of most enormous and execrable
villainies, have moved me to consider with my self, which way Religion might be
vindicated and redeemed from this abuse, the grand means of fomenting. Wars
discovered, the main jealousies prevented which Princes pretend to have of one
another, or King and people amongst themselves, toward accommodation of the
present Wars, and cutting off occasion from such as otherwise might spring up
again hereafter.

Whether Religion have been the real cause of so much War in Christendom, or
so pretended only, makes all one to what I have in hand, which is to prove in
this Discourse, by Gods assistance, how a man ought not to be persecuted for
conscience sake, as will appear by the inconsistencie thereof with sundry
Scriptures following, which being once concluded on, and put in practice, will
make an open way for the free passage of the Gospel, quite cut off the greatest
jealousies and fears which perplex the minds of Princes, States and People,
when they suppose or but allege an endangering of their Religion, and
consequently the likeliest course of reducing all Christian Countries to peace
amongst themselves, and friendly intercourse with * one another.

St. Paul says, You are bought with a price, be ye not the servants of 1 Cor
7. 22, 23, 24.
men: this must be meant for matters of this world, or else of that which is to
come; about subjection of the body in civil affairs, or subjection of the
soul in spiritual; but it cannot be understood for matters of the body, or of
this world, because it would then contradict other places of Scripture, which
command all to be subject Romans 13. 1. 1 Pet. 2 13. Ephesians. 5 22. and 65. 1 Pet. 2.
8. Col. 3. 22.
unto higher Powers, servants to their masters, wives to their husbands, and
the like; in which respect, as also from the coherence with the words
aforegoing, it appears necessarily to be understood, that we must not be
subject concerning our Religion, matters of conscience or touching the soul,
to be of this or that Religion, because we are commanded by King or State, for
though it be the true Religion which we profess, yet if we were forced to it,
it will do us little good, nor be ever a whit available, for God accepts only
of willing service, such as we perform of our own free election, not by
compulsion.

Neither is the objection good, that though men be forced into Object.
the true Religion at first without any liking of their own, yet afterward it
falls out that such approve of it, and will not be brought to change nor
alter, which must needs be acceptable to God: For first, the compelling of a
man to any thing against his Answ.
own conscience, especially in matters of faith, is a doing evil, which God
forbids, that good may come of it, and therefore we cannot Romans 3. 8. and 14.
23.
expect that he should prosper, so bad a means to produce so good effect, as
that people at first constrained to make profession of the true Religion,
should afterward prove sincere and true believers, by virtue of those coercive
powers which were merely unwarrantable and sinful, but for such as do so
continue, it is to be attributed to some other means whereby they became
convinced of the truth, or more secret call of God, which would in due time
have found out, and brought them home into his sheepfold without the help of a
tyranous inquisition.

This is more evident if we consider the multitudes of people and whole Nations
which live and dye in the Religion they were borne, with equal constancy and
security, though their faith and tenets be diametrically opposite to one
another; and for those that happen to be thus of the true Religion, because
borne in it, though it be the true one, and that they will not be brought to
change, yet for most part they can give no better reason of their faith, then
those that are in the wrong, and perish as obstinately, for they took not
their Religion upon choice or trial, neither do they continue it upon
judgment, never having searched or tried the Scriptures, as we are commanded;
and indeed they may well say, to what purpose shall we examine our selves, as
St. Paul says, whether we be in the faith or no? to what end, Try the spirits
whether 2 Cor. 13. 5. 1 John 4. 1. Gal. 1. 8.
they be of God? or, Search the Scriptures, whether the doctrine taught us now
be the same which the Apostles left us? when we may not profess the Religion
we apprehend to be the only true one, but are forced to make profession of that
only which the State shall think fit, and declare to be such.

Nay, in that St. Paul says, Try the spirits whether they be of God or no;
and tells them plainly, that if any man think himself to be something, then
he is nothing, that he deceives himself, and that every man should therefore
prove his own work, and that then he shall have rejoicing in himself alone,
and not in another, for every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6. 3, 4,
5. And to the Thessalonians he says, Prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Do not such thwart and resist these Scriptures,
who take upon them to assign and stint men unto certain spirits, as though
they could be saved by the faith and knowledge of others, with express
peremptory commands to receive them for the true Spirit of God, without any
trial or examination? and indeed it is better to take up a Religion without
trial upon adventure, then having examined and found it Antichristian or
erroneous, submit unto it notwithstanding; but certainly if well examined, this
will appear not a bare adding or taking from the word of God, but a flat
opposition, and giving the lie, as I may term it, unto the Scriptures, for
whom a heavier judgment is preparing, if such a one were possible, then that
which is denounced in the Revelation. Rev. 22. 18, 19


What if the Prince and Peers should change Religion, must they be subject
also to persecution? I know not how they can be well secured so long as such
Statutes are in force; for in that they concern matters of Religion, if they
bind at all, they bind most of all: But what if a King and Parliament should
repeal all Acts against the Papists, and pass others of the same tenor
against all Protestants, must we therefore all turn Papists? If that Religion
must be received and forced upon the consciences of people, which by a major
part is voted to be the true one, I know no remedy but that we may be liable
again hereafter to change as often as those that lived in the Reigns of Henry
8. Edward 6. Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth.

My humble desires therefore are, that we may not procrastinate any longer the
preventing so great a misery, as the world cannot possibly torment us with a
greater, not through confidence of a present prevailing party, or such other
assurance as carnal policy and wisdom do only furnish us withal; the
Bishops condition may be sufficient item to us in this behalf, who,
notwithstanding so many suffered by them, had within less then five years
since greater multitudes of abettors within this Kingdom, then ever any kind
of Church government in likelihood will find hereafter; it is necessary
therefore to proceed upon a sure foundation, by passing an act against
persecution for Religion, which besides the agreeableness with Scripture, all
degrees of people having once tasted the sweetness of it, will never suffer
themselves to be bereaved thereof again, and by that means become a sure
establisher of the general peace of the Kingdom, and dispose every one more
willingly to submit to higher powers, though to some prejudice of his propriety
when he apprehends himself certain to enjoy the Liberty of his Conscience.

But may we not any longer be subject unto men? Surely then in 1 Cor. 7. 22, 23
whatsoever sense it be meant, we must be subject unto Christ, his yoke is
easy; and we must not live lawless as we our selves list, Matthew. 11. 30.
but persecution imposes a heavier yoke of subjection upon the Conscience, then
any Prince or Tyrant in the world does upon the body of his Subjects: And
although every soul must be subject to higher Powers in civil matters, yet
there are degrees of subjection and relations in a Commonwealth whereby one is
bound to yield more or less subjection, obedience, respect, and honor,
according to the respective Laws and rank wherein he stands; and yet in most
Countries every Subject from the highest to the lowest has a kind of
freedom, and possibility of quitting himself from the most toilsome and
inferior vassalage, if he be a man of abilities or wealth; but that Law which
imposes on the Conscience, serves all alike, save that the most ingenious and
conscientious Note.
are most afflicted with it, and so long as it is in force, a good Conscience
has no means either to evade it or dispense with it.

But how fruitless a course it is to force men to conformity in a Religion
they have no liking of, will appear by the small success it wrought on
Papists here in England, many whereof went to Church when they were strictly
looked too, stopping their ears with wool because they would not hear at all,
or hear with an intention to believe the contrary; or else like Protestant
Merchants and travelers in Italy and Spain, which ordinarily go to Mass and
Vespers, to avoid suspicion of the Inquisition, but because their hearts join
not in the Church devotions, they purposely send their eyes a gadding after
beauty, whilst many, too too many, by custom assume so great a liberty, as if
the eye could not sin in one respect, whilst the heart consented not in
another, or rather as if God would pardon them the lust of the eye, so long as
they were not Popish in their hearts.

But more remarkable it is in the Moors of Spain and Jews of Portugal, some
whereof dissembled Popery in their successive generations some hundreds of
years together, until the Moors being discovered in such multitudes, as that
the King not thinking it safe to retain them longer in so slavish a captivity
of the Conscience, nor able to give them a tolleration without the Popes
dispencing, commanded them to be gone, and accordingly about the year 1606.
they conveyed themselves into Barbaria and Turkey, with such a stock of
Christian crafts and policy, as not only the Pirates, but those whole Nations
are much advantaged and improved, to the no less shame than detriment of
Christianity: Oh let not the like befall England, with her manufactors, but I
fear it is almost too late to wish so, for so many thousands of them being
already gone, are able to teach all the world, unless both they be suddenly
recalled, and others encouraged to continue by a Liberty of Conscience.

And for the Jews in Portugal, the Inquisition used always to be full of
them, seldom without four hundred or five hundred together, and though most
of them will not scruple, and many of them choose rather to marry with such as
really are Christians, that they may with more security play the hypocrites,
yet by such as live amongst them it is observed, that though from one
generation to another, they have matched into Christian families, yet they
reserve and instill their Jewish principles so subtly into their offspring,
as the children though they have remaining in them not above one two and
thirtieth part of a Jew, are notwithstanding known by infallible presumptions
to be Jews in heart, though outwardly they make profession otherwise.

In the Gospel according to St. John, Jesus answered, My John 18. 36.
Kingdom is not of this world, if my Kingdom were of this world, then would
my servants fight that I should not be delivered up to the Jews. What can be
more opposite unto the intentions and proceedings of our Savior, who rather
than resist chose to suffer persecution unto death, than these that persecute
others unto death? If Christ's Kingdom be not of this world, but if it be
mystical and spiritual, then must it necessarily be erected by powerful
preaching of the Word; and by the Spirit: When Peter. smote off the high Priest
servants care in defense of his Master, our Savior bids him put up Matthew. 26.
51, 52.
his sword, and instead of commending him and his zeal in rescuing the sacred
Person of our blessed Savior, says, All they that take the sword shall perish
by the sword: And St. Paul exhorts the Ephesians Ephesians. 6. 10. 17.
to be strong, but in the Lord, and in the power of his might, not brandishing
the sword of civil Magistrates, but to take the belmet of salvation, and sword
of the Spirit, which is the word of God: and in another place he says, that
Faith comes by hearing, and how shall they believe in him they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a Romans 10. 14. 17
preacher? And yet if it had been as good a way, Paul would doubtless have
taught it them, by saying, how shall they believe unless you tell them? and
how shall they know what is to be believed, unless you impose it upon them?
But this was none of Paul's Doctrine; both our Savior and his Apostles not only
taught and practiced, but sealed the contrary with their blood.

The Spaniards are blamed, and that justly, by all other Nations for having
massacred so many millions of West-Indians in their own Country, under
pretense of Religion, though it be evident, it was only that they might the
easier rifle them of their gold and silver, and so it is in all persecutions
pretended for Conscience sake; for did we but a little consider with our
selves, we would easily conclude, that few have been yet so mad to put people
to death merely for Religion sake; I know that many in passion, rage and fury,
will say it is pity such Heretics should live, but when such men are in a
calm mood, if another Nathan, like him that came to David, should say unto
them, there is such a neighbor of mine 2 Samuel 12. 1.
charitable to the poor, upright in his dealing, courteous in his behavior,
meek and lowly minded, loyal to his Sovereigne, true to his Country, choosing
rather to suffer than offer injuries, beloved of all that knew him, and never
so much as tainted with suspicion of any thing blameworthy, till of late being
accused as a Separatist for seducing the Kings liege people unto his own
Religion; the Jury finding him guilty, he is condemned to dye; will not a
tender hearted Christian be ready to reply, it is pity such a one should dye?
and though the Law condemn him, the King is merciful, and doubtless would
reprieve him if he knew he had been loyal to his Country, and committed no
other sin then endeavoring by argument from Scripture to bring others of his
own Religion: now though most men, or every good man would be loath that a
conscientious Christian should be put to death for doing nothing but what he is
bound in conscience, the winning Proselites to his cause, his religion, which
amongst so many different sorts of Christins, he thinks to be the right, and
himself no less obliged to publish it, then Peter and John, who when they
were commanded by the Magistrate not to speak or Acts 4. 17. 10.
teach in the name of Jesus, answered, We cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard: And when our Savior sent out his Apostles, he said unto
them, What I tell you in darkness, speak ye in light, and what ye hear in the
ear, that preach ye upon the house tops, and Matthew. 10. 17, 2^.
fear not them which kill the body, cut are not able to kill the soul: Now
though Christians generally will not acknowledge that they put any to death
merely for Conscience sake, yet so long as there is a Law whereunto such as
differ from us in religion, or any point thereof shall be more liable then our
selves: as the Jews, when they could not resist and gainsay the spirit
wherewith Steven spoke, stirred up the people, suborned and set up false
witnesses to accuse him, Acts 6. 11. 13. So, amongst us there will not be
wanting one or other who for some private interest and byrespect, will find
out one to accuse, others to witness, a Jury to give verdict and make guilty,
a Judge to pronounce the sentence, and at last find means to keep the King
from reprieving, all of them thus conspiring to put him to death by the
advantage of such a Law, whereas really it was not his Religion which they so
much regarded, and they may clearly say they put him not to death for his
Religion, but it was their own respective private benefit and ends which
corrupted them to compass his destruction by force and color of such a Law.

But why? what reason which is Scripture proof can be given, why a particular
Gentleman should be put out of a Manor whereof he has the propriety by
inheritance or purchase, more than a whole Nation, a Nation of Infidells and
Pagans for Religion sake? Perhaps it Object.
may be said, the State has enacted a Law whereby this Gentleman's whole
revenue or part of it becomes forfeited, because he is not of the true
Religion; whereto I answer, That Popery was enacted to be the true Religion in
Queen Mary's days, and that which Protestants profess Answ.
in Queen Elizabeth's, yet they could not be both the true Religion, however the
Subject was not suffered to say so much of either, so long as they had a
Parliament protection; but doubtless all just Laws have their grounds and rule
in Scripture, and more exactly such as concern Religion, which is the unum
necessarium: and if a Pagan Nation may not be invaded in their teritories,
because they will not be of our Religion, nor a neighboring Christian people
differing from us in some opinions, why should a particular man have his only
lamb, 2 Samuel 12. 4.
his pittance taken from him for refusing only to be of a religion, or of an
opinion which would absolute damn him because he doubts, so long Romans 14. 23.
as he lives peaceably, and gives unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's?

In Genesis we find that Hamor and Sechem told the men of their City that
Jacob and his children were peaceable, and therefore moved that they might
dwell in the land and trade therein; but when Simeon and Levi had treacherously
slain Hamor, Sechem, and all their males, whilst they were sore after their
late circumcision, though it was in revenge that Sechem had first defiled their
sister Dinah, yet Jacob reproved them saying ye have troubled me, and made me
to stink amongst the inhabitants, Genesis 34. 2. 21. 25. 30. So when the
Protestant Princes made intercession to the Emperors of Germany, or Kings of
France in behalf of such as professed the reformed Religion: nay, when any
Christian Prince made means to Turk or Persian that their subjects might live
within their jurisdictions enjoying Liberty of Conscience, do we think they
used any other arguments then that such Christians were peaceable harmless
men, meddled not with the State or Government, and desired only that they might
be permitted to recide there, and enjoy the freedom of their Conscience, where
they had their revenues, friends, or best means to get a livelihood? they
moved not that such poor Christians might not be persecuted because they were
of the true Religion, for every man thinks his own to be the truest, and
though he take advice of never so many, will not let another be final judge
thereof; for Turks have as much reason to persecute Christians, as Christians
have to persecute Turks; but for Christians to persecute one another, and yet
blame one another for the same persecution; how can they choose but think St.
Paul's reprehension was not so suitable to the Romans, as themselves? and how can
they expect to avoid Gods judgments mentioned in the Text, so long as they
perish so wilfully, condemning others for what they do themselves? the words
are these; Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge, for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge Romans 1. 1. 3.
do the same things: And think thou this, O man, that judge them which
do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment?
Might not St. Paul if he were now living say, Thou Protestant, say thou a
man [a Calvinist] should not persecute, and do thou the same? Thou
Calvinist, say thou a man [a Protestant] should not persecute, and do
thou the same? Since it is most true, that they must mutually justify, or
mutually condemn each other, and though it will be by both sides alleged,
that none are put to death amongst Note.
them merely for Religion sake, I fear me, it may be found upon due scrutiny,
how many have dyed on both sides, as well for exercising their own Religion,
as seeking to convert others; and in regard that both Calvinists, Lutherans,
and all others of the reformed Religion have received and acknowledged our
Saviors command to love their neighbors as themselves, and do to others as
they would be done to, and Mat. 19. 19. Luke 6. 31. and 22 32.
think they are no less bound then St. Peter, when he was converted, to
convert his brethren, and this being a doctrine and point of Faith, which all
reformed Christians make profession of, such of them as have been imprisoned,
fined, banished, or put to death, for no other cause but what this point of
their faith obliged them to, cannot be said otherwise then to have been thus
persecuted merely for Religion sake: And there is this more of aggravation,
that for the most part these fierce and persecuting Christians esteem each
other in a damnable condition so long as they perish and dye therein, and yet
either of them being by the other condemned to death shall have his pardon, if
he become a convert, which is a destroying of the spirit that the flesh may be
saved, just opposite to St. Paul's doctrine, but if he refuse, they proceed to
execution, which according to their own opinion sends them irrevocably to
hell, whereas in Christian charity they ought rather to reprieve them, that
there might be a possibility of their conversion: and were we not besotted with
most supine carelessenes or ignorance, we should not choose but see that
persecuting and putting to death the body of such as differ from us in religion
or opinion, cannot possibly be out of charity to their souls, but must needs
acknowledge that either we are guilty of their perishing both body and soul,
if they dye in such opinions, or else condemn our selves on the other side for
putting them to death, because they were of such a religion or opinion as
accompained them to heaven: If St. Paul to the Corinthians prescribes all 1
Cor. 5. 5
Christians a way of proceeding against sinners for destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus; and if he tells
Timothy that a servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26.
men, apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth, and that they may recover themselves out of the
snares of the Devil: what art thou, O Christian, who contradicting the Holy
Ghost in these places of Scripture, thus put Christians to death after such
a manner, and in such a time, as that according to the faith whereof thou thy
self make profession, the spirit of such Christians cannot possibly be
saved, but must inevitably be damned in the day of our Lord Jesus? consider of
it, I beseech thee in the fear of God, and be humbled, endeavoring to redeem
thine own misdoing by the grace of God, in earnestly petitioning his divine
Goodness to dispose the King and Parliament for repealing some laws, and
enacting others, whereby the people may be free hereafter from so dangerous a
temptation, as this power and color of persecuting others for Religion sake
leads them unto.

But I must not yet leave St. Paul without making a little more use of so
bright a light, who reproving the Corinthians in that they suffered such as
committed fornication to live amongst them, though absent by virtue of his
Apostleship, judged such offenders to be taken from them, and by the same
authority commanded the Church of Corinth to 1 Cor. 5. 3, 4, 5.
put it in execution, and that when they came together in the name of the Lord
Jesus, they should deliver such a one unto Satan for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus: Now either
this delivering up to Satan was a present putting to death with a blasphemous
inference, that the sudden putting to death is a saving of the soul, or else it
is only some Ecclesiastical and Christian censure whereby the sinner might
have liberty to survive for the mortifying of his body and destroying all
fleshly lusts that the soul might escape in the dreadful day of judgment, so
that such as put the body to death, as much as in them lies, damn the soul,
quite opposite to St. Paul's intention, who prescribed another way of justice
with his express reason for it, That the Note.
soul might be saved; wherefore they may well be reproved and reprehended in
his own words to the Romans, Despisest thou the riches of the Romans 2. 4.
goodness and forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness
of God leads thee to repentance? And whereas in other places, he says, We
are by Christ made able ministers of the New Testament, not of the letter, but
1. Cor. 3. 6
of the Spirit, for the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life; unless in
this, and such other Scriptures, it be understood that the Gospel dispences
ordinarily with the letter of the Law, to mitigate and qualify temporal
punishments of the body, as well as to free us from eternal torments of the
soul; I do not find where Christian people and Commonwealths Exodus 21. 12.
15. 17. L^v. 20. 10 and 24. 17 21. Number. 35. 16. and seq. Object.
take power of sparing such offenders which by the express letter of the Law
were commanded to be put to death.

But some will say, if men be suffered to preach such gross erroneous
doctrines, the number of Heretics would quickly be so great, that true
Believers might be swallowed up by them, as good corn which is choked many
times through abundance of tares and weeds; whereto I answer, That we should do
that only which is commanded and warrantable, relying upon Gods providence
concerning the event, he Answ.
spares not these erroneous Believers or Heretics that they might seduce and
pervert the faithful, for that is impossible, but that the faithful might in
his due time reduce the misbeleevers unto the truth, who Joh. 24. 24
if they should be taken off presently, would for all we can expect have
perished in their sins: And as St. Paul taught the Corinthians, If a 1 Cor.
7. 12. 14. 16.
brother have a wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away, for the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by the
believing husband, and what know thou O husband, whether thou shall save thy
wife? Surely this text may be well applied to the whole Church which is the
Spouse of Christ, and such as finally cut off the least inferior member by
persecution, be so much more justly censured and condemned by it.

Our Savior having sent his messengers to a village of the Samaritanes Luke 9.
32. and seq.
to make ready for him, the people of the village refused to receive them,
which when James and John saw, they desired to bring down fire from heaven to
consume them as Eliah did, but our Savior rebuked them, saying, ye know not
what manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of man is not come to destroy
men's lives, but to save them; I wish this Scripture were well considered on by
all that make profession of the Gospel.

The Inquisitors of these days have no better ground for their strict
proceedings, then the Old Testament which expressly commanded Exodus 34. 13.
Deuteronomy. 7. 5. and 12. 3. 2 King 18 4. Mich. 5. 14 2 King. 1. 1.
Idolatry to be rooted out, their Altars to be pulled down, and groves wherein
they worshipped false gods, to be destroyed; there have we also the example of
Eliah, who consumed the two Captains with their fifties, which were sent from
the Idolatrous King Ahaziah: the Disciples John and James, it seems, were then
of the same mind in this respect, and if they could have had their own wills,
would have caused fire from heaven to have rained upon the opposers of the New
Testament as Eliah had done upon the Idolatrous and disobedient of the Old, but
our Savior who was very Matthew. 11. 29.
meekness, reproved them for not knowing what manner of spirit they were of,
as if he should have said, you must not have the spirit of persecuters; but
such a spirit as those which are to be persecuted have need of; and for this
cause he had before taught them a lesson of preparation, Matthew 10. 23, 24, 25.
saying, When they persecute you in this City, fly ye into another, the
disciple is not above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord: If they have
called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them 2 Timothy 3. 12.
of his household? And for the destruction of the groves which had been made to
commit Idolatry in, if it concern Protestant Reformers to do the like under
the Gospel, we should not find many Churches in England which could escape;
but whether they be all to be pulled down, or why one more then another, I
leave it to such as have already delivered their opinions to make them good,
wishing them to remember: that in St. Paul's judgment, a good Christian might
have eaten of those 1 Cor. 8. and 10. cap.
meats which had been consecrated to their Idols, provided it were no scandal
to a weak believer.

And although this lesson was so quite contrary to the dispositions of John and
James ambitious when they reasoned amongst themselves who Luke 9. 46.
should be the greatest, that they might in liklihood be the more enabled to
persecute and punish others, as appeared afterward by this rash and unadvised
motion of theirs, yet the reprehension in both respects sunck so deep into
their ears, that the Disciples never exercised greatness amongst themselves,
nor persecution or compulsion toward others, much less prescribed it to be
practiced by their successors, and in pursuance thereof, St. Paul advised, or
rather required the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 3. 2.
and in them all Christians, that they give no offense; neither to the Jews
nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, and to the Colossians he says,
walk in wisdom to them that are without: Now what can be Col. 1. 4.
more against the rules of wisdom, then endeavoring to bring into the true
Church such as are without by a rigorous way of persecution? we see by daily
experience that men are by nothing so much obliged and engaged, as by courtesy
and affable proceedings, these both win and keep the heart fast, whilst
violence and constraint can at best, but prevail upon the body, the soul even
in that instant so much more alienated, as the body and outward man was forced
to play the hypocrite and yield obedience.

What possibility is there of converting Papists, Jews, Turks, or Infidels to
the Faith upon such grounds as most Christians hold at present? It is generally
and truly agreed on, that we ought not to invade their Countries to dispossess
them of it, or their means, because they refuse to embrace Christianity, and I
have scarce so much as heard of any Protestants, or others of the reformed
Religion (may it be spoken for their humbling and amendment) that ever employed
themselves to compass their conversion merely for Conscience sake; few of them
have means to come to us, and if they had, how can we think they would be
willing if they knew they might not live amongst us, without being forced to a
new Religion, before their reason and understandings were convinced in the
truth thereof? and for the same respects, as also in that the Christians in
their new Plantations seek more after the wealth of the Country, then
propagating of the Gospel, the neighboring people of these parts hate the very
name of Christians, make such opposition against them as they are able, and at
last, when they have no other remedy, fly further off, not one of a thousand
desiring their society or acquaintance: can any thing be more contrary to
walking in wisdom toward a people, then to practice such courses as make
themselves odious and hateful, that they cannot get to be admitted into their
company? St. Paul having writ unto the Corinthians that they should not
accompany with fornicators, lest they might 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11.
mistake him, he explanes it to them afterward, that it was not his meaning
that they should altogether forbear to keep company with the fornicators of
this world, or with the covetous or extortioners, or with Idolaters, for then
they must needs go out of the world, but if a brother were such a one, they
should not so much as eat with him; from hence I conceive may be inferred, that
if the Disciples of Christ had had a civil power to force a way for the
Gospel, yet they thought it either not lawful or not expedient to employ such
means, because they forbore to make use of milder, for though they might not
eat with a professor, a brother which was a notorious wilful sinner, yet such
as were without, though they were covetous, fornicators, extortioners, and
Idolaters to boot, they might eat and keep company with them by St. Paul's
permission, when they might as well have avoided it in them 1 Cor. 10. 27.
as in their own brethren; and whereas Idolatry and other execrable sins
were then so rife with all men, that St. Paul was forced to say in effect, that
it was not possible to live, and not keep company with such sinners, yet he
said not that such as would altogether avoid their company, must send such
sinners out of the world, or out of the Country Note.
by persecution, which the Inquisitors of these times practice, but insinuates,
that in case the world were so full of notorious sinners and misbeleevers, as
that a true Believer could not live in the world without conversing with them,
and that God would not permit his people to converse with them, that then the
true Believers themselves should rather go out of the world, then send such
notorious sinners and misbeleevers out of the world in the midst of their
sins by persecuting them to death, which I much desire were well reflected
on, as also that passage of St. John's Gospel in the prayer which our Savior
makes unto his Father in behalf of his sheep the true Believers, I pray not
that Joh. 17. 15
thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them
from the evil: from whence it may like wise be inferred, that if the true Note.
Believers could not be kept from the sin and evil of the world, in such
case they ought rather to pray that God would be pleased to take themselves out
of the world, then to desire that notorious sinners or misbeleevers were taken
out of the world in their sins, whereas so long as they live there is hopes of
their repentance.

Our Savior when he sent forth his Disciples, gave them charge to Matthew: 10.
14, 15.
preach the Gospel freely as they had received it freely, and that if they came
amongst such as would not receive or hear them, they should depart thence
shaking off the dust from their feet as a testimony against them, which is
far from a commission to plant the Gospel with fire and sword, or other ways
of persecution, which are practiced in these days; and Saint Mark in his
relation thereof makes the commission to be given them. Mark 16. 15. 16.
in these words, Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every
creature, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, but he that
believes not shall be damned: Now though it be not to be meant so literally
and precisely that they should preach the Gospel to irrational creatures, yet
the sense and meaning of every creature is so clear, that none which were
capable to receive the word, should be barred by persecution from hearing of it
preached; and whereas our Savior says, he that believes not shall be damned,
had his intention been, that such as believed not should be compelled thereto,
doubtless he would have said so in express words upon this occasion, rather
then denounce their damnation, before he had first countenanced this so
efficacious a way, as some allege, for to prevent it.

To say the Apostles had then no civil power, and therefore they used Object.
not, is not to the purpose, for if coercive power had been requisite, our
Savior when he sent them forth could as easily have ordered Answ.
them to make use of it (in which case the Magistrate must have contributed his
assistance) as to say, heal the sick, cleanse leapers, raise the dead, and
cast out devils, and although miracles were now quite ceased, yet it follows
not that the civil sword is given to the Church to clear the Gospels passage,
for God will have no ways or means made use of, but such as he himself
prescribed with express order only (not to persecute but) to depart from such
as would not hear it; and what command find we in the word of God which
warrants us to imprison, fine, banish, or put to death any one especially
amongst Christians for difference of opinion in Religion? many I know are so
indulgent to be contented that every man might enjoy his own Conscience
quietly, but would not suffer them to, have the free exercise of it, to
discourse or publish their opinions unto others, but hereof I find no ground
in Scripture; St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 9. 16. A command is laid upon me, and woe
is unto me if I preach not the Gospel; and our Savior said unto St. Peter,
Acts 22 32. When thou art converted strengthen thy brethren: So that the same
God which commands me to try the spirits, requires of me also that when I have
found the truth, I should not withold it like a candle under a bushel, but
teach it unto others. Mark 4. 31. Object.


Yea but some will say, God requires you to teach the Truth, but you teach
Heresy instead thereof, and therefore you ought to be persecuted; my answer
is, That I apprehend it to be the truth, and do but discharge Answ.
my conscience, though it be erroneous, desiring to see the warrant for
persecuting such as teach or publish erroneous doctrines, which they in their
own opinion thought had been sound: St. Paul in the name of the whole
Ministry said, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: And
in another place, 2 Cor. 10. 1. 3. 4. I Paul my self beseech you by the
meekness and gentleness of Christ, for though we walk in the flesh, we do
not war after the flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds: So that Paul did war,
but not according to the flesh, he did not imprison; fine, nor cut off ears,
his weapons were only spiritual, the power and might of Jesus Christ; gentle
exhortation and friendly admonition was the only meants the Apostles practiced,
which prevailed then so mightily, and ought for that very reason to be still
continued, especially since we cannot pretend any other commission but what
they had, unless we will also seem to have had an other Gospel.

I presume no Protestant will deny, but that we are bound to endeavor the
conversion of Papists, Jews, Turks, Pagans, Heretics, with all Infidels and
misbeleevers unto the only true and saving faith in Jesus Christ, this task
how little soever it be practiced and thought on, will one day lie heavy upon
all Christians, who are no less obliged thereto in their respective callings,
then the Apostles were to preach the Gospel Matthew. 28. 19.
unto all Nations, as was said immediately before: But as it is said in the
Parable, Mark 3. 27. That before one can enter into a strong man's house and
spoil his goods, he must first bind the strong man: So before you can
prevail and reduce a Turk or Papist to the true reformed Religion, you must
first convince him in the errors of his own, by the evidence of Scripture,
and by the power of the Holy Ghost, and this must be done by word of mouth, by
writing or by both, as I rather conceive; first, by word of mouth, in that the
Apostles were expressly ordered to go and teach all Nations, which necessarily
inferres their presence; and secondly, by writing, that it may be better
dispersed, and more freely enjoined at all times, places and opportunities,
besides, that controversies and businesses of intricacie, are far better and
more methodically stated and explaned in writing or in Print, then can possibly
be delivered by word of mouth: The Poet said, Qui volet ingenio cedere rarus
erit:


But far more rarely shall you find a man to give pre-eminence in point of
his Religion, each thinking his own to be the truest; this combat therefore
must be sought out upon eaven ground, on equal terms, neither side must
expect to have greater liberty of speech, writing, Printing, or whatsoever
else, then the other: But it will be again Object.
objected, that if such a tolleration as this be granted, the whole Kingdom
will be quickly pestered with a greater confusion then that of Babel; to which
I answer, That the confusion will not be such as is Answ.
so much imagined and feared, though it may seem greater at first then
afterward, when every man has associated himself with such as are of his
own opinion; and I crave leave to ask, if it be not a far greater confusion
both before God and man, and of more dangerous consequence to the State, and
their own souls, for a thousand men and women of ten several religions or
opinions to assemble together every Sunday in a Parish Church for fear of
imprisonment, fines, banishment and worse, or else that the same thousand men
and women being permitted freely, may meet in a peaceable manner at ten
several places according to their respective differing opinions and religion:
But Object.
you will say that all these thousand men and women were good Protestants,
before this licentiousness of being what they would, was granted them: I
answer, That they could not possibly be good Protestants, Answ.
but either were hypocrites and time servers, or else that they had happened by
chance, or rather by course of the Country into a mere formal profession of
the Protestant Religion, whereof they were not able to render a reason if it
had been demanded, and though they should have still continued as visible
members of the true Protestant Church, and participated in the outward means,
their actions would have been never the more accepted of the Lord whilst they
had lived, nor their persons at the day of judgment.

Secondly though this confusion were yet greater then you imagine, I desire to
be informed, how it may be prevented without a far worse inconvenience; first,
in that I find no express warrant, and less then express will not be enough
to abridge any man the exercise of his Religion, which makes him sin against
his own Conscience, and so is a doing of evil at least, that good may come of
it, Romans 3. 8. And secondly, because you are commanded to teach all Nations,
which is impossible, unless you could go and live amongst them, which you
cannot reasonably imagine or conceive, that people of different religions and
opinions will permit you to remain amongst them who hold tenets, that when you
have converted a considerable number, you may if you see possibility of
strength to compass it by force of fire and sword, compel the rest to be of
the same Religion, much less will they come unto you for the same reasons, as
also in that you will not permit them within your jurisdiction to make
profession of their Religion, whereof they have as good opinion as you can
possibly have of yours, and though perhaps they might be contented (not that
they are doubtful of their own, but in hopes it may be to make a Proselite of
you, or out of an ingenious disposition and desire to comply with you, who seem
so solicitous of their salvation) to hear what you allege, why they should
become good Protestants, yet you cannot in reason expect, or in equity require,
that they should not have as ample privilege as your self, to deliver their
minds freely both in speech and writing.

We know that in most Kingdoms there are several Courts of Justice, which
having different privileges and jurisdictions, when any man has cause to
commence a Suite, he first informs himself in which he may likeliest find
greatest favor of equity and justice, but if his adversary gain advantage,
and force him to a trial in such a Court, as according to the constitution
thereof, he could not have so favorable trial as in another, the party thus
agrieved forth with appeals from that where he was over thrown unto another,
never resting or submitting; if it may be otherwise avoided, until he
apprehend himself, to have been equally proceeded with; and yet the trial of
Religion must still be more precise and equitable, in that it must be voluntary
on both sides.

Suppose then that a man have a controversy with another about land, houses,
money, merchandise, or what ever earthly luggage else, of a considerable
valuation, is any so simple as to think that such a one even whilst he is
confident of his own right and title, will give it up unto his adversary upon
entreaty, menacies, or compulsion, and that willingly? Is it not then a greater
absurdity and incongruity of sense to think that a man should rest contented
willingly to be forced against his will? nay is it not a mere impossibility, as
absolute as the subsistence of contrarieties? can a man in one and the same
respect, about the self same thing, and at same time too, be both willing and
yet unwilling? can he at same time think he has just cause to keep possession
of such land or movables, and yet think he ought to render up possession of
them? how much more tenacious may we justly presume every man to be of his
religion, which he thinks to be the only true one? and how much more backward
and unwilling will every one be that makes conscience to part from his faith,
whereby he expects not some momentary profit and advantage, but his wel-being
and salvation unto eternity? And if being confident in mine own Religion, I
cannot possibly be brought to think otherwise by force, what ever violence
make me profess outwardly to the contrary, then will it be necessary to
proceed by fair means, that all reasons and inducements being aledged with
equal liberty and freedom on both sides, the whole controversy may be fully
stated and understood to the self-conviction of heresy and error, which if
other Nations of different Religions may not be permitted, and by that means
freely declare and express the grounds where on they built their faith, how
false soever they be, they cannot possibly be convinced thereof, but will be so
much more hardened in their opinions, conceiving them the founder, by how much
you restrain the publishing thereof, and when they see you intend to persecute
them, denying an equal and indifferent trial, they will be gone again with a
far more prejudicial conceit of the Protestant Religion then they had before,
if you detain them perforce you do contrary to St. Paul's doctrine, 1 Cor. 7.
15. who gave order that even the unbeleeving wife might depart, if she would
depart, and besides afright all such as hear of it, from ever coming to you
afterward.

Thus does it appear most evidently, that if you will continue your Note.
rules and maxims of persecution, besides the unwarrantablenesse thereof, you
cannot reasonably conceive a possibility to discharge our Saviors aforesaid
Commission, with sundry other Scriptures for teachching of all Nations.

Besides, we find how amongst other directions which our Savior gave his
seventy Disciples at their mission, Luke 10. 5. 6. He bids them, That into
whatsoever house they enter, they first say, Peace be to that house, and that
if the son of peace be there, their peace shall rest upon it, if not, it shall
return to them again: and by this instruction surely we may observe, Note.
our Savior did not intend, that his Disciples whilst they went about
preaching the Gospel should cry Peace, Peace, that they might more securely
instill into their Proselites a doctrine of war and persecution, and such
Christian States and Churches as do since practice it, go quite opposite to
that command of our Saviors, and his Disciples practice, wherein we are so
much more inexcusable, in that he declared himself so plainly, that his
meaning was, the Doctrine of Peace should be proffered to all, and that if they
and it were not received, Their peace should Met. 10. 14. Mark 6. 11 Luke 9. 5.
return to them again, and they only shake of the dust from their feet as a
witness against them at the day of judgment; as if he had said so on purpose,
lest they meeting with such as would not receive them and their peace, should
be to seek what further course to take, and think their labor lost, unless
they had compelled them to receive both whether they would or no.

But notwithstanding our Saviors charging his Apostles to teach all Nations,
Matthew. 28. 19. And St. Paul's saying, Romans 10. 17. That faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God; requiring Timothy to be instant in
season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. The Inquisitors are ready to say with
the young man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19. 20. All these things have we done: We
have preached and such will not hear us, some that hear will not believe us,
and such as believe us, will not live accordingly, Object.
what shall we do with such? I answer, this is no more then Answ.
St. Paul foretold, when he said, 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4, 5. The time will come when
they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they beap
to themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their
ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables, but watch thou in all
things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, make full proof of
thy ministry: v. 2. Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and
doctrine: This averseness to the saving truth which St. Paul prophesied of,
was not so much to be discovered in the time of Timothy, as afterward in
succeeding ages; and St. Paul's directions in that behalf to be applied to all
Ministers successively: To the Romans he says, Romans 10. 14. concerning his
brethren the Jews, How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?
and how shall they hear without a Preacher? But if he had lived in these
days, Paul himself must have been taught to say, Do you expect they should
go to Church unless you whip them thither? and how shall they believe unless
you beat it into them? This had been as easy for St. Paul to have prescribed
in those times had it been but as good doctrine, however the practice of some
Christian Countries is so contrary to it, that more care and watchfulness is
used, that Inquisitors be circumspect and diligent to require conformity of the
outward man, then that the word be sincerely taught, or the Sacraments
administered according to their due simplicity and purity, to the comfort and
edifying of the inward man; these may make a great show and bravery for the
present, surpassing in number like the National Church of the Jews when it was
most populous, but being such spurious Christians chiefly as are begot by their
illegal Inquisition, and not nourished by the fincere milk of the word, 1
Pet. 2. 2. they are never like to grow up and increase in godliness until
they become perfect men in Christ Jesus.

St. Paul writing to the Romans about meats which were lawful to be eaten, by
such as believed they might eat them, prescribes notwithstanding to forbear,
rather then offend a weak brother, but withal says, Romans 14. 22, 23. Happy
is he that condemns not himself in that thing which he allows, and he that
doubts is damned if he eats, because he eats not of faith, for whatsoever
is not of faith is sin. And in the same Chapter, verse. 5. he says, One man
esteems one day above another, and another esteems every day alike, let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind; according to which doctrine, a
man's own conscience was both primarily and lastly to be resolved fully before
he eat or drank, whether he keep holy days or no, and not the Inquisition
house or Bishops court: If eating with a doubting conscience only be sin,
what is it in such as eat contrary to their conscience? how much greater sin is
it in such as go to Church, or are present at worshipping of God in such a
manner as they themselves hold to be flat Idolatry; and then how comparatively
greater is their sin that force others to do that which damnes themselves, so
much against their own wills and dispositions? But perhaps it will be
objected, that they are not forced, but may choose whether they will come to
Church or no, so they pay one Object.
third part of their revenues or some easier fine: To which I answer, Answ.
That such fines, imprisonment, or lesser punishments whatsoever are justly to
be accounted force, and that in the highest nature, when a man will rather
resolve to hazard the loss of his own soul in going to Church with a double
conscience, according to his own tenets and opinion, then to submit to the
said fines, imprisonment or other punishments; I need say no more then such
going to Church is not of faith, but of fear, and faith comes by hearing, not
by fighting.

But it will be again objected, That the Apostles had no power or Object.
authority from the civil Magistrate to render into obedient unto their
doctrine in a compulsive way, otherwise they would in likelihood have made use
of it, there being no such probable means under, heaven as such imagine, to
settle an uniformity, as fining, imprisoning, banishing, cutting off ears, and
(...) if they see fit; whereto I answer, That the Apostles preaching,
baptizing, and doing miracles, were all Answ.
contrary to the authority and express commands of civil Magistrates, and if
they had had but equal (...) from their Master, having gained such multitudes
of converts as our Savior was fain to feed miraculously at one time, about
five thousand of them, all men, besides women and children; at another time
four thousand men, besides women and children, Matthew. 14. 24 and 15. 38. And
in the Acts it is said, Act. 2. 41. That through Peter's preaching, three
thousand souls were added to them in one day, we cannot justly think but
having once gained so many Proselites, and amongst those were soldiers, to
take leaders and commanders Luke 3. 12. 14. Act. 10. in the former part.
off, they had through their numbers both means and reason, rather to encourage
them in adventuring to settle, or at least to lay some groundwork of their
coercive discipline, then with such boldness at first to travel from place to
place, from one City to another, preaching Christ Jesus undauntedly, when there
was not so much as one to countenance and back them against the civil
Magistrate, or persecution of the common people.

Why did the Apostles baptize or teach in the name of Jesus, being expressly
commanded by the civil Magistrate to the contrary? this disobedience and
offending of the higher powers had been a sin in them, unless our Savior had
given them express commission to teach all Nations, and if coercive power had
been as warrantable, and more likely means to propagate the Gospel, the
Apostles were as much to blame in that they did not use it, as they should have
been if they had not preached the Gospel at all; for Christ that commanded them
the end, must needs understand the means there to conducing to be comprehended
in the same commission; neither could they be said to want power for putting
the means in execution, so long as they had the gift of working miracles:
which doubtless they also practiced so often as they had the divine Oracle for
warrant; and of this nature was Peter's punishing Ananias and Saphira with
sudden death, because they had Acts 5. 5. 10.
dedicated a certain possession unto the Lord, and afterward sought to rob his
Saints of part thereof: Paul likewise, Chap. 13. 11. struck Elimas the forcerer
blind, because he sought to turn away Paulus Sergius the Deputy his heart from
the faith: And his delivering of Himenous and Alexander unto Satan that they
might learn not to blaspheme, 1 Timothy 1. 20. I suppose may be understood in the
same manner. Our Savior having occasion to make use of an Ass that the
Prophecy in Zachariah might be fulfilled, Zach. 9 9. sent two of his Disciples
to the village Belphage to fetch one, giving them no other instructions, but
that if any body said ought unto them, they should reply, That the Lord had
need of it, Matthew. 21. 3. Even so might the Apostles have done when they had
met with obstinate people that would not receive their Gospel (especially the
Jews which the Roman Magistrate in likelihood regarded little whether they were
Jews or Christians) it had been but sending for a Centurian, or other officer
of justice with a little ticket, that Domino opus est, no body should have been
able to resist their will; as it is said in the Romans, Romans 9. 19. the
proudest Pharaoh must have submitted, and all his Subjects been willing to
assist, besides legions of Angels Matthew. 26. 53.
which would have been in readiness if God had pleased to warrant them in such
a course.

And whereas in the Scripture before alleged, it is said, Acts 2 41. That
three thousand souls were added to the Church that day; the Text declares
also, that they which gladly received the word were baptized, insinuating, that
they which do not willingly receive the word, ought not to Note.
be baptized, much less be forceibly baptized, or being first baptized in
their infancy when good hopes were conceived of them, be afterward compelled
to receive the word, and participate in the ordinances when their
unwillingnesse is so well known, and this to be the case of all such Christians
as are forced into a Religion: But how many souls soever were added to the
Church at Peter's preaching, Acts 2 47. and whereas it is said, That the Lord
added daily to the Church such as should be saved, it cannot be said so in such
Countries where the Inquisition rules, or people are forced to go to Church
upon penalties how small soever, there is neither adding to the Church, nor
falling from, they are one and all, all of the Church, or all out of the
Church, and which of the two is likeliest I am sorry to consider.

What people under heaven can boast of an outward unity, and so general a
uniformity as the Papists at this day, most eminently glorious if it were to be
contemplated according to humane wisdom, or beheld with the eye of flesh? But
do not Protestant Writers affirm of them, that they would fall into as many
pieces and opinions amongst themselves, as all other Christians have in the
whole world besides, if the yoke of their Inquisition bondage were but broken?
Nay do not all Protestants conclude that even such a hodge podge of uniformity
cannot be compassed without an Ecclesiastical Sovereignty? and that this
Ecclesiastical Sovereignty has such inbred corruptions and temptations in it
self as breeds a propensity, little less then unavoidably degenerating into
tyranny? and that tyranny over the mind to be seventy seven times worse, then
that which civil Magistrates exercise upon the body or estate? nay must it not
needs follow Note.
by consequence undeniable, that if there were as good ground in Scripture for
spiritual Sovereignty as there is for temporal, that this spiritual
Sovereignty ought to be reduced to Monarchy, as the best and only government to
settle uniformity? and would not this Pope and spiritual Monarch upon the same
grounds have a better claim and title to all the world, because ecclesiastical
and spiritual for sooth, then any King or Emperor has to his own Dominions?
All these gross absurdities (which we so much condemn in the Pope of Rome,
for the mystery of iniquity aims at no less then all the world, their
groundwork and proceedings conclude as much, though yet it speaks not
plain) will inevitably follow the endeavoring to settle a uniformity in the
Church, or such tenets as require a necessity of coercive power to be executed
on the body or estate in matters merely of Religion.

Let all Church governments be but brought to a trial, fee what the Pope can
say, Episcopacie, Presbytery, or any other that stands for compulsive
jurisdiction over goods or person, and though they mince it never so finely,
speak never so fairly, and each of them have not really in it self an equal
proportion of inbred putrefaction, tending unto spiritual tyranny, yet if they
be well examined, though in their negatives one may condemn the other, for
their affirmatives whatsoever shall be alleged by any one will be acknowledged
the doctrine and principles of all the rest, and each of them for the matter,
though not equally, upon most palpable consequence be found tending and
endeavoring a command and dominion over the faith and consciences of men,
which St. Paul disclaimed, 2 Cor. 1. 24. And when James and John the sons of
Zebeace desired to sit on our Saviors right hand, and the other on his left in
glory, he told them, That the Princes of the Gentiles do exercise dominion
over them, and they that are great exercise authority over them, but it shall
not be so among you: And when he was desired only to speak a powerful word
for execution of civil jurisdiction, that an inheritance might be divided
rightly betwixt two brothers, he reprehends the party, saying, Man, who made me
a judge or devider over you, Luke 12. 13, 14. And if the Apostles, and their
lawful successors in the Ministry, may not exercise dominion nor authority,
what ever their minds were, their persecution would want a sting, Mat. 20. 25,
26.

God will not have men persecuted for matter of Religion, lest under color
thereof, the persecuting of his dearest Saints should seem more justifiable:
But you will say, why does he then permit the civil Magistrates to put men to
death, by which proceeding innocent and guiltless persons have often suffered?
I answer, how it is true that through the iniquity of some Countries Laws, and
malice or corruption of wicked people, innocent and simple men have too too
often been condemned and put to death: But first, it is abvious to every ones
capacity, how the crimes and offenses for which men suffer under civil
Magistrates, are by most Nations concurrently agreed upon to deserve death.
Secondly, such delinquencies are more easily to be proved against the
malefactors, and in matters of difficulty, as to discover whether a woman had
committed adultery, the Lord had appointed a miraculous way of trial, and
called it The law of jealousies, Exodus 5. 12. which was, that if the spirit of
jealousy had possessed the husband, the Priest giving the wife a bitter water
to drink (in such manner as is related in the Story) her thigh should rot, and
belly burst if she were guilty, but do her no hurt at all in case of
innocence; from whence may be inferred, that the putting any man to death, or
punishing by civil Magistrates without undeniable proof and witnesses, cannot
be justified or excused without a miracle; how much more in matters of
Religion, where there is no law of Gods making that commands it, and seldom
righteous testimonies that can be produced to prove it? Thirdly, it lay in the
malefactors power not to have committed such crimes and outrages; and last of
all, civil Magistrates have the Scripture for a rule what delinquents they may
put to death, and how far they may proceed in fining: but for matter of
Religion it is quite otherwise; for first, no man is of opinion that another
deserves to be persecuted and put to death, only, because he is of the same
Religion which himself is of, since therein he should condemn himself:
Secondly, if a man will himself, you cannot tell what Religion he is of,
because whatever he is driven to make profession of, it is the heart that in
this respect, either justifies or condemns: Thirdly, though a man would use
all the means which can be prescribed him, and should even himself be
contented. and desire that such a Religion were the true one, yet it is not in
his power to think so, and consequently to be of the same in heart, until his
reason and understanding be convinced thereof: And last of all there is no
warrant for persecution in the Scripture, if there were, we might boldly say,
fiat justitia ruat Coelum, God will bear us out in whatsoever we do by his
commandment, and as severe an account will he require at the dreadful day of
judgment, for all such fining, imprisoning, mutilating, and putting to death,
especially of his Saints, and other conscientious people, as have been
practiced without it.

We are bid in the Scripture to come out of the world, and separate our Rev.
18. 4. 2 Cor. 6. 17.
selves from the wicked, lest we partake of their judgments, and the like; but
instead of conforming hereunto, such as will not enter into Covenant, such as
will not go to Church and receive the Communion with us, we endeavor to
compel them to it by pecuniary or corporal punishments, which is as much as
possible to withstand and hinder such a separation: for instead of preaching
unto the true Believers, according unto St. Paul's doctrine, that they should
separate themselves, and not communicate with notorious sinners, we quite
contrary turn our speech and power too, toward Papists, Blasphemers,
Traitors, and the mixed multitude in general, forcing them and the true
Believers to assemble and communicate together, to have one Faith, one
Baptism, one Church, and whether it may involve us in one doom, I leave to
others to determine, and at present only advertise, that, from hence arises a
double inconvenience, one to our selves by communicating with Atheists,
Papists, Traitors, Blasphemers and Reprobates of all sorts, from whom we are
commanded by St. Paul's Epistle to Timothy, 2. Tim. 3. 5. to turn away, whilst
we notwithstanding force them whether they will or no, to join with us in the
most sacred Ordinances of God: the other inconvenience is to those that are so
forced, by making of them hypocrites and time servers, so much worse then they
were before, or as our Savior says, Matthew. 23. 15. Two times more the
children of the devil, when perhaps what they would have done of their own
good will, though erroneous, might have been in part excused by ignorance, and
a good intention, as St. Paul did when he persecuted the Church of God, 1 Timothy
1. 13. and so far are we from building up the mystical body of Christ by
compelling the personal presence of Papists, and such like, at our spiritual
exercises, that it only hardens them so much more, and alienates their minds
so much futher from being wrought upon, by such arguments as are alleged from
reason or from Scripture.

In a Sermon preached before the House of Commons the 27. of December, 1643. I
find these words. It fears me that a great part of Mr. Alexander Hendersons
Serpag. 18.
the people of this land are still fond of a formal service, and a proud
Prelacie; and yet the Covenant which apparently professes a final extirpation
of them both, had found such acceptance, that I believe there is scarce one man
in a hundred throughout all London but has subscribed to it; however I am
fully of the same opinion, and verily conceive that from the carriage and
effect of this business only, it may clearly be observed, how easily
multitudes of men will permit shipwreck to be made of their souls, and
consequently how incongruous and dangerous a way of proceeding it is, to join
profit or preferment, hopes or fears, threats or force to work upon the
conscience; for although the Covenant has passed thus currantly, I find
notwithstanding by discourse that the greatest part of people are little weaned
from the present Service Book, and wish better to Episcopacie a little
reformed, I mean the rigor of it only, with some small superfluities of the
Lordlinesse, and that it should still remain Diocesan, rather then
Presbyteriall, or any other Church government whatsoever; but for such as hold
with independencie how their stomachs can thoroughly digest the Covenant, I
cannot any ways imagine.

I know that much is said and done in many places in behalf of uniformity, a
National Church and Covenant; which things indeed carry a great show of
wisdom in will worship, as the Apostle says, Col. 3. 23. were it not that our
Savior told us, That in vain they worship him, teaching for doctrines, the
commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9.

But wherefore such laboring in vain, and striving against the stream to
obtain a superficies, and false luster of a National Church? Do we think
that Gods salvation is also National? Surely if the seven thousand which never
bowed knee to Baal, had been in a body, Eliah 1 King. 19. 18.
would have known them better; we see indeed that they have all the face or
show of Mahumetans in Turkey, Papists in Spain, and Lutherans in Germany, but
this is the work of man and not of God; and though the power of flesh is such
to keep the purity and saving knowledge of the Gospel from them; they will be
sure enough to rise up in judgment, and with their uncircumcised hearts, and
law of nature, Romans 2. 2^
condemn the tyranny of those that kept it from them. And they allege also the
great reformations wrought by Ataxerxes, Ezra 7. 23. (and other good Kings
under the the Law) who said, Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let
it be diligently done for the house of the God of heaven; and many still cry
out aloud upon a reformation of Religion, or building up the mystical Temple
under the Gospel, after the same manner by fire and sword, never remembering,
that there was express order and direction from God himself concerning every
thing Exodus 25. 40. and 26. 30. Heb. 8. 5. Exodus 27. 19.
about the first Temple, not a pin excepted, whereas many of latter times, out
of greater eagerness to have the work done, then care and consideration to
the well doing, have put their own commandment afoot instead of Gods,
requiring judgment to be executed speedily upon them that disobeyed, whether
it were to death or to banishment, to confiscation of goods or imprisonment,
with as much confidence, as though the Prophet Ezra had purposely recorded it,
not so much that God Cap. 7. 26.
might be glorified in Artaxerxes great carfulness, and just commands for
beautifying of his Temple, as to countenance their own will worship and
inventrons.

But did God ever say to any Christian people as he did to Abraham, Genesis 17. 8.
I will give unto thee and thy seed thy neighbors Country, whose inhabitants
were without the Covenant of works, for an everlasting possession? How much
less does God give thee the confiscation of thy brothers estate, whom thou will perhaps acknowledge to be within, and can not possibly prove to be
without the covenant of Grace, because he differs from thee in opinion, or some
cases of conscience only? Did God ever say to Christians as he did to Abraham,
v. 14. The uncircumcised man-child shall be cut off from his people? If
Christians have any command equivolent hereunto, why is it not impartially put
in execution? If they have not, who shall answer for such as have been
persecuted or put to death without it? But as whatsoever God has commanded
should be punctually done; so what God has not commanded, ought not to be
done: the adding to in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and John's Revelation, Rev.
22. 18. is as much forbidden, as the taking from it; and Solomon says, Prove.
30 6. Add thou not unto the words of God, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found liar. I am confident it cannot be denied, but that the endeavoring and
practice of coercive power to sway the conscience in any kind, is for the most
part either expressively, or by undeniable consequence quite contrary to the
principal intention and letter throughout the whole Scripture, in which
respect if there were some few texts or passages which might seem to color it,
yet they ought to be so much more deliberately considered and pondered on for
the honor we owe to Gods truth, and charity to our neghbour.

In Matthews Gospel cap. 28. 20. it is said, Teach them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you; But I do not find persecution to have been
expressly commanded in any place of the Gospel: and whereas some would infer
it from the words, Let all things be done 1 Cor. 14. 40.
decently and in order, as by the coherence with the whole Chapter it appears
plainly to relate only unto the orderly proceeding and behavior in their
assemblies or public meetings; so it possibly cannot be made appear from
hence, that there is, or ought to be a power to persecute or put to death, for
then this conclusion would follow, that the Church Note.
of Corinth had commission given them to put a man to death only for
indecencie, or for having done any thing which was unseemly or out of order;
but this would be both a great absurdity, injustice and blasphemy to affirm:
again, Let all things be done decently and in order cannot possibly signify,
or imply a power or order of fining, imprisoning, and putting to death, unless
you will say, that the Apostles, Disciples, and all Christian Churches,
especially that of Corinth had the same power, and then you must either say
that there was no delinquencie to proceed against in a coercive way, which is
notoriously false, or else you must condemn them all, because they did not
practice it at any time; for as the precept or command was given to the Church
and Saints of Corinth, so Paul's meaning and intention must needs be, that they
of all others should observe and practice it fully and punctually in all things
that it might have been a president to others: and lastly, that the commission
of decency and order in all things was given 1 Cor. 1. 1. 2. Cap 9. 10. Cap.
10. 11 8.
unto the Church of Corinth, is plain, since the whole Epistle is directed to
them particularly, and by name, but it was written for instruction, and
concerned equally all the Disciples and Churches of Christ, both then living,
and us, as S. Paul says, On whom the ends of the world are come: now it is
gross and preposterous to think or say, that Paul gave the Church of Corinth
such commission, that is, an order or authority to Note.
use coercive power for the better prevailing that all things might be done
decently and in order, because he knew they wanted, and could not have the
assistance of the civil Magistrate thereunto; and if the coercive was not
intended to them, much less to future Churches, who have only received the
same commission after so many reversions, and can not pretend that the words
thereof should have a different or larger signification in our favor, then was
meant unto the Corinthians, unto whom it was immediately directed; and we may
well presume that if it had signified a compulsive or Lordly jurisdiction, to
have been put in execution by Christian Churches or Commonwealths in after
ages, which cannot be because of so many absurd consequences which follow
thereupon, yet dato and non concesso, in such case I say, the Apostles and
primitive Christians, though they themselves had wanted coercive means and
power, would not withstanding infallibly have left some ground or warrant
inserted in the letter of the Gospel, to be conveyed successively unto
posterity* for their better direction in (...)nesse of such concernment, and so
great obscurity in that sense which is objected; but if the point be intricate
or dubious, the safest way is to proceed no further then we have a precept or
president of our Savior or his Apostles to warrant us, especially in matters
of so high a nature, as are the worship and service of God Almighty, the
Discipline of his House, and tender consciences of his dearest Saints.

In the Gospel we meet with Bishops, a Presbytery, Elders, Deacons, Apostles,
Evangelists, Disciples, Prophets, strange tongues, and Interpreters 1 Timothy 3.
12 4. 14. Tit. 1. 5. 1 Timothy 3. 8 5. 1. 7. Act 6. beginning. Luke 10. 1 23. 1
Cor. 12. 10. Ephesians 4. 11, 12, 13. Romans 12. 8
of tongues, Elders that rule well, and labor in the Ministry, some to take
care of poor widows, others for exhortation, Pastors, Teachers for perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ until we all come in the unity of the faith, as St. Paul says: But
what spirit of truth do we ever meet with which says that any of these were
given for the corporal imprisoning, banishing, or putting to death the body of
Christ, which are his Saints, as of latter times too too often has been
practiced? where find we in the Gospel order or authority to convent, accuse
and arraigne men with power of life and death for matters of religion or
opinion only? this is but traditionall, and far short from being Canno^icall
and Christian; it is true we find here a precept for endeavoring to
accomplish a unity of faith in the Saints, or the Saints in the unity of faith,
but this was neither universal nor national unity, as appears afterward,
where he says unto the same Ephesians, Walk not as other Gentiles walk in
the vanity of their minds, much less was any constraint or compulsion ordered
Verse 17.
or intended to be used, for then both they and all other Christian Churches
had been bound to make all others walk with them in unity of faith, or to
walk unto the gallows; and the Apostles admonition in such case would have
been both more proper and effectual which the Ephesians, as such Church
commanders pretend, if he had said, Walk not as other Gentiles, who because
they will not walk with you in unity of Religion, and uniformity of
discipline, are deservedly compelled to walk unto the gallows.

Has it not often been instilled into the ears of Princes, as Hansan the
great favorite did unto King Ahasue^us concerning the Jews Gods people, who
were then afflicted in captiv^^y, and so ^bjectly contemp(...)le, that they
could not possibly be dangerous to the State? and ye^ proud Haman, ^stner 3. 8,
9. etc. only because a conscientious Mordecai was scrupulous and could not ^ow
and do rev^ience to him as the King commanded* (...)ed h^^ ^^jesty (...)a
there was a certain people scattered ab(...), (...) (...)spersed into all
Provinces of his Kingdom, whose laws were diverse from all people, neither
kept they the Kings laws, and therefore it was not for the Kings profit to
suffer them; in which respect, if it pleased his Majesty that letters might be
writ for their destruction, he promised to pay ten thousand talents of silver
into the Kings treasury; hereupon the King con^ented to the Edict, that all of
them men, women and children should be massacred, and for Hamans good counsel,
remitted the ten thousand talents of silver, and gave him the poor Jews to
boot, to be murdered in such a manner as his cruelty could b^st con^rive: Oh
how often has this wicked advice of Haman been practiced upon Gods best people
in all parts of Christendom? for there are Puritanes both in Spain and Italy,
in greater numbers then ever appeared in England before this present
Parliament, and permitted to meet and walk peaceably up and down the streets
together, more numerous then ever yet (...) saw in London, may it, in Gods
time, be spoken to the greater humbling, then shame of this Nation and all
Protestants besides.

But how often think we may it have been suggested unto our Gracious
Sovereignes, and i(...)nuated unto the people, how disserviceable and dangerous
the Pu^itanes were unto the State? surely not seldom, or else they would never
have reduced so many thousands of them into a necessity of leaving the Land,
and carry with them their gifts, arts, and manufactures into other Countries,
to the greatest detriment of this Commonwealth; and yet far greater loss and
judgment unto Gods Church in England: But what has been the end of the grand
Politicians and Persecuters? may it not be observed, that like Haman who was
hanged on the gallows, which he himself had caused to be set up for Morde^ai,
so many, nay, very many of the greatest that ever yet appeared enemies unto
Gods people, have been taken in their own nets, and felt those penalties and
proceedings, which they first invented and practiced upon others? And as that
villainous design of Hamans, Est. 8. 8. through Gods providence proved so much
more successful unto the Jews; (...) in like manner may the sunshine of
Gods love have been seen to break out still more bright and comfortable
toward such as in all times have been reproached for Puritanes, I may not say
for any deserts or works of theirs, but through Gods most gracious providence,
which as Mordecai foretold to Esther, cap. 4. 14. has wrought enlargement and
deliverance to them, though they perhaps may be said to have endeavored it,
not without many weaknesses and failings.

But since God both can and will finish his own great work of Reformation in
spite of all opposition, Let such as think they stand take 1 Cor. 10. 12.
Note.
hee^ lest they fall, and may it be far from any of Gods good servants to
imagine that God delivered them out of persecution to the end they might be
enabled to persecute their brethren: Persecution is a sin, Gal. 4. 28, 29.
a sign of the Church malignant, and no degree thereof dispensable by Popery,
Episcopacie, or Presbytery, neither may God be thought to be the author of it,
or countenance it further then he does other sins by barely permitting them
in wrath and judgment to chastife and scourge a sinful people, the whole
Kingdom did acknowledge it whilst Popery domineered, the greatest part are
weary of it in Prelacie; O let Presbytery be forewarned thereby, and know that
they have the same temptation which was common to both the other Governments,
and wherein they miscarried. The Jews came out with 1 Cor. 10. 13.
swords and staves to apprehend our Savior, but God never blessed them in it,
nor sanctified them since to bring men in, and made profession of the Gospel.
Let all the reasons, grounds and principles for a coercive power and discipline
in matter of Religion be produced, and it will most evidently appear how
Presbytery cannot possibly allege more, or better then what the Papacy and
Prelacie first brought to light, all having the self same inbred matter and
corruption in them, which infallibly, though not with equal posting, inclines
them naturally to degenerate into tyranny and persecution, and the work which
they all fight against, being of God, cannot possibly be overthrown, but will
notwithstanding be brought about to the greater misery and confusion Act. 5. 39.
of all such, who if they would make strickt enquiry with an upright heart into
the nature of such government, could not likely choose, having felt or
understood the bondage which this Kingdom has already twice suffered under
it, but see the malignant poison and putrefaction which is bred and lies
lurking within the bowels thereof, and be weary of it; yet I forbear to
judge, and in all meekness beseech that they would be as backwards in judging
others.

The Italians have a Proverb that whosoever goes beyond his commission must
run the hazard of it for his own account; but for such who have no commission
at all, and yet take away the liberty, livelihood, limbs and lives of their
Christian brethren, and that for mere matter of conscience only, cannot amount
to less then the shedding of innocent blould, that crying sin, for which the
Jews remain still scattered upon the face of the earth until this day: But
have the Jews been thus afflicted for putting Christ to death, and a few of
Gods Prophets only, how excessive then will be the torments of such Christian
States which have persecuted and put to death thousands of Christians for every
single soul which was executed by the Jews, and that principally because such
Christians differed from them only in opinion, when ^f they had been Turks or
Pagans they might likely have escaped? But you will say perhaps, that the Jews
put Christ to death the Object. Answ.
ransom and Savior of the whole world: I answer, That they knew him not to be
Christ, and that the Jews had then better grounds and warrant to put a
blasphemer to death, and such they ccounted Jesus, then Lev. 24. 16. (...)
Matthew. 26. 65. Genesis 45. 3. 5. Math. 26. 53, 54, 56.
Christians have now: Secondly. I answer, That when Joseph perceived that his
brethren were troubled in mind and grieved for having sold him into slavery,
making himself known, bid them not be grieved or angry with themselves, for
that God hand sent him before into Egypt to preserve their lives: and cur
Savior after they had laid hands on him, and apprehending him, for the comfort
no doubt of repentant Jews, was pleased so say, That if he had prayed, his
Father could have given him more then twelve legions of Angels, but then the
Scriptures would not have been fulfilled, that it must be so, and that all was
done that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled. In John we find
that therefore they could not believe because Esaias says, He has blinded
their eyes, Joh. 12. 39. 40. And whereas the same Evangelist says, 1 John 4.
20. He that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how shall he love God
whom he has not seen: So the Jews, though they saw Jesus and crucified him,
yet they knew him not to be God, and by John's way of arguing, were so much more
to be excused, and the sin of Christians aggravated, who do not only know
their brethren, but many times acknowledge that they setting aside the
difference of opinion, have more eminent gifts and abilities then themselves*
and yet will not forbear to perplex and perfecute them, and according to the
principles which many of them hold and practice, had they been living in our
Saviors days, they would Note.
have been far likelier to have crucified him, then were the Jews themselves:
And who can reslve me, whether the penitent thief was not once guilty, and
actually consenting unto Christ's death? or whether such Christians as come
short in nothing, but that they have not Christ on earth in their power, will
not be one day found guilty or crucifying him again, though they could not act
it upon his person: besides the Saints are coheir^s with Christ, they are his
beloved ones, his glory, his Romans 8. 17 R^v. 2. 9. Psi. 108. 6 Ephesians 1. 23. 1
Cor. 12. 12. P^^. 105. 15 2 Cor. 8 23 Heb. ^3. (...) (...), (...).
spouse, nay they are his body, they are Christ himself, they are all A^ointed
of the Lord, and we are forbid to touch them: Oh let us not be longer guilty of
persecuting the least of them: And whe^eas Saint Paul exhorted the Hebrews
that they should not be forgetful to entertain strangers, because some
thereby had entertained Angels unawares; I humbly wi^h all Ch^istian people
would, in the fear of God, consider, whether in putting their Christian
brethren to death for matters of conscience and Religion only, they do not run
a thousand times greater hazard to spill the innocent blood of Gods chosen
people, his first born; whose names are written in heaven, and that it be
imputed to them to have Heb. 12. 23.
crucified the Lord himself again, far more wilfully then the Jews, because
we crucify him in his Saints, our brethren, whom we have both (...) and
known. Matthew. 25. 40. 45.


It is said in the Acts, Act. 18. 12, 13, 14, 16. that when Gallio was Deputy
of Achaia, the Jews made insurrection with one accord against Paul, and
brought him to the judgment feat, saying, This fellow perwadeth men to worship
God contrary to the Law, but Gaellio answered the Jews, and told them, if it
were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness, he would have done as equity
required, and herewith drove them from the judgment seat: now though no doubt
but God guided this proceeding of Gallio, that Paul might have the better
opportunity to preach the Gospel, so is Gallio his judgment more remarkable,
who at such a time and instant, as God had over him a special, and more then
ordinary providence could say, (though it is likely that he regarded alike the
Jewish and the Christian Religion, yet we who are under the Gospel may
especially learn it from him) that the worshipping of God in a Note.
different manner, though contrary to an established civil Law, according as
men find themselves bound in conscience, which must not be wavering or
doubting, ought not to be interpreted or accounted as wicked lewdness, or a
matter of wrong to those that were of another opinion, much less be punished
as such.

The passage of Gamaliel, Act. cap. 5. and what he said to dissuade the Jews
from persecuting the Apostles to death, is no less worth our serious
consideration: The Apostles having cured and converted multitudes of people,
verse. 18. the high Priest and all that were with him being full of indignation,
laid hands on the Apostles and put them into prison, but the Lord who never
forsakes those that trust in him, sent an Angel and brought them out again;
the Apostles according as the Angel bid them, went into the Temple to reach the
word of life, which when the Jews understood, they caused them to be
apprehended and brought before the Council that they might be put to death:
The Jews having finished their accusations, and the Apostles answered what God
inspired them with for their own defense, Gamaliel one of the Council, a
Pharisie, a great Doctor of the Law, and in reputation among the people, having
commanded the Apostles to withdraw, said unto them, verse. 35. Ye men of Israel,
take heed to your selves what ye intend to do concerning these men, and having
given examples of Theudas and Judas who for a while drawing much people to
them, were afterward dispersed, exhorted them to let the Apostles alone,
saying, v. 38. 39. if this counsel or this work be of God, ye cannot
overthrow is, lest happily yt be found even to fight against God; and the Jews
agreed with him: I know that most men now adays, either reflect little upon
these Scriptures, or account both Gamaliel and Gallio to have played the worldly
politicians in this business, and not being servent in their own Religion,
took care only to quiet the people for the present, alleging, that we must
not live like those that say, let the world go how it list, nor Object.
expect that God will relieve us when we dye still in the ditch, and cry God
help ut only; but I desire such to consider, that as the lukewarm are so
distastefull unto God, that he has declared himself to spue them Answ. Rev.
3. 16. Romans 10. 2 Jam. 2. 19. 20.
out; so he has also said, that men many times have a zeal without knowledge,
and that the wrath of man works not the righteousness of God, for which cause
James exhorts them to be slow to wrath.

Gamaliel and Gallio are not to be looked upon barely as politicians, who in
that respect might be biased, and carried away through their own private
interest, or that of State, but their reason should be truly valued by men of
moderate temper, not without zeal, the more the better so it be according to
knowledge, but I mean such men as are not engaged to Romans 10. 2
the contrary opinion: Gamaliels great argument was, that the Jews should
forbear to persecute the Apostles, because they ran a hazard of Note.
fighting against God, and this was no bare jealousy or fancy of Gamaliele,
but a most sacred truth; for we find that our Savior told Paul before he was
converted, that he persecuted him, whilst he held the garments of those that
stoned Steven, and haled the Saints both men and women up and down before
Magistrates and into prison. Act. 9. 4, 5. and 22. and 23. chap. And it is yet
further to be observed that these advices and counsels of Gallio and Gamaliel,
were not only grounded upon policy, reason and Religion, but were in favor of
the Apostles, and recorded by the Spirit of God, with the liberty and success
which ensued thereon in the Apostles freer preaching of the Gospel, which in a
kind of silent manner tells us they were guided by an especial providence to
become instruments of procuring Liberty of Conscience unto the Apostles, and
remain an example for all Christians to grant the sike to one another.

Will it not be acknowledged that the Bishops in Queen Mary's days, and
since, persecuted many Christians, and therein resisted Christ instead of
setting him up upon his throne? Yea some will say, but they Object.
were Papists in Q. Marie^ days, and Episcopacie is Antichristian, but
Presbytery or some other government may be jure divino, and will only suppress
Heresies, and settle a uniformity in the Church of Christ: I answer, that the
Bishops in Queen Mary's days, and since, whether Answ.
Papists or others, did then say as much, and with equal confidence in defense
of their coercive proceedings for preventing Schifines, and establishing
uniformity, and, that they had Gods word to back them in it, and though I am
fully assured, that God has been pleased to dif^nver unto us since, a greater
measure of his truth then ever, yet if a Presbytery, or other Ecclesiastical
government shall silence or persecute in whatsoever manner, such Christians as
are conscientious, pious in their actions, zealous for God, and painful in
propagating of the Gospel, though they differ in opinion, and hold some points
contrary to the current of the times, but are obedient to higher powers in
civil matters that such should be persecuted whether by Presbyteriall or other
government, I never yet heard other reason for it then what Antichrist himself
alleged so long since, nor do see any other likelihood from the politic
constitution of this State, much less can find evidence in Scripture, but it
may run the hazard, that future times, when God shall please to enlighten us
yet further, will acknowledge it to be erroneous, that it will appear in the
last day to have been a fighting against God, and persecuting of Christ, or at
least a resisting and quenching of the Spirit and gifts of God, which are
acknowledged to be in such men so silenced and opposed.

St. Paul in his Epistle to the Corinthians tells them, 1 Cor. 12, in the
beginning, There are diversities of gifts but one Spirit one Lord one Gods to
one, he says, is given the word of wisdom, to an other the word of knowledged
to one faith, and an other the gift of healing; to one the gift of (...) to an
other prophecy; to one discerning of spirits, to an other diverse kind of
tongues, and to an other the interpretation of tongues, but all these work by
one and the self same Spirit. And though all these are gifts of the Spirit and
that there is not any one of these but a man may have it, and be a reprobate,
for even of faith Paul himself says, 1 Cor. (...) though he had it in such a
degree as he could remove mountains if he had not charity withal, he were
nothing, yet it is said in the 7 verse of the 12. Chaper, That the
manifestation of the Spirit in the diversity of gifts, is given to profit with;
that is for the profit, and benefit of the Church to which these gifts were to
be communicated: now if all these gifts are from God, and if God gave them that
they might be improved or dispensed unto all Nations; nay, since in the third
verse of the same Chapter, it is revealed unto us, that no man can so much as
say, That Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Ghost: how can it be denied, but
that the silencing or persecuting of any man that has but one or more of these
gifts in him, Note.
because he wants some others, or has not all, is not a plain suppressing of
the Holy Ghost? which though given in a smaller measure (like him that had but
one talent in the Gospel, and was condemned to utter Matthew. 25.
darkness for not employing it) or if it had extended only to the saying that
Jesus is the Lord, were all given to profit by, and would doubtless
effectually prove profitable, if they were not unwarrantably quenched.

Suppose I were of the faith generally professed in New England, and had a
brother of the Presbyteriall Discipline in Scotland, who loving me as himself,
desired nothing so much as to conform me to his own opinion, I that ammo whit
inferior to him in affection, that I may be the better able to give account
of my own faith, free from the least doubting, but prepared to embrace any
truth which to me remains yet unrevealed, after I have tried it by the touch
stone of Gods word, and made use of such other helps as God has given me,
that I may be the stronger settled, and not seem obstinate in my opinion, but
especially hoping hereby, as St. Paul, Romans 9. 22. whilst he became all things
to all men, to convince my brother in the error of his ways, I render my
self complying upon his request, to hear or read whatsoever can be said in
the defense of Presbytery: Now when I have used all those lawful means which
he prescribed me, or could think any waves available to reduce a man to: that
opinion, and tell him notwithstanding, that I find not the least, scruple or
ground of doubting in that faith which before I made profession of; my brother,
who sees no greater error or weakness in me then in himself, has nothing
else to except against me, knows that I cannot be of what religion or opinion
I will my self, until I be fully convinced about the truth there of, and that
a bare doubting in point of conscience, would bring damnation on me, can I say,
my brother Presbyter in such a case, upon good, ground or reason, think I
ought to be silenced or persecuted in any, manner? Can there be a Law according
to Gods word to punish me for what lay not in my power to remedy nor may with a
safe conscience be dissembled? But it will be said, that this plyablenesse and
Object.
readiness to receive such truth as shall be discovered, may be counterfeit and
hypocritical, and that such as Scripture and reason do not convince, are
wilfully obstinate, or instate of reprobation, though they, know it not
themselves: To this I answer, That though it be said of Answ.
the Jews, This people is waxed gross, and their cares are dull of; hearing,
and their eyes have they closed, lest they should see with their eyes Act. 28.
27.
and hear with their ears, and under stand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them, yet it was not meant that every one of that
Nation was hardened, or of any particular person that he could be distinguished
from the rest, nay it is plain, there are no signs or tokens given us
infallibly to know an obstinate or reprobate heart by, for though it be said, A
good tree does not bring forth bad fruit, and you shall know Luke ^. 43, 44.
Act 22.
the tree by the fruit, and that of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of
bramble bushes grapes; yet we know that Paul persecuted, and was a blasphemer
to the last, even till he was vocally called by Christ from heaven; and the
same Christ when he was on earth said, No man can come unto me except Joh. 6.
44.
the Father draw him, and therefore we have express order to judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come who will bring to light the 1 Cor. 4. 5.
hidden things of darkness; and St. Paul says, Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that
judge an other man's servant, to his own master he stands or falls, yea
he shall be upheld, for God is able to make him stand?

We find in Matthew, Matthew. 17. 5. that the Apostles heard a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him:
And our Savior bid them tell no body thereof till he was risen again from the
dead: whence we may be informed, that Hear ye him, was not said so much to the
Apostles themselves, as to all Christians in their generations to the end of
the world; for if that vision, and that doctrine of Hear ye Christ; be not to
be taught till after our Savior be risen from the dead, after which time he
had but a few days to spend amongst them on earth, then must it follow, That
it is Christ still that speaks to us in his Gospel, and by the Ministers of his
Gospel, the power which the Ministers of the Church have, is the power of
Christ, who is the head of the Church, and though Christ as he is God, has
power equal with God, and all power was given unto him in Matthew; 28, 18. Joh.
18, 36
Heaven and in Earth; yet as he said his Kingdom was not of this world, so
neither may the Church employ the power of the world, or use such coercive
means in the government of his Kingdom, as men be forced to perform outward
obedience for fear, and do what they do for the Church or civil powers
sake, and not for Christ's, like unto those people who are led to worship the
Devil, lest he should do them hurt.

And as in a politic State, it is not safe to suffer a penny to be taken or
forced from any man in an illegal way; so much less may an Ecclesiastical
government and power, or the Church of Christ extend their jurisdiction beyond
the express and precise warrant of the Scripture Law, for Christ's power being
unlimited as he was God and Man, whosoever lays claim thereunto to exercise it
according to any other rule, subjects himself to the greatest temptation of
becoming a boundless Tyrant, and the people to be enthralled by the most
arbitrary and wretched tyranny and vassallage of any under heaven: 1. Because
they that take upon them this supremacy of expounding Scripture whether in
doctrine or discipline must say in effect, or infer by their proceedings, that
their dictates are the infallible truths of God, otherwise men will be apt to
think they had as good believe their own: Secondly, that it is infallibly Gods
will to have those dictates of theirs to be forced upon men's consciences: and
thirdly, that they are infallibly called thereunto, and guided by Gods Spirit
to see them executed; all which are the darling reasons and tenets of the
Papacy to uphold the spiritual Scepter, greater they cannot be, the very
Power and Spirit of God himself; as they pretend, and less would not be
color enough to force the people to receive them: Now I shall leave it to
every understanding Christian to think and judge, whether such as exercise the
same Note.
dominion and power over the conscience which the Pope does, and not give the
same, or as good a reason for it, may not be thought greater tyrants and
usu^pers in requiting such obedience and implicit faith to their own
abilities and strength, which the Pope is so modest as to acknowledge only due
to an infallibility, and that infallibility to be from God?

In civil affairs we see by experience that every man most commonly
understands best his own business, and such as do not, but rely upon the
managing and furelight of others, (...) they of what calling or condition
soever, in a few years run out at heels to the utter undoing of themselves and
whole families; besides we should think it a most gross solecisme, and
extravagant, course in any State which did make Laws and Statutes, that the
Subject might not go about and dispatch his worldly business, save in one
general prescript form and manner, as a thing most irrational and
inequitable, because it cannot possibly be suitable to the infinite occasions
and interests of a Kingdom, or lesser people: Nay, why are not all Arts and
Sciences thus manacled, if Divinity may be so much improved thereby? why have
not each of them their respective theses, positions, and conclusions limited
and assigned them? why are Physicians permitted to make experiments, and kill
men after what fashion they please? Surely this kind of Inquisition,
Government and Discipline, should first have practiced upon other Arts and
Sciences, without daring to tamper with Theology and Conscience; before it had
proceeded master of all the rest: Besides, as our Savior in the Parable, where
the more early laborers murmured, that the latter comers should have equal
reward with them, said, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? So we know that every man is Matthew. 20 15.
desirous to do with his own as he thinks good himself, (especially when
others receive no wrong thereby, as in the said Parable) and if it Ver. 13.
thrive not in his own way, he may thank himself, and will like better of
it, and be content with what he does himself though it prove ill not so, if
others have the manage and ordering of it against his own desire: but in
spiritual matters it holds much stronger, and concerns men to be more
circumspect and wary, as the good or ill there of reads unto eternity:
wherefore since it is as possible for them or him to err, who take upon them
to conduct me to heaven, as I my self, since it is granted that I must give
account, repent and believe for my self, and Romans 14. 12. 1 Cor. 2. 11.
cannot do either by proxy; since no man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of the same man which is within him; since my salvation ought to be
more dear unto my self then to any else; since if I miscarry through mine
own choice and will, I shall easier acknowledge my destruction to be from my
self, and declare Gods judgments to be just; If I perish by mine own folly,
it is the loss of one, but if misled by others, we all fall into the ditch
together, with an aggravation of our condemnation, to me that relied finally
upon others in a business of the greatest concernment that possibly could
befall me, without other possibility or aslurance of doing well, than by an
implicit faith; and to them that took upon them to be guide and pilote unto
others in a coercive way especially, when they knew not how to save themselves.
For all these respects, and infinite others which might be heaped up, I desire
every Christian heart, in the fear of God, to consider, and revolve in his
saddest and most retired thoughts, whether it be not a much safer way in
spiritual affairs, for every particular man to understand his own estate
betwixt God and himself, and manage his own business; whether it be not a
greater infringement of Christian liberty and propriety, to have burdens and
impositions laid upon the conscience, Note.
whereby a poor soul lives in hateful bondage upon earth, and subjects it
self unto perpetual torments in hell hereafter, without a means or
possibility to help himself, though he be sensible of the miserable state and
condition wherein he is, or apprehend the inevitable destruction whereto they
lead him?

If the redeeming civil rights and privileges which has made this present
Parliament so dear, be acceptable in so high a nature as to engage the
Kingdom in a war for their defense; how much more will the Liberty of
Conscience, which transcends the other, as far as spiritual liberty does
temporal, engage it still further at their devotions? The civil Laws permit
Subjects to defend their estates with Swords and Guns; but what kind of Laws
are those which expose men naked, to have their Religion and Consciences
assaulted? The civility of the French Nation is such, that in regard the
Protestants, though they have a liberty of profession, being most commonly
fewer in number in what ever company they happen, lest the Protestants should
there with be adash'd as wanting courage, and not enjoy an equal liberty and
freedom of conversation with the Papists; in this respect; they are so
temperate and discreet, that it is held an inseemly and uncivil part, for a
Papist to ask an other what Religion he is of; whereas in England it is
ordinary with Protestants, to reproach one another with the nickname of
Puritan or Separatist, Presbyterian or Independent, even those which we cannot
but acknowledge to be conscientious and jealous of offending God in any thing,
and that which renders us inexcusable, is, that many times when we cannot
colourably fix any of these distinctions upon a man, who differs from us in
opinion, or discourse only, we are so apt to term him malignant or Popishly
affected, though never any Law was yet made to declare them such.

It is usual with gamesters to say they had rather lose their own money, then
that others should lose it for them; and surely if we took as much delight in
saving our souls, as gamesters do in losing of their money, we would quickly
choose to hazard the loss of our own souls our selves, rather then forgo the
present joy and comfort of endeavoring the salvation of them by our own, and
not by an implicit faith.

Parents or such as bear affection, when God pleases to call their friends or
children out of this world by sickness, have great contentment, that they were
near at hand to send for the Physicians, and provide such remedies, as if God
had pleased, were likeliest to prevail for their recovery; how much more then
will it increase the miseries of the damned, when they shall think and see how
foolish and sottish they have been, to take no care or thought of making their
salvation sure, by trying of the spirits, and searching whether they were in
the truth or no? How will children curse their parents; servants their masters,
and whole Nations the State and Government wherein they were borne and bred,
which instead of teaching them to prove all things and 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
hold fast that which is good, have brought them up in blind devotion, and
superstitious idolizing of whatsoever their ancestors or themselves believed,
saying, they ought to be wise unto sobriety, and not prefer their own
studies or judgments, before the Acts and Ca^^on^ of Synods and whole
Kingdoms? It is true that Christ promised he would send the Spirit which
should lead them into all truth, and that where two or Joh. 16. 7. 13. Matthew.
18. 20.
three be gathered together in his name he will be in the midst of them, from
whence, and such like Scriptures it will follow; that a Church, Synod or
Council cannot err in fundamentalls, no more then elect Christian fall
finally from grace; so long as such a Synod, or Church keeps close unto the
Scriptures, and herein all Christians agree, and join in one confession, that
the Bible is the very truth and word of God, but when a Protestant Synod or
Papal Council shall go further, and Paraphrase, make Inferences,
Consequences. Conclusions, Canors, and the like; or say, this is the genuine,
full and only sense and meaning of such a Text, and not as their respective
adversaries object, herein they are both, though not equally, in a possibility
offerring, and cannot be infallibly sure of truth, but as each of them is ant
to abound in their own sense, thinking their peculiar exposition (...) it, and
cannot choose but be swayed there with, so ought they equally, to leave all such
as differ from them, as large a liberty and freedom to enjoy their own
opinions; for though the Members of one Synod may be more learned, wise, and
outwardly conscientious, and zealous in Religion then another, yet these are no
infallible grounds, and tokens of Gods greater illumination and presence with
one then with the other, and though a third and more superior Synod, should
see that one of the two former is in an error, and advise them that they shall
do well to assent unto the other, yet this Synod which has two to one against
it self, neither may, not can forsake their own opinions, upon the ^ate
authority of the other two, before they see clear evidence in Scripture,
whereby their own reason finds it self convinced: And since in that text
according to John the Evangelist before mentioned, where it is said, cap. 16.
13, 14, 15. The Spirit shall lead them into all truth; it appears, that, that
truth is no other, then what the blessed Spirit had heard and received of
Christ's, then much less may frail mankind whether assembled in a Synod, or
otherwise, think any thing of their own addition, or but varied in the least
tittle, to be infallible, or of equal authority with Scripture: nay, since
neither Christ, nor his Disciples thought good to force men to receive their
Gospel, how much more presumptuous is it in men of the same passions and
infirmities with others, to impose Cannons and resolutions upon the consciences
of their brethren?

Christ said unto his Disciples, Matthew. 7. 6. Give not that which is holy unto
dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine lest they trample them under their
feet: and when a woman of Canaan be sought him, unto whom upon the third
motion, he answered, cap. 15. 26, 28. O woman great is thy faith; yet upon her
first and second deprecation, she could obtain no better answer, then, It is
not meet to take the childrens bread, and cast it unto dogs: And in David's
Psalms, Psalm. 50. 16, 17. God said unto the wicked, What have thou to do to
take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my
wor^s behind thee? Yet these Persecutors and Inquisitons, which compel others
to communion with them, do not barely prostitute the sacred Ordinances of God,
by a^table (...)cing and alluring a mixed multitude to abuse them, but far more
^o naturally, and with greater impiety, because spiritual, then those of
Sodom tempt provoke and force them by ^^^^ny several ways, to ravish and
deflowre the Church their spiritual Mother, and dearest Spouse of Christ: Nay,
suppose Christ Jesus himself should come again personally, and llive amongst
us upon earth, I would very saine be assured, how he might be free of being
persocuted, and crucified again, according to the principalls of such
government, if he should either work miracles, or teach, or speak any thing
besides the rule of man's inventions, or above the capacity of our frail and
carnal apprehensions.

It is acknowledged that St. Paul says, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject
unto the higher powers; but this only is meant in civil matters, and not such
as may concern the inward governing and reglement of the soul, or affect the
conscience with remorse and guiltiness: for first, we find in several other
texts, that if the difference be between Gods prerogative, and the powers on
earth, It is better to they God then man; and Act. 5. 29.
that Paul meant no less, appears clearly in the same Chaper, where he says
Romans 13. 5. Ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake, which cannot possibly succeed, if they commanded any thing
contrary in conscience, or the divine Supremacy, unto which only as it is
acknowledged even by the light of Nature the conscience is primarily subject,
and not unto any other Law or Court, without express warrant and dispensation.
Secondly, though we must be subject unto all Powers, because the Powers and
Ministers are of God, yet we are not bound to be subject to any of them,
farther then their known respective powers extend, for the power which is
assumed beyond their bounds is not of God, and so the reason which Paul urges,
why we must be obedient falls to ground, I mean in respect of active
obedience, and for passive especially toward those that are supreme, I refer
the Reader to such as have so lately argued it so largely.

I de^^^e not to seem as thinking that Christians may live as they list, for
when Paul told the Galatians, Gal. 5. 13. that they were called unto liberty,
he bid them withal, not use it for an occasion to the flesh; of that
government is ever a whit the less necessary in any Church, State, on
Commonwealth, for even a Corporation, or family cannot well subsist without
it: but it may not be imagined, that God did not prescribe and leave express
warrant, how he would have his own house governed. Paul tells Timothy that he
wrote those things unto him, hoping to come in person shortly, but in case he
carried longer that Timothy might know how he ought to behave himself in the
house of God, 1 Timothy 2. 14. and as Paul thought these directions enough, and
Timothy might not go beyond commission, so neither may we employ any other
means, or instruments to uphold Christ's government or household; then such as
were by him prescribed, which St. Paul says, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. are only
Spiritual, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing which exalts is self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ: And he said to the Ephesians, Put on the armor of God
that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil, for we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers of darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high places, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12. The armor
prescribed by him was only spiritual, and therefore their enemies cannot be
imagined otherwise then spiritual. But if civil powers, or others, have
authority in matters of Religion, then their commands and Laws in that respect,
must be as absolute, as in any other, and ought equally to be obeyed, which
would engage the whole Kingdom still to the Discipline of the
Common-Brayer-Book, and government of Episcopacy which for the present stand
established by sundry Acts of Parliament unrepealed; and all Puritans,
Non-conformists or Protestant separatists of what sort soever, are as subject
to persecution as any Papists, which appears by the respective Acts themselves
in that behalf, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. cap. 5. and 6. Edw 6. cap. 1. 1. Eliz. cap.
2. And if Subjects may say that Episcopacie and the Service-Booke are
Antichristian, contrary to the word of God, and may be their own judges in that
respect, what hinders but they may say so too concerning Presbytery, or any
other government? Wherefore there remains no modium, either a Liberty of
Conscience must be permitted us to enjoy our own opinions in matters of
Religion, or else there is a necessity of being liable and subject against
Conscience, whenever the civil powers which surely are no more infallible
then Ecclesiastical, shall happen to enact or stablish any thing else, less
consonant and agreeing to the word of God.

And whereas the 15. Chapter of the Acts is commonly alleged, from whence they
deduce the authority and use of Synods, with a supremacy of power in matters
Ecclesiastical, I say that whatsoever is pretended from thence in behalf of
Synods, Papists have long since said the same, and far more in favor of their
General Counsels, but that there is no ground at all in that place, neither
for Synods, or General Counsels, in that way which is pretended by either of
them, besides sundry others, will manifestly appear by these few reasons:
First, because Paul and Barnabas with the others sent from Antioch, did not
appear as Commissioners or Representatives at the consultation of Jerusalem,
jointly to consult with the Apostles and Elders about the Act. 15. 4. 5.
matter in question, but only made relation of their message, as bare
messengers. 2. The Text it self says, they should go to Jerusalem unto the
Apostles and Elders about this question, and not unto a Synod. Verse. 2.
Thirdly, the Apostles and Elders of Jerusalem only, came together to consider
of the business, as appears by collating verse. 6. with verse. 2. and 4. the
multitude which were then present, being perhaps standers Verse. 12.
by, as I may so say, or rather the Brethren also, who if they did consult in
v. 23. they were the Brethren of Jerusalem, the naming whereof evidences more
plainly, that there were no others who consulted. Fourthly, Synia and Cilicia
had no Commissioners there, for if they had, they would have been named as well
as Paul and Barnabas, when the Apostles, Elders and Brethren of Jerusalem wrote
their letters, and the decree Verse. 23.
should have been published in the name of the Commissioners, and
Representatives of Antioch, Syria, Cilicia, and all others that did consult, as
well as of the Apostles, Elders, and Brethren of Jerusalem, had they been all
assembled in a Synod, and so much more would it have obliged their respective
Churches, whom they represented: But perhaps it may be not improbably
conjectured that Paul and Barnabas as they passed from Antioch through Cilicia
and Syria, understanding that the Churches there were no less disquieted with
the same false doctrines, of their own accords informed the Apostles, Elders
and Brethren of Jerusalem so much at some more private season, whereupon they
joined them together in their Christian care, and directed their letters
jointly to all the Gentiles of Antioch, Syria and Cilicia, because it was
equally available to them all, though the question was only moved by those of
Antioch^ Fifthly, the Apostles and Elders answer of Jerusalem does not imply
any necessity of those other Churches submission unto their determination,
otherwise then infallibly inspired men, as appears by ver. 28. Sixthly, the
result of the Assembly, was not published, nor the letters wrote as from a
Synod, but in the name of the Church of Jerusalem to the Churches of Antioch,
Syria and Cilicia, for it says verse. 22. It pleased the Apostles and Elders
with the whole Church to send chosen men, etc. and verse. 23. The Apostles and
Elders and Brethren send greeting, whereas had they been assembled in
Pontificalibus or as a Synod, they would never have termed themselves by the
denomination of a Church: And seventhly, they imposed not their decrees with
Anathema's, or upon the Churches utmost peril of fire and sword, besides
whatsoever was then decreed by that pretended Synod, was only that Christians
should abstain from means offered unto Idols, Verse. 29.
from blood, things strangled and from fornication, with an express preamble,
That it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and them not lay Verse. 28.
any greater burden then those necessary thing, but the meat offered unto
Idols was quickly dispensed with, and for blood and things strangled, 1 Cor.
8. 8. and 10. Chap.
we take liberty unto our selves; but if Synods and civil Magistrates would
raise no further impositions, for matters of Religion, nor impose other
penalties then are there specified, it would not be so burdensome, or so
slavish a bondage to Gods Saints, and most conscientious Christians, as they
have been feign to prevent by flight, or live under, to the great vexation of
their souls, and perhaps not altogether without a doubting conscience.

But why do not Synods begin all their decrees, with, It pleases the Holy
Ghost and us? etc. this me thinks is more plausible and easier to be believed,
then the forcing of their decrees and votes upon others can be digested; for if
any man tell me, he is sometime miraculously inspired, I have no infallible
means to disprove him, though it were false, and sometimes I may see just
inducements to believe him, but I cannot possibly believe what he propounds
unto me, contrary to mine own reason and understanding: and yet though the
Apostles, Elders, and Church of Christ in Jerusalem, were immediately inspired,
and spoke in the Holy Ghosts name, yet they fixed not to their decrees any
other conjuration or threatenings, then, If you do these things, you shall do
well. Act 15. 29


Gregory Nazienzen could say that he never saw good end of General Counsels;
and Hugo Grotius in these latter times, both eminent Nazienz. ad Pr^co. Epist.
55. Grotii Apolog. cap. 6. p. 108.
for learning, and a friend to the Church Government of the united Provinces,
does notwithstanding affirm, that he could never understand how Synods can
prove a singular remedy for reconciling differences in Religion: and indeed as
it may easily be observed, that General Counsels and Synods, have seldom had
good success, so for the most part, it may easily appear, that there could
not much better be expected, for commonly the choice of such as were sent
thither, was factious or siding at the least, and the whole proceedings
accordingly, they sought rather to decide matters by a major part of voices,
then by mature debating and arguing of the question, they did take advantages
as well for alleging their own reasons, as concealing, or over-shadowing the
reasons of such as were of contrary opinions, that they might not be heard,
debated, or thoroughly understood, and being in all respects watchful, how they
might with craft and sub^^ty circumvent, and over reach one another, to
compass their private interests, or indirect ends, which the respective
parties that sent them thither did principally aim at, amongst other
stratagems and policies, it has not been the least to lay hold of such times
and seasons, to make their motions or forbear, when such, or such were present
or absent, which might best further or hinder, by seconding or contradicting of
their arguments.

But by Histories and Records of what passed betwixt all the Protestant Nations
almost, since the Reformation, it appears plainly, that though in some
Countries, and at some times, when certain hot spirits were predominant, there
has been for a spirit, very bitter persecuting of Protestants for difference
in Religion, yet their opinions and intentions when confiderately resolved were
still settled for Liberty of Conscience; and Calvin tells us, That the holy
Bishops [of ancient Instit. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 3.
times] did not exercise their authority in fining, imprisoning, and civil
punishments, and for his own judgment in this particular, he says, Though he
write a whole tract about punishing of Heretics, Ibid. sect. 16.
yet he could not choose but acknowledge so much truth in a few lines only as
confutes the whole Treatise, where he tells us, That as the Church has no
power of forcing of its own, so neither may it require such of civil
Magistrates, to employ it in a coercive way: And Beza, God never gave power to
man for imposing Laws upon the Conscience, nor can endure that any body
besides himself should bear sway or dominion over the minds of men, de
Haeret. a Civil. Magist. puniendis. The States of the united Provinces, when
they first began to free themselves from the Spanish tyranny, declared, That
they took not up Arms for matter of Religion, as appears by letters which the
States of Holland at that time wrote unto those of Amsterdam, quoted by Hugo
Grotius in his Apology, of those that governed Holland, Cap. 2. p. 24.
and the neighboring Nations in 1618. for then Amsterdam, and several other
chief Towns were absolutely Popish for matter of Religion; and yet all those
Provinces and several Towns did unammously agree, that, though they joined
their force against the Spaniard and common enemy, for redemption and
maintenance of their privileges and immunities, yet the liberty and freedom
of Conscience should be reserved to all, and each of them respectively: The
Protestants of Switzerland and Germany have published to the same purpose in
their Confessions and Manifesto's, and even of latter years, when the Synod of
Dort was first thought on to be assembled, most of the States and Towns
declared themselves before hand, that it was not their intentions that the said
Synod should oblige them unto any thing that was not agreeable to their laws
and government, which, as I said before, had abundantly established and
ratified a Liberty of Conscience to every particular person that inhabited
amongst them: And though upon the determination of the same Synod, in the point
of Predestination against Arminians, there ensued suddenly in some few places
by the instigation of a most violent party, seconded by the Prince, a fierce
persecution and banishment of diverse Ministers and others which were of that
opinion, with a total silencing and inhibiting them to preach, yet they were
quickly restored again, and have now their places of public meetings, and
greater liberty then ever, and that in Amsterdam and Utreckt, where they had
suffered most, to the very change and alteration of their government, as may be
seen more at large in Grotius his Apology: But the States of Frisia in July
1622. put out a severe edict which is to be seen in Print, that none of the
Dort Synod decrees should be put in execution throughout their jurisdiction,
until they were by themselves, in their own Courts and Magistrates approved
on; and in fine, I do not find so much as any one place, or City throughout
the united Provinces, where any one decree which that Synod passed, is at
present coercively enforced upon the inhabitants in any kind; but contrary
wise it is well known to all, how they permit people of all Religions to live
amongst them, and though they have continual wars with Spain, and Papists in
some Towns amongst them have more liberty then in others, yet every where their
freedom is great, and though in some places they are one fourth or one half
part Papists, yet do not the States subject themselves to be terrified or
troubled with jealousies or other plots and treacheries then in punishing the
authors at such times as they happen to be discovered; I wish it were well
weighed, whether the great liberty and freedom of the Gospel which they
permit, That Christ be preached whether through contention or of good will, as
Paul desired, and rejoiced at, may Phil. 1. 18.
not be a great means to prevail with God Almighty thus to prosper them
although they may otherwise have failings and weaknesses, which worldly and
carnal policies are most apt to be overtaken with.

If the whole manner of Gods worship were revealed unto us, or any State or
Church, and that such a Church or State could be certain to be in the present
possession, and practice of the whole truth, without any mixture of
superstition and Idolatry, then would there be far more color and ground for
erecting an Inquisition Office, or Spiritual Court to bring a Nation, a
Country, or all Christendom unto a uniformity both of Discipline and
Doctrine, but this appears plainly to be otherwise in both respects: First, no
Church can possibly be sure to be without a mixture of error and superstition,
in that it is necessary there should be herefies, that they which are approved
might be made 1 Cor. 11. 19. Matthew. 24. 24. 2 Pet. 2. 1. 1 John 4. 1. 1 Timothy 4.
1
manifest, and besides we are foretold that there shall be false Christ's and
false Prophets, and for that cause we are commanded to try the Spirits whether
they be of God or no: Then secondly, God is pleased only to discover the Gospel
to us by peecemeals, as we become worthy and capable of the mysteries and truth
thereof, which our Savior testifies in John, John 16. 12, 13. I have yet many
things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now, howbeit when the Spirit
of truth is come, He will guide you into all truth: Now though the Spirit which
is the Holy Ghost be Math. 28. 20.
come, and is with his Saints unto the end of the world, teaching and
instructing them in so many wholesome truths, as are sufficient for their
salvation, yet most evident it is that God still discovers new truths or a
greater measure of the same truths by obedience, unto which he intends to bring
unto salvation such as are then living, or to be borne hereafter; and this
appears further from St. Paul's words to the Corinthians, where he says, We
know but in part, and when I was a child I spoke as a child, understood and
thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things, 1
Cor. 13. 9. 11. Strong meat belongs to men that are of a full age, Heb. 5.
13. In another place, Who is sufficient for these things? And I have fed you
with milk and not with meat, for hitherto ye 2 Cor. 2. 16. 1 Cor. 3. 2, 3.
were not able to bear it, neither yet are ye able, for ye are yet carnal:
And of himself though he were extraordinary and miraculously gifted out of a
sanctified zeal magnifying himself unto the Philipians, he says, Not as
though I were already perfect, but forgetting these things which are behind,
and ^eaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the
mark, etc. Phil. 13. 12, 13, 14. Besides, if all Christians were equally
enlightened, and had the same measure and strength of faith and knowledge, it
would have been needless for the Apostle to exhort as to bear with one
another, there would have been no occasion for such as are strong to comport
the weak, not all in general to bear one another burden, which is required of
us as the fulfilling of the Law of Christ, Romans 15. 1. Gal. 6. 2. But the same
cause which made the Corinthians incapable of meat, such further truths and
mysteries as St. Paul had to discover unto them, resides in us doubtless, and
that in as great a measure, which is carnality, and consequently witholds Gods
Spirit from revealing a great part of his blessed will unto us, otherwise then
as we grow less carnally minded, and more spiritual.

And whereas it will be said by some, that they have all the principalls Object.
and fundamentalls of Religion revealed unto them, whereby they may be wise
unto salvation, which is as much as they are obliged to, and desire no more: I
crave leave to answer such with another question or Answ.
two, and ask, Do you not sometimes pray, that Gods will may be done Matthew 6.
10. and 5 48. Phil. 2. 5. Ephesians 4. 13.
on earth, as it is in heaven? And are you qualified to do your part thereof?
Are you perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect? Is the same mind in you
which is in Christ Jesus? Unless you have attained to this perfection,
according to the measure and fullness of Christ Jesus, there is yet a part,
which unless you use all possible means to arrive to, though I cannot tell
you when, or whether you shall or no, I see no ground whereby you may be sure,
as yet, to have that full proportion, either of truth or knowledge, which you
ought to have; much less how you can reasonably excuse the obstructing, as
much as in youlyes, the free passage of the Gospel, the limiting and stinting
of all spiritual gifts, with the quenching of Gods blessed Spirit, all which
are sent for the farther instruction and illumination.

Paul tells the same Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2. 14. That the natural man receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him,
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned: And our
Savior told Peter, Matthew. 16. 17 That flesh and blood had not revealed it unto
him, but his Father which was in heaven: And St. Peter exhorts them to grow in
grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. All which
are undeniable arguments, that though a Christian live never so long, yet he
both may, and ought still to grow from grace to grace, and from knowledge to
knowledge, continually aiming, Ephesians. 4. 13.
and endeavoring, until he arrive to a perfect man according to the measure
of stature and fullness of Christ, in both which respects an inquisition or
persecution for matters of Religion may not be tolerated: First, because it
would as much as in us lies, still withold such saving truth and knowledge as
yet undiscovered, and unto which we are to attain by degrees only, for not any
of them but at first sight and hearing, is accounted heresy to most men, and
much ado there is before we will embrace it: And secondly, in that persecution
for Religion, would render us altogether incapable of ever purging and
reforming our selves from such erroneous doctrines and superstitions, as are
amongst us for the present, and what would this be otherwise then a mere form
of godliness, but denying the power thereof, from which Timothy was ordered to
turn away? 2 Timothy 3. 5. 7. But as was said before, Matthew. 5. 48. our Savior
commands us to be perfect even as our heavenly Father is perfect; and in that
form of prayer which he taught us, cap. 6. 10. we were ordered to make
request, That Gods will may be done in earth as it is in heaven, unto which
height of godliness we may be sure not to be arrived, being still so much
further off, as we apprehend our selves to have attained it, forbearing to
press forwads, as St. Paul said to the Philipians, Phil. 3. 14. 15. I press
toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: let
us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded, and if in any thing you be
otherwise minded God shall reveal even this unto you: And S. Peter in his
first Epistle general, exhorts those Cap. 2. ^. 2.
Christians, As newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the word that
they may grow thereby, not that they should think themselves to have attained
either unto a perfection and fullness of knowledge, or purity of profession,
both which must be supposed, or else the groundwork Note.
and foundation whereon they build their Inquisition house for settling a
uniformity, is so much more unwarrantable and unsound.

The Parable of our Savior, Matthew. 13. 29, 30. wherein he forbids the pulling
up the tares lest they pull up the good wheat with them, and commands, That
both tares and wheat be let grow together till harvest, seems to me a full
argument that the State should not be forwards in putting any to death, save
such as are expressly warranted by the word of God, but this place makes
especially against persecution for matters of Religion; for though every body
can distinguish tares from corn, yet it is not so with heresies and errors in
point of Doctrine; besides, the outward man may so conform himself if he
will, as that it is impossible for the world to find him out, because they
cannot arrive to the heart, and what ever external means may be used, they
work only upon the body, and cannot reach the soul: But persecution for
Religion does not only contradict the Scripture, but is contrary to common
sense and reason, as will appear if you consider, that, although we say
proverbially, facile credimus, quod libenter volumus; yet a man of himself
cannot possibly believe what he himself desires to believe, before his
judgment and understanding be convinced, so that unless it be a good
argument, to prevail upon a man's judgment and understanding, to say, believe
this or that point of doctrine upon penalty of losing your ears, or the like,
it must needs be extravagant and unjust to practice it: let us not then go
against our own reason, and the Scripture where it is said, That though Paul
plant, and Apollo water, it is God that gives increase: And our Savior tells
us, That no man can come to 1 Cor. 3. 6 Joh. 6. 44. 63. 65.
him except the Father draw him, that it is the Spirit which quickneth, and
that the flesh profits nothing.

There is yet another place of Scripture which speaks more plainly, letting
all Inquisitors and Persecutors know, that though they had the spirit of
divination and discerning, wherewith they could be certain to have discovered
such as preach the Gospel out of strife and envy, and not sincerely, yet they
are not to silence them, but be glad that the Gospel be preached in a weak and
erroneous manner, then not at all, for even as a man that holds fast with his
hands, if his feet slip, will recover himself again, so if Christ the
foundation be kept, though for the present they may preach and teach many a
false doctrine, yet we may be certain that all rotten unsound superstructures
and erroneous tenets shall fall down in Gods good time and season, whilst the
foundation remains sure for ever: He that has given us Christ, will with him,
but at his own good pleasure give us all things; Paul thought this was a good
argument, and so far bare with all men's infirmities, that as Romans 3. 32
he says of himself to the end he might have opportunity to preach the
Gospel, he became all things to all men, that by all means he might save 1 Cor
9. 20, 21, 22.
some, unto the Jews as a Jew that he might gain the Jews, to them that are
under the Law, as under the Law, and to them that were without Law, as without
Law, that he might gain both; and lest you might think him a li^ertine in all
this, and without Law to God, he tells you he was all this while under the Law
to Christ, and doubtless did him no small service in thus complying: But that
you may guess in what manner and how far forth he had been indulgent at such
other times, the relation whereof we do not find recorded, take what he (...)
unto the Philippians. Phil. 1. 16. 17. 18, 19. Some preach Christ even of envy
and strife, and some also upon good will, the one preach Christ of contention,
not sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds, but the other of love,
knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel: what then? notwithstanding
every way, whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is preached, and I therein
do rejoice, yea and will rejoice, for I know that this shall turn to my
salvation through your prayers, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

Yea will some say great shame it were if we should not rejoice that Christ be
truly preached in what manner soever; but such as we silence and persecute
though they confess and preach Christ in words, yet they hold certain
erroneous tenets which strike at the foundation, and overthrow Christianity: I
desire such to remember those Scriptures which say, that, Whosoever is borne of
God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin
because he is borne of God: Whosoever ^ Joh. 3. 9.
believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life: And whosoever shall
confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in John. 3
13 (...) 4 15
God: Now as we know that David though he committed adultery and murder, was
borne of God notwithstanding this text, because it means only that God imputes
not sin unto them that are borne of God; so he that believes in God, and
confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, though he do together with this
foundation, hold certain points which may seem to cross it, and be in a great
degree erroneous, but contrary to his own intention, it is both very possible
and probable, that such a one notwithstanding shall not perish, but God
dwells in him, and he in God.

In the very Bible we find several texts and passages which seem to thwait
and contradict themselves, yet we are certain, that the whole Scripture being
the inspiration of one, and the same blessed Spirit, cannot but be at unity
within it self, and all good Christians are fully assured thereof, though they
be not able sometimes to make it appear so to their weak and carnal
understandings; and in such cases we have the example of St. Paul, Romans 11. 13.
the great Apostle of the Gentiles, who though he testified of himself, that he
gave his judgment as one 1 Cor. 7. 25. 40.
that had obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful, and thought that he also
had the Spirit of God, yet having waded into the mystery of Predestination, so
far as his own reason could arive, burst out into a most devout admiration, O
the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge Romans 11. 33.
of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out.

In S. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, chap. 3. 28. it is said, Therefore we
conclude that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law: And St.
James says, James 2. 24. Ye see then how that by works a man is justified,
and not by faith only: Now as we are fully assured that these two Scriptures
though they differ so much literally, are notwithstanding not only in their
own being reconcilable, but even in our shallow capacities and apprehensions:
And as God had good cause why he counted Paul faithful and put him into the
Ministry, who was before 1 Timothy 1. 12, 13.
a blasphemer and persecuter: So we may safely think, that God can much more
(after the manner of men be it spoken) tell how to prosper their endeavors,
and bring unto salvation, such as believe in him, and confess Jesus to be the
Son of God, for his word and promise are engaged and cannot be frustrated
through their weaknesses and unsoundnesse in some points of Discipline,
Doctrine, or of both: But it will be objected, Object.
why should such be suffered to preach Christ, who withal mix unsound
doctrine, since there may be teachers enough besides, who are all orthodox and
unquestionable? I answer, That this is not the true state of the case, for that
the Puritans or other conscientious Christians Answ.
hold their own teachers to be the soundest, and if they be silenced, conceive
they are bound, without power of dispencing with themselves to hear none at
all, rather then such with whom they cannot possibly join or be present
without a doubting and condemning conscience; Romans 14. 23. Matthew. 13. 29, 30.
so that at the very best this can be but a pulling up of good wheat together
with the tares, which as was said before, our Savior would not have so much as
hazarded and endangered; or a doing evil that good Romans 3. 8.
may come of it, which is as absolutely forbidden.

I will therefore forbear to make any further application of Paul's rejoicing
so Christ were preached in whatsoever manner, but beseech with meekness all
such as read it, to pause a little and consider, that since Paul rejoiced in
whatsoever way that Christ was preached, whether of contention, envy, pretense,
or in truth, how inexcusable will all those be that persecute or silence such
as preach him in any other manner then they themselves prescribe, whereby many
eminent abilities and gifts have been smothered and lost: To the same purpose
is that place in St. Marks Gospel, where John in the name of the Apostles
tells our Savior, saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name,
and he follows not us, and We forbad him because he follows not us, but
Jesus said, forbid him not, for there is no man which shall do a miracle in my
name that can lightly speak evil of me, he that is not against us, is on our
part, Mark 9. 38, 39, 40.

Paul tells the Hebrews, how He that despised Moses law dyed without mercy
under two or three witnesses; and asks them, how much sorer punishment Heb.
10. 28, 29.
they supposed such should be thought worthy of, who have trodden under foot
the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing, which is a plain evidence, that though such as
live under the Gospel, and neglect or despise the means of coming to the
knowledge, or yet speak against the truth thereof, deserve greater punishment
then those that violated the law of Moses, which was certain death in the
mouth of two or three witnesses, yet he says not that it ought to be so under
the Gospel; but though he aggravate the crime as far more heinous under the
Gospel, yet he declines to say they should be punished corporally in this life,
and plainly insinuates that it must be left until the day of judgment, as
appears by the coherence with the words which follow, where he brings the Lord
in, saying, Vengeance is mine, and I will recompense it: and again, Ver. 30.
31.
The Lord shall judge his people: It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God: And this is yet more manifest, if we consider that there had
been thousands of those which thus rejected and violated the Gospel which then
had not been punished with death according to the Note.
law of Moses, and yet Paul for all this did not blame those Christians for
omitting to do corporal execution on them, or leave any order that the civil
Magistrate should afterward have such power when they became Christian: And if
Paul tells Titus that a Bishop must not be soon angry, nor a striker; and
Peter bids the Elders take the oversight Tit. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
of Gods flock, not being Lords over Gods heritage, but as ensamples to the
flock; how shall a Presbyter that is a striker, or that Lords it over the
flock of Christ be justified? or how can he be said to be less then a
striker, that passes sentence of condemnation to banishment, imprisonment, and
death, or not to Lord it over the flock of Christ, that imposes laws upon their
consciences?

But did these persecuters of God and good men consider, that to be persecuted,
is a mark and sign of the true Church, and consequently to persecute, an
infallible character of unsound Christians and the Church malignant, in charity
we ought to think they might likely be reclaimed, I shall therefore entreat
them for their own direction to call to mind, what St. Paul says to the
Galathians, viz. Now we, Brethren Gal. 4. 28, 29.
as Isaac was, are the children of promise, but as then he that was borne after
the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the Spirit, even so it is now:
This text declares how the true Church and true Believers are children of the
promise, figured out in Abel, Isaac and Jacob, persecuted by Cain, Genesis 4. 8.
cap. 16. 11 12. cap. 17. 41.
Ismael, Esau, and their posterity, children of the bondwoman, teaching us in
express words, that as those which persecuted in the Old Testament were not
the Elect or children of the promise, so now the best servants of God were
persecuted under the Gospel; which will yet appear more plainly to such as
have their understanding darkened, if they reflect likewise upon these other
Scriptures: He that loves not his brother is not of God, for this is the
message that we heard from the beginning, 1 John 3. 10, 11, 12.
that we should love one another, not as Cain, who was of the wicked one, and
slew his brother: and wherefore slew he him? because his works were evil, and
his brothers righteous: And our Savior told his Disciples, Matthew. 10. 16. Joh.
16. 20.
I send you as sheep in the midst of wolves; ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice.

But if the practice of persecution for difference in matters of Religion were
a sign of the true Church, then that Church were likeliest to be the truest
Church that did most persecute others, which I believe Note.
will be denied by all Protestants, or else they must condemn themselves, in
suffering the Papists to go beyond them in persecuting others: and secondly, if
persecution were a note of the true Church, it would instigate and encourage
all States and Churches to double and increase their persecutions, until each
of them had attained to the most exquisite degrees and height of cruelty and
tyranny.

Again, though persecution for conscience sake be never so much practiced, it
is condemned by all men in every body but themselves, for who is there that
blames himself for persecuting others, or who would be contented to be
persecuted himself? and so far is persecution from propagating of the Gospel,
that nothing in humane appearance can possibly hinder it so much, for the
Papists having got the upper hand and greatest portion of the Christian world
into their power by vigor of their persecution, hinder the blessed Gospel from
being truly taught in the simplicity and purity thereof; and as it is well
known, that the best Churches have been in errors, sometimes able to digest
milk only, not capable of strong meat, so by the rules and principalls of
persecution, 1. Cor. 3. 2.
it were impossible to grow stronger, or come into the light of truth again,
because that according to such discipline, such as teach any new truth, or but
a further measure of former trut hs should be persecuted, as it happened unto
Paul and the other Apostles and Disciples, under the calumny of sedition,
heresy, blasphemy, or innovation, for Acts 6. 13 Acts 24. 5 14 Object.
Paul himself was reduced to say, I worship God after the manner which they
call heresy: And whereas some will object, that the Churches in the Primitive
times were weak as being newly planted, but that Christians now adays have
attained to a larger measure of strength and knowledge in the truth, I dare not
subscribe thereunto, and for whatever failings, errors and false doctrines
such men shall prove to Answ.
have been found in the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus,
Galatia, or any of the rest during the Apostles times, when through weakness
and carnality they were said to have need of milk, it will full easily
appear, that, as the infallibility of the Apostles, their 1 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Heb.
5 12.
diversity and preheminencie of gifts, and miracles which they wrought, were
far more efficacious means then at any time were since enjoyed; so none of our
Protestant Churches at present, especially National, but will justify the
Primitive, in our own greater errors, both for Discipline and Doctrine: It is
true that if liberty be given for men to to teach what they will, there will
appear more false Teachers then ever, yet it were better that many false
doctrines were published, especially with a good intention and out of weakness
only, then that one sound truth should be forcibly smothered or wilfully
concealed; and by the incongruities and absurdities which accompany erroneous
and unsound doctrines, the truth appears still more glorious, and wins others
to the love thereof.

Neither is this complying with weak consciences, or the tollerating of
several opinions, any other sort of Libertinisme, then what Paul practiced,
when he suffered all things lest he should hinder the Gospsl, and 1 Cor 9. 12
21. 22.
was made all things to all, that he might save some, at which very time he
professed himself notwithstanding to live not without law to God, but under law
to Christ: And Peter tells us, We must live as free, but not using our liberty
for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants of God, 1 Pet. 2. 16. And if
you demand whether Heretics then may not be reclaimed? Object.
I answer, That you both may, and ought to endeavor their reclaiming, Answ.
not by compulsive courses, but with brotherly and Christian admonition and
instructions, by evidence of Scripture in demonstration of the Spirit, and such
other peaceable and quiet ways as are warrantable by the Word of God: but for
such as say, we have tried all saire means, and Reply. Answ.
none but coercive will prevail; if they had order to make use of them, how
can they be sure that forcible means would have better success? and how much
more blameable are they that use them, when they neither have commission, nor
assurance that they shall prevail?

Our Savior told his Disciples, That if they were of the world, the world Joh.
15. 19.
would love his own, but he had chosen them out of the world, and therefore
the world hated them, and lest this should not prove a sufficient item to them
and us, St. Paul tells us plainly, How all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
2 Timothy 3. 12.
must suffer persecution: whereto that we may be the better induced, our
Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, amongst other blessings pronounces this
unto them, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute you, Matthew.
5. 11. 12.
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and
be exceeding glad for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you: And lest such poor distressed Christians
should be to seek, how to behave themselves in so great a temptation and
distress, the blessed Spirit of God by St. Paul to the Romans instructs Romans
12. 14. Mat. 5. 44. Joh. 5. 16. and 15. 20. 1 Cor. 4. 12
us, to bless such as persecute us, so that in these and many other
Scriptures, we have the practice of persecution given us as a sign to know the
Church malignant by; and to be persecuted as a love token, and most peculiar
livery of Jesus Christ to distinguish true from false believers.

And if it be objected, that then there must be no true Church amongst
Christians, and that all of them do persecute one another more or less,
Object.
it will notwithstanding follow, that such Christian States and Churches as Answ.
persecute most, are most corrupted, and though I could hope for their sakes
which still retain it with less rigor, that every smaller degree of
persecuting Christians which differ from them in opinion, may not hinder such
to be true Christians, though imperfect and failing in this particular, yet my
earnest desires are, that all such as are causers, counselors or instruments
promoting, or not endeavoring and dissuading persecution, will seriously
consider with themselves, whether, the thus persecuting one another by
Christian Churches which differ in opinions, though it should not hinder them
from being true Churches, yet if it may not be found, at least, an error and
exceeding great blemish in them all, even those that use it seldomest and in
milder manner, expressly forbidden in so many places of Scripture, and
continually declamed against by the whole proceedings of our Blessed Savior,
his Apostles, and most conscientious and truly mortified Christians, famous for
greatest piety and devotion in their respective generations.

St. John says, That light is come into the world, and men loved darkness
Joh. 3. 19, 20, 21.
rather then light because their deeds were evil, for every one that does
evil, hates light, neither comes to the light lest his deeds should be
reproved, but he that does the truth comes to the light, that his deeds may
be made manifest, that they are wrought in God: Methinkes we may well resemble
the true professors of Jesus Christ, to those that seek the light, that the
truth which they teach may be made manifest; and contrariwise such to be false
prophets and hypocrites, that hate the light lest their beloved errors and
counterfeit doctrines should be discovered, reproved and forsaken: Indeed many
a man has been over confident, and delivered up his body to be burnt in a bad
cause, but this should make such as have a good one, to gather so much more
courage to themselves, and not decline any lawful trial or disputation,
whereby falsehood would be vanquished, and the light of truth shine out, so much
more amiable and bright, as before it had greater opposition.

In the ordinary course of the world betwixt two which are at law together,
when either of them uses means to prolong the suit, and prevent what possibly
he can the coming to a judgment, may we not say, and that justly too, that
such a man has a bad cause, or else that he has not all his proofs and
evidences in readiness, especially if we suppose that he knew he had a Judge
who both understood his cause fully, and would infallibly do him justice?
surely the same may be said and that more warrantably concerning Religion, and
differences in opinion about any point thereof.

Confidence and boldness prevail sometimes, and that not a little even in a
bad cause, but never fail when they maintain a good one; we may see it in the
Acts that both Peter and John, with the cause of Jesus Act. 4. 13.
Christ sped the better for their boldness, which when the Scribes, Elders,
Annas, and all high Priests kindred saw, and perceived that they were unlearned
and ignorant men, they marvelled, and took knowledge that they had been with
Jesus, And beholding the man which was healed standing with them, they could
say nothing against it; and how wonderfully the cause prospered hereupon
appears in that fourth Chapter to the Acts, which is well worth reading out,
and cannot by a heart truly sanctified be passed over without great admiration:
St. Paul confirms it Ephesians. 3. 12 Phil. 3. 19. 20. 25.
unto the Ephesians, saying, That through faith in Jesus Christ we have
boldness and access with confidence: And to the Philippians he has yet a
fuller expression, where he says, I know according to my earnest expectation,
and hope that in nothing I shall be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as
always, so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by
life or death, and having this confidence I know that I shall abide and
continue with you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith: Surely as all
true Believers have the same good cause and Gospel, so can they not possibly
fare worse if they had but such a faith and confidence as Paul's was: Now Jam.
2, 2
true and lively faith cannot be without works, and the most eminent and
glorious work of all, is to seek the propagation of it, in such means and
manner as are most warrantable, and likeliest by the precept and president of
our only wise Savior, and his blessed Apostles to prove successful: Oh, let
us not then defer the practice of it any longer! do we suspect that error
should vanquish truth? this is so vain that no man will confess so much, but
for their full conviction if they were so conceited, let them take notice what
St. Paul says to the Corinthians, We cannot do 2 Cor. 13 8.
any thing against the truth but for the truth; we may plot, contrive and
endeavor whatsoever our own depraved natures will suggest us to against it,
but great is the power of truth, and it will prevail at last: or do we then
fear that the true professors may fall from their former steadfastness? it is
true that some which once made profession of the truth may fall from that
profession, but such, though they make profession of the truth, yet were they
never true professors, as St. John says in his first Epistle, They went out
from us, but they were not of us, for if they had 1 John 2. 1
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out,
that they might be made manifest, that they were not all of us: And doubtless
it were much to be desired, and all justifiable means to be employed, whereby
hypocrites, and such as are not true at heart, might be best moved to discover
themselves of their own accord, for then the people of God might be kept from
falling into many a sin through their ill example, and avoid many a temporal
judgment and affliction for holding fellowship and communion with them; but
blessed be God this is the worst that can befall them, neither devils nor the
deepest wiles of wicked reprobates can possibly deceive the true Professors
Gods Elect. Mat. 24. 24.
Our Savior has passed his word, That not one of these little ones shall
perish, Mat. 18. 4. And my sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they
follow me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand; John 10. 27, 28. And Paul
says, We are persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed, 2
Cor. 4. 9. And he told Timothy That the foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal, that the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19.

But since heresies must needs be, though a woe betide the authors of Cap. 1.
87
them, how much more may we well think should there be a Liberty of
Conscience? since the authors instead of woe, may be certain of a blessing,
and nothing can more manifest the truth, when all such as for fear of
imprisoning, fining, corporal punishment, or any worldly prerogative had
heretofore made profession thereof, would now appear in their own colors, and
follow the false calls of their more false teachers, leaving truth to herself,
and such only as did embrace her in true sincerity of heart; and yet this is
not all the benefit which would accrue hereby, the greatest and best part is
still behind; for as in the Primitive times, when Scribes, Pharisees, and all
the learned Doctors both Jews and Gentiles, Note.
disputed and opposed the truth with more liberty and freedom, it became then
much more famous and prevailing, until the mystery of iniquity undertook the
protecting of it by the Civil Sword, which if it were but sheathed again, and
the Blessed Spirit, which blows where it lists, not resisted, we might even
in these days with Gods assistance, Joh. 3. 8.
expect to see victorious trophies, and multitudes of Christians set at
liberty, and redeemed out of Babylon to the speedier downfall of Antichrist.

But some will say that the learned and wisest men have always been and are
still of opinion, that it is no good policy to suffer so many several Object.
Religions to be publicly professed in one and the same Kingdom and
jurisdiction, because that though many men may be able with Scripture to defend
their own Religion, and others perhaps steadfast and obstinate enough in their
opinions what ever they be, yet if contrary tenets may be debated freely, and
made profession of without control, some numbers more or less amongst such
multitudes of people, either by importunity, worldly advantages, or in that
their ignorance or little knowledge in spiritual matters, is not able to
withstand the arguments which are urged against them, must needs be seduced and
led a way from the Religion established by Law: Whereto I answer, That the
advice Answ.
of wise and learned men if they be otherwise also as well qualified, is to be
far preferred before that of ignorant and less wise, but such whose affections
and carnal lusts are mortified, and whose gifts are sanctified, these men's
counsels ought to take place before the deepest Politicians of State, or grand
Rabbis of the Law or Gospel: worldly wisdom and humane learning are both
useful and expedient, when they concur with Scripture, not against it: It was
the argument of the Jews against our Savior and his Apostles, That the
Scribes, Pharisees and great ones believed not on him; the Papists urged the
like, that all the learned Doctors and oh. 7. 48.
profoundest scholars throughout the Christian world were of their opinion
against Luther and the first Reformers, and although we all acknowledge of how
little account and force this argument was then, yet is it now as much stood
upon, and altogether as weakly grounded, even by the greatest part of Reformed
Churches, against such as yet strive for, and endeavor only a further
Reformation: surely if such would but consider of what low condition and mean
estate the Apostles were, they Act. 4. 13. Matthew. 4. 18. 21.
would never think the worse of truth, because it was held out unto them by men
of most inferior rank and quality, this would make such as are Scripture wise
to think the better of it, for who are likeliest to have spiritualll things
discovered to them, then such as are spiritual themselves? and who likeliest
to be spiritual, then such as are poor, base and abject both in the eyes of
others and their own opinions? Surely St. Paul speaks plain to this purpose
when he says, Not many wise men after the 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28.
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; But God has chosen the
foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty, and base things of
the world, and things which are despised has God chosen: And again, where is
the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of Ver. 20.
the world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? And to the
Corinthians he gives a reason why God made use of men of such low rank and
esteem in the world, to be the chiefest instruments of propagating the Gospel,
when he says, We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 7. And in another place he
says, Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, lest the
cross of Christ should be made of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17. If these passages
of Scripture with sundry others were seriously considered, by a mind prepared
to submit to Gods good will and pleasure what ever it were, when it should be
discovered unto him, such a soul would not be swayd, and led a way with any
carnal privileges or worldly circumstances how plausible soever, since all
such are but vanity and vexation of spirit, as the wise man assures us:
evidence of Eccles. 1. 2. 14.
Scripture is that only which ought to be our guide in what we do or say, our
supreme rule or touchstone to make trial of what we hear or see, according
whereunto if we proceed, whatsoever be alleged to the contrary, we may clearly
find, That persecution for matters of Religion does plainly cross so many
places of Scripture, murders so many of Gods Saints, and so much hinders the
propagation of the Gospel, as no other erroneous tenet or heresy whatsoever:
for if the Gospel had but a free passage, and the true Professors liberty to
teach and publish it, this only as a sovereigne remedy and counter poison,
would prevail against all heresies, unless you will grant that error may
possibly vanquish truth: and though our own fond fancies should suggest never
so many inconveniences to ensue thereon, we ought to rest satisfied with so
great a manifestation of Gods revealed will, no ways attempting any thing, or
cleaving to such opinions, which either directly, or by rational consequence
and induction may hinder the preaching of the Gospel to all Nations.

If Kings or States may lawfully enact a Religion, or settle any point of faith
to be believed and practiced by force and virtue of a new law, then ought all
subjects to be conformable thereunto, and so become liable to change and alter
their Religion, so often as the State and chiefest Council of the Land shall
deem just and requisite; for as our predecessors could not make a law to bind
their successors irrevocably, or Note.
longer then they pleased themselves in civil matters, much less in what
concerns the Conscience; so neither can we that are now living engage our
posterity in any act, but what they may repeal at pleasure, with the same
liberty and power by which it was made, since the whole Kingdom being a body
politic endowed with a supremacy, cannot have greater or less power over it
self at one time then another; wherefore since it is our duty to think very
reverently of Laws and Acts when once established by the highest Court, yet if
we consider that they themselves do not assume infallibility, that both they,
Synods, and chief General Counsels have thought it expedient and just to
repeal, alter, and sometimes enact Laws, concerning Discipline and Doctrine
quite contrary to their predecessors, by which means a people in their life
time have been compelled to change Religion twice or thrice; my humblest
desires beg leave to prostrate themselves in meekness and most submissive
manner unto the three estates in Parliament, That all former acts which
countenance persecution for matters of Religion may be repealed, and Liberty of
Conscience which is the greatest liberty the Gospel brings, restored, lest
whilst the prevailing party of Protestants in England think it lawful to
force other Protestants, because less in number, and differing from them in
opinion, to change Religion; God in justice permit Papists to do the like with
Protestants in Ireland, as well for our sins as their own, to the further
desolation of both Kingdoms.

FINIS.

