STRANGE NEVVES FROM FRANCE OR, The Copy of a Letter which was sent from
thence to the Ordinary Ambassador for the King of France, unto his Majesty of
great Britain, who lies in Lincolnes Inne-Fields, Febr. 8. 1641.

Wherein is set down a true Relation of a most Wonderful Apparition and
terrible Spectacle that was seen upon a Mountain in Province, February, 4.
1641.

Vnot the Amazement of all the Spectators, to the number of above two thousand.

Faithfully translated into English, according to the French Copy.

By W. V. Gent.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

Strange NEVVES from France.
MY LORD,
AFter I have done acquainting your Lordship with the affairs of Spain and
Italy, as far as my weak intelligence is able to inform you, pray give me
leave to write your Lordship something concerning your own Country ( France)
and verily my Lord, although Histories both modern and ancient are copious
enough in setting down not only the Acts of Chivalry, and Warlike guests of
the people and French Nation, but also the strange Accidents and supernatural
events that have happened in the Realm: Yet a more conspicuous then this
whereof J am now going to inform your Lordship, which happened Febr, the 4.
New style, nor more worthy of the remembrance of posterity, J think is not
mentioned in our Chronicles or annual records, for ought yet that J could ever
read; not to hold your Lordship in further expectance, or to raise your
admiration with attendance, which without doubt will be sufficiently affected
with the nature of the Relation: The Wonder following was this:

IN the Province of Avignon, two leagues from St. Vincents near the Mountain
and Plains called De Varra cavil, being the Demeanes and Hereditary of the
late possession of the late unhappy Monsieur Memoran^^^, betwixt seven and
eight in the morning, the day above mentioned, it being a great Gloome of Must
not seldom seen with us, were sensible heard, the call of diverse Drums
beating to Arms, after that the Trumpets, distinctly sounded but a sella;
after that both Drums and Trumpets, clearly and terribly, the one by beating,
the other by his tantaraing gave evident notice of marching, the Neighbors and
Inhabitants thereabouts to the number of some two or three thousand people fit
for Arms, presently flew unto their Weapons, thinking that some power of
Spain had been coming to invade them through the Grisons Country, but going
to use and aslay their Arms, they found themselves so possessed and ceased
with a pale and ghastly fear, that little stomach they had to go to meet
these supposed Enemies: The Priest of the Parish caused the Bell to be toled to
Prayers, assuring the people that by the effects he felt in himself, and those
he perceived in them; this was not the Army of any Earthly power, but of the
King of Heaven: The people gave of the course of Arming and followed his
advice, went to their Church, and to their devotion, all the Drums in a very
great number sounded most distinctly diverse distinct marches, as of several
Nations: and as did the Drums for the Jnfanterie, so did the Trumpets for the
Cavallery, some sounding deeper, some shriller, the voices of Commauders was
plainly heard but not understood. This This continued some an hour and a
half of thereabouts: all which time the Mist never seen before lay upon the
Mountain and plain in a very dismal manner, th Priest did his Office in
exhorting the people to trust in God, and to pray unto him, showing himself
more Man, then all his Parishioners besides.

At the last, it brake up a most clear day, the Mist was dispersed, and the
Sun shined, as for this time of the year in his full strength, and with the
appearing of the Sun, the Inhabitants took, at the Priests persuasion some
better encouragement to behold the wonders of God being then assured, as well
they might, that it was a Message from Heaven, the Sun thus clearly shining,
appeared two marshalled Armies upon the Mountain, the Ensign of one being
white, and a Sable Cross, of the other the Ensign red, and the Cross white,
in direct form of Battalia one against another, their Horse Marshalled in the
Wings in a very perfect way Cavallarie, at last the Cannons ratled on both
sides for the space of half an hour, during which time the two Armies were
seen to draw on softly, not only the noise and smoke of Cannons were
evidently seen; and heard, but the very form of Cannons with their Cariages,
Gunners, and Fire-sticks, was apparently perceived, and discried, by above
three Thousand People, who have deposed it and sworn it some of them, being of
no small quantity, after the play of Cannon on both sides the Armies drew
near, and the horse delivered charges ceived charges very siercely on both
sides, the Lances were both seen and heard to shiver, men as they appeared,
fell from horse, and horse fell under men, with great noise, groans and
piteous clamours, at last the gross of both Armies met, and fought in a maine
body, two whole hours most pitiful ejaculations being all the while heard,
men fell evidently on both sides to all men's view, but more on the side that
had the white Ensigns and Cross sable, then on the Other, at last the
Mountain was all covered again with the smoke of Powder, the sent whereof
came hot into the noses of the Inhabitants below. At length some half an hour
after the shooting and clashing began to cease, then again most gloriously
appeared the Sun, and only appeared the Army that bore the red colors with
the White-Crosse, vaunting, tryumphing, and with great joy shooting, and
ecchoing as well with Voice, as with Drum, Fife, and Trumpet, on the side of
the white Ensigns, and Sable-Crosse, were by them discryed abundance yea, an
innumerable multitude of dead Carcasses, both of horse and men, broken
Artillery, shivered Lances, and all other miserable tokens of a vanquished
party, the other Army fair marched away into the Air to all their thinking,
but the other lay in the posture as is written, some people would have gone up
that very day unto the Mountain; but were otherwise advised by their Popish
Priests, and the rest of the Clergy in those parts, the morrow they went up,
but saw nothing, nor any broken weapons, or dead Corpse whatsoever, as did
appear in that number the day before, save only upon the top of the
Mountain, there being a great plain, they went in that plain up to the knees
in blood, yea ingore-blood: Sir, what this may pretend God knows, but you
have the Relation as here it was delivered unto his Majesty by the said Parish
Priest: And the Gentry, Inhabitants of the place, with a Testat signed with
above a thousand hands more of those that were Spectators the first day, and
went up the Mountain to view; on the next, I my self (as my place it is) have
spoken with diverse of the Gentlemen that came up, and took the pains of
purpose to inform his Majesty, who all aver it in that worthy serious manner
that here we are forced to believe it, as I know your Lordship will take it for
no other from him that would be heartily sorry to inform you otherwise.

Your Lordships servant to command. P. Riville.
Paris. Febr. 7. 1641.
FINIS.

