A MOST GRACIOUS MESSAGE SENT By the Kings Majesty to both Houses of
Parliament, Declaring his a^dent desires for Peace and the setlement of a true
and happy union between his three Kingdoms, to be dispersed throughout his
Majesty's Realms and Dominions, for satisfaction of all his Majesty's loyal
Subjects. ALSO, Diverse new Proposalls presented to the Devines by His Majesty
touching Episcopacy and the Church Litturgy, with their several answers
thereunto.

To all true Subjects.
Great Brittain's King desires that Wars may cease,
True Subjects then rejoice, there is hopes of Peace,
All Subjects now may Halilujah sing,
And pra^se Jehovah that has raised their King,
No Subject ('it is conceived) desires these Jarres,
Then let all pray, that Peace may end these Wars.
THE TREATING HOUSE:
THE I WILL OF WAIT
depiction of King Charles I at Carisbrooke Castle (Isle of Wight)

October. 23. LONDON, Printed for R. L. 1648.

The Kings Majesty's most gracious Message to both his Houses of Parliament.
Right Honored
THe News here for present is of great Concernment: which I have sent in brief
viz. HIs Majesty concurs to the Propositions concerning Delinquents, with these
alterations, that those in the first and 2 qualification may have life, and be
in the Capacity of the 4. qualification. And that their incapability of Offices
be for a time. And of b^ing Members of Parl. to be for 3. years.

His Maj. has offered Propositions to the Commissioners several times, but
being not received. The King sent this Message to the Parl. 1. That his Maj.
may come to London, and have the faith of his 2. Houses for his security to be
there in safty, freedom, and honor. 2. That an Act (or Acts) may be passed for
a full Indemnity, and of oblivion, with such qualifications as shall be agreed
on by his Majesty and his 2. Houses of Parl. 3. That his Maj. may have his
Revenues restored unto him. And 4. That a Compensation may be allowed to his
Maj. in liew of what he shall pass away. The Ministers have delivered to the
King another paper concerning Episc^pacy; but his Maj. is not yet satisfied, so
as to pass away their Lands quite. A copy whereof follows viz,


May it please your Majesty*
WE desire to speak both to the Bishops Challenge, and to your Majesty's
description of Episcopal Government. And first to their Ch^llenge; because it
is first expressed in your Majesty's Reply.

The Challenge we u^dertake in two respects: 1. In respect of the power
challenged; 2. In respect of that ground, or Tenure upon which the claim is
laid. The power challenged consists of 3. particulars; Ordaining, giving Rules
of Discipline and Censures. No more, no other, in respect of their Episcopal
Office. We see not, by what warrant this Writ of p^^tition is taken forth, by
which the Apostilicall Office is thus shared or divided; The Governing part
into the Bishops hands; the Teaching and administering Sacraments, into the
Presbyters. For besides that the Scripture makes no such enclosure, or
partition wall, it appears, the challenge is grown to more then was pretended
unto in the times of grown Episcop^cie. Jerome and Chrysostom do both
acknowledge for their time, that the Bishop and Presbyter differed only in the
matter of Ordination: and learned Dr. Bilson makes some abatement in the claim
of 3. saying, the things proper to Bishops, which might not be common to
Presbyters, are singularly of succeeding, and superiority in Ordaining.

1. The name of Bishop the Scripture neither expressly nor by implication gives
to either the work which they are enjoined to do is common to Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers, and cannot of it self make a Character of
one distinct and proper Office; But that there was such an order of Officers in
the Church as Evangelists reckoned amongst the extraordinary and temporary
Offices, and that Timothy was one of that Order, and that both Timothy and
Titus were not ordained to one particular Church, but were Companions and
f^llow Laborers with the Apostles, sent abroad to several Churches as
occasion did require, it is as we (humbly, conceive) clear enough in Scripture,
and not denied by the learned defenders of Episcopal Government nor (as we
remember) by Scultetus himself during the time of their Travells.

2. To that which Your Maj. secondly says, That we cannot make it appear by
any Text of Scripture that the Office of Evangelist is such as we have
described, his work seeming, 2 Timothy 2. 4. 5. to be nothing else but diligence
in preaching the word, notwithstanding all impediments and oppositions, We
humbly Answer, That exact definitions of these or other Church Officers are
hard to be found in any Text of Scripture, but by comparing one place of
Scripture with another, it may be proved as well what they were, as what the
Apostles and Presbyters were, the description by us given being a Character
ma^e up by collation of Scriptures, from which Mr. Hooker does not much vary,
saying that Evangelists were Presbyters of principal sufficiency whom the
Apostles sent abroad and used as Agents in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
wheresoever they saw need.

Thirdly. Your Majesty says, that that which we so confidently affirm of
Timothy and Titus, their acting as Evangelists is by some denied and refuted,
yea even with scorn rejected by some rigid Presbyterians, and that which we so
confidently deny, that they were Bishops, is confirmed by the consentient
testimony of all antiquity, recorded by Jerome himself that they were Bishops
of Paul's ordination, acknowledged by very many late Divines, and that a
Catalogue of 27. Bishops of Ephesus lineallie succeeding from Timothy out of
good Record is vouched by Dr. Reynolds and other Writers.

Our confidence (as your Majesty is pleased to call it) was in our Answer
expressed in these words, we cannot say that Timothy and Tytus were Bishops in
the sense of Your Maj. but extraordinary Officers are Evangelists, in which
opinion we were then clear, not out of a total ignorance of those Testimonies
which might be alleged against it, but from intrinsic arguments out of
Scripture, from which your Maj. has not produced any one to the contrary, nor
is our confidence weakened by such replies as these, the Scripture never calls
them Bishops, but the Fathers do, the Scripture calls Timothy an Evangelist,
some of lrte have refuted it, and rejected it with scorn, the Scripture relates
their motions from Church to Church, but some affirm them to be fixed at
Ephesus and in Creet, the Scripture makes distinction of Evangelists and
Pastors, but some say that Timothy and Titus were both, we cannot give Your
Majesty a present account of Scultetus and Gherards Arguments, but do believe
that M. Cillespi and Rutherford are able with greater strength to refute that
opinion of Timothy and Titus their being Bishops, then they do (if they do)
with scorn reject this of their being Evangelists.

Your Majesty says, that we affirm but upon very weak proofs, that they were
from Ephesus and Creete, removed to other places, the contrary whereunto has
been demonstrated by some, who have exactly out of Scripture compared the
times, and order of the several journies, and stations of Paul and Timothy.

It is confeffed that our assertion, that Timothy and Titus were Evangelists,
lies with some stresse upon this, that they removed from place to place, as
they were sent by or accompanied the Apostles, the proof whereof appears to
us, to be of greater strength then can be taken off by the comparison, which
your Majesty makes of the Devines of the Assembly at Westminster.

And for the travells of Timothy and Titus we find them in order recorded in
these Scripture places, Act. 17. 14. 15. 1 These. 3. 1. 2. Act. 18. 5. Act. 19.
22. Act. 20. 4. 5. 6. 17.

Now if your Maj. shall be pleased to cast up into one total that which is
said, the several journeyes and stations of Timothy, the order of them, the
silence of Scriptures touching his being Bishop of any one Church, you will
acknowledge that such a man was not a Bishop fixed to one Church or precinct;
and then by assuming that Timothy was such a man, you will conclude that he was
not Bishop of Ephesus.

The like conclusion may be enforced from the like premises, from the instance
of Titus. Gal 1. 2. Titus 3. 12. 22. 12. 2. Cor. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 8. 6. 2. Tim. 4.
10.

To that which is asserted, That these singular persons were Bish. in distinct
sense, whither we brought any thing of moment to infirm this, we humbly submit
to your Maj. judgment, and shall only present to you that in your reply you
have not taken notice of that which in our Answer seems to us of moment, which
is this.

That in misterious and prophetic writings or visionall representations, a
number of things or persons is usual expressed in singulars, and this in visions
is the usual way of Representations of things, a thousand persons making up one
Church, is represented by one Candlestick; many Ministers making up one
Presbytery by one Angel.

Lastly these writings are directed as epistolary letters to collective bodies
usually are (that is) to One, but intended to the body; which your Majesty
illustrateth by your sending a Message to your 2 houses, and directing it to
the Speaker of the house of Peers, which as it does not hinder (we confess)
but that the Speaker is one fingle person, so it does not prove at all, that
the Speaker is always the same person, or if he were, that therefore because
your Message is directed to he^ that he is the Governor or Ruler of the 2
houses in the least, and so your Majesty has given clear instance that though
these letters be directed to the angels, yet that notwithstanding they might
neither be Bishops nor yet perpetual Moderators.

As for your Majesty's condescension, in vouchsafing us the Liberty, and Honor
of examining Your Learned, Reply Clothed in such Excellency of Style, and for
Your exceeding Candor; showed to such men as we are, and for the acceptance
of our humble duty we render to your Majesty most humble thanks, and shall
pray, That such a Peen in the hand of such abilities, may ever be employed in a
subject worthy of it. Sir having thus acquainted you with the chief heads of
the answer to His Majesty's last Papers, till next opportunity I remain,

Your humble servant, E. R
Newport October. 20. 1638.

FINIS

