A broken Spirit, GOD' s Sacrifices. OR, THE GRATE FULLNESS OF A Broken Spirit
unto GOD. Represented in A SERMON, BEFORE The right Honorable House of Peers,
IN K. HENRY the Seventh's Chapel in the Abbey Westminster, upon Wednesday
December. 9. 1646. Being a Day of public Humiliation for removing of the great
judgment of Rain and Waters then upon the KINGDOM, etc.

By FRAN. ROBERTS M. A. Minister of Christ, at Austins, London.

Joel 2. 12, 13. Turn yeeven to me with all your heart, and with sasting, and
with weeping, and with mourning. And rend your heart, and not your garments;
and turn to the Lord your God: For he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness and repents him of the evil.

Psalm. 147. 3. He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.

August. in Soliloq. Inanis est poenitentia, quam sequens culpa coinquin at:
nihil prosunt lamenta, si replicentur peccata: nihil valet a malis veniam
poscere, and mala de novo iterare.

LONDON, Printed for George Calvert, of Austins Parish, in the Old-Change, at
the sign of the Golden Fleece. 1647.

Die Jovis 10. Decembris, 1646.
ORdered by the LORDS in Parliament assembled, That this House gives thanks to
Mr. Roberts for his great pains taken in his Sermon preached yesterday before
their Lordships in King Henry the Seventh's Chapel in the Abbey Westminster,
(it being a day of public Humiliation for the removing of the great Judgment
of Rain and Waters now upon the Kingdom, and for the preventing the sad
Consequences thereupon.) And he is hereby desired to print and publish the
same; which is to be printed only by Authority under his own Hand.

Jo: Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
I appoint George Calvert of Austins Parish, to print my Sermon, Preached
December. 9. 1646.

Fran: Roberts.



TO THE Right Honorable THE HOUSE OF PEERS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THe wrath of God so variously and dreadfully revealed from heaven of late
against this Nation; and all the ungodliness and unrighttousnesse of men
therein, for which Gods wrath has been so revealed, do call and cry aloud to
all the Kingdom for mature and true Repentance. To the making up of true
Repentance (that holy change of the sinners person and conversation) these Four
necessary and eminent ingredients seem principally required: viz. 1. Conviction
of sin, Joh. 16. 8, 9* 2. Contrition for sin, Psalm. 51. 17. Acts 2. 36, 37. 2
Cor. 710. (...). Avorsion, or turning away from sin, both in inward Principles,
and outward Practices, Isai. 1. 16. and 55. 7. Ezekiel. 18* 30, 31 32* And 4.
Conversion to God in Christ, both in hear^ and life, Isai. 557. and 1. 17. Hos.
14. 12. Jerem. 4* 1. Joel 2. 12, 13. For till the Conscience be convinced of
sin, how shall the heart be contrite for sin? till the heart be contrite and
kindly broken for sin, how shall it forsake and turn away from sin? Till the
beart truly turn away from sin, how should it acceptably convert or return to
God? And till the sinner do return even unto God, how can he be said completely
and truly to repent?

1. In Conviction of sin, these things seem specially implied: viz. 1. A
sin-guiltinesse wherewith the sinner may be charged. All have sinned, Romans 5.
12. and Christ alone was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
Heb. 7. 26. and none could convince him of sin, Joh. 8. 46. 2. Clear and
evident Manifestation of that sin-guiltinesse to the soul, by the divine light
of the Word and Spirit of God, Psalm. 50. 21. Joh. 3. 1920. Ephesians. 5. 13. 3.
Reflection, and the turning in of the soul upon it self, to take a deliberate
view of sin manifested. If they shall bethink themselves: (...)
Heb. If they shall return unto their heart: or, If they shall bring back unto
their beart, 1 Kings 8. 47. 4. And finally, a self-sentencing, upon this
self-reflection, as clearly guilty of such sin, or sinfulness; as 2 Samuel 12.
13. with Psalm. 51. 4.

2. In Contrition for sin, these things seem peculiarly to be contained: viz.
1. The souls deep apprehensivenesse of the hatefulness, abominablenesse, and
sinfulness of sin wherewith it is convinced, seriously laying it to heart, as
being most lively and clearly sensible thereof. Psalm. 51. 3. My sin is ever
before me. 2. The hearts hating, detesting and abominating of these iniquities
with indignation, so deeply apprehended, as the greatest burdens, diseases,
deformities, evils or enemies in the world, 2 Cor. 7. 11. 3. The spirits inward
relenting, melting, and mourning bitterly for sin thus detested and abhorred,
Zech. 12, 10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 7. 10. 2 Chronicles. 34 27. 4. The sinners deep
debasing humbling, loathing and abhorring themselves for their iniquities so
abominated and lamented. 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. Ezekiel. 6. 9, and 20 43. and 36. 31.
Job 42. 6*

Now these inward acts of Contrition oft-times have been of old represented by
Gerh. loc. com. De Poenitent. Tom. 3. c. 11. 1.
outward discoveries and expressions of 1. Fasting, as counting themselves
unworthy of all food, Joel 1. 14. 2. Rending of garments, denoting the renting
of the heart, Joel 2. 13. 3. Tears, which are as the blood of a wounded spirit,
Matthew. 26. ult. Luke 7. 38. 4. Lying on the ground, in self-debasement, 2 Samuel
12. 16. 5. Covering their ^eads with ashes, as counting themselves more vile
then dust and ashes, Nehem. 9. 1. Job 42. 6. Luke 10. 13. 6. Sackcloth,
coursest garments, Esth. 43. Jonah 34. 7. Smiting upon the thigh, through
inward anguish and anxiety, Percutere femur est signum doloris, sicut
mulierculae in puerperio facere solent. Luth. in Glost. marginal.
as a traveling woman in extremity of pangs, Jer. 31. 19. 8. Beating of the
breasts, as deeply discontented at themselves. So the prodigal smote his breast
-- Luke 18. 13.

Sometimes these external expressions are without the inward acts of
Contrition, and then they are but as Crocodiles tears, but mere hypocritical
paintings. When outward expressions and inward Contrition go together, they are
melody delectable even to heaven it self.

3. In Aversion from sin, are remarkable, 1. A new and secret antipathy in the
soul against sin, from an oppsite principle of grace infused, Gal. 517. These
two are contrary one to another. 2. Ceasing to do evil both in the elicite and
imperate acts of heart and life, Isai. 1. 16. called denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, Tit. 2. 11. putting away all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, Jam. 1. 21. putting off of the old man, Col. 3. 9. casting away
of abominations as a menstruons cloth, saying to it, Get thee hence, Isai. 30.
22. etc. 3. Breaking off the occasions, inlets, inducements and temptations to
evil for time to come, Psalm. 119. 115. as Peter fled from the highpriests hall
where he was tempted, Matthew. 26. ult. 4. Maintaining a constant intestine
combat against sin, that it may be mortified, killed, extirpated at last out of
the soul. Gal. 5. 17. the spirit lusts against the flesh. See Romans 8. 13.

4. Finally, in conversion or turning to God in Christ, are considerable, 1.
The Motives inclining and alluring the sinner unto God; viz. extreme want and
misery in himself, but complete fullness and felicity in God: How many hired
servants of my fathers have bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with
hunger? Luke 15. 17. 2. Resolution upon those incitements to turn unto God. I
will arise, and go to my Father, Luke 15. 18, 20. 3. Self-denying groans,
desires, cries, for admittance and acceptance. Father, I have sinned against
heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son: make me as
one of thine hired servants, Luke 15 18, 19. 4 Sweet closing with God as his
God in Covenant; s^t out in these pathetick expressions: And when he was yet a
great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him. -- said, Bring forth the best robe, and put it on him,
and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his f^t: And bring hither the fatted
calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry, Luke 15. 20. 22, 23. O when
Repentance thus leads the poor soul into the presence of God as a Father, with
what unspeakable contentment do they embrace and enjoy one another!

Thus you have (Right Honorable) a dim portraiture of some li^eaments of that
ami^ble grace of Repentance: The Lord draw a perfect character of un^eigned
Repentance upon every one of your souls, both for your own and Englands sins.
Touching the Second of these; viz. CONTRITION, or br^sse of bears, and the
peculiar gratefulness thereof to God, some plain and familiar meditations (as
the narrow scantling of time allotted for preparing them would permit) have
been represented in your Honors hearing, and now ate (with some small and
necessary amplification about the opposite hardness of heart infected) again
hurr^ly tendered to Your, and the public view. May any hard heart be softened,
or any soft heart supported thereby, how should my spirit be refreshed*

God has brought Two of his Four so^e Judgments upon the Land; viz. ^word,
and Pestilence; and a Third of Famine may overtake us ere we be aware. How
highly does it concern us all, to present God daily for Englands sins, with
broken hearts, his well pleasing Sacrifices* who knows how God may repent him
of the evil?

To engage more fully your hearts and others in such Contrition for the sins
procuring these public Judgments, give me leave to lay before your eyes, out
of the Scriptures, a Li^t of such sins as God has been wont of old to Threaten
or Punish with SVVORD, PESTILENCE, or FAMINE; or with all at once: That the woe
of former ages may be our warning: For All these things happened unto them for
ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11.

I. The SVVORD has been threatened or inflicted on people for these sins
ensuing, viz.
1. Sottish ignorance of God and of his ways, Jerem. 4. 19, 20, 21, 22. 2.
Disobedience to Gods commands, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, -- 22, 23, 24. Job 36. 11. 3.
Backsliding from God, forsaking of God, Jerem. 15. 1, 2, 6. 4. Idolatry, Deuteronomy.
28. 21. to 26. Judge. 5 8. Psalm. 78. 58. to 63. Isa. 65. 11, 12. Jer. 9. 13. to
17. and 16. 4, 11, 12. and 32. 28, 29 30. etc. and 44 25, 27. 5. Breach of
Covenant, Jerem. ^4 18. to the end of the Chapter. 6. Distrusting the Lord, and
relying on the arm of flesh; as Asa on the King of Syria, 2 Chro. 16. 7, 8 9.
7. Prophesying lies in the name of the Lord, and entertaining them, Jer. 14.
13. to 17. 8. Mocking and mi^-using the messengers of God, and despising Gods
word by them, 2 Chro. 36. 15, 16, 17. 9. The sins and provocations of a pro^ane
and wic^ed King, as of Manasses, Jer. 15. 24. 2 King. 24. 23, 41. 10. Warring
against the Church and people of God, as did Amaleck, Exodus 17. 8, 16. 11.
Insulting over Gods afflicted Church and people, as Tire did over Jerusalem,
Ezekiel. 26 1. to 15. 12. Murder, Blood, Cruelty, etc. 2 Samuel 2. 9, 10. 13.
Pride, H^ughtiness^, etc. Isa. 3. 16, 25. 14. Oppression, Isa. 3. 12, 13, 14,
(...) 25. Jer. 6. 4. to 9 Job 27. 13 14. 15. Incorrigiblenesse under Gods
Judgments, Levit. 26. ^6. to 36.
II. The Plague of PESTILENCE has been threatened or inflicted on people for
these offenses, viz.
1 Confidence in the creature, diffidence in God, Ezekiel. 33. 26, 27. 2 Samuel 24.
2, 13, 15. Number. 14. 11, 1^. 2 Ungrateful murmuring against Gods Providence and
proceedings, Number. 11. 38. and 16. 41, 49. 3 Idolatry, Superstition, etc. Jer.
14. 10 12. Ezekiel. 5. 11, 12. and 6. 9 11 12. Number. 25 2, 9. Josh. 22. 17. 4
Contemning, opposing, or abusing Gods Prophets, Messengers with their Messages,
Jer. 29. 17. to 20. and 42. 21, 22. 5 Opressing and misusing Gods Church and
people, Exodus 12. 29. with Psalm. 78. 50. Amos 4. 10. 6 Murder and Cruelty,
Ezekiel. 33, 25, 27. 7 Adultery and wantonness, Ezekiel. 33. 26, 27. Numb. 25. 19.
Of that plague there fell 24000.
III. FAMINE has been threatened or inflicted upon a people for these
iniquities, viz.
1 When there is no knowledge or consideration of God and his ways, Isa. 5. 12,
13. 2 When a Land sins against God by trespassing grievously, Ezekiel. 14. 13, 14.
3 Carnal confidence and pride of a King in the Arm of flesh, 2 Samuel 24. 2, 13.
with 1 Chro. 21. 12. 4 Idolatry, 2 King. 18. 2. with 18. Jer. 13. 27. with 14.
1. to 7. and 16. 4, 11, 12. and 44 25, 27. Thus Babylons spiritual
fornications shall be rewarded, Rev. 18. 3, 8. 5 Breach of Covenant: As Isreal's
breach of covenant with the Gibeonites was plagued with diverse years of Famine;
though 1. This Covenant was subtly and craftily obtained. 2. It was almost
400 years after this Covenant was made that the Famine was inflicted. And 3.
That breach was especially made by King Saul and his bloody house. Compare 2
Sa^. 21. 1, 2. with Josh. 9. 3, to 17.
6 Opposing, prohibiting, threatening, etc. of Gods Messengers for their
Messages, Jer. 11, 21, 22. 7 Obstinacy and incurablenesse in great iniquity,
etc. Jerem. 13, 22, 27. with 14 1, to 7, 13, 14, 15, 16.
IIII. Yea, all these three sore judgments, SVVORD, PESTILENCE, and FAMINE,
are together threatened or inflicted upon people for these provocations
following, viz.
1 Disobedience to God, Jer. 42. 13, to 18. Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 21, to 27. 2 Carnal
confidence of Governors in the Arm of flesh, 2 Samuel 24. 2, 13. with 1 Chronicles.
21. 12. 3 Wandering from God, Jer. 14. 10, 11, 12. 4 Idolatrous abominations and
wickedness, Ezekiel. 5. 6, 7, etc. 12, 16, 17. and 7. 4 15. Jer. 32. 32, to 37.
Eze. 6. 11, 12. 13. 5 Not harkening to Gods word by his Prophets and Ministers,
Jer. 29. 17, 18, 19. 6 Oppression, Jer. 34. 17. 7 Not being humble and contrite
for sins of forefathers, Jer. 44. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 8 Incorrigiblenesse; when
men will not be reformed, no not by the severest judgments of God, Lev. 26.
24, 25, 26.
Thus have I briefly indigitated out of the word of God some of those sins and
abominations in these several Catalogues, for which the Lord has heretofore
threatened and plagued his people with SVVORD, PESTILENCE, and FAMINE, (two of
which this Kingdom of late has ^adly f^lt, and the third is greatly feared;)
That your Honors may clearly see the equity of Gods severest proceedings with
us in all this that is come upon us: and the necessity of our breaking our
hearts, and humbling our souls greatly in this Land for all those Sins and
Rebellions wherewith we have already pulled so much, and are like to pull down
more and more vengeance upon our selves and our Posterity. For, which of all
those Abominations forementioned is not England deeply guilty of? And shall
England think to commit the same sins, and yet escape the judgments of God?

Wherefore I most humbly and earnestly beseech your Honors, that as you tender
the glory of God; the true happiness of this Church and State; the removing of
present, and preventing of future judgments; the treasuring up of blessings
for the present generation and for posterity; and the re-imbarquing of England
again in the bosom of Gods favor; you would be pleased in your great zeal and
wisdom, to think of some way, how with the advice of the Assembly of Divines,
a more full and impartial Catalogue (then hitherto has been made) of the
Public sins and provocations of England may be drawn up, and published by
Authority of Parliament; and that a most solemn Day of Humiliation for the
whole Kingdom may be peculiarly set apart for afflicting of our souls deeply
for those sins, from Dan to Beersheba: And let the Lord accept us. Now the
Father of mercies and God of all consolation, lift up your hearts in the ways
of God, and make you strong for all the work of God that remains upon your
hand. So prays

Your Honors faithful servant in the Lord, FRAN. ROBERTS.

A Broken Spirit, Gods Sacrifices: OR The gratefulness of a broken SPIRIT unto
GOD.
PSALM. 51. 17. The Sacrifices of God, are a broken Spirit.
THis day we are come together to afflict our souls and mourn before the Lord,
because the heavens have now for diverse months together so sadly mourned upon
the Land in extraordinary dearth-threatning shours: These excessive shou^s and
judgment of rain, were first gendred and occasioned by the poysonfull vapors
of our sins, and the sins of the Land, that have ascended and been multiplied
before the Lo^d: One successful and approved remedy against both sin and
judgement^ is, To lay our selves low before the Lord with penitential
brokennesse of spirit: and this brokennesse is the peculiar subject of this
Text, Oh that our God would break our hearts like David's heart in the
consideration of it.

The Psalm may be justly styled David's Recantation: How does he bleed and melt
for his bloody sins? This sweet singer of Israel (as he is styled) never prayed
and sung more melodiously and pathetically, then when his heart was broken most
penitentially: as the birds in the spring tune most sweetly, when it rains most
sadly; or as some faces appear most oriently beautiful, when they are most
instampt with sorrow.

In this Psalm are Principally considerable, the Title and the The cohe^ence of
the words with the context.
substance of the Psalm.

1. The Title prefixed (which is here as the Contents of a book, as the Key of
the Psalm) contains, 1. The inscription of it, To the chief Musician, or to the
master of the music. 2. The Primary, or instrumental Cause of it. Viz. DAVID;
He ingenuously takes the shame of his sin upon his own face. 3. The Occasion of
the Psalm, which is twofold: viz. 1. DAVID'S Iniquity, and 2. NATHANS Ministry
waking his secure conscience out of it. When Nathan the Prophet came unto him
after he had gone in to Bath^heba. The story is fully laid down in 2 Samuel 11.
and 12. Chapters.

2. The Substance of the Psalm it self; wherein consider, 1. The nature or kind
of it; so it is ^^n. Anno^. in loc.
Psalmus (...) a Praying Psalm. 2. The scope or end of it, principally to
implore Gods free grace and favor in the pardoning and purging of his sin, and
the more plenary sanctifying and comforting of his sin-afflicted heart, as is
evident in the Current of the Psalm: Whence its very clear. 1. That the best of
Saints may foully fa^l. 2. That the Saints foully falling shall yet
penitentially rise again. 3. That when they rise after their relapses, they are
embittered against their own sins most impartially, they deal with God in their
Repentance most ingenuously and sincerely.

3. The branches or parts of this Prayer, which are chiefly two, viz. Petition
for himself who by Murder and Adultery had off^ed, Verse 1. to 18. And
Supplication for the Church of God, which by his fall might be scandalized and
endangered, V^^se 18, 19.

For himself he beggs Restoration, by Arguments drawn*

1. From himself, most seriously and sincerely repenting, Ver. 3. to 13.

2. From others who might be involved in like offenses, whom upon such his
experience of divine favor, he should be enabled feelingly to instruct in the
ways of God and mysteries of Conversion; Then will I teach transgressors thy
ways, and sinners shall be converted unto the, Verse 13. Then I that have been
a Pati^nt, shall become a Physician to other sin-bruised souls: Then I that have
had my bones thus broken by my fall, shall help to bind up the broken bones of
others.

3. From Gods own glory, which upon such beams and discoveries of grace would
be rendered most illustrious, 1 Partly in his thankeful publishing of Gods
praises for mercies received, Verse 14, 15. 2 Partly in his dutiful sacrificing
and rendering unto God, not so much the carnal typical sacrifices of the Law,
which were not the things wherein God did rest, Verse 15, 16. But the spiritual
and true sacrifices of a broken and contrite spirit, which were the sacrifices
of Gods delight, in the words of the Text, ver. 17. The Sacrifices of God are a
broken Spirit, etc.

Having thus led you to the Words, lets-view the treasure comprised in them,
they set forth, The singular gratefulness of true broken-heartednesse. Here
are two Propositions Emphatically discovering this; 1. Affirmatively, showing
in what high account a broken spirit is with God, The sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit. 2. Negatively, discovering what dis-respect or unkindnesse a
broken heart shall never find with God, A broken and contrite heart O God thou will not despise. Both Propositions are for substance one and the same, but
doubled (like Pharaohs Dreams) more infallibly to assure us of the certainty
thereof: and therefore in the handling of the first proposition we shall in
effect have the sense of both.

In the Affirmative proposition you have first the subject, A broken Spirit.
Secondly the Predicate affirmed of this subject, that it is the sacrifices of
God. The copula knitting both together is not expressed in the Hebrew text, but
must necessarily be supplied to make up the sense perfect [is, or, are]
therefore here the word [are] is put in a different character.

Now for clearing the sense of this Proposition these things are a little to be
opened: Viz.

1. What is here meant by the word Spirit? 2. What is intended by a broken
spirit? 3. In what sense we are to understand that such a broken spirit is the
sacrifices of God.
First, By the word [spirit (...)] the Scripture is wont to poin^ out to us
many s^veral things: If any word in the Old or New Testament be of multifarious
signification, certainly this word spirit is one. But as to this place, by
Spirit here understand. First, Not the regenerate part in a child of GOD, in
whom spirit stands opposed to flesh, Grace to sin. The spirit lusts against
the flesh and the flesh lusts against the spirit Gal. 5. 17. See also Ioh. 3.
6. For in this place brokennesse and contrition is rather a spark of that
Regenerate part, and part of the new man, subj^ctively inherent and seated in
the spirit here spoken of, as the Receptacle of it. Secondly, Nor the
intellective part, as distinct from the sensitive, and from the corporeal part
of man; as the Apostle makes the distribution; -- that your whole spirit, and
soul, and body be preserved blameless -- 1 These. 5. 23. As Calvin Quod autem
sequitur, it a explico cum doctis^mo intetprete, ut quod in genere dictum erat,
per parts explicetur. Mentem igitur Paulus Spiritus appellatione significat,
illud nempe (...) in quo nativa praecipua labes nest, Animam vero reliquas
inferio^es facultates. non quasi duae sint animae, sed quod ^uo more Paulus
functiones unius ejusde^que animae distribuat, cujus etiam alicubi tres
sacultates commemorat, ut diximus Ephesians 4. 17. Corporis d^nique nomine satis
constat animae domicilium significari. B^z. in loc.
Beza and others observe. Which spirit is elsewhere styled the spirit of the
mind. For though the Intellective part, as some of the Estuis in Distinctionem
16. lib. 4.
schoolmen think, be the more special subject of this brokennesse, yet cannot
the sensitive appetite besecluded, yea the body it self cannot but sympath z^
and become broken when the heart and spirit are broken. Thirdly, But here
understand the heart or soul of man principally, which is the most proper
receptive subject of this penitential brok^nnesse.

Secondly, By (...) A Broken spirit] thus conceive in general; Radix (...)
proprie significat, fregit, sicut fi anguntur ligna Exodus 9 v 26: Off. Exodus
12. v. 46. Vasa testacea Levit. 6. v. 28. Statuae 2 King. 11. v. 19 etc. ^xx.
plerumque redd derunt per (...) oppressione se^ depressione contusus est (...),
Isa. 67. versi^. 15. (...) humilis foit, humilia^us est. (...) humilis Spi^
etc. ^x quibus omnibus patet, contritionis nomme metapho^ice ^ligi fi actionem
and ^ssionem cordis, verum ac serium dolorem, quo vis and robu^ cordis vel^ti
conteritu^, sicut per morbos robu^ corporis. Quidam metaphoram desumptam elle
dicunt a vase testaceo quod in minutissima fracta redigitur* Psa. 31. v. 13.
Isa. 30. v. 11. ^er. 19. v. 11. Alij ab ossibus quae subito lapsu in plura
fragmenta dissiliunt, ut best^a^um dentibus assula^im comminuantur, Psa. 38.
versi^. 33. Isa. 38. v. 13. Os^. 6, v. 5. Ger^ard in loc. com. Tom. III. De
P^^itent. c. 11. Sect. 1.
It is a metaphor from ^orporal things, as from an Earthen vessel, a tree, the
bones or body of a man, or the like, which are properly liable to be broken,
and (that I may here allude to the Hebrew word here used) shivered-topieces:
The spirit cannot be s^d to be Broken properly, but allusively, metaphorically,
when for sin etc. it is humbled, as in Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. It is pricked
and wounded, as in Peter's hearers, Act. 2. 37. it is softened and melted, as in
Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. it is in bitterness, as in those intended in Zech.
12. 10, 11. etc.

More particularly here understand by brokennesse of spirit,

1. Not a mere natural brokennesse and tenderness, which arises from the
tender temper and constitution of the heart and eyes by Nature, which is in
some more, some less; whence they are ready to receive impressions of grief,
and to make Expressions in tears, upon occasion of any pathetical objects: This
being but a fruit of Nature, cannot be the spiritual sacrifices of God,
acceptable unto him.

2. Not a mere worldly Brokennesse and grief of Heart, arising from some
worldly ground or occasion, etc. Such as Jacobs grief for Joseph supposed to be
torn in pieces, GENESIS 37. 33* 34, 35. Of David for Absalom, (...) SAM. 18. 33.
Of Rachel for her children, MAT. 2. 18. As streams of water will not ascend
higher then the fountain head whence they first took their rise: so these
streams of worldly contrition, arising merely from a worldly Principle, can
never ascend higher then the world; and in fine the sorrow of the world works
death, 2 Cor. 7. 10.

3. Not any formal fained Thus one discriminates betwixt the Elect and
Reprobate in this point. Electi Ex sensu peccati, iraeque dei apprehensione
spiritus sancti ductu, volentes consugiunt ad deum, ut in Davide, Jobo,
aliisque ^idere est. Reprobi vero ut Cain compuncti desperant, dicentes major
est iniquitas nostra, quam vt sustinere possumus; aut hypocritae sese
prosternunt ut Achab, aut desperabundi sibi mortem consciscunt, ut Achitophel,
Judas, Ne^o, Diocletianus, Christianorum persecuto^es atrocissimi; vel intus
contremiscunt ut Caligula aut toto corpore concutiuntur nullum petentes
remedium, ut Baltassa^, qui viso digito in pariete scribente ita fuit
consternatus, ut concussis genibus vacillaret. Joan. Malcolmi Comment. in Act.
2. 37.
hypocritical brokenness for sin, which comes nearest to true Penitential
brokenness, and is the livelyest sh^dow or picture of it, but no more: whereby
a man may be first Convinced mightily of his sin committed: Secondly, Wounded
and afflicted in Conscience deeply upon such conviction: Thirdly, Even forced
voluntarily to confess the sin publicly before others for which he is
perplexed: Fourthly, Brought to make some outward Satisfaction by Restitution
of dishonest gain: Fifthly, And at last through extremity of anguish and horror
of conscience be so swallowed up of utter despair, as to make away himself. All
these were found in Judas, who yet never found a true Brokennesse of spirit,
Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5. But the God of Truth delights only in Truth and sincerity,
abhorrs Hypocrisy.

4. But here understand only a true, gracious, p^nitential brokennesse of heart
for sin, when the heart is kindly pricked, melted, humbled, and in bitterness
for sin, and finding no rest nor remedy in it self, nor in any created comfort,
makes out only to Gods favor in Jesus Christ for support and ease: This is a
proper fruit of that sweet Spirit of grace promised Zech. 12. 10, 11, 12. This
is that godly sorrow that works repentance not to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7.
10. This is for substance, that Repentance unto life, Act. 11. 18. or an
eminent branch thereof: And this was that Brokennesse of spirit which was upon
David in p^ning this Psalm, which he declares to be the acceptable sacrifices
of God, Verse 17.

This brokennesse of spirit in a child of God, may be considered either as it
is*

1. Habitual: viz. That habit of brokenness, tenderness etc. which is infused
into the heart of the Regenerate at first conversion, which is called in the
New Covenant an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26. The heart of stone
noting that habitual hardness that is in carnal men: The heart of flesh, that
habitual softness and brokenness that is in spiritual men.

2. As it is Actual; viz. That exercise of brokenness and tenderness of heart
for sin upon just occasions, as David reduced his brokenness into act upon his
fall, etc. That is a brokenness impressed on us, this a brokennesse expressed
by us.

3. In what sense is such a broken spirit here styled The 3.
S^crifices of God?

Ans. This phrase (...) The sacrifices of God] may bear a double
interpretation; viz. either first As denoting the singular excellency of this
sacrifice of a broken heart: For its usual in the Hebrew tongue to add the name
of [God] to a thing, to set out the excellency thereof; as, the Mountains of
God, i. e. exceeding high Mountains, Psa. 36. 6. Cedars of God, i. e. most tall
Cedars, Psa. 80. 11. Rivers of God, Psa. 65. 10. Wrastlings of God, i. e. Great
Wrastlings, Genesis 30. 8. Harps of God, Rev. 15. 2. etc. so here Sacrifices of
God, i. e. most choice, excellent Sacrifices. Or secondly As signifying the
peculiar gratefulness and singular acceptablenesse of this sacrifice to God,
above all the typical sacrifices of the Law, none of them all please God so well
as the broken and contrite spirit, this to God is the Sacrifice of sacrifices.
Now this latter seems to be most clearly here intended.

1. Partly because a broken heart is here opposed to all Ceremonial sacrifices
Verse 16, 17. These God neither desires nor delights in, in comparison of a
broken heart and Spirit.

2. Partly because this broken heart is here c^lled emphatically not only the
sacrifice of God in the singular number; but the sacrifices of God in the
plural, to note that this Sacrificia dei] Postquam Sacrificiis detraxit
propitiandi Dei virtutem, quam falso affinxerant Judaei, nunc dicit, Etiamsi
nihil praeter Cor contritum and humiliatum asterat, hoc Deo abunde sufficere;
quia unum hoc exigat a peccatoribus ut dejecti and prostrati, misericoid am
implorent; neque frustra plurali numero usus est, quo melius exprimeret
poenitentiae Sacrificium, pro omnibus unum sufficere. Si dixisset honi odoris
esse hoc Sacrificii genus promptum fuisset Iudaeis cavillari, alias tamen esse
species quae non minus deo placerent. Sicut videmus hodie Papistas, sua opera
dei graciae miscere, negratuita sit peccatorunt remissio; Consulto itaque David
ut omnia satisfactionum commenta excluderer unicum spiritus dejectionem,
quaecunque deus probat sacrificia in se complecti asseruit? Et quum sacrificia
Dei nominat, videtur oblique mordere hypocritas, qui suo tantum arbitrio
Sacrificia estimant, dum ad propitiandum deum valere arbitrantur. Calv. in Ps.
51. 17.
one Sacrifice of a truly broken heart has in it the gratefulness of all
sacrifices: with this one, God is better pleased, then with all others
forementioned.

3. Partly because it is said by way of exegetical amplification in the latter
part of this 17. Verse, A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not
despise, which seems to be a (...) less being spoken then was intended; thou will not despise i. e. thou will highly esteem and account of it, it will be
most acceptable with thee. The words thus explaned, this Doctrinal Proposition
is evident in them. Viz.

A truly broken spirit is a most pleasing and acceptable sacrifice Doct. 1.
unto God.

A broken spirit is not only grateful to the Saints themselves, refreshing both
their souls and the souls of others, as a seasonable April shower does the
grass; nor only delightful unto the very Angels of heaven, There is joy in the
presence of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents, more then over
ninety and nine just persons that need no repentance, Luke 15. 7. 10. Upon
which says BERNARD, Delicia Angelorum sunt lachrymae poenitentium, The tears
of Penitents are the delights of Angels* But (which is most of all) a broken
spirit is the delight of God himself, his most grateful sacrifices. This may be
evidenced chiefly two ways. 1. (...) That it is so. 2. (...) Why it is so.

1. For the first, the (...) That this is so: viz. That a truly 1.
broken spirit, is a most pleasing sacrifice unto God, may be cleared upon many
Considerations.

1. A broken spirit is so pleasing to God, that he prefers this one alone to
all Ceremonial sacrifices, and external Rites under the Old Testament
whatsoever; Holocaustis non delectaberis] Nihil ergo offeremus? Sic veniemus ad
deum? and unde illum placabimus? Oster; sane in te habes quod ^steras* Noli
extrinsecus th^ra comparare; sed dic in me sunt deus vo^a tua, quae redd^
lauds tibi. Noli exti insecus pecus quod mactes inquirere, habes in te quod
occidas. Sacrificium deo, etc. August. Enarrat. in Psa. 50.
For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in
burnt-offering: The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit -- Psa. 51. 6, 17.
There were many sacrifices under the Old Testament, The Burnt-offering, the
Sin-offering, the Meat Offering, the Drinkoffering, the Daily Sacrifice etc.
And these sacrifices were not only prescribed of God, but also in their kind
and season accepted also of him, as 2 Samuel 24. 25. 1 Kings 18. 36, 37, 38.
Notwithstanding God looked more at a penitential broken heart, then at all
those. Therefore he says elsewhere, Rent your hearts and not your garments,
Joel 2. 13. And no wonder: For 1. These were but outward Sacrifices, This of a
broken spirit is inward. 2. Those were of dead creatures, dead beasts, etc.
this of living men. 3. Those Typical, this Real. 4. Those would be of
acceptance with God, but for a Season, till the incarnation of Christ, Heb. 10.
5, 6, 7, 8, 9. this will be grateful to God, for ever, both under Old and New
Testament.

2. A broken spirit is so pleasing to God, that God highly 2.
preferres it before all mere moral performances, or Pharisaicall perfections
whatsoever: This is conspicuous in that eminent Parable of the Pharisee and
Publican, Luke 18. 10. to 15. where are remarkable, 1. The Devotion they
performed, they both went into the Temple to pray. 2. The manner of their
performance, The Pharisy was upon tiptoes with God, Negatively disclayming a
manifold guiltiness, God I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, etc. he borrowes Gods name, pretending to thank him, intending to
praise and appla^d himself. Affirmatively, assuming to himself a manifold
vertuousnesse, I fast twice in the week, etc. But the poor Publican performs
his Devotion in a far other manner, he stood a far off, as afraid to draw
near into the presence of God: he would not so much as lift up his eyes to
heaven, as unworthy to look toward Gods glorious habitation: he smote upon his
breast, as sore broken and displeased at himself for his own o^^ences; and said,
God be merciful to me a sinner, as apprehending no sufficient remedy, against
his deep sinful misery, but only divine Mercy. Thus the Pharisy wholly exalted
himself, the Publican wholly debased himself: The Pharisy only praised himself,
the Publican only dispraised himself: The Pharisy only justified himself, the
Publican only condemned himself, 4. But in the close, see the testimony of
Christ touching their acceptance, I tell you this man went down to his house
justified rather then the other Impropria est comparatio: neque enim quasi
communis ambobus sit justitia, Publicanum Christus tantum gradu aliquo prefert;
sed intelligit eum gratum ^uisse deo, quum Pharissaeus in totum rejectus
fuerit. Calv. in loc.
i. e. justified and not the other. Oh how happy are they that partake of Gods
justification, Psalm. 32. 1. 2. To be justified of God is a fruit of his highest
acceptance. This acceptance was the Privilege of the brokenhearted
Publican, when the cracking Pharisee with all his moral and legal
perfections, without true Contrition, was rejected.

3. A broken spirit is so pleasing to God, that God has 3.
a peculiar and especial respect thereunto. Thus says the Lord, The heaven is
my Throne, and the earth is my footstool, where is the house that ye build
unto me? and where is the place of my rest? For, all those things has mine
hand made, and all those things have been says the Lord: but to this man will
I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite Spirit, Isai. 66. 1, 2.
God looks upon him that is of a poor and contrire spirit, not only with a
look of bare intuition, for so he looks upon both the evil and the good: but
with a look of smiling favor and acceptance, called the lifting up of the
light of his countenance, Psalm. 4. 6. now where God thus looks, he likes, he
notably loves. So its said, God had respect to Abel and to his offering, Genesis 4.
4. i. e. God approoved it, accepted it, was well-pleased with it. Thus God
respects and accepts a broken-heart. How great respect had God to Josiah and
his brokennesse of heart, saying, Because thine heart was tender, and thou
did humble thy self before God, when thou heardest his words against this
place, and against the inhabitants thereof, and humbledst thy self before me,
and did rend thy clothes, and weep before me, I have even heard thee also
says the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27, 28. How great respect had God to King
Manasses, (that Monster of wickedness,) and to the brokennesse of his spirit,
for when he was in affliction, he besought the Lord his God, Or, (...) He
submitted himself exceedingly.
and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers: And prayed unto
him, and he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him
again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. 13. In a word what
respect had Christ to the penitent woman's brokennesse of spirit, when he so
commends her entertainment of himself with Tears, washing of his feet with
them, wiping them with the hairs of her head, etc. before the Pharisees
entertaining of him with all his dainties and Complements, Luke 7. 36. to the
end. Now all this respect which God so peculiarly manifests to brokennesse of
spirit, makes it clear that a broken spirit, is Gods most grateful Sacrifice
and delight.

4. A broken Spirit is so pleasing to God, That he ranks a broken spirit, a
tender fleshy heart, a spirit of mourning, etc. 4.
among the rarest expressions of his special grace and favor promised to his
Church: Therefore where God promises, To be to his people a little Sanctuary
in the Countries where they shall come -- Their gathering again, -- The
Reformation of the Land -- Oneness of heart -- Newness of spirit, etc. he
adds, And I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them
an heart of flesh -- Ezekiel. 11. 16. to 21. And elsewhere, after other promises
God says, Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean,
from all your filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you. A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh, Ezekiel. 36. 24, 25, 26. etc. yea when those Evangelicall blessings are
promised to the House of David and inhabitants of Jerusalem, The spirit of
Grace and of Supplication; it is added, And they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son,
and shall be in bitterness for him as one that is in bitterness for his first
borne, etc. Zech. 12. 10. etc. Where, brokennesse of Spirit for the sins that
broke and pierced Christ, is expressed under the notions, of Mourning as for an
only son, of being in bitterness as for a first borne; of great mourning as of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddo, where good Josiah was slain. -- Now why
should this brokennesse of spirit be thus ranked among Gods choice promised
blessings, if the Lord had not choice thoughts and account thereof?

5. A Broken spirit is so grateful to God, That himself 5.
undertakes it to be the peculiar Physician to heal, bind up, revive, and
comfort poor broken hearts and bleeding souls. He heals the broken in
heart, and binds up their wounds, Psalm. 147. 3. He bottles up their tears,
and their sighing is not hid from him. He dwells in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit; but to what end? To
revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones,
Isai. 57. 15. Grief and sorrow kills, joy and comfort revives. Its true God
sometimes sets off the beauty of his own sweet Comforts, by the darksome shadow
of trouble of spirit and broken bones inflicted upon us; he casts down, that he
may lift us up: he crusheth, that he may consolate us: yea he kills us, that he
may more gratefully revive us; as one said. Dejicit, ut relevet: premit, ut
solatia praestet:
Enecat, ut possit vivificare Deus.


Still the scope and intendment of God is the swathing up of broken bones, the
sweetning of the embittered spirits of his people. This the very office of
Jesus Christ himself, The Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto
the meek, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, -- to comfort all that
mourn. To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness, Isai. (...). 1, 2, 3. Compared with Luke 4. 18. ^ices la^, quas
beniguae manus condi^s abstergunt: and beati ^uli qui in t^, liquefie
^el^gerunt, quam (...) superb^, qu^ omne sub^e vider^, ^uam ava^it^ae and
petul^ntiae ^u lati. Bern. de Contemp. mundi.
Happy tears which Christ's hand shall wipe often: happy wounds, which Christ's
blood shall close again; happy brokennesse of heart, which Christ shall bind
up, etc. behold how God, how Christ loves a broken heart.

6. Finally a truly broken spirit is so acceptable to God, That he is pleased
to select and single out the broken heart, 6.
the poor and contrite spirit, for his peculiar habitation, and for the place
of his rest. Where is the place of my rest? says God. Himself answers, To
this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, as
if he should say, here is my rest, here will I place mine eye and heart, here
will I repose my self and dwell, Isa. 66. 1. 2. But more clearly, elsewhere;
Thus says the high and lofty-one that inhabiteth eternity, whose nam^ is holy,
I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and
humble spirit, Isai. 57. 15. God will not dwell with the proud, hard,
impenitent, unbelieving heart, yet will dwell with the contrite and humble
spirit: What? God dwell there? how dear is such a heart to God? It is not said
Saints or Angels shall dwell with such, though they are sweet companions: Not
Peace, Joy, Comfort, Life, Grace, Holiness, Happiness, etc. shall dwell
there, though these are dear delights, able to change the blackest midnight
into a smiling morning, a very Prison into a Palace, and the vale of the
shadow of death, into a mountain of life and joy: But i^s said, that the High
and Lofty One that inhabits eternity, will dwell with him that is of an humble
and contrite spirit. Oh how does the highest God descend, how does the lowest
heart ascend in such an inhabitation! The broken heart says with the
Centurion, Lord I am not worthy thou should come under my roof; much less
that thou should dwell there.

11. Thus much of the (...), That a broken spirit is a 11.
most pleasing Sacrifice to God. Now pass we to the second particular, the
(...), Why a truly broken spirit should be so grateful Sacrifices to God? This
may be opened both Negatively and Affirmatively.

Negatively, this gratefulness of a broken spirit, arises not from any merit,
or any degree or shadow of merit that may be imagined to be Quod contritionem
attine^, noseam in poen^tentia vera necessariam statuimus -- modo and dolorem
illum o^ peccata secundum Deum intelligamus, and prope^catis satisfactorium non
agnolcamus: Gratiae enim Dei, non contritioni attribuenda est peccatorum
remissio. Ut Glossa de Poenitent distinct. 2 c 1. contra Council. Tridenum
definiuonem Sess. 14. c. 4. recte exposait. Synopsi pur. Theol Disp. 32.. (...).
in a broken spirit, (as the Popish merit-mongers do commonly suggest when they
treat of this Theme of brokennesse of heart.) For though ou^ heads were
waters, and our eyes fountains of tears, Jer. 9. 1. Though we should eat ashes
as bread, and mingle our drink with weeping, Psalm. 102. 9. though all the
night long we should make our bed to swim, and water our couch with tears,
Psalm. 6. that our eyes were dim with grief, our cheeks furrowed with sorrow,
and our very moisture turned into the droughts of Summer, Psalm. 32. 4. yet when
all is done, we are but unprofitable Servants, what have we done more then duty?
nay for ground, manner, and end of all our penitential mournings for sin,
do we not come short of duty? alas for us, ipsae Lachrymae sunt Lachrymabiles
etc. we had need to weeep over our tears, sigh over our sobs, mourn over our
griefs, be broken for our brokennnsse, and to repent over our very repentance;
not that these duties are performed by us, but that they are performed no
better, when we do our best, so much flesh adheres to all. We read of David's
broken bones, but we read not of his merit: I a^mas ejus lego, satisfactionem
non lego. A^de P^it. Petri Sermon. 46. and ^uc. l. (...). c. 46. August. Scra. 1
17. de Temp.
we read of Peter's bitter tears for his sin, but we read not a word of their
satisfaction, that must be left for ever to the blood of Christ.

Affirmatively, a broken spirit is a most grateful sacrifice to God, because,

1. A broken spirit is a spiritual sacrifice. Herein not the 1.
bodies or blood of dead bruit-beasts, but the spirit i^ self of ^g and
reasonable man, even his very heart and soul is sacrificed to God; (and the
spirit of one man is better then all the beasts and earthly creatures in the
whole world:) And the spirit of man offered, is not his spirit as stony and
carna^, but as broken and spiritualized with godly sorrow and repentance? The
spirit is the best of man, a broken spirit is the best of spirits.

Now God insists much upon the spiritualnesse of his sacrifices and services,
he specially calls for the heart, My son give me thine heart, Pro. 23. 26. all
the Gospell-sacrifices, which are acceptable to God in Christ, they are
spiritual Sacrifices, 1 Pet. 2. 5. living sacrifices, I beseech you therefore
brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living
sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service, or, your
service according-to-the-Word, Romans 12. 1. God himself is a spirit, and will
be worshipped in spirit, Joh. 4. 24. and the more the spirit of man is
spiritualized, the more it becomes both like God, and liked of God.

2. A broken spirit is a true and sincere spirit. It does not 2.
hypocritically cover its sin like Adam, Job. 31, 33. or spare any iniquity as
Saul did Agag, etc. But like a broken vessel, lets all run out, ingenuously
spreads open all its own vilenesses before the Lord, takes the shame of all
upon its own face, lets all lie loose; As water, mire, stones, heterogeneals
which were inseperably congealed in a hard bound frost, yet they all lie loose
when there comes a kindly thaw: so the heart that was once congealed in the
mire and dregs of sin, when with penitential brokennesse it is kindly thawed
and dissolved, sins that stuck fastest in the soul lie loose, the spirit longs
to be rid of them all, as here broken-spirited David lamented both originalls
and actualls, he spares not even his foulest and shamefullest miscarriages,
would be thoroughly purged from all, Psalm. 51. 2. 7. Thus Paul after he became
a man of a broken spirit, freely rips up his foulest enormities, confesses he
was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious 1. Tim. 1. 13. elsewhere he
says, I verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary
to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. Which thing I also did in Jerusalem, and many
of the Saints did I shut up in prison, having received Authority from the
chief Priests, and when they were put to death I gave my voice against them,
and I punished them often in every Synagogue, and compelled them to blaspheame,
and being exceedingly mad against them, I persecuted them even unto strange
Cities, Act. 26. 9. 10. 11. And it is observeable how Gods promise of an heart
of flesh, is coupledwith the promise of sprinkling clean water upon his people,
of cleansing them from all their filthiness and from all their uncleanness,
Ezekiel. 36. 25. 26. 29. An heart of flesh, and uncleanness, cannot peaceably
lodge together; it would sincerely abandon all: Verus poenitens de peccatis
dolet, and de dolor gaudet. Synops. pur. Theol. Disp. 32. 35.
is in bitterness for all, and takes pleasure in that bitterness:
Counterfeits not trouble for sin like the Pharisees with their sower disfigured
faces, Math. 6. Squeezes not out a few crocodiles tears, etc. but his very
soul bleeds, and his eye trickles down with tears in secret, pouring out
complaints into the bosom of God, when no eye but his sees. Ille dolet vere,
qui sine test dolet.

Now God calls for uprightness, walk before me and be thou upright, Genesis 17.
1. he loves sincerity and Truth in the inward parts, Psalm. 51. 6. and Nathaniel
is prized and commended of Christ for a True Israelite indeed, because in him
there was no guile, Joh. 1. 27.

3. A broken spirit is a gracious spirit. Its part of the Grace 3.
promised in the Current of the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 11. 19. etc. and 36. 26,
27. etc. its one fruit, and that a Principal one of the spirit of grace
promised, Zech. 12. 10. etc. Consequently its part of that precious image of
God consisting in true holiness, Ephesians. 4. 24. and a rich link of that
admirable chain of Thus ^unius, and Ainsworth expound this expression vid.
utrumque in loc.
grace about the Churches neck, Cant. 4. 9.

And therefore God is much taken with a truly broken heart, he cannot choose but
accept and prize his own Graces in us, love his own image, and the reflexive
rays of his own beauty upon us. Christ pathetically professes to his Church
as much; Thou have ravished my heart, my sister my spouse; thou have ravished my
heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. The smell of thine
ointments is better then all spices, -- the smell of thy Garments is like the
smell of Lebanon, Cant. 4. 9. 10. 11.

4. A truly broken spirit is also a believing spirit. Faith and repentance are
inseparable twins, bred together in one and the same sanctified womb of the
converted Soul. Faith first is in us in order of nature at least, but actual
Repentance is apt first to appear: as sap and life are first in the root, yet
buds leaves and fruit first discover themselves in the branches. They shall
look upon me whom they have pierced: ther'es faith, for with what other eye can
they behold Christ crucified? And they shall monrn for him, etc. there is
brokennesse of spirit resulting from it, Zech. 12. 10. There is an hard
Question in Divinity, whether Faith be not part of Repentance? Synops (...)
Theol. (...). 40.
Thus some Resolve, If Repentance be considered largely for the whole work of
Conversion, so faith is comprised in it: if strictly, so it is the cause
thereof. however they are nearly allied, Sister-graces.

Now faith wonderfully pleases God, Heb. 11. 5, 6. hence that we read of such
a Catalogue of Faiths Triumphs, and glorious atchievments in that Chap. Faith
most highly honors God, and God highly honors faith. Faith clasps fast hold
of Jesus Christ, as its peculiar object, and comes into the presence of God
with Christ crucified in its Arms, urges his person and passion, as sins
propitiation; Counts all self-righteousnesse loss and dung, in comparison of
Christ's righteousness, Phil. 3. 7, 8. this, this is that which so singularly
pleases God; in as much as the person of Christ is most dear to God, his
beloved son, Math. 3. 17. the son of his love, Col. 1. 13. his only bogotten
son, Joh. 3. 16. in whom he is well pleased, Math. 3. 17. yea in whom his soul
delights, Isai. 42. 1. and the passion of Christ, is an odor of a sweet
smell to God, Ephesians. 5. 2. 3. no pillar of most fragrant incense or perfume, is
any way comparable thereunto. Thus brokennesse of spirit intwisted with faith,
and faith fast linking it self to Christ, become most grateful unto God.

5. Finally, a broken spirit is a self-debasing spirit. Can lay it 5.
self low before God, is vile in its own eyes. See this in several persons;
The Pharisy and the Publican, both of them went up into the Temple to pray, but
they went about the same work with far different hearts; The Pharisees was
stony and unbroken, therefore he only exalts himself, cracks and brags of
himself, justifies himself before all others: But the Publicans heart was
fleshy and broken, and therefore vilifies himself, dejects, debases, and
abhorres himself, Luke 18. 10. to 15. See this in the selfsame persons,
comparing them with themselves being found in several states and conditions.
Paul before he was broken in heart, he was alive, Romans 7. 9. stood much upon
his native or acquired Privileges, Phil. 3. 2, 3. etc. but when once he was
kindly broken, confesses all these things to be loss, yea loss and dung: and
counts himself unworthy to be called an Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 9. less then the
least of all Saints, Ephesians. 3. 8. chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. now he vailes
all his topsayles, sits down in the dust. Thus the Prodigal, when his spirit
became broken, debases himself exceedingly, Father I have sinned against heaven
and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son, make me as one of
thine hired servants, as if he had said, any, even the meanest of all relations
to thee, is far too good for me, Luke 15. 18. 19. Thus the sinful woman, when
her heart was penitentially broken for sin, how she debases her self; she
addresses her self not to Christ's head, but to his very feet, and there she
falls a weeping, and with her tears she washes, with the hair of her head she
wipes, with her mouth she kisses, and with her costly ointment she annoynts his
very feet, thought it honor enough for her, and her self exceeding happy, that
she might have liberty to perform the very meanest and lowest services unto
Christ, Luke 7. 38. Oh an heart thoroughly broken for sin, is greatly out of
conceit with its self, can lie down in the dust at the foot of God, can be as
any thing, can be as nothing that God in Christ may be all.

Now the Lord greatly prizeth a Summum est, hoc Sacrificium aliis omnibus
praeferri a deo, dum fideles vera sui abnegatione sic prostrati jacent, ut
nihil de se altum sapiant, sed patiantur se in nihilum redigi. Calvin in Isai
66. 2.
self-despising spirit, has respect to such, Isai. 66. 1, 2. will dwell with
such to revive them, Isa. 57. 15. And how was the selfe-debasing Publican
justified before the Pharisy? Luke 18. how was the selfe-debasing Prodigal
entertained of his father, Luke 15. 14. yea how was the self-debasing
penitentiary commended and comforted by Christ? Luke 7. 44, 45, 46. who from
this principle of broken-heartednesse were so mean and vile in their own
apprehensions.

Hitherto of the Doctrinall handling of this Observation, Applicat^^n 4. ways:
viz by
Now to the Practical Application. Is a truly broken spirit, such grateful
Sacrifices of God? Then how useful is this Doctrine, both to Teach, To Try, To
Exhort, and to Comfort us about this mystery of a broken heart.

This may Teach and inform us, chiefly about these two (...). Information.
things,

1. That there is a vast odds and disparity betwixt that account 1.
which God, and that which the world has of a broken spirit. With God a broken
and a contrite spirit (as has been showed) is most acceptable, beyond all
Typical Sacrifices, before all mere moral performances and Pharisaicall
perfections, peculiarly respected of God, ranked among the choice and flower of
promised blessings, the special cure of God, and the very Home and habitation
of the Lord himself most high and holy: But on the contrary this brokennesse of
heart is with the world, and the men of the world most unacceptable, is looked
upon as a sad, mopish, melancholy disconsolate distemper; always contrary to
their genius, who resolve to crown thimselves with rose-buds, before they be
withered, and to let no flower of the spring over-passe them; who say with the
rich fool, Soul thou have much goods laid up for many years, eat, drink and
be merry, Luc. 12. 19. etc. However the Saints know the world is grossly
mistaken in this matter of brokennesse of spirit for sin, and while God himself
counts it his Sacrifices, they can say Gemitus d^ctus quasi geminatus luctus,
quem merito fideles app^tunt, quoniam diligentes consolatur, poenitentes
emund^t, diabolum effugat, Cl^^sto conciliat, amaritudo dulcis, Lachr) mae
felices, salutar^s affli^tio. Cassi^. (...). Psalm.
it is an wholesome brokennesse, a sweet bitterness, a joyful sorrow, and
happy tears.

2. That an unbroken spirit an hard flinty adamantine heart is on the contrary
most hateful and abominable to God. A broken 2.
and contrite heart he cannot despise: an unbroken heart consequently he cannot
but despise. Take a short view of 1. the nature of an hard heart, and 2. of the
odiousness of such an heart to God.

The nature of an heard heart (which Scripture sometimes calls An heart waxing
gross, or fat, and so senseless, Act. 28. 27. and often elsewhere, a stony
heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26. Hardness of heart, Mark. 3. 5. Hardness,
Romans 2. 5. etc.) may be considered as it is hardened 1. Naturally, 2. Actually
and accidentally, 3. Habitually, and 4. Judicially.

1. Naturally every man's heart is an hard heart; a very stone, 1.
for intractablenesse and obduration. This is evident by the Tenor of the
Covenant of Grace, wherein God first undertakes to remove the stony heart,
before he give a fleshy heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19. -- and 36. 26, 27. therefore till
God by supernatural dispensation bestow a tender heart, every one by nature
lies under the curse of an heard heart. And this natural hardness of heart is
compared, not to the hardness of wax, or brass, or Iron or steel (for
though these be very hard, yet they become soft and malleable by the fire) but
to the hardness of a very stone, which will be sooner broken to powder then
softened, as Cor hominis non renativocaturlapideum Ezech. 11. 36. non ferreum,
quia 1. Etiamsi serrum durum sit, ut manibus flecti non postir, versarique
sicut cera: habettamen quandam qualitatem, licet exiguam, ad mollitiem nempe,
ut si igni admoveatur, molle fieri ^ueat, and malle^ omnem formam ^lecti,
quanquam remaneat ferrum. At lap^s nullam hab^^ mo^lit^em, neque ad mollitiem
aptitudin^m, ut seillcet ad^utus igne molles^ere malleoque ^lecti possit,
permanens lapis: Si^ cor nostrum ^ulla ratione ductile aut flexibile est, ad
r^cti obedie^^iam, ideoque opus est, ut totum cor auferatur, and aliud in ejus
lo^um reponatur. 2. Exlapide nullus unquam siquor exprimi poterit, unde
miraculum illud fu^t maximum, cum e pet^a in deserto fluxerunt aquae: sic e
cord nostro nihil penitus exprimi potest bo^ ^^si aliud siat, i. e. e lapideo
carneum. 3. Lapis non vivit ut ca^o, nec in^orde est aliquid vitae spiritualis,
4. Non ait Deus se transformaturum cor ^apid^um in cor carn^: sed ablat^m
lapideum, and daturum carneum. Significans in natura nostra nihil esle quod
as^initatem habeat cum natura Dei, sed opus est ut tota vetus natura tollatur,
and nova reponatur. -- Zanch, de liber. Arbit. These. 9.
Zanchy observes, so extreme is our natural hardness.

2. Actually and accidentally, not only the hearts of natural 2.
men, but also even of regenerate persons may contract some hardness,
spiritual security and stupidity; by not improving grace received, and other
means for maintaining and increasing of tenderness of heart. Thus the
Disciples believed not that it was Christ that walked on the Sea, because they
had forgot the miracles of the loaves, and their hearts were hardened, Mark. 6.
52. This seems to be an accidental hardness, discovered in that act.

3. Habitually men's hearts are hardened in sin, when by many acts men are so
accustomed to do evil that they cannot lay it aside; no more then the black
Moore his skin, or the Leopard his spots, Jer. 13. 23. This habitual hardness
creeps and steals upon men's spirits through sins subtilty, which leaves behind
it not only reatum, guilt, but also maculum, a stain, or spot: -- lest any of
you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. 13. This hardness
grows on by steps and degrees as Divines observe, viz. 1. There Is Suggestion of
sin, 2. Acceptance of the Suggestion. 3. Acting the sin accepted, 4.
Delighting in sin acted. 5. Habit and Custom in sin delighted in. 6. Necessity
in sin accustomed. 7. Finally death the result of all. See Jam. 1. 14. 15.
Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed. Then
when lust has conceived it brings forth sin, and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death. Wherein observe these degrees; 1. Lust within, which is
the nursery of sin, and a Tinder to catch at all Temptations. 2. Drawing-away
by it, viz. from God, 3. Entising, viz. unto evil. 4. Lusts corruption, viz. a
delightful accepting of the entisement, and consent of the will and heart
thereto, etc. 5. Bringing forth of sin, viz. into act, and execution. 6.
Finishing of sin acted, i. e. Going on in a course and custom of sinning, it
being a further step, Perfectum itaque peccatum non intelligo unum aliquod opus
perpetratum, sed cursum peccandi completum. Calv. in loc.
as Calvin notes. 7. Death, the due wages of all. -- The degrees of hardening
in sin are thus reckoned up by Bernard. l. de Conscientia.
Bernard (if he was author of that Book de Conscientia) viz. 1. He that has
been accustomed to welldoing, falling to sin grievously; Sin seems to him a
burden so intolerable, as if in sinning he were going down to hell alive. 2. Of
insupportable, in short time it becomes but heavy. 3. Of heavy, light, 4. Of
lightsome, delightsome. 5. Of delightsome, desirable. 6. Of desirable
customary. 7. Of Customary, excusable, 8. Of excusable, defensible. 9. Of
defensible, matter of boasting; To this height can nothing be added. Nothing so
much exasperateth the Majesty of that dreadful Judge as to sin, and securely
to sin, and to boast of vices as though they were virtues.

4. Judicially men's hearts are hardened in sin, when they are forsaken of God
and given up to their own obduration and the dominion of the Devil, that
seeing they will be hard they shall be hard with a witness. Thus we read often
of Gods hardening of Pharaoh's heart, Exodus 4. 22. and 7. 3. etc. and that God
hardens whom he will, Romans 9. 18. Pharaoh had many judgments upon him, but
his hard heart was the most dreadful of all his judgments. This was the
Plague of his plagues: This the Plague of his Soul: This a Plague that would
stick upon him to all eternity.

But when God is said in his just judgment to harden men's hearts, we must
understand it wisely, cautiously, Non indurat deus imperti^^do malitiam: sed
non impertiendo misericordiam August. Epist. 105.
God hardens no man's heart by infusing any new wickedness thereinto as the
Manichees wickedly imagined. See Jam. 1. 13. For then God should be the Author
of sin, (which were blasphemous once to think.) But God hardens the heart 1. By
Sed quomodo punit deus induratione? Non solum sustentat durum Cor hominis:
praescit ejus duritiem; homini contumaciter furenter s^ opponenti subtrahit
suam gratiam; permittit cum ferri suis cupiditatibus: Sed etiam Satanae talem
hominem tradit, a quo efficacit^r induretur; ut homini in potestatem diaboli
tradito offert verbum, idque subinde inculcat, nec tamen aliud quicquam
esticit, quam ut peccator fiat deterior; Distert insuper paenas, qua dei (...)
ad majorem indurationem homo pessime abutitur: Tandem etiam justitiam suam, in
poena induratorum ostendit. Sic ergo indurat deus, non ut peccati author,
necutotiosus spectator, sed ut justissimus jude^. Gerh. Loc. Com. Tom* 1. de
Providentia 119.
withdrawing or denying to the heart his softning grace, (which he is not bound
to give,) whereby the heart might be restrained from sin; which grace being
denied, the sinner hardens his own heart by his own inward pravity: as when an
owner denies to prop up or repair a ruinous, reeling house, the house falls by
its own ponderousness. Thus Divines make God, Causam removentem prohibens, a
cause removing the impediment, of such sins, as men rush upon when their
hold-back is removed. 2. By Delivering men up to the swinge of their own lusts,
and the dominion of Satan. Compare these places, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Romans 1. 26,
27, 28, etc. 1 King. 22. 22, 23. Joh. 13. 26, 27. in such case God says, he
that is filthy let him be filthy still; he that is hard-hearted let him be
hard-hearted, etc. 3. By giving m^n means of restraint, which falling upon
hearts thus forsaken of God, exasperate and enlarge them the more in all
wickedness with violence and greediness: as the stopping or damming up of a
violent torrent, makes the streams thereof the more impetuous; not that these
restraints provoke to sin properly and formally in their own Nature: but
occasionally and accidentally only through hard-hearted men's abuse. Thus the
Law irritates sin, works in them all manner of co^piscence, Romans 7. 8. Thus the
Prophets and Ministers of the word, harden some men accidentally, Isai. 6. 9,
10. with Act. 28. 26, 27. which soften others: as the same Sun which softens
wax, hardens elay; the same heavenly heat which makes a garden of flowers smell
more fragrantly, makes sinks or dunghills sent more loathsomely, 4. By denying
unto hard-hearted men even those means of restraint, after those means have
been thus miserably abused; but wholly leaving them to the Calamity of their
own ways. See Hos. 4. 14.

Thus much in brief of the nature of Hardness of Heart.

Now in the next place, consider how odious an hard heart is to God, and
consequently how odious and burdensome it should be to all Gods people. The
hatefulness and odiousness of an hard Heart to God appears plainly in diverse
respects, viz. In that he 1. Forbids it, 2. Grieves at it, 3. Brands it, 4.
Threatens it; and 5. Plagues it. Take a taste of all these out of the word.

1. God forbids it in his word; cries, harden not your hearts, 1.
-- See Psalm. 95. 8. Heb. 3. 8. 15. and 4. 7. What God forbids is displeasing
and hateful to him.

2. God much lays to heart the hardness of men's hearts. Jesus 2.
Christ looked round about upon the Pharisees with Anger, being grieved for the
hardness of their hearts, Mark. 3. 5. And after his Resurrection he upbraided
his own Disciples for the hardness of their hearts, in that they believed not
them that had seen Christ after he was risen, Mar. 16. 14. yea God professes
he was grieved with hard-hearted Israel for 40. years together, Heb. 3. 8, 9,
10.

3. God brands hardness of heart with such notes of infamy 3.
and disgrace, as discover his great detestation thereof. Among many other
passages hardness of heart is accounted of God a fruit and proper effect of
sin: Lest your hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.
13. such as is the cause, such is the proper effect, both abominable to God.

Hardness of heart is accounted a great sin it self, whereby God is much
tempted and provoked, Heb. 3. 8, 9, 10. The depth of a man's natural misery
under sin is laid down under the Notion of having a stony heart, Ezekiel. 11. 19.
20. and 36. 26, 27. The height of Pharoahs sin is comprised under his hardness
of heart, Exodus 14. 4.

Yea hardness of heart is a cause of sin Quid est cordurum? ipsum est quod nec
compunctione scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec movetur precibus, minis non
cedit, flagellis duratur, ingratum est ad beneficia, infidum ad con^a, saevum
ad judicia: inverecundum ad tur^ia, impavidum ad pericula, inhumanum ad human^,
temerarium ad divina, praeteritorum oblivi^cens, praesentium negligens, fu^ura
non providens: ipsum est, cui praeteritorum praeter solas inju^ias nihil ommino
non praeterit: ^uturorum nulla, nisi sort ad ulciscendum, prospectio est. Bern.
of any the foulest abominations; what Temptation of the Devil will not an
hard heart swallow down, what horrid impieties will not an hard heart rush
furiously upon? See that passage 2. King. 17. 14, etc. This is as a wicked
Devil that brings along many other devils with it, to possess the soul. More
especially it brings forth the cursed fruits of 1. Woeful impenitency, an hard
heart cannot, will not, repent, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Romans 2. 5. 2. Wilful
Rebellion, pride and obstinacy against God, Dan. 5. 20. Nehem. 9. 16, 17. 29.
Jerem. 7. 26. Ezekiel. 3. 7. 3. Woeful and damnable unbelief, Act. 19. 9. Mark.
6. 51, 52. and 8. 16, 17, etc. and 16. 14. Heb. 3. 8. 11. compared with ver.
18. 19.

4. God threatens hardness of heart with sad and heavy Comminations, 4.
as Pro. 28. 14. and notably, Pro. 29. 10. Jer. 19. 15. but most remarkably,
Heb. 3. 8. to 12. Gods threats argue evidently Gods wrath against it.

5. Finally, over and beyond all this, God plagues hardness of heart with
dreadful judgments, who ever hardened himself against God, and prospered?
Job. 9. 4. 1. What Temporal vengeance inflicts he for hardness of heart? as
upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, who after all their plagues for hardening their
hearts against God, were at once intombed in the Red Sea, Exodus 14. upon
Israel, for their hardness of heart not suffered to enter into Gods rest, to
enjoy the promised Canan, Heb. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. and afterward, they that
came into the promised Land, for this wickedness were removed out of Gods
sight, 2 King. 17. 14. with 18. How terrible was that vengeance of God upon
Nebuchadnezar hardened in his pride? Dan. 5. 20, 21, read it, and tremble at it,
2. What Spiritual wrath does God pour out upon hard hearts? giving them up to
utter obduration, as in Pharaoh, Exodus 4. 22. and 7. 3. and in others, Joh. 12.
40. 3. Finally, what eternal vengeance do hard hearts here treasure up unto
themselves against the day of wrath? -- Romans 2. 5, etc. Doubtless if God thus
forbid, thus lay to heart, thus brand, thus threaten, and thus plague, an hard
heart: an hard heart, be it never so pleasing to man, or grateful to Satan,
yet it is most hateful and abominable to the great heart-searching God: How
woeful their condition that lie under the plague of an hard heart! How happy
they that are delivered from it!

This may serve to put us all upon the Trial and Examination of our hearts and
spirits whether they be broken or no; II. Examination.
that so we may discover whether they be the grateful Sacrifices of God or no?
which of us would not be glad that our hearts and spirits might be truly
acceptable to God? then let us diligently inquire whether they be truly broken
and contrite. The stresse of our Comfort will peculiarly lean upon this basis
of penitential brokennesse; if our hearts be actually broken this day, what an
Odor of a sweet smell shall they be to God in Christ? if they be habitually
broken, how pleasing shall they be to God continually? but all will depend upon
this, that they be kindly broken and softened as David's was.

But how may we discover whether our hearts and spirits be truly broken and
contrite? Answ. Principally 2. ways,

1. By the Concomitants or Companions of a broken spirit. 2. By the Adjuncts or
Properties thereof.

1. By the Concomitants or Companions attending upon a broken spirit, Noscitur
ex comite, qui non dignoscitur ex se, oft-times a man is known by his
Companions, more then by his own Conditions. All the graces of the spirit are
spiritually concatenated and linked together: but some graces being more
peculiarly homogeneall and near of kin to one another, are more immediately
coupled and associated, and such do mutually descry and discover one another.

Now these are the usual and famliiar Companions of true brokennesse of
spirit, and tenderness of heart, viz.

1. A Spirit of Prayer and Supplication. A broken spirit is 1.
a praying spirit, they usually go together, they are promised together, I will
power -- the spirit of grace and supplications, and they shall look upon me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, etc. Zech. 12. 10. to the
end. They are performed together; when the heart of the Prodigal son was
touched and broken for his lewd courses, presently he resolves upon praying, I
will go to my Father and say to him, Father I have sinned against heaven and
before thee Luke 15. 18. Saul (who afterward was called Paul) was no sooner
dismounted, struck to the earth, and his heart humbled and broken at his first
Conversion by Christ's immediate voice from Heaven, but Christ gives this
character of him, Behold he prays, Act. 9. 11. this was worth beholding, and
considering indeed, that a persecuting Saul, should so soon become a praying
Saint. Yea Jesus Christ himself being so broken and abased in his spirit with
surrounding sorrow in his agony, (...), he prayed more fervently, Luke 22. 44.
then he did as it were bend all his nerves, intend the utmost activity of his
spirit, to wrestle with his heavenly father, the Apostle says, he offered up
Prayers and Supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5. 7. Some
writings cannot be read but in water, and those Petitions of believers which
are indicted by the spirit with sobs and groans, and swimming along toward God
in streams of tears, how legible and available are they with God? The spirit
it self helps our infirmities. -- See Romans 8. 26. No spirit can sigh and
groan, can weep and mourn, can tug and wrestle with God like a broken spirit.
Such a spirit, not so much prays to God, as powers out it self, and all its
desires into the bosom of God. See Psalm. 102. Title of the Psalm. Such a spirit
prays importunately, pathetically, powerfuly: of all frames of Soul, this
melting broken frame of spirit is Oration justi clavis est coeli, ascendit
piaecatio, and descendit dei misera^^o. ^etus cuius audit quam voces. August.
Ser^. 226. de Temp.
most ingenuous eloquent and potent in prayer, fetches arguments from the best
to picks, Gods nature, Christ's merit, Covenant, promises, etc. fills it self
full of them as a vessel with new wine; urges, darts them up vigorously,
pursues the Lord, will let him have no rest, will have no nay, resolves like
Jacob not to let him go, till he reach out a blessing. Reflect now upon thy
self o Christian, where is thy Spirit of Supplication? Where those mighty
unutterable groans and desires? where those wrastlings, etc. do thou not
know what a spirit of prayer means? neither do thou know what a broken
spirit means.

2. Humility. A broken spirit is an humble spirit, low in 2.
its own eyes, thinks worse of it self then of any others, or then any others
can think of it; can prefer the meanest Saint before it self, counting it
self the least of Saints, if a Saint at all, etc. But to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit -- Isai. 66. 2,
Poverty of spirit and brokennesse of spirit, are familiar companions. Again God
says -- I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, -- Isai 57. 15. Here Humility and Contrition of
Spirit are Associates. A proud, self-rich, self-full spirit is very
inconsistent with a broken spirit, the Angel of the Church that proudly
bragged, that he was rich, and increased with goods, and had need of no thing;
was as far from brokennesse of heart, as he was from apprehensivenesse of his
own misery, not knowing that he was wretched and miserable and poor and blind
and naked, Rev. 3. 17. Where now is thine humility and spiritual poverty? if
thou be hardened in spiritual pride, self-conceit, etc. how should a broken
spirit lodge in thy breast?

3. Love to Jesus Christ. A broken spirit is a tender affectionate loving
spirit, and the love of such a spirit flames out 3.
most ardently toward Christ. Oh it entirely loves Christ, that loved it,
prayed for it, bled for it, dyed for it, and washed it from its sin in his own
blood, Gal. 2. 20. Rev. 1. 5. how it esteems, affects, embraces the Lord!
says, thou art my portion in the land of the living -- whom have I in heaven
but thee? and in earth there is none that I can desire besides thee? -- All
things are but loss and dung to the wining of Christ, Phil. 3. one Christ is
worth ten thousand worlds, etc. See how strong the love of that penitent
brokenhearted woman was to Christ. Her bathing his feet in her tears, wiping
them with her hairs, kissing them with her mouth, and annoynting them with
costly oynment, palpably proclaim her love to Christ, and Christ himself
testifies, that she loved much, Luke 7. 37. 38. 44. to 49. she could not choose,
for Christ had loved her much; he forgave her her sins which were many, and she
gave him her affections and tears which were many. No wonder that a broken
heart is a Christ-loving-heart; for, its Christ that gives the broken heart;
Zech. 12. 10, 11. its Christ that loves, comforts, and binds up the broken
heart, Isai 61. 1, 2, etc. with Luke 4. 18, 19. there is much of Christ in the
broken heart: how then can a broken heart choose but be endeared to Christ? As
the soaking April showers make the fields send forth a sweet smell, or as the
bruising of Camomil makes it the more fragrantly odoriferous: so Christ
softening and bruising the heart, makes the heart express a sweet fragrancy of
love to him. See now what tender affection thou bear to Jesus Christ, to his
Person, presence, office, Honor, Ordinances, image in his members, etc. if
thou would read brokennesse in thine heart.

4. Obedience. A broken spirit is a dutiful tractable obedientiall 4.
spirit. Thus these two are coupled together, -- And I will give them an heart
of flesh, (there is brokennesse of spirit) That they may walk in my Statutes and
keep mine Ordinances and do them, (there is obedience associated to brokennesse
of heart,) Ezekiel. 11. 19, 20. and the like Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. softened wax will
receive any impression; melted mettle will run into any mould: thus a melted
softened heart, will bend and bow as God will have it: Then a Persecuting Saul
can say, Lord what will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 6. as if he should say,
Lord do but thou command, I am ready to obey. Then the betrayers and murderers
of Christ can say, men and brethren what shall we do? Act. 2. 37. as if they
had said, we see we are undone in our selves by our sins, but now we are ready
to take any course for remedy, which the Lord by you shall prescribe. Such an
heart is fixed and resolved upon all dutiful compliance with Gods commands:
can say as Da quod jubes, and jube quod vis. August. Conses. 1. l. 1. c. 13.
Augustine, Lord give me ability to do what thou command, and then command
me whatsoever thou please. Have thou such a flexible dutiful spirit? a
broken spirit is an obedient spirit. But an hard heart, like a stone, will not
bow or bend, may sooner be ground to powder. Hardened Pharaoh professed, he
would not let Israel go, Exodus 5. 2. Hard-hearted Manasses and the people
would not hearken to Gods messages, 2 Chronicles. 33. 10. The stubborn and stony
spirited Jews, tell Jeremiah plainly, As for the word that thou have spoken to
us in the name of the Lord, we will not harken unto thee: but we will certainly
do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own mouth, -- Jer. 44. 16, 17.

2. By the Adjuncts or Properties of a truly penitential broken spirit, we may
further discover whether our spirits be broken, and thereupon the grateful
sacrifices of God. Among the many Properties that might be insisted upon, take
a taste of these few that follow.

1. A broken spirit grieves and mourns for the sins of others, 1.
especially for the public abounding sins of the times wherein it lives. A
soft heart is like the moist elements water and air, which are very hardly
kept in and contained within their own bounds; it satisfies not it self only
within the bounds of its own sins to lament them, but runs abroad also in
lamentations for others. This as Pia est ista tristitia, and si dici potest,
beata miseria, vitiis alienis tribulari non implicari: dolor contrahi, amore
non attrahi, etc. August. Ep. 545.
Augustine expresses it, is pia tristitia, and beata miseria, i. e. A pious
sorrow, and blessed misery to be afflicted for, not to be entangled with others
vices, etc. Thus that Phoenix-King Josiahs heart was tender, and he mourned and
wept and rent his clothes for the sins of the land. 2 Chronicles. 34. King David
was a man after Gods own heart, and his heart was habitually tender and
broken, and how was he affected and afflicted at the sins of others, I beheld
(says he) the transgressors and was grieved; because they kept not thy Word,
Psalm. 119. 158. And again, Horror has taken hold upon me: because of the
wicked that forsake thy Law, Psalm. 119. 53. And yet further, Rivers of waters
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy Law, Psalm. 119. 136. Mark,
Josiah's heart was tender, he humbled himself before God, he rent his clothes,
and wept before the Lord. David expresses his grief, horror, and rivers of
tears, and both for others sins. Here, Right Honorable, you may see in these
two gracious Kings, that it is a beam of true honor and nobility becoming
Peers, or Princes, to have broken spirits, that can relent for others offenses.
And this is the Periphrasis of those tenderhearted Saints in Jerusalem, -- Men
that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that are done in the midst
thereof, Ezekiel. 9. 4. Whereas an hard heart troubles not it self at others
sins, but rather does the same, and takes pleasure in them that do them, Romans
1. 32. How is thine heart affected at others sins, especially at the horrid
impieties of these times, where is thy grief, thy horror, thy sighs, thy cries,
thy rivers of tears in secret? etc.

2. A broken spirit has clearest and saddest apprehensions of 2.
its own sinfulness; if others sins be motes, its own are beams; if others be
molehills its own are apprehended as mountains. The sins of others are
bitter, but its own sins are very Poenitentiam ce^m non facit, nisi odium
peccati, and amor Dei. Quando sic poenites, ut tibi an^rum sapiat in animo,
quod ante dulce fuit in vita: and quod te p^ius oblectabat in corpore, ipsum t^
c^uciat in mente, jam tunc been ingemi^cis, and dicis ad Deum, Tibi solipeccavi
Aug. Ser. 3. de Not. Dom.
wormwood, and the gall of bitterness. The eyes of such, like the Cherubims
faces, 2 Chronicles. 3. 13. are inward and most intent upon themselves. They know
that in themselves that is in their flesh dwells no good, Romans 7. 18. but by
nature, a mere Randezvouz, sink, Sodom and Hell of all sin: Original sin
being seminally, potentially and dispositively, all sins; consequently all
imaginations thoughts words works in that state only evil continually, Genesis 6.
5. and if brought into a state of grace still seeing another law in their
members warring, etc. Romans 7. 23, a body of death, Romans 7. 24. (...), that
casily-encompassing sin, Heb. 12. 1. whence not only innumerable swarms of
errors, infirmities, etc. and that in the best and most spiritual duties do
surround them, but too often gross lapses overturne them. These things sadly
pondered, deeply wound and perplex broken spirits; so that they are pricked in
their hearts, Act. 2. 36. they mourn, and are in bitterness, Zech. 12. 10, 11.
Their very bones are as it were broken, Psalm. 51. and they dolefully groan out
with the Apostle, oh wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us from the
body of this death, Romans 7. 24. For these things what sighs, sobs, tears and
sorrows do they power out before the Lord. Saepe quod torpentes latuit,
flentibus innotescit: and a^^licta men's certius invent malum quod fecerat, and
reatum suum cujus secura non me^t, hunc in se commota deprehendit. Greg lib. 8.
Moral.
Softness of heart making them most sensible of their own corruptions, which
while their hearts were hardened they little regarded: as blots run abroad and
seem biggest in wet paper: when the cockatrice egg is crushed, it breaks out
into a viper, Isai. 59. 5. the viper formerly hid and undiscovered, then
appears: Thus when the carnal heart is crushed and bruised, then the toads,
snakes, vipers and vermin of sin are evidenced, which till then were not
imagined to be there. Philosophers have a maxim, grave non gravitat proprio
loco, An heavy thing is not felt heavy in its own place, as water in the sea;
but a little of that water out of its proper place is more heavy then can be
borne: whilst the heart is in its hard sinful state, its in its element, in
its own natural place, sin is no burden: but when the heart becomes
spiritually broken for sin, and is taken out of its natural condition, then
the insupportable load of sin is felt with a witness. Consider, is all sin
bitter, thine own sin most bitter: do thou cast first stone at thy self?
etc.

3. A broken spirit is most perplexed at sin, as it is against God, as it is
against Jesus Christ. To sin against so 3.
good a God, so sweet a Savior, oh how this kills a broken spirit! this stabbed
David to the heart above all other consideratious, that he had sinned against
his God, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, -- Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee
that have made me, maintained me, loved me, delivered me, crowned me, redeemed
me, etc. oh against thee, thee only; what? had not David sinned against
Vriiah's life, by murdering him? against Bathsheba's chastity, by uncleanness:
against his own body, the Temple of the holy Ghost, by defiling it? 1 Cor. 6.
18. 19. and against the honor of Religion, scandalizing Gods people, and
giving great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspeame? 2 Samuel 12. 14. All
this is true, nor intended David to deny it, but to show where the pinch of his
grief principally lay; it went most of all to his heart that he had fined
against such a God. And when the Jews shall be re-implanted into their own
stock, This shall most deeply pierce them, that they did so cruelly and
causelessly pierce Christ. This shall bring them to mourn as for an only son, to
be in bitterness as for a first born, to a great mourning as in Hadadrimmon,
etc. for Josiah that best of Kings; to a particular private and serious
mourning, every family apart, and their wives apart, Zech. 12. 10. 11, 12. Hard
hearts are chiefly troubled at fear, shame or punishment for sin: but nothing
more melts a broken spirit then that it has sinned against such matchless^
love, spurned against melting bowels, and offended against such precious blood
of such a Savior: oh how its pricked with Christ's crown of thorns, how it
bleeds over Christ's bleeding wounds, and for its tearing open Christ's side and
heart, how it could tear its self in pieces!

4. A broken spirit trembles at Gods word, and at Gods Rod: 4.
when God speaks, and when God strikes.

At Gods Word the broken spirit trembles. But to this man will I look, even to
him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word, Isai 66.
2. He trembles at the promises, lest he should distrust them: at the Nihil
formidabilius est, quam non formidare dei minas. Basil. d^ Spiritu Sanct.
Threats, least he should despise them, and involve himself in them: at the
Commands, lest he should disobey and violate them, etc. oh there is enough in the
word of divine Majesty power and authority to make a Giants heart to quake.
Felix the Governor trembled before Paul preaching of judgment, etc. and Paul
at that time but a poor Prisoner in chains, Act. 24, 25. Did Felix tremble
slavishly? how much more do the contrire spirits tremble f^lially. They that
despise, scorn, oppose, blaspheme the word of God, how far are they from
true penitential Contrition?

At Gods Rod also the contrite spirit quakes. How did the repenting people of
God in Ezra's days, Tremble because of the great Rain? Ezr. 10. 9. and this
is the judgment of God that has of late been most extraordinarily inflicted
upon this Land, for which we are here trembling before the Lord this day: sure
we have great cause to tremble, not only at the plague of waters it self and
the sad consequences of scarcity and dearth which may follow, but much more at
the wrath of God that appears therein, and the sins of England the procuring
cause thereof. Yea a tender heart trembles at the very shaking of Gods Rod, how
did good Josiah's heart melt when Gods displeasure against his people did but
hang in the threats? 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.

5. Finally A broken spirit, humbled and wounded truly for sin, sets speedily
and seriously upon a real Reformation. Upon 5.
reformation both private and public, as his place requires and as opportunity
is afforded.

Privately, A broken spirit is studious to reform it self, to embrace a new
course of life, which (as Optima poe^entia nova vita. Luth.
Luther observes) is the best Repentance. The Prodigal humbled, reformes, goes
to his father, bewailes and forsakes his former lewdenesse, Luke 15. Saul
humbled by the mighty hand of Christ at his Conversion, presently reformes,
gives over persecuting of the Saints, and straightway preached Christ in the
Synagogues, that he is the son of God, Act. 9. 20. After Peter's heart was
broken, and he had wept bitterly for his shameful denial of his Master, Mat.
26. 75. Luke 22. 62. he so reformed himself in this particular, that we never
after read that he relapsed into the same sin, yea we read our Saviors
Prophecy of him that he should glorify God by being himself crucified for
Christ and his Truth, Joh. 21. 18.

Publicly; A broken spirit is desirous also to reform others. It is very
remarkable in Scriptures that when Magistrates and Rulers became men of
contrite and broken spirits indeed, they could not rest and terminate in
Personal, but did proceed to public Reformation in the Kingdom and Church
wherein they lived. Thus Ezra hearing of the sins of the people of the land and
of the Princes by unlawful marriages with the Heathens, rent his garment and
mantle, and plucked off the hair of his head and of his beard, and sat down
astonyed, Ezr. 9. 1, 2, 3. (here are notable symptoms how his spirit was
broken for their sins:) consequently both Ezra and the people weeping very
sore, set upon Reformation, to put away all the strange wives and their
children, and Ezra made them Covenant and swear to God to do it, and after
took course to have it done, Ezra. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. Thus good King
Josiah, his heart being tender and his spirit melted at consideration of the
peoples sins, he sets presently and vigorously upon public Reformation,
makes the Law of God be publicly read, enters into Covenant with God to keep
his Commandments and his Testimonies and his Statutes with all his heart, and
with all his soul, -- caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin
to stand to it -- took away all the abominations out of all the Countries that
pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel
to serve, to serve the Lord their God; and all his days they departed not from
following the Lord, the God of their Fathers; here was Reformation to purpose,
2 Chronicles. 34. 19. 27. 29. to the end of the Chap. Yea Mannasses himself (that
prodigious monster of wickedness, 2 Chronicles. 33. 2. to 11.) when in his
affliction his heart was broken, so that he besought the Lord his God, and
humbled himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, -- Even then this
Mannasses set upon public Reformation; for, he took away the strange Gods and
Idols out of the house of the Lord, and all the Altars that he had built in the
mount of the house of the Lord, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the
City. And he repaired the Altar of the Lord, and sacrificed thereon
peace offerings, and thank-offerings.; and commanded Judah to serve the Lord
God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 32. 12. 15. 16. Thus he 1. removed the abominations,
which himself had erected, 2. restored the pure worship of God, which himself
destroyed, and 3. commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel: who could
have expected such a Reformation from Manasses? his humbled spirit could not
choose but reform. Then what Church and State need despair of Reformation, if
the Lord would but thoroughly humble and break the hearts of Princes and
Rulers, as he did Manasses?

Right Honorable, this in special concerns you, be pleased to consider these
three ^amous Magistrates, how when their spirits were broken they speedily and
se^iously testified the same in public Reformations: get you broken hearts
like them, you will r^^orme (...) them. It Is true, you and the people have
sworn and covenanted with God a public Reformation according to the Word of
God, etc. And God has honored you to lay some foundations of Reformation, for
which we bless God; hoping that these beginnings will still be carried forward
to perfection; and that God will not despise the day of small things. Zech. 4.
10. But yet both Church and State still cry out for further Reformation, -- how
does the Commonwealth groan under woeful oppression, injustice, and all
manner of violence and wrong, as much, if not more then ever? -- O hasten to
save the poor Kingdom from these destructive evils! But how does the Church
of God, not only groan, but even languish, faint and dye continually under
those cursed diseases of error heresy, blasphemy, licentiousness, divisions,
disorder and confusion, horrid Atheism, and all manner of prophanness? Are
there not amongst us that say, we have no Church, no Ministry, no Ordinances:
that oppose and deny the Scriptures, the immortality of the soul, the divinity
of Christ, the deity of the Holy Ghost, and almost all the fundamentals of
Religion, yea and all visible outward Reformation? Whither are we falling?
should these things still pass on without control, what Religion shall we
leave to our posterity? Can we redress these distempers? Ministers may preach,
people may petition, and both may pray: but if you sit still, who are Heirs of
Restraint Judge. 18. 7. who bear the sword, and should not bear the sword in
vain; Romans 13. where shall we have healing? you have power to hinder, you have
sworn to extirpate these evils, if they be not extirpated; we may justly fear
they will extirpate both you and us at last. Let it not be said of these lewd
persons, as once of Elies sons, They have made themselves vile, but you
restrained them not; you know it is an old maxim in Divinity, Qui cum possit,
non prohibet, jubet. He that can, but does not hinder evil, commands it. God
forbid you should contract such guilt upon your selves; Besides these evils to
be removed, are there not many necessary parts of Reformation wanting? as the
public Confession of Faith, and Catechism, besides many things in
Church Government, etc.? Oh that the perfecting of these might be accelerated!
oh gird on zeal, be valiant for the truth, accomplish the Reformation, imitate
those brokenhearted Reformers; never let it be said that you should come short
of King Manasses. Be strong, and the Lord shall be with you.

This Doctrine may serve to Exhort all persons that desire III. Exhortation.
either this day or at any time hereafter to present the Lord with Sacrifices
acceptable indeed, that they get and keep broken spirits. These are the
Sacri^ices of God; these he will not despise, but without these all your
Prof^ssions, Prayers, Duties, etc. will be utterly rejected.

But how shall we get and keep broken Spirits? hic labor, hoc opus est. Her'es
the difficulty. 1.


Answ. A broken spirit may be obtained and maintained.

1. By a due dependence upon God alone in Jesus Christ for a broken spirit,
without God and Christ, thou can not break thine own heart, nor can all the
world do it for thee, thou may as well think to hold the winds in thy fist
from blowing, and the waves of the Sea from rolling up and down and roaring; to
span the vast Ocean with thy fingers; to hold the huge globe of the Earth in
the hollow of thy hand, and to stop the course of the Sun and Moon in the
firmament: as to instill into thine own heart true penitential brokennesse.
Only God gives repentance, 2 Timothy 2. 25. only God that made the heart, can melt
and mend the heart. It Is his sole prerogative, both to take away the heart of
stone, and to give an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 19. and 36. 26. 1. God can
enlighten and convince the heart of its own hardness: 2. God can subdue and
remove the hearts stoninesse. 3. God can infuse an habitual supernatural
tenderness and 4. God can draw forth that habit into actual relentings upon
all good occasions; this is his method. God alone can do all in this matter,
rely only on him for it, as the sole author of it.

2. By a dutiful attendance upon Gods word in the powerful 2.
Ministry of it: This is most quick and powerful and sharper then any two
edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, -- Heb.
4. 12. Are our hearts iron? the word is as fire, to ^o^^en and melt the iron:
are our hearts stone? the word is as an hammer to break the rock in pieces,
Jer. 23. 29. This instrumentally made King Josiah's heart tender, 2 Chronicles. 34.
19. 27. This made the returned exiles to weep, Neh. 8. 9. This pricked Peter's
hearers in their hearts, Act. 2. ^6. oh wait upon this word of God with a
lively heart-searching Ministry; oh tremble at this mighty working word of God,
that can through God make an hard heart soft, and keep a soft heart tender.

3. By a frequent and serious consideration of our own and others 3.
sias. Others sins may break our hearts, as it is clear in the case of Josiah,
2 Chronicles. 34. 19, etc. of David, Psalm. 119, 53. 158. 136. of Ezra Ezr. 9. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. and of those Mourners, Ezekiel. 9. 4. But our own sins may even grind
our hearts to powder, as appears here in David, Psalm. 51. 3, 4. 8. my sin is
ever before me -- against thee, thee only have I sinned -- that the bones which
thou have broken -- as in the Prodigal, Luke 15. 18. 19. as in those Jews,
Zech. 12. 10, 11, 12, etc. man's sin makes the whole Creation groan, as under a
load ready to break its back, Romans 8. 22. and shall not man's own spirit groan,
and his own heart break under the pressure of his own iniquities? In what words
shall I a little represent the sins of England, and the sins of your own souls
unto you for the actual mollifying of your hearts?

Think what sin is, it is the transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. the death
of the Soul, Ephesians. (...). 1. the fruits of the flesh, Gal. 5. 19. the works
of the Devil, 1 John 2. 8. and utter abomination to God, Pro. 26. 25. Sin is
so foul and filthy, that the filth under the nails and arm-holes (...) --
Jam. 1. 21. the vomit of a dog, the mire of a swine, 2 Pet. 2. 22. the poison
of serpents Romans 3. 13. the spots of Leopards, and the skin of black Moors,
Jer. 13. 23. the putrefaction and deadly stink of opened sepulchers, Romans 3.
13. and basest (...) --
excrements themselves, Jam. 1* 2^. are the similitudes wherein the holy Ghost
sets it out to us. Sin is the inlet of death and all misery, Romans 5. 12. worse
then the Devil, for sin made him a Devil: and the very Hell of Hell.

Think against whom sin is committed. Against God blessed for ever, infinitely
pure and cannot look upon it, Heb. 1. 13. just and will not clear the guilty,
Ex. 34. 7. Omniscient, knows all sin fully; omnipotent, can crush all sinners
eternally. He fashioned thee curiously, he has provided for thee plentifully,
has given Christ his own Son to redeem and save thee to the uttermost, has
loved thee freely, has always been doing thee good, never did thee harm: and
against him thou have oftended, oh how this wounded David, Psalm. 51. Against
Christ also thou sinnest, who became man, yea a man of sorrows; yea a worm
rather then a man for thee; who was tempted, betrayed, scorned, abused,
bruised, wounded for thee; who prayed, sighed, sorrowed, sweat drops of blood,
and powered out his soul to death for thee; who loved thee and washed thee from
thy sins in his own blood, Rev. 1. 5. how should this make thee mourn, Zech.
12. 10, 11, 12. yea against the Spirit, that convinces, illuminateth,
adopteth, Sanctifies, s^aleth, comforts and dwells in thee. Is this thy
kindness to thy God? d^est thou thus requite the Lord oh foolish person and
unwise?

Think by whom sin is acted, by them that are to God but as worms, mothes,
grasshoppers, as the dust of the balance, as nothing, as chafe before the
wind, as stubble before the consuming fire: your sins hurt not God, but your
selves. If you be holy, what do you to him? if sinful, what do you against
him? Job 35. 6.

Think how your sins, Englands sins are aggravated; being beyond sins of Sodom,
Samaria, Jerusalem; because against greater light, mercies, means, ordinances,
then ever they enjoyed against promises and threats, kindnesses and judgments,
the patience of God, wonderful deliverances, and a glorious gospel. How
should such conside rations as these even break the soul in pieces!

4. By a prudent laying to heart of Gods judgments inflicted. 4.
This may be a means of softening a stony heart, when perhaps the word will
not penetrate. Manasses that would not hearken to Gods word, yet melted in his
chains, humbled himself greatly, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12. How did the people tremble
at the great rain? Ezr. 10. 9. God implies that his judgments will make the
uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and accept the punishment, Levit. 26. 41. and
bring people to know the plague in their own heart, 1 King. 8. 38. Consider now
how God has plagued England with his judgments and let your hearts be broken
for England and your selves therein.

Think what variety of judgments are upon the Land. The Pestilence has slain
thousands: the sword ten thousands. The immoderate rain for these diverse
months hindering seed-time with some, or washing seed sown out of the ground,
with others; and so threatening a famine. The murrain among horses and cattle
in some places (as is credibly reported,) and which is heavier then all, the
spirit of error and heresy that spreads and frets among us as a Gangrene; so
many being given up to strong delusion to believe a lie, 2 These. 2. 11. how are
these judgments concatenated together, and pursue one another as Jobs
messengers, and the billows of the Sea? and Gods hand is stretched out still.

Think of the impartiality of Gods judgments upon us. No degree, sex or age
has been spared. King and subject, Nobles and ignoble, Magistrates, Ministers,
high and low, rich and poor all have tasted of Gods severity.

Think of Gods wrath and displeasure that discovers it self in all, his frown
more heavy then the frowns of all the world, if he look but upon the earth,
it trembles, if he touch the hills, they smoke, Psalm. 104. 32. and shall not
we tremble when he is angry?

Think of Englands sins deserving all these and worse, these shafts that fall
upon our heads we first shot up against heaven our selves, nay it is the Lords
mercies that England is not consumed, as Jerusalem said of her self, Lam. 3.
22.

Oh, how is Truth, Peace, Union among Brethren, health and our many comforts
broken? and shall our hard hearts only remain unbroken?

5. Finally, by deliberate Contemplations upon Gods mercies to 5.
England and to us. The love, kindness and mercies of God to man, are wont to
thaw and melt men's hearts for their unkindnesses to God, hence Ezra labors so
to break his own and his peoples hearts by the overcoming mercies of God
repeated, Ezr. 9. 7, 8. 9. 13. That your hearts may be softened with mercies,
seriously ponder upon and amplify to your selves* Personal mercies. Parliament
mercies, Kingdom mercies.

What comfort does this doctrine afford to all truly broken spirits and
contrite hearts! These are Gods Sacrifices, these God IV. Consola^ion.
will not despise, and then* who shall despise them?

Such (...) God preferres beyond all legal Sacrifices, Psalm. 51. 16. 17. 2.
Beyond all Pharisaicall duties and perfections, Luk 18* 3. to such he has most
favorable respect, Isai 66. 2. ^4. of such he is the peculiar Physician, Ps.
147. 3. Isai 61. 1, 2. and 5. with such he himself will dwell, Isai. 57. 15.
and where God dwells there light, life, grace, glory, peace, comfort,
happiness and heaven it self ^o dwell also. Thrice happy hea^^s that are thus
grateful unto God.

FINIS.

