THE Right, Pleasant, and Variable TRAGICAL HISTORY OF FORTVNATVS.

Whereby a Young Man may learn how to behave himself in all Worldly Affairs and
Casual Chances.

First Penned in the Dutch Tongue: There hence Abstracted, and now first of all
Published in ENGLISH; By T. C.

LONDON, Printed by A. Purslow, for George Saubridge, at the Sign of the Bible
on Ludd-gate-Hill, near Fleet-Bridge. 1676.

The Moral Documents and considerations, which are to be noted in this Book.
The example of Theodorus. Cap. 1.
HOw careless youth to pleasure bent,
when wealth does flow at will;
Till raging riot all ^ath spent,
they never had their will.
The Crafty Servan^ Robert, Cap. ^
How fashood wrought by flattery,
the simple does assail:
When spite with open enmity,
by no means can prevail.
Appearing (...) Andrew, an unthrifty Merchant. Cap. 6, 7, and 8.
How bankro^^^ pincht with poverty,
when grace is not their stay;
Do seek relief by villainy,
to work their just decay.
Expressed by the death of Je ^nimus Roberti, Cap. 8.
How these which murder do conceal,
to plague the Lord is bent,
Which all men ought for to reveal,
though guiltless of consent.
Example of the Thievish Host. Cap. 16.
How thieves by custom in their need,
do venture for their prey,
Until when they think best to speed,
they work their just decay.
Appearing, Cap. 31. and 32.
How some that fe^r their state to stayn
for dread of worldly shame;
Will sin procure for private gain,
deserving no less blame.
To be noted. Cap. 34.
How Venus lust in^y^ing may,
soon force the Amorous Knight,
His greatest se^^^ to bewray,
to Work his woeful plight.
Appearing by the whole course of the History, especially by the diverse
dispositi^ and final destinies of Fortunatus and his two Sons.
How strength and beauty soon do fail,
and health and wealth decay:
All fortunes gifts do naught avail,
where wisdom bears no sway.
How virtuous life, an honest end,
does commonly ensue;
And they which sin do still pretend,
with violent death shall ^u^.
To the Reader.
AS in the Writings of Fabulous Poets, and Witty Apothegms of Aesop, Diogenes,
and such like Pleasant-Conceited Philosophers, are to be found many pithy and
wise Lessons, behoveable for the state of Man's Life, as well as in the severe
precepts of the Sage Stoics; so in this Tragical History (though it be
somewhat fa^ced and enterlaced with Poetical Imaginations,) is to be noted by
the discreet Reader, sufficient matter concerning most Estates, to bring the
mind in remembrance of the fickleness of Fortunes transitory gifts, of the
reward of virtue, the punishment of vice, and the end of folly. Moreover in
this History is often occasion taken, partly to describe the names,
scituations, and commodities of the chiefest Countries, Merchants, Kingdoms,
and Cities of the Earth, which to the valiant mind brings no small
delectation. These few causes considered, I doubt not but this History shall
seem to Men of good Judgment more worthy the Printer's travel, than many vain
pamphlets, ballads, songs, and dallying devices, tending only to the artificial
cloaking of vice, and m^zling of Amorous Heads therein. And forasmuch as by
consideration, and conference in perusing thereof, I found much childish and
superfluous inventions, intermingled also with some sparks of profane
superstition (according to the manner of penning, used in that barbarous Age)
which might seem odious to the godly, and loathsome to the learned (the matter
and substance of the History being notwithstanding most Variable, Pleasant, and
Delectable to read) I thought it most convenient, by rejecting what was
unseemly, rather to collect an Abstract of the substance thereof in a plain and
English Phrase, than to have respect to the litteral Translation: Which if I
have ^ot accomplished so precisely as perhaps some of our English Rhetoricians
would have done, I crave pardon for my offense, and give them leave to mend
that is amiss, not doubting but the courteous Reader will rather accept
thereof, with the like affection as it is offered, than disdain my ab^lity to
offer it so perfect in all points as I would.

CHAP. I. Of the Birth of Fortunatus.
IN the Isle of Cyprus there is a great City called FAMAGOSTA, wherein dwelt a
Rich Citizen, descended of an Ancient and Renowned stock, whose name was
Theodorus, unto whom his Progenitors had left so much Goods and Revenues, that
through the abundance of Wealth, he esteemed himself mighty and puissant. He
was of Age young, of Disposition lusty and retchless, and little considering
the Frugality and thrifty sparing of his Ancestors, whereby they carefully
augmented their goods and possessions, which he without care enjoyed. So that
his mind being wholly addicted unto honor, pastime, and worldly pleasure, he
presumed to bear the countenance of an high and costly estate, by usual
frequenting of Princes Courts, Iustings, and other suchlike Martial games, by
which means he soon wasted much of his goods and tresure. His friends being
greatly displeased with such his outrageous prodigality, determined to marry
him unto a Wife; supposing thereby somewhat to alter his mind. Theodorus
willingly condescended to their desires: whereupon they diligently searching to
find out a comely and convenient Espouse for him, found at length in the City of
Nicova (which is the Head City of the Isle of Cyprus, where there Kings
commonly keep their Courts) a Noble and Rich Citizen which had a fair Daughter
named Gratiana, whom he forthwith was content to give in Marriage unto
Theodorus, without any further inquiry what manner of man he was. And thereupon
was the Maiden brought home unto him, only upon the great Fame of his Riches
and Puissance; who was at her Coming entertained with a Costly and Sumptuous
Banquet, as the manner is of the Rich, to show at such times their Wealth and
Magnificence.

After the Feast was ended, all things accordingly finished, and every Guest
taking their leave were returned home, Theodorus taking his Espouse unto him,
lived for a season friendly and virtuously with her; wherewith both she and her
friends took great pleasure, thinking they had achieved a very good deed, in
so taming the wild Theodorus, by tying him to a Wife: but yet they considered
not the property of Nature, which bends only to that which she is inclined
unto. So in process of time, Gratiana became great with Child, and was
delivered before the year was fully complete from the day o^ the Wedding;
whereof the friends of both parties were very glad. Then was the child
christened with the name of Fortunatus: And although Theodorus herewith
rejoiced, yet ceased he not to follow his old Trade, in Iusting, keeping a
great train of Men and Horses, and daily haunting of Princes Courts, not
without intolerable and excessive charges; insomuch that he began to sell and
morgage, now one piece of Land, and then another, leaving both Wife and Child
unregarded. Then in Selling, Gaging, and Wasting, he continued so long till all
was gone: and so fell into such extreme poverty, that he was neither able to
keep Manservant nor Maiden: So the good Gratiana was of necessity forced to
dress her own Meat, and to wash her own Clothes like a Handmaid or poor slave.
They on a time sitting together at a simple Dinner, pretending to make good
cheer if they had wherewithal, the Father beholding his Son, sighed from the
bottom of his Heart: which when his Son perceived, who was then eighteen Years
Old, and could Write and Read, simply (but was expert in Praying on the Lute,
in Hunting and Hawking, which were his chief Pastimes) he said to his Father:
Dear Father, what a^leth you? For I well perceive that whenever you beho d
me, you become sad, and show an heavy Countenance: I pray you Father, have I by
any means provoked you to be offended? tell me truly, and hide not your secret
thought from me; for I am wholly determined to Accomplish your Will in
reasonable Points. Then answered the Father, saying: My dear Son, the occasion
of my grief comes not by thee, neither may I blame any Creature therefore, but
my self only, for the pinching penury and distress which now I sustain, have I
my self caused: And therefore I call to mind the great Honor and Wealth that I
lately enjoyed, and now am utterly deprived of; which my Ancestors have so
carefully spared, as I also ought to have done, for the maintenance of our
stock and progeny in Honor and Dignity, the which alas, I have altogether
neglected: And when I call to mind how far unable I am to help and succor thee
my only Child, this is the Vexation and hearts grief that vexes me both night
and day. This moreover doubleth my Sorrows, that all these my most familiar
Companions, to whom I so frankly imparted my goods, have now abandonned my
Company, and that I am so little welcome unto them. To this answered
Fortunatus, saying: Dearly beloved Father, cast off your mourning, and take no
such immoderate care for me; for I am young, strong, and in perfect health, I
will tra^el into far and unknown Countries to serve. In the World by hardy
adventuring, there happens to many good chance and fortune, whereof I doubt
not but by the help of God, some part shall fall to my Lot. As for you Father,
you have business of the Kings, him may you serve, and it is not like that he
will suffer you or my Mother long to continue in any great want. Leave off
therefore (I say again) these tears on my behalf: For I have not been so ill
trained up (I thank God and you for it) but I can shift for my self. With this
went Fortunatus out of the house with a Hawk on his Fist, toward the Seacoast,
pondering with himself what he might best do, to absent himself from his
Fathers sight, that he might be no more grieved thereby. As he thus walked up
and down by the Seaside, he saw a Galley of Venice coming from Jerusalem;
wherein was an Earl of Flanders, who had lost two of his Men by the way. But
forasmuch as the Earl had no business with the King, and that the Patron of the
Galley caused a Sign to be given by the sound of a Trumpet, that every one
should speedily come aboard the Ship, the Earl with many other Gentlemen came
forthwith into the Galley: Which Fortunatus seeing, he thought in his mind:
Would God I might be one of this great Lords men, to accompany him into his
Country, that I might be rid of my Country Cyprus. With that he stepped boldly
to the Earl, making low obeisance and courtesy; (whereby the Earl well
perceived that he was no Rustical Clown;) And therewithal said: Gracious Lord,
I understand your Honor has lost two of your Men, and therefore pleases you
now to entertain one? Then asked the Earl: What can thou do? He answered, I
can Hunt and Hawk, and do all that pertains thereto: I have also some skill
in riding and Feats of Arms. To this, said the Earl, thou should like me
well: but to my Country we have a long and tedious journey, wherefore I suppose
thou wauldst be loath to travel so far. Not so, my Lord said Fortunatus, that
shall be to me no let at all, but I would willingly adventure the travel,
though it were four times as far. Then demanded the Earl, saying: What Wages
shall I give thee? Fortunatus answered, I require no wages, (if it so like your
honor) but to be rewarded according to my deserts These words of the young man
liked the Earl very well, saying unto him: The Galley forthwith shall be
lanched from the shore, art thou therefore ready to depart with us? He
answered, When it pleases you my Lord. And so casting the Hawk that he had
upon his fist up into the Air, departed without blessing of Father or Mother
with the Earl, and became his man, carrying with him very simple furniture, and
little or no money in his Purse. So hoi^ing up their Sail, in short time they
luckely arrived at Venice.

How Fortunatus sailed away with the Earl without Knowledge of his Father or
Mother: Chap. 2.
ANd when they were come to Venice, forasmuch as before in passing by it, he
had seen all the Royalties of that City, he stayed not long there, but made all
speed possible to ^eturn Scene from Chapter 2again into his own Country, to see
his Friends: For he was determined presently at his return to be Wedded to the
Daughter of the Duke of Cleave, which was a Fair and Gracious Lady, the
Marriage being appointed before his Departure: For which cause most likely, he
made the more have. Before they Departed, Fortunatus bought for his Lord at
Venice, very Costly Jewels, and Garments of Velvet, Silk, and Cloth of Gold,
and whatsoever else was requisite for the Wedding. For although he had many
Men, yet there was none of them that could speak the Italian Tongue, but
Fortunatus only, who was very expert to Buy and Sell, and therefore was in
great estimation and favor with the Earl.

Fortunatus perceiving his Lords good affection toward him, became the more
serviceable, applying himself to be always in the Evening the last, and in the
morning the first in his Lords presence. Now the Earl had bought many Horses
for his servants, of the which some were happily more fair to the eye, than fit
for any good purpose: He therefore would have them mustred before him, and so
distributed them among his men, giving to Fortunatus one next the best; which
grieved much the other Servants, and thereupon they envyed him, saying among
themselves: What Devil has sent this Italian to put us out of conceit and
credit? Howbeit it lay not in their power to stay him from riding with the
Earl, neither could they blame him in any point.

The Earl was now returned home joyfully, and at his coming was received of his
Subjects most honorably; for he was both affable, just, and virtuous, and so
the better beloved of his subjects, for that he loved them, and was careful for
their Estate.

The Nobles likewise, and other his friendly neighbors came together to welcome
him, thanking God for his prosperous journey: and before all other matters they
took special care for the present accomplishing of the wedding, which pleased
him very well: So that with full consent he was Espoused with all convenient
speed unto the Duke of Cleave his Daughter. For this Wedding was made great
preparation, and thither did resort many Lords and great Estates: where many
valiant Knights and Gentlemen in gorgeous attire, mounted on barbed Steeds, at
the Tilts and Turney, and other such feats of Chivalry, extended their manly
force before the fair and Noble Ladies there present. And although there were
assembled at that Wedding no small number of proper and comely Servitors,
attending on the ^hief Estates, yet there was none of them all whose service
and behavior was more commended than the service of Fortunatus: whereupon
diverse demanding of the Earl where he ^ad gotten him, he declared unto them,
that he ^y Fortune chanced on him in the way coming from Jerusalem: and told
them moreover, that ^e was so expert in Hunting and Hawking, that neither Wild
Beast of the Field, nor Fowl of the Air might hardly escape him: Be^^des that
also he especially commended him ^or his diligent and pliable service, and for
that he could so circumspectly apply and frame himself to all Estates. By means
of which commendation of his Lord, he had many gifts gi^en him of Noblemen and
women.

How Fortunatus did his endeavor in justing a his Lords Wedding, and gained
both the Jewels. Chap. 3.
Scene from Chapter 3

AFter that the Lords and Nobles had ^nished their tryumphs and martial game^
the Duke of Cleve and the Bridegroom (t^ Earl of Flanders) agreed that their
Servito^ and retinues should likewise have their pasti^^ and try Masteries, in
justing for two Iewel^ esteemed to the value of an hundred Crown^ and he that
might obtain the prize should ha^ one of them. Of this were all the servants
gl^^ and every man put forth himself to do his be^ So it befell that one of the
Duke of Burgun^ his servants had one of the Jewels on the one side, and
Fortunatus won the other on the contrary part; which misliked the most part of
the servitors, and thereupon they entreated Timothy the Duke of Burgundies man,
making many fair promises to recompense him with the like deserts, if he would
undertake to challenge Fortunatus to try in justing who should have both the
Jewels. Timothy having no power to deny the request of so many good fellows,
made open challenge unto Fortunatus before the Ladies and Gentlewomen to just
with him, and that whosoever obtained the prize, should posess both the Jewels.
When Fortunatus heard that, he took no great deliberation, but accepted the
challenge with a valiant courage. This being noised among the Lords, they
gladly drew together to see this bickering. The challenger and defender each of
them well appointed came to the Tiltyard, where they encountered with a manly
and violent courage, being on either part stirred with a fervent desire both of
lucre and fame. At the fourth course Fortunatus hoised Timothy from his Horse
the space of a Spears length: wherewith he won the victory, and obtained the
Jewels, esteemed more worth than two hundred Crowns. By this was the envy of
his fellow servants more vehemently increased, but the Earl himself rejoiced
greatly, that one of his retinue had so victoriously won the chief Prize.
Howbeit he understood not the Grudge and Malice that his men had against
Fortunatus, neither durst any man disclose it unto him.

Among the Earls Servants there was one, an old wise fellow, named Robert, who
offered himself to practice a cast of knavery in the behalf of all his fellows,
promising unto them, that if they would give unto him ten Crowns in ready
money, he would bring to pass that the Italian should depart of his own accord,
without taking leave of his Lord, or of any other, and that none thereof should
be suspected. Then said his fellows, If thou can do as thou have said, why
do thou linger any stay to attempt the same? He answered, Soft a while, for I
cannot do it without present money; but if every one of you will give me half a
Crown, I will repay unto each of you a whole Crown, if I work not this feat
according as I have said. They were all willing to grant to his request, so
that they speedily collected this sum of fifteen Crowns, and gave them to
Robert, who willed them to speak no more unto him concerning that matter, and
that every one should behave himself according as he had done before. From
henceforth this Robert became a daily companion unto Fortunatus, showing
himself very friendly unto him, inveagling him with pleasant communication, and
recounting of things done in the Country, which was to Fortunatus delectable.
He enured and enticed him to the company and haunt of fair women, where he of
his proper charges, would always send for Wine and other Banqueting Iunquets,
meet for such company. Robert also would collogne with him, praising his
Riches, Nobility, and valiant courage, which Fortunatus could well endure. And
when he would always offer his money also for their expenses, Robert would not
suffer him to pay any part; saying, that he loved him better than any of his
brethren, and therefore thought all too little that was bestowed on him. This
Company of good fellowship continued so long, that their fellows were therewith
grieved: saying one to another, Does Robert mean to drive away Fortunatus with
such a life? It is rather to be supposed that if he were in Cyprus again, and
wist to have such pleasant entertainment, he would think it long ere he were
returned thither: surely he does not fulfill his promise, and therefore it is
meet that we have our money again. Robert being advertised thereof, scoffed
thus at his fellows, saying, Would they have me make better cheer with their
money than I have done? Notwithstanding at the last, when the money was near
hand spent, on an evening when the Earl and his Wife were gone to rest, comes
Robert to Fortunatus, into his Chamber secretly, and said, Even now has the
Master Chancellor told me a secret, for he is my singular good friend, and did
earnestly forbid me upon pain to lose his friendship, that I should disclose it
to no man; but yet I cannot for the friendship that is between us, conceal this
thing from thee, which so nearly touches thine estate. Thus stands the cause
(as thou know) our Lord has a fair woman to Wife, and has many fair
Gentlewomen with her: He has of late conceived a durable Fantasy, and is
become very jealous in the behalf of his Espouse, and the other Gentlewomen,
fearing lest his young Chamberlains might be on them enamoured, and so provoked
to Carnal Lust; and although he dare repose such confidence in them, that they
would consent to no dishonesty, yet can he not well put out of his mind what a
blind thing Love is, and when it is once kindled, how hardly it is quenched,
and that when true Lovers be linked with like Affections, nothing may separate
them but only Death. To prevent this, he is counseled, yea, and ful^y minded,
on the morrow to ride to Lausan, where he must wage Law with an Earl concerning
certain Money and Land, and means to come thither stately furnished with all
his Men about him, because he knows that the Earl of St. Paul his adversary,
will be there also with no small company, gorgeously appointed. And whilst he
remains there, he will cause the four Chamberlains to be Gelded whether they
will or not, and then set them in their Office as before. He will also show the
matter unto his Wife, forbidding her to disclose it unto any person. Howbeit he
knows well that she cannot long conceal it from her waiting Gentlewomen, who
will most likely utter it further unto others, so shall it pass from one to
another until it be spread all abroad. And by this means he pretends to
prevent all Mischief that eft-soons might chance among you through Amorous
Love; for he considers that no woman regards a gelded man. When Fortunatus
had heard this report, he was therewith amazed; and first of all asked him
whether he knew any secret way whereby he might convey himself with speed out
of the City? saying, I will not in any case abide the presence of my Lord,
though he would give me all his Lands; no, though he would make me King of
England, would I serve him any longer: I pray thee therefore said Fortunatus
help me, my good friend Robert, and give me some counsel how I may speedily
depart. Robert answered, saying; Thou know all the Gates of the City be now
shut, and none can issue out or in, until to morrow when the Bell warns to
service, and then is the Cow-gate opened. But my beloved Fortunatus, if I my
self were in your case, I would not greatly refuse it, considering the great
Love and Affection that thy Lord has conceived toward thee, whereby thou art
like to come to great preferment, Then said Fortunatus, I would rather become a
beggar, to wander as a vagabond from place to place, than to endure such a
shame and villainy. Then spoke Robert again, saying, I am now sorry that ever I
advertised thee of these things, sithence thou will so depart: For I trust we
should have lived together in friendly amity, as loving brethren, and to have
passed our time joyfully, one delighting in the other. But sithence thou will
by no means here longer remain, let me yet be advertised by Letters from thee,
where thou art become, that when our Lord shall be sufficiently provided of
gelded men to his Chamberlains, I may write to thee, that thou may repair
hither again: for I doubt not but at any time thou shall have entertainment of
the Earl: to this answered Fortunatus, saying, You shall little need either to
write or send unto me, for so long as I live I mean not to come to this court
any more. And therefore I instantly require thee not to disclose my departure,
until I have been three days away: which thing Robert promised him, and so he
took his leave of him, making semblance as though he were very sorry: Thus this
traitorous Judas wrought this knavish device. It was about midnight when every
one was at rest, but Fortunatus head was full of bees, so that every hour
seemed unto him three: for he feared lest the Earl should understand of his
departure, and so cause him to be stayed. So passing all the night in fear and
grief, at the break of day he took his journey on Horseback with Hounds
following him as though he had pretended to Hunt, and rode so swiftly, that if
one of his eyes had fallen out of his head he would scantly have stayed to take
(...) up.

How the Earl was exceeding sorry for the sudden departure of Fortunatus. Chap.
4.
WHen Fortunatus had ridden ten miles, he bought another horse, and sent back
again unto the Earl, his Horse and his Hounds, that he might have no occasion
to pursue after him. When the Earl understood that Fortunatus had departed
without leave, forasmuch as he knew of no cause whereat he might be offended,
neither had paid him his wages, he greatly marvelled, and thereupon demanded of
all his servants generally and particularly, whether they knew any occasion of
his departing. They all denied that they wist thereof, and took their Oaths
that they had not by any means to their knowledge grieved him. Then went the
Earl to the Ladies and Gentlewomen, requiring likewise of them, whether they
had moved him to any displeasure, or whether they misdeemed any cause of his
going away without leave. The Countess and all the other Gentlewomen answered,
that they wist not of any thing that might offend him either by word or deed:
but that in the Evening before his departure he was exceeding merry and
pleasant: reporting unto them of the attire of Women, and of many other Vsages
and Customs of his Country, and that in such corrupt language, as we could not
refrain from Laughing, and he himself Laughing with us also; and so with no
worse countenance he left our company. Then said the Earl, although the cause
of his flight be now concealed from me, I doubt not but hereafter I shall be
advertised thereof: and verily if I shall know that any of mine was the
occasion of it, I shall be sharply revenged on him; for I know that Fortunatus
is not fled without some great cause. I am sure that he has gotten about 500
Crowns whilst he has been here: and I had thought he would not have departed
hence during his live. But now I perceive well he is not minded to return,
seeing he has taken with him all his Jewels and his Substance.

When Robert perceived that his Lord was so grieved for Fortunatus, great fear
fell on him, for he dreaded lest any of his fellows should bewray him, that he
was weined away by his procurement: whereupon he went to every one
particularly, requiring them not to disclose his doings, which they faithfully
promised him; and were very instant to know by what means he brought his
purpose so subtly to pass, and that he was so suddenly fled away. At the
length to one that was most in his favor, and was more importunate than the
rest, he told that Fortunatus had showed him the state of his Father, how he
was become po^^ and served in the King of Cyprus Court: Whereupon said Robert,
I have showed him that a Post was passed this way from the King of Cyprus,
toward the King of England, to advertise him of the King of Cyprus death, for
they were near of Kindred; which Post reported unto me, that the King had
exalted the state of Theodorus his Father, and had given him the Earldom of
Anclemus de Teraceno, who died without any Heir, by reason whereof, the Earldom
was fallen into the Kings hands; for which Theodorus making the first suit
obtained it, and both he and his Heirs were therein confirmed by his Letters
Patents. When I had told him, he scarcely believed me: and thereupon said, I
would my Father had sped no worse, notwithstanding upon this only he is
departed. When the other of his fellows heard this, they said among themselves,
how uncircumspect was Fortunatus? For if such good fortune chanceing unto him,
he had advertised our Earl thereof, doubtless he would have worshipfully set
him forth, with certain of us to accompany him, and so should he have been
honorably received into his own Country, and also still have retained the
favor and friendship of his Lord and Master.

How Fortunatus came to London, and consumed his Money in the company of
Riotous Persons and Harlots. Chap. 5.
NOw leave we the Earl of Flanders with his men, who knew little how Robert had
deceived Fortunatus with a devised lie: howbeit they heard afterward that
Fortunatus did well. Who when he had sent back his Lords horse, yet fearing
least he should be pursued, traveled with all speed possible, till he come to
Calis, where he took shipping, and yet thought himself scantly out of danger
even in the midst of the Seas, the fear of gelding so sore-troubled his
Conscience. When he was arrived in England, setting all fear aside, he took
courage again and came to London, which is a great and goodly City, frequented
of Merchants from all Countries of Europe. Thither at his arrival was come a
Ship from Cyprus, freighted with costly wares, the factors whereof were two
young Merchants, who had in Cyprus rich parents: and this being the first
journey that ever they undertook, were very unexpert how to behave themselves
in strange countries, but only by their Fathers instructions. When their ships
therefore were unloaden, their Wares sold, great sums of Money received, and
the custom discharged, they were lusty and jocund, as such youths commonly be,
which have not been accustomed to the handling and use of great treasure. Into
the company of these young men chanced Fortunatus, with whom he fell in
acquaintance, showing each other friendly countenance in a strange country.
These three happened moreover into a rout of other roitous Roisters, and usually
frequented with them, by whom they were soon allured to the haunt of Harlots,
Gameing, and other riotous demeanor: so that if one had gotten a fair woman,
the other would assay to get a fairer, whatsoever it cost him: this life led
they the space of half a year, till their money was so wasted, that it was time
to look to themselves.

How the two Cyprus Merchants, when their money was consumed, returned to their
Country. Chap. 6.
FOrtunatus had the least spring, so that his Well was soonest emptied: and the
others also were drawn almost dry, and had consumed all that they received of
their wares, on sumptuous banquets and fair women: and then was all the hot
love soon quenched with a cold purse, though they persuaded themselves
otherwise, and had often heard that it was scoffingly said unto them, go and
fetch more money. In the mean while were the other Merchants of Cyprus ready to
repair homewards, and the Master of the Ship gave warning unto the young men to
be in a readiness, who went forthwith to their Lodging, to make their accounts
with heavy hearts, finding that they had received great sums of money: but that
which they should have bestowed in Cloth, Wool, Tin, Lead, and other
Merchandise, they had consumed on English Beer, Delicate Fare, and Women's
Flesh. And notwithstanding, though they were now but bare Merchants, yet took
they Ship with the rest; and came home without Wares. But how they were
entertained of their Father at their return, let them see thereto.

How Fortunatus was entertained into Service, and how one Andrew a wicked
varlet, brought Fortunatus Master to great trouble, by murdering a Gentleman
in his house. Chap. 7.
When Fortunatus was now also clean money-less, he bethought himse f that if
he might get two or three Crowns, he would go into France, there to get him a
Master: so went he to his Love, requiring her to lend him a Rival or xv.
shillings, saying, that he would go into Flanders to his Uncle, to fetch 400
Crowns, which he had in his custody, before my departure said he, I would fain
make good cheer with thee. She coldly answered, saying, Go thou to fetch
Money? God speed thee well, so it be not to my hinderance: whereby he perceived
that he had but a cold suit, to wait for money at her hands: and then too late,
thought thus in his mind: If I had my money again, I would be more wary on whom
I bestowed it: and yet once more tried her, saying, My best Beloved, send for
some Wine, and let us yet drink once together e're we depart. Whereupon she
said to her Maid, go and fetch him a pint of Beer, and let the Ass drink e're
he go: This was the thin thanks that a harlot rendered him for his costly
courtesy. Fortunatus being thus abandoned, thought with himself, I must needs
serve until I have gained two or three Crowns. So he went to Lombard Street,
where was great resort, enquiring who was destitute of a Servant? There was a
rich Merchant of Florence, that retained many Servants, who he set at work in
his Traffic, of him was Fortunatus hired for two Crowns a Month, which liked
him well. Being Entertained, he was brought Home to his Master, named Jeronimus
Roberti, whom he served at the Table very handsomely; whereby he perceived that
Fortunatus had been well trained up in civil company: so that in process of
time, he sent him to Bestow the Merchandise into the Ships, and to receive
other that came into the Realm, in which Affairs he behaved himself very well.
About the time when Fortunatus served Jeronimus Roberti, there was a Florentine
named Andrew, the Son of a rich Merchant, to whom his Father had given much
Goods, and sent him therewithal to Bruges in Flanders, which he unthriftily in
short time consumed: And being therewith not satisfied, took up also more Money
by Bills of Exchange, making his Father believe that he would send him many
Rich Merchandises. This he used so long, till his Father was able to disburst
no more Money, but waited still to receive the Wares which he looked for from
his Son, which are yet to come. When he unthrifty Varlet had consumed all, and
lost his credit, so that no man would lend, nor give, nor trust him for any
more, he pretended to return again into Florence, to spy out there some old
Widow whom he might abuse. As he traveled home, he came into a Town of France
called Turn, where there lay in Prison a Rich Gentleman of England, a Citizen
of London, which thing when his Host had declared unto him, he asked if he
might speak with the Prisoner. The Host said, I will bring you thither, but he
is so fast imprisoned, that it is pitiful to behold. When Andrew came to the
Prisoner he spoke good English: whereof the Prisoner was glad, asking him
whether he knew one Jeronimus Roberti at London: He answered, I know him right
well, and he is my good friend. Then answered the Prisoner; Good Andrew, would
God I might entreat thee to go to London, and require Jeronimus Roberti to do
his best that I may be delivered; he is my near acquaintance, and knows my
ability; whatsoever he shall lay out for me, I shall restore it to him in
threefold. For if thou would do this diligently in my behalf, I will give
thee for thy pains five hundred Crowns, and also procure thee a good Office.
Thou shall show my friends also, that thou have spoken with me, and request
them to become sureties for me to Jero^imus. Andrew made a promise to the
Prisoner to deal truly in the matter, and so traveled toward London; where
de^^^^ing the matter to Jeronimus Roberty, he was well contented, so that he
might have for one Crown three. And although he knew the same Andrew to be a
lewd fellow, nevertheless he said unto him, go to his friends, and try if thou
can in the Kings Court provide sureties for me, and then will I be ready to
disburst the money. Andrew went forth to search the Prisoners friends, to whom
he declared how the case stood with him, and that he lay in prison fast bound.
His friends seemed little to regard his misery, but willed him to go to the
King or his Counsel, and show them thereof, for he went on the Kings service.
When he came to the Court, and could have no redress in the matter, he heard
say the King of England had espoused his Daughter to the Duke of Burgundy, and
that thither he meant presently to send certain Jewels of great price, the
carriage whereof he had committed to a certain Gentleman which had Wife and
Children resident in London.

As Andrew understood in the Court that such sumptuous Jewels was committed to
such a Gentleman, he inchroached into his company, saying, That he was
certified that the King would send certain costly Jewels to the Duke of
Burgundy by him: wherefore he prayed him friendly if it were Lawful that he
would permit him to see them: For, said he, I am a Ieweller also; and hearing
at Florence that the King made enquiry for the most expert in our faculty, I
have traveled so far, in hope the King would buy some of me. The plain-meaning
Gentleman said unto him, stay here a while till I be dispatched, and then shall
you go with me, where I will show them unto you. Anon after he came again to
Andrew and took him home to his House, being then Dinnertime: Wherefore he
said, we will first Dine, lest my Wife be displeased. So receiving of him
Courteous Entertainment, when Dinner was done, he carried him to his Chamber,
and there opening a fair Armory, brought out of it a Coffer, wherein were the
Jewels which he willee him to view at his pleasure. The Jewels were very
precious, amounting to the valud of threescore Thousand Crowns, and the more
one beheld them, the fairer they seemed. Andrew praised them greatly, and said,
I have yet some, that if they were as well set as these be, would no doubt
disgrace some of these. The Gentleman liked this well, thinking with himself,
if he have so costly Jewels, the King will yet surely bestow more money. Andrew
said, to morrow shall you dine with me, in Jeronimus Roberty his house, where I
will show you my Jewels. This liked the Gentleman well. Andrew went
incontinently to Jeronimus Roberti, and said, I have found out a man in the
Court, who I trust will assist me to deliver the Prisoner, and that you should
have good suretiship in the Kings custom-house. That liked Jeronimus well.
Andrew said moreover, I pray you appoint the dinner to morrow somewhat the
costlier, for I shall bring him with me to dine with us. The next day brought
Andrew the Man with him; but before they sat down at the board, he privily
warned Jeronimus, that he should not find much talk of the Prisoner, for the
matter must be secretly conveyed. They sat down to their meat and were merry,
and lingered somewhat long, but Jeronimus rose from the board, and went into his
study: at the last said Andrew to the Gentleman, come you up with me into my
Chamber, and I will show you my Jewels. So they went up together into a Chamber
that was over the Hall where whey dined, and there Andrew making an offer, as
though he would have opened a great Coffer, drew his Knife privily, and sticked
the Gentleman that he sunk down, and therewith stepped unto him and cut his
throat. That done, he took from his thumb a gold King, wherein his Seal was
graven, and took his Keys from his girdle, and so ran swiftly to the Gentleman's
House, and said to his Wife, Mistress, your husband has sent me unto you,
willing you to send him the Jewels which he showed me yesterday, and for a
token of truth does he send you here his King and the Keys of his Armory. The
Woman believing his words, searched narrowly, but found not the Jewels in none
of the three Armories. Then gave she him the Keys again, and said; Go and show
him that we can find none, let him come himself and fetch them where they lie.
Andrew being sore afraid that he had committed so shameful a murder, and yet
was fustrate of his purpose, he purposed to fly incontinently. In the mean
while that he went to the Gentleman's house, the blood soaked down through the
boards into the Hall, which when Jeronimus espied, he asking his man from
whence came that blood, who ran up to see, and sound the good Gentleman slain.
Whereat they were sore astonished, and wist not for fear what to do.

How Andrew escaping, Jeronimus with his retinue were imprisoned for the
Murder. Chap. 8.
Scene from Chapter 8

AS they stood thus amazed, came the Varlet Andrew, on whom they all cried,
saying, What have thou done in murdering this man? He answered; The naughty
Knave would have murdered me, hoping to have found costly Jewels about me, and
therefore I had lither kill than be killed. Be still therefore and make no
outcry, I will cast the carcass into the privy, and if any enquiry be made for
him, say ye, soon after dinner he departed, and since that we saw him not. So
when he had conveyed the dead body into the privy, he hasted night and day to
avoid the Country, fearing to stay any where lest he should be pursued, and so
suffer some rigorous death for his heinous fact, yea when he was fled as far as
Venice: wherefore he there offered himself to be a Rower in a Galley that went
to Alexandria. Where as soon as he was arrived, he renounced the Christian
faith, and thereupon was the better-esteemed, and safe from the danger of the
murder, although he had slain an hundred Christians. The same day that the
murder was committed, came Fortunatus home to London, from Sandwich, where he
had laden certain Wares of his Masters into a ship. And when he perceived that
he was not so joyfully welcome as he was wont, and that his Master, his
companions, and the rest of the household were not so merry as he had left them,
he mused greatly, and thereupon demanded of the chief Maiden, what had chanced
in his absence, that they all showed such heavy countenance. The discreet
housewife which her Master loved well, said unto him, be not thou troubled
Fortunatus, for our Master has received Letters from Florence, that one of his
dear Friends is dead, whom he so entirely loved as his own Brother? howbeit he
was not so near of Kin, that it should be requisite to wear Mourning Garments
for him. Fortunatus hearing this, made no more ado, but seemed also to be sorry
with them. Now the Gentleman's Wife forasmuch as her Husband came not home,
neither sent any word to show the cause of that stay, marvelled much, and that
night quieted her self: But in the morning speedily she sent one of her friends
to the Court to enquire whether her Husband were there, or that the King had
sent him any other way. When the Kings Counsel heard that enquiry was made for
him, they wondered that he appeared not in the Court. And when the King also was
certified hereof, he commanded a Messenger forthwith to go to his house, and to
see whether he were there, and had the Jewels about him. For the King somewhat
misdeemed of the matter, fearing lest peradventure he were gone clean away with
the Jewels: and though he supposed him to be an Honest man, yet thought he it
not unlikely that he might be tempted with the great value of his Charge. So
when every man had asked each of other, and no man could give certain
resolution where that Gentleman was become, the King willed that his House
should be incontinently searched for the Jewels: For although he loved the
Gentleman well, yet enquired he more earnestly for the Jewels, than for the
Man. When the Woman was asked for her Husband and for the Jewels, and what he
said at his departure? She answering, said, It is now the third day since I saw
him, and when he departed, he told me he went to Dine with one of F^orence, and
in the after noon he sent one unto me with his Signet and his Keys, willing me
to send him the Jewels. The Messenger moreover signified unto me, that he was
in the House of Jeronimus Roberti, where were (as he said) many Jewels also,
and that he would confer the one sort with the other. So I led him into the
Chamber, and with those Keys opened the Armory, but the Jewels could we by no
means find, so that the man returned unwillingly without them. Then demanded
they of her, whether he had any several places of custody? She answered: none:
For all the chiefest things whereof he makes account, as Deeds, Letters,
Seals, and such like, does he lay up in the Armony. The Jewels were once there
also, but none at that time, for if they had, I would have sent them unto him.
The searchers hearing this, brake up all the Coffers, Chests, and Cupboards in
the house, and yet the Jewels could they not find: whereat the Kings Messengers
were greatly astonished, and the Gentlewoman exceedingly amazed to see her house
so misused. When this was told the King, it grieved him more for the Jewels,
than for the money that was bestowed on them; For that although he had money
enough at will, yet he could not have the like Jewels at his pleasure. The King
and his Counsel being in this perplexity, wist not what was best to do, but in
the end concluded to apprehend Jeronimus Roberti with all his Family, that they
should give an account what was become of the man; which was so done the fifh
day after the Gentleman was murdered. So the Sheriff waiting till suppertime,
entered the house, where he found them all together: Namely, the two Masters,
the two Servants of Accounts, a Cook, a Horse-keeper, two Maidens, and
Fortunatus. So that there were in the whole nine Persons, which were all
brought to Prison, and placed every one apart from the other, and examined
whether the two men were become? They answered all alike, that presently after
Dinner they went their way, and sithence that they never saw nor heard of them.
But the Sheriff not therewith content, took all the keys of the House, and
narrowly searched the Stables, Cellers, and Warehouses, where they might have
buried the man, and yet found him not. But as they were departing, one amongst
the Searchers, who had a burning Torch in his hand, setting therewithal on fire
a handful of straw, cast it into the privy, and so lookfng down, espied the
dead body with the Legs upward; and therewith cried, Alas for pity the man
lies here murdered in the privy. Then drew they him out, being filthy and
loathsome, and laid him openly before Jeronimus Roberty his door. When the
Citizens of London understood of this heinous murder, they made such an outcry
upon the Florentines and Lumbards, that they were fain to keep them close in
their Houses, lest if they were seen abroad, they should be beaten down by the
people.

This tidings was speedily brought to the King, who commanded to rack the
Master and all the rest, whereby the Truth might be boulted out, and that their
confessions should be severally written, and especially concerning the Jewels.
So the Executioner first racked Jeronimus very grievously, enticing him
therewithal, to manifest who committed the murder, and where the Jewels were
bestowed? Jeronimus perceiving by the extreme pain he was put to, that the King
and his Officers had intelligence of the murder committed in the House,
without his knowledge or consent, therefore he was exceeding sorry. And when he
saw there was no remedy but patience, he declared how every thing had happened,
showing that one Andrew had required him to prepare a costly dinner, signifying
that he should bring a Gentleman to dinner with him, whom he had procured to
assist him to deliver a Prisoner that was in Turn in France, which thing (said
he) I did for the honor of the King, and the whole Realm, neither wist I of
any thing else. Now when dinner was done, I took no regard of them, but went to
my study to write; and when I had done, coming forth again, I espied blood
dropping from the Chamber above, into the Hall; whereat I being astonished, sent
my servant to see what it should be, who showed me as it was. And as it
happened, at that very instant came in this Varlet Andrew, to whose charge I
laid this murder, who answered, saying, the other would have murdered me, but
by Gods help I prevented his pretense, and flew him, and so cast him into the
Privy: and therewith he suddenly fled, and where he is become I wot not. The
very same in every respect did all the other affirm, when they were all racked.
But Fortunatus confessed nothing, though he were racked likewise; for he was
not in the house when this mischief betided, and therefore was clean ignorant
of the matter.

How Jeronimus Roberti with all his family were hanged, and how Fortunatus
hardly escaped. Chap. 9.
When as by all the policies and extremities they had tried, no farther
knowledge could be had, the King wrathfully incensed with anger, caused them
all to be Scene from Chapter 9hanged on a new pair of Gallows, and their dead
bodies to be fa^^ned thereto with Iron chains. And when as they orderly one
after another suffered execution, there remained only as yet alive Fortunatus
and the Cook. And when Fortunatus was now in this perplexity, not knowing
otherwise but that he should be hanged also; he thought with himself, would God
I had continued with my Master the Earl, and suffered my self patiently to be
gelded, then had I not come to this loathsome and vile death. When the Cook
(who was an English man) last of all saw Fortunatus should be executed, he
cried with a loud voice, and declared before all the people, that Fortunatus
was altogether innocent, and knowing nothing of the matter. Whereupon by great
entreaty, and that he was no Florentine, and also unguilty, the Sheriff said
unto him, get thee quickly hence, for if thou be found by the way, the women
will surely kill thee. So gave he certain men charge to convey him over the
water, and so safe conduct him unto the Seaside.

When Jeronimus with his family were thus dispatched, the King permitted his
house to be spoiled: Howbeit the Officers had feathered their nest with the
best before. When the Florentines and Lumbards heard say that such havoc was
made of Jeronimus goods, they were sore afraid both of their lives and goods,
though they were in nothing guilty: Wherefore they collected among them a great
sum of Money, which they sent unto the King, to purchase his good will for
their safeguard. The King being much moved with pity, granted them license to
occupy and traffic as they did before.

How the Kings Jewels were found under a bedsted in the Gentlewomans house, and
delivered to the King again. Chap. 10.
AFter all things in this sort finished, it behoved the King notwithstanding to
make farther enquiry for the Jewels, on the which as he had bestowed much money
before, so on condition he might possess them again, he would be content to
have paid for them the second time. Wherefore he caused to be published, that
who could bring the first tidings of them, should for a reward have five
hundred marks: This was also proclaimed in other Nations, and Letters were
written to many Princes and Lords of strange Countries, that if any came to
sell such Jewels, they should be staid, and tidings sent thereof: Howbeit there
was no news heard of them, although every man would gladly have done therein
what lay in his power, only to have gained the reward.

Thus passed the time, till the Gentlewoman did Solemnize the Funeral Exequies
of her Husband at the months end. And when the time of Chief Mourning was
over-passed, invited her Play-fellows, Gossips, and Neighbors to make good
cheer with her; Amongst whom was one that lately also had lost her Husband, who
said, If you will follow my Advice, I will teach you how you shall soon forget
the Death of your Husband. Make your bed in another Chamber: or if you list not
so to do, remove it from one place to another, and when you go to bed, call to
your mind some lusty Young man, whom you would wish to be your Husband, and say
to your self, the Dead with the Dead, and the Living with the Living; for so
did I after my Husbands death. Then said the Gentlewoman, Alas good
Play-fellow, but I loved my Husband so well, and with so good affection, that I
cannot forget him so soon. Howbeit, earnestly imprinted the words in her mind:
And so soon as the Company was gone, she began to remove the bedsteds, chests,
and Coffers, so that unawares by one of the beds-feet she found a little coffer
wherein were the Jewels: which the Gentlewoman well knowing, set aside for a
while, and nevertheless continued her moving till she had done. After that she
sent for one of her Kinsmen, to whom she declared that she had found the Kings
Jewels by chance, and that if she had not removed the Bed, they might have
layen long enough there unknown, for that none would have sought in such a
place for them. So she required his Advice how she might bestow them. Who
hearing that the Jewels were luckly found, greatly rejoiced, and said to her:
If you desire my counsel in this case, and will accept well thereof, I would
wish you thus to do: Take the Jewels, and I will go with you to make means to
speak with the King himself, and to deliver the Jewels into his own hands, and
also you shall show him the plain truth, by what chance you found them,
referring to his courtesy what reward he will give you; for if the Jewels
should be closely imbeseled from the King, it behooves to carry them into a
strange Country to be sold, where I warrant you he will lay privy wait if any
such be offered to the Iewellers, and then the King being advertised thereof,
all them that have had to do with them, might lose both Body and Goods, and the
Jewels notwithstanding should be restored to him again.

This Counsel liked the Woman very well, and so decking her self comely in
Widows attire, went with her kinsman to the Court, there making earnest suit to
speak with the King himself. The King being advertised thereof, she was
admitted in his presence in the Chamber of State. When she came before the
King, she humbly on her knees said; Most gracious Lord, I your poor Handmaid,
am come to signify unto your Majesty, that the Jewels which were committed
unto my Husband your servant, to be delivered unto the Duchess of Burgundy, are
found this day under a Bedsted, as I by chance removed my Bed, and so presently
with all speed I have made have to present the same unto your Majesty. The King
forthwith opened the Coffer, and found all the Jewels as they ought to be,
whereof he was exceeding glad, and so delivered them into the Iewel-house to be
kept. The King also conceived very well of her diligence, for that she would
not hazard them on the credit of any other, but delivered them with her own
hands: And forasmuch also as through occasion of the Jewels she had lost her
Husband, he thought in reason that she should by some means or other be
recompensed with a special reward, whereby her sorrow might be somewhat
diminished: wherefore he caused a certain lusty and courageous Young Gentleman
of the Court to be called unto him, to whom he said, I will now request of thee
a thing, which I trust thou will not deny me. The young Gentleman answered,
saying, Gracious Lord, you shall not use such entreaty, but command me what
likes you, and I will be obedient. With that the King forthwith sent for a
Chaplain, and even in his presence did he marry these two together, and
bestowed on them rich gifts, who lived joyfully one with the other. The
Gentlewoman anon after went to her Play-fellow and thanked her greatly for the
council which she gave her to remove her bedsted, which, said she, if I had not
done, the King had not enjoyed his Jewels again, neither had I gotten such a
fair and lusty young man to my Husband. Therefore I perceive it is good
sometimes to follow a friends advice.

How Fortunatus straying in a Wood was benighted, and in danger of life. Chap.
11.
NOw return we to show how Fortunatus fared, sithence he had escaped hanging:
for whereas at his departure he was destitute of money, and beset with peril
and danger, he speedily conveyed himself out of England, and arrived in
Picardy, where he would gladly have served, but could get no Master. So he went
further, and was come to Britain, where he adventuring to pass through a large
wood, was driven to stay all day long, and could find no way out. And being
benighted, he espied an old house, whereas some glass had been made, whereof he
was glad, supposing to have found some People therein. But when he came
thither, there was no Creature: nevertheless he stayed there all that Night
with extreme Hunger and Thirst, and also in great fear of the Wild Beasts which
there haunted, greedily longing for the day, and prayed God to help him out of
the Wood, lest he should perish for want of food. In the morning he intending
to cross the next way out of the Wood, chanced contrariwise in the length
thereof: So that the farther he went, the more he strayed; and thus wandered the
Second day also with great grief: And when the Night came on, he happened on a
Fountain, and being Feeble, for that he had received no sustenance in two days,
drank thereof with such an Appetite, that he was thereby somewhat refreshed. As
he sat him down by this fountain (the moon shining clear) he heard a noise in
the Wood, as if it had been the grunting of Bears: Wherefore he bestirred his
stumps, and conveyed himself a little aside out of sight; and therewithal
devising how he might best shift to be safe from the force of the Wild-Beasts,
he climbed upon a Tree-well freighted with boughs, not far from the Fountain,
from whence he beheld many sorts of wild and savage Beasts, coming to drink.
Among them all was a Bear not fully grown, which winded Fortunatus, and began
to climb up the Tree after him, therewith he was sore afraid. And when he was
climbed as high as he was able, he stayed on a bough, drew his sword, Scene
from Chapter 11 and ^^icked the Bear in the head, and wounded him else where in
many places, whereupon the fierce Bear so greedily stretched himself at
Fortunatus, that the bough brake whereon he stayed, and so fell to the ground.
When Fortunatus perceived the coast clear from all other Beasts, save only the
Bear that could now scantly remove himself, he descended from the tree and
thrust his sword through him, and then ^aying his mouth to the wound, sucked
out the warm blood, wherewith he was somewhat refreshed, and lay down and stepped
by the Bear until morning.

How the Lady Fortune gave to Fortunatus a Purse that never wanted money. Chap.
11.
Scene from Chapter 11

AS soon as he awaked, he saw standing before him a Fair and Beautiful Woman,
mufled over the eyes; wherefore he praised and thanked God devoutly, that yet
he beheld some mankind before his death. And to the Woman he said: I beseech
thee sweet Virgin for the Love of God to assist me, that I may come out of this
Wood, for this is the third day that I have here irksomely wandered without any
Meat, and herewith declared to her also what had chanced concerning the Beat.
Then demanded she of him, saying: Of what Country art thou, and what moved thee
to come hither? He answered, I am of the Isle of Cyprus, and poverty has
constrained me to wander, I force not greatly whether, until such time as God
(when it pleases him) shall provide for me a competent living. She said, fear
not Fortunatus, for I am Lady Fortune, and by the influence of the Heavens,
Stars, and Planets, are given me six powers, which I may bestow on one or more,
for a long Time, or short Space, according to the Government of the Celestial
Planets, and the permission of the Almighty God. The which are; Namely, Wisdom,
Riches, and Strength, Health, Beauty, and long Life: Chose one of these six,
and make no long nursing, for the Hour of Choice is near hand past. I was sent
by the Divine Power to bestow one of these worldly gifts on thee, which thy
affection does most desire. Fortunatus took no long deliberation of the matter,
but said, then I desire of Riches such plenty, that I may not lack so long as I
live. With that, forthwith she gave unto him a Purse, and said, Receive this
same of me, and in what Country soever thou art, as often as thou put^st thy
hand into it, thou shall draw forth ten ^ieces of Gold of the same Nations
Coin. And this Purse shall retain this virtue, during the life of thee, and of
thine own Children, whosoever shall possess it, either thou, thy children, or
any other; but no longer after your death: therefore esteem it accordingly, and
take special care thereof. Then said Fortunatus, Right courteous and beautiful
Lady, Forasmuch as you have freely bestowed such an incomparable Jewel on me,
reason would that I also be bound to do something for your sake, lest that this
worthy benefit in time slip out of my Remembrance. She answered him demurely,
saying: If thou had chosen Wisdom instead of Riches, thou would not have
been so careful to yield recompense where it is not deserved: For know thou
not, that I am guided by the finger of the omnipotent God? And perceivest thou
not that mine eyes are mufled not regarding whom I pleasure, nor seeing where I
bestow? render thanks therefore only where it is due, unto the Giver of all
good Gifts; to whom thou can yield no better recompense, than of thy riches
freely received to bestow on the poor and needy, where, when, and to whom it is
expedient.

Then said Fortunatus, this will I willingly perform to the utmost of my power,
and therewith made a solemn Vow, that this day he would evermore keep holy; and
in what Country soever he were, he would bestow on the same day four hundred
pieces of Gold of that Nations Coin, upon some marriable Virgin, in perpetual
remembrance how he first obtained his riches. Then said the Lady, follow me,
and she led him by chance (as the blindman casts his staff) overthwart the
Wood into a beaten way, willing him to follow that path without turning on the
left hand or the right, and that he should not look where she become, neither
any more trust unto her. Fortunatus did as she willed him, and traveled
speedily till he came out of the wood, where he espied a great house that was
an Inn, where men that passed to and fro the wood, usually refreshed
themselves. Before he approached the house, he took the Purse out of his bosom,
to try whether the Ladies promise would prove to effect, that he might have
therewith to pay his charges; and in putting his hand into the purse, drew out
ten Crowns, whereof he was very glad and then entered joyfully into the Inn,
calling presently to the Host for the best meat he had, saying, He well would
content him, for he was very hungry: that liked the host well, and so he
furnished the Table with very good fare.

How Fortunatus for buying certain great horses which an Earl had before
prized, was taken prisoner, and in danger of his life. Chap. 12.
NOw when Fortunatus had sufficient slacked his hunger and thirst, he rested
there three days to refresh his empty stomach, and weary limbs, and at his
departure bought of the host a complete harness, and to the intent he might be
the sooner entertained; and so discharging the host to his full contentation,
departed farther. There was two mile from the wood a litt^e town, with a
castle, wherein dwelt an Earl, which had jurisdiction of the Wood granted to
him by the Duke of Britain. Fortunatus passing that way, entered the best Inn of
the town, and asked of the Host, where he knew any good Horses to be bought?
The Host answered, Yesterday came hither a strange Merchant with fifteen fair
Palfrays, intending to sell them at the feast that the Duke of Britain does
make to the Kings Daughter of Arragon, among which our Earl has chosen three
of the best, and has offered for them three hundred Crowns, but the Merchant
demanded twenty more. Fortunatus being thus certified, went into his Chamber,
and privily took out of his Purse six hundred Crowns, which he put into a bag,
and said to the Host, where is the Merchant with his Horses? I would fain see
them. The Host said, I believe the man will scantly let you see them, for he
was very unwilling to show them unto the Earl. Then said Fortunatus, If the
Horses like me well, I dare perhaps sooner buy them than the Earl. The Host
supposed he had but jested in so boasting himself, being so simply apparelled,
and also a footman: yet brought he him to the Horse-Master, with whom he
communed so far, that they were brought forth and ridden before him. He liked
them all well, but meant to buy only those two that the Earl had cheapned;
wherefore he readily delivered for them three hundred and twenty Crowns, and
willed them to be brought to his Inn. He bespake also costly saddles and trim
furniture for them, and requested his Host to provide him two comely servitors,
to whom he promised to give good entertainment. While^^ he was thus furnishing
himself after the bravest manner, the Earl had intelligence that he had bought
the horses which he thought to have had; whereat he was greatly displeased, and
inwardly vexed, especially for that he was so disapointed, when as he purposed
to accompany many Noble Estates at the solemn Wedding Feast Wherefore in great
indignation he sent one of his Men unto the Innkeeper, to demand what manner
of man he was, that had so spightfully bought the Horses out of his hands: The
Host said he knew him not, but that he came into the Inn as a Footman, howbeit
furnished with Armor as a Horseman, requiring me to procure Horses for him,
and promised therefore gladly to content me. But after he had once dined with
me, I liked him so well, that except he had paid me for the first, I would not
have trusted him for the second, lest he should have beguiled me. Then said the
Servant angerly to the Host: Wherefore would you seem to wain him to the
horses? The Innkeeper answered, therein have I done as every honest Host ought
to do for his Guest in such a case. And although he required me to go with him
to cheapen such fair horses, yet I thought him scant able to buy silly Asses.

How Fortunatus was taken Prisoner, and straightly examined concerning the
Purse. Chap. 13.
THe Servant returned with his answer to the Earl; who being informed that he
was no gentleman, commanded his men in a great rage to lay hands on him;
saying, that he had surely committed some great Robery, or murdered some man.
The servants executed his Commandment, and enclosed him in a loathsome Prison,
asking from whence, and what he was?

He answered, I was born in a Town of Cyprus, called Famagosta, and I am the
Son of a poor Gentleman.

Then asked the Earl by what means he got so much money? He said, My money is
my own, truly gotten, and therefore I trust your honor will not rigorously
enforce me to recount from whence I had it: but if any man can prove or say
that I have done wrong to any creature, or come untruly by it, I shall
willingly stand to thy Law and mercy. To this, said the Earl, thy prating will
not avail thee; but thou shall ere thou depart confess from whence and how thou
have obtained this money: with that caused they him to be brought to the rack;
when Fortunatus saw how extremely he should be dealt withal, he was sore
afraid, howbeit he purposed rather to die, than to open the secret Virtues of
his Purse. But when he was Racked, and felt the grievous pangs and torments
thereof, he cried to them to unlose him, and promised to utter whatsoever they
would ask. Then being again demanded how he came by so many fair Crowns? He
said: After I had wandered three days long in the Wood, and with much ado at
length came out into the fields, I found a Purse wherein were six Hundred and
Ten Crowns. Then asked the Earl where is that Purse? Fortunatus said, When I
had told the Money, I put it in my own bag, and cast the Purse into the River
that runs by the Wood. The Earl said, Thou Varlet will thou rob me of that
is mine? Thou shall well understand that both thy Body and Goods are forfeited
unto me, forasmuch as whatsoever is in the Wood is mine own. Then said
Fortunatus, Gracious Lord, I wist not of your Jurisdiction therein, for I
thanked God therefore, and esteemed it as a Gift. And think thou, said the
Earl, this to be sufficient excuse for thee? Did thou never hear say, That he
which is ignorant must ask? Therefore to be short, prepare thy self, for to Day
will I take from thee thy Goods, and to Morrow thy Life. Then thought
Fortunatus with himself, miserable wretch that I am, how uncircumspect was I,
having the free Election on six Gifts, that I chose not Wisdom before the rest,
for then I had not fallen into this danger and thraldom. And then he craved for
mercy, saying: O gracious Lord, have compassion on the poor wandering wight, and
seek not my death, which will nothing avail you: take unto you the goods found,
which be yours, and spare me my life which God has lent me, and I will
evermore pray truly for your good estate.

The Earl was very loath to pardon him, because he feared lest he might make
ill report of his rigor where he should become, which might turn to his
reproach among other Noble Estate, they hearing thereof. Notwithstanding he
being moved to mercy, by the instance of his men, granted him his Life, but
bereft him of all his goods, saving only the Harnass, which he rendered to him
again, with a Crown also in his Purse.

The Earl moreover in the morning before day commanded his Men to bring him
without the Town, and there to take an Oath of him, that he should never again
come into his Jurisdiction, so long as he lived. Fortunatus inwardly rejoiced,
that he had so well escaped, for if the Earl had but known the truth, most
likely he had been bereft of his most precious Purse. After this came
Fortunatus to Angiers, which is the chief Town of Britain, situated by the
Seacoast, where were then lodged many Lords and Noble Estates, abiding the
coming of the Duchess, whom they purposed to welcome with all kind of martial
games, dancing, masking, and other such triumphant pastimes. Of this was
Fortunatus very glad: and being desirous to advance himself among them, thought
thus with himself, if I should do in all points as I might if I list,
peradventure I should be served as I was lately by the Earl.

Howbeit he adventured yet once again to buy three fair horses with costly
furniture, and hired two servants, clothing both them, and himself presently
in trim apparel, and so lodged in the best Inn of Angiers, there meaning to
wait the Duchess coming, and to receive her in the Company of other Gentlemen.
So the Duchess being landed, was met by many Nobles and great E^tates, and so
conveyed to Angiers, where the Duke held a great Feast for the space of six
weeks and three days.

How Fortunatus entertained an Irish Gentleman to be his Guide and Companion in
traveling. Chap. 14.
FOrtunatus delighted in the company of such lusty Gallants, and with the sight
of many sumptuous shows, used very often to go and come to the Court with his
goodly Horses and his two men, leaving nothing ought worth behind him in the
Inn: Which the Host misliked, forasmuch as he knew him not, fearing lest he
would give him the slip, and leave him in the lurch for his charges, as others
had done at the like Feast before time. Therefore said he unto Fortunatus: Good
Friend, (fithence I have so small acquaintance with you as you know) I pray you
let me be discharged for that you have had every day, before you ride to the
Court. With that Fortunatus smiled, and said to the Host, I mean not to depart
without contenting you to the uttermost; and for a sufficient testimony to
satisfy thy mind, take here of me these hundred Crowns, and when thou think
that I or mine that come with me, have spent the value thereof, tell it me, and
I will give thee more, neither will I look for any straight account of thee.
The Host received the money, and after that much more reverently esteemed of
Fortunatus, veiling his Bonnet always when he passed by: setting him in the
worthiest Room at the Table, with the best; and placed him in a fairer Chamber
than he had before.

As Fortunatus sat at the board with many other Lords, thither resorted many
other Musicians to make Mirth and Pastime for Money. Amongst others came before
them a Lusty Old Man, declaring unto them his Poverty: and said moreover that
he was a Gentleman of Ireland, and that in seven years space he had traveled
throughout ten Empires, and twenty Kingdoms, whereby said he, I am driven to
this poor estate, an^ therefore I beseech your honors to assist man with your
courteous liberality toward m^ Charges, to pass home into my Country. A^
certain Earl sitting at the Board, willed him to name all the Countries through
which h^ had passed.

The Old Gentleman did as he was requested truly and at large: and said
furthermore there is few of these Kingdoms but has also a^ the least three or
four Dukes under it, beside^ other Earls and Lords, both Spiritual and
Temporal: All these have I seen, which have every one their proper Language,
whereof I learned so much, as if need were, I could express my mind in any of
them. I have moreover in writing, the name of every King that then reighned
when I was in his Court and the True Distance of every Kingdom from the other.

The Earl said, would God I had been with thee every where, so I were here
again as I am; and therewith gave him four Crowns, and offered him also if he
would stay there whilst the Feast lasted, to pay for his charges. The
Gent^eman greatly thanked him for his Gift and gentle proffer, and said he much
longed to see his Friends and native Country, and therefore was loath any
longer to stay. Fortunatus had given good ear to the talk of the old Gentleman,
and thought in his mind, if I might have him to guide me through strange
Countries, I would richly reward him. So presently after dinner he sent for the
Gentleman, and asked his name, who answered, I am called Leopoldus. Then said
Fortunatus, I perceive even now by your words that you have wandered throughout
many Countries and Kingdoms, I am a Young Man, earnestly disposed to pass my
youth in travel, for Experience and Wisdom: If thou therefore wilt vouchsafe,
to be my Guide and Companion, I will give thee a goodly Horse for thy self, and
another for thy Man, whom I will maintain to Attend on thee, allowing you what
Money you will with reason spend, and will esteem thee as my Brother.

Then said Leopoldus, I could be right well content to enjoy such courteous
intertainment, but alas I am old, and have wife and children, that wot not what
is become of me, and therefore Natural Love does compel me to return home again.

Then said Fortunatus, If thou will agree to fulfill my request, I likewise
faithfully promise thee, that I will go with thee also into Ireland, and will
moreover endow thy self, thy wife, and thy children, (if they be alive) with
riches sufficient, if our journey speed well, and that we may safely return to
Famagosta, (that lies in the Isle of Cyprus) I will there provide thee a
House, Menservants, and maidens, and all other things necessary during thy
life, if thou list there to stay.

Leopoldus thought with himself, this young man promises me very much, and if
he be able to perform it accordingly, it falls out luckily for me in my old
age: and therewith said to Fortunatus, I am content to grant your Request, so
far as you accomplish your promise. But I would not wish you to take upon you
such a matter, except you have so much ready money as shall be requisite, for
Travel requires infinite charges, if we look to be well entertained.

Then said Fortunatus: For money care thou not, for in every Country can I get
enough. Be content therefore to promise that thou will remain with me to my
full journeys end. He said again: Promise you me also to give that you
bequested. Thus did they Faithfully vow, the one not to forsake the other, what
Danger soever might betide. When they were thus both agreed, Fortunatus gave to
Leopoldus two hundred Crowns, saying: Go and buy two fair Horses, and hire thee
a Servant, or if thou list, a couple; and when that money is spent, I will give
thee more: Leopoldu, thinking this to be a good beginning, furnished himself
lustily with a Horse and a Man. The like did Fortunatus also, and took with him
but two Servants and a Page; so that they were in all six persons. Then agreed
they upon the gests of their journey, determining first to Travel over the
whole Empire of Rome, and so took their ne^^ way by Norem-Berge, Word, Ausburg,
Norlingen, Usme, Constance, Bazil, Strasburg, Ments, Colen, and so from Colen
to Bruges in Flanders, and from thence to London in England, which is the chief
City of the Realm, and so next to Edenbourgh, the head City in Scotland, which
is nine days journey from London.

How Fortunatus accompanied his man home, where they went together to St.
Patrick's Purgatory. Chap. 15.
Scene from Chapter 15

ANd when they were there, they had yet three days journey into Ireland,
whereas Leopoldus dwelt: when they were arrived in London; Leopoldus requested
his Master to go with him to his House, which was in a Town called Waldrink:
where at his return he found his wife and children as he had left them, saving
that one of his sons and one of his daughters were married, which all were glad
of his coming. And whereas Fortunatus considered that Leopoldus had no more
Provision than was needful for his household, he gave him an hundred crowns to
ordain all things after the most sumptuous manner, against he should come to
make good cheer with him. Wherefore Leopoldus made provision of great plenty of
delicate victuals, and bad his Children with their husbands and wives, and many
other friends and neighbors to accompany his Master at that Feast. So there
was kept such bountiful hospitality for that time, that all the Town fared the
better for him.

Fortunatus after the feast was ended, called unto him Leopoldus, and said:
Thou must now again take thy leave of thy Wife and Children: Wherefore receive
here of me three Purses, in each of them is five hundred Crowns, whereof thou
shall give one to thy wife, another to thy son, and the third to thy daughter
for a farewell, that they may have sufficient whereby to live when thou art gone.

Leopoldus greatly thanked him for his liberal gifts, and therewith made his
wife and children exceeding glad. Fortunatus understanding that two days
journey from thence was St. Patr^cks Purgatory, he was very desirous to see the
same. Whereupon they rode unto the City Vernecks, wherein is an Abbey, and there
behind the high Altar in the Church is a door, within the which is a deep dark
Hole, the same do men call St. Patricks Purgatory: But none may go into it
without license of the Abbot. Whereupon Leopoldus obtained leave of him, of
whom he was demanded of what Country his Master was? he answered, of the Isle
of Cyprus: Whereupon the Abbot invited Fortunatus to Dinner, which pleased him
well. So at his coming he presented the Abbot with a Vessel of the best Wine he
could get. The Abbot yielded unto him great Thanks, for in that Country they
seldom use any Wine, except it be in Ministering the Sacrament. When the Dinner
was finished, Fortunatus said unto the Abbot. May it please your Honor to let
me understand upon what occasion this Hole first was named St. Patricks
Purgatory? The Abbot answered, saying: Many hundred Years sithence was this
Town and this Abbey a Desolate Wilderness, and not far from it dwelt an Abbot
called Patrick, who was a very Devout Man. He oftentimes resorting to this
Desert, to do some work of penance, one day by chance found this long and deep
Hole, into the which he went so far, that he could not return. With that he
fell on his knees, praying unto God instantly, that (if it were his pleasure)
he would deliver him out of that dark dungeon: whilst he thus devoutly prayed,
it seemed to him that he heard yet further of a piteous cry. In the mean while
suddenly he was delivered out of the Hole: Wherefore he joyfully Praising the
Lord for his mercy, went again into the Cloister, and became more devout than
ever he was before. And so in perpetual memory of this chance, was this Abbey
builded by devout men. Fortunatus then asked farther what the Pilgrims reported
that came thence out again? The Abbot said, I seldom enquire of them: but some
say, they have heard a pitiful screeking: others report they have neither seen
nor heard any thing at all, but that they have been sore afraid. Then said
Fortunatus: I am come from far Countries to this place, and if I should return
home without some certain Trial of such a Monument in my own Person, it should
be a reproach to me: therefore will I not go hence till I have been in the
Hole. Then said the Abbot, If you will needs adventure, beware you go not too
far in, for there be many byways wherein you may go astray, as many others have
done in my time, which have not been found till three days after. Fortunatus
asked of Leopoldus whether he would adventure in with him? He said: Yea, I will
go into any place with you so long as God spares me Life. That liked Fortunatus
well: Whereupon they receiving the holy Sacrament: on the next morrow, the
Priest let them in, blessed them, and shut the Door after them. There they
wandering in the dark, at the length wist not to go backward or forward, for
they soon went astray; neither could they hear the calling of the Priest in the
morning, whereon they trusted, and the bolder adventured.

Thus they not knowing how to help themselves, and being very hungry and faint,
they wholly despaired of all succor, and dreaded their lives, they sat down as
men forlorn, neither hearing nor seeing any thing at all, and therewith made
their humble prayers unto God; Saying: Almighty Lord, assist us with thy Power,
by some means or other, for in this loathsome Den, neither Silver nor Gold can
ought avail, though we have it at will, but in thee only is our trust. The
Priest in the mean while signified unto the Abbot, that the Pilgrims were not
as yet come out again, whereof he was very sorry; especially because of
Fortunatus, who had presented him so liberally. The Servants also at the Door
watched continually, and greatly lamented for their Masters: But the Abbot
notwithstanding remembered himself of an old Man, who many years before had
measured the Hole with a Cord, for him he sent, and requested him to try
whether he could bring forth the men. The Servants also promised him an hundred
Crowns for his pains. The old man said if they be yet alive, I shall sure bring
them forth; and therewith prepared a musical instrument, played on it, and so
passed from one hole to the other, until he had found them, being very feeble
and faint; whom he willed to take hold of him, and so follow the sound of his
Instrument, as the blind follows his guide. So by the help of God, and the
old man's assistance came they again to the light, whereof the Abbot was very
glad: for he feared if those two Pilgrims had been lost, that no more would
have resorted thither, whereby he and his Covent should fare the worse. The men
also told Fortunatus that they had promised an hundred Crowns to the old men
for searching them out, which he forthwith delivered with great thanks. He
ordained also a sumptuous dinner, whereto he invited the Abbot and his
brethren, thanking God for his deliverance out of so great danger. He gave also
unto them for a Farewell, five hundred Crowns, to the intent they should pray
for his prosperous success. Then took they their leave of the Abbot, and
setting forward to accomplish their purposed journey, traveled back the next
way to Callis, and from thence to St. Joss in Picardy, and so by Paris, through
France, Spain, Naples, and Rome, unto Venice.

How Fortunatus went to Constantinople, to the Coronation of the young Emperor.
Chap. 16.
Scene from Chapter 16

WHen they were come to Venice, they heard say that the Emperor of
Constantinople would have his Son Crowned Emperor; and for that he was himself
very old, he would yield up unto him the whole Authority and jurisdiction of
the Empire, for the term of both their lives: whereupon the Venetians appointed
a worshipful Ambassador to pass to the young Emperor in a Galley, and to
deliver unto him certain jewels sent in token of gratulation from them.
Fortunatus therefore bargained with the Master of the Galley, so that he had
his men passed therein to Constantinople, which is a great and famous City.
Thither were assembled such a number of people of diverse Nations, that there
was very hardly any lodging to be had: and although the Venet^ans had assigned
a house for their use, yet would they admit no stranger under them, so that
Fortunatus and his men seeking long for a lodging, at the last they chanced on
one (such as it was) whereof the Host was a thief. There continued they a great
while, going every day forth to see the Triumphs and Royalties of the Emperors
Court, whereof much might be written.

Fortunatus always when he went abroad, caused his Chamber door to be fa^^
locked, supposing then all things to be safe. But the Host had a privy entrance
into the Chamber, where the greatest bed-sted was, through the feeling,
whereout he had taken a board, and set it in again that none might perceive it,
and there entered he in and out when he listed. And when they were all abroad,
he would search the Males and Budgets, and could find no money. Wherefore he
thinking of likelihood that they carried their money with them sowed in their
Doublets: when as they reckoned with him for their charges, he marked
diligently from whence they took the money, and perceived that Fortuna^us took
it from under the Table, and g^ve it to Leopol^us, who paid the Host, abating
no penny; for so he was willed always to do. But the Host was not therewith
content, but would gladly also have had both the money and the purse. About
this time was the day at hand, wherein he had vowed in memorial of Lady
Fortunes Gift, to bestow ^our hundred pieces of Gold toward the marriage of
some poor maiden. Wherefore he asked of the Host, whether he knew any poor
honest man that had a daughter marriageable, and was not able to bestow her for
lack of ability: such a one, said he, bring unto me, and I will bestow largely
on her to prefer her marriage. The Host said, of such you may have plenty; and
to morrow I will bring you an honest man, who shall bring with him a modest and
comely maiden. This liked Fortunatus very well. But then thought the Host with
himself, this night will I rob him of his money before he bestow it. So the
same night did he convey himself into their chamber through the see^ing, when
they were all asleep, and searched their clothes, supposing to have found great
sums of money in their Doublets, but therein he was foulely deceived. Howbeit
out of Leopoldus purse he took forty Ducats, and handled Fortunatus purse on
the outside also: but when he felt no money therein, he cast it under the
bed-s^ed; which when he had done, he went forth, and set open the door and the
windows, as though some strange thieves had been there.

When Leopoldus awaked, and saw the windows and door open, he rebuked the men
for their negligence, but the servants being fast asleep, started up suddenly
half amazed, saying: That they also were ignorant thereof. With that Leopoldus
was greatly afraid, and looked for his Purse, which he perceived to be cut off,
and a piece of the string hanging yet at his girdle. Then called he to
Fortunatus, saying: Our Chamber is burst open, and the Money which you
delivered me is stolen. Fortunatus forthwith looked to his doublet, and
perceiving his fortunate Purse to be cut away also, he was therewith
astonished, that he sunk down in a swound as though he were dead. Leopoldus and
the other Servants not knowing of this great loss, rubbed and refreshed him, so
that his spirits were revived again.

As they were thus affrighted and in great perplexity, in came the Host, and
set a grim countenance on the matter, asking angerly what ailed them to be so
unquiet? they told him that they were robbed of their money; then said he: What
careless men are ye? have ye not a close Chamber with lock and key? why then
did ye not make all things fast and sure? They answered: When we went to bed,
we both shut the windows and locked the door, but now we find them all open.
Then said the Host: Look that you have not one robbed another, and there be
also at this present many strangers and lusty Fellows in the City, who perhaps
had more skill to break into your Chamber then we wot of. Howbeit when he saw
them in such sorrowful plight, he asked of Fortunatus whither he had lost any
great sum of money? He said: Not much. Then said the Host, Why then do you so
take on and disquiet your self for a little Money? yesterday you would have
bestowed a poor man's daughter in marriage: Spare now the Money and bestow it on
your self. Then said Fortunatus: I care more for the Purse than for the Money,
for there is in it a Bill of exchange of great importance which can profit none
but my self. When the Host saw that Fortunatus was so sad and heavy for his
Purse (though he was a desperate and hard-hearted fellow) yet was he moved with
some Compassion; saying: Let us yet search narrowly about the Chamber:
Perchance we may find it, for no thief regards an empty Purse. With that
every man began to search, and one of them creeping under the bed-sted, found
the Purse, and showed it Fortunatus, who presently knew the same: but yet
feared greatly lest that by the cutting it had lost its Virtue, which he sore
longed to know, but durst not as yet make trial in his fight; for he misdoubted
the worst, that if any had known the quality of the Purse, they would have
murdered him for it. So then lay he down in his Bed again, and privily under
the Covering put his Hand in the Purse, and found that it retained still the
virtue it had before: whereof he was exceeding glad. Howbeit he was so sore
affrighted with fear, and vexed with anger and sorrow before, that he could not
so soon perfectly recover again his former strength and color, but remained so
in his bed all that day. Leopoldus came to comfort him, saying: Good Sir pluck
up your lively spirits, and be content, we have left fair Horses, Chains, and
Rings of Gold and other Jewels: so although we have no money, we will sell all
these things, and by Gods help bring you safe home again: for I have full often
passed many Countries without money; For Leopoldus thought in his mind that
Fortunatus had riches sufficient at home, if he might attain thither. But
Fortunatus answered faintly, and said: he that loses goods, loses
understanding; Wisdom is to be chosen before Riches,: also health, strength,
beauty, and long life, can no man steal; and therewith held his peace.
Leopoldus wist not what he meant by those affectionate words, neither knew he
which he had chosen of all these gifts: And supposing that such sudden passions
proceeded of the lightness and disturbance of his head, was no farther
inquisitive to know his meaning. Howbeit after a while, Fortunatus being with
warm meat refreshed, his Color was restored, and began to be merry again,
commanding his Servants to provide Candles to keep light in the Chamber all the
Night long, and that they should have their naked Swords ready drawn by them,
to prevent the like Attempt of thieves. In the morning went Fortunatus with his
men into the Church of Sephia, and there gave to the Priests ten pieces of
Gold, that they should in our Ladies Chapel which was fair and sumptuous,
cause a Sermon to be made, and Te Deum to be sung to the praise of God. From
thence went he to the place where Merchants and Exchangers resorted, and willed
all his men to go home to tend the Horses, and prepare their dinner: and
delivered to Leopoldus certain money to buy five Purses, saying: I will go to
my Exchanger to take up some money, of which we may not in any case be long
destitute. When Leopoldus had bought the Purses, Fortunatus put in one of them
an hundred Ducats, which he delivered to Leopoldus to be disbursed upon
ordinary expenses. He gave also to each of his three men a Purse with ten
Ducats therein, and said unto them, be merry and wise, take good heed that no
such danger befall unto us, as has of late happened. They all thanked him, and
promised their diligent and careful service to their uttermost power. He
moreover put four hundred ducats into the fifth purse, sending for the Host,
to whom he said, do I pray as I request concerning some Poor man's Daughter, on
whom I purpose to bestow liberally toward her marriage. The Host said, I will
bring unto you a Man with his Daughter, that you may see them. With that he
went to the Poor Man, and told him he had a Rich Guest; take (said he) your
Daughter with you, and go with me, and thou shall see how well the matter shall
fall out for your Commodity as I trust.

How Fortunatus bestowed four hundred Ducats toward the Marriage of a poor
Maiden. Chap. 17.
THe Maidens Father was a Ioyner, an honest and homely fellow, who said to the
host I would be loath to bring my Daughter any where abroad, I wot not to whom,
lest she should be abused and lose her virginity, which is the chiefest Jewel
that she has to make her fit for a husband: therefore tell the gentleman if he
mean to do her any good, that if it please him he may come hither to see her.
Hereat was the host displeased, and declaring his uncourteous answer, supposed
that Fortunatus would be therewith offended also: but he took it in good part,
and was well content. And taking Leopoldus with him, willed the host to bring
him to the man's house, to whom he said: My host here has given me to
understand that thou have a fair daughter, which is at woman's state, let her
come unto me with her mother. He asked, for what intent? Perhaps, said
Fortunatus, more for thy commodity than thou wotest of. With that the poor man
called forth his wife and his daughter, which were ashamed of their homely
apparel, especially the bashful maiden, which hovered behind her mothers back.
Howbeit she was both fair and well-favoured: to whom Fortunatus said: Stand
forth fair Virgin before me, and be not abashed. Then asked he her Father of
her age, who said: She is full twenty years old. Then said he, Why have you
kept her so long unmarried? to which the Mother made quick speed to answer
before her husband, saying, she was tall and old enough six years agon, but she
wanted ability to marry her. Then said Fortunatus, if I would bestow on her a
large dowry, could you forthwith find out a fit husband for her? Then said the
mother: Our neighbor has a Son who bears unto her good Will, who I know but
only for want of wealth would take her to his Wife. Then asked he the maiden
how she liked of her neighbors Son: She answered: I will in no case make my
own choice, though I should die without a husband: but whom my Father and
Mother will appoint unto me, the same will I have: With that the mother could
not stay from speaking, and said: I know she says not as she thinks, and I
am certain she loves him, and would fain have him before any other. Fortunatus
then sending for the young man, whom at the first he liked very well, poured
out of a Purse four hundred Ducats upon the Table before them: and said to the
young man, who was but thirty years old, will thou be content to Wed this Maid?
and to the maid he said, art thou willing to have this man for thy husband, and
I am disposed to give you freely this little money for a dowry? Then answered
the young man, saying: If you mean good earnest, and indeed will perform your
liberal promise, for my part we shall be soon agreed. The mother without
further pausing offered her consent, and said: Then does my Daughter likewise
agree thereto. Whereupon Fortunatus forthwith sent for a Priest, and caused
them to be married in the presence of their Parents, and after the marriage was
finished, he gave unto them the money which he had brought only for that
purpose. He gave also to the Father ten Ducats to cloth him and his wife, and
ten Ducats more to keep the marriage feast; whereof they were all glad,
thanking greatly Fortunatus, and praised God for their good fortune, saying
among them God has surely sent this man from heaven to help the poor.

After this they went again to their Inn, but Leopoldus marvelled that his
Master was so liberal to give money so lightly, whereas before he was so sad
for a little money that he had lost. The Host likewise was grieved that he
could not find the Purse with the four hundred Ducats, when as he searched so
narrowly: and therefore thought thus with himself, sithence he has so much to
give away, I must needs empty his purse once again. He therefore knowing that
they had a Taper of wax to burn all night, when they were all gone forth to the
Court, brake privily into the Chamber, made holes in the Taper, poured in
Water, and stopped them close that it could not be perceived: so that when it
had burnt two or three hours, it should quench and go out of it self. So
forasmuch as the Emperors Feast was nigh ended, when as he knew Fortunatus
would depart, he determined the same night to rob his guest again. Wherefore he
provided for them against they came from the Court, the best Wine that he could
get, and gave it them of his own cost to drink, to the intent they should sleep
the sounder. So when they had made good cheer, and were laid down to rest, the
taper burning, and their naked swords lay by them, they fell into a sound sleep
without ear.

How Leopoldus slew the unfaithful host at Constantinople. Chap. 28.
Scene from Chapter 28

But the Host lay waiting for his Prey, and when he perceived the Light to be
quenched, he crept through the hole which he had made before, coming first to
Leopoldus; under whose head when he began to grope, Leopoldus therewith
suddenly awaked, and with his sharp sword that lay ready by him, striking about
him in the dark, by chance so wounded the thief in the neck, that he fell dead
to the ground. Then called Leopoldus angrily to the men, and said: Why have you
put out the light? They answered, that none of them had done it. Then willed he
one of them quickly to go fetch a light, and the rest to stand with their
swords about the door; For, said he, let none go out, here is a thief in the
chamber. When the light came, they found the Host deadly wounded, lying by
Leopoldus Bed-sted. When Fortunatus saw that, he was more afraid than ever he
was in his life, and said: Alas that ever we came so Constantinople: it were
not much to lose our goods, but now shall we be bereft of our life also: and
therewith said to Leopoldus: What a heinous fact have thou committed in staying
our Host: if thou had but yet wounded him, by Gods help and money we might
have escaped. Leopoldus answered: It was dark, I wist not where I smote, nor
whom I touched: but my pretense was to strike a Thief that groped under my
head, who most like has robbed us before. Therefore if the truth were known
why he was slain, we should be in danger neither of Life nor Goods. Then said
Fo^tunatus: It will in no case be believed if w^ make our Host a Thief: for his
friends will not suffer us to escape, neither will money (...) reason help in
this behalf. Fortunatus als^ in this distress, thought in his mind, If (...)
had a friend whom I durst trust, to show hi^ the secrets of my purse, though we
were imprisoned, and declared the truth of the matter, perhaps the Judge would
be entreated for a great sum of money offered by that friend, to spare u^ our
lives, and deliver us: Contrariwise h^ thought again, If I hazard my purse upon
an man's credit, it will be so acceptable to him, tha^ rather than he will
restore it again, instead (...) friendship, he will exagerate the cause, sayin^
unto the Judge, that it were a great shame an^ reproach that Guests murdering
their Ho^^ should escape unpunished. Wherefore he concluded by his own Reason,
that it were no good to trust any man with his Purse, o^ with a great Sum of
Money, lest it should the sooner work destruction: so that he was i^ a fearful
Perplexity. When Leopoldus sav^ his Master and his Servants so dismayed he said
unto them: Why stand you thu^ trembling and amazed? No sorrow will hel^ when a
mischief is once done, neither ca^ we Revive him again; let us therefore
speedily Devise and take Counsel togethe^ with a bold E^^rage, how we may
Escap^ this present Danger. Then said Fortunatu^ I cannot devise what is to be
done (repenting inwardly again, that he had not chosen Wisdom instead of
Riches) but if thou Leopoldus can give us any good counsel, perform it with
speed: Leopoldus said, then follow me, and do as I bid you, and with Gods help
I will bring us all hence without any danger of body or goods. This speech of
Leopoldus somewhat revived their spirits.

How Fortunatus and his men conveyed themselves out of danger from
Constantinople. Chap. 29.
Scene from Chapter 29

LEopoldus willing them to be silent, and to hide the light, took the dead
Corpse on his back, and cast it into a deep well by the stable, with the head
downward. It was then about midnight, so that no body saw or heard him. Then
returned he to the Chamber and said: I have rid us of this Thief, so that in a
great while none can know where he is become. I suppose also that he made no
man privy to his attempt: so that it is far unlike to be descried that we have
done ought unto him: therefore be merry again, and pluck up your hearts. He
said moreover to the servants: Go speedily and prepare your horses, with
whistling, singing, and pleasant communication, and in any case look that none
of you show a sorrowful countenance, and we will do the like: Then as soon as
the day breaks we will ride away, so that we shall be six miles hence at the
least before the Host shall be missed. With this Fortunatus was comforted, and
framed himself a pleasant Gesture. When the horses were readily appointed, they
called for Malmsey, which there is very good, and made all merry, with lusty
and frolic demeanor: and at their departure gave unto every Manservant and
Maiden in the house a Duckat. Leopoldus said: I trust we shall return within
this month, and make merry here again. Then Fortunatus took his leave, and said
to the Servants of the house, thank our Host for his friendly entertainment,
and tell him that I would have brought a Cup of Malmsey to his bedside, but
that I thought Rest would do him more good. With that rode they forth of the
Door toward Turkey, with all speed possible, and took their next ^ait in a City
called Raropia, in the Turkish Empire: in the which was an Officer whose charge
was to convey the strange and Christi^n Merchants, and to give them a Pasport
through the Country. Leopoldus having for^er experience thereof, went to the
Officer, and told him, There were six Pilgrims that required a safe Conduct to
ride with them. He answered: You shall be safely conveyed, but I will have of
each of you four Crowns, and the Guide must have a Crown a day. Leopoldus
(though he thought it overmuch) made not many words, but gave him the money,
and the Officer delivered him a pasport in writing, and sent with them an
expert guide, who conveyed them throughout all Turkey. Fortunatus by this time,
having abandoned all dread and care for their thievish Host, behaved himself
cheerfully, and so rode lastly to the great Turks Court, and beholding there
his exceeding riches, and the infinite multitude of Soldiers that be
continually maintained in Garrisons, marvelled at the mightiness and glory of
his Empire, and especially to see so many Mamelukes and Enemies to Christian
Religion, which greatly m^sliked him: and therefore stayed not long there, but
went from thence to the great Walachia, wherein was ruler, Tracola Waida; and
so came to the Kingdom of Bosna, from Bosna, orderly through Croatia, Dalmatia,
the City of Buda in Hungary, from Buda to Cracovia in Poland; and so to
Coppenhagen in Denmark, to Stockholm in Swecia, to Paragon in Norway, to Prague
in Bohemia; and so the next way through the Dukedom of Saxony to Frankenland,
and then to Augsborough. There met he with certain Merchants, and accompanying
them to Venice, paid all their charges. Fortunatus had registered in a book,
the names, usages, ceremonies, religions, and the courtly demeanours of all
those Countries Cities, Emperors, Kings, and People by whom he had traveled.
But now in the time that he stayed at Venice, he laid wait for the fairest
Jewels that might be gotten, not sticking for the price were it never so great;
whereby the Venetians received of him a great sum of money, so that he was
highly esteemed amongst them. He remembering also in what poverty he had left
his Father and Mother when he departed from Famagosta, bought much fair Cloth,
Velvet, and Silks for their Apparel; and costly Household Stuff, of every sort
double: And also bought a Ship to convey all those Goods into Cyprus. It was
now the sixteenth year sithtnce he departed; and when he came to Famagosta, it
was told him that his Father Theodorus, and his Mother Gratiana were both dead,
wherefore he was very sorry.

He then hired a large house, wherein he bestowed his goods, and entertained
many more menservants and maidens for all purposes; and from thenceforth
maintained most stately and sumptuous Hospitality, that of every man he was had
in great estimation. Howbeit many mused and much marvelled how he had obtained
such wealth, whereas the most knew that he departed in extreme poverty.

How the King of Cyp^us made a Marriage between Fortunatus and the Lord Nemians
youngest Daughter. Chap. 20.
ANd as soon as he might bring it to pass, he purchased again his Fathers
house; and many more thereto adjoining: All which he caused to be plucked down,
and in that place builded a goodly large Palace after the bravest manner, like
as he had seen in other Countries. And by the house also he founded a sumptuous
Church, and twelve more houses for twelve Priests to continue in divine service
of God, as it were a Chantry or Cathedral Minster. For the Revenues whereof, he
also allowed yearly xiv hundred Ducats: that was for every Priest one hundred,
and the other two for the Reparation and Ornaments of the Church. He caused
moreover to be made in the Minster three Tombs, one for his Father, the other
for his Mother, whose bones he caused to be dug up, and buried therein: and
the third to be reserved for himself and his Heirs. When all things were
finished to his mind, he purposed to take a Wife, which when the nobility and
gentlemen of Cyprus understood, every one which had the fairest daughters, set
them forth to the uttermost show, by training them up with fine qualities,
nurturing them with good behavior, and trimming them in comely and gorgeous
attire. But amongst all others, not far from Famagosta dwell an Earl named Lord
Nemian, which had three daughters that were passing fair, whom the King
counseled to bestow one of them on Fortunatus if he might, and offered himself
also to break the matter if the Earl were so content. Now the Earl, though he
were not very rich, seemed at the first to make little account of Fortunatus,
saying to the King: If he should be a suitor to any of my daughters, would your
Grace advise me to give my consent? For we know he has no lands nor yearly
revenues: and whereas perhaps he had great sums of ready money, we see how he
has bestowed it in sumptuous building, whereof comes no profit. And albeit he
have sufficient store yet left, money is casual and may soon be consumed and
lost, and so may he come to be in poverty at the end as his Father did, who
sometime was exceeding Rich and Puissant. Then said the King to the Earl, I
have been certified by them that have seen it, that he has as many precious
Jewels as would buy an Earldom, and yet will sell none of them. I hear say
also, that he has traveled through many nations, whereby it is to be
presupposed that he would not have builded such a gorgeous Palace, and a
Chantry which he has so endowed with perpetual Rents, except he well knew how
to maintain an estate agreeable: And therefore if you will do by my counsel,
you shall (now he is disposed to marry) offer unto him one of your Daughters.
And if so be you are willing so to do, I my self will do my diligence in first
motioning of the matter, not doubting to bring it to pass. For Fortunatus I
know will do much at my request: and indeed I had rather he should match in a
Noble kindred, than with one of the meaner sort, being also unmeet (as to me
seems) that one of a base Lineage should possess that fair Palace, and dwell
therein.

The Earl understanding that Fortunatus was greatly in the Kings favor, said:
forasmuch as I perceive your graces pleasure is that I should give one of my
daughters to Fortunatus, therein I give your majesty full power, both of her
and my goods, Then said the King, Lord Nemian send your three daughters to my
Wife the Queen, and I will cause them to be gorgeously attired, upon hope that
one of them shall please him: howbeit I will give him the choice, to take which
he best fancieth; I will moreover bestow all the charges of the Wedding Feast,
and look what he requires more, that will I perform, for that thou have
frankly committed both Body and Goods unto me. The Earl humbly thanked his
Majesty, and so taking his leave of the King, rode home and declared to the
Countess his wife all the matter as it was decreed between the King and him.

The Countess liked of their Agreement well, save only that Fortunatus was not
no^^^ enough of birth, and that she was loath he should have his free choice:
for she loved one of them above the rest, whereof she would in no wise make the
Earl privy. Howbeit she agreed to his will: whereupon she comely addressed
them, and appointed a motherly Gentlewoman to be their Guide, with men and
maidens to attend on them, as was meet for their estate; they were sent unto
the Kings Court, where they with their retinue were honorably received, and
were taught the courteous guise and nurture of the Court, whereof they were not
altogether ignorant before. When the King thought it most convenient, he sent a
Messenger for Fortunatus, that he should come to the Court. And albeit he was
not certified for what cause he was sent for, yet he presupposing that it was
for no ill intent, speedily prepared himself and rode to the King, of whom he
was friendly entertained.

Then said the King unto him: Fortunatus thou art my Subject, and I am well
persuaded of thee, that thou will have respect unto my counsel, for that I
would be loath to with thee any evil. I am informed that thou have builded a
goodly House, and erected a Church with a Chantry, and that thou art now mind^d
to marry a Wife: wherefore I fearing lest thou should take one whom I should
not well like of, I have bethought me of a wife for thee, by whom the
worthiness of thy Lineage shall be advanced. Fortunatus answered, saying:
Gracious Lord, truth it is, that I am disposed to marry, and meant to have
espied out a wife for my liking, but forasmuch as I now perceive that your
Grace will vouchsafe so far to debate your Royal estate, as to provide so
favorably for me, I will no farther seek nor be careful, but will gladly put
my whole trust and confidence in your Majesty's assignment. When he had this
answer of Fortunatus, and was also assured of the Earls assent who had
committed to him his daughters, he thought in his mind, a Marriage is here
easy to be made, and said to Fortunatus as ensues.

I have in my custody three fair Ladies, which be all Sisters by one Father,
and one Mother: The eldest is eighteen years of age named Germana; the second
is seventeen years old, called Marcepia; the third of the second lacks four
years, whose name is Cassandra, I will permit thee of these three to have thy
choice: therefore advise thee whether thou will see them one after another, or
view them altogether. Fortunatus made no long deliberation, but said: My
Sovereign Lord, six hence your grace grants me such free choice, I require of
your Majesty that I may see them all three standing together, and hear each of
them speak.

The King granted his request, and sent word presently to the Queen, that she
should cause her Ladies to be trimmed in the best attire, for that he would
come thither, and bring a Guest with him. When the King thought all things were
ready, he would have taken Fortunatus alone with him, who entreated the King,
saying: if it please your Grace, suffer also this old servant of mine to go
with me: the King granted: so took they Leopoldus with them, and came into the
chamber where the Ladies were.

How Fortunatus of three Sisters chose the Youngest, named Cassandra, for his
Wife. Chap. 21.
THe King there setting down with Fortunatus standing by him, called the three
virgins before his presence. They Reverently kneeling before him, he willed
them to stand up, and said first to the eldest: Tell me Germana, had thou
lever remain with the Queen, or with the Earl thy Father, and the Countess thy
Lady Mother? She answered: My Sovereign Lord, it is not meet for me to answer
that question: and although I might choose, yet would I not follow my own
Fantasy: but that your Grace and my Lord and Father do Command, the same ought
I to Obey. Then spoke he to the second, saying: Marcepia, tell me truly which
thou love best, the Earl thy Father, or the Countess thy Mother. She likewise
answered, Let your grace pardon me for it is not convenient to give my
resolution to this demand. I love them both well, and with all my heart; if I
loved the one better than the other, I should be sorry my Heart should know it,
and ashamed that my Mouth should confess it: for I have found in them both as
much natural love and friendship, as a Daughter might look for of her parents.
Then moved the King the youngest to speak, saying: answer me Cassandra
unfeignedly to this question. If there were here in our Court a company of
noble and worshipful men and women preparing to dance, your Father and Mother
standing by, if one of them say stand forth and dance with them, and the other
bid step aside, and appear not among them, whose commandment would thou
obey? She replied, saying: Let not your Majesty be offended, your Groce^
knows that I am but young, and that (...) comes not before age: your Majesty
may also consider the affections and desires of Youth, therefore it is not for
me to disclose my unknown determination in this doubt; For (...) I obey the
one, I must needs displease the other, which I were very loath to do. But yet
urged the King farther, asking, if either of them must needs be done, whom had
you rather to please? Then said Cassandra, may it please your Highness to grant
me a year and a day to deliberate of this question, that I may ask counsel of
wiser than I am, to give you a direct answer. With that the King ceased asking,
and troubled them no more. Then went the King aside into another Chamber with
Fortunatus, and said unto him: Thy desire was to see these three Ladies, and to
hear them speak, which I have showed thee to the uttermost: now therefore
determine with thy self which of them thou think meet to be thy Spouse.
Fortunatus answered: I like them all so well (my Liege) that I cannot so
suddenly advise me which I may choose. Wherefore I beseech your Majesty, to
grant me but a little space to confer and consult with my old and trusty
servant Leopoldus therein. The King therewith was well content, and so let him
depart aside to deliberate of the matter.

Then Fortunatus withdrawing himself into a secret place, said to Leopoldus:
Thou have seen and heard these three Ladies as will as I, and forasmuch as I
consider that in matters consisting of mere Fantasy, reason and right
judgment be often abandoned by wilful affection, therefore do I first require
thy opinion also in this case, before I proceed to farther choice, desiring
thee to council me, even as the Case were thine own. Leopoldus being somewhat
abashed with this Demand, said, Sir, It is not for you to regard my judgment
in this Point: For many times one Brother likes of that which is Displeasant
unto the other; and most often it chances that every Singular man has a
particular judgment, and that especially in the choice of a woman. Therefore
your own affection in this case should be more acceptable, than any foreign
council: for that good liking is the root of sound love. Then said Fortunatus:
Of all this full well I wot, and that I take a Wife for my self and for no
other: But yet would I fain that thou should disclose the secrets of thy
heart unto me, for thy experience is far greater than mine, to judge the inward
disposition by the outward marks and tokens of Physiognomy, which often proves
true.

Leopoldus was very loath to move him any way, fearing lest if he did not
counsel him as his Fancy was before bent, he would therewith be discontented.
Howbeit thus much he said: Sir, They all three like me very well; and as far as
I can guess, they be either sisters, or sisters Children: neither do I mark any
tokens of unfaithfulness in them. Then asked Fortunatus of which of them he
thought best? Leopoldus answered: I will not first counsel, neither shall you
first choose, lest if I should mislike that you best fancied, you might be
offended. Therefore take we each of us a piece of Paper, and therein let us
write both our minds asunder, you at one end of the Table, and I at the other.
This device liked Fortunatus well, and so did both accordingly.

When as they had read in each others writing, that Cassandra was of them both
fancied more than the rest. Fortunatus was glad that the same liked Leopoldus,
which liked him: and Leopoldus also rejoiced that he had most preferred the
Lady whom his Master had chosen. When Fortunatus had thus determined with
himself, with the advice also of Leopoldus, he went again unto the King, and
said: my Sovereign Lord and King, forasmuch as your Grace has assigned unto me
a choice, which (though it were not, as indeed it is, very acceptable unto me)
I ought to take it in good part, esteeming my self not unworthy thereof: I
therefore humbly present unto your Grace my faithful service in all your
affairs; and will employ my whole might and power to recompense your
benevolence. And to satisfy your Majesty as concerning my determination, I
give you now to understand; that by your favor and license, I have chosen
Cassandra the youngest sister for my Spouse, if so it like your Majesty to
grant me. The King said, thy request is granted, and so sent presently for the
Queen to bring Cassandra with her. When the Queen and Cassandra were come, the
King sent for a Prelate, and caused them to be Married incontinently: Wherewith
Cassandra was scantly well content, for that she was so suddenly wedded without
the consent or presence of her Parents; howbeit the King would needs have it
so. Now when the wedding was finished; the Sisters of the Bride, with many
other Ladies and Virgins, with courteous salutations wished under her good
luck; but yet the two sisters wept bitterly. Fortunatus demanding the cause of
their mourning, comforted them, saying: Be of good cheer, lament not at your
sisters good fortune, lest you be rather suspected of envious disdain, than
commended for natural kindness: hope the best, and I will ere long somewhat
case you of your sorrow. With that he sent forthwith to Famagosta for the
Jewels that he bought at Venice, and gave two of the best to the King and the
Queen, and to the Bride and her two Sisters each of them one, which were also
very sumptuous, fair, and beautiful: And on every one of the Queens waiting
Ladies bestowed he a precious Jewel also, for the which they all greatly
thanked him, and marvelled at his bountiful liberality. The King then sent for
the Earl of Nemian, and the Countess, his Wife. Fortunatus understanding
thereof, sent Leopoldus together with the Messengers, and delivered to him a
thousand Ducats to give unto the Countess; and willed him to say unto her,
that her Daughters Husband has sent her that present, that she might come with
a cheerful Countenance to the Wedding Feast of Cassandra: The Countess at the
first bearing of this Message, was displeased, because Fortunatus had chosen
the Youngest, which ^e loved more tenderly than the other: But when Leopoldus
had given her the money, her choler was soon allaied, and her Displeasure
pacified; so that she and the Earl prepared themselves with gorgeous Attire,
and all other comely Furniture accordingly to go to the Court, where they were
received of the King very honorably. Their lodging also was prepared exceeding
sumptuously, and of all kind of delicate fare they had great plenty: Insomuch
that the Earl said to his Wife; as often as we have repaired unto this Court,
such honor was never done unto us before: wherefore sithence our King is
become so gracious unto us, and has ordained such a puissant Husband for our
Daughter, we be much bound to render thanks unto the Omnipotent God. And as
they were all assembled together, the King said unto Fortunatus; now rests
only the Wedding Feast to be ordained, which I mean to have kept in my own
Palace. Then spoke Fortunatus: May it like your Grace to grant me so much, as
that I may Solemnize the same at Famagosta, in my new Lodging, wherein never
was yet any triumphant Pastime. The King said: Not so, lest the Lord Nemian and
you should be overmuch charged. Fortunatus again replied, saying: no cost, be
it never so great, shall either grudge or grieve me, therefore I beseech your
Majesty vouchsafe to honor my feast with your own person, and the presence of
the Queens Grace, and all the Noble and Worshipfvl Retinue of your Highness
Court: and although perhaps I cannot give sufficient Entertainment in all
points correspondent to the worthiness of such princely and noble estate: yet I
will undoubtedly so provide, that there shall be nothing necessary wanting,
which money can procure.

How the King and Queen of Cyprus accompanied the fair Cassandra to Fortunatus
House, where they were bountifully feasted. Chap. 22.
WHen the King heard Fortunatus make such a bountiful and magnificent proffer,
he thought to himself; I would gladly see his behavior, and said unto him: be
it as thou have requested; ride home before to make preparation, and I will
shortly come with the Queen, thy Father and Mother-in-Law, with thy spouse, and
with all our retinue. Fortunatus was thereof glad, thanking the King, and said:
Your Grace shall not need to be long absent, for in three days I shall be ready
for your coming. So rode he forthwith to Famagosta, and there made provision
as magnificently as he could devise. After the fourth day, the King came to
Fortunatus house, with no small number of noble estates: where at the first
entrance they were triumphantly received with sundry kinds of melody, and
musical harmony, and with many delectable and pleasant shows to delight their
senses, the house also being triml^ compacted, and so gorgeously garnished,
that it was most glorious to behold. Thus continued they the whole day, and
most part of the night, with feasting, banqueting, and dancing, after the most
sumptuous manner that might be devised, until Fortunatus and fair Cass^ndra
were brought to their Chamber: And in like manner continued the space of
fourteen days after. But notwithstanding the Countess, the Brides Mother had
seen this Royalty, and all things so sumptuously accomplished, yet was not she
fully satisfied, because Fortunatus had no Land nor yearly Revenues, and so
signified unto her Husband the Earl, who said: trouble not your self therewith,
for there is no doubt but that he will sufficiently provide for your Daughter.
On the next morrow went the King, the Earl, and the Countess, and requested him
that he would assign some certain dowry unto Cassandra, what casualty soever
might befall. Then said Fortunatus, I have neither Land, Lordship, nor yearly
Revenues; but I will give to her five thousand Ducats in ready money,
wherewith I will put you (my Lord and Father) in trust, to purchase for her
some mannor-house with Lands, where you and she shall think most convenient.
Then said the King: I wot well how it is best to do in this matter. Here is the
Earl of L^gorn, which is forced of necessity to sell a parcel of his Living for
ready Money: He has a Castle and a Town three miles hence called Larganenbo at
the Rainbow; the same you may buy of him, with the Title that he has both of
the Land and People. So sent they presently for the Earl, who was contented to
bargain with them for seven thousand Ducats. Fortunatus therefore without delay
told out the money, and the Earl of Legorn concluded with him to yield up all
his right, title, interest, and jurisdiction that he had, in, or to the
Countiship Castle, and Town of Legorn unto Cass^ndra, and never to make more
challenge thereto. When this matter was thoroughly accomplished, then was the
Countess in all points well pleased.

How the King and the Queen departed, and Fortunatus ordained a new Feast for
the Citizens. Chap. 23.
NOw lest the time whilst the King there remained, should seem tedious
Fortunatus ordained three Jewels; the first valued at six hundred Ducats, for
the which the Nobility and chief Champions of Chivalry should Just three days,
and he that did best, freely to possess the same. The second was worth four
hundred Ducats, provided for Squires and Gentlemen. The third prised at two
hundred Ducats, appointed for servitors and yeomen: for the which, each degree
for three days space should orderly contend; and to him that did best should
the jewels be frankly given. Thus every man extending his manly force to the
uttermost trial, they spent every Day three Scene from Chapter 23hours in
justing: and the rest of the day, and great part of the night, they passed
merrily in Banqueting, Dancing, Masking, and other such like Revels. Now when
this sumptuous Feast, and triumphant pastime had continued the space of
fourteen days, the King with all his Train and Retinue would depart, whom
Fortunatus fain would have had to continue longer, especially his Father and
Mother in Law: But they would in no wise stay, fearing lest through overmuch
cost and charges, he might run too far in the lurch. When the King should
depart, Fortunatus with all his men brought him on his way: and when he took
his leave of them, he gave great thanks unto the King, the Queen, and the
Nobility, for that they had so vouchsafed to Honor his Wedding Feast with
their acceptable presence, and so returned home again to Cassandra. After this
he prepared yet another feast, inviting thereto all the Citizens, both men,
women, and children; which also continued eight days, whereby he won great
favor and friendship of all the inhabitants of Famagosta. When that Feast was
likewise ended, he purposed from thenceforth to lead a quiet life with fair
Cassandra, and in this wise spoke to his old servant Leopoldus: Dear friend,
according to my promise when I first entertained thee, I will now propose the
choice of three things unto thee, wherein show me thy mind, and I will surely
perform it accordingly.

First, If thou be disposed to return into Ireland again, then will I give thee
four servants to bring thee worshipfully thither, and will give thee also as
much money in thy purse, as shall maintain a competent living for thee and
thine during thy life: Or if thou list hereto remain Eamagosta, I will provide
thee a House, and allow thee yearly as much as shall maintain three servants,
and two maidens to attend on thee, and will not suffer thee to want during thy
life: or if thou will still abide in house with me, thou shall have all things
that are necessary, as good as I my self. Now choose of these three proffers
which thou likest best, and I will faithfully perform my promise in either of
them.

Then said Leopoldus: This is much more than I have deserved either of God or
Man, that such honor and courtesy should be proffered to me in my old Age:
wherefore I yield to you as hearty thanks as one man may tender to another.

But as concerning this choice; to ride home again, for one of my years, it is
very painful and unmeet; and perhaps I may dye by the way; yea, though I might
come safely home, Ireland being a hard and uncivil country, where are no good
wives, nor delicate victuals well prepared, whereto I have been long
accustomed, my life (most like) would be the sooner shortened. And to remain
still in household with you, for me is more unfit: For whereas you have now a
Fair young lusty Wife, many goodly Gentlewomen and jolly Fellows about you. I
being old and feeble, shall be loathsome unto them; for the behavior of old
men, is irksome unto the younger sort. Howbeit I mistrust not your virtuous
disposition. Therefore if it shall please you, I especially request you to buy
me a house in the City, wherein I may end my life; beseeching you
notwithstanding, that I may not be secluded from your counsel, so long as we
both live. Fortunatus thereto yielded, not attempting any weighty cause without
his advice so long as he lived. He also bought him a house according to his
desire, gave him men and maidens, and alow'd him for his charges an hundred
ducats every month. Leopoldus was glad to be free at his own liberty, to eat
or drink, rise or go to bed when he lifted, and not bound to any kind of
service. Nevertheless he went daily to the Church, there to show himself to
Fortunatus, and other his attendants, when need required; whereby appeared his
fidelity. When Leopoldus had now lived half a year in his estate, he was taken
with a grievous sickness, which when no Physicians could remedy, soon after he
died, whereof Fortunatus was exceeding sorry, causing him to be worshipfully
buried in his own Church.

How Fortunatus had by his Wife two Sons, the first named Ampedo, the younger
Andol^ci^. Chap. 24.
FOrtunatus and Cassandra his wife now living in joyful and happy Estate, found
lack of no earthly thing but only of Children; for he knew that the virtue of
his Purse would end after his decease, if he had no lawful heirs of his body:
howbeit he made not his wife a counsel thereof, but prayed daily together with
her, that God would make them Fruitful. Insomuch that the Lord hearing their
requests, Cassandra was conceived with a Son, whom they Baptized with the Name
of Ampedo. Shortly after she came with Child again, and brought forth another
Son, which was Christened by the name of Andolocia. Thus Fortunatus was not a
little joyful, that he had now two such fair and well-proportioned children,
whom he and his Espouse trained up carefully, and tenderly loved: Howbeit
Andolocia was always of stouter courage than Ampedo, as after it appeared. And
although Fortunatus would gladly have had more Children by Cassandra
(especially a daughter or twain also) yet from thence forth she conceived no
more by him.

How Fortunatus got leave of Cassandra to go unto the Heathen Nations. Chap. 25.
FOrtunatus having now lived joyfully with Cassandra twelve years, and
persuading with himself that it was unlikely he should have any more Children,
it seemed irksome and grievous unto him to abide any longer at Famagosta,
though he there wanted no kind of pleasant Recreation and Pastime; but purposed
to travel among the Heathen, through both the greater and lesser India, and
over all the Kingdoms of Prester John: For the which he demanded the good will
of Cassandra, and told her, that forasmuch as he had already ranged through one
half of the earth, he was minded to see the other half also, though he should
lose his life thereby. When Cassandra heard him so earnestly bent to depart so
far from her, she lamentably entreated him to desist from his purposed Voyage,
saying: If you thus without cause will adventure your quiet estate, it is no
other likelihood, but that you will greatly repent it. For although heretofore
you have passed throughout most Christian Nations in your youthful, strong, and
lusty age, yet now you being long accustomed to a quiet life, may not so well
endure to travel in these elder years into the Savage and Heathen Countries,
who also be most envious, unfaithful, and tyrannous to all Christians;
therefore oh my well-beloved Fortunatus, oh my dear and faithful spouse, on
whom I repose all my trust, I beseech thee for Gods sake, and the love thou
owe unto me, that having respect unto thy Wife and Children, thou will cast
out of thy mind such dangerous and unneedful travel, and abide still with us;
and if I have displeased you in any thing, or have done ought that misliked
you, let me understand of it, and I will endeavor to eschew the same: with
that she wept bitterly, and showed her self very sorrowful. Then said
Fortunatus, my dearly beloved bedfellow, take not the matter so grievously, I
intend to be but a small time absent, and when I return, from thenceforth I
will continue with you so long as we both live. Then said Cassandra, If I were
sure of your return, I would patiently abide your departure: Or if you went
elsewhere than amongst an unfaithful people that coveteth the blood of
Christians, it should the less grieve me. Then said Fortunatus, I am so fully
minded to accomplish this journey, that no creature save God and death only
shall alter my pretense: howbeit at my departure I will leave you so much ready
money, as shall maintain you and your Children during your lives, though I
never come again. When Cassandra perceived that no entreaty would prevail, she
said: Well-beloved husband, sithence it cannot be otherwise, I beseech you
hasten your return, and let not the love and faithfulness which you have hither
showed, be banished out of your heart, and we will all pray unto the Lord day
and night, that you may have health, peace, and good weather, and favor of all
them with whom you shall be conversent, and under whose power you shall fall.
Then said Fortunatus; God grant your prayer take effect, and I trust to return
the sooner.

How Fortunatus departed from Cyprus again to visit more strange countries.
Chap. 26.
SOon after Fortunatus taking leave of his Wife and Children, desiring God to
bless them all, departed in a Ship of his own, and sailed to Alexandria; where
when they had attained license to come on land, they were demanded who was Lord
of the Ship, to whom they answered: That Fortunatus of Famagasta in the Isle of
Cyprus was the only owner thereof: then required they Fortunatus to be brought
into the Kings presence, to present a Gift unto him; for such was the Custom
there: And every Merchant at his first arrival at Alexandria, should give some
present unto the Souldan. Scene from Chapter 26Wherefore the Courtiers were
ready and diligent to bring him unto the Court: where he willed a Cup-Board to
be prepared, and thereon he set many fair and costly Jewels for the King to
behold. When the Souldan came forth and beheld them, he marvelled, supposing
they were brought to be sold: And thereupon enquiring the price of them.
Fortunatus again caused to be demanded of the Souldan whether they liked him?
The Souldan answered, I have not lightly seen fairer, therefore I cannot but
like them well. Then requested Fortunatus that his Grace would take them in
good worth for that he would freely give them all unto him: when the King heard
that, he marvelled that one Merchant should present him with such a rich gift;
for he esteemed them worth 5000 Ducats, which he thought was a sufficient
Present for the Commonalty and ^att of a whole City, such as Venice, Florence,
or Genua: Howbeit he would not refuse them, but accepted it for a gift,
recompencing him with an hundred barrels of Pepper, which amounted to the value
of the Jewels. When the Factors of Venice, Florence, and Genua, and Catholonia
(who were then at Alexandria) had heard that the King had given unto Fortunatus
such a reward; forasmuch as they abiding there continually, brought great
commodity unto the Realm, and gave Gifts once or twice a year unto the King,
and yet none of them at any time received any reward, great or small, they
envied Fortunatus. Besides that, he bought all the best Merchandise, not
sticking at any price: Wherefore they fearing their Hinderance, sought to bring
Fortunatus in displeasure with the Souldan. Whereupon they gave unto the Lord
Admiral great Gifts, to the end he might conceive the worse of Fortunatus, and
so Discredit him to the King. But Fortunatus having intelligence thereof, gave
unto him privily every time so much more than they. This fell out well for the
Admiral, who took Money on both Parties, and yet did what he thought good, and
was nevertheless friendly unto Fortunatus; wishing that many more such would
come unto Alexandria. After Fortunatus had been there certain days, behaving
himself very worshipfully: the King invited him and the chief Masters of the
Ship to Dinner, giving them honorable entertainment, which grieved the
Merchants greatly. Soon after the Admiral did in like manner feast them: And
then did the Merchants plainly perceive that their gifts were in vain bestowed;
for the which they inwardly fretted. When the time drew nigh that the Ship must
needs depart, for the custom was, that no vessel might stay at Alexandria above
six weeks, (whether he had sold or not.) Fortunatus had appointed another
Patron over his Ship in his stead, whom he charged to sail with his Merchandise
to Cathalonia, Portugal, Spain, Flanders, and England, and to augment his stock
by exchange of Wares at all those Coasts. He also charged him, that after two
years he should repair again with the Ship unto Alexandria: For in the mean
while he purposed to see many strange Countries, and at the two years end would
he there meet him again: but if they found him not there, that they should make
no account that he were alive, then they should return to Famagosta, and there
deliver the ship and the goods into the possession of his Wife Cassandra and
his Children; which Commandment of his, the Patron faithfully promising to
accomp^ish, took his leave and so departed.

How Fortunatus departed to travel toward the Indies, and many other strange
countries, and at the length returned again to Alexandria. Chap. 27.
FOrtunatus forthwith made request unto the Lord Admiral, that he would procure
him of the Souldan a sport, a guide, and letters of commendation to those
Princes and Monarks, by whom he minded to travel. The Admiral accomplished his
request in all respects, whereof he was glad, and incontinently furnished
himself and all that should accompany him with all things necessary and
expedient at his own charges; and so made his first journey through the land of
Persia; from thence he passed through the dominions of the great Cham of
Cathay, and so through the desert, came to the Court of Prester John, who had
under him, both of the Isles and firm Land lxxii Kings, every one of the which
Countries is full of People, fair Cities, and strong holds: There Fortunatus
gave unto Prester John many goodly Jewels and presents, such as were rare and
strange in those Countries. He gave also many gifts unto the Gentlemen of the
privy Chamber, and such as were in authority; requesting them to assist and
further him, that he might take up certain Men, and have the Kings Letters to
address him to Calicuate, whereas the best Pepper grows like unto Grapes, and
the men of the country for extreme heat go all naked. Fortunatus therefore not
able for parching heat to travel any farther that way, and now remembering his
beloved wife and his two sons, longed to be at Famagosta, and so returted a
contrary way homeward, through many other strange Countries, until he came to
the City Lamecha; and there bought a Chamel, whereon he rode through the desert
of Jerusalem, to see the holy Monuments of our Saviors Passions. The time
whereas he appointed to be again at Alexandria was nigh at hand, within two
months: wherefore he took shipping to abridge his Journey, and made have away,
until he was arrived again at Alexandria; where he went presently unto the
Souldan, thanking him and the Lord Admiral highly for their Letters; by whom he
was entertained very honorably, when they understood that he had so manly
behaved himself, and had seen so many strange Countries.

When Fortunatus had been now eight days at Alexandria, having there with him
many strange beasts and other rare Novelties, he longed greatly for the Ship,
that he might set forward to Famagosta. In the mean time was the ship arrived,
laden with so much, and so rich Merchandise, that she was thrice better in
value than when she departed, whereof Fortunatus was exceeding glad, especially
for the health of his men, and that they had brought Letters from Cassandra,
signifying that she and her Children were in good estate, wanting only his
presence. Wherefore he willed his Merchants to make a speedy sale, and to
afford these wares better cheap than they commonly used. And in so doing, as
they were willed, whereas other ships do scant make their Mart in six weeks,
they dispatched all their business in twenty days, when as Fortunatus would
have presently taken his leave and departed: But the Souldan requested him to
stay with him at Supper the night before he departed, which he could not
refuse, but willed his men to go aboard, and to lanch out the Ship from the
Haven into the Rode, appointing presently after supper to come unto them, and
so to depart. In the mean while went Fortunatus with the Admiral unto the Kings
Palace, where he was worthily entertained. Then communed the Souldan with him
concerning his Affairs and success in strange Nations, which he uttered at
large, thanking him again for his Letters of address, saying: That by them he
was greatly furthered, and the more accepted of strange Princes. By this time
was the supper ready; the King was set at the Table, and Fortunatus was placed
almost over against him, where they were served with all kind of delicate fare,
as was convenient for such a Mighty Prince.

How Fortunatus gave great Gifts to the Souldans houshold-servants, and how the
Souldan showed him his treasure and his wishing-Hat, which Fortunatus carried
away. Chap. 23.
Scene from Chapter 23

When supper was ended, Fortunatus craved license to bestow his benevolence on
the household, which the Souldan granting, he opened his purse privily under the
Table: and when he had given to every man in the house a large gift, according
to their degree, the Souldan marvelled with himself how he could bear so much
Gold about him unperceived, esteeming it a great honor done to him, that he
had been so liberal to his servants, saying: right courteous Gentleman, this
your bountiful behavior, and liberal disbursing toward me and all mine,
deserves no small commendation and recompense: come therefore with me, and I
will show you that before you go, which few or none does know but my self, and
the like whereof you never saw: With that he brought him unto a strong Tower,
vau^ted all with Marble-stone; in the first room whereof were a great number of
vessels, and Jewels of Silver, and huge heaps of silver coyns: In the second
were many vessels and household implements of Gold; and many great Chests full
of golden Coin: within that was a great Ward-rope, full of many costly Jewels
and gorgeous garments, beautified with precious stones of all sorts, belonging
to the ornaments for his Body: There were also two golden Candlesticks, upon
which stood two orient and great Carbuncles, which shone in the night all over
the Chamber. Fortunatus was rapt with great admiration to behold this infinite
Treasure, praising it greatly: Then said the Souldan, I have yet a jewel in my
Chamber which I more esteem than all those you have seen: Then the King carried
him to his own Bedchamber, which was sumptuously adorned, having a prospect
unto the main Sea, and there opening a closet, brought forth in his hand a
plain Felt hat, base and simple to behold, saying: I set more by this Hat, than
by all the Precious Jewels that I possess, for that if I had no Jewels, money
would get them, but such an Hat is not to be had.

Then said Fortunatus, if it so please your Majesty, I would gladly know what
power and virtue consists in this hat. The King said, it has this quality,
that whosoever has it on his head, where he wishes then to be, he is with a
thought conveyed thither; so that with the fame have I more pleasure than with
all my jewels: for when my men go forth to hunt, and I long to be with them,
setting my Hat on my head, where the best game is to be seen, I am there
suddenly present: and where the Deer rests, I can be there when I list, to
drive them to the hunters hand. In time of wars also, I can be with my
Soldiers when I lift, and in my Palace again w th a wish, which all my Jewels
cannot do. Then demanded Fortunatus, if he that made that Hat were yet alive:
The King said, of that I am uncertain. Then thought Fortunatus in his mind: How
well would this Hat agree with the Purse^ and said unto the King: Methinks,
sithence that Hat has such great virtue, that it would seem very heavy on his
head that wears it. Then answered the King, that it was no heavier than
another Hat, and therewith bid him to essay it on his head, asking him whether
he fe^t it otherwise. Fortunatus answered, saying: Verily I did not think it
had been so light, neither supposed I that your Grace wou d be so unadvised to
set it on my head: with that he suddenly wished himself into his ship, willing
speedily to hoise the sail, and having a fresh gale of wind, they sailed
swiftly away: when the Souldan saw he was thus deceived of such an incomparable
Jewel, perceived also at the window that the ship was under sail, he in great
rage commanded his men to set after Fortunatus, and to bring him back prisoner,
threatening to him a cruel death. But ere they could be scantly appointed, the
ship was clean passed out of sight; so that the Messengers returned again in
vain, whereof the King was exceeding sorry.

Now when the Factors of Venice, Florence, and Genua understood that Fortunatus
was gone with the Kings Jewel, they inwardly rejoiced, saying among themselves:
The King and the Admiral are but very well served; for whereas they thought they
could not do unto him too much honor, he has therefore yielded them a fair
recompense: but yet are we now sure that he will not return hither again to
hinder our Marts as he has done. Now the Souldan being thus in a great agony
for his Hat, would gladly have devised how to obtain it again, but wist not how
to attempt the matter.

To send his Admiral, or any of his heathen Lords among the Christians, he
thought it both dangerous and little available: wherefore he thought best to
send the Captain of the Chrstians in his Embassage unto Cyprus, to deal by way
of entreaty. Wherefore he called the Captain unto him, who was a Venetian,
named Marcholandus, requesting him to accomplish an Embassage faithfully unto
Fortunatus in Cyprus: and showing him the case before, willed him to say unto
Fortunatus, that if he would vouchsafe of courtesy to send him the hat again,
sithence he showed it him upon trust, he would accept it thankfully, and would
send his Ship again laden with costly spices: but if he would not be so
entreated, that he should make his complaint unto the King of Cyprus,
requesting him to enforce Fortunatus to send the Jewel which he had
unfaithfully carried from him: the Captain promised truly and diligently to do
his message. Whereupon the Souldan caused to be ordained for him a fair and
strong ship, well manned with Christian Mariners, in all points sufficiently
appointed, promising unto him rich rewards if he could bring the Hat again. But
the Souldan was so dismayed that he could take no ^e^^, whereat his servitors
were very sorry, who praised Fortunatus highly when he dealt so liberally with
them; but when he had thus disquieted their King, they said, he was the
naughtiest man that ever lived.

How the Souldans Ambassador could not obtain the Hat of Fortunatus. Chap. 20.
MArch olandus being arrived in Cyprus, tame to Famagosta, where Fortunatus was
come home ten days before. But how joyfully he and his company were received of
Cassandra, of his two children, and of all the City, it were tedious to report:
for there were many citizens also, whose friends were landed with Fortunatus,
that had traveled far with him; which mirth and joy Mercholandus well
perceived. And when Fortunatus understood that an Ambassador was come from the
Souldan, to Famagosta, he easily deemed what was his errand: howbeit he caused
a fair lodging to be appointed for him, and all other things requisite, willing
his provision to be brought in, which he would discharge. When Marcholandus had
bin now three days in Famagosta, he sent word unto Fortunatus, that he had a
message to do unto him. Fortunatus willed him to come unto his fair Palace,
where he did his Message: saying: The King Souldan of Babylon, Lord of Alcary
and Alexandria, sends his greeting to thee Fortunatus, by me Marcholandus:
requiring that thou will vouchsafe to let me be a speedy Messenger, and send
unto him his Jewel again by me. Fortunatus answered in scotting manner, saying:
I marvel that the King Souldan was so uncircumspect to tell me the virtue of
the Hat, and also himself to set the same upon my head; by occasion whereof I
was in such Danger, that it will never be out of my remembrance so long as I
live: For my Ship being at rode on the Sea, and upon his saying. I wishing my
self therein, if it had then failed by the way, I had been drowned, and so have
lost my life, which I esteem more than all the King Souldans Kingdom; and
therefore am I minded not to depart from the Jewel so long as I live. When
Marcholandus heard this answer, he thought by fair entreaty to persuade him:
Wherefore he said unto him; Fortunatus, be not so hard-hearted, but advise you
by reason and counsel: What profit can you make of the Jewel? I will warrant
you an hundred times the Value of that pild Hat, whereof if I had a sackful,
and each of them had the virtue that it has, I would give them all for the
third part of that I shall procure you for the same: Wherefore let me speed I
beseech you of my message, and I will promise you that the King shall lade your
Ship with the finest Spices; as Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs, and Cinnamon,
and suchlike: the which may be worth an hundred thousand Ducats. Besides
that, shall it be granted you not to yield the Hat before you have the said
Spices delivered into your Possession. Therefore if it please you on this
Condition to agree, I will my self go with your ship to Alexandria, and bring
it home unto you laden, trusting unto you, that when I bring that I have
promised, you will likewise yield over unto my Gracious Lord the King, his
Jewel again.

Fortunatus answered, saying: I would fain be in the Kings friendship, and in
yours also, but let no man persuade with himself that he shall get the Hat out
of my hands so long as my life endures.

Upon these words Marcholandus trusted no more to entreaty, but wrathfully
departed unto the King of Cyprus, to whom he made his complaint, requesting his
Majesty that he would enforce Fortunatus his subject to restore again to the
Souldan the Jewel which he had most deceitfully gotten, and now wrongfully
detained: saying, that if it were not by fear means restored, great Wars were
like thereof to ensue. The King said again to M^rcholandus, I have Princes and
Lords in my Kingdom, whom though I command, they will do what they list: But if
your King have any just Complaint or Quarrel against Fortunatus, let him deal
with him as he thinks good; for I would that he should have Justice as he
has deserved.

Marcholandus then supposing with himself that the Heathen in Cyprus should
have but slender justice, returned to Famagosta, there to take shipping and
depart. But Fortunatus notwithstanding, at his return bad him to Dinner,
entertaining him sumptuously. He gave also unto him many goodly Jewels, and
freighted his Ship with sufficient Victuals, at his own charge, saying unto
him: Have me commended unto the Souldan, and tell him; That if he had such a
Hat of mine in like manner, I suppose he would not send it me again, neither
would his council persuade him so to do: likewise am I advised by my friends
and my own reason, not to depart from it, so long as I may keep it.

The Marcholandus thanked Fortunatus for his courteous entertainment, and his
costly gifts, saying: he would so signify unto the King, and departed
sorrowful for his cold suit.

Fortunatus having now passed over most part of the World, and wanting almost
no earthly Commodity that man might wish; he began to tender the advancement of
his own and his Childrens estates; maintaining a Princely port, procured
Masters and Men of faculties to instruct his Children, especially in Learning,
and in feats of Chivalry, whereto the youngest was most inclined, behaving
himself manfully; for which cause Fortunatus bestowed many Jewels, for the
which was much Iusting at Famagosta, wherein the Youngest Son had always the
chief praise: Whereupon the common people would say, that Andolocia did honor
to the whole Country: Fortunatus therefore rejoiced, passing his days in great
solace with the pastime and pleasure that he conceived with the Hat, and also
by Hawking, with Andolocia and fair Cassandra. When they had thus many years
enjoyed all earthly pleasures, Fair Cassandra was summoned with a Grievous and
Deadly Sickness, to yield up her immortal Soul from the transitory and
corruptible Body, were it never so near; whereof Fortunatus also conceived such
an inward thought, that he languished with a deadly consumption, and an
imposthumation in the head. When the feeble estate of his Body put him in fear
of death, he sent far and near for the best Physicians that might be had; but
they only prolonged his life for a small time, but could give him no comfort of
recovery.

How Fortunatus on his deathbed, declared unto his Sons the virtue of the
Purse and the Hat. Chap. 30.
Scene from Chapter 30

FOrtunatus therefore perceiving no amendment, but rather that Death
approached, sent for his two Sons, Ampedo and Andolocia, saying to them, My
dear Children, your Mother that so carefully trained you up, is departed out of
this world, and I likewise perceive by the feebleness of my tormented body,
that death is nigh at hand; therefore I will show you how you may continue in
honor and wealth as I have do^e until my dying day. With that he declared unto
them the virtue of the Purse, and that it should last no longer than their two
lives; and also told them the virtue of the Hat, and how much the Souldan would
have given for it. He commanded moreover that they should not part the Jewels,
but use them in common friendly together, neither that they should make any
person privy to the virtue of the purse, were she or he never so well beloved
unto them: for so said he, have I concealed it this xl. years, and never
uttered it save now to you only: With that he ceased speaking, and gave up the
Ghost; whom his Sons caused to be honorably buried in the Minster which he had
erected.

Ampedo and Andolocia, having now left off all kind of martial Exercises, and
mourned twelve months for the death of their Father: Andolocia having read over
his fathers books, wherein was registered in how many Nations he had traveled,
was therewith greatly delighted, and earnestly moved to do the like. Wherefore
he said to Ampedo: My dear brother, that we may not pass these our lusty and
youthful years together in vanity, idleness, and obscure behavior; let us
travel into strange Countries, to get experience, and purchase Honor, as our
Father has done; a memorial whereof he has left to us in writing, which I
greatly de^ight to read. Ampedo answered, saying: Let them wander that is
disposed; for I mean nothing less, lest perhaps (as most like it is) I should
come into many a place where I should gladly wish me at home again: So that
(God willing) I am determined to remain here at Famagosta, and to end my life
in this fair Palace. Then said Andolocia: Sithence you are so minded, let us
part the Jewels. Ampedo said: will thou so transgress our Fathers commandment:
wotest thou not that by his last will, he charged us that we should not divide
them: Andolocia said: What need we care for that? he is dead and we be alive,
therefore sithence we mean to part company, let us also divide them.

Then said Ampedo, Take the Hat for thy share, and go whither thou will.
Andolocia said, take thou it thy self and abide here: thus when they could not
agree, for that they both desired the Purse, Andolocia said: Good Brother, then
I pray you hearken to my Counsel; which shall be indifferent for us both. We
will privily fill two coffers full of gold, wherewith thou spending at thy
pleasure, may live merrily during thy Life: Thou shall have the Hat also to
make thee pastime, and let me only have the Purse during the space of six
years, wherein I will travel to purchase experience and honor: And at my
return thou shall enjoy the purse at thine own use six years in like manner;
thus shall we not break our Fathers Will. Ampedo thinking this to be a
reasonable demand, was contented that so it should be.

How Andolocia having the Purse, went well furnished unto the Fren^h Kings
Court. Chap. 31.
WHen An^olocia had the Purse, he attired himself gorgeously, entertained forty
tall and comely Men, whom he apparelled at his own cost, after the bravest
manner: And taking leave of his Brother he departed in a Ship of his own, and
sailed toward France, until he came to the Haven, called Aquamorte, where he
went on Land, and passed to the French Kings Court, where he was well
Entertained of the King and all the Courtiers. There he accompanied himself
with Earls, Lords, and Knights; for he maintained his Estate as sumptuously as
the best of them: Wherefore he was had in great estimation with every man;
attending also daily on the King, as if he had been an ordinary Servant. In the
mean time it befell, that a Challenge was made by certain Lords and Gentlemen,
to Just, Wrestle, and leap with any one that would contend with him: Andolocia
advanced himself to try his force in all these Games, wherein he excelled them
all. And in the evening when the Nobles and Ladies should dance before the
King, he was also called and preferred to Dance with them, wherein likewise he
behaved himself so well, and with such a comely grace, that the Gentlewomen had
him in great favor, delighting to recreate themselves, and pass the time in
his company, whereof he was glad, yielding unto them again pleasant
communication, and familiar courtesy.

After the Revels was ordained a Banquet, whereto the King also invited
Andolocia, and as he sat at the Table, it chanced that he was fuddenly pricked
with a passion of hot love toward a fair Gentlewoman, whose Husband was most
familiar with him of all the other in the Court: Wherefore as soon as he was
risen from the Table, without delay or long circumstance, he rounding her in
the ear, offered her a thousand Crowns, on condition she would grant to lie
with him but one night. The Gentlewoman being a Faithful and Chaste Wife, would
not Consent thereto, but presently detected the great offer of Andolocia unto
her husband; who said unto her: A thousand Crowns would do us great pleasure,
and were soon earned: howbeit honesty passes Riches, and the infamy that
thereby to us both might ensue, can with no Money be taken away;
notwithstanding (if so be you think it good) we may so use the matter, to have
most part of the money without destraining of your own body, by this policy:
You know we have a fair and well-proportioned Neighbor, who is nothing nice of
her flesh, neither refuses any clean man's bed for money; to her you may
promise an hundred Crowns to lie with Andolocia in your stead, and the rest may
we reserve unto our selves: I need no further to instruct you, for a Woman I
trust is not commonly to seek in such a shift: The Gentlewoman liked well of
this device, and forthwith went unto her Neighbor, saying unto her: So it is,
that a fair, lusty, and valiant young Gentleman, being a Stranger, offered unto
me two hundred Crowns if I would lie with him one night; and forasmuch as my
Husband loves me so dearly, I dare not therein to deceive him, lest it cost me
my life; therefore if thou ^arest to adventure in my stead, I will bring to
pass that thou shall lie with him in my Chamber in my own bed, and will give
thee for thy part an hundred Crowns. Then said the arrant honest Woman, I would
not stick to lie with such a one for bodily Recreation, and Amorous pleasure
only: but if I do this at your Request, you will perhaps send me away with a
Crown or twain, and keep the hundred Crowns to your self. The Gentlewoman said:
Thou shall have that I have promised thee beforehand. Then was the bonny Wench
well pleased; and willing her to prepare all things accordingly, promised to be
ready at a call to Accomplish her Will. The Gentlewoman declared to her
Husband, how she had appointed the matter with her Neighbor, whereof he was
glad. Andolocia being not yet satisfied, repaired again unto the Gentlewoman,
and was importunate to obtain his suit; to whom the Gentlewoman said: Sir,
sithence you will not be otherwise answered, if you will perform your promise
concerning the Thousand Crowns, come to morrow night unto my house, and bring
the money with you, for my Husband will be then forth about the Kings business.
Andolocia with this answer was a joyful man; and next night as he was willed,
came privily alone unto the Gentlewomans house, and brought with him the
thousand Crowns.

How Andolocia was deceived by a Gentlewoman, which laid another in bed with
him in her stead. Chap. 32.
THe Gentlewoman gave him very friendly entertainment, and receiving the Money
of him untold, brought him into her Chamber, willing him to go so bed, and she
would immediately come unto him. Then sent she hastily for her kind-hearted
neighbor, to whom she gave an hundred Crowns, and sent her to bed to
Andolocia, where he solaced himself with her in the pleasant pastime of
Venus-game, supposing he had lain with his Companions Wife. But when the Wench
perceived that Andolocia was sufficiently delighted with the use of her body
(for Joan was as good as my Lady till he knew the contrary) she declared how
the Gentlewoman had beguiled him, hiring her for an hundred Crowns to take her
place.

Andolocia hearing that he was so deceived, waxed angry in his mind, not so
much for the loss of the money, but rather for shame that it should be blazed
abroad to his reproach, how he was deluded by two Women. Wherefore he forthwith
rose up, and gave his Leman an hundred Crowns, willing her that after his
departure, she should challenge nine hundred more, which the Gentlewoman
wrongfully detained, and that she her self has duly earned; which the Wench
performed with such impudent and open contention, that the Gentlewoman for all
her pretended honesty being noted for a Baud, sustained great shame. But
Andolocia presently went to his lodging, and called up his men, willing them to
prepare all things ready, for he would forthwith depart, thinking with himself,
I will hereafter beware of the enticing beauty and dissimulation of women, and
so rode displeasantly away. When he was now gone ten or twelve miles from
Paris, he thought in his mind, it was well the false Harlots had not beguiled
me of my Purse, and began to be merry and pleasant, and so rode unto the King
of Arragons Court: from thence to the King of Castile: then to the King of
Portugal: and next to the King of Spain's Court: There did the people and their
behavior like him so well, that he apparelled himself and all his men after
their Country Guise; and offering his service unto the King, was thankfully
entertained. He daily practiced all feats of chivalry, and oftentimes gave
Jewels, for which Gentlemen should contend in martial games, and invited the
Ladies and Gentlewomen to many costly Banquets. Moreover when there was any
pressing of Souliers, he would set forth an hundred at his own charges, and
load them, whereby he was had in great favor and estimation with the King. And
forasmuch as he was so active, valiant, and courageous, that he would commonly
be in the forefront of the battle, the King dubbed him Knight, and pretended
otherwise to advance him. Insomuch that whereas there was in the Court, and Old
Earl which had one only Daughter, which was his Heir, to her would the King
have Married Andolocia, promising him also the Earldom after her Fathers
decease. But Andolocia liked not the Earls daughter, neither regarded he the
Earldom; for he was rich enough by the virtue of his Purse: When Andolocia had
served the King of Spain certain years, he required leave to depart. The King
granted to his request, and told him, that whenever his pleasure was to
repair to Spain again, he should find him always a friendly and gracious Lord,
for his faithful service. Then bought Andolocia a ship, wherein he and his men
sailed into England, whereof some that envied at his costly and sumptuous
behavior were glad, and many other were sorry, which had received commodity by
him.

When he was now come to the fair City of London, where the King then kept his
Court, he hired a goodly house, and bought all necessary furniture plentifully
for it: There he kept an open Court, with liberal hospitality, like as if he
had been a Prince, daily feasting the Nobility and Courtiers, to whom he also
gave many gifts, and used to just, and practiced other martial exercises with
them: but in all feats of chivalry, both men and women gave Andolocia the
praise.

When the King understood of his Noble demeanours, he demanded whether he would
retain to his Court? He answered, That he would most willingly bestow his body
and goods in his service. In the mean while it chanced that there was wars
between England and Scotland; so that Andolocia led a band of men against the
Scots, at his own charges, where he behaved himself so courageously in the
battle, that although he was a stranger, yet for his manly exploits, he was
commended above all other.

When the victory was obtained upon (...) Scots, Andolocia returned home to
London; where he was received of the King and Queen very honorably, and was
had in great estimation with the people.

How the King had Andolonia to dinner, where he fell in Love with Agrippina the
King's Daughter. Chap. 33.
THen ordained the King a great Dinner, and invited thereto Andolocia, and all
the other Captains, where was also present the Queen and her fair Daughter
Agrippina, who surpassed in beauty all the women in England: whom when
Andolocia had steadfastly beheld, his Heart was so fervently kindled with the
love of her, that he had no more list to eat or drink, were the meats never so
delicious or delicate. When the feast was done, and he was returned home to his
house, he thought by himself how he might win the favor of Agrippina: wishing
that he were of Royal blood, that he might be esteemed Worthy to Marry her:
Howbeit he encouraged himself with Hope, to purchase her good Will and Liking
by some means or other. Wherefore he advanced himself from thenceforth in
Justing and other Martial exercises before the Queen and her Daughter very
often, and in more Gorgeous manner than he was wont, wherewith Fair Ladies be
most delighted. And when he thought it convenient, he invited the Queen and her
daughter, with many other Ladies of the Court to dinner, which was so
sumptuously in all points adorned, that it was wonderful in a subjects house to
behold.

He gave also to the Queen a costly Jewel, and another to Agrippina, and to
every one of her Waiting Gentlewomen one, that he might be the better Esteemed
of Agrippina, when he came to the Court: whereof the King was informed:
Insomuch that when Andolocia came unto the Court, the King said unto him: I
understand by the Queen that she has been very well and sumptuously
entertained at your House: Why had not I also warning thereof?

Andolocia said: Most gracious Lord, if your Majesty would not disdain to
honor my poor House with your presence, how acceptable should it be unto me!
Then said the King: I will also come to morrow unto you, and bring ten more of
my Counsel with me.

Of this was Andolocia very glad, and hasted him home to prepare all things
accordingly. The next day came the King and the Lords to dinner; where all
things were so magnificently accomplished upon so short warning, that the King
and such as came with him greatly marvelled thereat. Then thought the King, it
were good to abate the pride of Andolocia, and to make him ashamed; wherefore
he appointed the next day also to take his recreation with Andolocia again, and
forthwith sent privy commandment, that no Wood-seller should upon pain of his
grievous displeasure, sell or give one stick of Wood, or any kind of fuel unto
Andolocia, or any of his retinue, during the space of two days. Howbeit
Andolocia was glad of it, and had prepared all the Delicatest Victuals that was
to be had for money: but when he could by no means get any Wood or other fuel,
he was sore afraid left he should be utterly shamed, not knowing how the Cooks
should dress the meat; but when he saw no other remedy, he sent speedily to the
Merchants Ships, and to all the Grocers in London to buy an huge quantity of
Canes, Cloves, Nutmegs, Liquorish, Ginger, and Cinnamon, which were used in the
Chimneys and Ovens, to burn instead of Wood, to dress the Meat. About dinner
time, though the King supposed that Andolocia's Kitchen was but simply provided
for lack of Fire, yet would he and other Lords that were with him before, ride
unto Andolocia's Lodging, where they smelt such an exceeding strong and sweet
savor, that they mused whereof it should be. Then the King demanded whether
Dinner was ready? it was answered, that all Things were Prepared, and that with
sweet Spices instead of Fuel, whereat the King and all the Lords marvelles
greatly.

When dinner was done, and the Kings train came to fetch him home, he gave each
of his Guard ten Crowns, and so returned the King with his Lords home again,
thanking Andolocia for their sumptuous entertainment.

When the King came unto the Court, he recounted unto the Queen what a costly
dinner they had, and that all the meat was ^^essed with pure spices instead of
wood, and that he had given to each of his Guard ten Crowns. Wherefore said the
King, I greatly muse, and long to understand from whence, or how he has such
exceeding store of money (...) he spares for no cost, and is every day more
sumptuous and costly.

The Queen said, I know none that I suppose could sooner or better understand
his secret in that behalf than our Daughter Agripp^na: For that, as it seems,
he loves her so well, that I believe he will not deny her ought that she shall
demand. Then willed the King that the Queen should do her diligence, and use
her discretion with her daughter, to put this device in practice. Then went the
Queen unto her daughter, and told her in secret of the sumptuous and rich Port
that Andolocia maintained, whereat (said she) the King and I do greatly marvel,
sithence he has neither lands, Subjects, nor Kent, (as far as we know) to
continue and uphold the same.

Wherefore forasmuch as I perceive by his behavior in your presence, that he
is far in love with you, I would have you when he comes next in your company,
to delight him with long and friendly communication, and in the end to try
whether you can obtain to understand of him, whence he gets such abundance
of goods: Agrippina promised to do her utmost endeavor in that behalf.

How Agrippina with fained love, deceived Andolocia of his Purse. Chap. 34.
Scene from Chapter 34

WHen Andolocia came again to the Court, the matter was of purpose so handled,
that he was appointed to have secret communion with Agrippina. So that when
they thus were all alone, after most friendly salutation, and many courteous
proffers offered by Andolocia: Ag^^ppina said: Sir Andolocia, there goes an
honorable report of your magnificence, and how you have Entertained the King
with an exceeding Costly Banquet, and have given largely to his Guard: I pray
you tell me, do you not fear lest your Money will at length fail? He answered,
saying: Gracious Lady, I cannot want money so long as I ^^ive: Then belike
(said she) your Father was very puissant, that he has left you so rich.
Andolocia said, I am as rich as my Father, neither was he richer than I am now:
howbeit he was otherwise inclined than I am; for his delight was to see strange
Countries, but my greatest pleasure is to obtain the love of Fair Women and
Ladies. Then said Agrippina, I have been certified that you have been in many
Kings and Princes Courts, did you never yet find any there which liked you?
Andolocia answered: I have been in six Kings Courts, where I have seen many
goodly Ladies and Gentlewomen, but (without Flattery be it spoken) in beauty
and comely demeanor you pass all that ever I yet saw: Wherewith you have so
ravished my Heart with Love, that my doubtful Passion engendered between Hope and
Despair, enforces me to crave a Salve for my Sore: And although I am descended
of no Princely Progeny, yet may Love, which has only Respect of Personal
liking, be requited with love again on your behalf: if it be my good hap to
find such favor with your Grace, beseeching thee not to deny me a medicine to
heal my wound, that Cupid has pierced with his poisoned Dart: and whatsoever
you shall require of me (in my power consisting) you shall at your pleasure
obtain.

Then said Agrippina, tell me the truth unfeignedly Andolocia, from whence thou
have so much money, and riches, and then I Will live in thy love, and yield to
thy request.

Andolocia was now glad, and not remembering that he had not long before vowed
to beware of Women's unfaithfulness, said unto her:

My most dearly beloved Agrippina, I will fulfill your desire, on condition you
will keep all things secret, and perform your promise. She said: Right
well-beloved Andolocia, doubt not you of my fidelity, for what I promise you in
words, shall be surely performed in deed. Upon these sugared words, Andolocia
willed her to hold up her lap, and told out a thousand crowns out of his
virtuous purse, saying: this do I give you; and can without any hinderance
afford you as much as you will have more: for so long as I have this Purse, I
do want no money: and now you may believe me that I have uttered the certain
truth of that you longed to know. She answered, I see and acknowledge this to
be so manifest, that I need no more to wonder at your sumptuous expenses.
Wherefore my beloved Andolocia, forasmuch as on this night the Queen has
appointed to sleep with the King, I will procure with my Chamberlain that you
shall lie with me: for without her consent I cannot bring it to pass: Therefore
you must reward her largely, that she might consent and be secret. Andoloc^a
thanking her, promised so to do, and not to fail of his coming at night to her
Chamber.

As soon as Andolocia was gone, Agrippina went to the Queen, and showed her
with great joy, how she had gotten knowledge of Andolocia, whence he had his
abundant wealth, and she had promised him to lie with him that night. The Queen
thereof was glad, and said to her: If you can well remember the fashion, the
color, and the bigness of the Purse, it were expedient that the like in all
points were presently made; which they raused to be done with all speed, and
slubbered it also to make it seem old. The Queen also caused her Physicians to
make a strong Potion, which should suddenly cast one into a dead sleep. These
Iugling Tools being thus prepared ready in Agrippinas Chamber, to show unto
Andolocia, a Cast of Legerdemain, they informed the Chamberlain, that at night
when Andolocia came, she should receive him courteously into the Chamber and
that when Agrippina and he sat together at their banquet, she should be
circumspect to put the drink into Andoloci^s Cu^ that was ordained for him.
Andolocia coming to the Chamber at the hour appointed, was let in; and friendly
entertained by the old Gentlewoman of the Chamber: and soon after came
Agrippina, who had him welcome with a cheerful countenance, sat down by him,
and offered much friendly communication; whilst they recreated themselves with
many deiscious junkets and pleasant wines. Wherefore Agrippina drank unto him,
saying: I drink to you this Bole full of Hypocras, more than I commonly am
accustomed, in token of my love, requesting you to pledge me as much for my
sake.

The Chamberlain filling the Goblet again with the Somnoriferous Potion (having
the Relish of Delicate Hypocras) gave it unto Andolocia, which he Quaffed with
a cheerful Heart. Whereupon he incontinently fell into such a Sound Sleep, that
he might not feel whatsoever was done unto him. Agrippina boldly stepped unto
him, opened his Doublet, cut off his Purse, and sewed another instead thereof.
Then carried she the Purse presently unto the Queen, and putting her hand
therein, to try whether it were the right Purse, she pulled out three handfuls
of Gold, which the Queen brought in her Lap to the King, and told him how
luckely the matter was conveyed, Andolocia being left in a Dead Sleep. The King
thereat exceedingly Rejoiced, and requested to have the Purse to his own
Custody, lest Agrippina should come in danger thereby. But she alleging the
danger that she adventured in the getting of it, if he had awaked on a sudden,
requested earnestly of her Father that she might have the keeping of it only
for her labor; affirming that the King and Queen both notwithstanding, might
have as great commodity by it as she her self: wherewith they were content.

When Andolocia was awaked, and saw none by him but the old chambermaid, and
perceived that he had slept all night in the chair, he mused greatly, and asked
what was become of Agrippina? the old gentlewoman said: the Queen sent for her,
and she is risen: but sir, I marvel much how you could sleep so out of measure:
for I often assayed to awake you with great noise and stirring of your body,
but all your senses were so benumbed, that if I had not perceived breath to
issue from your mouth, I should have supposed you had been dead, whereby you
have lost your pastime with Agrippina. When Andolocia understood that by
drowste sleeping he was so frustrated of his purpose, he began to curse
himself, and swear like a Tyrant. The Old Gentlewoman assayed to pacify his
wrath with fair words, saying: Sir, I pray you let reason rule your furious
passion, and be contented, for that you have now let pass, may hereafter be
obtained at a like opportunity. Andolocia said again, ragingly, a mischief
light on thee thou old Bawd, why did thou suffer me to sleep so long? for I
never yet slept so long in all my life, but that if I were lightly touched, I
did presently awake: But she still affirmed, and thereto swore, that she did
her utmost endeavor, and answered him with fair language (for in the evening
before, he had given her a hundred Crowns) so that with fair words in the end
she brought him out of Agrippina's Chamber. Andolocia then went home to his
house very sad and displeasant, for that he had so shamefully lost the amorous
pastime that he hoped to enjoy with the fair Princes, but he wist not as yet
that he had lost his peerless and fortunate Purse.

The King being disposed to try how he would behave himself after the loss of
his purse, and whether he had any more of them, sent word to Andolocia, that he
would din^ again with him the next day. Andolocia, being certified thereof,
called the Steward, and willed him to prepare a costly Dinner; for that the
King would be there on the next morrow. The Steward answered, that he had
disbursed much money of sat, and had not sufficient store to serve the turn.
Then took Andolocia the Purse out of his bosom, and would have Delivered him
five Hundred Crowns: but when he groped in his Purse, after his accustained
manner, and brought nothing forth, he turned the inside outward, and felt it
thoroughly, but there was no money to be found. Then was he in a great
perplexity, and almost dismayed with bitter anguish and sorrow: calling to
mind, how for the contempt of his Fathers advice (that willed him to utter the
secrets of the Purse to no creature) he was in this manner plagued; but this
remembrance was now too late, and all his sumptuousness and pride was now
quelled, and at an end.

Wherefore he called all his men before him, and said unto them: I have been
your Master these ten years, wherein I have so entertained you, that you wanted
nothing which was fit for men to have, neither am I debtor to any of you, for
you be paid all before hand. The time is now come that I can no longer keep
House, and maintain such a stately port as I have done: therefore I must desire
you all to provide for your selves; as well as you may: for I may remain here
no longer, neither have I any more money left than one hundred and fifty
Crowns, whereof I will spare to each of you ten shillings, and will also freely
give to every man his horse whereon he is accustomed to ride, and his harness
thereto belonging.

These words made all the men astonished and afraid, looking one on the other,
and marvelled what sudden mischance was happened unto their Master. Whereupon
one that was of all the rest most loving, faithful, and trusty unto Andolocia,
said, Sir, if any man have done ye^ displeasure, or betrayed you, let us
understand of it, and we will be revenged on him, though it were the King
himself, and we should lose our lives therefore. Andolocia answered, that on
his behalf should no man hazard his life. Then said they: We would be loath in
your misery to leave you, but we will rather sell horse, and harness, and all
that we have, to remain with you for your comfort and solace. Andolocia said: I
thank you for your faithful good will, my well-beloved servants: if ever
fortune smile on me again, I will requite your courteste: but now as I have
said, and saddle my horse, forthwith, for I will have no man to go or ride with
me. The servants for sorrow could not refrain from tears, to see the sudden
calamity of their Master, with whom they had lived so pleasantly, and so
brought him to his horse. Andolocia then taking his leave of them all, departed
with an heavy heart, and traveled the next way both by sea and land, until he
came to his brother Ampedo.

How Andolocia returned to Cyprus, and complained to his brother of the loss of
his Purse. Chap. 35.
WHen Andolocia was now come near unto the fair Palace, Ampedo had espied him
from the top of a tower, whereof he was exceeding glad, hoping to enjoy the
purse again, and that he should be no more careful to spare as he had done
these ten years: then came he down to meet his brother (who received him
joyfully, asking why he came so alone, and where his men were become? He
answered, I have left them all, and thank God that I am come safe home. Ampedo
said: I pray you brother show me what misfortune has befallen unto you, for
you make me greatly afraid. Andolocia said, let us first Dine, and then you
shall understand the truth of all matters. After dinner went they together into
a Chamber, where Andolocia said to Ampedo, with an heavy countenance: O dear
Brother, shame will scantly let my faltering tongue to utter what mischance is
happened on our behalf; for our fortunate Purse is taken from me, for sorrow
whereof my heart is ready to break, but patience persuades that grief nothing
avails. Ampedo being with this heavy tidings astonished, pitifully said: is it
taken from thee by violence, or have thou lost it by negligence? He answered, I
have most shamefully transgressed our dear Fathers commandment, and disclosed
the secrets of it to a Lover of mine, who beguiled me when I least mistrusted
her. Ampedo said, if we had observed our Fathers will, our Jewels had not been
separated, but you will needs adventure in dangerous travel to work your own
mischief, whereof I sufficiently forewarned you. Andolocia said: Dear brother,
it does so sore and inwardly grieve me, that I fear it will cost me my life.

How Andolocia beguiled his brother of the hat, and conveyed himself therewith
into E^gland, and carried away Ag^ippina with the Purse. Chap. 36.
Scene from Chapter 36

But when Ampedo heard that his brother took the matter so heavily, he
recomforted him, saying: Let not sorrow come so near thy heart, we have yet two
chests full of ducats, and the wishing Hat, whereof we will write to the King
Souldan, who if need be, will give us sufficient to maintain us during our
life, though we had no more; and let the purse go with all ill luck and
mischief with it. Then said An^olocia: But goods and Money are subject to many
casualties, and in time of conquest and other such extreamities, cannot be
lightly conveyed. Wherefore I beseech thee good brother grant to lend me your
wishing hat, and I trust therewith to get the Purse again. Ampedo said, it is a
common proverb; Whosoever loses his goods, loses his wits: which appears by
thee, who when thou have already deprived us of ^ur greatest treasure, would
also bereave us of the chiefest pleasure: but I trow one of us will be wiser
than to suffer thee to carry away the Hat also. For me seems you might be
contented to make you pastime with it when you list. When Andolocia perceived
that his brother would not in any case grant that he should carry the Hat from
him, he thought by policy to deceive him of it, and said: Dear brother, if I
have requested that you think inconvenient, I will be contented from henceforth
to be ruled by you.

Soon after as his brothers men were gone forth to hunt, he requested the Hat
to convey himself among them. His Brother not mistrusting any deceit, delivered
it unto him. But he having gotten it, came neither at the Wood nor the Men, but
wished himself at Genua. When Ampedo saw that his Brother had thus deceived
him, he took it notwithstanding patiently, and hoped that perhaps he would
thereby return again with the Purse also. Andolocia being now at Genua, willed
that the fairest Jewels that were to be had should be brought to his lodging;
which when they were showed him, and had agreed on the price, he put them in a
Casket, and poised them with his hand, as though he would essay whether he
might easily carry them; and therewith wished himself away without payment. The
like did he at Florence and Venice, and at last with all the Jewels conveyed
himself to London in England; so that the Iewellers whom he had deceived,
thought verily some Spirit Incarnate had be guiled them. Then went he unto the
Court, apparelled like unto a Merchant, and got license to display his Jewels
upon a Table, as Agrippina with her train of Ladies should came from the
Chapel, whom he well knew, but they knew not him, for that he had disfigured
his heard, and the color of his face.

But when Agrippina was passed by, he gave two Kings unto the two chief
Gentlewomen that attended in the Chamber, and requested them that they would so
procure that he might come to their Ladies presence, saying: that he would show
her such Jewels, as her Grace never saw the like. They promised so to do, and
presently showed the rings to Agrippina, which they said the Merchant had given
them, to the intent they should procure that he might come before her, and sell
unto her Grace some of the best Jewels, for he had many which were very fair
and costly.

Agrippina said, I believe well that he has exceeding rich Jewels, for that he
would not stick freely to give such fair Kings, therefore will him to come unto
me, for I long to see his Wares.

When he had laid forth the Jewels before Agrippina, she liked very well of
them, and cheapened those that she best fancied, whereof some were worth a
thousand Crowns, for which she offered not half the Money. The Merchant said:
Gracious Lady, I have been informed that you are the richest Princess in the
World, which moved me to seek out the most costly and fairest Jewels that are
to be be found, to bring unto your noble Grace, for the which I have sustained
painful travel, and great danger: Therefore I trust your Grace would not I
should be so much looser by them, as to sell them for less money than they cost
me: But if it please your grace to choose and lay out those that you best like,
they shall be yours for as easy a price as I can afford them. Then did
Agrippina choose out ten Jewels, whereof the price amounted to five thousand
Crowns; but she would in no wise give so much. Andolocia hoping she would bring
the Purse, was contented to agree for four thousand Crowns. So that Agrippina
took the Jewels, and went unto her Chamber, where she took the Purse out of a
Coffer, and knitting it carefully to her girdle, came forth to pay the
Merchant. As she came near unto him, beginning to tell the money, he clasping
her suddenly, held her fast, and wished that he were in some Wilderness with
her, wherein was no dwelling nor resort. With that they were carried through
the Air in a small space unto a desert place in an Isle that bordereth upon
Ireland, and were set there under a tree, whereon were growing fair Apples. As
Agrippina was thus suddenly under the tree, having the Jewels in her Lap, and
the Purse at her Girdle, she said to the Merchant: Lord, for thy mercy where
are we now, or how came we hither? I am exceeding faint and hot; therefore I
pray reach me some of those Apples to refresh me. The Jewels that he had left
poured he into her lap also, and set the hat on her head to shadow her from the
parching heat of the Sun, lest it should trouble him in climbing. As he was
thus on the top of the tree, looking for the fairest Apples, she sitting under
full heavily, began to say, would God I were in my Chamber again. With that she
was presently in her Chamber. The King, the Queen, and the Courtiers asked
where she had been, and where the Merchant was become that carried her away?
She said: God bless me from such Merchants; I suppose it was the Devil himself,
or some of his Angels; Howbeit I left him on the top of a tree: but I pray you
trouble me with no more questions, for I am exceeding faint and weary, and must
needs rest me a while.

How Andolocia by eating two Apples, had two Horns growing on his head. Chap.
37.
When Andolocia sitting on the tree, saw that Agrippina was gone with the Hat,
and with all the Jewels, he bitterly cursed the tree, the fruit, and him that
planted it: saying moreover, cursed be the hour wherein I was born, and the
days and hours that I have lived. O death, why had thou not strangled me
before ever I came into this miserable danger and distress, and ere ever I knew
or beheld the bewitching beauty of Agrippina: would God my brother were with me
in this wilderness, then would I surely strangle him, and hang my self: so that
we being both dead, the purse should lose his virtue, and the false Queen, and
cruel Agrippina should enjoy no further comodity nor pleasure thereby. As
Andolocia went wandering thus to and fro, the night came on, that he could go no
further; so that he sat him down to rest, but could not sleep for fear, neither
thought otherwise than to dye in the Wilderness. Thus lay he all night as a
desperate man desirous rather to dye than live any longer. When it was day, he
arose and walked every way, but could not hear nor see any man; and being very
hungry, came at last unto a tree, whereon grew very fair red Apples, whereof as
soon as he had eaten a couple, there sprang out of his head two horns, like as
it were of a Goat, which he could by no means get off. Then began he more
inwardly to feel the vengeance of God, for his theft and whoredom before time
committed, and asked mercy for his sins, saying: O wretch that I am, O
unhappiest of all other men; thus monstrously disfigured like a beast, for that
I have beastly lived, and have not taken small correcttion therefore patiently:
Wherefore, O God Almighty, sithence I am deprived of all men's help and succor,
forgive me my offenses, take from me this deformity, and assist me in this
extreme calamity.

How an Hermit helped Andolocia to be rid of his Horns. Chap. 38.
Scene from Chapter 38

IT chanced that an old Hermit which had been xxx. years in that desert, and
never had seen any man, heard this piteous lamentation of Andolocia, and going
to him, he said: Alas poor man, who brought thee hither, for what seek thou
in this desert? Andolocia said: good brother, God be thanked that has sent
thee hither, somewhat to my comfort; verily full sore against my will do I here
remain. Then Andolocia being very hungry and faint, asked the Hermit for some
meat: he brought him into his Hermitage, where was neither meat, bread, nor
wine, but only fruits and water, whereby he lived: Andolocia therefore took a
small refection, and then asked if he could show him by any means how to get
his horns away. The Hermit wished Andolocia to follow him, going through a
little path from his Hermitage, and there plucking down two Apples from another
tree, willed Andolocia to eat them. So soon as he had clean swallowed the two
Apples, his Horns were vanished away. Andolocia thereof was exceeding glad, and
demauded of the Hermit how it came to pass that he had so soon gotten Horns,
and was so soon rid of them again: The Hermit said: The Creator of all things
has given this secret nature to these two trees; neither be there their like
on earth, but in this desert only. Then desired Andolocia that he might carry
some of these Apples with him. The Hermit willed him to take as many as he
list: But (says he) I perceive thy mind is greatly cumbred with temporal and
transitory estates, but it were far better to content thee with a com^^cent
life, and not to bring thy soul in danger, for a small pleasure. But these
persuasions could not now sink very deep into Andolocia's ^eart, who was now
wholly bent to recover again his Purse and his Hat, and to be re^enged of
Agrippina. Wherefore he got as many Apples as he might conveniently carry of
both sorts, and requested the Hermit to show him the way to some Town. The
Hermit brought him to a way lying toward a Town: wherefore he greatly thanked
him, and so departed and came unto the Town: where with good meat and drink he
refreshed himself. From thence went he to a Haven-Town not far off, where he
found ships that were setting forth toward London, with whom he departed. As
soon as he was come to London, he closed up one of his eyes, and disfigured his
face with a loathsome color, as strangely as he could devise. Then went he to
the Court, and when he knew Agrippina should pass, laid abroad his Apples very
handsomely upon a fine cloth and wrapped them in Sarce^et, whereby they should
seem more precious, and called them Apples of Damasco. When many did require
the price of them, he held them at three Crowns every Apple: so that none would
buy of them, whereof he was glad, not meaning to sell of them but only to
Agrippina.

At the last when Agrippina with her Ladies passed by, he asked if it would
please her grace to buy any precious Apples of Damasco. Agrippina asked what
was the price of one of them? He said: Three Crowns. Then asked she what virtue
was in them more than in other to be so dear? Andoloc a answered, that they
would cause excellent beauty, and make a sharp wit in them which should eat of
them. Agrippina then willed one of her Gentlewomen to buy two of them.
Andolocia then having accomplished his purpose, put up his wares, and conveyed
himself speedily away.

And as soon as Agrippina came to her Chamber, she eat her two Apples, and
presently two great horns sprang out of her head with great ach and pain, so
that she laid her down to bed. When the horns were fully grown out, and her
headache ceased, she felt and beheld in a glass two great horns. Then called
she two of her Ladies, who blessed themselves, and were affrighted at that
strange sight, and she was so astonished with shame and grief, that she could not
for a while speak. Then asked they how it was come to pass, that her Noble
Personage was so monstrously disfigured. She said: I wot not how, but it is a
just plague of God as I suppose, or else it comes of the Apples of Damasco,
which I bought of that villainous Merchant. Wherefore I beseech you find some
means that I may be rid of them.

Then got they privately a saw, and sawed them off hard by the head, which she
patiently endured: But they presently sprang up again, whereat she was greatly
dismayed, and pitifully lamented, saying: O cursed and miserable wretch that I
am, what avails it me to be a Kings Daughter, the richest that lives on the
Earth, and to have the praise of beauty above all other Women, and now to be
thus monstrously misshapen like a br^te beast: therefore alas that ever I was
born, if I cannot have speedy help, I will surely by some means shorten my
life: One of her Ladies, a Witty Gentlewoman, comforted her, saying: Be patient
a while (O gracious Lady) and pluck up a cheerful heart; for no doubt as you
have gotten those horns by some cause, so by removing of the same cause you may
have remedy: and if any earthly thing has power to work this effect,
undoubtedly God has created the like to take it away again. Therefore we will
send for Physicians, it cannot be but that they have found written by what
ocasion they grow, and how they may be consumed away. Agrippina with these
words was comforted with some hope, willing them to keep all things secret, and
by privy means to learn if Physic might help her.

Whereupon the Old Chamberlain went with speed to all the best Physicians, and
told them: That whereas one of her Kindred had two great Horns grown out of her
Head, she would know whether they could by Physic be taken away or not. The
Physicians hearing of this strange infirmity, were all desirous to see the
party. But the Gentlewoman said, you must not in any case see her, except you
will be bound in great bonds to take them clean away, which if you can do, you
shall be richly rewarded. But there was none would take upon him to take away
the growing of the horns, for they had never seen, heard, nor read of the like.
When the Gentlewoman thought that no remedy would be had, she was returned home
again to Agrippina with a heavy heart.

How Andolocia did counterfeit a Physician, and cured the Kings Daughter of her
Horns, whereby he recovered again his wishing hat and his Purse. Chap. 39.
Scene from Chapter 39

AS she was coming toward the Court, she met with Andolocia, who being
apparelled like a Physician in an ancient Gown, and disfigured with a
counterfeit bottle-nose, said unto her: I perceive good Mistress that you have
been with three sundry Physicians in my light, I pray you show me, have you
sped of your purpose? Be not displeased that I am so bold to ask you this
Question, for I am a Physician also: And if you have any grief, you may show it
me, for it must be a very strange disease that I will not with Gods help cure
and take from you. The Gentlewoman supposing that God had sent this Physician,
which offered himself so luckely, said: there is a mavelous impediment
chanced to a Noble Gentlewoman, out of whose head are grown two horns of a
Goat, which if you can take away, that they spring no more, you shall be richly
rewarded, for she has money at will. The Physician smiling, courteously said,
if that be the worst, I have the science to rid her of her horns without any
pain or smart. I know well also the cause whereof they came. She earnestly
requested him to declare the occasion of that strange disease. He said: She
has been unfaithful where she professed Love, and has inwardly rejoiced at
Wickedness done to her friend, which joy she durst not openly utter: howbeit,
whereas it must needs in some place of the body have an issue, it is least
dangerous when it breaks out upward: for if it should not be expelled; it
would so oppress the heart, that death would shortly ensue. It is not now two
years sithence that I was in the King of Spains Court, where an Earls Daughter
of a fair and tender Complexion, had grown on her forehead two great Horns,
which I by my science, and Gods help took away.

When the Chamberlain had now great hope of his cunning, she asked where he
lodged, saying: that she would presently come again to him. He said: I am
lodged here-by, at the swan, there may you enquire for me; I am called the
Doctor with the great Nose; and although I have another Name, yet am I best
known thereby, because I am but a stranger. Then went she joyfully unto the
sorrowful Princess, and said: Gracious Lady, pluck up a merry heart, and be of
good cheer, you shall be shortly rid of your Horns; showing unto her how when
most of the London Physicians had sent her away comfortless, she met by chance
with a strange Doctor, who made light of the matter, and would warrant me to
help your grief, for that he had taken away the like from an Earls Daughter of
Spain before. Moreover he told me the cause whereof they did spring, which your
grace does well know, whereby I did the better believe him. Then said
Agrippina, why had you not brought him with you, seeing you know how earnest I
desire to be cured? Go incontinently and fetch him hither, and will him to
bring all things necessary for the purpose, not sparing any cost. Take also
with you to give him an hundred Crowns, and if he demand more, give him as much
as he asks. The Gentlewoman went to the Physician, gave him an hundred
Crowns, saying: I pray you be now diligent, and to the patient, that I shall
bring you, must you come only by night, neither must you disclose the matter to
any person; for her own father and mother as yet know not of it. The Physician
said: Doubt not you of my secretness: but before I go with you, I must buy at
the Apothecaries such things as are requisite: in the mean time you may stay
here, or return again two hours hence: she said, I will tarry for you, for I
dare not go home without you.

Then went Andol^cia to the Apothecaries, and bought a quantity of Rubarb,
Sugar, and Rose Water, and therein soaked and rolled one of his Apples, being
cut in little pieces. He bought also a Box of sweet Ointment, and many other
sweet odours and per^umes to delight her senses withal, and then ^ame again to
the Gentlewoman who con^eyed him by night to Agrippina, to whom he said, let
your Grace be of good comfort, and ^oubt not but by Gods help and my science,
you shall be soon eased of your disease: therefore prepare you that I may see
and feel your grief. Agrippina though she were greatly a^hamed to show her
Horns, sat up in her Bed. The Physician viewed and handled the horns, saying:
You must have upon each horn a piece of rough Apes-skin, taken warm from the
Ape, and with this confection will I anoint them also. There was an old Ape in
the Court which was presently slain, and the skin flayed off, of which were
made two cases, as the Physician had commanded. Then did he anoint the horns
and her temples with Apes-grease, and his sweet confection, and put on the
cases of the skin, and said to her: This have I done to soften and mollify the
horns: but they must be brawn away by purging, for the which you shall swallow
these small Pills, and rest thereupon, whereby you shall perceive a speedy
amendment.

Agrippina received the purgation, which was the Apple to drive away horns, cut
in small pieces, and mingled with rubarb. And although this counterfeit
Physician had used such Apish Medicines to make a show of rare cunning; yet was
it the Apple indeed that only did the feat. Andolocia withdrawing himself a
little aside, the Rubarb began to work with his Patient, so that she went twice
or thrice to the Stool. After a while came in the Doctor, and said: Let us see
whether the Physic has done any good, and therewith he pulled off the skins,
and the horns were also diminished, whereof she was exceeding glad. Then
departed he, and said, he would go to the Apothecaries again, and that the next
night he could finish his cure. When he had tempered the other Apple with Sugar
and Spice of another relish, he came the next night unto her again, and
dressed her as he had done before, but gave her not so much of the Apple,
because she should not be thoroughly cured, before he had talked with her, and
had some likelihood to bring his purpose to pass. Wherefore as he sat by her,
she being asleep, he thought with himself, two or three thousand Crowns were a
sufficient reward if another had done this cure, but it is nothing comparable
to the mischief she has done unto me; wherefore before I clean take away the
horns, I will let her understand my mind, to the which if she will not consent,
where she thinks to be rid of her horns, I will cause them to grow so long as
they were before; and then I will go into Flanders, and from thence send her
word, that if she will have remedy, she shall come unto me, and bring with her
the wishing-Hat and Purse. As he was thus devising, came in the Gentlewoman
with a candle to see Agrippina, who was asleep,

How Andolocia by chance found the Wishing-Hat. Chap. 40.
IT chanced that Andolocias Cap fell from his head, so that when he stooped to
take it up again, he espied his wishing-hat lying under the bed on the ground,
which none regarded, for they knew not the virtue of it: neither knew the
Princess her self, that by the means thereof she was conveyed out of the Court,
and from the Desert; for if she had, it should not have been so negligently
laid up. The Physician then sent the Gentlewoman for some Conduit Water; and in
the mean while he took it up from under the Bed, and held it privily under his
Gown. By this time was Agrippina awaked, then took he the skin from her Brow,
to see how much the Horns were sunk, which were now become very slender, and
scant an handful long, whereof Agrippina was very glad. And whereas Andolocia
meant to have rough and sharp Communion with Agrippina, he was now somewhat
pacified when he had the Hat, and in Courteous manner said unto her: Gracious
Lady, you see that your malady is now well-diminished, the chiefest cure that
rests behind, is to drive the root of the Horns out of the skul, to the which
must be used very costly medicines, which if I cannot find in this Realm, I
must needs either go my self, or send some other Doctor to fetch such things
whereof I shall inform him, in other Countries; which will ask great charges.
Besides this, would I know what certain sum of money you will give me, when you
shall be clean rid of your Horns, and that your forehead shall be as smooth as
ever it was. The Princess answered, I have certainly found that your science is
exxellent and true, therefore I beseech you to do your best to help me, and
spare no money. The Physician said: You bid me not to spare, but I have no
money, whereof I should be liberal. For Agrippina (as naturally all Women be
more nigardly than men) was careful in sparing, though she had a Purse which
could not be empty. Howbeit when he craved her liberality so plainly, she went
to her Coffer and brought out the Purse, hanging it at her girdle, wherein were
also her best Jewels; the same she tied about her middle, and went to the
Window, where she counted out three hundred Crowns. When Andolocia perceived
she had the Purse and Jewels about her, he groped under his Gown, as though he
sought for a Purse to put his money in, cast off his Cap, set on his Hat,
clasped Agrippina fast about the middle, and wished himself in a solitary
Desert, which was presently accomplished by the virtue of the Hat. When
Agrippina was thus suddenly gone, the Gentlewoman of the Chamber ran to the
Queen, and told her that a Physician had carried away her daughter in such sort
as the Merchant had done, and declared what had chanced concerning the Horns.
The Queen with this heavy news was astonished: but yet hoped that she would
quickly return, as she had done before the other time. But when she came not
again after one day and a night past she was exceeding sorrowful, and recounted
unto the KING also, how strangely all things had chanced, and how the Physician
had conveyed her away.

The King said, he is indeed a wise Physician, and has I warrant you more
knowledge than the common sort: It is none other then Andolocia, whom you have
falsely deceived. For it is no other like but he that gave unto him such a
Purse, has given him such Wisdom also, when he should lose it, to recover it
again. It is the will of God that he only should enjoy the Purse, and none
else; like as his pleasure is that I should be only King of this Realm: would
God therefore that we had but our Daughter again, and with the Purse well might
he speed that has most Right thereto.

Then said the Queen, let us send forth Messengers into every coast, to hear of
her if it may be, lest she come to some poverty and distress.

The King said, it were in vain to seek her, until God restore her again and
also it were a shame for us that we have kept her no better. But when Andolocia
and Agrippina were alone in the desert, he cast off the Doctors Gown, and
plucked away his counterfeit great nose; whereby she perceived it was
Andolocia, to whom she could not yet speak for shame and fear, for that he
looked on her with such an angry and grim countenance, as though he would have
presently killed her. And first he drew a knife, and cutting her girdle
asunder, took the purse, and fastened it to his Doublet where it was before,
whereat Agrippina trembled and quaked with great fear. Then said Andoloc^a a
fiercely unto her: O thou false faithless Woman, thou art now fallen into my
power, where I will requite the Treason thou did Conspire against me, when
thou tookest the Purse from me. How could thy Heart serve thee (thou Perjured
Wight) to show such unkindness toward me, who committed unto thee both my
secrets, body, and goods, and so often adventured my self to just, and to use
other feats of Chivalry only for thy sake? For recompense whereof thou
wroughtest me such mischief, and broughtest me into such desperate misery, that
if God of his grace had not comforted me, I had surely destroyed my body, and
thereby damned my soul. Now be thine own judge, whether it be reason that I
take as little pity on thee, as thou have done on me,

Agrippina distilling many tears, lamentably said: O virtuous and valiant
Knight, I confess that I have done dishonestly, and have intollerably abused
you: yet notwithstanding have some compassion on me, and consider the frailness
aod ignorance that is naturally in Women more than in Men, and do good for
evil, as it becomes a Christian, Virtuous and valiant Knight. Andolocia
answered: but the misery and shame that I have sustained by thee, went so near
my heart, that I can hardly Forget or Forgive. Then said she again: yet
Andolocia for the love of God advise your self, what dishonor it would be for
you to avenge your Wrath on a poor Woman, being alone with you as a Prisoner in
the Desert, the report whereof you may suppose would be a great blemish unto
your Noble Chivalry. Then said Andolocia: Well Agrippina, though thou deserve
no mercy, yet will I restrain from tyranny, and do promise the by my
Knighthood, that I will neither distain thy honor, nor hurt thy body. But thou
have one token on thy head, which thou shall carry with thee to thy Grave, that
thou may the better remember thy unfaithfulness toward thy Lover. Agrippina
being glad that she had escaped Violence or Death, thanked him, and therewith
said: Now would God my Horns were away, and I were again in my Fathers Palace.
Andolocia hearing her begin to wish, suddenly caught up the Hat, that lay not
far from her, and held it fast in his hand: Whereby Agrippina perceived that he
greatly esteemed the Hat, and that by virtue of it she was thrice conveyed,
whereat she was inwardly vexed, that she had esteemed and kept the Hat no
better. But she earnestly entreated Andolocia that he would clean rid her of
her Horns, and convey her again to her Father. To whom he said: It is bootless
for thee to crave that of me (be thou never so importunate) but thou must have
the Horns during thy Life. Notwithstanding I will carry thee so near thy
Fathers Palace, that thou may see it; but I mean my self not to come no more
there. She requested him again twice or thrice, to deliver her of her Horns,
but he was fully determined not to grant her request.

How Andolocia put fair Agrippina in a House of Religion.
WHen Agrippina saw that no Entreaty would prevail, she said: Sithence I must
needs continue thus shamefully disfigured, I will not covet to come any more
into England, neither to see Father or Mother, or any other of my friends; but
convey me I pray you into some strange place, where I am unknown: And if you
would place me in some House of Religion, where I might keep me close from all
Worldly Affairs and Company, I were greatly beholden unto you.

Then said Andolocia: That will I not stick to do for you.

With that he prepared himself, bound his Hat fast on his Head, took her by the
middle, and conveyed her into Ireland, near unto St. Patricks Purgatory, where
there was a great Nunnery of Noble Women. He leaving her thereby in the fields,
went unto the Abbess of the House, and told her that he had brought with him
an honest and noble Virgin, which is very fair and beautiful, save that certain
knobs are spring out of her Head, whereof she was so ashamed, that she could
not abide with her friends, but requested to be in some solitary place where
she was unknown. Wherefore if it will please you to take her into your
Cloister, to be one of your company, I will pay her portion thrice double. The
Lady Abbess answered, saying: Every Gentlewoman that is in this Cloister
entertained, must pay at her first entrance, two hundred Crowns, for they be
every one allowed a Waiting-Maid, and do want nothing that is convenient for
them: If you will then pay the Duties thrice double, bring her hither whatever
she be.

Andolocia went forthwith and brought Agrippina to the Abbess, who bid her
heartily welcome. Agrippina thanked her so mannerly, and with such courteous
demeanor, that the Abbess well perceived she was born of Noble Lineage, and
pitied her greatly, that such a comely personage should be so disfigured with
Horns. Then declared she unto her the Orders of the House, and that the
greatest charge was to keep the only Ordinary Hours of Divine Service; and that
the Custom of their House was not altogether so straight as other Nunneries,
but that when they were disposed to leave the Order, they might depart and
marry, leaving behind them the money that was given with them at their
entrance. Agrippina said, Madam Abbass, your orders be so tolerable, that no
Christian may mislike thereof; which I to the utmost of my power will learn to
observe. Then did Andolocia count unto the Abbess six hundred Crowns requiring
her to entertain and to treat Agrippina courteously, which she promised
faithful, to do, for she was glad to have received so much money for one
sister. Andolocia took leave of the Abbess, and said to Agrippina: God bless
you and give you health to live quietly in this Cloister. She therewith Weeping
bitterly, said Right courteous Knight, yet remember me er^ it be long, and
deliver me from this thraldom for I shall have little joy to serve God, or do
any thing else, until I be rid of these Horns These Words Andolocia printed in
his mind but gave her no other answer but this, saying When it pleases the
Lord you shall have Remedy; and so departed.

The sorrowful Agrippina went in with the Abbess, who appointed her a fair
Chamber and a Maid to wait on her, where she live^ solitarily, and served God
so well as she might When Andolocia had thus well rid himself o^ Agrippina, and
obtained his purpose in all respects, he was a Joyful Man; and setting his Hat
on his Head, wishes himself from one Country to another, until he came t^
Bridges in Flanders, where he solaced him self with all manner of Pastime, in
the company of fair women. He there also bough xl. goodly Horses, and
entertained as man men, and clothed them all in a Livery, an used to practice
himself again in feats of Ch^valry. From Bridges he rode through Germany, and
saw most of the fair Cities of the Empire, and from thence passed by Venice,
Florence, and Genua, where he sent for the Merchants of whom he had bought his
Jewels, and paid them in ready money. After that he took shiping with his men
and his horses, and come joyfully home to Famagosta to his brother, who
received him gladly, and liked well that he came home ^s stately.

When they had dined together, Ampedo walked with his brother into the Garden,
and asked him how he had sped in all his affairs? Andolocia told him at large
what had happened concerning the purse, and the Hat, the Hermit in the desert,
the strange Apples, and Agrippina, whom he had left with Horns on her head.

Ampedo marvelled at his strange adventures, and yet greatly rejoiced that he
was now ^ase come home with the purse and the hat, both which Andolocia offered
to his Brother; but Ampedo said: I will not have the Purse at all, ^t brings
him that has it to such care and ^anger, as I have read of our Father, and now
^eard the like of thee: Andolocia was thereof ^ery glad and after he had been a
while at Fanagosta, exercising himself in martial pastime, ^e rode with all his
men unto the Court to see ^he King, of whom he was honorably enter^ained, and
demanded where and how he had ^ent his time in travel. Andolocia made report at
large of all the Countries whereby he had passed; but concealed his secret
mischances and adventures. Then demanded the King, whether he had been lately
in England? He answered, that it was not long sithence he came thence. Then
said the King: the King of England has a fair Daughter named Agrippina, who is
the only Heir to the Crown, to whom I supposed to have married my Son, if all
parties should agree: But I heard say lately, that she was suddenly conveyed
away, none can tell whether: can you certify me whether she be yet found again
or not? Andolocia said: thereof I can inform your Grace. It is most true that
he has a daughter that is very beautiful, who by some conveyance of Negromancy
was brought into Ireland, and there is remaining in a Religious House of
Gentlewomen, with whom not long agon I had long talk.

The King asked: May it not be brought to pass, that her Father may have her
again? for I am old, and would fain establish my Son in Marriage, and the Realm
in good order before I die.

Andolocia said: Gracious Lord to pleasure your Majesty and your Son, I will
travel in the matter, and will cause her in short space to be brought again
into her Fathers Palace. The King required him to do it, and to spare no
charges, promising to consider him well for his travel, and largely to requite
his courtesse, if he could bring it to pass. Andolocia said: let your Grace
appoint a Noble Embassage, and let them be sent fourteen days after me into
England, and they shall find her at London in her Fathers Palace: It were also
expedient that there were also a Lively Picture drawn of the young Prince,
which the Ambassadors may show unto the King and Queen, whereof they cannot but
like very well, if it be truly and cunningly limned. The King thanked him for
his advice, willing him to accomplish his Promise, and all things should be
done as he had said.

The young Prince also requested Andolocia to be diligent in the matter, for
that he was greatly destrous to see her, having heard so great commendation of
her beauty: Andolocia promised both the King and his Son, to do his best: and
so taking his leave of them, went to Famagosta, there borrowed he the wishing
hat of his brother, and willing his steward to let his men be well used, and to
want for nothing that was expedient for them in his absence: saying; that he
would very shortly return: were out of sight, set the hat on his head, and
wished himself in the wilderness, where the Apples were that would procure and
take away horns, where he found the trees laden with Apples. Now wist he not
certainly which was the one from the other: howbeit at all adventure he tasted
of the one tree, and there presently sprang horns on his head. After that he
did eat the Apples of the other, and the horns vanished away. So took he of
both sorts with him, and from thence conveyed himself unto the Abbey in Ireland,
where he knocked, and was let in to speak with the Lady Abbess; of whom he
required license to talk secretly with Agrippina. The Abbess knowing him very
well, called Agrippina unto him; who when she saw Andolocia, looked on him with
a strange countenance, not knowing the intent of his coming, and therefore was
somewhat afraid. Andolocia taking her a little aside, said unto her: Lady
Agrippina, tell me, if you were now rid of your horns, where would you wish to
be? Agrippina said: You may well suppose that I would then long to be with the
King my Father, and the Queen my dear Mother. Then said Andolocia, God has
heard thy Prayer Agrippina, and thou shall obtain thy desire: with that he gave
her an Apple, and willed her to eat it, and rest thereupon a while, and when
she did rise again, her Horns should be clean consumed away. Agrippina did as
she was willed, and when she awake, she felt that all was well, wherewith it is
to be thought the did not a little rejoice.

Then called she her waiting-maid, to help to comb and trim her head, which
being done, she came before the Abbess, who marvelled greatly to see such a
sudden change; and calling her Ladies to behold her also; they wondered likewise
that she was become so beautiful, and so clean rid of the Horns, as there
remained no sign of them; wherefore they all sang praise to God for his miracle
showed. Then said Andolocia: Agrippina is a Princess of a Kings Lineage; I must
now take her from you, and carry her to her Father and Mother again, and before
a month be ended she shall be married to a young King, being of a fair and
comely personage, as likely to be seen. Andolocia gave unto the Abbess and her
company an hundred Crowns, and thanked them for their gentle entertainment and
usage of Agrippina: she her self also gave them most courteous thanks. And so
taking both their leaves, they went forth into the field, where Andolocia
setting his hat on his head, carried her to London by the Kings Palace, and
forthwith departed to Famagosta.

How Agrippina was espoused to the young King of Cyprus. Chap. 42.
WHen Agrippina was now come into the Court, there was exceeding joy and
gladness on every behalf: and the King and Queen ordained a solemn Feast, and
adorned her in most sumptuous attire, that all the Courtiers and Commonalty
might rejoice with them, for the return of their fair daughter, that they
supposed to have been lost. As the King, the Queen, and the Nobility were in
the midst of their mixth and pastime, there was tidings brought, that the King
of Cyprus had sent a noble Embassage to entreat of a Marriage between Agrippina
and the young Prince of Cyprus. The Ambassadors at their coming were very
honorably entertained after their estate, whereof the one was a Duke, and the
other two were Earls, with many other Knights and Gentlemen, who did their
Embassage before the King and the Counsel, and had so far thereof concluded,
that they began to confer about the dowry and the wedding day. When the Queen
perceived that they had almost determined of the matter, it grieved her that
her Daughter should be carried so far into a strange country, and to be married
to one of whose demeanor, favor, and personage, she was altogether ignorant.
Then required the Ambassadors that the Queen might come in presence, to whom
they showed that painted Portraicture of the young Prince, affirming with an
oath, that the person whom that picture did represent, was rather more amiable
than the Image did express and that he was but four and twenty years of age.
With this they were all pleased, and the Queen, who took the picture and
brought it to Agrippina, showing it to her, and how they had determined to
marry her unto a young King, which was more beautiful than the Picture could
show. Agrippina remembering the words of Andolocia in the Abbey, gave the more
credit, and granted her consent, that what her father and the Queen should do
in that behalf, she would be obedient thereto.

When it was perceived that Agrippina was willing to consent, they concluded
fully of the Marriage. Then were their ships prepared with men, vict^als,
artillery, and sumptuous garments, and precious Jewels were put to making for
Agrippina: and she had assigned to attend on her many goodly and tall Gentlemen
and Yeomen, and many fair Ladies and Gentlewomen. When all things were in
readiness, Agrippina took her leave of her Father the King, and the Queen her
Mother, kneeling and saying: Gracious Prince my Father, and Dearly Beloved Lady
Mother, the Almighty God have you in his Protection, and grant you health and
long life: And now I must needs depart, give me I pray you your last blessing.
The King said: My most dea^ly beloved Daughter; The Blessing of God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, defend thee from all grief and misfortune,
and grant thee to be a Mother of many Children. The Queen thereto said, Amen.
Then rose up Agrippina, and went aboard the ship with all her Train: And the
Mariners hoised up the sails: they passed forthwith a prosperous wind until
they came altogether safe and sound unto Famagosta in Cyprus, where the King
had appointed to receive her by a Duke, a Duchess, four Earls, and many Noble
Ladies. There was also at her arrival a sumptuous Feast in Famogosta for all
that came, and every man rejoiced that they had gotten such a fair and
beautiful Queen. From thence was she conveyed by land unto Medusa, where the
King kept his Court; thither were resorted all the Nobility of the Realm, both
of men and women: And although she was Royally received at Famagosta, yet was
she ten times better and more gorgeously entertained at Medusa, by the King,
and Queen, and her Ladies, and by the young Prince and his train; all which she
thanked with a merry countenance, and rode joyfully unto the Kings Palace.
There was Feasting and Triumphs the space of six weeks after the Wedding, with
such solemnity and sumptuousness as had never been seen in Cyprus before: And
amongst many other rich gifts that were presented to the young Princess at the
Feast; Andolocia for his part gave a whole ship full of Malmste and Muscadel;
so that it was as common a drink with them during the Feast, as Beer or Ale.

How Andolocia did best in Justing, whereby he got the praise of women, but
hatred and envy of certain Lords. Chap. 43.
ALL the while that the Feast lasted, the Lords and Knights practiced daily
justing, Turny, fighting at Barriars, and such other martial exercises. And he
which had quitted himself most manfully in the day, at night in the time of
Dancing and Revels, the young Queen did openly set a Garland on his Head. But
Andolocia was crowned with the Garland more often than any of them, and was
praised for his active carriage, both of men and women. At the last it chanced
on a time, Andolocia had by right deserved the Garland, yet for honor sake it
was given unto the Earl Theodorus of England, who came over with the Queen,
whereof Andolocia made small account; howbeit that all men said openly that
Andolocia had better deserved it. And when this rumor came to Theodorus ears,
it spighted him greatly, and thereby he conceived inward malice against
Andolocia. Wherefore he concluded a conspiracy with the Earl of Limose (who had
his House in an Isle not far from Famagosta) to put Andolocia to shame and
reproach, or else to destroy him for envy, that he carried the greatest honor
and praise of Knightly manhood so far from them, that no Lord, Knight, nor
Squire might compare with him. Wherefore they appointed at his return toward
Famagosta after the Feast, to set upon him, to slay all his men, and carry him
Prisoner to Limose, out of the Kings Land, where the Earl had a Castle, and
that there they would rack him, and put him to such intolerable pain, that he
should confess where his greatest treasure lay, and should by some privy token
send for the most part of it, whereby they should keep a stately port, and his
pride should be much abated.

How Andolocia after the Feast, riding homewards to Famagosta, was taken
Prisoner by the two Earls, and all his men slain. Chap. 44.
SO when Andolocia after the Triumph had taken his leave, and was returning to
Famagosta, the two Earls having appointed an ambush of men, they took Andolocia
Prisoner, slew all his men, and carried him into the Castle of Limose, where he
was so straightly kept, that in no wise he could come out. Then promised he
unto the Keepers a great sum of money, if they would let him go free, but they
durst not so do, lest that when he were at liberty he would not keep promise
with them: neither durst he tell them of any great sum of money beforehand,
lest they should thereby perceive the virtue of his Purse, and so might lose
both the Purse and his life also. Soon after came tidings to the King that
Andolocias men were slain, and he himself gone no man knew whither, neither was
it known who had committed that heinous murder. The two Earls after this
wicked fact rode again unto the Court, and behaved themselves as if they knew
nothing thereof. When Ampedo likewise was certified what had chanced to his
Brother, he requested the Kings assistance to lay privy wait throughout his
dominions for Andolocia. The King answered: That he was as sorry for him, as
himself, and that on condition he could learn whether he was safe and alive, he
would spare no money to look him, though it should cost him half his Kingdom.

How Ampedo burned the wishing-hat. Chap. 45.
AMpedo imagining with himself that his Brother was come into some distress by
occasion of his Purse, and that by racking and torments he might be forced to
confess of the Hat also, whereby he might in like manner come into the like
danger; in a great fury he cast the Hat into the fire, and stood by it till it
was burned to ashes. And when he could by no means hear tell what was become of
his Brother, he conceived thereby such an inward grief, that for thought he
fell sick, and shortly after ended his life.

The King had caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever could bring word
whether Andolocia were dead or alive, he should have a thousand Ducats in
ready money, but no tidings could be heard of him. Then the Earl of Limose took
his leave of the King, and departed home to his Castle, where he found
Andolocia in a deep dungeon. When Andolocia saw him, he was glad, beseeching
him to be merciful unto him, and to deliver him out of prison; for (said he) I
wot not whose prisoner I am, neither for what cause I am thus straightly penned
up: if I hade done wrong to any man, I will recompense it either with body or
goods. The Earl said: Andolocia, thou art not brought hither to be delivered
again, thou art my prisoner, and before thou depart shall thou tell me how and
from whence thou had to much money, to maintain such a sumptuous and Princely
Port, as thou have so long time done, or else I will so torment thee, that thou
shall be glad to show it. When Andolocia heard those cruel and threatening
words, he was exceedingly afraid, his hope failed him, and he wist not how to
dissemble the matter, but said on a sudden: My Father when he died, showed me
a Privy which is in our House at Famagosta, wherein I should find more money
than I were able to spend during my Life: and if it please you to carry me as a
Prisoner thither, I will show you the experience thereof. The Earl would not be
persuaded that this was the truth, but took him out of the Stocks, and racked
him grievously, which he a while endured, but at the length he was so bitterly
tormented, that he might no longer refrain, but showed plainly the virtue of
the Purse. When the Earl heard that, he took the Purse of him, and by trial
finding his saying to be true, caused Andolocia to be again set in the Stocks,
and committed him to one whom he trusted well.

The Earl then paid his Debts, stored his Castle with victuals and furniture,
and rode forthwith to his Companion the Earl Theodorus, who rejoiced at his
coming to the court. And when they had communed together concerning the purse
that the Earl had gotten of Andolocia by racking, there was no small triumphing
between them on either part. But Theodorus liked not that Andolocia was left
alive: For (said he) I hear it reported in the Court, that he is a Doctor in
Negromancy, and can fly in the Air: Therefore it is to be feared that he will
by some means escape, whereby we may both come in Danger of death. But the Earl
said, he lies so fast and sure in Prison, that I warrant you he cannot come
forth. Then went they together and took out as much money as they listed, and
were both alike desirous to have the purse: but to eschew all controversy,
they agreed that one should have it one half year,, and the other should have
it another half: and that whosoever had the purse, should not suffer the other to
want, or remain in danger: and that forasmuch as the Count of Limose was the
elder, he should first enjoy it, The two elders having now money at will, yet
were they circumspect, and durst not seem very liberal or wastful, for fear of
suspicion. But Theodorus could not be yet satisfied, as long as Andolocia was
alive, for dread lest they should again lose the purse. Besides that, he
purposed when he had the possession of the purse, to go so far with it, that he
would be safe and sure both from the King and the Earl of Limose. And therefore
he entreated of the Earl that he might have his Letters, and one of his men to
see Andolocia in Prison, which the Earl granted. Then took the Lord Theodorus
his leave of the King, and said, he would travel to see the pleasant commodity
of his Dominion. Then rode he straight unto the Prison to Andolocia, whose legs
were rotted with the stocks and irons, but now he hoped that sithence they had
his Purse, they took no more regard of him, but supposed that the Earl had sent
Theodorus to let him out of Prison.

How Andolocia when his purse was gone, was also murdered himself in Prison.
Chap. 47.
Scene from Chapter 47

But the Earl Theodorus said unto him: tell me Andolocia, host thou any more
such Purses as thou have given to the Earl of Limose? If thou have the like
bestow it on me, and I will presently let thee go free: He answered: Gracious
Lord, so God help me, I have no more, but if I had, it were at your
Commandment. Then said Theodorus: It is reported that thou art skilful in
Negromancy, and can fly in the Air: Why do thou not now practice thy Cunning
to deliver thee from hence? He said: My good Lord, I neither have, nor never
had, any pleasure in that Art; but have only had my pleasure with the Purse
which ye have, the same will I freely give to you and the Earl of Limose,
before God and the world, and will never make claim to it again, if you will
for the Honor of God, but only deliver me poor wretched man out of this
prison, lest I die here miserably.

Theodorus said: Can thou now submit thy self? Why wast thou not so lowly,
when with such Pride and Presumption thou did advance thy self before the
King and the Queen to dishonor us all? Where are all the fair Ladies whom thou
did so well please, and which gave thee all the praise? Try now if any of
them can help thee: but sithence thou do so sore long to be out of Prison, I
will soon deliver thee from thy sorrow. Then offered he five hundred Ducats
unto the Keeper to strangle Andolocia, but he would not do it, saying: He is an
honest man, and very freble, so that he must needs ere it be long die of
himself, but I surely will not commit such a heinous sin. Then said Theodorus:
Give me a Halter, and I will Strangle him; but the Keeper would not in any case
help him. Then took he his girdle that was about his middle, and casting of it
about Andolocias neck, with his Dagger writhed in it, and so strangled poor
Andolocia to death, sitting in the stocks, and gave the Keeper a reward to
convey the dead body out of fight. When this cruel tyrant had finished this
horrid murder, he incontinently departed again to the Court, where he secretly
told unto the Earl of Limose what he had done: saying; Andolocia is like to
work us no more mischief, for I have killed him with mine own hands, neither
could I rest before I was sure that he was dead. Now whereas the Earl in four
days space had not meddled with the purse, and the half year was expired that
Theodorus turn came to enjoy it as long, he demanded him to deliver it, and
take as much spending money as he would. The Earl of Limose was well content,
and went forthwith to the Coffer, and brought forth the Purse, casting it upon
the Table. Theodorus took it in his hand, and would have Coined out some money,
but there was none to be felt, neither would the Purse yield any more fruit.
Then looked they strangely one on the other, not knowing that by Reason that
Ampedo and Andolocia were both dead, the Purse had lost his virtue. Then the
Earl Theodorus said angerly: Thou false and deceitful man, think thou so
fondly to deceive me? by delivering unto me this simple Purse that is not worth
a groat, instead of that precious Purse whereof we had so much money? fetch me
therefore that which I now ought to have. He answered: It is in good faith the
same Purse that I took from Andolocia, neither have I any other: but how it
comes to pass that it yields not as it bid before, I know not. Theodorus
would not be pacified with this Answer, but was far more angry, and said he
would be revenged on him whatever befell, and therewith drawing his Rapier,
struck at him. The Earl of Limose having no other defense, ran within him, and
staid his hands as soon as he might, whereby they made such a noise, that their
men being in the next Chamber, brake up the Doors, and parted them. Howbeit the
Earl of Limose was deadly wounded therefore his men laid hold on Theodorus.
When tidings came to the King, that the Earls which were great friends, had
fought in a Chamber, and one almost slain the other, he commanded both to be
brought before him, to enquire the cause of their debate; but Theodorus only
was examined, the other being so wounded, that he could not come.

How the two Elders by striving for the Purse were detected of the Murder, and
put to death. Chap. 48.
Scene from Chapter 48

WHen the King by strict Examination and grievous Racking, had violently forced
Theodorus to confess how they had dealt with Andolocia, he was exceedingly
grieved, and being moved with wrathful displeasure against the murderers,
without longer deliberation, he gave judgment, that they should be executed
with bruising their bones upon wheels, and that if the Earl of Limose were
sick, he should be carried to the place of execution, and if he were dead, that
his carcass notwithstanding should be set on the wheel, which was executed on
the two Earls, as the King had commanded. Then sent the King also certain
Officers to the Castle of Limose, to seize upon all the goods and lands of the
Earl; and willed also that as many men and women as were in the castle,
consenting to the murder, or that had concealed the same, should be all hanged
out upon the Castle walls without any mercy. And whereas they had knowledge how
the body of Andolocia was cast into a ditch by the Castle, they caused it to be
taken up, and carried it to Famagosta, where it was honorably buried in the
Chantry Church, which his Father had founded; for whom the King and the Queen,
and the Prince, and Princess mourned, as if he had been of their near Lineage.
And forasmuch as neither Ampedo nor Andolocia had any Heirs left behind them,
the King took the Costly Palace into his Possession, wherein he found so much
goods and ready coin, such sumptuous household stuff, and so precious and costly
Jewels, that it might rather seem the Palace of some mighty Emperor, than of a
Subject. In the same Palace the young King and Queen held their Court, until
his Father departed out of this life; and then began they to reign and govern
the whole Realm of Cyprus.

FINIS.

