AN EXACT SUMMARY, OF The transactions in the TREATY at BREDA: CONTAINING, The
most remarkable Occurrences that happened in their Consultations: And the Scots
Commissioners Proposals to their [declared] King, for an Agreement; his Answer
thereunto: With the sending of a Letter to the Queen his Mother in France,
touching his Condescensions.

As it was related by Dr. Rivet, Tutor to the Prince of Orange.

Also, the Declaration of the States of Hamborough, concerning the Parliament
of England; And the Proceedings of the Queen of Swedens Ambassador, touching
the declared King of Scots.

London, Printed for G. H. and are to be sold at the Royall-Exchange. 1650.

AN EXACT SUMMARY, OF THE Proceedings of the Treaty at Breda. Illustrating, the
most remarkable Occurrences which happened in their several disputes and
consultations.
SIR,
HAving lately crossed the Alps in Italy, I am now returned to fair Breda; a
Town swelling with delight, gallantry, and wealth; whose Artisans are very rare
and eminent, both in the Schools of Mars, and Venus; and indeed so beautiful
is the Fabric, that the King of Spain formerly said; That she was fitting to
be shown and seen upon Holy Days, by reason of her great worth, and
excellency, in training and nursing of the most true-bred Cavalry.

In which beautiful place (during my residence there) I made the Treaty my
chiefest object; the transactions whereof [between the Royall-party and the
Scots] I seriously re-viewed with an Eagles eye; And because I will not deceive
your expectation, nor leave you unsatisfied therein, I shall presume to salute
you with an exact Summary, of the most Remarkable Occurrencs that happened in
their disputes, and consulations; which were as follows:

The Commissioners (on both parties) for many days, having been very private
in their negotiations, their results are now come to some maturity; occasioned
by the Commissioners last final and Declaratory speeches and propositions;
where in plain terms they laid open to their declared Kings view, the apparent
and inevitable danger that threatened him, if he still persisted in his evil
ways, depending and hearkening too much to the advice of his corrupted
Counsel; and that if he did not speedily cast them off, and unfeignedly
embrace the advice of his subjects of Scotland, they would (for the future)
make no further addresses unto him; and therefore humbly desired him, speedily
and effectually to give in his final Answer to their Desires and Proposals; to
the end, that those judgments might be prevented, which so inevitably threaten
the destroying of the Cedars of his late Fathers house: And first, they humbly
desired, that he would graciously be pleased to sign and subscribe to the
solemn League and Covenant, and to give his assent for the settling of the
Presbyterian Government, throughout his Dominion. To which particulars he
answered, that as for the Covenant, he held it both unnecessary and unsuitable
for him to sign thereunto; it being a thing proper for the obliging and
binding of the people more firm and steadfast in their lawful obedience and
loyalty to their Sovereign, rather then a Sovereign to take an oath to be true
to himself, and the preservation of his own person, which by the laws of God
and Nature he is bound to perform, etc. Further intimating, that he would give
his consent for the propagating and tendering the same to all his subjects, for
their subscriptions, etc. so that himself might go free. But this would not
satisfy the Scots, for they have other ends to serve upon him.

From this branch, the Commissioners insisted upon the next, which was, That he
would be pleased to give his assent for the settling and establishing of the
Presbyterian Government, which after he had a while maturely debated thereon,
he replied, that he would freely assent thereunto [provided] that he might
enjoy liberty of conscience in the way of Episcopacy, and that he might have
the continual use of three of his Chaplains, to administer, and practice with
him, and that they might have free leave to go along with him into Scotland:
But this was absolutely denied by the Commissioners, urging it was against
their Covenant, and they seemed to be much displeased at the motion, and said,
it was in vain to treat, if he stood that way affected.

Lastly, they earnestly implored him, that he would be pleased to condescend,
that the Militia of that Kingdom might continue in the hands of such as the
Committee of Estates should confide in, for the preservation of the Kingdom
peace and tran uility, and putting it posture of defense, in cafe of any
opposition or attempt; to which he replied, that he could not in honor give
his assent thereunto; but (because he would not altogether leave them
unsatisfied in their desires) for five years, he most freely gave his
condescension; desiring a blessing from heaven therein to accompany them.

But the Earl of Lannerick (foreseeing what would ensue, if the Treaty took
not effect) implored him, to sign to an Agreement; and to give his
condiscention to those particulars before related: By whose persuasions, he
assented unto them, and consented to an Agreement. And I was certified by a
Gentleman of very good estimation, that he heard Doctor Rivet (Tutour to the
Prince of Orange) affirm, That he was an eyewitness of the King of Scots
signing the Agreement, and that all things in debate between the Commissioners,
were concluded on the first of this instant May: And that a Messenger was
forthwith dispatched into France to the Queen (from her son) wherein he
certified her, that the Treaty was finished, and that he had made an Agreement
with the Scots Commissioners, and yielded to most of their demands, in relation
to themselves; but with provision for the royall-party.

It is likewise reported, that the Covenant is to be imposed on none in
England, but all that will take it may; and likewise to be authorized and
allowed of, in all that have already taken and subscribed thereunto; And that
he has also condescended to conform himself to the form of Divine worship in
Scotland; [which I cannot be persuaded to give credit to] But this is done
chiefly by the Lord Lannerick, who hopes (by giving all that is demanded) to
bring the demanders into a condition to lose all they have got, and to
frustrate their expectations, in what they really thought to have accomplished:
For diverse of the royall-party leaves no means unattempted, for the propagating
of Monarchical interest, and have earnestly solicited the Duke of Lorain (as I
am very credibly informed) to give his assistance therein; which (if the Peace
between France and Spain could be effected) would be ready enough to do you
mischief; and Scotland would be made a trap-door (secretly) to let in your
enemies; therefore be wise, and secure that passage this Summer, lest missing
so fair an opportunity, you repent when it is too late.

As soon as the Treaty was concluded, the Commissioners dispatched a Letter to
the Committee of Estates in Scotland, with a Copy of the Articles; desiring a
confirmation of the same, the Lord Louthain and the Lord Liverton, being
confident they will prove satisfactory to the Kirk and State, but the Earl of
Cassels and others, are of another mind.

But the counsels by which these things are carried, are not primarily
Presbyterian, for the Queen of Swedens Secretary (here resident during the
Treaty) seems greatly affected to Monarchy, and has given large promises from
his Mistress, for the propagating thereof; which occasioned a great rumor,
that if the Scots had not answered their expectations (by receiving of what
promised in way of condescension) that their declared King would go into
Sweden, giving out (how true I know not) that a marriage between the Queen and
Sweden, and the King of Scots, could not be unacceptable to her Council.

But yet notwithstanding all this, the royall-party (here seems to be
exceedingly crest-faln, and much cast down, by reason of the falling off of
many in place and authority, who formerly promised them aid and assistance, and
that which does at present so much distaste them, is the receipt of an extract
from Hambrough; wherein is intimated, the arrival of Mr. Richard Bradshaw
Resident for the Parliament of England, who was very joyfully received, and
entertained with a gallant volley of great shot, and a noise of Trumpets; Upon
his going to audience, he was accompanied with several Coaches, and diverse
English Merchants, and others of good quality: Where having delivered his
Embassy, with an excellent grace and singular Oratory, the States seemed to be
exceedingly pleased thereat, showing good affection to the present Government
of England, and withal declared; That they desired nothing more then a
constant and perfect league of amity and friendship with his Masters (the
States of England and Ireland) and that nothing should be wanting in them, for
the due observation and performing thereof; with some other declaratory
expressions, much to the same effect.

Here are diverse Commanders (both English and Scots) who daily look for
employment, and are persuaded the Scots, etc. will engage against England this
summer; but as far as I can gather (by their agitators in these parts) there is
little probability. Notwithstanding, I shall diligently attend their motions,
and if I can attain to any thing worthy your acceptance, be confident it shall
be communicated to your knowledge; By

Breda, the 15. of May, 1650. Your most affectionate Serviteur, J. P.

FINIS.

